FT  02 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Cost cuts help NIE to Pounds 75m - Some 510
staff leave core business, further reductions planned
Job cuts and above average sales growth helped Northern Ireland Electricity,
which was privatised last June, to increase annual pre-tax profits by 28 per
cent, from Pounds 58.7m to Pounds 74.9m.
The comparative figures are on a pro forma basis.
NIE cut 510 staff from its core business in the 12 months to March 31,
leaving 2,756 in place.
It plans to lose at least another 200 by March 1996.
The jobs cuts were one of the factors behind a 5 per cent reduction in
controllable costs during the year.
The company also benefited from a 2.4 per cent growth in unit sales for the
year, compared with an average of 1.1 per cent achieved by power
distributors in Great Britain.
Operating profit increased to Pounds 81.9m (Pounds 72.3m) on turnover of
Pounds 482m (Pounds 453m). The pre-tax line, however, was depressed by an
Pounds 8.2m exceptional item for reorganisation and restructuring costs
mainly incurred in reducing staff.
Earnings per share were ahead 32 per cent at 36.7p (27.8p). A proposed final
dividend of 8p gives a total of 11.39p.
Sir Desmond Lorimer, outgoing chairman, said the company had told the
industry regulator that it favoured the introduction of competition into the
market.
The regulator has already tabled proposals for the creation of a pool
trading system.
Sir Desmond said NIE had 'highlighted the need to avoid structures which are
uneconomic or which might compromise stability'.
COMMENT
The pattern is familiar enough. A recently privatised company finds the
scope for cutting costs is far greater than it had imagined when it was
negotiating with the government on setting the price for the sale. It
happened when the power industry in England and Wales was privatised four
years ago and it has happened again with NIE. Consumers and taxpayers will
no doubt complain, but shareholders need not worry too much. They can
rejoice that, unlike the England and Wales power companies, NIE will escape
major regulatory reform this summer. They should also congratulate the
management whose control on job numbers and capital expenditure should
ensure that gearing will reach nothing like the 60 per cent levels once
predicted for the late 1990s; even 40 per cent may seem excessive now. With
dividend cover last year at 3.2 times, there is plenty of scope to increase
the distribution to shareholders. This year could see about 13p, putting the
shares on a prospective yield on a fully paid basis of 4.6 per cent, nearly
a percentage point lower than the England and Wales power companies.
Nonetheless, the shares have been strongly outperforming recently. In the
short term their progress will be arrested as the June 28 deadline
approaches for paying the second instalment for the shares.
