FT  23 MAY 94 / Emerging Markets: Market watches German money supply -
Currency markets
Foreign exchanges will be focusing this week on the release of the April
German M3 figure for an indication of the likely future path of German, and
European, interest rates.
Markets were awash last week with rumours of another poor figure - M3 grew
by 15.4 per cent in March, way beyond the Bundesbank's 2-6 per cent target
range - which would probably slow the pace of monetary easing.
These fears come in the wake of comments made last week by Mr Hans
Tietmeyer, president of the Bundesbank, that recent German rate cuts had
'cleared the horizon for the next few months'.
The market took this to mean that the central bank will probably slow the
pace of German rate cuts. German rates, which set the level for most
European interest rates, have fallen fairly briskly in recent weeks. The
repo rate is 5.23 per cent, down from 6 per cent three months ago. Although
the Bundesbank has been fairly cavalier in the attention it has recently
given to M3, it runs the risk of damaging its credibility if it continues to
cut rates against the background of ongoing, and substantial, overshoots in
an important monetary indicator. As a result, there is little anticipation
of any move in rates at this week's Bundesbank council meeting.
If the market's suspicions prove correct, this is likely to bolster the
D-Mark and put renewed pressure on the dollar. It may be that the central
banks will again be called on to support the dollar, as they did earlier
this month. Last Friday the dollar was slipping back towards the levels that
prompted the previous bout of intervention, despite recent favourable moves
in German and US interest rates.
US data releases this week include April durable goods orders, and the
revised first quarter GDP figure. These are unlikely to have important
currency implications, as the Fed has implied that no rate increases are
likely in the near term.
In Europe attention is likely to stay with Greece where the drachma is under
speculative attack. Short-term interest rates have risen as high as 500 per
cent, as banks have sought to defend the currency, but most analysts regard
devaluation as inevitable.
In the UK, the market is likely to focus on Friday's release of the CBI
monthly trends enquiry. The forward-looking survey will be inspected for any
signs of inflation, which could hasten a tightening of monetary policy. This
would help sterling, but any rise in the UK currency is likely to be capped
by its ties with the weak dollar.
