FT  11 JAN 94 / Reynolds reassures N Ireland nationalists
Mr Albert Reynolds yesterday promised Northern Ireland's nationalist
community there would be no return 'to the bad old days' of unionist
domination under the UK-Irish peace initiative.
In his first substantial speech of the new year on the initiative, the Irish
prime minister insisted that majority consent in Northern Ireland was
essential for any peace settlement.
But in a passage aimed at Sinn Fein leaders - who have deman-ded
clarification of last month's Downing Street declaration be-fore passing
judgment on it - Mr Reynolds made it clear he thought the scope of the
so-called 'unionist veto' was limited.
'It is important to note that the requirement for the consent of a majority
is related . . . to the constitutional issue,' he said. 'It does not mean
that all forms of political progress or other decisions by the two
governments are subject to a similar block.'
Sinn Fein has argued that the veto has been able to block political progress
in the past and would continue to do so under the terms of the peace
initiative.
Mr Reynolds' remarks came as Lord Callaghan, the former Labour prime
minister, added his voice to calls for London to provide Sinn Fein with the
clarification it has requested.
But Lord Callaghan - who, as home secretary, sent the first British troops
into Northern Ireland in 1969 - said the government was right not to
negotiate with the IRA alone.
Separately, Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist leader, predicted that
talks between Mr Michael Ancram, the Northern Ireland minister, and the
province's four constitutional parties could lead to an elected assembly for
Ulster by the end of the year.
As unionist politicians hardened their rhetoric, Mr Molyneaux predicted that
the IRA and Sinn Fein would reject the joint declaration and said Mr John
Major, the prime minister, was right not to offer clarification. The
document was set out in plain English.
He could see no reason why even those of 'limited intelligence' could not
understand it.
A joint Army and police base at Crossmaglen, South Armagh, was rocked by an
explosion early today. Two soldiers were believed to have been injured in
the attack. A separate mortar bomb exploded at the base last night, but no
injuries were reported.
