FT  26 FEB 94 / Malaysia rejects UK appeal on trade ban
The British government last night accepted there was little it could do in
the short term to end the Malaysian trade ban, following an emotional
statement from Mr Anwar Ibrahim, the Malaysian deputy prime minister. Mr
Anwar announced the exclusion of all UK companies from Malay government
contracts.
However, it emerged last night that Lady Thatcher, the former British prime
minister, who has a close personal relationship with Dr Mahathir Mohamad,
Malaysia's premier, is prepared to intercede in the dispute.
'She is keeping a close watch on the situation and would contact Dr Mahathir
if asked,' said a close friend of Lady Thatcher.
Lady Thatcher's zealous lobbying in the mid-1980s succeeded in persuading Dr
Mahathir to end his Buy British Last policy, imposed in 1981, and secured a
Pounds 1bn defence deal between Britain and Malaysia in 1988.
It also emerged yesterday that Lord Prior, chairman of the electronics group
GEC, had requested that Mr John Major, the prime minister, telephone Dr
Mahathir.
The Malaysians announced the ban in anger at British press allegations that
bribes were paid to Malaysian politicians and the recent disclosures of a
link between a Pounds 1bn defence contract won in 1988 and Pounds 234m paid
in aid for the Pergau hydroelectric dam.
Mr Anwar yesterday said of the British press: 'We detest their patronising
attitude and innuendoes that the government of developing countries,
particularly a Moslem-led nation like Malaysia, are incompetent and their
leaders corrupt.'
British government attempts yesterday to defuse the row appear to have
failed. Mr Major sent a letter to the Malaysian prime minister which arrived
early yesterday. Malaysian officials said they were not excited by the
letter's contents nor hopeful of any break in the impasse between the two
countries.
'We have no intention of reviewing our policy,' said Mr Anwar, in his
statement.
Foreign office officials said last night a plan to send the head of the
diplomatic service, Sir David Gillmore, to Malaysia had been shelved,
because 'this would only be worth doing if we thought we could make the
Malaysians change their minds'.
The exclusion of UK companies from Malaysian government contracts could cost
British industry hundreds of millions of pounds.
Business leaders expressed concern yesterday. Lord Weinstock, managing
director of GEC, a prime supplier of equipment under the defence contract,
urged the Labour party to set aside political differences. He has written to
Mr John Smith, Labour leader, saying: 'It cannot be worth exploiting
inaccurate media comment for the sake of a temporary embarrassment to your
opponents . . . when the consequence is to help bring about losses in UK
employment and business.'
A Labour official replied: 'Lord Weinstock should not be asking the Labour
party or any MP not to participate in the proper role of parliament.'
GEC is also one of seven companies, including P&amp;O, BICC, Kleinwort Benson
and Rolls-Royce, which have written to The Times accusing British newspapers
of writing 'ill-informed and tendentious articles'. The letter, in today's
edition, lauds Malaysia as 'a fine example to the world in racial harmony
and political stability'.
Mr Anwar was particularly critical of an article in The Sunday Times last
weekend which alleged that a British company had paid bribes to Malaysian
politicians and that Dr Mahathir had asked for a Dollars 50,000 (Pounds
33,500) payment.
Mr Andrew Neil, editor of the newspaper, said he regarded the attack as a
'badge of pride'.
He added: 'The British press ought to be proud of what it has done' in
uncovering links between the winning of the 1988 defence contract and the
provision of Pounds 234m in aid for the Pergau dam.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, yesterday admitted the two projects
had been 'entangled' for a few months in 1988.
The Malaysian trade ban: special reports, Pages 4 and 5
London stocks, Page 17
