FT  23 FEB 94 / Rome government ends Fiat labour dispute to save jobs
The Italian government has forged a costly deal between Fiat, the country's
biggest private employer, and the unions to avoid big job losses and
lay-offs in the motor industry. Fiat lost close to L1,800bn (Dollars 1.06bn)
last year.
The deal, affecting 16,600 of Fiat's 95,000 Italian workforce, contains
three main elements: an unprecedented use of early retirement for 6,600, and
special funding for 2,200 losing their jobs; the introduction of
work-sharing and a shorter working week influenced by events at Volkswagen;
a commitment by the government and Fiat to invest L450bn in developing
non-polluting cars.
An industry analyst described the agreement as 'the last of the old-style
corporatist deals with the state bankrolling labour peace and giving Fiat a
helping hand'.
A leading member of the main engineering union, Fiom, said: 'We fought hard
to make the point that this is throwing money at funding job losses instead
of finding money to finance an industrial strategy. This is a financial
solution; it does not secure the industrial future of Fiat or future jobs in
the motor industry.'
Fiat announced in November it wanted to cut the labour force by 5 per cent
and lay off 10 per cent more for two years. When it began implementing the
programme last month without union agreement there was a series of stoppages
at Fiat plants, especially those most at risk of closure.
The government wanted to bring the two sides together to avoid serious
labour unrest in the run-up to the March general elections.
Fiat has made an important concession in accepting the principle of
'solidarity contracts', a catch-all phrase covering work-sharing, a shorter
working week and lower salaries to ensure that people keep their jobs. Until
recently, it was insisting that this was not a productive use of labour and
proposed lay-offs for two years pending a sales recovery.
In return for acceptance the government has shouldered more of the social
and political cost of streamlining Fiat's automotive operations. Some 2,200
jobs have been saved.
However, the unions have not obtained the guarantees they would like about
Fiat's future. They fear plants could close, including Mirafiori, the
historic centre of Fiat's operations in Turin. They fear that production
will shift from the north to new plants like Melfi in the south and abroad.
The agreements on funding a clean car  - mostly for an electric car  - are
vague and it is not clear what proportion of the money will come from the
government. The success of the deal depends ultimately on whether the car
market begins to recover this year and whether Fiat returns as quickly to
profit as promised.
