FT  08 OCT 94 / Motoring: Future takes the stand, but will it hit the road?
/ A look at all the prototypes, dotty and practical, at the Paris motor show
What is the star of the Paris Mondial de l'automobile that opened this week?
Is it an exciting but dotty Renault Espace incorporating a lot of Formula 1
racing car parts and claimed to be the world's fastest four-seater? Or is it
Xanae, a concept car described by its builder, Citroen, as 'a house on
wheels'?
The 186 mph / 300 kph Espace F1 has a mid-mounted Renault V10 engine from
the 1992 and 1993 World Championship winners, a semi-automatic six-speed
gearbox and Williams racing car rear suspension.
Renault says, tongue in cheek, that this first F1 four-seater offers a
'never to be forgotten motoring sensation'. I am sure it does on a race
track. One hopes that no one is ever tempted to stretch its legs on a public
road.
Unlike so many concept cars which burst upon the motor show scene like
comets and then disappear just as quickly, Citroen's Xanae (you say
Zan-eye-eh) is a practical running prototype. It has the same chassis
platform, 2.0-litre, 16-valve petrol engine and automatic transmission as a
Citroen Xantia. The suspension incorporates the active roll limitation
system that impressed me so much when I tried it a few weeks ago (this
column, 24 September).
If the mechanicals are more conventional than state of the art, the body
bristles with bright ideas. Although at 423 cm (almost 14 ft) overall the
Xanae is shorter than a Xantia and only a little longer than a ZX, up to
five people find it spectacularly roomy inside.
The floor is completely flat and the body pillarless. When a front door and
rear-hinged back door are opened, nothing obstructs people getting in and
out. The minor controls are in a height-adjustable cluster on the steering
column.
A windscreen as steeply slanted as that of a French TGV train extends into a
transparent roof panel. Xanae would not, as one might suppose, become
insufferably hot on a sunny day because the glass is heat reflective and air
conditioning is standard.
Citroen side-steps questions on whether Xanae will evolve into a production
vehicle, saying it was created to test public reaction to new vehicle
concepts.
Elsewhere in the show there are four MPVs (multi-purpose vehicles), jointly
developed with Fiat and made by PSA (Peugeot-Citroen Group). These MPVs are
sold, badged as Citroens, Fiats, Peugeots and Lancias, as 'monobox'
alternatives to normal large estate cars.
In three or four years, I could see a car based on Xanae fitting nicely into
the PSA product range below these MPVs and above the Citroen Xantia and
Peugeot 306.
The only obvious drawback to Xanae is an intimidatingly high sill that would
put the roomy but deep boot out of bounds to anyone who has a bad back - or
is afraid of getting one.
Ford is also showing a concept car based on an up to seven-seat MPV it has
jointly developed with Volkswagen and which goes on sale next Spring.
Zero emission vehicles are due to appear soon in Californian showrooms to
satisfy environmental protection legislation. Things have not gone that far
in Europe. But even here the battery-electric car is moving from the
impractical novelty stage into small-scale production. It will, though, be
some time before they are sold in dealerships alongside petrol and diesel
cars.
At the Paris show, Peugeot has unveiled Ion, a 3.32 metre (130.7 inch) long,
four-seat battery-electric concept it thinks might be the ideal urban
runabout of 2000. Like the Peugeot 106 and Citroen AX electric cars now
being evaluated on a large scale in France, Ion has a nickel-cadmium battery
pack giving it a range of up to 150 km (93 miles). Peugeot says Ion is only
an exploratory project, but concedes that some of its interior and exterior
styling ideas will be incorporated in a future town car.
Britons may get a chance of seeing Peugeot's Ion at the UK's International
Motor Show in Birmingham later this month.
Among cars being unveiled to the public at Paris are a stunning Alfa Romeo
GTV Spider (successor to the car immortalised by Dustin Hoffman in The
Graduate) and the new Jaguar XJ saloons and their high-off-the-ground,
four-wheel driven counterparts, the luxurious new Range Rovers. Aston Martin
has the first of its ravishing DB7s due to be delivered to a French buyer as
the centerpiece of its stand.
Nissan and Honda are making a splash with their new QX 2.0-litre and
3.0-litre V6-engined executive saloons and Civic five-door hatchbacks
respectively. Ford's odd looking Scorpio replacement is there, as are two
desirable Porsches - a new 911 Carrera 4 with all-wheel drive and a
rear-wheel drive 911 with gear selection for its Tiptronic transmission by
thumb button on the steering wheel.
Mondial de l'Automobile at the Porte de Versailles exhibition complex is
open until 16 October.
