FT  10 MAY 94 / Survey of Kenya (19): Enjoying the high life - The delights
and frustrations of a tourist
Travelling overnight by train from Mombasa to Nairobi, dining at dusk,
sleeping in a first-class cabin and waking to breakfast as the central
plateau bush rolled past seemed like an elegant way to travel.
Doing so at the peak of the rainy season was the problem. Just a few miles
outside Mombasa, through both sittings for dinner, the train sat for more
than four hours. There was no air-conditioning or lighting. There was no
explanation from staff either, simply a casual shrug as they prepared for a
long delay.
No doubt due in part to the presence of three politicians, the district
controller from Mombasa arrived by car a little before midnight to see what
was happening, while the guard had a chance to blame the British for their
railway tracks, which he said caused the delay because they were sinking as
a result of the rain.
It was the sort of small, quirky incident, endearing after the event, that a
visitor to Kenya might come across during a holiday. And certainly there are
many visitors now coming: more than 650,000 in 1992, and accounting for an
estimated Ks21bn in revenues last year or nearly one third of all export
earnings.
Fears over political turmoil, machinations at the Kenya Wildlife Service
following the resignation of Richard Leakey, and reports of violence against
tourists - including a number of murders such as that of the British nurse
Julie Ward - may all have contributed to declining numbers from a peak in
1990 of nearly 900,000.
But the government has responded with tougher security measures in the
national parks. The appreciation of the Kenyan shilling in the past few
months at a time of relative economic stability may now seem to be as great
a threat to renewed expansion in the number of visitors.
A tempting option for the more adventurous visitor is to climb Mount Kenya,
complete with porters, cooks and guides (a mandatory requirement for entry
to the park). Past the grazing buffalo and elephants, through the sticky
delights of the 'vertical bog' before the scramble through rock and snow
begins, most rise early to avoid afternoon rains and stagger the trip over
three or more days in mountain huts to alleviate the effects of altitude
sickness.
The final ascent of Point Lenana, the highest feasible trek without serious
climbing equipment, at nearly 5,000 metres, typically begins by moonlight at
2am or 3am, to allow for arrival at the peak for sunrise.
In spite of the difficulties, a remarkable number of trekkers make the
attempt often inappropriately dressed in loafers, while their guides gallop
up in Wellington boots carrying only conventional umbrellas for rain gear.
For an extra frisson of fear, do the trip to Mount Kenya by 'matatu' or
shared taxi by night, experiencing local driving at its most adventurous
without seat belts, as the driver lights one cigarette after another in a
petrol-reeking car while overtaking and tail-gating traffic without lights.
These experiences are a far cry for those who seek simpler forms of
relaxation. To them, Kenya means little more than the beaches running north
and south from Mombasa, with hotels offering packages at prices more
attractive than in many other resorts around the world.
At the more expensive end of the market are niche hotels such as Hemingways,
named after the novelist, which specialises in offering deep-sea fishing
trips, or the equally luxurious Lonrho-owned Mount Kenya Safari Club.
For the urbanite, Nairobi offers a large range of cosmopolitan cuisines
including French, Thai and Mongolian, as well as the more indigenous grilled
zebra and wildebeest.
For those tempted to sample a more distinctly African experience, there are
safaris in abundance. Herds of tourists in four-wheel drive vehicles now
trek across the country's game reserves each year in search of wallowing
hippos, hunting cheetahs and mating lions.
At one extreme, visitors can arrange their own safaris or join organised
groups to drive around and camp in the country's parks. At the other end of
the scale, they can stay in high-priced 'tented camps' where they sleep
under canvas.
