FT  29 AUG 94 / Media Futures: A fever caused by fear - Victoria Griffith on
the race by US publishers to get on-line
US publications have been racing to go on-line over the last 18 months. The
Chicago Tribune, the San Jose Mercury News, the New York Times and Time
magazine are all now available through personal computer on-line services,
and the Los Angeles Times, the Washington Post and Newsweek will be on-line
by the end of the year.
The on-line fever appears to be partly motivated by fear. 'A lot of people
in this sector are afraid,' says John Lux, on-line editor of the Chicago
Tribune. 'We were battered by other technologies such as radio and
television, and people think the information highway might shrink us again.
I think newspapers will be around for a long time. But we also have an
opportunity to embrace this new technology, and put some life into a staid
industry.'
Newspapers and magazines are still feeling their way in the electronic
world. 'We're going to be shaping the service as we go along,' says Victor
Perry, vice president of new business development of the Los Angeles Times.
'This is new to us. We don't pretend to have all the answers, but it's
important to get on the learning curve now. Newspapers without on-line
services will be left behind.'
The first step for most publications is to make their articles available -
usually for a fee - to users of an on-line service. The number of people who
will actually read newspapers on-line, though, is probably very limited.
'It's not an ideal way to browse a newspaper,' says Robert Ingle, president
and executive editor of the San Jose Mercury News. 'The amount you pay to
load the articles into your computer over the telephone is more expensive
than buying a paper, and most people don't enjoy reading text on a computer
screen. For on-line services to take the place of newspapers you need
technology such as a flat panel, an easily portable screen, and wireless
communication.'
Still, some demand for on-line articles exists. Readers often like to access
local newspapers when they are out of town. They also get to read the
articles earlier, since publications usually make material available several
hours - or in the case of Time magazine, one or two days - before the
printed version.
On-line graphics are also improving. More publications are offering
photographs through the wire. The Washington Post plans to introduce a
service which resembles a newspaper layout, complete with headlines,
photographs and captions. Newsweek will include sound in its package.
Because the demand for on-line reading is limited, publications are trying
to lure in customers with other services. Many of the on-line newspapers,
for instance, offer extensive data bases. The Chicago Tribune and the San
Jose Mercury News services allow readers to pull out past articles and
supplementary information. A piece on the crime bill, for instance, would
probably include a detailed history of its struggle through Congress. The
New York Times, Washington Post and the Los Angeles Times also plan to offer
plenty of local interest information, such as restaurant and entertainment
guides. The guides would be coupled with past reviews from the newspapers.
Interactivity - or communication with readers - is also a key selling point
of the services. Almost all the services provide bulletin boards for readers
to post comments and questions on articles they have seen. The New York
Times holds formal, schedules sessions during which readers can 'talk'
on-line to journalists and editors. Time magazine has hosted celebrity
hours, during which readers can communicate electronically with well-known
personalities.
'Interactivity is one of the main reasons people subscribe to a service like
this,' says Richard Duncan, executive editor of Time magazine. 'It's an
important way for journalists, who are usually too much in their own world,
to get in touch with their readers.'
Publications are unsure, though, how far interactivity can be taken. 'It can
quickly get to the point that demands on journalists will become
overwhelming,' says Duncan of Time. 'If journalists answer every inquiry, it
would eventually take up all their time. But if you hire specialists to
answer the letters, it defeats the purpose of the interactivity. The
industry will have to sort this out.'
Other questions remain unresolved. Pricing issues, for instance, will be
essential to the services' success, and advertising will play a key role in
keeping down costs. 'Advertisements are crucial to allow us to provide the
service at a low cost,' says Michael Rogers, managing editor of Newsweek
InterActive. Yet publications are unsure how best to integrate advertising.
Many hope to allow readers to purchase items from advertisers directly
on-line in the near future. The Los Angeles Times also plans to provide
catalogues, and advertising packages on-line. 'For instance, we could run a
What's New at Walt Disney programme as an on-line form of advertisement,'
says Perry, of the Los Angeles Times.
It is also unclear how much updating readers will demand from the on-line
publications. 'We do a certain amount of updating during the day,' says Mark
Potts, director of product development for Digital Ink, the on-line arm of
the Washington Post. 'If our own stories aren't updated, readers can access
updates through the wire services, like Reuters and the Associated Press. We
don't have the resources to update everything, though.'
Despite the uncertainties, on-line services have already established a firm
place in the news industry. Consumers may not cancel their subscriptions for
printed news yet, but many seem ready to plug into electronic information.
For the old-fashioned newspaper and magazine industry, the on-line services
may provide an important impetus to an otherwise slow-growing market.
