FT  26 JAN 94 / Riddle of the three Guys: Belgium's French-speaking
Socialists face allegations of corruption
The ancient palais de justice in Liege stands on the brink of a vast hole,
excavated years ago as part of a plan to renovate the Belgian city's central
square. But while the city authorities argue about what to do with the hole,
Mrs Veronique Ancia, one of the palais' investigating magistrates, is
opening up a second pit with an inquiry which threatens to undermine one of
the partners in Belgium's fragile coalition government.
Mrs Ancia is digging into allegations of bribery and corruption in Belgium's
French-speaking Socialist party, the PS. Liege, in the francophone region of
Wallonia, is getting used to such probes: in 1992, for example, the city's
image was tarnished when the then mayor of the Socialist stronghold was
given a 28-month suspended prison sentence for accepting bribes to award
parking meter and property contracts to certain companies.
But what sets Mrs Ancia's inquiry apart from more humdrum allegations of
Belgian political corruption is the fact that it was triggered by a murder,
and that it could destabilise the country's fragile four-party government,
made up of Christian Democrats and Socialists from both sides of Belgium's
French-Dutch language divide.
On Friday, her inquiry claimed its first ministerial victims. Mr Guy Coeme
quit as Belgium's deputy prime minister, quickly followed by Mr Guy
Spitaels, respected head of the regional government of Wallonia, and Mr Guy
Mathot, Wallonia's interior minister.
Mrs Ancia wants to interview the trio - inevitably dubbed 'the three Guys' -
about claims that bribes were promised to the PS in return for awarding a
BFr8bn helicopter contract to Agusta, the Italian aircraft manufacturer, in
1988. The Belgian parliament has already agreed to the partial lifting of Mr
Spitaels' and Mr Mathot's immunity from prosecution. Mr Coeme yesterday
asked a separate parliamentary committee to clear the way for him to defend
his position in the Belgian supreme court.
All three deny any wrongdoing. Agusta itself is due to hold a press
conference on the affair next week, and is expected to repeat its denials
that it has been connected with illegal financial dealings.
So is the Agusta affair just an easily contained internal ruction affecting
one coalition partner, or a potential earthquake that could bring down the
government?
What is certain is that extensive leaks of Mrs Ancia's report to parliament
have provoked a rare passion in the Belgian media and exposed divisions in
the PS which will be difficult to patch over. De Standaard, the heavyweight
Flemish daily, summed up the crisis on Monday with a cartoon of a crumbling
PS headquarters with a large, helicopter-shaped hole punched in one
supporting wall.
Leading francophone Socialists admit that the main reason the affair is
provoking such fervour is that Mrs Ancia's inquiry into the Agusta affair
was triggered by her parallel investigation into the 1991 murder of Mr Andre
Cools, former PS leader and prominent Liege Socialist. He was gunned down in
a Liege street as he left his mistress's apartment. But although rumour is
rife, nobody has yet proved a connection between the Agusta bribery
allegations and the killing.
However, a deep desire to seek a solution to the Cools assassination has
prompted some prominent members of the PS and friends of the dead man to
testify against their colleagues in the Agusta affair. As Mr Philippe
Busquin, leader of the PS, said at the weekend: 'The basis of the problem
(in the PS) is that behind all this there is a death - and not just
anybody's death - the death of a former PS president. We have to know who
was behind the assassination of Andre Cools, and the mixing of this problem
. . . with other problems has created an emotive and passionate atmosphere
which is quite understandable.'
Such emotion is not calculated to assist Belgium's coalition government,
which has spent most of its 22-month life tiptoeing along the edge of
crisis. So far, Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the tenacious Flemish Christian
Democrat prime minister, has managed to sidestep other pitfalls. Partly that
is because the government parties are afraid that opposition parties -
particularly the right-of-centre liberals - might bounce them out of office
in an early general election. Mr Dehaene has also profited from that fear,
which has enabled him to push through difficult measures such as
constitutional reform and budget cuts.
However, before Friday's clutch of resignations, the coalition was beginning
to look queasy. In particular, the opposition was pressing home its
criticism of the government, which is still trying to implement unpopular
austerity measures and cut the country's budget deficit.
Then last Wednesday, MPs from the Flemish coalition parties prevented Mr
Dehaene from blocking three opposition parliamentary motions calling for the
resignation of Mr Coeme. It was a clear signal that the deputy prime
minister, and his colleagues in the regional government, would have to go,
or risk opening up the old Flemish-Walloon political divide which has
brought down previous coalitions.
According to observers, the ministers' departure came just at the right
moment, as international investors in Belgian bonds and currency began to
question the government's chances of survival. Mr Peter Praet, economist at
Generale de Banque, Belgium's biggest bank, says that even after weeks
proclaiming their innocence, the trio finally realised they had a 'political
responsibility' to resign.
The decision appears temporarily to have defused the political tension. At
the weekend, the coalition parties reaffirmed their commitment to continue
in government, in spite of the large-scale national and regional ministerial
reshuffle provoked by the turmoil within the PS. The standard PS line on the
affair has also become clear: from the grassroots upwards, francophone
Socialist officials are echoing their president's call for 'clarity and
respect for the judicial procedure'. Apart from that, it is business as
usual.
However, with European elections due in June and local ones in October, the
opposition is not going to let the matter drop. The Flemish liberals, in
particular, want to push through plans for a 'clean hands' bill which would,
they say, curb corruption, clean up party financing and underpin the
independence of public servants, who are said to be depend too much on
political patronage.
Plans for legislation were already laid, say the liberals, before the
political row over Agusta, but several government politicians have accused
them of profiting from the occasion, in particular by organising a
fact-finding trip to Italy last week for two deputies to examine the
country's anti-corruption measures.
Critics of the mission believe parallels between Italian and Belgian
corruption scandals have been exaggerated. But Mr Hugo Coveliers, one of the
MPs on last week's trip, claims there are similarities. 'The problem is, if
you have a weak authority, a weak administration, then groups like the Mafia
and others are going to try and capture it: I think in some parts of this
country that has been done,' he says.
All sides agree on one point, that Mrs Ancia is the only person who has a
chance of shedding light on what really lay behind the award of the Agusta
contract and the murder of Mr Andre Cools. And although she has herself been
accused of political motivation (she is a Christian Democrat) and the leaked
details of her dossier have been criticised for their lack of substance, she
alone has the tenacity to pursue the inquiry until the Agusta and Cools
affairs are finally solved.
Until she completes that task, the PS and, by extension, the government will
have to face up to more buffeting from the opposition over the Agusta
affair. But it seems unlikely that any of the government parties will want
to force an election. As the prime minister pointed out in a radio interview
on Monday, no Belgian party has ever gained by quitting a coalition
prematurely.
