FT  16 AUG 94 / Personal View: Clever trick but the cracks remain
The privatisation of the water industry was, and remains, the least popular
and most problematic of utility privatisations. In the first comprehensive
regulatory review, Ian Byatt, water industry regulator and former Treasury
civil servant who has become the most respected of public utility
regulators, seems to have pulled off the trick of simultaneously satisfying
water companies, consumers and the stock market.
Water bills should rise by far less in the next five years than in the last,
and yet water share prices emerged at the end of July with substantial
pluses across the board.
But this has been achieved by papering over some of the large cracks in the
structure of the industry. The most important of these cracks is the divorce
between economic regulation and environmental regulation - between the
determination of what water quality standards should be and how they should
be paid for.
This divorce seems to have much to commend it. We all want our water to be
safe, and what it costs should always be secondary. This is not the subject
of concern - the days when you risked contracting cholera or typhoid from
British drinking water disappeared a long time ago.
What is at issue is whether concentrations of pesticides, already far below
levels at which there is any likely danger to health, should be reduced
further - from one thimbleful per swimming pool of water to one
tea-spoonful.
Excessive quantities of nitrates in water can cause blue baby syndrome. But
the incidence of this is negligible and the last case occurred more than 20
years ago. We can be less sanguine about the ways we dispose of our sewage.
So how much should we be expected to pay for higher quality standards? In
other markets, such as the car or holiday market, people make up their own
minds - a Rolls Royce for some, a Lada for others; you can visit Mont-ego
Bay while I go to Black-pool.
In the water industry, the archetype of natural monopolies, the quality of
water supplied is the same for everyone. You can ask some people what they
want, but only those who have undertaken their own extensive research would
find it easy to answer the question: What price would you pay to have x mg
of nitrates per x litres of water rather than y mg?. Nor is it clear how you
would analyse the different answers.
The exercise in customer consultation which the Office of Water Services
required the water companies to undertake - the preparation of a 'market
plan' for a product for which there is no competitive market - does not
seem, in the end, to have led very far.
Most people's answer to the question about spending Pounds x to have x mg of
nitrates per 1,000 litres of water rather than y mg would be: 'Someone
qualified should decide that.'
The basic weakness of the existing structure is that there is no one with
responsibility for posing such questions or implementing the results.
Water quality standards are imposed by the European Union with virtually no
regard to, and certainly no knowledge of, what the likely cost implications
are for the countries on which they are imposed.
European Union involvement in all this is a piece of pure opportunism. In
the 1980s, Brussels saw a chance to seize the moral high ground from member
states by aggressive and populist promotion of environmental standards. It
is, as a matter of fact, difficult to think of a better issue for the
application of subsidiarity than water quality.
If we choose to drink and bathe in dirty water, that is really our own
business, and for Brussels to fine us when we admit to doing so is only to
add public insult to private injury.
But whether it is sensible for the EU to be concerned with these matters or
not, it is the EU which has control of the standards, and they are enforced
in the UK by government agencies which have no real discretion in
implementation of the rules.
The economic regulator - Ofwat - has to reconcile its obligations to ensure
the proper financing of water company functions with tariffs that customers
can afford and are willing to pay.
The answer Ofwat has adopted has been to squeeze all expenditure that is not
legally necessary to keep rises in charges within acceptable levels while
meeting EU requirements.
In the south west, where the cost of waste water standards is greatest, this
objective cannot be squared. In the rest of the country, other kinds of
investment - to meet growing water demand, in security and replacement -
have been arbitrarily cut back. That may matter to customers, but no-one has
asked them.
The principal argument for water privatisation was that it would allow a
more rational approach to investment planning.
It was intended to be an antidote to the decades in which those in the water
industry put forward ambitious plans for capital spending which were
successively squeezed by a Treasury anxious to keep the charges down and
avoid burdens on taxpayers.
Five years on, substitute Ofwat for Treasury: otherwise, nothing much has
changed.
John Kay is chairman of London Economics and Professor of Economics at the
London Business School
