FT  28 OCT 94 / Mobil shapes up for next round: Richard Waters meets Lucio
Noto who says the cuts are not over
Lucio Noto interrupts impatiently: 'Chop. Chop. Chop.' In his blunt Brooklyn
way, the new chairman of Mobil leaves you in no doubt about how he plans to
raise earnings at the US's second biggest energy group.
It is a message Wall Street likes. On Tuesday, the day after Mobil had
announced it was on track for another round of restructuring, its shares
jumped Dollars 3 to Dollars 83 1/4 .
The race to shrink the US's biggest energy groups is on, and Mobil - a late
starter - is trying to claw its way back from behind. Its return on capital,
at around 9 per cent, lags that of its main competitors.
'We have an asset base that we have to work on, we have to get more out of
it,' says Mr Noto. 'We have to get our returns up by a point and a half, or
two. If we don't do this, we aren't going to be here.'
His stark message, in an interview before this week's announcement, makes
clear the cost-cutting at Mobil and other US energy groups is far from over.
Mr Noto, who became Mobil chairman in March, has no comforting messages to
deliver to employees, only the promise of more upheaval.
Mobil has seen its workforce decline by 6,000 people in the past two years,
to 54,000. Since 1991, the company claims to have taken Dollars 675m out of
its controllable costs. Over the next three, says Mr Noto, they should fall
by as much again.
His aim is to lift Mobil's after-tax profits by a half, to an annual Dollars
3bn, over the next five years. Like other energy groups, Mobil is no longer
looking to oil prices to bail it out.
.New projects are now assessed against a range of assumptions for oil
prices. 'We haven't seen any projects that depend on crude at more than
Dollars 15 (a barrel),' says Mr Noto.
The next slice of cost cuts may not be easy. Mobil has been focusing on
shrinking the costs of each of its divisions (the most recent round,
announced in July, will involve the loss of one in five of the jobs in its
chemicals business).
Now, the company is looking for ways of removing overlap across the group.
For example, each part of the group has its own computing operations,
creating duplication both between the divisions and with the group's central
computing functions.
'There is a hell of a lot of duplication,' says Mr Noto. 'Some of it is
natural, but some of it is bullshit, some of it is turf, some of it is
getting one up on the next guy. To take the next step down, you have to look
at these shared cost pots.'
While cost-cutting is likely to remain one of the main factors driving
earnings in the short term, Mobil should also get a lift from the cyclical
rebound in its petrochemicals business. After-tax profits, which slid to
Dollars 44m last year from Dollars 558m in 1989, bounced back to Dollars
148m in the first nine months of this year.
Mr Noto, though, sounds a note of caution. 'I think there's too much
happiness in the chemical business today. It's probably not going to last.'
The rebound in petrochemical profits is threatened by additional production
capacity due to start up in the coming months, he warns. Any long-term
recovery in margins will not come until the end of the decade.
In the longer term, Mobil's spread of big international projects, moderately
successful exploration record (it has replaced 95 per cent of its production
over the past five years) and extensive interests in natural gas are likely
to place it among the more diversified and stable of the US energy groups.
'It has a very well-balanced exploration programme,' says Mr Paul Ting, an
oil industry analyst at Oppenheimer in New York. Ten years ago, 52 per cent
of Mobil's oil and gas production took place in the US. By 1993, that had
fallen to 35 per cent.
This year, Mobil became the first US company to return to drilling in
Vietnam. It has been slower than other Western groups to enter Russia -
though given the delays in getting projects there started, that may not
prove much of a hindrance.
Having a finger in a broad range of overseas ventures is essential if Mobil
is to maintain its reserves. It will only be able to replace about half of
its annual production of 600m barrels of oil from extending existing fields,
says Mr Noto. 'We have to find 300m from new plays.'
In the near term, the biggest addition to Mobil's upstream earnings is
likely to come from two large liquefied natural gas projects in Quatar.
The first, in which the company has a 10 per cent interest, should start
production in early 1987. But the real pay-off will come from the second, in
which it has a far more significant 30 per cent stake.
In its downstream refining and marketing operations, Mobil is more exposed
to Asia Pacific than most, and has suffered from the collapse of refining
margins in the area this year.
Though a depressant on short-term profits, Mr Noto claims the collapse will
help Mobil by discouraging rivals from building new refineries in the
region. 'The US is still our biggest market, it is still important to us: we
are loyal Americans, we like to see America prosper,' he says. But adds:
'The opportunities here are closing off and the opportunities abroad are
opening up.'
