FT  08 SEP 94 / Bancassurance's golden egg loses some of its shine: Alison
Smith doubts the benefit of diversification
When one of the UK's larger and steadier retail financial organisations  -
Halifax Building Society - plans to set up its own life insurance
subsidiary, it may seem heretical to question the benefits of bancassurance.
Yet half-year results for organisations which have set up subsidiaries
suggest limitations on the strategy - which involves selling financial
services products through bank and building society branch networks.
The most spectacular drop was at Black Horse Financial Services, the Lloyds
Abbey Life arm which sells only to customers of Lloyds Bank, which reported
a 40 per cent drop in sales for the first half of the year. Other
bancassurers also reported flat or worse results.
The underlying logic behind bancassurance remains: it offers a low-cost,
high-productivity method of distribution. A wholly-owned subsidiary gives
the bancassurer control over the product and gives it all the profit from
sales.
But bancassurers are affected, like their competitors, by pressures such as
the increasing costs of meeting regulators' training and compliance
procedures.
'The typical Barclays customer will have a relationship with a number of
other providers who are in bancassurance as well,' says Mr Ken Bignall,
chairman of Barclays Life.
The specific limits within which bancassurance works helps to keep costs
down, but also mean checks on their growth.
At Woolwich Life, the jointly-owned subsidiary of Woolwich Building Society
and Sun Alliance insurance, the range of products is deliberately
mortgage-related.
Mr Michael Turner, chief executive, says this enables them to focus training
and systems on these products. However, it provides less prospect of
developing income streams which are particularly beneficial when the housing
market is depressed. 'The mortgage market has been pretty flat, and business
has been mirroring that,' he says.
Bancassurers restrict themselves to the bank's customer bases. This may not
seem much restriction when, as in the case of Barclays and TSB Group this
can total 7m, but only TSB believes it can aim to provide financial services
to more than half its customers. Most other bancassurers expect about a 30
per cent penetration of the retail customer base.
Mr Stephen Maran, chief executive of Lloyds Abbey Life, says that while
there is a finite customer base, customers who have bought life insurance
once are likely to do so again. He adds, however, that the customer base
will mature over time. 'Then you have to find other affinity groups, and do
the same.'
A further restriction lies in customers' tendency to think of financial
institutions in separate categories, even when they offer similar ranges of
services.
A poll for the National Consumer Council in July showed that for current
accounts people were most likely to go to a bank, but for life insurance
most likely to go to a life company.
Mr Nathan Moss, managing director of Midland Bank personal finance, admits
that the expansion of the range of services does take time to feed through.
Similarly, Mr Lawrence Churchill, chief executive of NatWest Life, says that
only about 30 per cent of National Westminster customers realise they can go
to the bank for a pension plan. 'We have to build awareness that NatWest is
not just where you go for cash.'
There are two other increasing restrictions. The more important is the drop
in bank customers visiting bank branches.
A recent survey by Mori for ICL the computer company suggested that only
around two-thirds of bank customers enter their branch regularly. Some
bankers say even that figure seems too high.
Banks then have to develop other strategies for contacting customers, such
as direct mail, where the impact of the brand and the existing relationship
may be diluted.
'We have to use a different communication channel to speak to these
customers,' says Mr Peter Ellwood, TSB group chief executive. 'We now get
quite a lot of our contacts from writing to customers. We can also speak to
customers over the phone.'
Secondly the passing of information about customers from the bank to a life
insurance subsidiary, is being restricted under pressure from consumer
groups.
The financial services industry is under pressure both for conventional life
companies or bancassurers. As the number of bancassurers increases, so their
total market share is likely to increase as well, but perhaps not at the
overall volumes of business or at the profitability that might once have
been envisaged.
As Mr Bignall says:'I think the advantage of bancassurers has been
significantly exaggerated'.
