FT  12 DEC 94 / Peace primes Irish trade links: John Murray Brown on the
potential for cross-border business
In Belfast you can barely find a free parking space for all the cars from
the Irish Republic, bearing their distinctive blue plates. In the wake of
the paramilitary ceasefires the city is buzzing with Christmas shoppers -
and some shopkeepers are even willing to accept Irish punts.
Economists expect a boom in cross-border economic activity if the peace
process holds.
The potential is considerable. Two-way trade was about Pounds 1.2bn in 1992,
with Northern Ireland incurring a deficit of Pounds 357m.
Mr Paul Gorecki, of the Northern Ireland Economic Council, an independent
advisory body set up by the government, says it would be wrong to exaggerate
the differences between the north and south. He said: 'We're not dealing
with East and West Germany or even the US and Canada.'
Both have high unem-ployment, a high birth rate, a shrinking manufacturing
base and an overdependence on exchequer funding, whether from the Treasury
in Northern Ireland's case or European Union funds in the repub-lic's.
Already Northern Ireland Electricity, the privatised utility, is to restore
the north-south interconnector with the Electricity Supply Board. It was
blown up by the IRA in the early 1970s.
This will create savings for the consumer and provide both companies with
trading opportunities. British Telecommunications is understood to be
interested in opportunities arising from the privatisation of Telecom
Eireann.
Private companies are also refocusing on an all-Ireland strategy to maximise
efficiencies. Takeover activity in areas such as food retailing will spur
the process.
There are difficulties, however. One is a lack of shared information on
cross-border trade. Companies also face poor roads and telecommunications.
Other problems are those associated with any foreign investment - the
adverse currency risk and the difficulties in pursuing payment in a foreign
jurisdiction.
Historically the two economies grew apart at partition in the 1920s. Heavy
industry such as shipbuilding, and the manufacturing sectors such as linen,
brewing and distilling located in the north. The southern economy remained
dependent on sales of farm products and commodities and over-reliant on the
UK for much of its exports.
The real constraint is political. The joint framework document which both
governments hope will form the basis for a constitutional settlement for
Ulster envisages greater cross-border economic links. Unionists are
concerned, however, that this could be the nationalists' Trojan horse for
their ultimate goal of a united Ireland.
Investment is particularly contentious because it would involve the
respective government agencies - Northern Ireland's Industrial Development
Board and the republic's Industrial Development Agency.
Mr Kieran McGowan, managing director of the IDA, said joint tourism
initiatives and trade missions would benefit both agencies. He said: 'But
with IDB we are competitors. We would talk about the issues that any
competitors would talk about. If the ceasefire holds, that competition will
intensify.'
The strategies of the two agencies differ markedly - the republic relying on
a 10 per cent corporate tax and the IDB enticing investors with big capital
grants.
So far much of the foreign investment on both sides of the border has been
what Mr Gorecki at NIEC calls 'stand alone - easy entrance and easy exit'.
The challenge for authorities north and south is to persuade existing and
new investors to deepen their roots in the community, through more local
sourcing and research links with local universities, and sharing
subcontractors on both sides of the border.
The private sector is setting the pace. Ulster Bank has an extensive network
in the south - in small towns such as Killarney its branch offices display
the logo in Gaelic.
Monaghan Mushrooms in the republic, which accounts for 25 per cent of the UK
fresh mushroom market, is one of a cluster of food companies near the border
with Northern Ireland. Monaghan provides compost to small farmers on both
sides of the border, buying back the mushrooms.
The operation also provides pizza toppings for Heinz's Dundalk factory in
the republic. Heinz's decision to locate in Dundalk was to take advantage of
IDA incentives, and the proximity to the Larne port in Northern Ireland.
Fruit of the Loom, the US clothing manufacturer, also operates on both sides
of the border.
Mr Gorecki believes with the peace in place, the first question will be
whether the IDB can continue with its generous grants. This will depend on
the IDA's strategy. Currently, the 10 per cent tax incentive in the republic
is assured until the year 2010.
