FT  05 FEB 94 / Tarmac aims to dig deep in Norway
A large chunk of the rocky Norwegian coastline could shortly be finding its
way into British motorways, hospitals, offices and homes.
Tarmac, the UK contractor and building materials group, has acquired the
right to buy and develop one of Europe's biggest quarries at Jossingfjord,
which is 70 miles south of Stavanger.
Yesterday the company announced that it had received a NKr10m (Pounds 1m)
grant from the Norwegian Development Bank to help to pay for geological
studies and the preparation of detailed plans. Up to 40 per cent of the
high-grade igneous anorthosite could be exported to the UK by the late 1990s
for use in construction projects.
The quarry scheme, including a deep-water harbour in thenearby fjord, is
expected to cost up to NKr750m. Tarmac has agreed to hide the quarry by
scooping out the inside of the hill, leaving its sides intact.
The anorthosite will be crushed and transported on conveyor belts along a
1,000-yard tunnel through the wall of the hill to the dock, which will be
capable of handling ships of up to 70,000 tonnes.
Mr Peter Rothwell, commercial director of Tarmac Quarry Products, said:
'This is a very beautiful coastline and wewant to do nothing to spoil it.
'These are the most comprehensive environmental protection safeguards we
have had to meet.'
Tarmac has preliminary planning permission for the development, which it
initially expects to produce about 5m tonnes a year.
The company produces about 40m tonnes of aggregate annually in the UK out of
a total British output of 230m tonnes.
The plan to develop a Norwegian quarry comes as the UK government is
considering restricting planning permission for quarrying to protect the
environment.
A consultation paper published by the Department of the Environment last
year proposed that local authorities base future planning permission on
providing 80 per cent of demand from local quarries, with the shortfall made
up from imports and recycling.
Yet ministers are concerned that the new planning guidelines, which are due
to be published shortly, should not impede recovery in the construction
market.
