FT  13 SEP 94 / UK Economy: Factory-gate price growth is higher than
expected
The price of goods leaving factory gates rose in most manufacturing sectors
last month, providing one of the first indications that companies have
started to pass the recent rises in the cost of raw materials to their
customers.
The Central Statistical Office yesterday said that output prices rose by 0.3
per cent in August compared with July - its biggest monthly increase for
four months.
Measured without the volatile food, drink, tobacco and petroleum sectors,
output prices rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.4 per cent, month on month,
and by 2.1 per cent in the year to August.
The rise was larger than City forecasts. It follows several months in which
output prices were relatively flat, although raw-material costs have been
rising steadily, fuelled by commodity price increases.
Since the start of the year input prices have risen by slightly more than 6
per cent, while output prices have risen by only 1.2 per cent.
Although most analysts have been predicting that commodity price increases
would eventually feed through to output prices, many had suspected that
companies would not be able to make price rises stick in the face of strong
customer resistance.
Mr Adrian Cooper, UK economist at brokers James Capel said: 'These figures
are obviously disappointing. You can't read too much into monthly figures
but they are the first sign that manufacturers are able to make price
increases stick and commodity price rises are feeding through.'
The rise in output prices was particularly noteworthy, analysts added,
because the pace of the rise in input prices had actually slowed in August.
The cost of raw materials and fuel purchased by the manufacturing sector
rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.4 per cent between July and August, and by
3.4 per cent in the year to August. This was considerably lower than earlier
this year, when input prices rose by 1.4 per cent, month on month, in June
and 0.6 per cent in July.
Without seasonal adjustment, input prices fell 0.6 per cent between July and
August, partly due to a seasonal fall in home-produced food manufacturing
input prices.
Another factor which reduced the seasonally adjusted input prices was a 0.9
per cent drop in fuel prices between July and August, and a 4 per cent fall
in crude oil prices. These falls were partly offset by rises in the price of
chemical inputs, imported food products and other imported goods. However,
the cost of metals also fell by 0.6 per cent in August compared with July,
reversing the pattern seen in recent months when rising commodity prices
have affected some metals sectors.
On the output side, the rise in prices was spread fairly evenly across most
sectors. The petroleum sector saw the fastest rise, with prices up 1.9 per
cent between July and August. The textile sector also saw a significant rise
of 0.7 per cent in the month.
Prices in the basic metals, chemicals and transport sectors rose by slightly
over 0.5 per cent, while rubber and plastics, pulp, paper and publishing
goods grew by 0.45 per cent.
The only price fall was in the wood and wood-products sector. The cost of
goods produced by food manufacturers, electrical and optical equipment
factories and other machinery sectors were flat.
