FT  12 NOV 94 / Weekend Money (Financial Planning): Make the most of your
cash - Anthony Bailey begins a series on budgeting through life
There is, ultimately, only one reason for having money: to spend it. But a
problem for most people is that they never seem to have quite enough of the
stuff.
Financial planning can help to square the circle, though. The art is to use
income, savings and investments in the most tax-efficient and suitable way
now to produce the money you need to spend in future.
No two people's lives are the same, of course. So, when it comes to
generalising on financial planning needs throughout a typical life, many
people will spot ways in which they are atypical.
Some become grandparents in their 40s while their peers are just starting
out on raising a family. Many go on to higher education in their late
'teens. Others do not taste university life until much later, while some
return to the lecture room for a second time as mature students.
The majority will spend their working lives as employees but some will set
up in business on their own. But the dream of abandoning a high-paying,
wheeler-dealer City job to run an antiquarian bookshop in Surrey is more
likely to become a reality if plotting the escape route begins early.
Our lifetime chart of financial hurdles can be only a generalisation. But
most people will find in it some pointers to their own future and, perhaps,
more than just one or two holes in their present plannning.
The 20s
This is a time when spending desires and resources may feel most out of
kilter. Would it not be a better system if people could enjoy their
retirement while they were young and healthy, travel the world, have a good
time - and then enter the labour market at the age of 40? Alas, it does not
work like that.
Young people who still live with their parents may find themselves flush
with cash. They are, in fact, in a good position to spend just a little less
on clothes, holidays and fast cars and put money aside for various future
needs. But many twentysomethings are burdened with debts acquired during
student days. They struggle to pay the rent.
Friendly banks are more than happy to allow large overdrafts to run for
years if they are raking in charges. But it is usually possible to find
cheaper ways to borrow and to wipe out the debts over a planned period.
Strictly speaking, it is illogical to save money while the cost of borrowing
elsewhere exceeds the interest earned. In practice, the discipline of saving
money each month through a standing order is more likely to produce a cash
sum which will be needed, for instance, to buy a home.
The 30s and 40s
If you felt hard-up in your 20s, the real problems of juggling with money
can begin when you take on a mortgage, a marriage and babies. Commitments
and responsibilities mean bills have to be met. The fanciful option of
giving up work and touring the world is no longer there. And where there
were two incomes when first you set up home with a partner, there might now
be only one.
The key to achieving long-term financial security is to consider things like
pensions, personal equity plans and life insurance as essential rather than
optional spending. Budget accordingly.
The 50s
These can turn out to be something of a golden age. Income from employment
is likely to be at its highest, children may have left home (or be
contributing to the household budget) and the mortgage could be nearly paid
off.
It should be a golden age for financial planning, too. But it could also be
a period of worry and panic if you have not yet started to think seriously
about retirement. Now is the time to look carefully at pension provision and
all other investments.
Work out when you can afford to retire, where you want to live, and how much
money you will need. Do not forget the reality of old age 30 years hence -
the extra costs of health problems, domestic help and perhaps, one day,
full-time nursing care.
The 60s and 70s
Good health and mental attitude willing, a planned retirement can be well
worth the wait. The prime concern will be the delicate balancing act of
maximising investment income while protecting capital to guard against
inflation.
Those who have built up a good reserve of assets will also be juggling with
another problem - passing on wealth to avoid inheritance tax while retaining
sufficient resources to see them through the 80s and and even 90s. Advice is
essential - and so is making sure you do not leave yourself short.
The 80s and beyond
Life can become expensive, and even low levels of inflation may now be
making an erstwhile good pension package look paltry. But if you have spent
a lifetime of careful financial planning, then you should be able to avoid a
cash crisis.
Is it really possible to square a recalcitrant circle? That is a question we
will try to answer in the rest of this series.
