FT  28 FEB 94 / Equity Markets: Fund managers see future in OTC derivatives
 -Risk and Reward
Derivatives fund management is crossing a new frontier with the advent of
funds investing in over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives.
Kleinwort Benson launched an open-end Derivative Products Fund in January
which specialises in OTC derivatives on global interest rates and is
incorporated in Ireland.
In April 1993, the fund management arm of Gottex, the Swiss swaps brokers,
launched its offshore Global Swap Fund, based in Bermuda, which has some
Dollars 90m under management. For the period to December 31 1993, it posted
an annualised return of 39.4 per cent.
Both the funds invest primarily in derivative instruments traded on the
inter-bank markets. These include interest-rate swaps, forward rate
agreements, options, swaptions and complex derivatives structures.
'These instruments allow for the construction of tailor-made payment, risk
and arbitrage profiles which cannot be replicated through other
instruments,' says Mr Konstantin von Schweinitz, who heads Kleinwort
Benson's derivative products group.
By contrast, 'cash instruments restrict dealing to available bonds and
provide little opportunity to establish forward positions, while dealing in
futures is limited to standardised contracts and delivery dates,' he says.
Both funds are targeted at professional investors: investment institutions
looking to diversify, financial institutions with limited access to OTC
markets, private investors, and professional money managers looking for
alternatives to managed futures funds.
'The swap market has been booming since 1980 and banks made very good,
consistent returns in it,' says Mr John Haam, who manages the G-Swap fund.
'But banks and large corporations are the only institutions who can trade in
the inter-bank market, and we wanted to offer these instruments to investors
who can't directly access this market.'
'The OTC market is much more flexible than exchange-traded markets - it
allows you to do exactly what you want rather than roughly what you want,'
says Mr David Moore, director at Credit Lyonnais Rouse.
One concern lies in understanding the risks these new types of funds may
represent.
'Investors will find it very difficult to assess the risks,' says David
Anderson, chairman of Allingham, Anderson, Roll &amp; Ross, which uses advanced
mathematical techniques for investment management.
'Do they have any audited, authorised past performance records? And how can
investors assess the counterparty risks involved?' he asks.
'One of the key reasons there are so few OTC funds is the problem of credit
risk,' concedes KB's Mr von Schweinitz.
'The OTC market has grown up on an unsecured basis and the creditworthiness
of its participants is a critical component.'
However, he says that KB 'deals with credit risk through securitising
individual transactions.'
All transactions are entered into on a two-way margin basis with
professional counterparties, limiting the counterparty risk of the fund to
the initial margin, he explains.
After the huge losses recently incurred by highly leveraged funds in
tumultuous bond and currency markets, some warn of the risks of investing in
complex derivatives traded in an unregulated market.
But according to Gottex's Mr Haam: 'It all depends on how you manage it  -
this sort of fund can be anything to anybody. You can run it like a bond
fund, a futures fund or a spread-arbitrage fund.'
