FT  14 APR 94 / Personal View: Services can offer scope for growth
In 1956 manufacturing employment in the UK peaked at 38 per cent of the
workforce; it has fallen relentlessly to less than 20 per cent today. Many
see this shrinkage as another symptom of British economic decline. In fact
it is a phenomenon common to all the richer first-world countries. Germany's
manufacturing jobs peaked in 1960, Japan's in 1973, France's in 1974 and the
US's in 1979. This suggests universal factors are at work. They include the
tendency for demand for services to rise faster than demand for goods in
rich countries, the shift in the labour force in favour of women who have
revealed a preference for more flexible service-sector jobs, and the impact
of labour-saving technology in manufacturing.
A new factor is that a growing number of third-world countries are
developing a strong manufacturing advantage. Initially the preserve of east
Asia, this advantage has spread to Latin America, India and parts of the
former Soviet bloc. Workforces have been educated and producer-friendly
economic policies adopted. Productivity is rising fast. This, combined with
low wages and rising domestic demand, provides a magnet for companies to
locate new manufacturing production in those countries.
The result will be intensified pressure on manufacturing jobs in the OECD
countries. Over the next 30 years, we estimate that the share of the
workforce employed in manufacturing will fall below 10 per cent in most rich
countries.
Can, or should, this job loss be resisted? As we climb out of recession,
with unemployment still high in Europe and growing in Japan, governments are
under great pressure to do so. However, protection - for example, tariffs or
anti-dumping duties on cheap manufactured imports - would be expensive and
self-defeating, as we learnt with the Common Agricultural Policy.
OECD governments should instead take the offensive. Too many people still
believe that services will never be truly tradeable. Our view is the
opposite: unless we can make services tradeable, by liberalising the rules
surrounding services, OECD countries are in for a bitter and ultimately
fruitless battle against developing countries over manufacturing goods.
An OECD shift away from manufacturing can be accommodated as long as two
conditions are fulfilled. First, service sector jobs must continue to grow.
Second, service companies must be able to compete internationally. The first
requirement poses little concern. In most OECD countries, job growth in
services has been much faster than in other parts of the economy for a long
time. The driving force for this is the growing demand for services, such as
design and business services, travel and entertainment.
There is little doubt such demand will continue to grow. The big question is
who will supply it? This is where the importance of trade in services
becomes critical. Traditionally, service companies such as telecoms,
insurance, electricity and airlines were restricted to their home market
and, as quid pro quo, were protected from international competition on their
home turf. This cosy arrangement has limited both industry size and
productivity growth. Economies of scale could not be sought beyond the home
market and competitive pressures there were not sufficient to drive
technological or managerial change. This catch-22 led to the erroneous
belief that services were inherently less capable of productivity growth
than manufacturing. Few in the fiercely competitive parts of the service
sector still believe that.
Market access is now the critical factor. Once service industries can expand
beyond home markets, they can gain from economies of scope of the kind that
economies of scale brought for manufacturing in the 1960s. To reap such
gains will require a trade regime that does more than lower trade barriers.
The new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade agreement contains a
framework for services, but the specifics must still be negotiated and some
fundamental thinking remains to be done. This deserves top priority.
Building the legal basis to make services fully tradeable will not be easy.
But equally, we must not underestimate the pressures that our economies will
face if we fail. In manufactures, about 50 per cent of world production is
traded. Even if services were only half as tradable as manufactures, that
would still imply scope for a doubling of service trade at today's output
levels. The potential gains are enormous. Our task now is to build the World
Trade Organisation, the Gatt's successor body, into the driver for this new
growth dynamic.
The authors are, respectively, chief economist of British Airways and
visiting fellow at Manchester Business School
