FT  26 APR 94 / Survey of A-Z of Computing (6): Pragmatic view prevails -
Enterprise Computing
The mainframe is dead: long live the enterprise server.
Computer manufacturers say organisations are finding that the traditional
central mainframe does after all have a place in the new world of
client-server systems and networked personal computers.
Indeed, although client-server and PC systems initially take work from the
mainframe, they later give it back even more.
'Just 12 to 18 months ago, people talked about choosing between mainframes
and client-server,' says Mr Peter Slavid, corporate systems business manager
at computer manufacturer ICL.
'Today, there is a more pragmatic view. People see that the future for
enterprise and departmental computing lies in making the most appropriate
and efficient use of both approaches.'
Mr Slavid says client-server was initially seen as a cheaper approach but
that this is no longer the case. Several studies over the last 18 months
support this view. Separate surveys by research firms Xephon, International
Technology Group and Ideas International conclude that in systems supporting
200 users the mainframe cost per user in equipment, software and staff is
40-50 per cent less than the networked PC cost.
The Xephon research shows mainframe systems are also 25 per cent cheaper
than client-server systems based on minicomputers.
Mr Barry Graham, a consultant working on the Xephon research, says the
increasing automation of mainframe operations and the falling costs of
processing power, running at around 10 per cent a year, mean mainframes are
becoming even more attractive.
'PC networks in particular were not designed for 100 people doing
complicated things,' he says. 'As you add users, you get queues, so you put
in more powerful file servers and other processors, so the costs increase.
With mainframes the reverse happens.'
The argument here is that mainframes are designed to handle large numbers of
users running big systems with fast access to big databases, so up to a
point users can be added without increasing the costs.
Researchers also point to hidden costs and other issues related to
distributed client-server and networked PC systems. These include the time
spent by office staff on running their systems instead of doing their own
work - put at 10 per cent of their time, including training, by research
firm Gartner Group. There are issues of file back-up, security, viruses,
unauthorised use of pirated software products and other matters which a
central mainframe operation, manned by specialist staff, deals with as a
simple routine.
Once the costs and issues are appreciated, the mainframe versus
client-server debate disappears and the right combination of the two
approaches can be selected, says Peter Slavid at ICL.
First, organisations remove from the mainframe the jobs that it is not good
at, such as word processing, plus applications which are truly departmental
systems. The mainframe workload initially declines. But, as end-users get
more and more of their own systems and their networks expand, the problems
of handling large volumes of data and managing big networks arise, problems
which mainframe data centres are used to handling.
So the mainframe's workload increases again, albeit in a different
direction, especially towards managing data. It becomes the enterprise
server in the client-server set-up, running the corporate databases.
Meanwhile, there are established corporate systems which the mainframe will
continue to run, at least for the time being.
'Most businesses are highly dependent on applications which have been
carefully built over the last 10-20 years,' says Mr David Heap, a consultant
at IBM.
'These are often called legacy applications, implying that they are
inflexible, of little value and soon to be replaced. I prefer to call them
trusted applications. They may lack flexibility but they provide the basic
information used to run the business.'
The dependence on 'legacy systems' is reflected in various surveys on
mainframe use. The research group, IDC last year found that over 80 per cent
of organisations planned to continue running mainframes. Even so, half of
those said new systems would be installed primarily on other equipment,
mainly Unix machines.
IDC concluded that 'traditional mainframes are not dead but they will become
a dead end'.
However, although mainframe use is apparently not declining significantly,
the suppliers' mainframe revenues are. Peter Slavid at ICL says revenues
from mainframes are falling by 10-15 per cent a year, yet the technology
performance is increasing at about the same rate, so the amount of mainframe
power in use is staying fairly stable.
In addition, both ICL and IBM say organisations are increasingly merging
data centres, saving money by running the same amount of work on fewer
machines and with fewer staff.
'Falling revenues can mean cuts in research and development but these are
offset by other developments,' says Peter Slavid. 'Manufacturers are
increasingly using commodity components. They are moving to open systems in
their operating systems. In addition they are introducing specialist add-on
processors, for example for database management. All these developments
maintain the improvements in price performance.'
Mr Slavid takes up the point about established 'legacy' systems and
concludes where he started, with pragmatism: 'Most big critical business
systems will continue to be run on the mainframe, if only for one simple
reason: it works.'
