FT  10 OCT 94 / Geld galore in Deutsche Telekom sale: Richard Lapper sees
banks chase a lucrative slice of Germany's giant share issue
Most international bankers would not willingly submit themselves to an
intensive oral examination by civil servants - especially if the language of
the test is German.
Yet for five days towards the end of last month, senior executives from at
least 19 leading international banks* patiently underwent the ordeal at the
ministry of post and telecommunications in Bonn. All had spent months
preparing written accounts of how they intended to sell the shares of
Deutsche Telekom to international investors when the giant
telecommunications company begins a massive capital-raising exercise - and
'part-privatisation' - in 1996.
The mandate to organise the sale is the most hotly contested on the market.
And the assessment process - conducted by civil servants from the finance
and post ministries, and officials from Deutsche Telekom, has been tough.
Rarely have so many banks been asked to tender for international equity
offers - only four or five were involved in other recent European cases.
Whoever eventually wins the mandate, all those competing agree that the
prize is highly attractive. Bankers will earn fees for raising at least
DM10bn (Pounds 4bn) and possibly up to DM20bn in a deal which will dilute
the government's existing 100 per cent ownership of Deutsche Telekom.
They are expecting the 'fee pool' to amount to at least at least DM360m on
the assumption that the fee structure will be similar to that adopted when
the government sold part of its stake in Lufthansa, the national airline,
last month. In the Lufthansa deal, fees for distribution are understood to
have amounted to 2.1 per cent, with fees related to administration and
underwriting amounting to a further 1 1/2 per cent, for a total of 3.6 per
cent.
Two German banks - Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank - helped the government
in last month's assessment process, and are widely expected to be asked to
place shares with German institutional and retail investors. They may also
be offered part of the international issue.
Analysts expect roughly 40 per cent of the issue to be placed with
international investors, implying that a minimum of some DM150m could be
left for the international placement. A big chunk of that would go to the
international bank which wins the role of global co-ordinator.
Morgan Stanley and SG Warburg are among those mentioned by competitors as
strong contenders. It is Goldman Sachs, however, that has the closest links
with Deutsche Telekom. Goldman advised it in its largest ever acquisition,
that of Hungarian telecommunications company Matav. 'It will be difficult to
prise the mandate away from Goldman,' says a banker at a rival US firm. The
winner would still need to allocate some of the fee for the international
placement to rival banks which would distribute smaller packages of shares
internationally. Typically, banks earn between 2 per cent and 12 per cent of
the lead bank fees for these subsidiary roles, known, for example, as 'lead
co-management', 'co-management' or simply 'management'.
In addition, the losers might also compete for another 'runners up' prize
since a separate bank is likely to be appointed to advise the German
government on its strategy.
Overall the immediate fees available for international bankers are not
considered by bankers to be especially lucrative, compared with some recent
exercises. Bankers are said to have earned more than Dollars 100m (Pounds
63m) in fees from one recent smaller Latin American issue, mainly because
fee rates were higher. And the overall task of marketing the issue,
Germany's second global equity issue, will not be easy. It will partly
depend on the parallel organisation of a retail issue in Germany, in a
country where equity investment is unfamiliar. The sheer size of the issue
could also be a problem in its own right. Large institutions may be
attracted to Deutsche Telekom but they already have a sizeable portfolio of
German stocks, and there are fears that in order to accommodate Deutsche
Telekom they could dump other stocks, depressing prices.
Set against these difficulties are two long-term attractions. Bankers know
that the winner of this first stage will be in pole position to win business
stemming from the future capital-raising exercises that analysts expect to
take place over the next five years and, after the expiry of current legal
restrictions in 2000, a possible fully fledged privatisation.
With Deutsche Telekom currently valued at between DM50bn and DM80bn, the
ultimate size of the prize for bankers could be very considerable indeed.
'If you win the first tranche the chances are you will get a senior role in
the others,' says one UK merchant banker.
'It's a landmark transaction. The perception is that anyone winning their
spurs doing it can expect to be in on the later stages of the deal,' adds a
rival.
And the winning bank would be in a good position to compete for mandates
stemming from other telecommunications privatisations, planned elsewhere in
Europe, Latin America and Asia.
*Among the banks which are understood to have sent submissions: Morgan
Stanley, Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brothers, Salomon Brothers, SG
Warburg, Kleinwort Benson, Barclays de Zoete Wedd, National Westminster, NM
Rothschild, Robert Fleming, Swiss Bank Corporation, CS First Boston, Union
Bank of Switzerland, and several French banks, including Banque Paribas,
Societe Generale and Banque Nationale de Paris.
Additional reporting by Nick Denton and Andrew Fisher
