FT  10 NOV 94 / International Company News: Siemens drops 17% after charges
Siemens, Germany's leading electrical and electronics group, is to pay an
unchanged DM13 dividend in spite of an unexpectedly sharp profits setback in
the year to the end of September.
Net earnings before extraordinary items dropped 17 per cent to DM1.65bn
(Dollars 1.1bn) because of higher restructuring charges, increased price
competition in important sectors and relatively weak investment income, the
group said yesterday.
However, the DM344m proceeds of the sale of a heart pacemaker subsidiary
raised total net profits 1 per cent to DM1.99bn. Executives had warned of a
maximum decline of up to 15 per cent.
Although yesterday's preliminary figures gave no earnings breakdown, recent
statements have suggested that core divisions - including public
telecommunications and the KWU power generation subsidiary - have been
squeezed especially hard by international price competition and the end of a
period of high demand after German reunification.
Group sales, up 10 per cent abroad and down 4 per cent at home, rose an
aggregate 4 per cent to DM84.6bn. Incoming orders increased 5 per cent due
solely to a 15 per cent increase in foreign demand, which accounted for 60
per cent of the total bookings. Domestic orders, which were 6 per cent lower
after six months, fell 7 per cent over the full year. Foreign demand, up 21
per cent at halfway, appeared to slow in the second half.
The group blamed weak demand for heavy plant and electrical equipment for
the drop in domestic orders. Most foreign growth came from the Americas and
Asia-Pacific.
The best results appeared to have been posted by divisions such as
automotive components and railways, which reported sales increases of 16 per
cent and 21 per cent respectively.
Siemens Nixdorf, the loss-making computer subsidiary, recorded a 2 per cent
turnover decline although domestic orders were reported to have increased
for the first time.
Semiconductors, a trouble spot, is believed to have returned to profit on
the back of a 43 per cent sales increase to DM3.1bn. Turnover at the Osram
lighting business, bolstered by the first-time consolidation of the US
Sylvania group, rose 82 per cent to DM5.4bn.
After adjustments for Osram and the pacemaker disposal, the group cut 21,000
jobs during the financial year, of which 17,000 were lost in Germany.
Meanwhile, the number of part-time workers rose 50 per cent to 21,000.
Lex, Page 24
