FT  02 APR 94 / Arts: Pungent soap - Theatre
Anthony Neilson's new play at the Finborough Arms (SW10) cocks a snook at
John Major's Back to Basics. That is an unsurprising thing for a new play to
do; but though this is a strongly written piece (by the author of
Penetrator, which recently transferred from the Finborough to the Royal
Court Upstairs), its satirical purpose is a touch too deliberate.
The final tableau of family life has been shadowed at the start, and the
intervening development of character and plot turns out to be largely a
strategy for making the ending seem as grotesque as possible.
Largely, but not entirely. The characters are interesting even if the plot
is melodramatic. Two effectively parent-less half-sisters are each living
with an older man: in one case a tramp who has lost his memory and is being
perversely persuaded by Fliss that he is really her long-lost father; in the
other a sadly middle-aged wife-deserter whose affair with Claire is
compromised by the fact that she is enjoying a sado-masochistic relationship
with his angry, layabout, Glaswegian son, Sid. Melodrama ensures a quota of
sticky ends.
The play unfolds in rapidly changing naturalistic scenes like a soap opera,
but has a pungent sexual frankness not yet available to TV and a certain
poetic force. Though Sid is verbally vicious in the best Glaswegian manner,
he can rise to the inclusive metaphor: kinky fun with Claire and some
tabasco becomes a vision of the burning up of the entire social fabric.
Dickie, his father, tells him that he left his wife because she had started
to 'move through life like treacle'. What happens inside a marriage, he
opines, 'is a mystery, like the pyramids or the cosmos'.
Poor kindly Dickie is trying his best to please young Claire but only
alienates her with his inept presents and his guzzling. Roger McKern brings
to the role a well-drawn pathos. Claire herself, reasonable though
hard-bitten, and only sheepishly kinky, is attractively taken by Sophie
Langham. Rachel Weisz is excellent as her 'mad', Sloaney sibling. Timothy
Barlow's Tramp stumbles about with mostly mute grandeur, gasping and
tormented. Alastair Galbraith's Sid is alarmingly close to home.
To make a soap opera convincing in a pub takes much ingenuity. The author,
directing, and his team have exploited every inch.
