FT  12 SEP 94 / Business Travel: BA relaunches Club Europe
British Airways will unveil today a Pounds 70m revamp of its Club Europe
business-class services.
It is the biggest investment BA has so far made in the European business
travel market. It comes at a time when European business travel is
recovering from recession and airlines are facing new challenges from the
imminent Eurostar Channel tunnel rail services and from growing
liberalisation in the European single aviation market.
In a study of the European travel market to coincide with the launch of the
new BA Club Class services, DeAnne Julius, BA's chief economist, notes that
European air travel continued to increase appreciably even during the last
three years of recession.
Between 1989 and 1992, the total number of passengers travelling for
business reasons in Europe rose by 15.5 per cent. Julius forecasts growth of
4.4 per cent in 1995 and 5.5 per cent in 1996 in European scheduled air
traffic.
These forecasts take into account what BA expects to be the likely effects
of the Channel tunnel. 'We expect it to divert a portion of current
city-centre London to Paris traffic, but also to stimulate additional
leisure travel between Britain the Continent,' she says.
BA does not expect the Channel tunnel's impact on total European air traffic
to be large. But a number of other industry analysts disagree and say the
start of Channel tunnel passenger rail services in November is likely to
spark off a fierce fares war on air, rail and ferry traffic.
BA's chief economist believes the European economy is on the threshold of an
accelerating recovery, which will clearly have an impact on business travel.
The UK is leading the way, with recovery now also finally gathering momentum
in the German and Italian markets. French prospects are also looking good,
she adds.
The Club Europe revamp also reflects the growing importance BA is now
placing on the overall European market. 'The growing European air transport
market is crucial to BA, with Europe as a whole, rather than the UK alone,
now its home base,' Julius emphasises.
This shift has seen BA increasing its European flights by 22 per cent
between 1991 and 1993, as well as reinforcing its European presence by
investing in new European airline subsidiaries, including TAT in France and
Deutsche BA in Germany.
BA's Club Europe was originally launched in 1988 as one of BA's first new
branded services.
