FT  15 JUL 94 / Markets Report: Modest rise for dollar
Rumours of a US invasion of Haiti and a firmer tone to the Treasury bond
market helped the dollar finish stronger yesterday, writes Philip Gawith.
Analysts said the US currency had also benefited from a technical
bounce-back which did not signal an interruption of the recent downward
trend. The dollar is currently about 6 per cent lower against the yen and
the D-Mark since the beginning of June.
The US currency finished in London at DM1.5457 from DM1.5383 and at Y98.28
from Y98.1550.
The D-Mark had a quiet day with trade muted by holidays with the French
market closed for Bastille day.
The Dutch central bank cut its special advances rate to 4.80 per cent from
4.90 per cent for a four day money market pact it will launch on Friday.
The dollar's firmer tone helped the sterling index rise to 79.2 from 79. The
pound finished slightly higher against the D-Mark at DM2.4174 from DM2.4089.
Against the dollar, it closed at Dollars 1.564 from Dollars 1.566.
For dollar bulls, the best news lay in the firmer tone of bond markets, both
in the US and Europe. In recent months, one of the factors behind D-Mark
strength - and dollar weakness - has been investors selling holdings of
European bonds and putting the proceeds into D-Mark deposits.
'If this is a turn in the bond markets, it should be positive for the
dollar,' said Mr Chris Turner, currency strategist at BZW. 'Anything that
takes upward pressure off the D-Mark would have to be good for the dollar.'
Part of the improved tone of bond markets may be attributable to improved
interest rate expectations. Contrary to the rumours of an imminent and
aggressive Fed tightening, which gripped markets on Wednesday, the December
eurodollar contract rose by 13 basis points to finish at 94.07. This
movement suggests the market is becoming less bearish in its interest rate
outlook.
Mr Turner said a firmer dollar required that the Fed either moved to a
restrictive monetary stance, from the more neutral position currently; or
that evidence emerged about a slowdown in the economy, which would vindicate
existing policies. The performance of the bond markets suggests the market
believes it may be getting the latter.
Before the Haiti rumours emerged, the dollar had failed to gain any support
from the release of the June retail sales figures which rose by 0.6 per
cent, in line with market expectations. May retail sales figures were also
revised down so the case for higher rates was, if anything, diluted.
Of more encouragement for dollar bulls - and testifying to the confused
state of the market - was the White House mid-session review which said the
US was approaching full capacity slightly faster than expected. Mr Adrian
Cunningham, senior currency economist at UBS in London, commented: 'If the
White House is thinking it, then almost certainly the Federal Reserve is
thinking it too.'
The dollar received some support from Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank
president. He told a lunch in Frankfurt that 'the world economy has an
interest in an internally and externally stable dollar.'
But he made clear that 'the prime responsibility for the dollar's strength
lies in the US itself. The thesis current at the beginning of the seventies
 -it's our currency but your problem - is clearly too short-sighted,' the
Bundesbank president said. 'It didn't do the US much good at the time
either,' he added.
The dollar received further support later from Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the
Treasury secretary, when he said the US wanted a stronger dollar and would
work with the Fed to achieve it.
Mr Cunningham said there were certainly investors who felt the dollar
offered reasonably good medium term value at current levels. But it remained
vulnerable on the downside against the yen, he said, so long as the US
administration continued its tough talk on trade issues with Japan - most
recently from Mr Jeffrey Garten, the US undersecretary of Commerce.
The Swedish krona weakened after hearings in parliament's finance committee
failed to provide the market with any assurance that the government has a
workable strategy for reducing state debt. The krona closed in London at
SKr4.961 against the D-Mark from SKr4.34.
The market was more positive in its response to to Italy's deficit proposals
to cut L5trn this year and L40trn next year. The lira finished slightly
firmer at L990.5 from L992.5.
Although volumes were less buoyant than on Wednesday, short sterling futures
continued their recent recovery. The December contract traded 38,678 lots to
finish 15 basis points higher at 94 from 93.85. Euromarks were also firmer,
with the December contract finishing at 95.12 from 95.05.
The Bank of England provided UK money markets with Pounds 1.091bn assistance
after forecasting a shortage of Pounds 1.15bn. Overnight money traded
between 4 and 5 5/8 per cent. German call money eased slightly to 4.80/4.85
per cent from 4.90/5 per cent.
