FT  19 AUG 94 / Modest retail sales rise points to patchy upturn
Retail sales grew only modestly last month in spite of heavy summer
discounting, according to official figures, underlining the competitive
pressures operating in the stores sector.
The patchy recovery in consumer confidence suggested by the figures was
reinforced by data on broad money supply, which pointed to mixed levels of
credit demand in the economy.
The Central Statistical Office said retail sales' volumes grew by a
seasonally adjusted 0.4 per cent between June and July, and by 3.8 per cent
in the year to July.
This was higher than the previous month, when sales volumes grew at an
annual rate of 3.3 per cent. But with most of July's growth coming from food
retailers, analysts said the figures painted a picture of steady, rather
than sharp, growth.
In spite of the record price fall in the household goods sector in July,
shown in inflation data earlier this week, the volume of household goods
sold last month dropped slightly, the CSO said.
Clothing and footwear sales, however, rose slightly amid similar
discounting.
The Treasury yesterday welcomed the figures as an indication of 'the steady
upwards trend in retail sales'.
However, the British Retail Consortium, which represents 90 per cent of
retailers, warned that small shops were facing 'very difficult conditions'
in spite of the growth. It called on the government to hold base rates
steady at 5.25 per cent.
But this week's figures indicate that there is little basis for fears that
the recovery might create an inflationary consumer binge, and analysts said
speculation about an early rise in interest rates rise was fading.
Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist at broker Salomon Brothers, said: 'I think
that the chance of an interest rate move in September is less likely now.'
This sentiment was supported by Bank of England figures showing that M4, the
broad measure of money supply, fell to a seasonally adjusted 4.8 per cent in
July from 5.6 per cent in June, towards the bottom of the government's 3 per
cent to 9 per cent monitoring range.
M4 growth is one of the leading inflationary signs monitored by the Bank.
However, sterling lending to the private sector, excluding banks, building
societies and the public sector, was well above the monthly average for the
year.
Mortgage lending was also patchy in July. While building societies reported
a small rise in net lending, banks recorded a fall.
See Lex
Food figures get fatter; Shops' mixed blessings, Page 8
