FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - Industry (22): Hype
obscures real needs - Convergence / Andrew Adonis on the information
superhighway
It used to be simple. Telephone calls mostly travelled across copper wires,
and mobile phones, using cellular technology, were expensive yuppie toys
used only by thrusting professionals.
In fact, most of the world never had - and still does not have - telephone
connections of any kind. The challenge for the telecoms industry is to meet
basic telecommunications needs in the developing world, while the developed
world races ahead to the 'information superhighway' that will turn the
conventional telephony into one of several services provided via a
multimedia 'terminal' which, in all likelihood, will turn out to be the
personal computer.
The race to the 'superhighways' has generated an industry of writers vying
with each other to paint the most plausible and/or exciting picture of the
multimedia world as the computing, telecoms, and entertainment industries
converge. The FT's front page recently featured a US company planning to
offer virtual reality weddings - in heaven, if requested - and its business
pages are taken up, day by day, with proposed multibillion-dollar mergers or
alliances between companies in the different sectors.
However, it is important not to soar away on hype, which too easily results
from a failure to grasp three key facts about the future of
telecommunications:
First, the priority for the developing world is not virtual reality, but
basic telephone lines. The need is to vastly increase network coverage
within a few years. China, for instance, wants to boost its number of basic
telephone lines from about 30m to 120m by 2000, an increase equivalent to
three times the existing network of British Telecommunications. Barely two
in 100 Chinese have a telephone line, compared with 49 per 100 in
neighbouring Hong Kong.
'We used to think it was new roads that mattered; now we realise that
telecoms links are more important - and a crucial agent for growth,' a
senior Chinese official puts it. OECD studies chart a direct relationship
between growth in telephone line density and economic growth: the precise
projections are debatable, but no one denies that for developing countries
there is a close connection.
Second, in the free world buyers, not sellers, sustain markets. The
multimedia industry has got to come up with saleable products - and they are
mostly still in their infancy. Even such obvious products as home shopping
and video-on-demand are making slow, faltering progress.
Third, convergence within industries can be as important as convergence
between industries, even if it is less exciting to observe.
This last point is particularly relevant for today's telecoms industry,
where potentially the most significant technological development is the
convergence of 'fixed' and 'cellular' systems.
In the developed world, 'fixed' phones are becoming increasingly mobile,
with the introduction of 'intelligent networks' which enable, for instance,
personal numbering systems to track subscribers down to their location via a
single number. As Torbjorn Nilsson, strategic planning director at Ericsson
radio systems, the Swedish supplier, puts it: 'People want to call people,
not places.'
Meanwhile, the falling cost and increasing versatility of cellular systems
is rapidly turning the mobile phone into a consumer good. It is only a
matter of time before a single handset will be able to relate to both fixed
and mobile networks, with the user unaware of the means by which the call is
being transmitted.
However, the implications of fixed/cellular convergence are perhaps even
more profound for the developing world, with the development of 'fixed
cellular' systems which could slash the cost of installing infrastructure to
provide basic line connections. 'For us, fixed cellular is one of the most
significant things happening in the industry,' says Nagarajan Vittal,
chairman of India's telecommunications commission. He sees it playing a 'key
role' in lifting India's number of telephone lines from the present 8m.
Fixed cellular is still in its early stages, but developments in Mexico and
Indonesia may offer significant pointers to the future.
Indonesia boasts 16 telephone lines per 1,000 people - compared with 460 per
1,000 in the UK - putting it towards the bottom of the telephony league even
in the Asia-Pacific region. To help achieve rapid line growth the Indonesian
government has licensed a company to build a 'fixed cellular' network in
urban areas.
The network is for fixed telephones serviced by radio base stations.
Initially connection and call charges will be similar to those for
conventional fixed-line telephones, with a monthly rental higher to reflect
a shorter waiting period for connection. But in time fixed cellular charges
could be far cheaper.
Ratelindo, the new fixed cellular operator, is a joint venture between
Indonesia's state-owned telecoms operator and Bakrie Electronics, a private
company. It is licensed to provide 280,000 fixed cellular connections -
250,000 in Jakarta and 30,000 in West Java.
Its fixed cellular system - supplied by Hughes, a US manufacturer - is a
flexible overlay network based on the US TDMA digital system. Ratelindo
claims that it provides a voice quality equal to that of a fixed-wire
telephone.
Hardianto Kamarga, president-director of Ratelindo, hails the Hughes system
as a breakthrough, saying it is 'the most spectrum efficient digital
cellular technology commercially available today', with about three times
the capacity - that is subscribers per base station - of GSM, the digital
cellular mobile system used in Europe.
'The fixed cellular system has a subscriber capacity equal to between 10 and
20 per cent of the fixed network,' says Mr Kamarga. As for the cost: 'at the
moment landline telephones are less expensive than comparable wireless
systems for the same traffic capacity, but in the operating environment we
have in Indonesia the balance can swing in favour of wireless.' As fixed
cellular evolves, the balance in its favour is likely to shift dramatically
 -and with it the economics of telecoms modernisation in the developed
world.
