FT  11 NOV 94 / Technology: Nothing left to luck - Operators of the UK's
first national lottery believe they have ruled out system mishaps
When the UK's national lottery is launched next week, the winning numbers
will be picked by a mechanical structure resembling a Perspex cement mixer.
It is virtually the only low-tech aspect of the lottery, which will use a
sophisticated infrastructure of terminals, network and processors to deal
with up to 15m transactions an hour.
Although the equipment has mostly been tried elsewhere, its quantity and the
short time available for its installation have won the lottery a place in
the record books. Over the past 25 weeks, members of the Camelot consortium,
which runs the lottery, have worked flat out to manufacture and install
10,000 lottery terminals, set up the communications network and train nearly
35,000 retail staff.
The most visible part of the system is the retailers' terminals, which scan
customers' gamecards and print out the tickets that must be presented to
claim any winnings.
The terminals, 27,000 of which should be installed by the end of 1996, have
been designed by GTech, the US lottery operator and member of the Camelot
consortium. It used a 10-year-old design, which has been upgraded by the
addition of a liquid crystal display panel and a device to read bar codes on
the tickets. GTech says the technology is tried and tested. 'The design was
already done, the technology was in place. The challenge was just the scale
of the system,' says Don Stanford, senior vice-president for technology.
Bob King of ICL, which built and installed the terminals, agrees. 'The
complexity simply comes from the very short timescale involved. The actual
making of the terminal and installation of the terminal is straightforward,'
he says.
Racal, responsible for linking the terminals with the lottery processing
centres at Rickmansworth, outside London, and Aintree, in the north-west of
England, has also used relatively old technology. 'The timescale was
extremely aggressive. You could not afford any new design or risky
technology in case there was a hiccup,' says Steve Hodson, executive
technical manager.
The data will be transmitted using the X25 communications standard on what
will be the UK's largest private terminal/host network. This is an upgraded
version of a six-year-old network which connects government offices around
the country.
Racal, which has added 25 per cent of extra capacity to the network,
believes the two uses of the network will complement each other. For
instance, the peak lottery traffic on Saturday afternoons will coincide with
a low point in government activity.
Not all retailers will be connected to the central processors by landlines.
In less populated areas, some 5,500 retailers will use satellite dishes,
served initially by Eutelsat and eventually by Orion.
Accuracy, security and robustness have all been important considerations in
building the network. Racal is confident that no one can be cheated of their
lottery winnings through an error in the transmission of the data. 'The
chance of getting an error is infinitesimally small,' says Hodson.
Likewise, Camelot says it is satisfied that its software incorporates
adequate security devices to prevent hackers from breaking into the system.
The designers of the system have also tried to ensure that it can cope with
the failure of processors or cables. If one processor fails, the
Rickmansworth and Aintree sites between them have three other processors
that could act as back-ups.
It also has tried to ensure that a failed line will not disrupt the lottery.
At Rickmansworth, Mercury and BT have five different cables running into the
building through separate ducts. As the system fans out to the retailers,
only the last mile of cabling lacks the back-up of a second line. 'It is a
balance of cost against reliability,' says Hodson.
It may take years before the system shows itself able to cope with all
contingencies. But next week will provide the system's first and most
challenging test. Camelot claims to be confident, as a result of its past
experience with the technology. Unlike its customers, it trusts that nothing
has been left to luck.
