FT  15 FEB 94 / Call to broaden Iraq probe to businessmen
Labour yesterday urged Lord Justice Scott to widen his inquiry into arms
sales to Iraq by taking evidence from a group of senior businessmen.
Mr Michael Meacher, Labour's frontbench spokesman on open government, said
in a letter to the judge that the businessmen had 'unique access' to
information about the arms trade.
'They are the ones who actually fixed the deals with the Iraqis and arranged
for delivery to be diverted through Jordan or by other routes,' he said.
However, he said there was no suggestion that any of the businessmen had
been involved in, or aware of, any breach of the law or of government
guidelines.
Mr Meacher said the vital witness would be Sir John Cuckney, a former deputy
chairman of the TI Group, which owned Matrix Churchill, one of the main
conduits for arms sales.
He said the inquiry should also take evidence from two former heads of the
government's defence sales department - Sir James Blyth, now chief executive
of Boots, and Sir Colin Chandler, chief executive of Vickers.
Mr Meacher also urged the judge to interview Sir Peter Levene, a former
chief of defence procurement at the defence ministry, who is now deputy
chairman of Wasserstein Perella, the US merchant bank. He said Sir Peter's
period as chief of defence procurement covered the 'crucial period' between
1985 and 1991, when government guidelines on arms sales were relaxed.
Others named include Mr Stephan Kock, a consultant to the defence equipment
finance department of Midland Bank, which underwrote some of the arms deals,
and Mr Frank Machon, a Glasgow haulier who transported some of the arms.
Mr Meacher said the inquiry should also hear from US government officials
and executives 'who had inside knowledge of British arms sales'.
Mr Meacher said Lord Justice Scott had focused 'for obvious reasons' on
ministers and senior civil servants because their knowledge of arms sales
was at the heart of the inquiry. 'But there are other categories of
witnesses who may well be able to supplement this material with further and
relevant information to which they have had unique access,' he said.
The inquiry has no powers to compel witnesses to attend. However, Mr John
Major, the prime minister, who has given evidence to the inquiry, has said
the government would consider giving such powers if requested by the judge.
