FT  20 OCT 94 / Industry reports buoyant orders
Manufacturing companies are enjoying buoyant domestic orders and are
planning to invest more in plant and equipment, according to the latest
survey from the British Chambers of Commerce.
The proportion of companies working at full capacity has jumped sharply and
is not far short of the pre-recession levels reached in 1989.
The survey deducts the proportion of those reporting a decrease in a factor,
from those reporting an increase, to derive a per cent balance. In the third
quarter a balance of 35 per cent of manufacturing companies reported an
increase in home deliveries, up from 29 per cent in the previous quarter.
There was also a rise in the balance of those reporting higher home orders.
On the export side there was a small fall in the balance of those reporting
higher deliveries, but a slight rise in those reporting higher orders.
Among service companies there was a slight fall in the balance of those
reporting higher home deliveries, but there were small rises in both home
and export orders.
The survey shows signs that the economy might be gathering speed and
encountering capacity constraints. In the manufacturing sector the balance
of those reporting that they are working at full capacity has risen from 29
per cent to 37 per cent, while in the service sector it has risen from 22
per cent to 29 per cent.
There was a slight rise in the balance of manufacturing companies reporting
recruitment difficulties, and the balance remains at its highest level since
1990.
However, companies can increase capacity by investing in new plant and
equipment and the balance of manufacturing companies which are planning to
do so has risen from 22 per cent to 26 per cent.
The home counties north is experiencing the fastest sales growth of all the
UK regions, while Scotland is witnessing the slowest.
The Chambers of Commerce survey is compiled from data from 7,665 companies,
employing 1.14m people, and was carried out between September 2 and
September 23.
