FT  05 APR 94 / Equity Markets (This Week): Clouds of uncertainty linger
After the hammering endured by stocks over the past fortnight, the reasons
to be pessimistic about further declines this week are painfully evident.
Most importantly, the cloud of uncertainty hanging over the financial
markets - the root cause of the current malaise - has shown no signs of
dissipating. Rather, it appears to have thickened with each downward lurch
of the Dow. Yesterday's tumultuous session was an omen of more of the same.
By Monday's close, the Dow industrial average had lost 9.6 per cent of value
since the Federal Reserve's first tightening of monetary policy on February
4. Such a decline was still in line with expectations immediately after the
Fed's move.
With each passing day, however, the initial forecasts seem to have been
overly optimistic. Since March 22, the day before the Fed lifted short-term
rates for a second time, the Dow's fall has accelerated, with the average
dropping in seven out of nine sessions. Yesterday, the blue-chip index was
off 42 points after climbing back from a 80-point deficit in mid-morning.
The deepening of the downturn has rattled even the most bullish of Wall
Street's seers. Ms Elaine Garzarelli, the influential Lehman Brothers
analyst, hedged her bets last week by saying there was a 50-50 chance of a
10 per cent to 15 per cent correction before stocks settled down.
There was a fleeting break in the gloom late last week. In Thursday's highly
volatile session, the market fell by about 70 points before midday, only to
fight its way back to a nine-point gain by the close. Some analysts
interpreted the sudden swing in share prices as a sign that market had
bottomed out.
Those hopes were dashed by Good Friday's news showing the biggest monthly
jump in non-farm payrolls since October 1987. The figure suggested the
economy had grown by more than 3 per cent in the first quarter, as most
economists forecast. It also suggested higher inflation, the bane of bonds,
and a subsequent sell-off by equity investors.
Although most bond trading firms were closed in observance of Good Friday, a
few decided to remain open in anticipation of the important jobs report. As
a result, prices plunged and yields surged in light activity which ended at
midday. Yesterday, it was the stock market's turn to catch up with the news.
Cash flows into mutual funds - one of the driving forces of the three-year
bull market - slowed considerably last month. Anticipation of a big jump in
mutual fund redemptions, as the wariness of individual investors
intensifies, may push share prices even lower as the week progresses.
The bond market will continue to fall under the close scrutiny of equity
investors. Signs of stability in Treasury prices could trigger some
bargain-hunting and a modest comeback by stocks. But late in yesterday's
session, bonds were experiencing a fresh round of heavy selling even though
there was no obvious news to depress sentiment further.
