FT  04 MAR 94 / Letters to the Editor: Commercial agents rules not so tough
Sir, Ian Hamilton Fazey's article 'A rude awakening in Britain' (FT
Exporter, January 27) concerning the new Commercial Agents Regulations
contains certain statements which could be misinterpreted and deserve
clarification.
The regulations apply to agents dealing with goods on behalf of another,
whether on commission or for fixed payments. An agent may now claim
compensation when an indefinite term contract is terminated (including for
death or infirmity of the agent) even if the principal has a contractual
right to terminate. Hamilton Fazey states that an agent could now claim up
to a maximum of three months' average commission as compensation. The
regulations in fact set no overall maximum. It is likely, however, that the
courts will favour the indemnity formula in the regulations to calculate
compensation, namely no more than the equivalent of one year's commission
averaged out over the last five years of the contract.
Hamilton Fazey's compensation assumption seems based on the minimum notice
provisions of the regulations: in the case of an indefinite term contract,
the minimum notice period of one month for every year of the contract to a
maximum three months. If that notice is not served, an agent may claim
damages for breach of contract based on commissions that could have been
earned during that period as well as compensation or an indemnity.
Timing of commission payments is also affected. It has been common practice
to withhold commissions until the principal is paid by its customers. Now,
an agent becomes entitled to commission when the principal completes or
should have completed the transaction or, if earlier, when the customer has
completed the transaction. This provision can be excluded by agreement.
What cannot be excluded is the provision fixing the latest point when
commission is due: when the customer has 'executed his part of the
transaction or should have done so'.
Thus, a principal can only withhold commissions until payment is due from
the customer. This can cause a cash flow problem for the principal where
customers pay late, but the position is not as bad as Hamilton Fazey
indicates.
Discussion on interpretation of the regulations will no doubt continue until
cases come to court.
Linda Fazzani,
partner,
Paisner &amp; Co - London,
Bouverie House,
154 Fleet Street,
London EC4A 2DQ
