FT  08 MAR 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Go east, young company -
The opportunites offered by the Polish privatisation programme
Since the Berlin Wall fell in 1989 and eastern Europe was opened to western
investment, not one of the world's biggest computer makers has set up or
bought manufacturing plants in the region.
Yet a small British company is on the verge of taking just such a step,
attracted by the low manufacturing costs and the quality of available
engineers. Metric Components, which makes electronic point-of-sale (Epos)
cash registers, will this week take management control of Temed SA, a
medical equipment factory based in Silesia, southern Poland, and owned by
the state.
The deal is high risk. Apart from anything else, Metric might find that
being removed from its main market makes it less responsive to its
customers, costing it more in lost sales than it gains from lower
manufacturing costs.
But Metric's deal does show that other smaller companies, which would
benefit from a lower manufacturing cost base, can join the largest companies
in buying privatised assets in eastern Europe.
Metric's Epos cash registers are akin to small computers, not only recording
transactions but helping the management of inventory and re-ordering. The
machines are designed in Basingstoke, England, the electronics come from Far
Eastern suppliers such as Lucky Goldstar, and the finished product is sold
mainly in the UK. Until this week the machines were manufactured under
contract in Poland.
Job Maats, Metric's Dutch chief executive, says the attraction of Temed  -
which is being sold through the Polish Privatisation Through Restructuring
programme - is the opportunity of cutting the cost of innovation.
About 90 per cent of the cost of making a mould for the plastic casing of
the cash tills is the cost of engineers. With Polish engineers costing 10
per cent of their western counterparts, the saving is substantial. As a
result, the risks involved in changing the design of a product are reduced
because smaller batch runs become economic, he says.
While the big computer companies have chosen not to move to eastern Europe,
Maats is not alone is extolling the attractions of the region. David Thomas,
director of Schroder Polska, the Polish subsidiary of merchant bankers
Schroders, says he is puzzled why more companies have not yet adopted the
approach.
'The Privatisation Through Restructuring programme is specifically focused
on the medium-sized companies in Poland,' he says. Under this programme, a
management group restructures and then privatises small and medium-sized
enterprises in return for a fee, profit sharing and a commission on the
transfer of shares to investors.
It contrasts with the Mass Privatisation Programme - in which 33 foreign and
domestic fund managers are being selected to run 600 state-owned companies.
'I have spoken at several conferences to try to open potential investors'
eyes to the possibilities of investing in Poland,' Thomas says. 'Poland has
had a reputation of being dominated by large industry.'
One reason for the relative lack of interest in smaller Polish companies is
a shortage of support for investors. The most comprehensive government
investment guarantee scheme for eastern Europe is provided by Germany. But
most of Germany's Mittelstand companies have been more interested in
manufacturing plant in the Czech Republic, on the doorstep of their domestic
market.
There are other obstacles in the way of buying a manufacturing base in
eastern Europe. Maats says it took at least 20 visits to negotiate the
purchase of Temed. He says no one should underestimate the demands such
deals make on top-level management time. 'It has taken me a year to do the
deal. I spent three years restructuring the Brazilian debt so I know
something about negotiation.'
The financial structures are often complicated. A similar deal to buy Elzab,
another Silesian state-owned company that makes mainframe computer monitors
for the Russian market, fell through because Metric could not get the banks
to agree the restructuring terms.
Maats eventually agreed a deal with the Ministry of Privatisation in which
Metric first takes management control and an option to buy Temed for Dollars
1m (Pounds 600m) within two years. Central to the deal was agreement from
Temed's banks that they would write off half their debt and waive the
substantial interest charge on the balance for a year.
Any company considering this route must contend with cultural differences
arising out of a history of central planning. Maats says this message came
home when Metric was developing a plan with Elzab's management, a team that
was once in charge of 2,500 people. 'It took us six weeks to realise the
people had only ever implemented a plan coming down from the central plan.
They had never initiated.'
Metric had one big advantage that many unquoted companies could not turn to:
a pile of cash. Last year, Maats reversed three companies, including the
Epos till company, into a quoted shell, raising more than Pounds 700,000 in
the process. But much of the leg-work was done before this cash was raised.
Nevertheless, buying a manufacturing base in eastern Europe is a route more
intrepid smaller companies might consider if they are well enough structured
to allow senior managers the time to negotiate deals. 'If someone has the
vision and a plan then Poland is ideal because the people are used to
implementing a prepared plan,' Maats says.
He says many factories, particularly in what is becoming known as Silesia
Valley, own large amounts of technology and sophisticated
computer-controlled machining centres. And because the factories were hugely
over-staffed, they have plenty of manufacturing space.
'The real advantage is that there is highly qualified manpower with a
historic infrastructure which you can use for making new things in new
ways,' he says. 'What was done in the Far East can now be done in eastern
Europe. There is better training, it is closer to market, no investment
problems and the finance is available more easily across the region.'
That is the theory. Time will tell whether Metric was right to go to Poland
or the big companies were right to eschew the region.
