FT  11 JUN 94 / Sport: Sailing is the life of Riley - Yachting
Here is a prediction. Dawn Riley will do for women in sailing what Nick
Faldo has done for British golf.
This brawny, humorous American blonde skippering an all-woman crew has just
brought a clapped-out W60 named Heineken home 8th in the Whitbread
round-the-world race. No big deal, you might say. Women first did the race
four years ago on Maiden (where Riley, 29, was a watch leader under skipper
Tracy Edwards). Eighth is hardly world-shaking. Only the
technically-deficient Russian and Ukrainian boats finished behind Heineken.
More to the point was the inspirational style of Riley's leadership under
testing circumstances. Heineken was the first W60 built and it had too many
miles on the clock even before leaving. During the race, sails ripped so
often that the crew renamed themselves the Sewing Circle. The most recent
mishap left them drifting rudder-less in a force 9 gale west of the Scilly
Isles.
Riley's despatch from last Monday read: 'It took a minute before we could
see that the shaft between the rudder and the tiller was broken at the
bottom weld.' She tried to fix it by going over the side into the big seas
with a small electric drill.
'Our drill wasn't up to the task,' she continued. 'I then spent 1 1/2 hours
in the water tying ropes to the rudder blade so we could steer it. We're now
doing five knots but I'm not sure it will hold for long.'
Four hundred miles from the finish at Southampton, there were other
problems. 'We need to get (there) soon because we have enough propane gas
for one more meal.
'Looking on the bright side, we'll all be skinny when we get to Ocean
Village (the race base).'
Riley's own future looks even brighter. When she returns to the US, she will
join the all-women crew who will race America3, the defending champion, in
next year's America's Cup trials. It will be the first all-female crew in
the cup's long history but sponsor Bill Koch, a mid-west billionaire, is
confident about their chances.
'We are not sending a bunch of bunny girls out there to look good,' said
Koch who, during the 1992 cup races, turned himself from a rabbit helmsman
into a class act. 'These women are great sailors and really determined
people.'
Some 650 women applied to join the cup programme for 1995 and 23 have been
chosen already. The smart money says Riley will soon be named as America3's
skipper.
Her first piece of good fortune was to be raised in Detroit, Michigan,
rather than on the east coast where a woman's role on a boat is to gaze
admiringly at her Ivy League husband. They do things differently in the home
of Henry Ford and Tamla Motown.
Her fiance is New Zealand sailor Barry McKay, who was on the catamaran Enza
when it set a 75-day round-the-world record earlier this year.
Riley has sailed since her schooldays, honing her skills in the tricky winds
and waves of America's Great Lakes. At 13, she took a year off school to
sail with her parents on their 36ft cutter around the east coast of the
Caribbean.
When she joined Maiden five years ago, it was a turning point for Riley and
women sailors. The Maiden campaign had to punch through both the strength
barrier and the notion that women did not have the stamina, drive and skills
to tackle the 32,000 gruelling miles of the Whitbread. And it did so
famously, winning two of the six legs in its class, triumphing in the media,
and was greeted on returning to Southampton by cheering, flag-waving
supporters.
Heineken's welcome early on Thursday was more subdued. But unlike Edwards,
Riley is not heading for the Welsh hills to breed horses. The best of her
racing is yet to come.
Women's rugby, Page XXIV
