FT  02 MAR 94 / World Trade News: French attack Clinton on aircraft sales
French aerospace leaders yesterday accused President Bill Clinton of
intervening unfairly to sell Dollars 6bn (Pounds 4.1bn) worth of US civil
aircraft to Saudia Arabia, while announcing sharp falls in their own
turnover and exports last year.
Mr Louis Gallois, president of Aerospatiale, the French partner in Europe's
Airbus consortium, said the US government appeared to have entered into
'real state-to-state negotiations' to secure the deal with Saudia, the Saudi
Arabian carrier. This was unprecedented in civil, as distinct from military,
contracts, he said, adding: 'If this becomes a permanent American attitude,
we must prepare ourselves in Europe for this type of trade.'
In an interview Mr Gerard Longuet, France's trade and industry minister,
said the US civil aircraft sale appeared to be 'linked to rescheduling of
Saudi Arabia's military debt', referring to reports that Riyadh is to delay
payment of Dollars 6bn of the Dollars 9bn it owes US military jet makers
over the next two years. Mr Serge Dassault, president of Dassault Aviation
and of GIFAS, the French aerospace industry association, said it was
symptomatic of Washington's involvement that, contrary to traditional
practice, the Saudia deal was announced by Mr Clinton himself, 'the supplier
rather than the client'.
Announcing that their collective turnover had fallen by 8.5 per cent and
exports by 12.9 per cent last year, leaders of the French aerospace industry
 -Europe's largest - urged Europe to stand up to the US in the Gatt
negotiations to control aircraft subsidies.
But, Mr Gallois said, while 'Europe should continue to defend its system of
direct subsidies or reimbursable advances (which Airbus receives), it is
also worth reflecting whether and how we could adopt the US system of
indirect aid, so that perhaps we could have two irons in the fire'.
An executive of Snecma, the French aero-engine maker, warned, however, that
failure to reach any agreement with the US would leave the aircraft industry
without any special treatment on subsidies. French aero-engine exports alone
fell 26.6 per cent last year.
The level of new orders - which determine future turnover and exports - fell
last year by 20 per cent to FFr88bn (Pounds 10.1bn) from FFr110bn in 1992.
The contract to sell 60 Mirage 2000-5 jets and a large number of missiles to
Taiwan was included in the 1992 order book, though deliveries will only
begin in a couple of years.
Waiting for such arms export orders to work through, the French aerospace
industry is also hoping that the government will unveil an ambitious
1995-2000 military procurement programme this year and that the civil
aircraft sector will soon revive. But the interim is proving lean. Dassault,
the maker of Mirage jets, saw its turnover drop 20 per cent last year,
though it claims to have improved profitability.
