FT  14 JUN 94 / European Elections: Spread of red across the map delights
Labour
It is a sight that Labour politicians have been waiting to see for 15 years:
splotches of red all over southern England.
Since Labour's general election defeat in 1979 the party has repeatedly
faced an insurmountable problem each time it goes to the polls - its lack of
credibility with the more affluent voters in the south.
Labour can do - and has repeatedly done - very well in Scotland, the north
and the Midlands. But the distrust of southern voters at successive general
elections, in particular over Labour's tax and spending policies, has robbed
the party of power every time.
Yesterday it was different. Labour party managers sensed that - at long last
 -they had made a breakthrough which augurs victory at the next general
election.
In the two Essex Euro-constituencies, bastions of the C2 voters who ritually
support the Tories, Labour won stunning victories. In Bedfordshire and
Milton Keynes, where the party faced a ferocious campaign from Mrs Edwina
Currie, the former Tory minister, the Labour candidate won with a
substantial majority.
Even in Thames Valley - with ultra-safe Tory constituencies such as
Berkshire East and Windsor-and-Maidenhead - Labour came within 700 votes of
taking the seat.
To cap it all, there was the party's performance against the Liberal
Democrats.
Labour's fear in every campaign has been that Mr Paddy Ashdown's party will
reap the votes of disaffected Tory voters who cannot stomach Labour.
Yesterday Labour claimed that southern Tory voters had shifted to their
party 'without stopping off on the way'. While Labour now has 16 Euro-seats
in the south, the Liberal Democrats have ended up with only two. And in
those few southern seats which remain Tory, Labour has come second many more
times than Mr Ashdown's party.
But questions still loom over Labour's performance. In particular, is the
party secure enough in the south to repeat this performance in a general
election that could be three years away?
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's campaign manager, was anxious to underline that
Labour's performance in the south, far from being a one-day wonder, had been
steadily built up since the county council elections in 1993.
He said: 'It has been a cumulative effect. The more people have seen us win
in parts of the south, the more confidence they have in our ability to win
in other parts of the south.'
Labour activists said that the party had learned the important lesson of
fighting every southern by-election to win.
One party activist said: 'At previous by-elections we have had candidates
but downplayed their campaigns, making it look like the Liberal Democrats
were the challengers. At Eastleigh we went for victory, establishing a
platform for us in the rest of the region.'
Above all, the party can build on this success if - as seems almost certain
 -Mr Tony Blair is elected Labour leader. His more middle-class,
public-school background must consolidate the party's grip on the south.
But Conservative activists in southern constituencies were far from downcast
yesterday.
In the Euro-constituency of Hertfordshire, which the conservatives lost to
Labour, a local Tory MP said that most of his regular supporters had not
come out to vote. 'There is no reason why we should not get back these
supporters next time,' he said. 'The main thing is that there has not been a
permanent shift of supporters from the Tories to Labour.'
Another Tory MP said that the Liberal Democrats' poor performance in the
south could help him at the next election. He said: 'In a two-way contest we
are far more likely to keep our main supporters because the disaffected just
don't vote Labour.'
Above all, Tories can take some comfort from the occasional splits between
the Labour and Liberal Democrat votes, which have helped them to keep
constituencies such as Surrey and Sussex South.
A senior figure at Conservative Central Office said: 'The fear was that the
Liberal Democrats would make big inroads against us, but they didn't. We
have kept our heartlands and that is the first stage in a recovery that will
win us the next election.'
