FT  19 JUL 94 / Lautro to probe leak on Prudential
The regulator for the life insurance industry has launched an inquiry into
how an internal paper on an investigation into the Prudential Corporation's
selling of personal pensions to people transferring out of occupational
schemes became widely available.
Lautro said yesterday it was taking action to investigate and deal with the
circulation of a confidential briefing paper.
A particular cause of controversy will be the paper's reference to 'a sharp
telephone exchange' between Mr Mick Newmarch, chief executive of the
Prudential, and Mr Kit Jebens, Lautro chief executive, after which Lautro
agreed to drop a formal investigation and instead carry out an informal
inquiry.
The memorandum is also sensitive because Prudential, the UK's largest life
insurer, has taken a high-profile stance on pension transfers. Last year,
against a background of widespread public concern on possible pensions
mis-selling, it launched an advertising campaign intended to reassure
customers that it had behaved properly in this area.
Earlier this year Mr Newmarch said Prudential did not need to make any
provision against possible claims for compensation from people who had
suffered as a result of taking poor advice to transfer out of an
occupational scheme. Prudential has about 45,000 personal pension holders.
The Lautro memorandum says that by late June it had become clear there was
evidence of 'significant cause for concern' that although Prudential's
salesforce had generally followed the company's procedures, the practices
they used did pose a risk and had, in a significant number of cases, 'caused
actual harm to investors'.
Lautro said yesterday that this comment should be read in the context of an
inquiry in which 159 sample cases and 59 complaints had been examined, and
should not be seen 'in relation to Prudential's business as a whole'.
Prudential said yesterday that Lautro had approached it in April with a
request for an informal review to validate the regulator's pension transfer
rules for the future, and that it had agreed to co-operate.
The company said: 'Our approach to the sale of pension transfer contracts,
which Lautro now seems to be questioning, was developed within Lautro's
rules for the benefit of our customers. Prudential challenges any contention
that it has acted improperly with regard to pension transfers.'
