FT  18 JUN 94 / Markets: Where are the benefits of growth? - London
There was a time when guests of the Lord Mayor of London strode into his
official residence, the Mansion House, under a pediment depicting 'The City
of London trampling on Envy and receiving the benefits of Plenty'.
The pediment is still there, but guests on Wednesday slipped in through a
side-door, now the devalued main entrance, to hear Ken Clarke give the
chancellor's annual speech to the Mayor and City. He promised that the
government had forsworn boom-time policies based on 'a fraudulent,
inflationary, feel-good factor', which inevitably led to busts.
But if the Government has stomped on inflation, where are the benefits of
growth? A raft of economic statistics released this week showed that
inflation was indeed moderate but growth was worryingly weak in some
respects.
The markets had to cope with this and several disturbing external factors
such as rising commodity prices in the US and acute tension over North
Korea. Commendably, London equities held their own even as their nemesis,
the European bond markets, fell further. Despite these pressures, the FT-SE
100 index slipped only 33 points to end the week at 3,022.9.
A rising stock market is a leading indicator, running perhaps some 18 months
ahead of economic growth. Judging from the accompanying chart, however, the
stock market has been ambling along over recent years, foreshadowing very
moderate growth at best.
This year and next, gross domestic product will rise by 2.8 per cent,
according to the consensus forecast of 36 predominantly City firms. But four
of them - Citibank, Kleinwort Benson, Panmure Gordon and Robert Fleming -
expect growth to be well below 2 per cent next year.
The gloomsters were quick to seize on the dark lining to every silver cloud
in the economic sky this week. Factory output prices rose only 0.1 per cent
in May from the previous month, but input prices were up 0.9 per cent thanks
to higher prices for oil and other commodities. Retail prices excluding
mortgages were up 2.5 per cent in May from a year earlier but sales volume
was virtually flat. The growth rate of average earnings moderated slightly
in April to 3.75 per cent but the unemployment rate slipped 0.1 of a
percentage point to 9.4 per cent in May.
Kleinwort Benson identifies a number of weaknesses in the economy. These
include: the wearing off of the one-off boost to consumer spending from
lower interest rates; stagnant employment growth, which will lead to only a
moderate rise in real personal disposable income; particularly meagre export
orders, now that the post-ERM devaluation benefits have passed; and the
creation of a fiscal policy, due to the government's extensive spending
cuts, which is 'even more deflationary than the Howe budget of 1981'.
Given this flaccid economic outlook, there is no reason for an interest rate
rise, Kleinworts said. In fact, close scrutiny of the minutes of meetings
between the chancellor and the governor of the Bank of England, Eddie
George, show that the chancellor is aware the economy might slow and that he
is prepared to act if it did.
For his part, governor George told the Mansion House audience that a rise in
interest rates would be the right response to underlying strength in the
economy and the prospect of rising inflation. This was taken by some in the
City to mean that interest rates were about to rise.
But for Robin Aspinall of Panmure Gordon, the risks lie on the downside. He
believes that the Governor is too obsessed by the danger of inflation. 'We
are rapidly approaching the point where the economy will demand still-lower
interest rates, yet Eddie's paranoia threatens us with the biggest economic
error of judgment since Nigel Lawson was made chancellor.'
If rising oil prices did anybody any good this week, it was British
Petroleum and Lasmo. BP shares ended the week at 411 1/2 p, matching their
all-time high. Buying of the stock continues strong on both sides of the
Atlantic and will accelerate if, as expected, the Clinton administration
approves the export of oil from BP's Alaskan fields.
For Lasmo, a rising oil price could float it off the rock of Enterprise's
takeover offer. The bidder marginally improved its terms on Tuesday; no cash
is on offer but Lasmo shareholders would end up with 44.5 per cent of the
enlarged group rather than the 40 per cent first proposed.
But Lasmo shares are a good play on the crude price. A number of key
institutions holding both Lasmo and Enterprise shares might prefer to
maximise that opportunity by keeping the two companies separate. The offer
closes on July 1.
A number of departures of varying kinds were flagged by companies this week.
Amstrad is moving away from 'pile-it-high, sell-it-cheap' retailing by
buying Viglen, a maker and direct seller of computers; Glaxo is saying
goodbye to Sir Paul Girolami, its chairman through its breath-taking organic
growth. He distrusted acquisitions so the company might now warm-up to a
large takeover; EMAP turned itself into the third-largest publisher of
consumer magazines in France through Pounds 108m of purchases; and Central
Railway launched a Pounds 6m placing, seed money for its multi-billion pound
plan to build a 180-mile railway from Leicester to the Channel Tunnel. It
would be the first new mainland route in more than 50 years.
If Central's trains ever run, they would plunge through the Eurotunnel
portal in Kent. Judging by Eurotunnel's plunging share price this week ahead
of the close next week of its rescue rights issue, a pediment should be
erected over the entrance: 'Bankers trampling on equity and receiving the
benefits of penury'.
