FT  06 SEP 94 / The British Association: Moser renews education plea
Sir Claus Moser, whose presidential address to the British Association in
Swansea four years ago played an important part in pushing education up
Britain's political agenda, returned aggressively to the theme when this
year's conference opened yesterday.
Sir Claus, former head of the government statistical service and warden of
Wadham College, Oxford, called again for sweeping improvements in education
to achieve 'a thriving economy and a healthy and civilised society'.
His speech picked up several recommendations made last November by the
National Commission on Education, set up with charitable funding as a result
of the Swansea speech.
'The call for action now needs to be as strong as four years ago,' said Sir
Claus. 'We still have a long way to go to make this truly an educated nation
for the majority rather than for the privileged minority, let alone to keep
up with other nations.'
Sir Claus conceded there had been advances: a 'sea change' in public
attitudes to education, improved planning of the school curriculum, the
prime minister's 'apparent commitment to nursery education for all' and the
'refreshing and encouraging' approach by Mrs Gillian Shephard, the education
secretary, to the teaching profession.
On the negative side, Sir Claus pointed to the continuing increase in
primary school class sizes and 'the government's lonely position in
maintaining its support for A-levels in England and Wales as an educational
gold standard'. Economic history showed that gold standards were not worth
sticking to, he said.
His priorities for urgent action included:
More private funding of higher education, with an extended student-loan
system on Australian lines. 'The only alternatives to a shift towards
private funding are to stop expansion, which is evidently and rightly ruled
out, or further to reduce unit costs, which could have the most damaging
consequences,' he said.
A broader school curriculum to bridge vocational and academic education and
provide sixth-formers with a wider range of subjects. Sir Claus said
A-levels damaged science because they forced pupils interested in science
and the humanities to choose between them - and 'many are not prepared to
give up humanities, quite rightly in my view'.
An emergency programme of educational aid for Britain's most deprived areas.
Sir John Cassels, director of the National Commission on Education, said
renewed funding from the Paul Hamlyn Foundation would enable it to go on
working until May.
He said commission was studying the factors that made schools successful in
deprived areas.
'A lot of the reforms that have been good for schools in the leafy suburbs
have gone right over the heads of schools in some of the most deprived
areas,' Sir John said.
