FT  19 JUL 94 / International Company News: Lac rebuffs takeover bid from
Royal Oak Mines
Lac Minerals, the Toronto-based mining group, has scathingly rebuffed Royal
Oak Mines' CDollars 2bn (USDollars 1.4bn) takeover bid, describing the offer
by the Vancouver-based gold producer as inadequate and opportunistic.
Lac's board unanimously advised shareholders yesterday to reject Royal Oak's
cash-and-share offer, which was made on July 7.
It disclosed that it is considering a number of other options, but declined
to give details.
Royal Oak had no immediate response. Investors and analysts have given the
Vancouver company credit for drawing attention to Lac's shortcomings.
Several sizeable Lac shareholders have gone on the record in the past 10
days to support the rationale behind Royal Oak's bid.
Mr Jim Pitblado, a non-executive director of Lac who will act as the board's
spokesman in the unfolding takeover struggle, acknowledged yesterday that
'perhaps we can be criticised for hiding our light under a bushel basket'.
Nevertheless, many outsiders doubt that Royal Oak will emerge victorious. A
competing bid is widely expected to surface if Lac fails to find a white
knight.
Lac is about three times bigger than Royal Oak. But its share price has
under-performed other North Am-erican gold producers despite the high
quality of its assets.
Ms Peggy Witte, Royal Oak's pugnacious president, has estimated that she
could chop at least USDollars 40m from Lac's annual operating costs.
Mr Pitblado said that Royal Oak's offer would leave the proposed new company
'saddled with significant interest expense, stripped of cash, highly
leveraged and strapped for investment capital just as Lac is ready to move
ahead with significant new mine development programmes.'
Mr Pitblado described Royal Oak's offer as 'a blatant attempt to rob Lac's
shareholders of the true value of their investment with a low-ball offer
that provides no real premium and dilutes their interest in Lac's
significant growth potential'.
He drew an unfavourable comparison between the Lac and Royal Oak mines,
claiming that the latter had high-cost operations with unknown environmental
risks. Royal Oak has an average cash cost of Dollars 315 per oz, compared to
Lac's Dollars 180 an oz.
In a further bid to support its case, Lac yesterday raised its estimate of
its gold reserves from 8.6m to 13.5m ozs and announced decisions to go ahead
with several new projects in North and South America.
