FT  11 MAY 94 / Arts: The Wasteland
This is not called, you will notice, The Waste Land: this 'thriller opera'
has nothing to do with TS Eliot, oh no, certainly not. Not literally, anyhow
 -because the pernickety Eliot estate forbade the use of any name or
recognisable phrase from the sacred text.
The estate is odd that way. For several years after his friend Stravinsky
set 'The Dove descending' as a cantata, Eliot's poem could not be reproduced
in programme-notes for performances. The ban seems now to have been lifted
for 'serious' music, and of course Cats was acceptable (and very profitable)
 -but not, apparently, a scintillating parody like Martin Rowson's
comic-book 'Waste Land', which was the basis for this show.
Luckily, The Waste Land itself provides a loophole which the librettist Andy
Rashleigh and composer Stephen McNeff have exploited with glee. Some of its
best-remembered lines are quotations from other sources, and they get
mischievously prominent settings here. Nor are the mythical seers Tiresias
and Sosostris pure inventions of the Master, so they can appear with their
own names (or almost: just for safety, the seeress is spelt 'Sesostris').
All this is byplay, however, for the basic joke is to turn The Waste/Land
into a Raymond Chandler mystery. Rowson's knowing cartoons overflowed with
visible puns and gags. In the Modern Music Theatre Troupe's operatic
version, crisply directed by Caroline Sharman, they meld into a cod film
noir, which has to trail the perpetual Eliot references with less recourse
to Lit.- Crit. visuals. The private-dick hero, cutely called 'Chris
Marlowe', only speaks (Matthew Aldridge looks wearily right, though his
spoken American is as pallid as most of Rashleigh's Chandlerisms). Five
intrepid singers sing everybody else - clients, mistresses, victims,
obscurely sinister figures and cops.
That gives each of them a crack at a flashy cameo or two. There is plenty of
action, variety and contrast, crucially underpinned by McNeff's score:
pitched between Kurt Weill and Sir Arthur Sullivan, leaning this way and
that as opportunity dictates. More strenuously chromatic than either of
them, more than a big commercial musical would risk; but economical,
craftsmanly - there are a couple of very ingenious ensembles - and
endearingly loyal to the film noir sound.
The excellent singing cast take to it easily, flattered by the Donmar
acoustic. Something irretrievably Lit.- Crit.- clever clings to the piece;
for maximal appreciation, you should re-read The Waste Land just before you
go.
BOC Covent Garden Festival: at the Donmar Warehouse until Saturday
