FT  07 SEP 94 / Business and the Environment: Green leather in fashion -
Tomas Larsson visits a Laos tannery which is trying to be as environmentally
friendly as possible
A once defunct tannery in Laos, south-east Asia, has won its first orders by
selling itself to western leather buyers as an environmentally friendly
operation.
While much industry along the Mekong River is still pumping out effluent and
dumping waste, the Simon Lao factory is capitalising on greater
environmental awareness among western consumers.
Simon Lao in Vientiane, the Laos capital, is the country's only tannery. It
was built by the government in the late 1980s with funding from the United
Nations Development Programme but was mothballed on completion. The plant
never opened for business because there was no further funding once the aid
programme ceased.
But commercial production began as soon as the tannery was privatised last
year, and sales are now up to Bt2.5m (Pounds 64,600) a month. The government
sold 75 per cent to Bangkok-based Simon &amp; Associates, an Australian-Thai
joint venture. It is one of Thailand's largest makers of leather furniture,
with sales of more than Dollars 1m (Pounds 600,000) a month.
Simon Lao made it a marketing policy to become a 'green' leather niche. It
is now hailed as one of the most environmentally-friendly tanneries in
south-east Asia.
Keen to buy from such a supplier, Ikea, the Swedish group, recently placed a
Dollars 2m (Pounds 1.2m) order for leather furniture from Simon &amp;
Associates.
Ikea says it would like to buy more furniture from the parent company, but
the tannery is running at full capacity and cannot deliver any more at the
moment. But the company says it has 'many more leather articles which can be
shifted to the Lao tannery. And we are in the process of adapting our
furniture - to give it a new look - to further fit their production.'
Laos is perhaps not the most obvious of investment destinations in Asia. As
a late industrialiser, the country is not trying to attract foreign
investment by agreeing to environmental 'dumping' - but rather the opposite.
Jean-Francois Renaudin, general manager of Simon Lao, says: 'Simon &amp;
Associates was very interested in this tannery, first because it could
supply them with water-buffalo leather, which is getting hard to find in
Thailand.
'Second, Ikea, which is a very large customer, has to watch what it does in
terms of the environment. Simon identified that if it could get a tannery
that was clean at the start, and then make it cleaner and greener, surely
Ikea would be interested in that. Mind you, it is a gamble - it's not a deal
with Ikea - that is part of the marketing strategy of Simon.'
Renaudin believes the plant's success so far is because of its cleanliness.
'We are one of the few tanneries in south-east Asia to have a dedicated
effluent treatment plant. And it is the biggest one I've ever seen. In fact,
we could probably increase production capacity by 10-15 times and the system
would still be able to cope.'
The plant has a modern waste water treatment plant, imported from Europe,
which chemically removes dangerous chemicals from the water used in the
tanning process.
Bernhard Meyhofer, a German consultant working with Thailand's ministry of
industry on a series of environmental projects, agrees that the Simon Lao
tannery is cleaner than most. 'Compared with the 150 tanneries in Thailand,
the Lao tannery is definitely much cleaner. They are doing one very
important thing right: separating chromium-containing waste water from the
other waste water streams and removing the chromium by precipitation.'
Chromium is used in the tanning process.
The resulting sludge is disposed of in drying beds on the plant site. A
heritage from the UNDP days, the tannery is equipped with a chrome recycling
system, which could eliminate the need for a more suitable site for
end-disposal of the chrome-filled sludge. But the system has never been
fully operational. It would require further investment to open and Renaudin
is not convinced that using recycled chrome would have no effect on the
quality of the leather.
Renaudin's gamble, as he puts it, appears to be paying off so far. He is now
embarking on a project to improve further the plant's environmental record -
to eliminate what the industry calls 'wet blue' shavings. The shavings,
which contain chromium, are produced when the hide is shaved to produce a
uniform thickness.
Simon Lao will introduce a two-step tanning process. The shaving of the
hides will in future be done in a pre-tanning stage called wet white, before
the usual chrome-tanning process.
'In the west,' explains Renaudin, 'tanneries dump the wet blue shavings at
disposal centres specialised for toxic waste. A small tannery such as Simon
Lao produces perhaps 200 kilos of shavings per day - and in Laos they didn't
even have a rubbish tip when we came here.'
In contrast, the new tanning process, expected to be up and running by the
end of the year, involves only organic compounds (aldehydes) and the
shavings can be used as animal feed. 'We will probably be the first tannery
in the world to use the wet white process for 100 per cent of our
production,' says Renaudin. 'And Laos will certainly be the only country in
the world where all tanneries use this technology - because we're the only
tannery here.'
But not all factories in Laos are as environmentally aware. Local villagers,
for instance, have to tread with extreme care to avoid hurting themselves
when struggling through heaps of broken bottles, rusty bottle caps and
copious amounts of rubbish and effluent. Heavy rain flushes much of the
waste into the relatively pristine waters of the Mekong. If the success
stories of companies seeking out the 'green' buyer in Laos continue, this
practice may finally come to an end.
