FT  27 OCT 94 / PLO-Hamas strikers revile peace treaty with Jordan: Protests
greet Hussein's special role
The Palestinian strikes and rallies held across the Israeli-occupied West
Bank and in Arab East Jerusalem yesterday were in protest at the
Israel-Jordan peace treaty, which recognises Jordan's historic custodial
role over Islamic sites in Jerusalem.
In a rare display of Palestinian political unity, Mr Yassir Arafat's
Palestine Liberation Organisation called a strike jointly with the Islamic
resistance movement Hamas, closing schools and businesses to mourn
yesterday's signing ceremony.
In Hebron, up to 2,000 Palestinians took to the streets, shouting
anti-Jordan slogans and burning pictures of Jordan's King Hussein. Israeli
troops fired tear gas and bullets to disperse Palestinians stone-throwers in
the West Bank city of Nablus.
Palestinians are outraged at the treaty, which recognises King Hussein's
special role in Jerusalem's Islamic sites and in negotiations over the
future of the Holy City sacred to Moslems, Christians and Jews. The king
bases his claims to Jerusalem on assertions that his Hashemite monarchy is
directly descended from the Prophet Mohammed, said to have ascended to
heaven from Jerusalem's Temple Mount. The Dome of the Rock is said to mark
the spot and is the third holiest site in Islam.
The king opened a speech to the Jordanian parliament last Saturday defending
the peace treaty by calling for prayers and peace 'on the truthful Hashemite
Arab prophet and on his household'.
Jerusalem, he said, 'remains a trust with the Hashemites who are resolved on
its patronage and reconstruction and on the supervision of its holy sites.'
The Jerusalem controversy is the latest sign of a long history of tension
and animosity between King Hussein and Mr Arafat. King Hussein, whose
country includes 2m-3m Palestinians, once challenged Mr Arafat for
leadership of the Palestinian cause; the PLO believes the king has not yet
given up his ambition to influence the West Bank.
Under UN resolutions, Arab East Jerusalem, including the old city, is
defined as occupied territory seized by Israel in 1967. Palestinians want
Jerusalem as their future capital. They accuse Israel and Jordan of trying
to de-politicise the fate of Jerusalem and believe King Hussein has become a
willing partner of Israel to maintain its occupation. Israel claims
Jerusalem as its 'eternal and indivisible capital'.
The PLO and Jordan last week made rival appointments to the post of Mufti,
the highest Islamic authority in Jerusalem. In a speech last Saturday, which
angered Palestinians, King Hussein said: 'We will never relinquish our
religious responsibilities towards the holy sites'.
At the United Nations, the PLO also appealed for international support to
overturn the parts of the Jordan-Israel peace treaty relating to Jerusalem,
saying it violates UN resolutions and the Israel-PLO peace accords.
For decades, Palestinians have accorded Jerusalem a special symbolic
reverence. Photographs of the Dome of the Rock hang on the walls of almost
every PLO leader. In spray-canned graffiti across the Gaza Strip the Dome is
often depicted, symbolising the long-held Palestinian dream of a return to
their cherished homeland.
Mr Arafat, who was not invited to yesterday's ceremony by either Jordan or
Israel, on Tuesday blasted the Israel-Jordan agreement. 'Jerusalem is the
capital of Palestine, whether they like it or not. If they don't like it,
they can drink Gaza sea water,' he said, quoting an Arab proverb meaning he
did not care if his statements were accepted or not.
'I say to them: Jerusalem is not for sale,' he averred.
Hamas, usually at loggerheads with the secular PLO, has joined Mr Arafat's
condemnation of the deal, saying it opens the door for Israeli domination.
