FT  23 APR 94 / A suitable case for treatment: As world finance ministers
gather in Washington, Peter Norman detects unease at the IMF
Finance ministers from around the world have been braving Washington's high
pollen count this week as they prepare for one of their twice-yearly
gatherings to take stock of the global economy.
When the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank
get under way with a meeting of finance ministers from the Group of Seven
big industrial countries tomorrow, there will be much accentuation of the
positive.
The IMF, in its latest World Economic Outlook, has already forecast a
strengthening of world activity and trade this year and next that may lift
world output growth to 3.7 per cent next year or close to the annual average
since 1970.
The Fund has been quick to attribute signs of improvement to measures taken
since its policy-making Interim Committee, representing all IMF members,
adopted a 'declaration on co-operation for sustained global expansion'
exactly one year ago.
But while there is little doubt that lower interest rates in Europe, action
to boost economic growth in Japan, market-oriented reforms in the developing
world and the successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of trade
liberalisation talks hold out hope of a better future, it does not require
much digging to find misgivings among policymakers about trends in the world
economy and their own role.
The sense of malaise is especially pronounced in the industrial countries.
The problems start at the top with weak political leadership. Japan and
Italy have been going through extended political upheavals, while the
leaders of the US, Britain, Germany and now France have been enfeebled by
allegations of scandal, internal party divisions, the disappointment of
voters' expectations and persistent unemployment.
The reality of the much-trumpeted new world order seems to be an increased
focus on domestic policy issues and a tendency to bilateral disputes and
settlements, as exemplified by US-Japanese differences over trade. The
recession of the early 1990s taught nations to put their own houses in order
to achieve growth. The G7 economies, comprising the US, UK, Japan, Germany,
France, Italy and Canada, may converge in terms of growth next year if
Germany and Japan can pull out of recession. But that will entail further
divergence of monetary policies, with US short-term interest rates set to
continue moving upwards while those in Europe may have further to fall.
It will be the job of the financial markets to adjust to these changes. When
the G7 finance ministers meet for the third time in as many months tomorrow,
part of their discussions will focus on recent turbulence in financial
markets and the role played by derivatives, the complex financial
instruments at the centre of much speculative activity. But the ministers'
scope for effective action is small in the face of movements of funds that
are huge and often appear perverse. Governments have been powerless to
influence the big event in the world economy so far this year - the rise in
long-term interest rates.
The jump of about 1 1/4 percentage points in long-term bond yields since the
US Federal Reserve started to raise interest rates in February has
demonstrated the capacity of financial markets to ride roughshod over
economic policy objectives. Ironically, one reason for the Fed's initial
tightening was to prevent the sharp rise in long-term borrowing costs that
has taken place.
A general debate over whether the markets are the servants or masters of
policymakers is sure to grow as banking and monetary authorities intensify
their investigations into derivatives. But regulators and policymakers seem
doomed to lag behind financial innovation, supported as these are by
sophisticated computing power and cheap and readily available
telecommunications.
The power of the financial markets is just one aspect of a broader trend.
The industrialised countries are experiencing a slow but steady diminution
in their global status and influence. Modern knowledge-based industries are
not tied to natural resources or geographical areas: they can and do migrate
easily. While the established industrial countries have been preoccupied by
recession and rising unemployment in recent years, new rivals have been
emerging.
According to IMF figures, growth in the developing countries, excluding
former communist states making the difficult transition to market-based
economies, has only once fallen below 4 per cent in the past eight years. It
dropped to 3.7 per cent in 1990. By contrast, growth in the industrial world
has only once risen above 4 per cent in the same period when it reached 4.4
per cent in 1988.
This divergence of performance is set to continue, according to the World
Bank. It has forecast average annual growth of 4.8 per cent in the
developing world over the next 10 years against yearly growth averaging 2.7
per cent in high-income countries.
In a reversal of previous roles, developing nations are emerging as the
world's free traders. They have also
started to contribute resources to initiatives designed to improve the
world's economic welfare. According to Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing
director, 20 developing countries contributed to the enhanced structural
adjustment facility (ESAF) when the special fund, which lends money at
subsidised interest rates to low-income countries, was relaunched by the IMF
in February.
Against this background of geo-political change, there are two institutions
that the industrialised nations continue to dominate: the IMF and World
Bank. Together the G7 countries control just under 50 per cent of the votes
in the IMF and the US alone can block any constitutional changes in the
Fund.
At first glance, the Fund has never been more influential. It is either
developing or negotiating economic reform programmes with about 70
countries. All propagate the orthodoxies of market-oriented policies, low
inflation and sound fiscal strategy that underpin the economic programmes of
the big industrial nations.
But in the IMF there is a sense of unease not unlike that among economic
policymakers in the industrial countries. The unease has crystallised around
the risky venture to grant Russia a further Dollars 1.5bn in financial
support. The G7 pressured the Fund to negotiate the loan, which was approved
unanimously on Wednesday by the IMF board. It has been granted on conditions
that appear lax to many developing nations that have been forced to borrow
from the Fund in the past.
The G7 has pushed the IMF into the biggest gamble in its 50-year history. Mr
Camdessus has in effect staked the IMF's reputation and credibility on the
ability of a Russian government in which reformers are absent to reform the
economy after many false starts.
If Russia fulfils its part of the bargain and enacts the reform needed to
put its economy on the path of growth and low inflation, the IMF and its
industrial country masters will be able to congratulate themselves. If not,
the IMF could join its client as a suitable case for treatment, and the
industrial nations will have suffered further erosion of their position in
the world economy.
