FT  25 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Non-cartel plan studied for
aluminium output cuts
Trade representatives from the big aluminium producing countries hope they
have found a formula to cut annual global output by another 1.5m to 2m
tonnes without being accused of acting as a cartel.
This is likely to see the Russian industry agree, in perhaps a week, to
reduce its output. Then there would be further cuts by western producers who
have already mothballed more than 1m tonnes of annual capacity.
As no specific targets are to be set for individual western countries, the
trade delegates feel that they will be able to convince anti-trust
authorities in the US and elsewhere that the aluminium industry is reacting
to market forces rather than acting as a cartel aiming to lift aluminium
prices.
'The problem is that, unless some kind of trust can be built up between the
producers, everyone wants to see others make the first cuts,' said one
delegate yesterday. 'We hope we now have a formula to generate that trust,
one that will produce the world-wide cuts necessary to bring the aluminium
market back into balance.'
The formula, in the shape of a memorandum of understanding, was despatched
yesterday by Mr Jorn Keck, the European Commission's external trade
relations commissioner, who should have a clear idea of what is acceptable
after chairing the three-day negotiations in Brussels last week between
representatives from Australia, Canada, the 12-nation EU negotiating as one,
Norway, Russia and the US. Lawyers from the US Justice Department,
responsible for anti-trust matters, were also involved.
The countries have been asked to respond to the memorandum by Friday this
week.
If all then went to plan, production cuts would start shortly afterwards and
would be monitored by the International Primary Aluminium Institute. The
Russian delegates said that their smelters would co-operate by providing
IPAI with statistics and become members of the international data-collecting
organisation. There would be a follow-up, monitoring meeting between the
trade delegates in Canada at the end of February to assess whether the
scheme was working properly.
The Brussels meeting last week was meant to last only two days but was
prolonged at first by Russia's refusal to change its offer to cut output by
300,000 tonnes but only if there were similar reductions in the west. This
offer was too low as far as the US delegates were concerned.
Further delays were caused by wrangling between the US and the EU, mainly
about the import restrictions on aluminium from the Commonwealth of
Independent States imposed by the EU last year and which will not be removed
until the end of February at the earliest. According to one delegate, the EU
and the US eventually agreed that there should be no unilateral trade
restrictions imposed in future but only multilateral solutions should be
sought.
