FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - The World's Economies
 -Eastern Europe (50): Fledglings flex their wings - Eastern Europe's
transformation has been messy
The greatest conundrum facing 450m people when communism collapsed in
eastern and central Europe five years ago was how to create capitalism
without capital. It seemed an impossible task which became even more
difficult when the demise of the old Comecon trading network led to a
collapse in foreign trade between the former communist states.
Five years on, however, it has become increasingly clear that the end of the
cold war and 'constructive destruction' of the old centrally-planned
economies has liberated capital and resources on a huge scale. Nearly 60 per
cent of the Polish economy is now in the private sector with the Czech
Republic and other 'fast track' reformers of central Europe approaching
similar levels. Domestic capital and savings, not foreign investment, are
emerging as the principal source of finance throughout the region as private
companies re-invest profits, banks re-capitalise to improve their lending
base and embryonic financial institutions such as pension funds and
insurance companies compete for the savings of higher income groups emerging
from greater income differentials.
Inevitably, the process of economic transformation, still far from complete,
has been messy as well as painful and often arbitrary and unfair. The Czechs
pioneered mass privatisation through vouchers on a grand scale,
enthusiastically followed by Russia, and all the former communist states
have their own variant of a mass privatisation programme, flanked by trade
sales and other negotiated disposals, mainly to foreign investors.
But a vast array of state-owned assets has been transmuted into private
property without due process of law - stolen in plain English. All too often
the new 'owners' turn out to be former communist nomenklatura factory owners
or party officials with the right connections. If the early French socialist
thinker Proudhon were still alive he might well have modified his famous
dictum that property is theft to read something like this: 'Socialist
property is theft: the theft of socialist property creates capital.'
Many of those wily enough to survive and prosper under the old regime have
taken to capitalism like ducks to water. In many cases capital once acquired
has been rapidly transferred into bank accounts and other assets abroad -
well over Dollars 50bn is believed to have left the former Soviet Union by
various channels over the past few years.
In practice, it is often used to provide offshore financing for deals within
the former Soviet Union. Much is waiting to return as laundered, ostensibly
legitimate, 'foreign' investment. Victor Geraschenko, chairman of the
Russian National bank, favours a form of amnesty to attract such funds back
to Russia.
Increasingly, however, real new wealth is being created by entrepreneurs
building up their own businesses from modest beginnings, not just the
re-investment of capital acquired during the essentially one-off stage of
'primitive capital accumulation'.
The quickest returns have come from trade - a path blazed by the Poles who
dominated illegal trading throughout the former Soviet bloc and jumped at
the new opportunities opened up by convertibility of the zloty. Currency
convertibility was a key element in Poland's January 1990 stabilisation
programme and loomed large in similar market reform programmes throughout
the bloc.
Increasing amounts of domestic capital are going into productive industry,
although the bulk of such investment to date has come from western
multinationals.
But for millions of individuals and families in the former Soviet bloc now
free to engage fully in economic activity, the main opportunities to enter
business with limited amounts of capital have come in the service sectors so
neglected under central planning, but so vital for job creation.
Thousands of companies have been formed and millions of new jobs have been
created over the past five years in retailing and wholesaling, banking and
finance, insurance, marketing, media, advertising and communications,
tourism and the like. They have not fully compensated for the loss of jobs
in the old state industries and military establishments. Unemployment
typically ranges from 10-15 per cent, except for the Czech Republic where
service sector growth is highest and where artificially low wages have kept
many under-employed on factory payrolls.
Meanwhile, mass privatisation programmes have created millions of small
shareholders and the short-lived boom in share prices on the fledgling
bourses of Warsaw, Prague and Budapest last year both attracted popular
attention to the potential merits of share ownership and permitted the first
quoted companies to raise cheap equity. The longer-term task of creating
efficient banks and other financial institutions like insurance companies
and pension funds is under way.
Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary are most advanced along the path to
becoming 'normal' market economies, but seemingly unlikely candidates such
as Estonia, Slovenia and even Albania have shown in their differing ways how
small economies can be swiftly turned around, given tight fiscal and
monetary management, a modicum of technical advice and financial assistance,
entrepreneurial flair and a handful of dedicated market reformers.
Poland and Bulgaria in particular have also benefited from successful debt
reduction agreements which have reduced the burden of repayment and
re-opened access to normal commercial borrowing and foreign equity
investment. Prior to these agreements both countries were heavily dependent
on help from the international financial institutions (IFIs) - especially
the IMF and World Bank.
But as restructuring progresses and economic growth returns, reliance on the
IFIs is falling as foreign equity investment and commercial bank operations
become more available.
