FT  12 SEP 94 / CDU and SPD keep power in state polls
The Christian Democratic Union and its Social Democratic Party rival both
won decisive victories yesterday in two regional elections in eastern
Germany - seen as an early poll test ahead of federal elections on October
16.
The CDU premier of Saxony, Mr Kurt Biedenkopf, and the SPD premier of
Brandenburg, Mr Manfred Stolpe, swept back into power with absolute
majorities.
Big gains were also made by the former communists - the Party of Democratic
Socialism (PDS). They became the third largest party in both states.
But the Free Democratic Party, the junior partner in Chancellor Kohl's
governing CDU-led coalition in Bonn, failed to get the 5 per cent minimum
required to enter either of the two state parliaments. A similar fate befell
the Bundnis 90/Green party.
The FDP's failure to clear the hurdle is a big blow to the party. It raised
further doubts about its ability to get back into federal parliament - a
possibility that could upset coalition forecasts.
In Saxony, the only state where the CDU has an absolute majority, Mr
Biedenkopf, a former law professor, was returned with 58.1 per cent of the
vote, according to provisional figures. This is more than four percentage
points higher than in the last election in 1990.
The SPD failed to make inroads in Saxony, winning only 16.6 per cent of the
vote, 2.5 percentage points less than in 1990. The FDP's share of the vote
was cut from 5.3 per cent to 1.8 per cent and the Bundnis 90/Greens' vote
fell from 5.6 per cent to 4.1 per cent. The PDS vote rose from 10.2 per cent
in 1990 to 16.5 per cent.
In Brandenburg, the only eastern German state with an SPD-led coalition
government, the party's share of the vote rose from 38.2 per cent in 1990 to
53.5 per cent. But the strong showing may reflect the special factors at
play in eastern German politics rather than national trends.
The CDU's share of the vote in Brandenburg collapsed from 29.4 per cent in
1990 to 18.9 per cent. The FDP vote fell from 6.6 per cent to 2.1 per cent,
and the Bundnis 90/Greens vote also dropped from 9.3 per cent to 3 per cent.
By contrast, the PDS share of the vote rose from 13.4 per cent to 18.9 per
cent.
Mr Werner Hoyer, FDP chairman in Bonn, said the party's poor showing was an
'extremely atypical result'. He did not believe it could be compared with
the outcome of the federal poll next month. The party would return to the
Bonn parliament 'if we can keep our nerves'.
