FT  23 FEB 94 / The US strikes back: Detroit fights back to regain US market
share - Spurred by Japanese success, the Big Three have returned to
profitability - but the struggle is not over
At the start of this decade there was no more potent symbol of America's
apparent industrial decline than its car manufacturers, as Japanese rivals
gobbled up an ever increasing share of the US vehicle market. 'Detroit's Big
Three are staring death in the face,' declared one influential business
magazine. Yet far from expiring, Detroit today presents one of the main
examples of a recovery in US industrial competitiveness against Japan and
Europe - though one that requires heavy qualification.
In 1993, for the second year in a row, Japan's share of the US car and light
truck market fell, to 23.1 per cent from 24.3 in 1992 and 25.7 in 1991.
Detroit's Big Three - General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler  - saw their
share rise from 72.2 per cent to 73.9 per cent. And while European and
Japanese manufacturers are losing money, Detroit has returned to
profitability after two years of huge losses. Chrysler, the smallest of the
Big Three, which came close to financial crisis three years ago, is now the
most profitable, on a per-vehicle basis.
The US industry has certainly made great strides in the past few years, but
just as the dire predictions of 1990 exaggerated its weakness, there is now
a danger of over-stating its competitive strengths relative to the Japanese.
First, the restructuring of the industry is far from complete. While
Chrysler and Ford are prospering, General Motors, largest of the three, is
still battling to return its bloated, inefficient North American operations
to profitability.
Second, the turnround is due in no small part to economic shifts that could
prove temporary. The yen has appreciated sharply against the dollar over the
past year, even as Japan has fought recession. Japanese car companies cannot
afford to price their vehicles cheaply in North America and chase market
share. The Big Three's vehicles now cost some Dollars 2,500 (Pounds 1,710)
less than equivalent Japanese models - a huge price advantage.
Third, winning back market share in the domestic market could be the least
of the challenges facing Detroit. It also needs to build up its presence in
the fast-growing Asian market, which is dominated by the Japanese, and ward
off an increasing Japanese threat in Europe.
At least the leaders of the US industry recognise they have no grounds for
complacency. Says Mr Alex Trotman, chairman of Ford: 'We are going to have
to work like mad, get more and more efficient, to survive and prosper in
this global industrial environment.' Such attitudes represent a huge change
from American smugness in the 1970s and early 1980s when Detroit, secure in
its vast domestic market, totally underestimated the threat from Japan.
Needled by inexpensive imports, the Big Three challenged the Japanese to
compete 'fairly' by building plants in the US.
The Japanese did just that, setting up numerous 'transplant' factories in
the 1980s. Their share of the US car market soared from 20 per cent at the
start of the decade to a peak of just over 30 per cent in 1991, thanks to
efficient factories producing vehicles which were keenly priced, with
attractive styling and performance and a reputation for reliability.
Detroit's comeback is due to improvements in each of these areas, thanks to
belated copying of Japanese methods. It also stems from slashing the
encrusted layers of corporate bureaucracy which in the past reduced speed,
flexibility and initiative. Chrysler, for example, completely changed the
way it develops new vehicles, setting up 'platform teams', bringing together
disciplines such as engineering and design to work together, rather than
passing the development process sequentially from one department to another.
It has also set up close links with suppliers, which are brought early into
discussions about new models. As a result, it has sharply cut the time and
cost of bringing cars to market - and created a succession of models which
are among America's hottest new vehicles.
Ford, modelling itself on Toyota, has moved in a similar direction, but GM
is still struggling to rationalise its sprawling product development and
engineering processes, and its relations with suppliers remain poor.
Financial woes also forced Ford and Chrysler to restructure manufacturing
operations in the 1980s. Productivity at many of Ford's assembly operations
is now approaching that of its Japanese rivals, with Chrysler lagging some
way behind and GM far in the rear, according to Harbour and Associates, an
industry consultancy.
At the same time, the Big Three have all managed to narrow the reliability
gap which separated them from the Japanese during the 1980s by concentrating
much more closely on quality control during the manufacturing process.
Japanese vehicles still fill nine of the top 10 spots in a closely-watched
quality survey produced by consultancy JD Power &amp; Associates, but the gap is
now so small that customers are prepared to give much more weight to other
factors, such as styling and price. In styling, Ford and Chrysler are
winning customers with a succession of attractive new models, particularly
in the fastest growing segment of the market, for Jeep-like sports utility
vehicles and family mini-vans, known in Europe as multi-purpose vehicles.
The Japanese and GM have weak positions in these sectors.
As for pricing, some US industry executives suggest Detriot's edge could
prove a long-term phenomenon, not related solely to the recent gyrations of
the yen. Mr Ed Hagenlocker, head of Ford's North American automotive
operations, says Japanese companies have consistently put up their US prices
by around 5 per cent a year over the past decade, irrespective of the value
of the yen, while Detroit's have gone up 3 per cent a year and inflation 4
per cent. This, he says, seems to represent a trend-line, and he wonders if
the Japanese have been 'selling product at less than cost for quite a while'
 -a luxury they certainly cannot afford now.
Whatever the truth, no one is counting the Japanese out. They remain
formidable competitors and have repeatedly demonstrated a remarkable ability
to bounce back from adversity.
But at least Detroit now knows it too has the initiative to stage a
comeback. Mr Wayne Booker, head of Ford's international operations, speaks
for much the industry when he says: 'It's my perception the Japanese are a
force with which we can compete - if we stay on our toes and perform very
efficiently.'
Report by Martin Dickson, Louise Kehoe and Tony Jackson.
This is the last in a series on US competitiveness. Earlier articles
appeared on February 7, 15 and 22
