FT  13 JAN 94 / Government Bonds: Low inflation figures prompt big advances
in US Treasuries
The long end of the US Treasury market posted big gains yesterday as
investors reacted positively to news of low inflation.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  29/32 at 101
1/16 , to yield 6.166 per cent. The two-year note was only slightly firmer,
however, up  1/32 at 100 13/32 , yielding 4.015 per cent.
The news that sparked the buying was the 0.1 per cent rise in December
producer prices.
Although the figure was in line with market expectations, prices rose as
investors judged that the second half of the monthly inflation data -
today's consumer prices report - would be equally bullish for fixed-income
instruments.
Dealers said the long end was further buoyed by short-covering and
futures-related buying. The latter was the result of the March T-bond
contract breaking through a technical barrier, which sparked demand from
retail accounts, and which in turn prompted heavy buying in the cash market.
A dramatic decline in the UK unemployment rate for December wiped out hopes
of a near-term cut in interest rates and depressed the gilt market yesterday
morning, reducing earlier gains in UK government bond prices.
Short-dated gilts closed marginally weaker while longer-dated issues ended
about  1/8 of a point higher.
The gilt market opened on a firm note, and prices rallied across the curve
with the long end showing the strongest gains. However, prices fell back
after the release of unemployment data which showed that the number of
jobless fell by 46,800 in December, reducing the unemployment rate to 9.8
per cent from 10.0 per cent the previous month.
Dealers said the news fuelled speculation that Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor of the exchequer, and Mr Eddie George, governor of the Bank of
England, will decide to keep interest rates at current levels when they hold
their regular policy meeting today.
Other European bond markets gained encouragement from the US rally. However,
the German bund market lost some of its earlier gains as hopes of a further
easing of interest rates faded, following comments by several Bundesbank
council members. 'If German M3 money supply for December is high, the
Bundesbank won't be cutting rates this month,' one analyst said.
The Spanish market, which is experiencing a revival of international
interest, performed strongly, gaining half a point.
'Spain has come back into fashion,' said Mr Juonni Kokko, an international
economist at Warburg, noting that the peseta has recovered to Pta82.70
against the D-Mark. 'If anything, the implication of the Banesto scandal is
that rates may have to come down more than expected,' he added.
The Italian market also performed impressively, rallying a further 30 basis
points as political fears eased. Traders hope that the parliamentary debate
over a vote of no-confidence in prime minister Carlo Ciampi will produce an
early general election.
