FT  02 APR 94 / Food &amp; Drink: Truffles to covert - Nicholas Lander spends an
afternoon making chocolate truffles
It is fortunately very rare for this column to report a new type of injury.
But it is with equal amounts of sadness and pleasure that I have to draw
readers' attention to 'truffle elbow'.
This self-inflicted malaise has been creeping up on Sara Jayne's right elbow
for 12 years, ever since she made her first chocolate truffles for a dinner
party.
Since then her love affair with the chocolate truffle has grown, as has her
expertise with the chocolatier's most difficult task - tempering the
chocolate. But the excitement, and challenge, of making delicious
hand-rolled truffles, with flavours such as lapsang souchong, calvados and
coffee beans, still remains.
Jayne managed to obtain some expert advice from such eminent pastry chefs as
Michel Roux, whose recipe she still uses, John Huber, principal pastry
lecturer at Thames Valley University, and Ian Ironside, now head pastry chef
at the Gleneagles Hotel, Scotland. But she confesses that during the initial
four years she made some mistakes. In 1989 she found a factory and with two
staff was doing well until January 1991, when the recession struck. With
only two orders in one month, she decided to bring the business back to her
small domestic kitchen in Clapham, south London.
Jayne had been shown by a master chocolatier how a top-of-the-range
microwave could melt the chocolate to the right temperature in seconds - but
this was not for her. Instead, everything was done in spotless stainless
steel pans, the chocolate melted over a giant heavy-bottomed roasting pan
that acts as a bain marie.
It is the subsequent enrobing process which Jayne believes has brought on
truffle elbow. Her recipe below gives the 'easy' option of coating the
truffles in cocoa powder. But for the finest truffles this will not do.
More couverture chocolate has to be melted to exactly the right temperature
(31`C). Then, grasping a dipping fork gently, lift the truffles and dip them
in the liquid chocolate to enrobe them, avoiding the appearance of small air
bubbles on the chocolate's surface. This continuous dipping process is the
cause of truffle elbow.
Jayne's criteria for making the finest chocolate truffles included the best
ingredients (Cacao Barry couverture chocolate from Ritter, 081-903-7177 or
Valrhona, available at many delicatessens) and the best quality piping bags
and dipping forks from Keylink, Rotherham, (0709-550206).
Then in order of importance came practice and patience - it takes her an
hour to box and ribbon five 1lb packs of truffles and she has recently
ordered her 200,000th petit four case.
SARA JAYNE'S BASIC CHOCOLATE TRUFFLE Ingredients: 1lb bitter couverture
chocolate;  1/2 pt whipping cream, preferably Devon; cocoa powder to dust or
couverture chocolate to enrobe.
Break the chocolate into tiny pieces and put into a large bowl over hot
water (off the flame). Cover tightly, stirring occasionally until nearly
melted.
In a saucepan bring the cream to the boil and then pour into the melted
chocolate and blend thoroughly. Leave to cool at room temperature which will
take a few hours.
Using an electric hand mixer, whisk the cream and chocolate mixture until
the consistency of softly whipped cream - not too hard or it sets.
Spoon this mixture into a 14in piping bag with a half inch nozzle and pipe
small amounts on to a tray of waxed paper or cling film. Refrigerate for
about one hour.
Sieve about 8 oz cocoa powder into a large bowl. Ease the truffles one at a
time off the baking sheet and roll in the cocoa powder, dropping them gently
into petits four cases. Keep refrigerated.
Sara Jayne's truffles: Pounds 17 per lb (inc post and packing) from 517 Old
York Road, London SW18 1TS. Tel: 081-874-8500.
