FT  29 JUN 94 / Clarke launches fightback against Tory Euro-sceptics
Mr Kenneth Clarke will launch a counter-offensive today against the Tory
party's Euro-sceptics with a strong re-affirmation of the government's
fundamental commitment to the European Union.
Throwing his formidable political authority behind his party's beleaguered
pro-Europeans, the chancellor will insist that disputes over the European
Commission presidency and over beef trade will not undermine a basic
identity of interest between Britain's Conservatives and Germany's Christian
Democrats.
His intervention will come in a speech to the Christian Democrat Konrad
Adenauer foundation in Bonn - the audience chosen by Mr John Major more than
three years ago to proclaim his determination to keep Britain at the 'heart
of Europe'. Mr Clarke will repeat the phrase.
Mr Clarke, one of the most powerful figures in the cabinet and the leading
potential successor to Mr Major, is expected to enrage the Euro-sceptics by
underlining his personal support for the eventual goal of economic and
monetary union.
Dismissing the notion that Britain will refuse to contemplate a single
currency, he will urge EU governments to recreate the conditions for stable
exchange rates by meeting the Maastricht Treaty's economic convergence
criteria.
Putting himself directly at odds with the minimalist vision of Europe
offered earlier this week by Mr Michael Portillo, his Thatcherite deputy at
the Treasury, the chancellor will reaffirm strong support for that Treaty.
Few people, Mr Clarke will add, could seriously question that Britain's
future lies in Europe.
His speech marks a determined move against efforts by the Euro-sceptics to
capitalise on the recent breaches between Britain and its European partners.
The sceptics want to lock Mr Major permanently into a more overtly
nationalistic stance.
The speech is likely to be followed within the next few days with a
similarly positive view of Britain's place in Europe from Mr Douglas Hurd,
the foreign secretary.
Mr Clarke will emphasises that Britain must retain the right to disagree
with its partners. He will tell his audience that other European governments
must be sensitive to political realities in Britain.
In a robust as well as unmistakably pro-European speech, he will defend
strongly Mr Major's decision to veto Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene as the next
president of the European Commission.
He will emphasise that Britain's agenda of an enlarged, liberal and
deregulated Europe should be shared by the German Christian Democrats and by
other right-of-centre parties throughout the European Union.
But both the substance and tone of the speech will be seen at Westminster as
a deliberate attempt to reverse the recent tide flowing in favour of the
Eurosceptics.
