FT  15 OCT 94 / Efforts stepped up to sell Swans yard: Receivers and unions
hope buyer will emerge to continue Tyne shipbuilding tradition at Wallsend
facility
Attempts to sell Swan Hunter's Wallsend yard, if possible for shipbuilding
use, are to be stepped up with separate initiatives planned by the Tyneside
company's union campaigners and receivers.
Mr Dick Gonsalez, chairman of the Tyne and Blyth Confederation of
Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions at Swans, said yesterday that while he
was sad at the break-up of the company's assets, ending hopes of a
going-concern sale, Thursday's disposals of its Hebburn and Neptune yards
could improve sale prospects for Wallsend, the company's main shipbuilding
facility.
Mr Gonsalez said the union campaign to save shipbuilding on the Tyne would
continue.
And joint receiver Mr Gordon Horsfield, of Price Waterhouse, said he was
planning a new worldwide advertising campaign, probably in early November,
focusing on the Wallsend yard.
He said: 'I would like to see the Wallsend yard bought by a company of
substance that has pockets deep enough to make the necessary investment to
re-establish it as one of the world's leading shipbuilding yards.'
The receivers said there had been some expression of interest for Wallsend.
Yesterday Mr Eric Welsh, managing director of Tees Dockyard, said his
company's acquisition of the Hebburn site and its huge dry dock meant
Britain could repair large vessels which had previously gone to Germany,
Sweden, France and Spain.
The Hebburn dry dock, 259 metres long and 44 metres wide with the capacity
to take 150,000 tonne ships, is the biggest on Britain's east coast.
Mr Welsh said that within three weeks the new business, Tyne Tees Dockyard,
should see its first ship arrive at Hebburn, a site little used by Swan
Hunter in recent years.
Mr Welsh, chief executive of the new company, hopes its permanent workforce
will reach 200 in a year, with others on contract.
Ship repairer A &amp; P Appledore, buying the Neptune yard for extensive
refitting of large ships, hopes to create 150 to 200 permanent jobs.
Mr Gonsalez welcomed the prospect of new jobs and the retention of the sites
for marine industry use.
Price Waterhouse has until now put Swans' break-up value at Pounds 7.3m but
it seems that it may fetch nearer Pounds 8.5m. Mr Horsfield said that in the
light of disposals so far more than Pounds 7.3m was likely. Apart from
Wallsend, the other substantial asset to be sold is Swans' UK intellectual
property.
On Monday the unions will ask Price Waterhouse to make November 3, when
Swans' last ship leaves, an open day for past and present employees, their
families and supporters.
Mr Gonsalez said: 'We'd like to see everybody there so we can march back out
with our heads high. They haven't broken the spirit of Tyneside.'
Mr Horsfield said if approached with the request he would make every effort
to accommodate it.
