FT  15 DEC 94 / Belfast Investment Conference: Five large investments in
Ulster confirmed
Mr John Major, the prime minister, yesterday announced new investment in
Northern Ireland amounting to Pounds 74m at the international investment
forum he hosted in Belfast.
Although some of these investments have been in the pipeline for some time,
their announcement - timed to coincide with the conference - served to
underline the forum's success.
The organiser, the Industrial Development Board for Northern Ireland, said
it was well pleased with the event. More than 300 delegates attended,
including a large delegation from the US accompanying Mr Ron Brown, the
country's secretary for commerce, who addressed the conference.
The investments confirmed yesterday were:
Du Pont of the US is spending Pounds 13.5m on developing prototype
technologies at its Lycra facility in Londonderry, bringing its investment
in research there to Pounds 38m in the past three years. Du Pont employs
1,000 production staff in Londonderry.
Ford, the US motor group, which has had a presence in Belfast for 30 years,
is to invest Pounds 15m in the production of new engine components.
Nacco Materials Handling of the US will be investing Pounds 11m at
Craigavon, consolidating the plant's position as a source for its new range
of Hyster and Yale forklift trucks. More than 100 extra jobs will be created
by 1996.
British Telecommunications is to invest Pounds 30m in a new office block at
Laganside in Belfast and a further Pounds 1.5m in expanding its customer
services centre at Enniskillen, providing 113 new jobs. Sir Iain Vallance,
BT chairman, said the investment would be in addition to the Pounds 30m BT
expects to invest in Northern Ireland in the coming year.
Fujitsu, the Japanese electronics group, which is already established in
County Antrim, is to build a Pounds 3.5m factory at Springvale Business Park
in west Belfast which could create 100 new jobs.
A shadow hanging over the conference in the shape of a possible boycott by
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, evaporated when Sinn Fein
councillors arrived at the Europa Hotel early yesterday morning and began to
lobby delegates over the province's economic future. They subsequently took
seats in the conference hall and listened to some of the speeches before
walking out.
One potential US investor, however, criticised the treatment of Sinn Fein.
Mr Alan Hevesi, the New York City comptroller - who controls a Dollars 50bn
(Pounds 30.4bn) pension fund - said that Mr Gerry Adams, the president of
Sinn Fein, should have been invited to the conference.
He said that exclusion of 'a representation of a substantial portion of the
population' from the conference was 'a mistake on the part of the British
government'.
After the conference Mr Major visited the site of the new BT office block in
Laganside.
He later went with his wife Norma to the centre of Portadown, which was
devastated 19 months ago by an IRA bomb.
The Majors were given a warm welcome as they walked through the central
shopping district. They then visited the local Royal Ulster Constabulary
headquarters.
