FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (36): Fresh markets opening - The
tourist industry
The Umngazi River Bungalow Hotel nestles sleepily in its Indian Ocean cove,
where rollers break on the crescent-shaped white beach, deserted but for a
lone fisherman and two dogs, gambolling in the adjoining lagoon.
Anywhere else in the world it would be the retreat of the rich, a private
playground in an unspoilt environment. It's within easy reach from
Johannesburg - a 60-minute flight east to Umtata, and then an hour's drive
through the green hills of what used to be the Transkei homeland.
On the cove's grassy slopes are scattered 42 bungalows. A tennis court and
swimming pool are in easy reach, while alongside the jetty on the river
which feeds the lagoon, a motorboat stands ready for fishing or
bird-spotting expeditions.
The hotel is not a retreat for the well-off. Dinner, bed and breakfast costs
R125 a night - just over Pounds 20 - but the resort has only a handful of
guests.* It is as if Umngazi is still cocooned and isolated from the outside
world by the country's apartheid past.
In the grim period after the mid-1980s, when Mr PW Botha, prime minister,
defied the world and angry black teenagers took to the streets, Umngazi and
hundreds of other resorts suffered the consequences. South Africa seemed to
have put up the shutters against political reform, and the outside world
shunned it: barely 250,000 tourists came to the country in 1988. But with
the political transition and the inauguration of a stable government of
national unity, Umngazi awaits discovery by visitors to the new South
Africa.
Many of those travellers who already knew what this spectacular country has
to offer are looking back with something akin to guilty nostalgia to a time
when a berth in the luxurious Blue Train could be obtained at short notice,
or a room at the Mount Nelson hotel in Cape Town with a view of Table
Mountain - provided it wasn't the school holidays.
Those days are well passed, for a vigorous promotion campaign is getting
under way.
'Explore South Africa 95 Year' will be its theme, exploiting events such as
the World Rugby Cup, the Comrades Marathon in Natal, the Million Dollar Golf
Classic at Sun City and the Grahamstown festival
'The aim is to to achieve R9.5bn in foreign exchange earnings by 1996, based
on 1m overseas visitor arrivals and 3.7m arrivals from Africa', says the
South African Tourism Board's marketing plan.
It may seem an ambitious target, but when the world discovers what South
Africa has to offer it will beat a path to beaches, game parks, mountains
and lakes served by an excellent transport and communications
infrastructure, and offering lodges and hotels that range from budget class
to the luxurious.
Since the lifting of sanctions, direct air links with Australia and the US
have been re-established, existing airlines have increased their services,
and more than 20 new airlines are serving South Africa.
Tourist sector officials acknowledge that coping with a million
holidaymakers a year will strain the country's existing hotel capacity. But
the sector is already preparing for a boom that will encourage hotels to
upgrade their facilities and, above all, create jobs.
And while the 1m target is four times the annual number of holidaymakers who
came during the political traumas of the mid-1980s, Satour points to last
years' figures as evidence that it is within reach.
In 1993, the country earned about R6bn from 618,000 overseas tourists - 10.5
per cent up on 1992 - making the sector the fourth-largest foreign exchange
earner after manufactured goods, gold and mining, and employing
approximately 430,000 workers.
Notwithstanding this increase, the potential has barely been tapped, say
Satour officials. South Africa has less than a 1 per cent share of the
international market and tourism accounts for only 2 per cent of South
Africa's gross national product, compared to the world average of 6.1 per
cent.
There is scope for growth even in traditional strongholds. The UK is by far
South Africa's largest overseas market, accounting for about 23 per cent of
visitors - excluding those from Africa - and Germany is the second-largest
source.
But thanks to the new political environment and the number of new airlines
serving Johannesburg, Satour can now exploit lucrative markets hitherto out
of reach, such as India and Japan, and Scandinavia.
But it is Africa itself that is expected to provide the most dramatic
results, from a mere 200,000 arrivals in 1991 to a targeted 3.7m in 1996.
Good news for the South African economy, but not happy reading for those who
now have to share the country's scenic beauty with millions of newcomers.
So don't delay: visit South Africa while the hotels are relatively cheap and
underbooked, the beaches are not crowded, tourists are not fleeced, and
Umngazi River Bungalows are not taken over by the package tour business.
*Umngazi River Bungalows, near Port St Johns (0471) 22370
