FT  31 OCT 94 / Media Futures: US cable groups push into telecoms
US cable companies are resisting the Federal Communication Commission's
(FCC) ruling allowing local telephone groups into the cable business, by
mounting their own bids to break into telecommunications.
Last week, cable group Time Warner applied for state permission to enter the
local telephone business in Ohio. A day earlier, TCI, Cox and Comcast
announced the formation of a joint venture with long-distance carrier Sprint
to offer local and long-distance services, wireless communications and cable
in a single package to consumers.
These forays will eventually result in the complete breakdown of barriers
between the two industries, analysts predict. 'In the long-term, cable will
compete with the local exchanges and vice-versa,' says Berge Ayvazian,
senior vice-president of Yankee Group. 'These companies are wise to position
themselves to act quickly once the barriers come down.'
Earlier this month, the FCC's 'video dial tone' ruling paved the way for
local telephone companies to build the infrastructure for cable services.
Long-distance providers like AT&amp;T, Sprint and MCI do not benefit from the
ruling, since they do not provide wiring to houses and businesses.
However, the ruling did impose restrictions on local telephone groups'
adventures in cable. Although the companies are allowed to establish
facilities for video signals, they are so far forbidden from sending videos
down those lines. Even so, the ruling was enough to rile the cable and
long-distance sectors.
'It's very possible that local telephone customers will end up paying higher
rates to finance a new video infrastructure', says Lisa Meredith,
spokesperson for the National Cable Association. But the FCC and local
telephone groups insist federal and state scrutiny of rates will prevent
this from happening.
The Rochester telephone company, re-named Frontier earlier this year, will
soon become the first to face competition in its market. In January, Time
Warner will offer residents in the up-state New York region an alternative
service. The success of that experiment will probably help determine the
speed with which cable companies gain access to other areas. Most states now
guarantee a monopoly for the Baby Bell groups which split off from AT&amp;T in
the 1980s.
Cable wires are generally set up to send one-way signals to households, and
are not easily adaptable to two-way telephone signals. Time Warner will try
to resolve the problem in Rochester by putting a telephone box to convert
the signals next to the cable box in customers' homes. The new Sprint, TCI,
Cox and Comcast venture will try a more direct route, aiming to provide a
wireless service to consumers.
The sudden burst of activity in the cable-telephone cross-over has sparked
renewed calls for sweeping Congressional legislation. 'This cannot and
should not be settled on a case-by-case basis, depending on what individual
states decide,' says Donna Lampert, special counsel for legislation and
policy at the FCC. 'We need comprehensive federal legislation.'
The FCC, for its part, can only interpret existing laws governing the
sector. A nearly successful push for a telephone-cable bill was squashed by
the local telephone companies earlier this year and observers are sceptical
that the 1995 Congressional session will produce any new legislation on the
issue. Meantime, telephone and cable companies will continue to test the
limits of their involvement in each other's business.
