FT  15 NOV 94 / Survey of European Airports (12): Coping with the crowds -
The case for expansion in southern England
Months before the public inquiry into the proposed Terminal 5 at Heathrow,
London, pressure is building for further airport expansion in southern
England.
The inquiry, in May next year, will examine the case for Terminal 5 set out
by BAA which owns Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted in south-east England as
well as Southampton in the south-east and Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen in
Scotland.
The company says that by 2015 traffic at BAA's south-eastern airports will
have soared from more than 70m movements now to about 160m. If terminal
capacity does not increase, traffic will be lost to European competitors,
such as Amsterdam, Frankfurt and Paris.
BAA says it will self-finance the Pounds 900m Terminal 5. If work starts by
1997, the first phase will be completed by 2002, adding 15m passengers a
year; phase 2, expected to finish by 2013, will double this to 30m. The
extra space will raise Heathrow's capacity to 80m passengers a year; in the
12 months to this September it handled 50.3m.
BAA says that over the past 20 years, the number of passengers at Heathrow
has more than doubled, while the number of people affected by noise has been
reduced from 2m to fewer than 500,000 by the use of quieter aircraft.
When Terminal 5 is completed, BAA says this number will have fallen to about
300,000. The company encourages the use of quieter aircraft by offering
discounts on airport charges for them and penalties for noisier ones.
If approved, Terminal 5 would create 6,000 jobs - not including those in
construction work - and 8,000 existing jobs would be protected. Heathrow
generates 70,000 jobs, and the airport and the businesses it supports
contribute Pounds 3bn a year to the economy.
Airlines and other aviation businesses strongly favour Terminal 5. But
opposition is expected from residential and environmental lobbies around
Heathrow - despite the BAA's rejection of another runway and its promises
that everything would be done to lessen environmental problems.
Long before Terminal 5 is fully operational however, BAA and the airlines
will have begun to think hard about how to cope with further traffic growth.
New terminals are under consideration for Gatwick and Stansted and another
runway will be needed at one of the southern airports.
The runway debate is becoming contentious. BAA, believes that a new one is
not likely to be needed elsewhere in the south-east at least until 2010, a
view supported by a Department of Transport working group, Runway Capacity
to Serve the South East (Rucatse), which says 'benefits to passengers could
provide a case for a further runway at Heathrow or Gatwick by 2010 or, if
this were not provided, at Stansted by 2015'.
Rucatse says there is scope for making more use of existing airport capacity
in the south-east than had been assumed, and that greater use of regional
airports would also help to delay the need for expansion in London.
It identified possible sites for additional runways at the four main London
airports, and looked at the plan for an offshore airport near Sheerness
(Marinair). Rucatse was not asked to make any formal recommendations but its
report was intended to stimulate debate in UK commercial aviation.
The airlines believe that if traffic increases, another south-east runway
would be needed - by 2005 rather than 2010 - at either Heathrow or Gatwick,
to benefit from expanding inter-lining (connecting) traffic.
The British Air Transport Association (Bata), representing the airlines,
says that traffic growth has outstripped projections, and could reach the
160m level by 2010 rather than 2015. A study it commissioned from Alan
Stratford and Associates shows that London's capacity would be exhausted by
2012 (near the time that Terminal 5 would be working) and that by 2015 there
would be more than 22m passengers too many for London's airports.
'This clearly points to the need for new runway capacity to be provided in
the early years of the next century, even if Terminal 5 and expansions at
Luton and Stansted are sanctioned,' says Bata.
'If new (runway) capacity is to be provided, the Heathrow/Gatwick axis is
the most efficient location for it.'
Earlier this year the Chartered Institute of Transport, in its report 'New
Solution for Heathrow', also argued that Rucatse under-estimated the urgency
of the need for additional runway capacity at Heathrow, and did not
'adequately assess the broader economic issues and the vital contribution
which air services make to the prosperity of the economy'. Nor did Rucatse
fully acknowledge 'the advances in aeronautical technology which have
substantially reduced, and will continue to reduce, the adverse
environmental impacts of airline operations.'
The institute said more aircraft could use the airport if parallel runways
were built closer to the existing runways.
Meanwhile, other expansion schemes are emerging: an independent company has
proposed redevelopment of the airfield at Redhill near Gatwick, as a
'reliever' airport. BAA continues to spend large sums on its own airports.
Apart from Terminal 5, which will cost Pounds 100m even before the planning
inquiry starts, the company has earmarked Pounds 3.5bn for capital
expenditure at all its airports in the next 10 years.
The John Mowlem-owned London City Airport is steadily expanding, forecasting
up to 460,000 passengers in 1994, compared with 245,000 in 1993 and hoping
for 1m passengers a year by the end of the century.
