FT  28 MAR 94 / World Bond Markets: Fears of rising inflation rattle gilts -
Capital &amp; Credit
Amid continued weakness in global bond markets, UK government bonds have
continued to post the sharpest losses, rattled by fears that rising
inflation pressures may put an end to monetary easing.
Indeed, after last week's stronger than expected retail prices data, the
gilt market is increasingly pricing in a rise in short-term rates, causing
yields at the long end of the curve to soar. Moreover, weakness in global
bond markets, where traders are worrying about further US interest rate
tightening and the slow pace of German easing, is contributing to gilts'
decline.
'What is happening in gilts largely magnifies what is happening elsewhere,'
says Mr Graham McDevitt, bond strategist at market analysts IDEA.
According to Salomon Brothers' World Government Bond Index, global bonds
have shed 3.01 per cent in the year to date while UK bonds have fallen by
7.18 per cent in the same period. More dramatically, gilts' 10-year yield
spread over German bunds has widened from a low of 49 basis points in late
January to 155 basis points late on Friday.
At the short end, the June three-month sterling interest rate future on
Liffe is now discounting three-month rates at 5.57 per cent by mid-September
and 5.87 per cent by mid-December. Three-month money currently trades around
5.30 per cent, just above the 5.25 per cent base rate.
'What we're seeing is a burst of collective neurosis after the RPI data,'
says Mr Ian Shepherdson, UK economist at Midland Global Markets. 'To think
there's a snip of a chance that they'll put up rates is absurd - the market
is losing all track of reality.'
The easing scenario is partly complicated by political considerations, with
local elections in May and European elections in June. 'Rate cuts around
that time would look politically motivated and would hurt the market,' says
one gilts trader.
But traders have been especially worried by a recent rise in average
earnings and by the February retail prices index. The RPI was higher than
expected, with a headline rate of 2.4 per cent and an underlying rate of 2.8
per cent, against market expectations of around 2.2 per cent and 2.6 per
cent respectively.
'While we wouldn't see February's figures as radically altering the outlook
for inflation, they do make an early cut in interest rates unlikely,' argues
Mr Darren Winder, UK economist at S. G. Warburg.
But while most observers agree that the inflation data does not point to an
imminent price explosion and are likely to ease back in the summer, the
market sees the US example 'as a taste of things to come', says Mr Nigel
Richardson, head of bond research at Yamaichi International. The US Federal
Reserve has raised its Fed Funds rate twice in the past two months to nip
simmering inflation pressures in the bud and is expected to strike again.
Most market participants feel the sell-off has been vastly overdone, but few
are willing to predict when it will end - partly because, even at these
levels, gilts elicit little buying interest. 'We have the curious situation
where investors, who usually like to buy on dips, say they'll buy when the
market goes up,' says Mr Richardson.
According to IDEA's Mr McDevitt, there is currently no point in trying to
determine the bottom of this market. 'You have to let sentiment rule,' he
says, adding that many investors are holding long gilt positions which they
hedge by selling futures against them.
In spite of scant cash selling, this has caused the futures market to drag
cash prices down further, triggering a vicious circle. 'The lower we go, the
more stop-losses are triggered,' says Midland's Mr Shepherdson.
Nevertheless, most dealers expect Wednesday's auction of Pounds 2.5bn
floating-rate gilts to go relatively smoothly, if only because the short end
of the yield curve has cheapened so much in recent days. The gilts mature in
1999 and will pay a coupon of the three-month London inter-bank bid rate
less one-eighth.
'Investors who remain convinced that UK rates have to move higher . . . will
find the issue attractive,' says Mr Ifty Islam, fixed-income strategist at
Merrill Lynch. But even for investors who expect to see further rate cuts,
'the issue is likely to prove an attractive hedge to their current positions
at the short end of the yield curve, just in case rates do go up.'
