FT  03 SEP 94 / Adams set to meet Irish PM: Politics
'It is a total anathema to us that anyone would consider taking any sort of
retaliation for the deeds of a few people within the unionist community'
Martin McGuinness Sinn Fein executive member
Sinn Fein may be poised to take another big step towards recognition as a
fully legitimate democratic party with a meeting between Mr Gerry Adams and
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, within two weeks, Dublin
officials indicated last night.
Word of the meeting - which would be the first ever between a Provisional
Sinn Fein leader and an Irish premier - came as Mr Adams extended his list
of demands by calling in Dublin for the withdrawal of British troops from
nationalist areas.
In Washington senior members of the US Congress warned that no extra money
was likely to be available this year to help smooth the way to peace in
Northern Ireland.
But Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, said after a meeting with
President Bill Clinton in the holiday resort of Martha's Vineyard that he
hoped 'substantial' sums would be forthcoming.
As Downing Street continued to voice doubts about the permanency of the IRA
ceasefire, republican leaders rejected the possibility of a violent reaction
to the killing by loyalist paramilitaries of a Roman Catholic man on
Thursday.
Mr Martin McGuinness, a member of Sinn Fein's governing executive, said it
was 'a total anathema to us that anyone would consider taking any sort of
retaliation for the deeds of a few people within the unionist community'.
Mr Michael Ancram, Northern Ireland minister, responded to Thursday's
loyalist attacks by pledging that the government would 'continue to pursue
those who commit crimes of this sort'.
Mr Reynolds met yesterday with Mr John Alderdice, leader of the
non-sectarian Alliance party, to discuss the setting up of the Irish
government's Forum for Peace and Reconciliation, which is intended to
include Sinn Fein for the first time in round-table talks with other
political parties.
Dublin hopes to establish the forum - which unionist parties are expected to
boycott - before the end of October.
Officials said Mr Reynolds would be anxious to 'get things moving' before
departing on a visit to Australia in two weeks' time. They said a meeting
with Mr Adams was 'inevitable' before he leaves.
In the US, Senator Patrick Leahy, chairman of the Senate appropriations
committee which controls overseas aid, said money to smooth the peace
process was already in the pipeline for next year, in the form of the US's
Dollars 20m (Pounds 13.3m) contribution to the International Fund for
Ireland.
Mr Clinton said the US was 'prepared to take some steps to do whatever we
can to help'.
In London, Downing Street said Mr John Major would study the report he had
demanded into the transfer on Thursday of four republican prisoners from the
mainland to jails in Northern Ireland over the weekend.
Peace struggle, Page 6
