FT  01 JUL 94 / Fiske S&amp;L probe clears White House staff
US administration officials committed no crimes when they discussed a
savings and loan investigation involving the president, Mr Robert Fiske, the
Whitewater special prosecutor reported yesterday. He also confirmed police
findings that Mr Vincent Foster, a White House aide, committed suicide.
Mr Fiske was releasing his first findings on Whitewater since he was
appointed by Ms Janet Reno, the attorney general, this year. The probe,
which originally centred on Mr and Mrs Clinton's financial dealings in
Arkansas in the late 1970s and 1980s, later broadened to include the White
House's handling of investigations into those dealings and Mr Foster's
death.
The report concludes there is insufficient evidence that meetings between
the then deputy Treasury secretary, Mr Roger Altman, another Treasury
official and White House staff to discuss an investigation into Madison
Guaranty, a failed Arkansas saving and loan, broke the law.
Some of Mr Clinton's opponents have implied that the White House might have
wanted to influence the investigation into Madison Guaranty. Federal
investigators claim that Madison may have improperly diverted depositors'
funds to Mr Clinton's gubernatorial campaign and to the Whitewater property
development in Arkansas, in which the Clintons had a stake.
On Mr Foster, who was found shot dead in July 1993, the report dismissed
allegations that his death might have been other than suicide. It also
concluded that matters relating to Whitewater and to Madison did not play a
part in his death.
In an extensive examination of Mr Foster's state of mind, Mr Fiske points to
a wider pattern of depression. Mr Foster had been exhausted and anxious,
particularly over criticism of his role in the sacking of employees from the
White House travel office.
The findings were seized on with glee by the White House yesterday, even
though they cover only a small proportion of the issues Mr Fiske is
examining. 'We believe no law was violated and the report confirms that,'
said Mr Lloyd Butler, the White House special counsel. He said he hoped the
report would put to rest 'the irresponsible speculations - many of them
politically motivated - that something more sinister occurred'.
