FT  29 SEP 94 / International Capital Markets: NICAM launches innovative
fund
A new type of open-ended mutual fund is available to UK institutional and
retail investors: the Nikko Japan Return Reversal Fund, run by Nikko
International Capital Management (NICAM). Investing in Japanese equities, it
aims to outperform the broad Tokyo stock market index, TOPIX.
Its investment strategy is based on 'mean reversion' theory, a concept
derived from statistical evidence which shows that the price of a share
tends to over or undershoot its intrinsic value, returning to its 'real'
value over time, NICAM states.
Research conducted by two American academics has shown this trend to be
particularly pronounced over the long term in the Japanese equity market,
they state. Nikko's fund therefore aims to select fundamentally undervalued
stocks at the bottom of their price cycle and capture their price recovery.
Given expectations of a stronger Japanese stock market performance as the
economic recovery gathers pace, 'the timing of the launch makes sense,' says
a London dealer.
The fund's investment strategy follows a three-stage approach to select the
stocks which are deemed most likely to increase in value and outperform
TOPIX.
It begins with the selection of the worst-performing 25 per cent of stocks
over the preceding eight years listed on the first section of the Tokyo
stock exchange.
Each stock is then measured to establish its level of undervaluation, and is
judged to establish its potential value for performance, in order to remove
stocks of fundamentally poor companies.
Finally, the stocks are assessed on the basis of specific fundamentals,
including net worth, risk, equity and financial solvency. The final
portfolio will consist of 60 to 80 stocks and will be rebalanced each
quarter to ensure that all stocks in the portfolio are likely to be
undervalued and that those which have already reached their peak are
removed.
NICAM launched an institutional offshore fund using the return reversal
strategy in February 1992, which, it says, has outperformed TOPIX by more
than 9 per cent and the Nikkei 225 index by 22 per cent.
