FT  29 SEP 94 / Political Notebook: The perils of the press
Mr John Major should not read this. No, it is not another of the media's
all-too-familiar attacks on the prime minister's leadership. As it happens
Mr Major is doing quite well these days.
Peace in Ireland is no small prize. He has just returned from a mishap-free
trip to South Africa. With just the odd finger touching the wood of their
Whitehall desks, colleagues are predicting a low-key party conference. He
looks safe from a November leadership challenge.
But he still spends far too much time reading the newspapers. So for that
matter do most of his colleagues. The result: politics is infected by a
self-perpetuating short-termism. Ministers judge themselves on that day's
headlines and the media feels free to praise or, more often, abuse them on
the basis of that day's performance.
The prime minister's friends insist he has been weaned from the worst of his
addiction. The barrage of personal abuse since the 1992 sterling debacle -
matched only by that meted out to the then Mr Harold Wilson after the 1967
devaluation - has toughened what was a very thin skin. Mr Wilson, of course,
was renowned for his obsession with the front pages.
Mr Major has cut down on his newspaper order. On foreign trips he has
dropped chummy socialising with the Westminster lobby in favour of more
infrequent and formal encounters. He watches carefully for stray
tape-recorders. But he still spends his late evenings reading the first
editions. On Saturday afternoons in Huntingdon he checks the headlines on
Ceefax. 'What will the press make of it?' has become the most ingrained
reflex of this administration.
Let's not be partisan, though. By all accounts Mr Tony Blair is not content
with the distinctly complimentary treatment he has received during a
three-month leadership honeymoon. He still gets agitated by the occasional
criticism tucked away on page 10. His complaints are not restricted to what
appears in the national dailies. An unflattering headline in the Northern
Echo prompts the despatch of the party's spin-doctors to convey his
displeasure.
There are plenty available to do the job. The Labour leader's office has no
fewer than four people designated to deal with the press and broadcasters.
Mr Blair is in for a nasty shock when the hacks decide it is time to turn
against him. If he is sensible he will follow the advice of Mr Clement
Attlee who told colleagues in his post-war administration to follow his
example and make a point of not reading the newspapers. But he won't.
Mr Paddy Ashdown does not have the resources to bombard newsdesks with
complaints. But the Liberal Democrat leader cannot resist getting up at dawn
to monitor the Today programme on BBC Radio. And yes, he reads all the
papers at breakfast, checking in particular how many column inches his party
has secured in The Guardian.
The politicians, of course, blame the media for the short-termism. The
advent of instantaneous electronic news, intense commercial pressures in the
newspaper industry and the fashionable cynicism of the 1990s have shortened
the focus of today's journalists. Politics must be reported in terms of
triumphs or disasters. Newspapers and television news refuse to inject
historical context or an understanding of the limits of modern government.
President Bill Clinton (another newspaper junkie) has the same problem.
Admiral William Crowe, newly appointed US ambassador to the Court of St
James, made the point eloquently in his first speech in London this summer.
The British press, he had quickly discovered, emulated its US cousins in
preferring to give instant judgments over the more difficult task of
offering long-term perspective. The media was full of self-appointed
coroners. The only consolation was that they had chosen journalism over
medicine. Admiral Crowe, a shrewder successor to Mr Ray Seitz than some in
Whitehall expected, has a point. Journalists have always relished their
power to build up political leaders as a prelude to their demolition.
Amplification of the routine ups and downs of politics sells newspapers.
But by and large the media takes its cue from the politicians. As long as
ministers eschew strategic thinking in favour of demanding instant
recognition of their triumphs, they will pay also an immediate price for
failure. Tactical politics invites tactical journalism. Mr Major would
disagree. But then he will not have read this far. Nor, of course, will
Messrs Blair or Ashdown.
