FT  23 DEC 94 / Belfast shoppers reap the peace dividend: John Murray Brown
finds consumers bullish as the city's retailers enjoy their best ever
Christmas
Belfast's retailers are having their best ever Christmas as consumer
confidence returns in the first December free of the threat of terrorism for
25 years.
Scores of buses are lined up along Adelaide Street in the city centre, many
from the Republic of Ireland. Until recently, a parked car was likely to be
demobilised by the bomb squad.
Mr Chris Newton, manager of the BHS store in Belfast, said: 'We've had our
best ever day, our best ever weekend, and this week looks like being our
best ever Christmas.' Mr Frank Caddy, head of the Belfast Chamber of Trade
and Commerce, explained: 'There is no more money around. It's just more
stable.'
The chamber says takings in Belfast city centre in the first eight months of
1994 were 4 per cent down on the same period last year.
This has been transformed since the IRA's ceasefire on August 31. September
sales were up 2 per cent, October's 8 per cent, and November's 13 per cent.
Mr Caddy believes December's takings could increase about 10 per cent over
1993, itself a record year.
He also estimates that sales volumes will increase by about Pounds 30m to a
total of Pounds 400m for the Christmas period.
Mr Stephen Brown, professor of retailing at the University of Ulster, said
Belfast had suffered from poor accessibility in the past. Because of the
frequent bomb alerts, people were reluctant to shop in the city centre. As
well as fear of personal injury, there was the inconvenience of finding the
city centre sealed off, leaving cars marooned overnight.
One factor is the shoppers from the republic. Mr Newton said: 'We're taking
so many transactions from Irish customers, we're now taking the punts (Irish
pounds) through our tills and personal Irish cheques, on a pound-for-pound
basis. Normally it would be dealt with by our customer services people.'
For southerners, it was once a regular event to shop in the North,
particularly for wines and spirits - differences in value added tax being
the main attraction. And this year wine is still one of the main items, with
Marks and Spencer reporting a 400 per cent increase in sales. The city
centre is also attracting shoppers from distant parts of the province and a
hovercraft service from Stranraer is pulling in people from Scotland.
Mr Newton said that some people were shopping in the city centre for the
first time in 10 years. 'We're getting people . . . asking where our food
hall is. Well we haven't had a food hall for 10 years. The area they're
remembering is now occupied by Mothercare.'
Mr Caddy said: 'The most exciting thing for us is we have a level playing
field with the other UK regions. We can start to project Belfast as it is
rather than how it's perceived to be.'
Northern Ireland's retail sector has always outperformed the rest of the UK.
The M&amp;S Sprucefield megastore has been the group's best performing operation
for years.
Latest figures on the Northern Ireland economy are encouraging. Unemployment
is down 1 per cent on a year ago, job vacancies are up and house prices are
rising faster than the UK average. Of those in work, 30 per cent work for
the state, either the civil service or the security services. Rents are
appreciably lower than in the rest of the UK, resulting in greater
disposable income.
