FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (29):
Finding solutions takes time - Fast software development / Object-oriented
computing is widely acknowledged to be the future direction for software
development. But discovering ways to build software fast is a painstaking
process
In the ultra-competitive business world of the 1990s, a company's ability to
create new information systems rapidly is a pre-requisite for survival.
The key is to find ways to build application software which are both
flexible and scalable. Object-oriented computing, which sees an information
system as a set of self-contained components, is the most promising approach
and it is steadily gaining favour with both software developers and users.
Fast software development is a priority for both groups. A survey of
delegates to last October's 'Objectworld' conference in the UK, for example,
cited 'flexibility to change' and 'reduced time to market' as the two main
reasons for adopting the object-oriented.
Object-oriented computing is widely acknowledged to be the future direction
for software development and most software developers have pledged their
allegiance to the cause. The Object Management Group (OMG), an industry
organisation which promotes object-oriented computing, now claims 370
members and points to growing attendance at shows and exhibitions.
The object-oriented approach is making the running at both extremes and is
central to any debate on speeding up the production of software.
There are several reasons:
Firstly, object-oriented systems are built from sets of components which can
be re-used elsewhere.
This speeds up the development of new applications and makes existing ones
easier to maintain.
Secondly, object-oriented systems operate in a way that makes software
'portable' to other platforms and preserves investment in application
software.
Thirdly, objects reduce the complexity of applications software by enforcing
tight design disciplines.
Most importantly, object-oriented development techniques make it easy to
build prototype systems to demonstrate to users - which is widely
acknowledged as one of the keys to speedy application development.
'I think rapid application development is as much about the approach as it
is about the tools you use,' says Mr Vic Morris, UK managing director of
tools specialist Powersoft.
'As far as possible you want to break the application down to make it easier
for end users to do it themselves.
'If you look at what many users have done with their PCs - building complex
applications with spreadsheets, for example - you can harness that talent,'
he goes on.
Thinking of applications in terms of objects is the key, according to Mr
Morris.
'In the past, we viewed applications as a set of functions like, say, an
order processing system. It was very structured. Now with objects, we can
think in terms of business processes and put in place applications which can
support them,' he explains.
Mr Morris also places emphasis on the 'scalability' of applications. This
means, for example, an application program built for two or three users on a
small network should be able to cope with hundreds - or even thousands - of
users on a much larger system.
'We have recently re-positioned our Powerbuilder tool set to reflect this.
So you can start with a cheap desktop version and move up to a full
networked version and keep the same applications,' Mr Morris says.
Other tool vendors have taken a similar approach because it can speed up
production of larger systems if you can start with small ones and 'scale'
them up.
'All our tools are based on Smalltalk so you can move from our desktop
product Enfin to our corporate Synchrony product,' says Mr Jeff Sutherland,
vice-president of object development at software tools company Easel.
'But it is not enough just to scale up to a large number of users. You need
greater access to database and tools which can deliver the performance.
'We see the answer in tools which will do 80 per cent of what a user wants
automatically. The users can then concentrate on the bits they understand
best - the business objects,' he says.
Mr Sutherland believes that not enough is being done to promote object
technology at the application level. He is part of a group of software
developers pushing for the specification of business-based 'objects'.
'We have a problem at the moment with object-oriented technology. People
talk a lot about code re-use - but where is it?
'We see the need for re-usable business objects which can give different
views of the way the business operates to different users,' says Mr
Sutherland.
There are other, more serious, reservations about the use of object-oriented
design for speeding up software - initially, at least.
'Although object-oriented is the way forward, it is not a panacea. It's a
solid framework to build re-usable code,' says Mr Paul Burford, a systems
engineer with object-oriented tool specialist Next Computer.
'In the short term, it is not a quick way to get more out of programmers.
Although it reduces the number of lines of code you need to produce, there
is much more design input needed'.
Mr Burford cites the example of the Swiss Bank which used Next's Nextstep
object-oriented tool to build its systems.
'When we started at Swiss Bank four years ago we wrote objects that were not
re-usable so there was no advantage. But they recognised over time that they
had chunks of re-usable software,' he says.
'If you take a new environment it will never be quicker to start with
because of teething problems. But by taking an object-oriented approach you
have a chance to start putting in new features in a more natural way'.
While object-oriented design techniques provide a suitable framework for
building applications, the real productivity benefits come from software
tools.
Strategies for selecting development tools differ - according to the size
and data processing heritage of the individual company.
Larger companies tend to bring in programmer productivity tools so that
their information systems departments can respond more rapidly to users'
demands.
Smaller companies give their users their own desktop tools. Many companies
combine both of these approaches.
The result is a growing demand for tools which can support fast software
development and there is no doubt that these tools will use object-oriented
computing as a starting point.
What is clear, however, is that finding ways to build software fast, takes
time.
