FT  15 NOV 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries move higher ahead of Fed
meeting
US Treasury prices rose sharply at the long end yesterday following a rising
dollar, but volume was light as traders waited for news of interest rate
policy from today's meeting of the Federal Reserve's open market committee.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up 25/32 at
93 1/2 , yielding 8.073 per cent. At the short end of the market, the
two-year note was up  3/32 at 99 23/32 , to yield 7.011 per cent.
Toward the end of the afternoon, the dollar rose to Y98.27 and to DM1.5446
from Y97.55 and DM1.5305 late Friday. Traders said the rising dollar drew
some foreign investment into the bond market.
Trading was light, however, as investors waited for action on interest
rates. Market analysts expect the Fed to boost the target federal funds rate
by 50 basis points to 5 1/4 per cent at today's meeting, and most say such
an increase has already been factored into the markets.
Inaction by the Fed could cause prices to tumble, while an increase of 50 or
more basis points should cheer the market, which is looking for signs that
the central bank is committed to taking a tough stance against inflation.
Some fear, however, that a 50-point increase could disappoint the market.
In addition to word from the Fed on interest rates, traders will take note
of a series of other economic statistics due out today including figures on
October's retail sales, industrial production and capacity utilisation.
Most analysts expect both retail sales and industrial production to be up by
0.5 per cent; capacity utilisation - the amount of capital stock being used
to produce goods - is anticipated to be 84.8 per cent.
European government bond markets followed US Treasuries slightly higher
yesterday, with most investors staying on the sidelines, waiting for the
impact on US interest rates of today's Federal Reserve meeting.
German government bonds edged up in the wake of Treasuries, and the December
bund futures contract ended at 90.22, up 0.15 on the day.
Mr Paul Compayne, bond strategist at Paribas Capital Markets, said: 'We are
seeing most of the markets being cautious ahead of the FOMC meeting. That
meeting will determine where markets will go over the next few weeks.'
He added that most participants were already discounting a 50 basis point
rise in US interest rates, saying: 'If there is no Fed action as a result of
the meeting, then markets will sell off.'
The UK government bonds market remained nervous ahead of the FOMC meeting
and a raft of UK data to be published tomorrow. However, gilts prices were
lifted by the rise in US Treasuries and a rumour that the CBI distributive
trades survey, which is due to be published today, would show that the
recovery is faltering.
Analysts were digesting the suggestion that the balance of UK retailers who
had seen a rise in sales in the past year had fallen to a negative 3 per
cent from a positive figure of 28 per cent.
Swedish bonds put in a strong performance on the back of the 'yes' vote in
the European Union referendum, with the yield on the benchmark 11-year bond
falling 23 basis points to 10.88 per cent. On Thursday last week it was
yielding 11.43 per cent.
Mr Paul Donovan at UBS said that the Swedish vote was likely to support
other Scandinavian bond markets, with Norwegian bonds strengthening on
prospects for its entry after the vote on November 28 and Danish bonds
benefiting from international capital inflows to the Scandinavian bloc.
He added that the possibility of a downgrade of Sweden's credit rating by
Moody's Investors Service, the US credit rating agency, remained a threat
but that fiscal tightening might avert this.
He said: 'There is a perception that EU membership will provide an external
fiscal constraint on the government. Investors will now look for further
fiscal tightening through spending cuts.'
