FT  22 APR 94 / UK Company News: SB rises to Pounds 353m despite decline in
European sales
Strong growth in US drugs sales volume failed to offset declines in Europe
during the first quarter of 1994 for SmithKline Beecham, the healthcare
group.
Total drugs sales fell by 1 per cent to Pounds 874m (Pounds 886m), although
with currency effects stripped out, the sales were 1 per cent up.
Better performances from the other divisions - animal health, consumer
healthcare and clinical laboratories - pushed group pre-tax profits up by 15
per cent to Pounds 353m (Pounds 307m), resulting in earnings of 8.7p per
share, against 7.5p.
The dividend for the quarter is raised by 18 per cent to 3p, reflecting
'management's confidence in the future of the company'.
The shares rose 8p to 372p, reflecting the drugs sector's recently acquired
responsiveness to yield considerations.
Group turnover was Pounds 1.48bn (Pounds 1.52bn), a figure depressed by the
sale of the personal care business, which contributed Pounds 53m in the
first quarter of 1993.
The pharmaceuticals division was clearly split between sharp rises in sales
for newer products and declines for more established drugs.
Sales of ulcer treatment Tagamet, whose US patent expires next month, were 3
per cent lower in constant currency terms at Pounds 153m.
Sales of antibiotic Augmentin, the company's biggest product, fell by 8 per
cent to Pounds 191m. It was hit by measures implemented in January to cut
Italy's drugs bill which also affected other SB products. Some of those
measures have since been reversed.
The best-performer of the newer drugs was anti-depressant Seroxat/Paxil,
with sales up sharply to Pounds 77m.
New launch Kytril, an anti-emetic for chemotherapy patients, more than
doubled sales to Pounds 29m. It is competing directly with one of the stars
of Glaxo's portfolio, Zofran.
The group's over-the-counter medicines business, which should receive a
further boost in the second quarter with the launch of an OTC version of
Tagamet, increased sales by 11 per cent to Pounds 150m.
See Lex
