FT  05 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Workers' control
The proposed worker-shareholder deal at United Airlines (UAL), whereby the
workforce will acquire majority control of the company in exchange for
Dollars 4.5bn worth of cost savings, has met with understandable scepticism.
The financial distress of the US airline industry is due at least in part to
the power of its trade unions. UAL's workers may be prepared to give ground
as part of a one-off transaction; whether they remain so adaptable when they
control the company may be another matter. Besides, worker control is
scarcely a new concept. Barring a handful of successful cases on both sides
of the Atlantic, it has mostly been tried as a desperate last throw in
struggling industries such as shipbuilding and steel, and its record over
the last few decades is correspondingly dismal.
But these are strange times in the world of capitalism, and strange remedies
should not be quickly dismissed. Leaving UAL's troubles aside, it is worth
recalling that in the US, in particular, it has become commonplace for
employers to preach the necessity of involving the workforce more closely in
the enterprise. This may sometimes be rhetoric, but is more often a matter
of practical urgency. In the fast-moving 1990s, the key to lower costs is
frequently the speed of a company's response to changes in markets or
technology. Imposing change from above on a hostile or apprehensive
workforce takes too long. The trick is to have ideas pushed up from below.
The snag is that, for the workforce, the deal can prove one-sided.
Commitment is required in the form of ideas and enthusiasm. Corresponding
commitment from the owners in the form of job security is seldom on offer.
Indeed, some of the most ardent advocates of worker involvement in the US
have also been among the most sweeping job-cutters. In Japan, a system of
reciprocity is still widely practised, whereby flexibility and enthusiasm
are rewarded with a job for life. But that ultimately depends on Japanese
companies growing fast enough to create new jobs for those displaced by the
process of change. Now that the Japanese economy has slowed down along with
the rest of the world, the model is under pressure: for in a low-growth
world, rigidity of numbers is no more affordable than rigidity of function.
But the thinking behind the Japanese approach still holds good. One reason a
company such as Toyota evolved a flexible and committed workforce was that
in its early days it simply could not afford an army of passive workers on
the old Detroit model. Many more companies around the world now appreciate
that logic. In the impoverished climate of the 1990s, employers need to
enlist the full energies of the workforce to survive. The question remains
how those energies are to be rewarded.
This brings us back to the issue of worker ownership. To the extent that the
UAL deal is the product of desperation, it is likely to prove a bad example.
But the interests of capital and labour are becoming increasingly hard to
disentangle. Arguably, the standard corporate structure no longer reflects
that. There is plenty of room for experiment.
