FT  21 FEB 94 / Manchester prepares to receive angels: Plans to attract rich
investors to small business
More than 100 wealthy people will gather in Manchester this week to seek
angelic status.
They want to be 'business angels' - individuals who back small companies to
help them grow and thereby grow richer themselves. The aspiring angels hope
a local scheme will help them find businesses with potential.
Capital Access - run by Greater Manchester Business Innovation Centre - has
already enrolled 14 angels. They have so far made Pounds 2.8m of their own
money available for investment in unquoted companies under the government's
new Enterprise Investment Scheme - if suitable candidates can be found.
'This is the difficult part,' says Mr Philip Ellison, who runs the
innovation centre, 'since there appears to be no shortage of angels.' The
centre is acting as marriage broker, assessing high-risk, hightechnology
projects to select applicants for investment.
He had planned a small, private seminar for about 30 people on Wednesday to
promote the scheme. But demand forced the event's expansion to more than 100
places, surprising the sponsors - Pannell Kerr Foster, the accountancy firm,
and the Manchester office of Davies Arnold Cooper, a corporate law firm. The
scheme itself is backed by Manchester Chamber of Commerce and National
Westminster Bank, which has seconded Mr Paul Cochrane, a specialist in
risk-assessment, to work on it full-time.
He will make sure angels are rewarded for their good deeds with tax breaks.
However, Mr Cochrane warns: 'Our advice is, don't make investments to save
tax but for positive reasons, such as trying for real growth. Once in, the
taxation arrangements can be tailored for maximum benefit.'
This message will be reinforced on Wednesday by Mr Peter Cookson, one of
only two of the angels already in Capital Access willing to speak at the
seminar and the only one willing to be interviewed.
Mr Cookson, a chartered accountant, will not say how much he is worth, but
he made his money from being part of two management buy-outs. The first, in
1983, involved a Hanson subsidiary.
He says: 'The Enterprise Investment Scheme only allows 20 per cent tax
relief, compared with 40 per cent under the old Business Expansion Scheme,
which it replaces. You can invest up to Pounds 100,000 per deal, where each
deal's total investment package is below Pounds 1m. The potential tax
savings are not enough in themselves to be much of a driving force.
'The big advantage of the new rules, however, is that investors can become
involved, where they could not under BES. If you can take an active part in
growing the business, it's a way of removing some of the risk from unquoted
shares, especially if you have managerial experience.
'I will only look at companies where I can add value, such as through
advice, guidance and the benefit of having done it before. If someone just
wanted a sleeping partner, I would not be interested. I also want to like
the people involved. The other thing I shall be saying on Wednesday is only
invest what you are prepared to lose.'
Of the 14 angels, all but one want to be active. They would take minority
stakes of up to 25 per cent, or buy redeemable stock to encourage the
business they back to greater efforts so they can buy the equity back.
Most angels are likely to be fee-earning, non-executive directors. Some
deals may involve co-investment with an institution, such as a regional
venture capital fund, with the angel representing the co-investors on the
board.
