FT  05 APR 94 / The Monday Interview: Making the medium the message -
Vladimir Gussinsky tells Leyla Boulton how he hopes to help Russian society
The first and only Russian to build a private media empire, Vladimir
Gussinsky rejects suggestions that he is Russia's answer to Rupert Murdoch.
His press secretary says the parallel does not fit because Gussinsky does
not seek to control what his media says. The explanation from Gussinsky
himself is that of a businessman. 'In the west, the media means revenues. In
Russia, it means expenditure,' says this 41-year-old banking, real estate,
and now media, magnate.
Gussinsky declines to say exactly how much money his Most (Bridge) banking
and construction group has put into building one of the nation's most
popular television networks, and one of its most respected liberal
newspapers. He says simply that helping NTV, his Independent Television
Company, and Sevodnya (Today) newspaper - both of which recently celebrated
their first anniversary - will cost him and his bank partners 'dozens of
millions of dollars'. Two Russian banks, Stolichny and National Credit,
share with Gussinsky a majority stake in and the extension of cheap loans to
NTV and Sevodnya.
Like Murdoch, Gussinsky's investment in the media, which he believes will
ultimately pay back financially, is also about power - albeit in a
specifically Russian context. His explanation is simple: 'We must try to
influence the political and social situation in the country so that our
investments are secure and a market and society develop in the most legal
way possible'.
His focus is on upmarket journalism. The quality and independence of NTV's
news programmes have been a big factor in the company's rapid transformation
into a direct threat to Russia's ailing state-owned Ostankino and Russian
Television networks. NTV's weekly Itogi (Conclusions) programme is the
closest thing Russia has to a serious western-style analytical news
programme, while its daily mixture of news and feature films has managed to
attract 40m viewers in just one year.
Sevodnya newspaper, which took over many of the best journalists from the
rival Nezavisimaya (Independent) newspaper, manages a print run of 100,000
in a nation of 150m at a time of falling demand for newspapers.
Gussinsky's approach stands out in a country where much of the media's
dependence on meagre state subsidies means they are open to political
influence and corruption.
Some critics would argue that he is simply ambitious and rich enough to
afford the sort of media whose quality can only enhance his own prestige and
respectability. Others point out that private media ownership introduces to
Russia new constraints of a different kind: the media's inability to
criticise its private owners or clash directly with their interests.
Although Itogi has presented both sides of the argument over foreign banks
coming to Russia, Sevodnya, for instance, has consistently backed Russian
banks' demands for protection against western banks, a view which coincides
with Gussinsky's.
Both his media have also stayed away from corruption allegations made
against the Moscow city authorities, with whom Most has close business
relations. Despite some fears of what use Gussinsky might make of his power
further down the line, for the moment, however, the benefits of media
patronage outweigh any disadvantages of what he describes as enlightened
self-interest.
'As soon as the freedom of the journalists stops, I think (private) banks
will stop existing,' Gussinsky says. 'It is a symptom and a test. The first
thing the Bolsheviks did was to limit the freedom of speech.'
NTV's superior performance has also demonstrated just how much the
state-dominated media has suffered from a lack of competition to date.
Resistance to new, competitive, private media has come not only from Russian
conservatives, but from officials within a Kremlin establishment used to
treating the media as its private property. Gussinsky only won the right to
lease Russia's state-owned fourth channel every day from 6 pm to 1 am for
NTV - a rare concession to private television - after a decree signed by the
president was pushed through.
His appetite for 'creating the preconditions in which the media can
flourish' also reveals the instincts of a man who loves to influence events
from behind the scenes. He says that NTV is to spend some Dollars 30m
acquiring rights to what he describes as some of the best films from the US,
England, Italy, and France. He wants to build NTV, which leases state-owned
premises, a studio and technical centre of its own, as well as to buy into a
professional advertising agency.
While planning to expand its network of foreign correspondents, NTV has
negotiated news-sharing agreements with both Reuters and CNN. Gussinsky is
now examining the possibility of acquiring a few radio stations, including
Ekho Moskvy, whose independent coverage played a role in defeating the
August 1991 coup but now says it will die without financial support. He is
also discussing with Time a project to launch the US news magazine in
Russian.
He says he has no ambitions to expand internationally. And, although he has
a home in London, he has no intention of joining the exodus of rich Russians
who have made a pile of money and left Russia for good.
As Russia displays a more assertive foreign policy, Gussinsky says that what
it needs from the west, more than any financial aid, is understanding and
treatment as an equal partner.
'What is wrong with letting BP refine oil in Russia? In a society like ours,
industry cannot simply disappear. Patriots who ask why we should drink
foreign vodka could well create a fascist state. If that happens, we will be
the first victims, and (the west) the next.'
