FT  19 FEB 94 / BT freezes managerial pay: Professional staff stage protest
outside London headquarters
British Telecommunications will in April impose a basic pay freeze on most
of its 26,000 managerial staff. This follows the breakdown of negotiations
with the managers' union, the Society of Telecom Executives.
An estimated 1,000 BT managerial staff protested at the decision outside the
company's headquarters in London yesterday. The union has called a delegate
conference for March 10 to decide how to react.
'We regret there has been no agreement,' said Mr Peter Archer, BT's employee
relations director. 'There was no meeting of minds. This is the first time
we have ever gone ahead (in imposing pay) without making a deal.'
About 4,000 managers - 16 per cent of the total - are to receive no income
increase this year. The best-performing 10 per cent will received
consolidated pay rises averaging 3 per cent with a maximum improvement of 6
per cent.
BT estimates that 85 per cent of all managers (including the best
performers) will next month receive one-off payments averaging 2.5 per cent
or Pounds 800 - within a range of Pounds 300 to Pounds 1,940. But after
April their pay levels will be frozen.
The total cost will add an estimated 2.5 per cent to BT's annual pay bill.
Mr Archer said the two sides had earlier come close to agreeing a deal. He
said that was not possible because the union had insisted that all managers
receive an increase consolidated into basic rates if possible.
Last month BT decided to suspend a performance-pay scheme that started last
year, on the grounds that it was paying managers too much.
'BT has shot itself in both feet,' said Mr Simon Petch, the union's general
secretary. 'We have tried to rescue the company from its difficulties. It is
true our members are well paid but they have played a big part in adding
value to BT. What the company is now doing is wholly unacceptable and will
result in a further worsening of morale among its managers.'
The union said it wanted whichever proved to be the greater of a 2.5 per
cent rise or a percentage greater than the size of March's inflation figure.
The company insists that it must bring the pay of its managerial and
professional grades more into line with what it sees as market realities. BT
executives argue that their managers are paid 11 per cent to 15 per cent
more than others in similar jobs in comparable companies.
BT said yesterday that 85 per cent of managers in the largest grade earned
an average of Pounds 24,000 a year compared with Pounds 22,000 for their
counterparts elsewhere. The company said its most detailed pay comparison
showed that no other part of its 160,000 workforce was as well placed as its
managers.
Mr Petch said the union did not accept the findings of the survey and he
questioned the basis on which they were compiled.
The company reported a Pounds 2.2bn pre-tax profit for the first nine months
of last year.
