FT  21 APR 94 / The Queen's Awards 1994: Eggs and chips go down well -
Awards made to information technology companies
Software which persuades Apples to jump through Windows, electronic locks
which yield to plastic keys and computers which shrink mainframe power to a
handy size are among the contributions of the information technology
industries to the awards for export and technology.
The technology winners - all computer makers - took their awards for
products which combine compact dimensions with substantial computing power.
Husky Computers, a 200-people-strong subsidiary of the Peek Group, has been
developing rugged, hand-held computers for data collection since the early
1980s. Its latest creation, the FS2, for which it took the award, is already
showing promise in the US where the utility metering company Itron has opted
to use it in place of its own hardware.
Psion was a pioneer in hand-held computers that pack the power of a desktop
into a package the size of an electronic organiser. Its Series 3 computer,
for which it won the award, uses a variety of advanced manufacturing methods
including surface mounted chips and folded printed circuit boards.
International Business Machines' manufacturing facility in Havant,
Hampshire, has distinguished itself more than once by serving as the sole
source world-wide for key devices. So it is with the 0681 disk drive, an
eight centimetre high box which provides enough storage for 1bn bytes of
data.
Products from equipment which makes chips, to machines which write on eggs
won export awards. ABS Electronics of County Down, Northern Ireland, won its
award for electronic locks which prevent unauthorised use of photocopiers,
printers and other office equipment. With a turnover of more than Pounds 3m
and employing some 30 people, the company's present product line developed
out of coin-operated devices. Now magnetic striped cards are the key to the
lock. Some 95 per cent of sales are outside Northern Ireland.
Applied Implant Technology is the UK subsidiary of Applied Materials of
Santa Clara, California, one of the world's largest manufacturers of
semiconductor manufacturing equipment. Established in the UK since 1980, it
has won an award for exports of its Precision Implant 9500 ion implant
machine - essentially an electronic gun which 'shoots' ions of boron,
arsenic or phosphorus into the microchip surface. The 9500 was designed in
the UK and the entire yearly output of 50 machines is exported.
Semefab, now operating out of General Instrument's old semiconductor
fabrication plant in Glenrothes, Scotland, is evidence that a UK company can
be successful at the leading edge of the semiconductor business. Started
eight years ago as a subsidiary of the privately held UK company Semilab of
Lutterworth, it employs 55 people and turned over Pounds 3.8m last year. It
makes custom semiconductors for customers in the US, Hong Kong, Germany and
Switzerland.
Software supplied by Insignia Solutions of High Wycombe depends on the
success of Microsoft's 'Windows' operating system. Windows - and therefore
Windows applications - runs on personal computers which use Intel
microprocessors, that is, about 90 per cent of all pcs. Insignia's software
persuades other kinds of computer - Apple Macintosh, Unix-based and so on -
that they, too, can run Windows and MS/DOS applications. With its
headquarters in the UK, the company has US operations in Mountain View,
California. Some 95 per cent of the company's sales - Dollars 19m in 1992 -
are outside the UK.
International Banking Information Systems makes a different scale and
flavour of software. Part of the Italian Monte dei Paschi banking group (IBM
has a 10 per cent stake in the company), its principal offering is a
fully-integrated banking package running on IBM's mid-range AS/400 computer.
IBIS is one of a small number of companies - the others include BIS, now
part of ACT, and Kapiti, taken over last month by Misys - which have been
developing international banking packages since the 1980s. Some 70 per cent
of IBIS sales are abroad.
Lombard Risk Systems, based in London, also develops software for financial
services but within a narrower focus. Founded in 1988, it has grown to 50
people selling a software package which enables banks and leading companies
to manage the risks of trading in financial derivatives such as interest
rates and currency swaps, caps, floors and swaptions. Called 'Oberon', the
package will also handle less complicated instruments such as futures,
options on futures, loans, deposits and bonds.
Exports have nearly trebled over the past three years and 60 per cent of
revenues come from outside the UK.
Scientific Software Intercomp, British subsidiary of a US company based in
Denver, Colorado, provides consultancy services and develops software for
the oil and gas industry. Its packages fulfil a variety of functions. Some
are used to analyse data derived from oil reservoirs enabling engineers to
describe the reservoirs in numerical terms. Others can be used to simulate
the behaviour of the reservoirs.
The telecommunications and data communications business is represented by
three companies, Cable &amp; Wireless, Philips Telecom and Madge Networks. It is
the second time C&amp;W has won an award; perhaps not surprisingly because this
UK-based telecommunications group, which includes Mercury Communications,
has a powerful reputation for winning business overseas. In the past year,
it has secured contracts in collaboration with Telecom Finland to develop
telecommunications services in Latvia, it is working on cellular radio
networks in South Africa, a joint venture in undersea cables with the
Chinese government and it is chasing developments in Bulgaria.
It is also second time round for Philips Telecom although it was the
technology award which it won in 1989. Now it exports more than 50 per cent
of its radio pagers to mainland Europe, especially Sweden, India and the Far
East. The pagers are designed and manufactured in Philips' Cambridge
facility.
Madge Networks, one of the UK's few international successes in computer
technology, has taken on a bewilderingly cosmopolitan air in the past few
months. With headquarters in Paris, it is registered in Amsterdam, carries
out research and development in the UK and is listed on the US NASDAQ
market. The company supplies hardware and software for computer networks
which stretch across organisations. It specialises in local area networks
using IBM's token ring technology.
Advertising on eggs, a current fad, is made possible by continuous inkjet
printers, tough, industrial variants of the familiar office machines,
developed by companies such as Willett International. It is this company's
second award.
