FT  27 MAY 94 / Letters to the Editor: Latvia an equally good role model
Sir, Professor Steve Hanke's unqualified praise of Estonia's economic
reforms (Letters, May 23) and his exhortations that they be used as a model
for Russia, cannot be left without comment.
Latvia, Estonia's neighbour has adopted a contrary approach with regard to
the stability of its currency. The lat is free floating, its value having
been set (as was its predecessor's, the Latvian rouble) by the supply of
lats and western currency. For more than a year now, the lat has appreciated
against western currencies because of an oversupply of dollars. At the same
time, Latvia has achieved the lowest inflation in the Baltics (34.2 per
cent, March 1993-March 1994). Conversely, Estonia's inflation rate for March
1994 jumped to 8.9 per cent, higher even than Russia's.
As for the Estonian policy of shadowing another currency, Nigel Lawson, as
UK chancellor, made the mistake of also shadowing the D-Mark for too long
and when Britain joined the ERM, after a strained period, the pound received
its come-uppance on Black Wednesday.
The Estonian economy is the most successful of the former Soviet republics
but, similarly to Latvia at present, it is suffering from an overvalued
currency leading to difficulties with exporting and an increase in imports.
In Latvia's case, when it comes to paying for imports, payment will be in
western currency, the purchase of which will tend to lower the exchange rate
for the lat. Estonia, with its fixed rate, will have less room for
manoeuvre.
As can be seen then, there is more than one way to skin a cat and Estonia's
way will not necessarily bear fruit for Mr Viktor Chernomyrdin and Russia.
One should not forget, either, that both Estonia's and Latvia's decisions to
convert to their own currencies were frowned upon by the International
Monetary Fund at the time but the Balts proved that even holy cows can be
wrong. If Russia has enough confidence in its own policies, it should do
whatever it thinks is right and turn a blind eye to the critics.
Maris Ozols,
(Riga bureau chief, Baltic Independent, March 1983-Jan 1984),
11 Heathfield Road,
London W3 8EH
