FT  17 NOV 94 / The Queen's Speech: Major pledges a boost from 'meaty
measures'
Mr John Major, the prime minister, forecast yesterday that inward investment
would 'continue to flood in' to Britain as the containment of inflation
remained a central objective of government policy.
Outlining the legislative programme for the new parliamentary session in the
Commons, he suggested that the significance of the 'vote of confidence by
foreign investors in the British economy' had not been fully appreciated.
He again underlined the importance of holding to the maintenance of low
inflation as a long-term objective.
Mr Major said: 'For the first time we may be in a position where we have
broken the inflation psychology which has damaged this country time and time
again since the war.'
He flatly rejected the charge made by Mr Tony Blair, the Labour leader, that
the lack of substance in the Queen's Speech showed that the government was
'out of touch and out of steam'.
The prime minister insisted that the 'meaty measures' which the government
intended to introduce would provide a further boost to the economy.
These included the bill authorising the construction and operation by the
private sector of a high-speed rail link between London and the Channel
tunnel. Mr Major said this was likely to create between 10,000 and 15,000
jobs.
Mr Major ignored Labour taunts about the absence of a measure to privatise
the Post Office as he told MPs that the government intended to 'proceed with
privatisation'. This would be achieved with the bills to privatise the Crown
Agents, which played a significant role in delivering the overseas aid
programme, and by the measure promoting competition in the gas industry.
Mr Major suggested that Labour MPs would find it difficult to oppose the
legislation providing for the equalisation of the retirement age for men and
women at 65.
He recalled that this approach had been recognised as reasonable by the
Commission on Social Justice appointed by John Smith, the late Labour
leader.
Mr Blair said that the Queen's Speech reflected the central quandary facing
the Conservative party - 'whether to praise Thatcherism or to bury it'.
It was four years since the departure of Mrs Thatcher and the issue was
still unresolved, with the result that dogma was being tempered by
dithering.
Mr Blair said that the 'politics of the 1980s' had run their course, and
that the concerns and needs of the British people had changed: 'It is the
Labour party that speaks for them.'
He said the British people wanted a new economic approach based on
partnership between the public and private sectors, and management and
employees which gave businesses and families the stability to plan for their
future.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, said ordinary people had taken a
severe battering from the government over the past five years.
They had suffered from lost jobs, threatened homes, cuts in services,
burgeoning crime and swingeing increases in taxes.
Mr Ashdown said: 'If now the economy is improving then people can be
expected to feel relieved. But it is a bit much for the prime minister to
ask them to feel grateful.'
Mr Ashdown accused Mr Major of always reacting behind events, never ahead of
them. 'He is driven to action by a small group of backbenchers here or a
collection of newspaper reports there.
'It seems the prime minister's chief calculation is not what is right or
what is wrong - but what he can get past his divided and waring party.'
Mr Michael Spicer, Tory MP for Worcestershire South and a leading
Eurosceptic, indicated that he was unlikely to vote against the bill
authorising an increase in UK payments to the European Union.
He said that the Conservative party needed to unite behind a radical
programme for securing fundamental changes in the Common Agricultural Policy
and other areas rather than 'worrying about a particular measure'.
The six-day debate was adjourned until today.
