FT  27 JAN 94 / Hussein willing to hold direct talks with Rabin
King Hussein of Jordan said yesterday for the first time he was willing to
meet Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israeli prime minister, in a move that could bolster
efforts to reach a broad Middle East peace.
'I hope an opportunity will arise before too long,' King Hussein said after
meeting Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, in Washington. 'Its
normal when moving toward peace that people meet.' Such a meeting could take
place before full peace was established, the king said.
His offer breaks with his and other Arab leaders' long-stated policy of
refusing to meet Israeli leaders openly. It will put pressure on
Palestinians to strike a deal with Israel in talks which remained deadlocked
in Cairo yesterday over implementation of Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank area of Jericho.
Israel, anxious for increasing Arab recognition abroad and peace dividends
at home, has been urging Washington to arrange a summit meeting with King
Hussein in return for US assistance with Jordan's external debt.
Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, met the king secretly in Jordan
last November. Israel says a detailed peace agreement with Jordan was
concluded, but the king has been reluctant to sign a formal peace with
Israel ahead of Syria and Lebanon.
The king's move is likely to stir protest in Jordan, where parliamentarians
yesterday condemned a visit by 83 Jewish Rabbis last week and attacked the
government for letting them in. But lately he has pushed far ahead of Moslem
fundamentalists and others in Jordan who strongly reject peace with Israel
and has outlined his vision of an unfolding peace based on regional economic
co-operation and trade.
The king has made it clear that, while he is still committed to a
comprehensive peace, Jordan is no longer willing to wait indefinitely for
progress in talks between Israel and other Arab states. 'We are not waiting
for anybody but we hope that as things move we will all meet before too long
having accomplished our work in establishing a just and lasting peace,' he
said.
The king's offer will be warmly welcomed in Israel, which has been focusing
recent moves on appealing to President Hafez al-Assad of Syria to assure a
sceptical Israeli public about Syria's intentions towards the Jewish state.
Mr Rabin said yesterday his government 'yearned' to strike a lasting
regional peace agreement this year and urged Mr Assad to 'go the extra mile'
and assure the Israeli public that Syria had long-term peaceful intentions
towards the Jewish state.
Speaking in Strasbourg, Mr Rabin urged Syria and other Arab states not to
lose precious time and to seek agreement in Washington. 'Israel is ready for
peace and willing to take risks and make dramatic decisions .. We are
looking for a peace that would last for generations to come - a peace that
will put an end to the suffering and fear of all the peoples of the Middle
East.'
Mr Rabin's remarks came after President Ezer Weizman showered rare praise on
the Syrian leader, saying he held the key to peace and was a man of
integrity, sincerity and honour.
In Cairo, Israeli and Palestinian officials held lengthy talks to try to
hammer out an agreed document after weeks of fruitless negotiations focused
on control over border crossings. Israeli officials sought to damp hopes
that Mr Peres and Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, would be able to sign an
agreement when they meet in Switzerland at the weekend.
