FT  18 JUN 94 / Heseltine eager to remain at DTI: Trade secretary insists he
has no desire to be Tory chairman
Mr Michael Heseltine yesterday ruled himself out as next chairman of the
Tory party and insisted he wanted to remain in his present post as trade and
industry secretary.
Mr Heseltine took the unusual step of openly declaring his wish to stay in
his present position in an interview with the BBC. His comments were
immediately interpreted as a show of disloyalty to Mr John Major.
'My interest is in being president of the board of trade - everybody knows
that,' Mr Heseltine said.
'I think there have been too many changes in this department over the course
of the last years and my interest is in staying where I am,' he added.
Mr Heseltine's reluctance to fill the vacancy caused by Sir Norman Fowler's
decision to stand down is thought to stem partly from a desire not to tie
his own fortunes too closely to those of Mr John Major, thereby scuppering
his own leadership ambitions.
Speculation about Sir Norman's successor has mounted since Thursday when he
announced his intention to step down at the time of the reshuffle.
Yesterday's suggestion that Mr Heseltine should succeed came from Mr Kenneth
Baker, a former chairman and cabinet minister.
Mr Heseltine is regarded as the one of most effective and energetic
campaigners in Tory ranks - the man who would restore the party's flagging
morale.
'What is needed now is a wartime chairman,' Mr Baker said. 'He has to be a
street fighter, he has to be combative and he has to be a drum major. The
one who most fills that role certainly would be Michael Heseltine.'
Likening the situation to a Hollywood movie, Mr Baker continued: 'You need a
hard cop and a soft cop and the party chairman has to be a hard cop over the
next two or three years.'
Mr David Hunt, employment secretary, is the favourite to succeed Sir Norman
after a year in which he has won widespread plaudits for his confident
campaigning style.
But many Tory backbenchers nursing inadequate majorities see Mr Heseltine as
a better bet to minimise casualties in the next general election. Labour's
strong performance in last week's European elections will probably have
reinforced these views.
Other possible contenders for the post of party chairman include Mrs
Virginia Bottomley, the health secretary, and Mr Tony Newton, leader of the
Commons.
Beckett breaks with party policy on picketing, Page 4
