FT  11 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Small is ugly?
Those who take pleasure in poking fun at the fickleness of management
fashion are having a field day. Two very different styles of management
theory are now parading down the catwalks.
One model, firmly in favour for the past few seasons, is for extreme
corporate concentration. The strategy is to pare the company back to a
streamlined core through repeated cuts in staff numbers and divestment of
superfluous divisions.
But the wave of mega-mergers which has been such a feature of US stock
market activity this year, creating some of the world's biggest empires in
media, healthcare and defence, makes a different argument: size is
essential. Can they both be right?
To an extent, yes, in that they both recommend specialisation. Some
divestments simply represent the acknowledgement that the ambitious
acquisitions of the last decade did not deliver the expected benefites.
Specialisation was certainly the mantra recited yesterday by Lucas
Industries, the UK-based conglomerate, in explaining the Pounds 214m of
exceptional charges for restructuring in its half-year results. Although it
pronounced the outlook 'quite bullish', it announced the sale of half a
dozen 'non-core' businesses to focus on aerospace and automotive products.
But the Lucas statement, which comes just weeks after Grand Metropolitan
revealed radical restructuring plans at its IDV drinks business, raises
other questions. Why are the changes necessary after so many years of
recession, and how far should the process be taken?
The restructurings partly reflect disappointment with the nature of the
economic recovery. Pressure on many companies' margins has been unexpectedly
great, a point made forcibly last month by BTR, the UK-based industrial
conglomerate, unveiling unexpectedly poor half-year results. Raw material
costs have risen, but growing international competition has - so far, at
least - prevented much of that increase being passed on through higher
prices in many sectors. Meanwhile, advances in telecommunications and
electronics have helped executives make repeated cuts in middle management.
But downsizing is not necessarily the best response to margin pressure.
Companies can weaken themselves if they become too lean. Cutbacks can lead
to problems in hiring and training new staff if growth in demand resumes,
and to sharp inflation in the salaries of the best staff. Excessive
slenderness may also inhibit investment, and sacrifice genuine opportunities
for synergy between different activities.
The retreat from constant corporate dieting may now be under way. Last week
General Motors hired several hundred production workers, the first it has
taken on since 1986. But in an environment of low inflation, management and
shareholders in some industries may have to accept that margins will be
lower than in the past.
