FT  28 JUN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Equity market prices rally behind
firmer gilts - Market report
Worries that continued turbulence in international currency markets would
trigger another wholesale retreat by the London stock market were proved
wrong yesterday. The market shrugged off an initial bout of selling and
moved ahead strongly in the wake of a firm gilt-edged market and a good
opening performance by Wall Street.
The FT-SE 100 Index finished another tense trading session a net 23.3 higher
at 2,899.9, having penetrated the 2,900 level in mid-afternoon. At the
outset the index looked set to threaten the 2,800 mark as investors fretted
about the current crisis in foreign exchanges where the US dollar has come
under heavy selling pressure.
The market rally was generally confined to the front-line stocks; second
tier issues came under continued pressure, with the FT-SE Mid 250 Index
ending 10.8 lower at 3,363.4. Share prices began the day under pressure,
with marketmakers reacting to the big sell-off of stocks and bonds on Wall
Street late on Friday by chopping their opening prices for the leading FT-SE
100 and Mid 250 stocks. Sentiment was also hit by the sharp slide in
Japanese equity prices on Monday after the shock resignation of the Japanese
prime minister.
Taking its cue from the gilts market, where long-dated stocks were down more
than a half-point in very early trading, the FT-SE 100 index registered a
fall of almost 32 points at 2,844.7 within 30 minutes of the opening of
business, as the dollar moved to its lowest level against the Japanese
currency since the Second World War. The rally in gilts was attributed to a
more confident feeling in currencies, as well as buying ahead of tomorrow's
auction of Pounds 2bn of floating rate gilts.
With no signs of any institutional selling pressure evident in the stock
market, and with gilts beginning to rally in the wake of a shift in
sentiment in the foreign exchange markets, share prices gradually clawed
their way back as the session wore on.
The FT-SE 100 reached positive ground just after midday and thereafter moved
ahead fairly comfortably, reaching the day's high point of 2,902.2, up 25.6,
before slipping off its best level just before the close.
While acknowledging the UK stock market's better tone yesterday, senior
marketmakers remained extremely nervous about the market's potential for
further big losses. 'There were big movements in share prices both ways and
the market is looking increasingly disjointed. This market could still fall
to 2,800 in the very short term,' said a marketmaker at one of the top UK
integrated securities houses.
He added that European bourses and Far Eastern markets had performed badly
and that the lack of consistency in international markets remained one of
the biggest worries to traders.
Activity in UK equities remained very poor, with turnover amounting to only
463.2m shares, raising the possibility that the big investment institutions
may not return to active trading in the market until the third quarter of
the year. Non-Footsie volume accounted for more than 58 per cent of the
total.
The value of customer business in the market last Friday dipped below the
Pounds 1bn mark for the third time in a week, totalling only Pounds 920.9m.
Newspaper shares were again the centre of attention as the market responded
to comments from Mr Conrad Black, proprietor of The Telegraph, that the cost
of the price-cutting war could be less than had been feared.
