FT  29 JAN 94 / Fury over French connection: The response to the Channel
rail link route
You have to travel at least 50 miles north-west from Folkestone along the
route of the planned high-speed rail link from the Channel tunnel to London
before you meet people who are enthusiastic about the project.
At Stratford, in east London - not far from the link's final destination at
St Pancras station - a young woman at a jobs agency is thrilled that the
trains will stop just minutes from where she works.
'There will be a new shopping centre, new street furniture and green spaces
 -I think it will be the best thing that has happened to Stratford for a
long time,' she says.
In contrast to this flash of enthusiasm a trail of anger, confusion and
tragedy on small scale runs through the Kent countryside.
For six years residents have been in limbo, not knowing when the link will
be built, where it will be built and whether they will qualify for
compensation.
If anyone knows the meaning of planning blight it is Stuart Smith.
Two-and-a-half years after moving from a house in Lenham Heath which was
threatened by the original route of the link, he now faces the prospect of a
second move.
Revised proposals for the rail route, unveiled earlier this week by John
MacGregor, the transport secretary, could bring trains within yards of The
Mount, a Pounds 300,000 oak timber-framed farmhouse in the hamlet of Ram
Lane near Ashford to which Mr Smith and his family moved in 1991.
'We got a sensible price from British Rail for our last house but there was
no allowance made for the upset it caused,' he says. 'We had lived in that
house for 22 years and you can't compensate for that.'
Mr Smith is just one of thousands of home-owners who live near the 68-mile
railway line, which is intended to speed sleek express trains at up to
140mph through the Garden of England. If the government can persuade private
companies to invest at least half the Pounds 2.6bn cost of the project,
Eurostar trains should be slicing through the Kent countryside by 2002.
But before work starts on the line, Union Railways, the British Rail
subsidiary working on the early stages of the project, hopes to have
resolved the problems caused by years of planning blight. If the scale of
resident's protests is maintained, Union Railways' negotiators are in for a
tough time.
While David and Ivy Hilliger, at Westnell Lane, are relieved that the new
route will no longer run 30 yards from their back garden, they are not
celebrating. 'I don't think Union Railway realises just how much it is
affecting people's lives mentally. People in the village want to retire, but
don't know whether they will qualify for compensation.'
Mr MacGregor claimed that only 40 homes would be in the direct line of the
route. But this small number is only arrived at because of the narrowness of
the corridor which the government intends to 'safeguard' - that is, formally
declare as the line of the route, a move which triggers the right to
statutory compensation.
A final decision on the corridor has yet to be taken by the government, but
Union Railways says it is unlikely to be much wider than the 36 metres
between the fences required to protect a twin railway track. This is in
marked contrast to the 240-metre wide corridor declared by BR on its first
route, abandoned in 1991, which would have run through south London into
Waterloo.
BR spent Pounds 140m buying homes along this corridor, acquiring practically
the whole of the village of South Darenth and large swathes of Peckham. It
has since been selling these properties off at a large loss. Union Railways
says it has chosen a narrower corridor to keep costs down and reduce the
area of blight.
'BR got its fingers burned last time but now Union Railways is being far too
cautious,' says a Kent County Council official. In a recent study of the
rail link project, the council called for a more generous compensation
scheme for home-owners outside the 36-metre corridor.
One problem facing residents is that there is no agreement on standards
which should be applied to the disturbance that would be created by a fast
railway line. The government and the local authorities involved are still
discussing noise and vibration criteria.
Kent County Council complains the present limits under which compensation is
awarded are based on surveys of road noise carried out 20 years ago.
Motorways create a background hum but fast trains cause a sudden rush of
sound, it says.
But such technical details are of little concern to Pat and David Henderson.
Their three-bedroom semi-detached home on an estate at Pepper Hill near
Gravesend will be just 24 feet above a planned tunnel. Pepper Hill and
Ashford are the only two parts of the route which may be changed.
The Hendersons were hoping to sell up, buy a smaller house and put some
money in the bank. But they have seen their home plummet in value from
nearly Pounds 100,000 to Pounds 60,000 in a few years. 'Estate agents say
they won't even put us on their books,' says Mrs Henderson.
Despite the uncertainties surrounding compensation, Union Railways says it
is prepared to be more flexible than the law provides for. In theory, it
cannot purchase properties compulsorily before the passage of the rail link
bill through parliament, expected to take at least two years. But it says it
will offer compensation as soon as an order safeguarding the route is
published in the next few weeks. Compensation legislation allows it to offer
market value plus up to 10 per cent.
Home-owners in the direct line of the route will automatically be eligible
for compensation but people living near but not on the line will have to
apply to Union Railways. Estate agents will be asked to value properties.
Only those 'very close' to the rail are likely to be bought while double
glazing may be available for those living further away.
Double glazing would not assuage the fears of Arthur Reeves, who runs a used
car business next door to the Garden of England Mobile Home Park outside
Harrietsham. Its pretty setting - old army ambulances and rusty Rolls Royces
stand between the trees surrounding the house - is ruined by the drone of
the M20 motorway which runs in front of the house. The Channel link,
according to the latest plans, will run on his side of the motorway,
compounding an already serious noise problem.
'They say that when the link is complete, there will be trains running every
10 minutes.' says Mr Reeves.
Union Railways insists that local residents' fears are exaggerated and that
modern railways are built to such high standards that they will not create
the noise and vibration many expect. But even if this turns out to be the
case, the insecurity is causing unhappiness in Kent.
'There has been a lot of illness, and a lot of mental strain,' says Mrs
Margaret Bottle, of Harrietsham, pointing out houses purchased by BR and now
standing empty. 'It has been hanging over us for so long, and we can't get
any sense out of Union Railway. They will not give us any straight answers.
We won't know what any of this means to us, until the first train makes its
first trip.'
