FT  29 JAN 94 / Property: An English Tuscany - A touch of old Italy in
historic Worcestershire
Flat river bottoms and stumpy hills make Worcestershire an English version
of Tuscany as we see it in early Italian paintings. But green is the
dominant colour, not white or beige.
Much of that green comes from flooding by the county's rivers. At its core,
they have formed a large plain between hills on three sides. Chief among
them is the Severn, which starts in neighbouring Wales and flows through
Shrewsbury, Worcester and Gloucester to the Bristol Channel. Others include
the Teme, the Stour and the Avon (known better at Stratford-upon-Avon,
Shakespeare's birthplace). The rivers were the main transport link before
the Industrial Revolution brought the railways.
The Malvern Hills bound Worcestershire on the west. To the north-east, the
Clent and Lickey Hills separate the county from greater Birmingham. To the
east are the Cotswolds.
Birmingham, Cheltenham, Gloucester and Bristol are reached easily on the M5
motorway. For London, though, you must take a route that starts in the wrong
direction - north, towards Birmingham. Then it turns east onto the M42 (the
Birmingham southern ring road) and south-east to the M40 for a 2 1/2 -hour
drive to the capital.
Worcester's county cricket ground - among the most beautiful in England -
has been flooded often by the Severn. It is just across the bridge from the
town centre, ideal for spectators fleeing the office on summer afternoons.
If the players flag, they can look to the nearby cathedral for inspiration.
The racecourse is also in the water meadows and just as easy to reach.
It is a fertile county and farming thrives, notably fruit and vegetables in
the Vale of Evesham. Wool from Wales and the Cotswolds made textiles a big
business which survives - just - in a few carpet factories at Kidderminster.
Potting, the other traditional speciality, can be seen at the Royal
Worcester works.
Worcestershire's many handsome Georgian facades show how all the county's
towns prospered in the 18th century. Brick replaced the traditional timber
framing, with its black- painted beams which make a bold check pattern
against the white lath and plaster infill. But some half-timbering did
continue into Victorian times - and the 20th century - as a veneer over the
brick.
Bewdley is one such Georgian town, a place of narrow streets and striking
houses where Stanley Baldwin, prime minister at the time of Edward VIII's
abdication in 1936 and later Earl Baldwin of Bewdley, was born. Quays on the
Severn flank a substantial bridge (designed by Thomas Telford) leading to a
broad market place where people from both sides of the river could trade.
Late in the 18th century, though, it was eclipsed by the new town of
Stourport.
Two grand red brick houses in Bewdley, needing work but both with plenty of
potential, are on offer from Andrew Grant. Tickenhill Manor, listed grade
II* for its history and Georgian architecture, was Crown property until
1873. Henry VII's eldest son, Prince Arthur, married Catherine of Aragon by
proxy at Tickenhill's chapel in 1499. Henry VIII made the house into a place
for his daughter, Mary.
In the Civil War, it was a royalist stronghold (as, indeed, the county was
generally; Worcester itself was 'the faithful city' where Charles II took
refuge, before fleeing abroad, after losing the battle of Worcester in
1651).
The house, on high ground above Bewdley with open country behind, has a
bow-fronted dining room and panelled drawing room, while the main bedrooms
have windows to the floor. Asking price is Pounds 310,000.
The other house, Kateshill, for which Pounds 290,000 is sought, was on the
Tickenhill estate. Originally Hillside House, it was renamed for Catherine
of Braganza, wife of Charles II, who liked its views. It has good-sized
rooms, cornices galore and a double flight of steps to the front door.
The garden is sombre, dark-leaved Victorian but a fine backdrop for the
rhododendrons when in flower. Its glory is a huge Spanish sweet chestnut
planted by Sir Henry Sidney, Lord High Admiral of England, to celebrate the
birth of a daughter.
Priced at Pounds 425,000 is another brick house, Newbury, at Lower
Broadheath near Worcester; this village was the birthplace of Sir Edward
Elgar, the composer. Agent Stewart White (Knight Frank &amp; Rutley's associate)
also offers the brick Manor House at Clifton-upon-Teme, 11 miles from
Worcester, for Pounds 325,000. In Pershore, Grant has a Georgian brick
townhouse, Abbey Place, for Pounds 190,000.
Traditional black and white houses include Tundridge Grange at Suckley, near
Malvern; this is a warm and welcoming house in good condition (Grant, Pounds
550,000) with 35 acres for horses and a badminton court. Then there is
Detton Mill House at Neen Savage, 12 miles from Kidderminster (White, Pounds
235,000).
In Bretforton, near Evesham, Jackson-Stops offers the stone Church Cottage
for Pounds 138,500, and the modern stone and half- timbered Greenacres for
Pounds 210,000.
Broadway, on the west scarp of the Cotswolds, is one of the tourist haunts
of England - a show village where you can browse in antique shops and
recover (expensively) in the Lygon Arms, part of the Savoy Group. Its
architecture is a harmony of building styles dating back to the 16th
century, with houses flanking a long high street descending a hill.
Pond Close Farm, which backs on to nine acres of land, is both Georgian and
pre-Georgian. Rural behind and urban in front, it has a superb stone-flagged
floor in the hall, while the Cotswold teddy bear museum is across the road.
The agent is Butler Sherborn (Pounds 485,000). In the centre of Broadway,
Jackson-Stops is selling the imposing early-Georgian Picton House, now
partly an antiques shop, for Pounds 685,000.
Further information: Butler Sherborn, Burford (0993-822 325); Andrew Grant,
Worcester (0905-24 477); Jackson-Stops, Chipping Campden (0386-840 224);
Stewart White, Worcester (0905-723 438).
