FT  14 FEB 94 / Russia faces population crisis as death rate soars
Russia is facing a double population crisis - a dramatic rise in death rates
and a sharp fall in the birth rate, according to official figures which have
largely been kept hidden from public debate.
In the past year alone, the death rate jumped 20 per cent, or 360,000 deaths
more than in 1992. Researchers now believe that the average age for male
mortality in Russia has sunk to 59 - far below the average in the
industrialised world and the lowest in Russia since the early 1960s.
The results, which have been a matter of close concern at the level of
Russia's National Security Council, are only now trickling out. Some were
given at a conference last week at the New York Harriman Institute by Ms
Natalia Rimashevskaya, head of the Institute for Socio-Economic Studies of
the Population, while further research into the figures has been done by Ms
Judith Shapiro, a British academic working with the macroeconomic and
finance unit which was attached to the Russian finance ministry until last
month.
Ms Rimashevskaya's findings showed, she said, an 'unprecedented' rise in the
death rate, with much of the increase due to 'killings, suicides and
conflicts'. However, infant mortality had also gone up sharply, from 17.4 in
1,000 in 1990 to 19.1 in 1,000 last year.
The average age of death (for men and women) was now, she said, 'at 66 or
lower' - the same level as in the early to mid-1960s and four or five years
below the figure that had been achieved more recently. In 1993, 1.4m people
were born and 2.2m died - although inward migration of Russians from former
Soviet republics compensated to some extent, bringing the net fall in
population to 500,000 last year.
Ms Shapiro's findings, based like Ms Rimashevskaya's on figures from the
state statistical committee Goskomstat, which have had very limited
availability, show men to be the main victims of earlier deaths. The average
death rate has been brought down to 59, she says, largely through two causes
 -a higher rate of coronary disease and strokes, and more violent deaths.
Of the total of 360,000 extra deaths in 1993, nearly 50 per cent were from
heart and circulatory failure and more than 25 per cent were from violent
causes.
Ms Shapiro says that simple poverty, and the state of the post-Soviet health
service, are probably minor causes of the phenomenon. More significant is
what she calls a 'psycho-social crisis' with greatly rising insecurity.
Ms Rimashevskaya says the decline of births is partly due to a simple
shortage of women - but more because women of child-bearing age postpone
having children or decide not to give birth 'because of the poor situation
in the society'.
