FT  15 MAR 94 / SNCF and BR may act on Eurotunnel delay
SNCF and British Rail, the French and UK railway operators, may demand
compensation from Eurotunnel for the delay in the start of freight services
through the Channel Tunnel, according to Mr Alain Poinssot, head of SNCF's
freight division.
Speaking at a joint press conference with Mr Ian Brown, his British Rail
counterpart, Mr Poinssot said that the delay in the launch of freight
operations, which were due to have started yesterday, entailed significant
costs both in terms of lost revenues and the uncertainty facing clients.
Mr Poinssot said that the loss of earnings was being evaluated by his
company's lawyers. British Rail and SNCF are already involved in a dispute
with Eurotunnel concerning the fees for use of the Channel Tunnel rail link.
Eurotunnel has not set a firm timetable for its services following last
month's announcement of delays due to the complex commissioning and testing
process. The official opening of the Channel Tunnel will go ahead as planned
on May 6.
Despite the desire for compensation, Mr Poinssot said that the delay in
services should be put into context. 'The tree should not obscure the
forest,' he said, describing freight services through the Tunnel as
'revolutionary'. Mr Brown estimated that by 1996-1997, the annual volume of
freight passing through the tunnel would amount to more than 6m tonnes.
About 60 per cent of this would be represented by container traffic.
Automobile shipments are expected to account for 25 per cent of total
freight.
According to Mr Brown, the work needed to prepare for the launch of Channel
Tunnel freight services had been completed last weekend. He said that
services would be expanded progressively, starting with 10 trains per day in
each direction and increasing to 35 trains each way by 1995-1996.
Mr Brown said that the launch of freight traffic services through the Tunnel
was of particular importance to British Rail. 'The tunnel is a 50km journey,
but it joins the UK's 15,000km network to the 240,000km continental rail
network,' he said, adding that it would provide an important stimulus to
demand for rail freight.
British Rail and SNCF have set up a series of joint ventures to manage and
market their Channel Tunnel freight services. British Rail has also adapted
parts of its network, including rebuilding 90 bridges between London and the
Channel Tunnel, to allow the smooth passage of freight trains to the
continental network.
