FT  11 JAN 94 / Technology: Miners bitten by the gold bug - How Ashanti is
using bacteria to release the precious metal at its processing plant
Gold miners like to think that their latest allies, Thiobacillus
ferro-oxidans, spend their lives eating and breeding.
They speak affectionately of them as 'gold bugs', which munch their way
through ore to release precious metal that would otherwise be very difficult
to liberate. If bugs are treated well, their number multiplies rapidly.
That is certainly the way that many of those responsible for the world's
biggest biological gold processing venture talk about T. ferro-oxidans.
Their venture, a Dollars 105m (Pounds 71m) plant at Ashanti Goldfields in
Ghana, starts up well ahead of schedule this week, instead of March as
originally planned. The plant is a crucial element in a Dollars 305m,
three-year expansion scheme that will take Ashanti's annual gold output
above 1m troy ounces and place it among the world's top 10 producers.
When pressed, however, the miners have to admit that the truth about T.
ferro-oxidans is more complex but no less colourful. These bacteria are
among the most odd of this planet's life forms. They require a very acid
environment and a temperature of between 30`C and 40`C to do their best
work. They are unaffected by high concentrations of most metals.
But they do not 'munch' gold ore. They cause enzyme and chemical changes on
the gold-bearing sulphide rock, extracting electrons or energy from the ore
and breaking the sulphide bonds. That releases the metal. Neither do they
breed in the conventional way. Every few hours each single-cell bacterium
splits in two - and that leads to the rapid multiplication.
T. ferro-oxidans cannot cause disease because it can only develop on
inorganic matter. Those bacteria being employed by Ashanti started life in
South Africa at the Fairview gold mine. It was at Fairview that Gencor, the
South African mining group, built the first commercial-scale gold processing
plant to use biological leaching. Ashanti is relying on technology developed
by Gencor; technology that is also being used at the Sao Bento gold mine in
Brazil and at the Harbour Lights and Wiluna mines in Western Australia.
Until the mid-1980s, miners used two other methods to break down (or
oxidise) refractory (or difficult) ore that otherwise would have released
very little of its gold: pressure oxidation and roasting. Both are
expensive, and roasting has the added drawback of sending liberated sulphur
and arsenic compounds up the chimney. If the compunds are not captured they
produce acid rain and poison the countryside.
Neither of these high-tech processes seem in any great danger from
bioleaching, however. Two large gold projects where bioleaching would work
well - at Lihir Island in Papua New Guinea and Kanowna Belle in Western
Australia - have decided to used pressure oxidation and roasting
respectively.
Ashanti considered roasting its refractory ore but opted for bioleaching
because operating costs should be lower and it 'is the world's most
environmentally friendly way of extracting gold from ore', says John Clarke,
Ashanti's consulting metallurgist. Roasting also needs high-tech process
plant - temperatures of 680`C-700`C are required - and is not really
suitable in a country where there are shortages of the skills needed to
operate and provide technical support for such equipment.
In contrast, the bioleaching process is relatively simple to operate.
'Constancy is the key to successful bioleaching,' says Clarke. 'Constant
material, constant temperature. Always let the bugs acclimatise to their new
environment.'
Ashanti's plant was built by Minproc, the Australian group. Sulphide ore is
crushed into a powder, which is mixed with water in tanks into which the
bacteria are introduced. After the bugs have done their work - they take
about four days and release more than 90 per cent of the gold - the solution
is moved to conventional carbon-in-leach tanks where gold is recovered. The
solution containing the free arsenic, sulphur and iron is pumped into
neutralisation tanks. Limestone and lime - 150,000-200,000 tonnes a day,
accounting for half the operating costs - is added to the solution, which is
rendered non-toxic as it hardens to form stable arsenic and sulphur
compounds.
Ashanti's plant has six times the capacity of the biggest built so far, but
each tank is only twice the size of those at Sao Bento and Wiluna. Clarke
suggests it is unlikely that bigger tanks will be used elsewhere because of
the need to keep supplying T. ferro-oxidans with oxygen and nutrients.
Initially, the bugs will be responsible for producing about half Ashanti's
gold and, in a year or so, nearly all of it.
The question being asked elsewhere in the gold mining industry is: do the
bugs have to be kept in tanks to do their work?
Newmont Mining, biggest of the US gold miners, believes tanks are not
necessary. Newmont has built a 20,000-tonne heap of refractory ore at its
operations on the Carlin Trend in the Nevada desert and introduced T.
ferro-oxidans to it. The company has already established that the system
works technically and has patented some aspects (such as the way the fluid
containing the bugs can be percolated through a large heap of ore and not
allowed to get too hot or too cold). Newmont is about to begin a feasibility
study to look at capital and operating costs to make sure that its process
is commercially viable.
Once the bacteria have done their work, the heap must be washed and
neutralised and then the gold extracted by conventional heap-leaching, by
which a weak cyanide solution is trickled through the ore to capture the
metal.
Newmont is also experimenting with a chemical other than cyanide, though it
will not say which.
