FT  08 DEC 94 / Successful start to S African bond issue
Investors greeted South Africa's first international bond offering since the
end of apartheid with enthusiasm yesterday, leading to an increase in the
size of the issue from Dollars 500m (Pounds 304.8m) to Dollars 750m.
The launch of the global issue of five-year bonds marked the country's
return to international capital markets since the elections in April.
Its success suggests that the country's reintegration into the international
financial community is now all but complete.
A flood of new issues from South African companies in the public and private
sector may follow.
Many South African companies and institutions were closely watching the
performance of the offering as a measure of the acceptabilty of South
African bonds on the global market.
'Although the issue is small, the reception is a welcome signal of
international confidence in the country's economic future,' said Mr Tony
Twine, an economist at Johannesburg-based consultants Econometrix.
'It will help smooth the way for other public issuers like (electricity
utility) Eskom.'
Eskom, the state-owned electricity utility, and Telkom, the
telecommunications company, among others, as well as several private
companies, are expected to approach the international capital markets soon.
The South African government is expected to make a second issue, possibly
after the next budget, due in March. 'South Africa remains grossly
underborrowed internationally, relative to other emerging markets of a
similar size,' says Annelise Peers, of Johannesburg brokers Frankel Pollak
Vinderine. 'There's room for a lot more borrowing.'
As a result of the strong demand, the bonds are expected to be priced at the
lower end of the launch spread of 193 and 198 basis points over US Treasury
bonds.
The exact pricing is expected to be confirmed today.
Investor demand was greatest in the US, with European and Asian investors
also making a strong showing.
Swiss Bank Corporation and Goldman Sachs are the banks arranging the deal.
Government bonds, Page 36
