FT  28 JAN 94 / Ofgas eases price setting factor: Domestic gas bills will
fall more slowly to offset industrial losses
Ofgas, the gas industry regulator, yesterday relaxed the main element in the
tariff formula which sets the price British Gas can charge to its monopoly
market of about 18m residential customers.
Ms Clare Spottiswoode, Ofgas director-general, accepted a recommendation by
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission that the efficiency factor in the
formula, set in 1992 at the retail price index minus 5 percentage points, be
relaxed to RPI minus 4. The factor makes up 60 per cent of a consumer's
bill, with the actual cost of the gas accounting for the remainder.
The reduction is intended to compensate British Gas for the large loss of
commercial and industrial customers to independent gas suppliers in the past
two years, and the negative impact that has had on investment.
Mr Norman Blacker, managing director of UK Gas Business, the domestic supply
arm of British Gas, welcomed the decision, saying it would 'help redress
some of the loss of income caused by . . . the introduction of competition
into the market above 2,500 therms'.
The financial benefit to British Gas is likely to be worth about Pounds 24m
after-tax this year, according to City analysts. British Gas shares closed
up 4 1/2 p at 349 1/2 p.
Ofgas said the change would have little impact on consumers, who would
simply see a slower rate of decline in gas prices.
The regulator estimated gas prices would fall 1.8 per cent less over three
years than under the RPI minus 5 formula. That would be equivalent to about
Pounds 2 a year for the average household, it said.
But the Gas Consumers Council said prices would fall by 3 per cent less over
three years. Mr Ian Powe, director, said some would see this concession as a
watchdog eating from the hand it used to bite.
Many analysts saw the decision as further evidence of a rapidly improving
relationship between Ofgas and British Gas. Relations between the two were
often turbulent under Sir James McKinnon, former director-general, who
stepped down last November.
Earlier this week, Ms Spottiswoode admitted that Ofgas had at times
'exceeded its powers' in dealing with British Gas.
But the regulator remained adamant that it would not implement another MMC
recommendation that consumers pay for the break-up of British Gas. The
government last month rejected that course in favour of the complete
separation of the storage and transportation business from British Gas's
trading arm.
Ofgas said that since divestment was no longer an issue, 'there is no reason
why the costs of internal restructuring should be borne by customers'.
See Lex
