FT  02 AUG 94 / Hussein adamant on role in future of Jerusalem
King Hussein of Jordan sought yesterday to capitalise on the accord he
signed last week with Israel by reaffirming his determination to play a role
in the future of Jerusalem, the most sensitive issue in Arab-Israeli peace
negotiations.
He said he had received several invitations to visit the city, claimed by
Israelis and Palestinians as their capital, and that he intended to go there
and to the West Bank 'before too long'.
'I feel it is my right as a Moslem and a Hashemite and an Arab to visit
Jerusalem and Hebron (in the West Bank),' he said. 'When I do so, I will not
ask anybody's permission.'
His statement, made to a group of journalists at his residence outside
London, will reignite protests among Palestinians and other Arab leaders
over the Israeli-Jordanian peace declaration, which refers to Jordan's
'present special role' in administering Moslem holy sites in Jerusalem.
In particular, it will fuel the already intense suspicion among Palestinians
that King Hussein, who does not attempt to conceal his disdain for the
Palestine Liberation Organisation, is trying to recreate a power base in the
territories he lost to Israel in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
The PLO is establishing a Palestinian self-governing authority in the West
Bank town of Jericho and in the Gaza Strip. Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman,
has vowed repeatedly to go and pray in Jerusalem since his return to the
area last month.
King Hussein acknowledged that the PLO, not Jordan, would be negotiating
with Israel over Jerusalem's political future.
But he went on to affirm his family's historic role in the city, saying he
wanted to depoliticise the Jerusalem issue and promote dialogue between
representatives of its three great religions.
The Jordanian monarch was in high spirits following the Washington accord.
He said he was thinking of submitting its final outcome to a national
referendum in Jordan.
He expressed optimism about rapid progress in resolving outstanding issues
with Israel and about the prospects for progress in parallel negotiations
between Israel and Syria. He added: 'I have never felt as much at peace with
myself as I do now.'
But he also sounded a grim note about the continuing threat of terrorist
violence such as the recent bomb attacks against Jewish targets in Buenos
Aires and London. 'We have to brace ourselves for more of that, until such
time as there is a tremendous change throughout the region,' he said.
