FT  03 JUN 94 / International Company News: HungarHotels sale draws interest
Hungary's privatisation authorities have put HungarHotels, the country's
largest hotel chain with 15 hotels, up for sale.
The sale, targeted at international hotel groups, looks set to become one of
the most hotly contested privatisation transactions in eastern Europe this
year.
The sale of 51 per cent of HungarHotels is expected to raise about Dollars
50m. CS First Boston, the US investment bank which is advising the SPA
privatisation agency, said that 24 companies had registered initial
interest.
The potential bidders, which have to submit preliminary offers by next
month, are believed to include the Intercontinental, Forte and Holiday Inn
hotel groups.
Intercontinental, owner of the Forum hotel chain, is thought to be
interested in maintaining its connection with the Budapest Forum, which is
operated by HungarHotels under a franchise agreement.
While foreign attention is likely to centre on specific hotels, the SPA is
determined to avoid selling the group piecemeal.
The SPA wants to sell HungarHotels as a single entity and let the buyer take
responsibility for subsequent restructuring.
The transaction represents the international hotel industry's - and other
investors' - last chance to acquire an interest in an established hotel
operation in Hungary.
Intercontinental lost the franchise of the flagship Budapest hotel, the Duna
Intercontinental, when a consortium led by Marriot of the US offered Dollars
53m and won an auction for the property.
Two of Hungary's big three hotel chains have been privatised. Danubius
Hotels was sold to portfolio investors, and Pannonia Hotels to Accor, the
French hotel group.
The privatisation of HungarHotels has dragged on for four years, hampered by
recession in the international hotel market, confusion over title to
property and the need to trim an unwieldy company.
The company's management is known to have pushed hard for a stock market
flotation, but HungarHotels' weak results made this route difficult to
justify.
Profits, at the operating level, halved to Ft431m (Dollars 4m) in 1993 on
turnover of Ft6.93bn.
The slow pace of work on the 1996 world expo in Budapest has begun to dampen
expectations about tourist levels in Hungary over the next couple of years.
