FT  19 MAY 94 / DM defender in lions' den
In a dull little lecture hall on the campus of Bamberg university, normally
devoted to the delights of business studies, Mr Manfred Brunner was putting
on a passable imitation of Daniel in the lions' den.
The leading campaigner against the Maastricht treaty in Germany - the man
who fought the case vainly all the way through to the constitutional court
in Karlsruhe - was trying to persuade an audience of 40-odd young Christian
Democrats, normally loyal supporters of Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his
Bavarian allies, of the need for Euro-scepticism. He was surrounded by
passionate pro-Europeans of most other political persuasions.
Mr Brunner showed no sign of trepidation. He warned them of the looming loss
of the precious Deutsche Mark in a single European monetary system.
He denounced the danger of weakening democratic control over an ever-more
bureaucratic European Union.
He intoned against a feeble German government allowing its interests in
eastern Europe to be subordinated to French fears of German domination.
Mr Brunner argues with all the passion of a convert. He used to be the chef
de cabinet in the European Commission in Brussels to the senior German
commissioner, Mr Martin Bangemann.
He refers to the Maastricht treaty as the moment of his 'conversion on the
road to Damascus.'
He has already spent at least DM200,000 (Pounds 80,000) out of his own
pocket, he says, in fighting the legal battle against the treaty.
'The whole treaty is dedicated to the unilateral destruction of the D-Mark,'
he declares. 'The stability of the future Ecu will lie somewhere between the
D-Mark and the drachma.
'It will be a double fiasco. The hard currency countries will lose their
advantage of currency stability. The weak currency countries will be forced
into a harmful revaluation. Everyone will end up a loser.'
The threat to the D-Mark is Mr Brunner's best and biggest campaign theme.
Yet his first reason for fighting the Maastricht treaty was his conviction
that the treaty was a deliberate attempt to prevent 'the first real chance
we have had in history to create a truly pan-European community.'
His opponents see his movement as a threat to mobilise the latent forces of
'conservative nationalism' in Germany: he is an establishment figure, unlike
the extreme right represented by the Republicans. He represents a
respectable way to vote for national interests.
He has founded the 'Free Citizens' Alliance' to campaign against the treaty
in the European elections in Germany. And in Bamberg he was treated with
respect. But he is clearly finding the exercise an uphill struggle.
'If I had a proper organisation, I would win 30 to 40 per cent of the vote,'
he says. 'That is the level of sympathy in the population. But without an
organisation, I am not sure how we will do.'
Tonight, at a rally of disgruntled Bavarian farmers on the Chiemsee, Mr
Brunner will unveil his secret weapon in the campaign: the support from
across the Austrian border of Mr Jorg Haider, populist and nationalist
leader of the Austrian liberal party.
'I can only win this election with polarisation,' he admits. 'It is no good
to me being everybody's second-best choice. I know Haider, and I am
convinced he is not an extremist.'
Mr Brunner has a second secret weapon: he believes that Germany should be
seeking to forge a new and much closer relationship with Britain, to balance
its ties to France.
'The British philosophy is fundamentally much closer to our own,' he says.
'The Maastricht treaty is the last throw of the French revolution. I believe
much more, like the British, in an evolutionary process.'
He is convinced that the Chancellor's office in Bonn is orchestrating a
campaign of silence in the 'bourgeois press' against him.
He may pick up some protest votes, and even drain a little support from the
Republicans on the right.
But the prospect of losing the D-Mark has receded into the distant future of
1999. The German economy, jobs and taxation are the issues of the day.
Anti-Maastricht was a good theme one year ago, but it seems unlikely to
mobilise so many frustrated voters today.
