FT  03 JUN 94 / Campaign Diary: Kick-in-teeth politics packs a punch
Dr Alan Sked's UK Indepen-dence party claims to be signing up hundreds of
members a day following its first party political broadcast this week. But
the party's uncompromising promise to withdraw from the European Union is
also making inroads into the conservative academic establishment. Few
candidates can have better academic support than David Wilkinson, the
party's man in Oxford and Hampshire North, who was nominated by Lord Dacre,
the historian of Nazi Germany, and seconded by Norman Stone, professor of
modern history at Worcester College, Oxford. Lord Dacre, who sits on the
Conservative benches in the Lords, was not available to discuss the party
yesterday owing to a lunch engagement at Oriel. But Prof Stone, who
describes himself as an independent Tory, says this is the time for a
'protest kick in the teeth' for the party over Maastricht. He thinks
Wilkinson might even win because of growing disenchantment with the EU:
'It's a case of galloping detumescence.'
Where are the 'bastards' hiding? Of the four rightwing cabinet ministers
whose parentage was questioned by John Major in an unguarded moment, only
Michael Howard has taken an active part in the campaign. John Redwood made
his first appearance yesterday, but Peter Lilley and Michael Portillo have
been noticeable by their absence. Asked where Portillo was, a senior Tory
official said he would take at least one press conference after June 9. Slip
of the tongue, of course. No-one at Central Office is trying to keep the
right quiet until after the election. Perish the thought.
                         *        *       *
Esperantists are threatening to spoil the Euro ballot. Brian Barker,
campaign officer for the Esperanto Association of Britain, is urging voters
to protest against the cost of translating the EU's nine working languages.
He claims there are 4m European speakers of esperanto, an artificial
language which mixes a largely Romance vocabulary with Swahili vowels. The
association - campaign slogan sparu monon per esperanto (save money by means
of esperanto) - wants esperanto to be a common European language, scorning
claims for Latin, once spoken from the North Atlantic to the Black Sea.
Apparently computers prefer esperanto.
The Communist party of Great Britain, self-declared inheritor of the CP's
Leninist mantle, is putting up hopefuls in Scotland North West and two
London seats. But the revolution may be delayed: the party won 425 votes in
the local elections - split between seven candidates.
                         *        *       *
Labour's glossy election document on animal rights promises protection for
creatures as varied as badgers and whales, and bans on everything from
hunting to battery farming. Unaccountably, its moral outrage fails to extend
to the most common form of human cruelty to animals - the predominantly
working-class sport of angling. Nothing to do with tawdry vote-catching, of
course.
                         *        *       *
Labour's leadership election presents a ticklish timing problem for John
Major. The new leader - almost certainly Tony Blair - will be named on July
21, probably the last day of the parliamentary session before the summer
recess. Major wants to reshuffle the cabinet as close to the end of the
session as possible, to minimise the opportunities for sacked ministers to
make embarrassing resignation statements to the Commons. He could try to
spoil Labour's inauguration ceremonies by going for July 21, but that would
also blunt the impact of the reshuffle. An earlier announcement might give
someone time to do a Norman Lamont, but a short delay would look like a
defensive reaction to Blair. He could postpone the shake-up until the
summer, but ministers' holiday commitments would probably mean that it would
be delayed until September. Bit too close for comfort to the party
conference which is to be held in October.
Lindi St Clair, sometimes known as 'Miss Whiplash', seems a bit confused
following the demise of her Corrective party, which fought so hard for
courtesans' rights. Almost every window of her house in Charlton, south-east
London - the one with video cameras on the front and a pink Corrective party
hoarding stashed in the back garden - is plastered with Liberal Democrat
posters. But Ms St Clair has also applied for membership of the UK
Independence party. No doubt the party will want to sleep on it.
