FT  09 DEC 94 / Turkey's jailing of Kurd MPs angers EU
Eight Kurdish members of the Turkish parliament were sentenced yesterday to
jail terms of up to 15 years, in a verdict that will intensify concerns in
western Europe about Ankara's human rights record.
European Union MPs at the trial were visibly shaken and angered after the
verdicts were read and an immediate expression of concern about the
sentences was issued in Bonn by German foreign minister Klaus Kinkel. 'The
German government regrets that the court case ended in long jail terms. It
assumes that the verdicts will be reviewed in the appeals process,' Mr
Kinkel said in a statement.
Charges of treason against the Kurdish MPs, which would have incurred the
death penalty, were dropped. The defendants were accused of backing the
banned Kurdish Workers' party (PKK), a Marxist group battling for a separate
state in south-eastern Turkey.
Five of the defendants - including Ms Leyla Zana who denounced the
'political and legal absurdities' of her trial in an article in the
Washington Post this week - were given 15-year jail terms.
They were accused of acting on orders from PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan,
visiting his headquarters and urging people to support the PKK.
Another defendant was given a 7 1/2 -year term for urging support for the
PKK and praising its cause, while two more parliamentarians were given 3 1/2
years each for spreading separatist propaganda.
Mr Yusuf Alatas, a spokesman for the defence lawyers, said the
parliamentarians would appeal. 'We no longer have trust in Turkish justice,'
he said, adding: 'This trial has not been a legal but a political case.'
Diplomats said the verdict will cast a fresh shadow over a meeting of EU
ministers on December 19 at which a long-awaited Turkish-EU customs union
will be discussed.
German Parliament President Rita Sussmuth, a member of Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's Christian Democrat party, said the tough sentences would strain
Ankara's ties with the EU. 'Today's tough sentences are, especially on the
day before the EU summit in Essen, a highly questionable signal for future
relations between Turkey and the European Union,' she said.
In Germany yesterday, more than 350 police conducted raids on 76 homes and
offices to crack down on the PKK.
This followed the firebombing of Turkish companies in three German cities
earlier this week.
In London, the courts are considering a request for the extradition to
Germany of Mr Kani Yilmaz, European spokesman of the PKK, who was arrested
in October as he was about to enter the House of Commons and address a
parliamentary group.
Greece, in a discreet move to limit tensions with Turkey, has made it clear
that Mr Yilmaz would not be welcome in Athens. Turkey, while welcoming the
arrest of Mr Yilmaz, protested recently to Britain about the activities of
Amnesty International. It singled for complaint an Amnesty-sponsored
campaign in which schoolchidren were encouraged to write letters of protest
about Ankara's treatment of the Kurds.
Amnesty has defended the campaign, calling it a legitimate response to
Turkey's 'abysmal' record on human rights.
In another row, Turkish officials have expressed acute concern about a
conference in Russia for Kurds from all over the former Soviet Union at
which support was expressed for the PKK. Ankara is seeking urgent
clarification from Moscow over whether the conference was officially
sponsored.
