FT  08 APR 94 / UK Company News: Capel hits out at analysts over recovery
prospects
Analysts are underestimating the scope for profits recovery from UK
industrial companies over the next two years, according to research from
James Capel.
The stockbroker's market strategy team argues that sector analysts,
including its own, are being too cautious about prospects for sales growth
and margins and concludes that cyclical recovery stocks are still cheap.
The report, entitled A Profits Pathology, says there is 'substantial scope
for an earnings surprise in UK industrial stocks'. It points to experience
in the US, where corporate earnings have been on average 3 per cent better
than expected over the past year.
Aggregate projections from Capel's sector analysts forecast earnings per
share growth of 19 per cent in 1994 and 13 per cent in 1995. But the report
forecasts 25 per cent and 20 per cent growth. That reduces the prospective
p/e for industrial stocks from 16.5 to 15.5.
While the most rapid growth will be seen in 1994-95, Capel predicts 'it may
well be another 3-4 years before this cycle peaks'. Over the next five years
the UK should be able to sustain average profit growth of 11.5 per cent,
taking GDP profits' share back to levels last seen in the early 1960s.
The bullish forecasts are based partly on the prediction of low growth in
input costs, such as raw materials, utility prices and labour, compared with
manufacturers' prices, together with continued productivity improvements,
particularly in services.
Capel also believes that companies have become more 'operationally geared'
over the last decade, judging by the sharp rise in capital/labour ratios.
This should mean that changes in turnover will have a greater impact on
profits.
The aggregate forecasts of Capel's sector analysts are based on annual sales
growth of 6 per cent over the next two years, in line with the nominal
growth of the UK economy. But, with the world economy recovering, the
strategy team argues that this could be too modest, given that half the
sales of UK industrial companies are overseas.
The report suggests that the caution of sector analysts may stem from the
fact that they misjudged the impact of recession on UK industrial profits.
More generally, forecasters find it difficult to gauge the timing and scope
of turning points in the profits cycle.
'Most forecasters failed to predict the earnings downturn in 1991 and 1992,
much as they had failed to predict the extent of the upturn in 1983 and
1984.'
