FT  19 APR 94 / Serbs rob west of Russian prize: John Lloyd on a setback to
hopes for a Partnership for Peace
There is no constituency of any weight in Russia which would agree that
Serbs should be punished militarily for their aggression in Bosnia. If the
west agrees further use of force there, it will lose Russia.
The west wants to draw Russia into a broad security alliance, through the
initial medium of the Nato-inspired Partnership for Peace: and it is this
desire which the Russians are using as a bargaining card in Bosnia.
Mr Vitaly Churkin, the special envoy to former Yugoslavia, said in a radio
interview earlier this month that the choice before Russia was whether to
continue partnership and co-operation with the European countries and the
US, 'or whether we need to return to the past and attempt to retire into
ourselves and somehow gather the Commonwealth of Independent States under us
as a hen does her chicks and in this self-imposed isolation attempt to work
out our problems'.
But that was before the Nato bombardment a week ago of Serb armour around
Sarajevo without consultation with the Russians. Immediately after that,
President Boris Yeltsin made clear that Russia's line was unswervingly
against force. 'It would mean war forever,' he warned, adding that the
Partnership for Peace was no longer a priority issue because of the lack of
consultation.
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, Russia foreign minister, despatched at the weekend to try
to broker yet another agreement from the Serbs on a ceasefire, came back on
Sunday saying Russia would not sign the Partnership unless its scope was
considerably extended. General Pavel Grachev, the defence minister and
another former enthusiast for the Partnership, also pulled away, saying of
Nato: 'I don't like it when people tell me one thing and then do another. It
seems we have to think again.'
Mr Kozyrev should have gone to Brussels this week to sign up for the
Partnership deal but called off his visit. He has since said Russia wants
something broader than a planned framework agreement that would allow it to
have notice of 'unilateral actions' by its former enemy.
'The problem is that . . . there should be close co-ordination and we become
partners,' he said in a Russian television interview yesterday. 'People take
signing of those three pages (framework agreement) as marriage and in effect
it is at best a date.
'We want real marriage and we stick to this,' he added.
In the state duma (lower house of parliament) yesterday Mr Sergei Yuzhenkov,
chairman of the House defence committee (and himself a member of the liberal
Russia's Choice party) struggled to keep the possibility of signing the
Partnership alive.
However, even he said it was impossible without a series of conditions,
including a recognition of Russia's special status (though this could be
done after Russia joined the Partnership), an agreement not to use force in
Bosnia and a commitment from Nato that Russia would not lose its traditional
armaments markets.
'It would be a courageous move by the president and General Grachev to say
again that they support the Partnership for Peace and that they intend to
join it, no matter what happens in the former Yugoslavia,' said Mr Yuzhenkov
yesterday.
However he admits that this is unlikely, though he insists that the basic
calculations in the foreign and defence ministries remain unchanged. 'They
do not want for Russia to again be isolated,' he said.
Both Mr Kozyrev and Mr Churkin yesterday voiced extreme displeasure at the
Bosnian Serb forces, both with their actions in Gorazde and with their
attacks on Russian peace keepers around Sarajevo. However, both are now
pressing for an end to the sanctions on Serbia as a prelude to the Serbs
lifting their siege and getting down to talks again.
To the west, this may seem like aggression rewarded: to the Russians, with
their quite different view of the Serbs, it is lifting the pressure to
encourage reasonable behaviour.
Russia is again emerging as a geo-political player after nearly two years of
restrained diplomacy and adopting the posture of agreeing with the US on
most matters. It has now fully emerged as the leader of the CIS, some half
of which states have already indicated they wish to join the Partnership -
another reason for Russia to want to do so.
If Russia succeeds in reaching a working relationship with Nato, it will do
so only by curbing what it sees as the latter's excesses and by gaining
recognition of its special status within the CIS - both of which could be
hard for the western states to swallow.
The internal resistance within Russia to close co-operation with the west
has risen, and remains high: parties such as the extremist Mr Vladimir
Zhirinovsky's Liberal Democrats, the Communists and many of the so-called
centrists are hostile, or at best sceptical, making the passage of Russia's
accession to the Partnership through parliament far from automatic.
If it is agreed, continuing hostility - the legacy of centuries of relative
isolation - will make it an awkward and capricious partner. But partnership
with Russia is the prize: and for that, sacrifices in Bosnia must apparently
be endured.
