FT  05 APR 94 / VW rejects fresh claims against Lopez
Volkswagen has again been put on the defensive by reports of impending legal
action for perjury against Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, group
production director.
The German motor group dismissed as 'highly speculative' a weekend report in
the news magazine Der Spiegel that Mr Lopez faced a charge of making false
sworn statements in a court action last year. Meanwhile, it is believed that
a separate German investigation into allegations that Mr Lopez and three
colleagues stole General Motors' industrial secrets, before defecting to VW
a year ago, has been widened to include other former GM workers.
Until recently only Mr Lopez and three of the seven close colleagues who
joined him at VW - all from the US group - had been under suspicion.
According to Der Spiegel, the Hamburg prosecution service has told Mr
Lopez's lawyers that, if they do not present a defence, it will shortly seek
a judgment on the perjury allegation based on evidence on file. Legal
experts said this indicated that the prosecutor was confident of winning a
prosecution. German penalties for perjury range from a fine to imprisonment.
The magazine based its report on statements attributed to Mr Andreas Behm,
the Hamburg state prosecutor, although VW said it stemmed from comments from
GM lawyers. Mr Lopez's lawyers had spoken to Mr Behm and still expected no
charges, the German group said in a weekend statement.
Suspicions of perjury against Mr Lopez arose last year in a civil action in
which VW failed to win a gagging order intended to prevent Der Spiegel
repeating allegations of industrial espionage which lie at the heart of
continuing criminal investigations in Germany and the US.
Central to the magazine's latest report is an affidavit dated last June in
which Mr Lopez said he neither asked for nor received photographs of a
secret new model planned by Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, shortly
before he left to join VW. He contradicted this four months later in another
affidavit presented in a separate civil hearing.
VW's weekend statement reiterated that the company remained convinced that
no GM data had come into its possession or was used to its benefit.
A German criminal probe against Mr Lopez based on allegations of misconduct,
embezzlement and breaches of competition law has been under way since last
spring. Investigators have made no formal statements since late last summer
when they seized masses of computerised data in raids on VW's headquarters
and the homes of its new employees from GM.
The recent widening of the investigation is believed to be related to
information found among these data.
A federal inquiry in the US, started last summer, is also continuing. The
investigation into suspected wire and mail fraud - the illegal transmission
of data across state boundaries - is focused on VW's local subsidiaries.
However, at least two main board directors have been questioned before a
grand jury.
