FT  09 SEP 94 / (CORRECTED) Management: A special City club - A group of
black City workers tell Joel Kibazo why their forum can benefit everyone
Correction (published 16th September 1994) appended to this article.
Phillip Wright, loans manager at Banco di Sicilia, an Italian banking group,
reflects on his 23 years of working in the City of London. 'I've seen racism
in the City, no doubt about it. I think I could have done better had I been
white given my experience and the work I've done.'
He adds: 'The only reason I've survived is because I've played the game, but
guys I've worked with at the same level over the years now earn double what
I earn so things haven't changed that much.'
It was an attempt to change the way that black people working in the world
of business and finance are perceived that Wright and several other black
professionals came together to form the African &amp; Caribbean Finance Forum
(ACFF) four years ago.
The group now has 70 individual members, drawn mainly from the world of
banking and finance, although there are plans to extend the catchment to
other areas of business and outside London.
Paul Campayne, a bond strategist at Paribas Capital Markets and current
chairman of the ACFF, says: 'Several black people had been meeting
informally since the early 1970s so we decided to put a structure to an
informal network.'
The aim of the forum, he says, is to advance, develop and promote black
people in the world of finance and business. That has so far mainly been
carried out through networking of members and non-members by which 'we offer
each other expertise about our work experiences and a shoulder to cry on if
necessary. The idea is to pull each other along', says Campayne.
Seminars are also held, addressed in the main by black British luminaries
such as Diane Abbott, MP for Hackney South, and broadcaster Trevor Phillips,
head of current affairs programmes at London Weekend Television.
The speaker at a seminar in June was Courtney Blackman, a former governor of
the Central Bank of Barbados, and in July the group held a weekend workshop
on career planning.
Campayne is sensitive to charges that the ACFF could be seen as a separatist
organisation. He says: 'There are a lot of city clubs and societies. We are
no different from those. What we are about is enhancing black people's
ability to get on in the business and financial world. We want to try to
open as many doors as possible. We welcome anybody who wishes to help us
further our objectives.'
The ACFF believes it has a strategic role to play, particularly among
potential employers, and is especially keen on personal and career
development - for both black and white staff.
Campayne says: 'As a group we have a lot of expertise in various fields and
there is no reason why an employer wishing to send a signal to the rest of
the staff can not use one of us. For the black members of staff, often in
very junior positions, they would have a role model. For white staff and
management, it would show there are black people with professional skills
that can actually do things.'
ACFF is also keen to highlight its potential to act as ambassador for the
business and finance world to the black community as a whole and the younger
generation in particular. Committee members have visited Middlesex and
Coventry universities to speak to black and other ethnic minority students.
'There are still very few black people working in this area so we say to
young black students 'you too can have a career in finance and business.
This is how you go about it'.'
Business and financial institutions have been eager to embrace the group and
this year Midland, National Westminster, Barclays and Standard Chartered
banks signed up as corporate members. Other institutions have also lent a
helping hand. The Banking Information Service helped with printing material
while the Bank of England and Bankers Trust have provided venues for
meetings.
Andi Constantinides, equal opportunities manager at Midland Bank, the
group's first corporate member, believes membership provides a useful link
with its staff. 'We can use it as a sounding board for ideas on equal
opportunities, while the staff can use the forum to share their experiences
at Midland and learn about experiences elsewhere. We also hope to use it in
devising in-house seminars and conferences,' she says.
Midland plans to hold an evening reception soon when it will introduce its
black staff to the ACFF.
For David May, head of equal opportunities at National Westminster, which
became a corporate member in July, there is a double reason for joining. Not
only does it 'give us an opportunity to develop an understanding of this
important group of professionals', but it also 'gives a clear corporate
message to our existing and potential staff that we value people's
individuality'.
The forum says several employers have expressed interest in ACFF, helping
them to find black professionals and managers. A committee member says:
'There are companies that want to broaden the background of their employees
but have simply not known how to go about it.'
Black professional groups have long been a feature of the US corporate
sector, as have affirmative action programmes to assist black people to
advance up the corporate ladder. The ACFF has already been in touch with
counterparts in the US but dismisses calls for affirmative action in the UK.
Alan Smith, a manager in the regulatory advisory unit of the financial
sector group at KPMG Peat Marwick, and a committee member, says: 'I don't
believe in affirmative action. It is only useful in extreme circumstances.
It can do more harm especially when simply increasing the number of black
people employed is the objective, rather than to get good people. We are
focusing on the talent there is and inviting the British corporate sector to
take advantage of it.'
Campayne says: 'There are things we can learn from the Americans but you
can't just transport an American model here. The circumstances are
different.'
Raymond Whyte, a manager in the international trade and finance division of
Standard Chartered Bank, has been working in the City for more than 15
years. He says: 'Things are changing in the City but we as a group are here
to help that process along. I'd like to see us become an established part of
the City and the business world.'
CORRECTION
Phillip Wright, whose comments were reported in an article on Sept 9 ('A
special City club'), was not at the time employed at Banco di Sicilia, and
is not due to commence employment there until 26 September. Banco di Sicilia
is an equal opportunities employer and is in no way associated with the
comments made.
