FT  22 APR 94 / Campaign Diary: Birmingham tantalises victory-starved Tories
 -Paul Cheeseright finds strong indications that Labour will fail to repeat
its success of four years ago and will lose control of the city
Birmingham is a beacon for the Conservatives. It winks tantalisingly across
the sea of their national political misfortune.
The electoral figures look so encouraging. Just another push from the gains
of 1992 and they would have control of the UK's largest metropolitan
authority. Even if the Liberal Democrats gain ground from Labour, that would
help the Tories - Labour only has to lose four seats and it has lost overall
political control.
Labour holds 62 seats, three of which are vacant, the Conservatives hold 42,
of which one is vacant, and the Liberal Democrats hold 13.
On May 5, 40 seats will be contested - one in each of Birmingham's 39 wards,
plus one by-election. Labour is defending 29.
The reason for Conservative hope is that 28 of the Labour seats were won in
1990, a year when Conservatives did exceptionally badly over issues such as
the poll tax, and Labour did exceptionally well.
Even Mrs Theresa Stewart, Labour leader since last year, conceded that it
would be a 'remarkable achievement' to hold all those 1990 gains,
demonstrating that both parties, for their own reasons, move into the
election campaign defensively.
In Birmingham, as elsewhere, Conservatives carry the baggage of the national
government's unpopularity: tax increases, value added tax on fuel and the
rest.
When the government trumpeted another fall in national unemployment on
Wednesday, local newspaper headlines were about the Moulinex Swan kettle
factory closure.
Labour difficulties are local. The party has controlled Birmingham City
Council for 10 years and has at times fallen prey to the arrogance
associated with long periods of power.
Its provision of local services has been caught between continued financial
stringency set off by government policy, and rising demand for services
triggered by recession. Its record, inevitably, is patchy.
The result on May 5 will depend on the way the parties can rise above their
disadvantages.
For Labour it is important that the elections are seen as a national vote of
no-confidence in Mr John Major's government.
For the Conservatives the task is to concentrate minds on local issues,
lifting the voters' horizons above the next fuel bill.
The political slanging reflects this. Labour leaflets evoke the possibility
of Conservative cuts in services and ask: 'Would you trust a Conservative
council working hand-in-glove with John Major's disastrous government?'
The Conservative approach is a series of darting attacks on the Labour
council's spending policies and management of its business: the standard
assault on what it calls the loony left.
Enthusiasts on both sides are canvassing. But the absence so far of posters
and window displays has deprived Birmingham of any sense of electoral
excitement. As the political players do their bit the electorate is left to
watch the sallies in the local press.
But there is disappointment even in that. Vigorous correspondence concerned
with the policies and attributes of Mr Bernard Zissman, the Conservative
leader, yesterday lost some potency when it was acknowledged that the
attacks on Mr Zissman had been hoax letters from bogus addresses.
Yet this jockeying for position hides what may be a fundamental change in
the nature of Birmingham politics.
Since the 1970s, both Labour and the Conservatives have shared the same
vision of city development. This is manifest most clearly in the growth of
the National Exhibition Centre and the development of the International
Convention Centre and the National Indoor Arena.
These developments, now loosely called prestige projects, reflected a shared
belief that the public sector should help the private sector diversify into
services and relieve the local economic dependence on manufacturing.
But, as local political personalities have changed and as the projects have
been completed, the political argument has moved away from bickering about
efficiency of management, about means rather than ends.
There is now a left-right ideological squabble between Mrs Stewart and her
belief in public action for private benefit, and Mr Zissman who emphasises
efficiency in the council being the catalyst for, rather than cause of,
change.
Neither will win decisively: the citadels of support for Labour in
inner-city wards and for Conservatives in the suburbs make sweeping shifts
of support unlikely. Wading through local political analysis to project a
result produces the prediction of a hung council.
