FT  23 MAR 94 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (4): Speed is imperative - Cutting
the time it takes to bring a new molecule to market remains one of the
industry's most important priorities / Bringing drugs to market
It is imperative to speed products to market, says Dr Stephen Carter, senior
vice president of worldwide clinical research and development - 'you're
dealing with a finite patent life during which you can market the drug
exclusively. That's the period during which you can gain a return on your
investment.
'Even if it costs more 'up front,' saving time can be worth hundreds of
millions of dollars.'
The need to accelerate drug development has become even more acute over the
last 12 months, according to Dr Edward Scolnick, president of Merck Research
Laboratories.
'Cost containment and therapeutic substitution has shortened effective
patent life,' he explains.
'Look at Pravachol and Mevacor (two cholesterol drugs) - they're competing
on price. Although its patents are still valid, they've lost their effective
patent life. When Bristol-Myers Squibb's Capoten comes off patent, we expect
the healthcare companies won't be willing to pay the difference for our
competitor product Vasotec, even though they won't be prescribing the best
medicine. We'll lose our effective patent.'
The difficulty is that although the drugs groups want to bring products to
market as quickly as possible, the regulatory hurdles facing them are
increasing all the time. The regulatory process is becoming increasingly
complex and demanding, says Dr Carter.
'Just take the fact that you now have to do trials using active control
compounds so you can compare the new molecule against the old ones.
'Now you not only have to show that the drugs work, you have to show they
work better than the existing therapies. That often means large trials
involving large numbers of patients. And the fact that regulatory
authorities are asking for clinical end-points, rather than just surrogate
markers. Add on to that the requirements for health economics data. It's
becoming really expensive and time-consuming,' he laments.
Dr Carter admits that one counter-trend is the US Food and Drug
Administration's willingness to accelerate approval for life-threatening
diseases such as Aids when there's no available therapy. But this is an
exception, he argues.
Another problem is co-ordinating development on a worldwide basis. The costs
of development are so high that it is no longer possible to achieve a
reasonable return from just the European, or Japanese, or US market.
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer has taken this on board. It is throwing all its
resources at the international development of Taxotere, its new cancer
compound.
'We will be filing the new drug applications in north America, Europe and
Japan within three months of each other. We've never done that before,' says
Mr Robert Cawthorn, chief executive.
Dr Trevor Jones, Wellcome's director of research, development and medical,
explains: 'Five years ago, Japan wasn't even on the agenda for our company.
Now it's a central part of our thinking and we've 65 clinical scientists
working on phase III trials.'
Similarly, some Japanese groups, such as Fujisawa, are busy trying to
establish international development capabilities.
Bristol-Myers Squibb has now reached the stage where it prepares one core
dossier for Europe and the US.
'A long time ago we used to file a new drug application in the US, and then
look at Europe.
'We know what's required for the individual markets, but it's far more
efficient with a core dossier,' says Dr Carter.
When Bristol-Myers Squibb prepares assays for the European and US regulatory
authorities, it conducts them at Japanese standards, even though the drug
may never be developed for that market - 'if we do decide to take the
product to Japan, it can save us 18 months,' he says.
One of the most important elements in achieving speed to market is ensuring
the compounds picked for development are good ones.
'When the benefits of a drug are incremental rather than dramatic, then
approval becomes a lot tougher. The major breakthroughs are much quicker,'
says Dr Carter.
Once the compounds have been chosen, the R&amp;D director is then faced with the
problem of allocating scarce resources to competing projects.
'You have to prioritise. Otherwise you're dead,' says Dr Carter. 'Dollars
spent on useless compound X, means fewer dollars spent on potential
blockbuster Y'
Most drugs groups have been developing far fewer compounds than in the past.
Bristol-Myers Squibb reckons it has cut the number of compounds in the
pipeline by a third in recent years. At Upjohn, the number of compounds
being developed has been cut from 74 three years ago to 34, according to Dr
John McCall, executive director of discovery research.
Cutting drugs in development is not easy, however. 'It's really easy to
start a programme,' says Dr William Scott, senior vice-president exploratory
drug discovery research at Bristol-Myers Squibb - 'the difficult part is
knowing when to kill it. You have to set stringent go-no-go decisions. And
you have to make those decisions as early as possible. You can save a lot of
time and money that way. You have to be tough. You want to add to the
portfolio as much as possible, making it as rich as possible. So you have to
have strict criteria to make sure all the compounds are competitive,' he
says.
Dr Carter explains: 'One of the hardest problems is knowing when to say
'no'. Your teams invest years of their lives. They will come up with all
sorts of alternative approaches to save the project.
'They will always ask for one more trial. But you have to be surgical. You
have to put the bullet into the brain. Then you turn them on to something
else. You have to have a culture that says you personally have not failed,
it was the project that failed. Human nature being what it is, they tend not
to believe you. And I can't deny that success helps career development.'
Once the compounds have been chosen, all resources must be allocated to
them. Sir Richard Sykes, Glaxo chief executive, explains: 'If you have
priority molecules you have to get them to market as quickly as possible.
Take our neuraminidase inhibitor (for treating 'flu). It's important so it
gets 100 per cent attention. We will spare no expense bringing that drug
through the system.'
'Allocating resources and making these judgments is the most important part
of my job,' says Dr Scolnick. 'On the top-priority drugs, nothing should
rate-limit the process. When we were developing Mevacor (a
cholesterol-lowering drug and fourth-biggest selling medicine in 1992) there
were concerns about its safety. The drug was in limbo. So we threw resources
at it. Half of the dogs we had were allocated to testing Mevacor's safety -
you can't do that with more than two drugs.'
One rate-limiting problem can be manufacture - 'traditionally, you'd make,
say, 5kg of a drug for a trial,' says Dr Carter at Bristol-Myers Squibb.
'And if the trial looked good you'd make another 5kg. For a potential
blockbuster, we'd make it all at the start. In the past, if you didn't do
that, you'd save money, but by hedging your bets, it might take two years
longer to develop the compound. You have to plan for success rather than
failure.'
Drawing up a design for the clinical trials and then sticking to it is also
important, according to Dr Robert Spiegel, senior vice-president, clinical
research at Schering-Plough.
'The major improvement comes from having an agreed aim when you start the
process, and then - it's going to sound like a cliche - doing it right first
time. You have to make sure everyone agrees what you're trying to do and
then not make too many changes so you can avoid being forced to go back to
scratch and start again,' he says.
One technique used by European and US groups - though not Japanese ones - is
parallel development. Dr Spiegel explains: 'It depends on the product.
Either you can wait until you've completed the dose-ranging study and then
start the pivotal phase three study, or you can start the pivotal study
early, using three or four doses. That takes more resources, but it can be
really effective in compressing and telescoping the process.
'Although we might have accrued between 50 and 100 per cent more patients
than we might have done normally, and even taken a little longer over the
pivotal trial, we could shave two or even three years off waiting for the
results of the first dose-ranging trial.'
However, not all are convinced of the need to be first. Dr Roy Vagelos,
chairman and chief executive of Merck, says: 'It's nice to be first, but
it's best to be best. Our ace-inhibitor Vasotec overtook Capoten
(Bristol-Myers Squibb's drug) because it's a better drug. There's nothing
better out there.'
Clinical trials: thorough preparation can cut costs: see page 7
