FT  29 SEP 94 / Indian plague cases soar to 1,400
Plague cases multiplied in India yesterday as the authorities struggled to
control the deadly disease and assuage domestic and international concern.
The total of reported cases of suspected plague rose to 1,400, with about
500 new cases yesterday, mainly in the western city of Surat, where
pneumonic plague broke out a week ago, and in the remote eastern part of
Maharashtra state, where bubonic plague first struck a month ago. The
government's national institute for communicable diseases also recorded
three more deaths, taking the official toll to 47, though unofficial
estimates ran as high as 100.
The health authorities were anxiously watching for signs that 300,000-plus
people who have fled Surat have spread the disease. About 30 suspected cases
have been recorded in Delhi, more than 40 in the tourist mecca of Rajasthan
and about 50 in Bombay, the country's commercial capital which lies close to
Surat. Further isolated cases have been reported as far away as Calcutta.
Other countries have taken precautions against the disease. Pakistan has
banned flights from Bombay and is considering suspending services from
Delhi. Saudi Arabia yesterday banned all flights from India, forcing a
Jeddah-bound Air India jet to turn back in mid-flight.
The UK, US, Germany, and France are among countries which have started
monitoring visitors from India and urging them to report to a doctor if they
develop fever-like symptoms. Some governments, including the UK, have also
urged their nationals to avoid travelling to Gujarat state, which includes
Surat.
In Germany, which has put out the strongest warning, at least two tour
groups have cancelled holidays to India, raising fears that the outbreak
will affect the Indian travel industry.
The plague has also seriously disrupted business in Surat, a city of 2m with
important textile, chemicals and diamond polishing industries. The Gujarat
Chamber of Commerce and Industry estimates the city is losing about Rs500m a
day in turnover, due to the absence of owners, managers and workers who
fled.
The plague has prompted bursts of public anger at the failure of the health
services to provide adequate care, particularly in Surat, where protestors
have stoned private clinics abandoned by their owners.
