FT  30 JUN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Strong gains as equities ignore
dollar's setback - Market Report
A strong performance by UK government bonds set the stage for further,
solid, recovery in share prices in London yesterday. Weakness in the US
dollar failed to upset bond markets in Europe and turnover in UK equities
was boosted by a heavy buying programme from a leading US investment bank.
The closure of trading books for the second quarter of 1994 opened the way
for fund managers to enter the market again.
Encouraged at the close by a 27- point gain on the Dow Average as New York
opened the new session, the FT-SE 100 Index closed 37.3 points up at
2,946.3, only a shade under the best of the day. Even the market's dollar
stocks brushed off the fall in the US currency and there were widespread
gains in domestically orientated shares.
The stronger tone in equities reflected increasing confidence in the
recovery in the UK economy. The upgrading of economic growth forecasts and
downgrading of inflation predictions by the UK Treasury this week has helped
to offset tensions caused by the dollar's fall.
Shares opened lower following Wall Street's overnight fall and the continued
setback in the US currency. But the London market quickly drew heart from
stock index futures and then from a highly successful outcome to the auction
of Pounds 2bn of floating rate UK government securities. A steadier bond
market has long been identified as the necessary base for a recovery in
equities.
The ability of London and other European bond markets to brush off the
weakness in US Federal bonds overnight played a leading role in
strengthening the equity market.
A modest reduction in money market repo rates by the Bundesbank also served
to strengthen confidence. Markets appeared to be resigned to the fall in the
dollar, which deepened when the appointment of a Socialist prime minister in
Japan cast clouds over prospects for the US-Japan trade talks, but seemed
more sanguine on the dangers of higher US interest rates.
The strength of dollar stocks in London was confirmed by signs of a large
buying programme from the US. Trading volume, slow at first, increased
smartly in the second half of the session and the final Seaq figure of
764.9m shares compared with only 729.1m on Tuesday, when retail, or
customer, business worth Pounds 1.23bn maintained average levels.
Around 63 per cent of yesterday's business was in non-Footsie stocks,
indicating that buying was fully spread across the market. The FT-SE Mid 250
Index, which incorporates a wide range of second line issues, rose 31 points
to 3,415.2.
Trading volume was also swollen by hectic activity in the oil sector as
Friday's deadline for the Enterprise Oil bid for Lasmo drew nearer. Turnover
in Lasmo exploded when Enterprise mounted a buying raid, suggesting that it
was hopeful of success.
Almost every sector of the stock market joined in the general advance.
Utilities continued to display optimism on the regulatory pricing outlook.
Banks strengthened as the recovery in UK securities markets augured well for
their customers' loan problems.
Consumer sectors, such as breweries and food retailers, looked for benefit
as the recovery in the UK economy feeds through to their customers' pockets.
There were also widespread gains across the general manufacturing,
engineering and chemical sectors which are major players in the UK economy.
