FT  05 JAN 94 / Dreams versus hard facts in private banking
With private banks, mystique counts for a lot. So has the small London-based
bank Leopold Joseph taken a big risk by trying to open up the normally
opaque investment process and emphasise that disorientating concept (for
private bankers) of value for money?
Leopold Joseph has just launched a new approach to portfolio management
based upon index-tracking mutual funds, under the slightly pretentious title
of the Optimised Investment Service. This is aimed at private clients and
the kind of charities and smaller institutions which find private banks
congenial.
The investment management industry has been polarising into the managers
serving big institutions, which demand rigorous reporting and performance
measurement, and the smaller client managers; such advisers make it their
business to emphasise relationships and service rather than statistics.
Performance figures have had the effect of ruthlessly sorting out the sheep
from the goats among big pension fund managers. Over the past 10 years a
lower quartile UK manager would have turned an initial Pounds 1m into Pounds
4.3m but an upper quartile manager would have generated Pounds 6.5m.
Unfortunately there is a strong possibility in this business that a sheep
may metamorphose into a goat, or even a donkey.
For private banks and similar firms the performance numbers can be very
difficult to find. Usually there is a vague claim to expertise, unsupported
by quantitative evidence. A bank may, for instance, claim to be able to find
investments which are fundamentally undervalued by the markets. It may be
able to use 'detailed economic and company research from the most highly
regarded sources' which can be combined with its 'strong in-house analytical
capability'.
I am teasing Leopold Joseph here because these phrases come from its latest
annual report, published last July. Its new brochure on the Optimised
Investment Service observes more candidly that the conventional private
client and smaller institutional fund manager will find it very difficult to
add value.
Evidence is, I repeat, hard to come by, but LJ has taken the published
performance of UK general unit trusts as a proxy for what the private client
and small institutional manager may be achieving. Over a recent five-year
period (ended last April) the average trust underperformed the FT-A
All-Share Index by almost 3 per cent a year (even ignoring the bid-offer
spread).
The bank reckons that the total cost of managing a conventional Pounds 1m
portfolio for a 40 per cent taxpayer resident in the UK may be about 3.2 per
cent a year, about 2 percentage points of which arises from capital gains
tax and commissions resulting from portfolio switching.
These costs can be halved by changing to the 'optimised' strategy which
eliminates all stockpicking and relies on top down asset allocation using
index funds, deposits and bonds. The saving effectively comes from a
reduction in transaction costs and taxes.
One problem, however, is that some of the same doubts are associated with
asset allocation as with individual stockpicking: can the costs of switching
really be recouped through the exercise of investment skills in efficient
markets? The logical extreme here is to index to some kind of consensus
strategy, a service actually available to UK pension funds from Barclays de
Zoete Wedd Investment Management.
But of course the client is usually not at all happy dealing with a
computer, and this is the marketing problem. A private banking client may
not be all that rich and may be expensive to service, but he (or she) thinks
he deserves a premium service and that is the ego-massaging relationship
that the most successful private client managers provide.
The client wants to believe that his portfolio manager is clever and well
informed, not least because he would like to think he has been smart in
choosing him in the first place. Part of the deal is an individualised
portfolio, which just happens to make it very difficult to produce
comparable performance statistics.
Portfolio management all too often represents the triumph of greed over
experience. Leopold Joseph somehow has to put over its low-cost approach to
clients without destroying their dreams of outperformance.
