FT  15 SEP 94 / Survey of Northern Ireland (4): Derry's high tech coup -
Manufacturer's profile, Seagate
The quality of the labour force was the reason that US disc drive
manufacturer Seagate chose Derry as the site for a Pounds 45m high-tech
factory last year.
'The area offers a pool of well-educated, well-qualified and hence trainable
labour,' explains Mr Michael Caulfield, the managing director of the plant.
A chance meeting between Derry's nationalist MP, Mr John Hume and Seagate's
Irish-American director and chief technical director, Dr Brendan Hegarty
also 'could not but have helped put Derry on the short-list for possible
sites,' admits Mr Caulfield.
Northern Ireland has the twin distinctions of having among the highest
educational standards in Britain and Ireland, and the worst levels of
unemployment. Of the top 200 schools in the latest round of A-level results,
20 per cent were in Northern Ireland, explains the Belfast-born Mr
Caulfield. Parts of Derry, however, where 13 per cent of the workforce are
without a job. have some of the worst unemployment rates in Northern
Ireland.
Seagate's manufacturing strategy is to take every stage of the process of
making disc drives and 'look at the amount of technology, capital and labour
involved and ask what type of employee and what type of investment is
needed,' explains Mr Caulfield.
The company then decides on the most appropriate location for that stage of
the process. This has resulted in labour-intensive assembly processes being
located in South East Asia and until now, the technology and
capital-intensive stages being located in the US. Derry was a very suitable
choice for the location of the first facility for manufacturing the 'heads'
which read the memory discs in the drives - the equivalent of the needle
that plays the record in a record player - outside the US, explains Mr
Caulfield.
The head manufacturing process is extremely technology- and
capital-intensive, using machines costing between Pounds 500,000 and Pounds
1.5m each. However, the machines require extremely competent and
well-trained operators, as it is only through the use of human operators
that the manufacturing process can be flexible enough to meet the demands of
the computer industry - where product life cycles can be as short as nine
months.
Northern Ireland's development agency, the Industrial Development Board,
offers some of the best capital grants in Europe - up to 50 per cent of
capital expenditure. Just as importantly, in Seagate's case, generous
assistance towards training and technological development are also
available.
'Wherever we set up, there would have been a huge training load,' explains
Mr Caulfield. The first 100 employees of the Derry plant had to spend three
months training in the US, before the start of production in Derry.
Further training will have to be carried out in Derry as new employees are
recruited. The company has received grant assistance for this, on a level
similar to the capital assistance given by the IDB, from the Training and
Employment Agency. There has also been help from the Industrial Research and
Technology Unit towards the establishment of a worldwide research and
development centre in Derry and this 'will take Seagate's recording head
technology into the next century,' explains Mr Caulfield.
The factory, which commenced production in January, will produce 100m heads
a year, half of Seagate's total production, by the end of 1995. This will
give the company the ability to double revenues from the current level of
around Dollars 3bn, explains Mr Caulfield.
The heads, roughly two millimetres square, are manufactured in batches of
around 6,000, neatly spaced out on ceramic squares about the size of a
bathroom tile. The squares are shipped from Derry to Malaysia where they are
sliced up into individual heads before being shipped to Thailand for
mounting on the disc drive arms - the equivalent of record-player arms. The
final assembly process takes place in Singapore, where the disc drives are
assembled before shipment to computer manufactures for inclusion in their
products.
Seagate produces 200 different drives ranging from the small drives used in
desktop PCs to the massive '30 gigabyte' drives used in supercomputers.
Northern Ireland has seen multinationals come and go, resulting in a healthy
scepticism about the real value of such high profile, high tech, highly
mobile investment.
The main and obvious benefit is the jobs that the factory will bring,
believes Mr Caulfield. Seagate employs 200 people at the moment, and will
employ 500 by 1996 and an additional 46 in the research and development
centre. Around 100 employees are graduates, but the ratio of graduates to
non-graduates will fall by the time the factory is fully operative.
The age profile of employees is young, with Michael Caulfield being one of
the oldest at only 44. All employees have at least A-level standard
educations.
Seagate will contribute Pounds 5m a year to the local economy in wages
alone, but the amount of raw materials bought locally is limited. The bulk
of the equipment and raw materials are sourced outside of Northern Ireland,
with notable exceptions including some bulk chemicals and computers.
Seagate is in Derry for the long term, says Mr Caulfield, who points to the
worldwide research and development base as proof. It is an investment in
people and the return period is at least 5 years, he says, adding: 'You
don't invest in a worldwide research and development centre unless you are
here to stay.'
