FT  03 SEP 94 / Arts: Saving Grace - patience, passion and the baron /
Annalena McAfee meets the collector and benefactor Baron Thyssen-Bornemisza
Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza is relishing the role of saviour of
British heritage. 'My wife and I love Britain,' he says, nodding indulgently
at his fifth wife, Carmen 'Tita', a former Miss Spain. 'We were married
there - in Moreton-in-Marsh.' They liked Britain so much, in fact, that they
took a little of it with them when they left - Constable's 'The Lock'
(Pounds 10m) and Holbein's portrait of Henry VIII (a snip at Pounds 10,000).
The baron's donation of the final Pounds 800,000 to keep Canova's 'Three
Graces' in Britain is being greeted with whoops of joy in some museum and
gallery circles. But there is, as those used to dealing with the wily
billionaire will have anticipated, a catch to the baron's offer.
'I would like it to come to Madrid, maybe for six months, maybe a year, to
be a centrepiece of an exhibition we are holding at the Villahermosa'. Only
200 yards from the Prado, the Villahermosa palace houses the Pounds 175m
Thyssen collection, said to rival that of Queen Elizabeth II in range, if
not quite in value.
Tim Clifford, director of National Galleries of Scotland, seems undaunted by
the prospect of parting with the prize he has only just secured. 'Obviously,
we would smile on this loan,' says Mr Clifford. 'We're all absolutely
thrilled.'
Others in the UK heritage lobby, still smarting from the baron's rejection
in 1988 of a Pounds 100m government inducement to bring his collection to
Britain, will be more sceptical. Baron Thyssen's passion about art - 'it is
universal, it is impossible to have a disagreeable conversation about it. It
should be shared by everyone' - is matched by the hard-headed pragmatism
that befits the retired head of an industry spanning plastics, car parts,
container leasing and shipping.
He clearly enjoyed giving the run-around to heads of state and royalty as
they queued to woo him and his collection. 'Mmmm,' he says reflectively.
'That was a very nice period.' Prince Charles came to put the case for
Britain and even prime minister Margaret Thatcher got swept along in the
excitement, inviting the baron to Number 10 to press Britain's suit. 'Yes,
she tried her best,' he says. 'We sat on the same sofa and she talked for
ten minutes. Then she suddenly said 'I shouldn't talk so much. You should
talk.' I later heard that she thought I was formidable - that I was the only
one who didn't give in to her, though I don't think I was the only one.'
In the event, Spain won the prize, largely thanks to the loyalties and
powers of persuasion of the baroness, the former wife of Hollywood tarzan
actor Lex Barker. The collection, ranging from Old Masters of the early
fourteenth and fifteenth century to Picasso, Cezanne, Bacon, Hopper and the
German Expressionists, was to be loaned to the Spanish government for 10
years, split between Villahermosa and Pedralbes, a 14th century convent in
Barcelona. Last year, however, the baron signed it over permanently for
Pounds 230m, maintaining a key interest and a core collection which he
distributes between his five homes.
Some of the baron's five children had initially resisted the hand-over of
the collection. 'There were a lot of conditions to get all my sons and
daughters to consent. We had a pre-inheritance discussion and they exchanged
pictures for money and objets d'art. If I die, there will be no discussion
about it. Everything has been divided up.'
The family wrangle has uncomfortable echoes of the fate of his father's
collection, which forms the Old Master nucleus of the 850 paintings on show
in Madrid and Barcelona. This original collection was, against his father's
wishes, dispersed after his death and the present baron spent years trying
to buy it back - pursuing a Fra Angelico Madonna, taken by his sister Margit
in 1948, for 40 years.
Collecting, he says, is like falling in love. 'Only unlike women, the
pictures can't talk back.' He confesses to using an unorthodox method before
pursuing art deals. He plays the solo card game patience 'and if I don't
have to cheat too much to win, I go ahead.'
The future of the collection has been recently uppermost in Baron
Thyssen-Bornemisza's mind. Only two months ago, he was lying near to death
in a Paris hospital after suffering a stroke while undergoing surgery. The
baroness, a vivacious woman who frequently graces the pages of the Spanish
celebrity magazine Hola], attributes his recovery to the intercession of the
Virgin of the Miraculous Medal.
Before long the baron was stirring in his hospital bed, leafing through a
saleroom catalogue and authorising his wife to put in (successful) bids for
a Monet and a Pissarro. His intervention to save the Three Graces is a
further sign of his full recovery. 'And, ' he confides, 'I didn't have to
cheat at patience at all when I played for the Graces. The cards kept coming
up. I kept winning ..'
