FT  04 NOV 94 / Hope for mail managers facing nightmare scenario
For the Post Office's senior management, yesterday's decision was the
nightmare scenario. Rarely in the past has the chief executive of a
nationalised industry campaigned as publicly for change as has Mr Bill
Cockburn, the Post Office's outspoken chief executive.
Mr Cockburn's argument was simple: without greater commercial freedom the
Post Office would not be able to develop its business to meet new national
and international competition.
Since Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, claimed that full
freedom could only come with some form of privatisation, it might appear
that the Post Office is now sentenced to gradual decline.
That, however, would be to take rhetoric at face value and to ignore stark
facts. In reality:
The Post Office remains highly profitable. Last year it made a pre-tax
profit of Pounds 306m, and has been in profit for more than a decade. It is
commonly seen as one of Europe's most efficient postal services.
Only one other European postal service - the Dutch - has been privatised,
and unlike telecommunications there is no sign that privatisation is about
to sweep across the industry in the European Union. The Post Office need
not, therefore, be at a severe competitive disadvantage remaining in the
public sector.
The way is still open for the government to give the Post Office much of the
freedom it craves - without privatisation.
The new challenge for Mr Cockburn is to persuade Mr Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor, that existing Treasury constraints can be dispensed with. He
could begin by quoting the government's green paper, which reveals that the
Treasury has contemplated removing some controls on the Post Office even if
it remains in the public sector.
The paper lists specific controls which could be lifted. These include the
existing limit on overall capital expenditure, and allowing some
joint-venture projects with private companies - two areas of acute concern
to Mr Cockburn.
Furthermore, the Post Office is under no serious threat of competition in
its core domestic business of letter collection and delivery - it has a
monopoly over the delivery of all mail stamped at less than Pounds 1.
The government was contemplating reducing the Pounds 1 limit - but that,
ironically, is likely to be another casualty of yesterday's retreat.
Mr Cockburn might do well to familiarise Mr Clarke with the postal services
of Sweden and New Zealand. Both are state-owned, but run on a similar basis
to private companies. And both are highly successful.
