FT  17 OCT 94 / FT Guide to Game theories
Last week the Nobel Prize for Economics was awarded to three 'game
theorists': John Harsanyi, John Nash and Rheinhard Selten. What is game
theory?
Game theory is about how people make decisions when they have to take other
people's responses into account. Businessmen often have to make this type of
calculation - whether or not it makes sense to enter a new market, for
example, or lower prices, may depend on how other companies react.
Politicians, trades unions and parents all come up against the same thing
whenever achieving a desired result means correctly guessing how others will
respond. Before game theory, economists had observed interactive
decision-making in the real world, but there were no general models for
examining the way people were likely to behave.
Where do the games fit in? Do game theorists really think life is like
poker?
Not really. Most of the games used are not games people play, but stylised
models which capture some element of the theory. The 'prisoner's dilemma',
probably the best-known game, is a case in point. Strictly speaking it is
not a game but a paradox about co-operation. The original, as conceived by
Albert Tucker in 1950, describes two men getting arrested for a crime. After
locking them in separate cells, the sheriff explains that they can either
confess to committing the crime with the other man, or refuse. If neither
confesses, both will get two years in jail. If only one confesses, he will
go free while his accomplice gets 12 years. If both confess, however, each
will get four years. The problem is that each will inevitably confess, even
though they would both be better off if neither talked.
Does game theory provide an answer to the paradox?
In technical terms, the outcome is a 'Nash equilibrium'. This means that
each prisoner would choose to confess even if he knew what his friend had
decided to do. Elements of the prisoner's dilemma crop up a lot in real
life. Take cartels. In order to keep prices artificially high, all producers
might agree to produce only a certain quantity of goods. Afterwards,
however, it makes sense for each producer to try to gain extra profit by
over-producing. In the end, all lose out because the price stays low. Game
theorists do not really resolve problems like this, but they provide formal
ways of analysing them.
How does that help? Can you learn anything if you don't understand the
maths?
By abstracting from the details of particular cases, the models can
sometimes identify ways to change the game to deliver a better outcome.
Allowing the game to be repeated, for example, may help the players get it
right the next time. In the case of the cartel, producers might behave
differently if they believed they would need to deal with the other
producers again. Another possible solution is to change the 'pay-off
structure', so that each individual faces a higher penalty if he or she
decides to renege on the deal. At its simplest, game theory shows that
individual incentives matter. Sometimes the lesson is to change the
incentives to get a better result. At other times it shows that the players
would be better off not playing the game at all.
It still sounds rather abstract. Are there any specific cases where game
theory has been used?
Game theory is still a relatively young field. John von Neumann and Oskar
Morganstern introduced many of the central ideas in a book published in
1944. Most of the work since has been devoted to refining their ideas to
produce a more sophisticated set of theoretical tools. But academics from
other fields have applied the analysis more broadly. Henry Kissinger was one
of the pioneers, using ideas from game theory in studies of international
diplomacy in the early 1960s. Business strategists, political scientists and
macro-economists have followed, using the same techniques to analyse
anything from industrial disputes to negotiating international environmental
agreements.
Give me specific cases.
Game theory is hampered by the fact that the models themselves are very
difficult for non-specialists to follow. But in a sense, the lessons of the
theory are everywhere. UK long-term interest rates are currently higher than
they might be, because Britain's chancellor of the exchequer cannot credibly
commit himself to never inflating the economy for short-term political gain.
Costly strikes happen because neither workers nor employers can trust the
claims of the other side. Game theory has explained why these games are
lost; it has yet to show how to win them.
