FT  12 MAR 94 / No no no, Minister: Strains between the civil service and
its political bosses seem sharper then ever before. John Willman examines
why
In Whitehall's village, the bush telegraph is humming. Top mandarins are
said to be falling out with their ministers. Civil service morale is
described as being at an all-time low. Turf wars are breaking out between
rival UK government departments.
This is hardly surprising given the radical civil service reforms the
government is pushing through. But the strife extends to the politicians.
Parts of the government machine are reportedly paralysed by ministerial
indecision. Ministers are accused by some civil servants of spending more
time jostling for position in the race to replace Mr John Major than reading
the red boxes packed with papers needing their urgent attention.
There is certainly evidence of unhappiness among permanent secretaries, the
grade 1 civil servants in charge of departments. Two have retired early in
recent months, amid rumours of clashes with their political masters.
In November, Sir Geoffrey Holland announced his departure from the
Department for Education after barely 10 months in the post. At 55 and after
a glittering career as head of, first, the Manpower Services Commission and,
then, the Department of Employment, he was leaving Whitehall to become
vice-chancellor of Exeter university.
'He jumped with a golden umbrella and a big smile on his face,' a spokesman
for the Department for Education suggested. Others were less sanguine: it
was widely reported that he had fallen out with Mr John Patten, the
education secretary. 'Either he goes or I do,' he is rumoured to have told
colleagues.
It is improbable that such a polished performer said anything of the sort.
But there was a problem over rapport, with Sir Geoffrey said to be
frustrated at the inability of Mr Patten to think big. Too much time was
spent fire-fighting, dealing with problems over issues such as school
testing that many in the department felt were self-induced.
This week, Sir Clive Whitmore, top man at the Home Office, confirmed he was
also off before retirement age. His imminent move to an unspecified
'well-paid' job in the private sector was linked with reports of friction in
the department between civil servants and Mr Michael Howard, the home
secretary.
Unlike Sir Geoffrey, Sir Clive circulated a memo to his officials denying a
rift with his secretary of state. But there is no doubting the unhappiness
among many senior Home Office mandarins over the home secretary's robust
approach to law and order. They see the rapidly increasing prison population
as a policy designed to strengthen Mr Howard's claims in a future Tory
leadership battle. That he has not been willing to listen to their
objections - or study evidence suggesting the policy will be an expensive
failure - adds insult to injury.
'I can't understand why Clive hasn't exploded in public instead of simply
retiring,' says one a seasoned Whitehall watcher.
Morale is also said to be low among civil servants at the environment
department. Their secretary of state, Mr John Gummer, recently made a
much-publicised conversion to the Roman Catholic church after the Church of
England decided to ordain women.
Mr Gummer was already in his officials' bad books after last year's public
expenditure battle when he conceded cuts in his budget of more than Pounds
1bn. He is now condemned by senior mandarins for what they regard as an
unforgivable sin: his alleged reluctance to read briefs. Departmental
business has ground to a halt, they say, as he wrestles with his conscience
over matters spiritual.
Elsewhere in Whitehall, there is a struggle for turf over the new job
seeker's allowance for the unemployed, to be introduced in 1996. Merging
unemployment benefit and income support for the jobless will cost thousands
of civil service jobs. The Department of Social Security believes its
Benefits Agency should pay the new allowance. The employment department says
job seekers are the province of the Employment Service which runs programmes
to help the unemployed back into work.
A similar battle can be expected over proposals to merge the Inland Revenue
and Customs and Excise, revealed in yesterday's FT. These two Treasury
departments are unlikely to surrender their independence without a fight.
And the interminable tug of war continues over responsibility for training.
The Departments of Trade and Industry, Education and Employment are all
unwilling to give up their share of this market.
Even the Foreign Office, under the unflappable Mr Douglas Hurd, is not
immune from fear and loathing. An unprecedented meeting of London-based
staff was summoned in January to hear the foreign secretary try to soothe
fears on the future of the diplomatic service.
'There is an awful lot of turbulence around,' according to a civil servant
in charge of an executive agency. 'Ministers haven't got their act together.
'The thrashing around gets back to senior colleagues who are becoming very
concerned. It all creates great uncertainty.'
That uncertainty is amplified by the Scott inquiry into the arms-for-Iraq
scandal, which has sent a frisson through Whitehall. The public
interrogation of senior civil servants by Lord Justice Scott and Ms Presiley
Baxendale, his steely counsel, has set what many see as a dangerous
precedent.
'It came as a great shock to learn that ministers' private memos could be
produced in court,' says one grade 3 civil servant in charge of a policy
area in a large department. 'It's much harder to get decisions out of
ministers now. They are no longer willing to commit their thoughts to paper,
and delay everything for meetings.'
Whoever is responsible for current indecision and delays, mandarins have
long griped about the shortcomings of their political masters in their Pall
Mall clubs.
Professor Peter Hennessy, the Whitehall historian, quotes the example of Mr
George Turner, a permanent secretary at the wartime Ministry of Supply, who
was prone to describe the department's ministers as 'our two parliamentary
liabilities downstairs'. Neither of the ministers in question could be
called political slouches: Mr Harold Macmillan went on to become prime
minister, while Mr Duncan Sandys had a distinguished cabinet career and was
colonial secretary.
That the standard moans have become louder is seen by many as a consequence
of the reforms imposed on the civil service since Mrs Thatcher came to power
in 1979. Civil servants have had to digest manpower cuts, privatisations,
the creation of more than 80 agencies to deliver services, the Citizen's
Charter and pay freezes.
The most hated reform has been market-testing, the programme under which
civil servants must compete for their own jobs against bidders from the
private sector.
'The civil service has traditionally been regarded as an unrisky
profession,' says Ms Kate Jenkins, a former high-flying civil servant, now a
consultant on public service reform. 'Now it has been involuntarily exposed
to risk in a way that civil servants would not have expected when they
joined the service.'
The standard civil service response under such an onslaught is the sort of
backchat and griping that is now the dominant signal on the Whitehall bush
telegraph. Another is foot-dragging, which has been clearly visible in the
slow progress over the first 18 months of market-testing.
Figures this week from the Cabinet Office show that several departments have
yet to finish half the market-testing programme that should have been
completed by the end of last September. They include Social Security, Trade
and Industry, Education and the Lord Chancellor's department.
Embarrassingly, the Treasury, guardian of the nation's purse, is also among
the laggards. And the Office of Public Service and Science, the Cabinet
Office division in charge of Whitehall reform, has barely done better, with
just over half its programme finished.
The final straw for many mandarins has been the recent report from the
Cabinet Office efficiency unit on top appointments in the civil service.
'It talks about opening up the top jobs to outsiders, advertising all posts
and introducing contracts of service,' says one aggrieved civil servant.
'It's all very unsettling.'
These sentiments might easily be put down to fears that promotion would be
blocked by such measures. Yet this civil servant is of an age when he has no
further career ambitions. His concern is over the effect on those further
down the ladder who will see the best jobs awarded to people brought in from
the private sector.
Ministers' tendency to denigrate the civil service exacerbates these fears,
says a former civil servant who is now a public sector consultant with a
large accountancy firm.
'Ministers have this ethos that there's nothing very good about the civil
service,' he says. 'They neglect its strengths - the collegiate approach in
which no decision is taken without consulting a wide range of people and
thinking through long-term consequences.'
'Politicians no longer see civil servants as professional advisers,' says
another ex-civil servant. 'Increasingly they treat them as gophers.'
Prof Hennessy sees this mishandling of the civil service as a reflection of
the decline of the British political class. 'Civil servants always like
working for the big figures like Willie (Lord Whitelaw) and Dennis (Lord
Healey). They're even quite fond of current grandees such as Douglas Hurd
and Michael Heseltine. It's the meagre placemen they don't like, the
small-minded ideologues who have risen without trace.'
Civil servants have also been wrong-footed by the unexpected radicalism of
Mr Major on civil service reform, according to Mr Graham Mather, president
of the European Policy Forum, the independent think-tank.
'They had expected things to calm down after Mrs Thatcher went, and they
haven't'
Since Mr Major shows no signs of abating his radicalism in this policy area,
the hard times look set to continue. Expect more grumbling on the Whitehall
grapevine, and further premature departures from the ranks of Britain's top
mandarins.
