FT  15 FEB 94 / Lamont backs referendum on Euro-currency
Mr Norman Lamont, the former chancellor of the exchequer, yesterday said a
national referendum should be held before any future UK government adopted a
single European currency.
Speaking at a Dow Jones conference in London on the foreign exchange
markets, Mr Lamont said: 'The last time Britain held a referendum on Europe,
the people were specifically told that monetary union was not envisaged.
Since the circumstances have changed, there would appear to be a case for
revisiting this matter in a national referendum.'
Mr Lamont said that, while he had not agreed with the idea of a referendum
on the Maastricht treaty itself, 'the issue of a single currency is a
clear-cut one and one which raises profound political as well as economic
issues. It strikes at the heart of sovereignty'.
The ex-chancellor said that the 'supposed economic benefits' of monetary
union 'are slender against the potential dangers. A single European monetary
policy would make structural adjustment more difficult and worsen
unemployment'.
Mr Lamont added that 'the real danger about monetary union is not that it
will happen. Rather it is that another attempt, doomed to failure, will be
made.'
Meanwhile, Sir Alan Walters, the former economic adviser to Mrs Thatcher,
was giving his views on the future of European monetary union at a meeting
organised by the pressure group City Concern over Federal Europe.
Sir Alan expressed the view that European countries would skip over the
second stage of monetary union (where countries strive for economic
convergence) and move straight to the third stage (full monetary union). But
he believed that full monetary union would be based on other currencies
having a fixed exchange rate with the D-Mark, with the Bundesbank acting as
a de facto European central bank. Already, he said, the Dutch guilder was
virtually fixed to the D-Mark.
Sir Alan said that it was foolish to imagine that the Germans would want to
give up their currency, or the Bundesbank its power, in order to create a
new European central bank based on the European currency unit.
Referring to comments made by the late Lord Ridley, he said the condemnation
of the exchange rate mechanism as a 'German racket' was not all that far
wrong. But he said that 'lashing yourself to the German economy is an act of
misplaced faith. Germany has increasingly become a corporatist state and its
performance has gone down'.
