FT  28 JAN 94 / Management: Dismantling the office - Chiat/Day is banishing
desks, phones and filing cabinets in a radical move
A few hundred yards from funky Venice beach, the most bohemian stretch of
sand in Los Angeles, stands one of the city's most surprising pieces of
architecture: an office building with two completely dissimilar halves - one
rather like a ship and the other resembling a factory - linked in the middle
by a giant pair of binoculars.
This is the headquarters of Chiat/Day, the US advertising agency known for
its unconventional, cutting-edge campaigns. Inside the building, Jay Chiat,
the agency's iconoclastic chairman, is pushing through an organisational
upheaval which could prove just as radical as the architecture.
He is redesigning the way his staff work and the space in which they do so.
It is, he says, an attempt to make the business leaner, more nimble and
creative, and is a response to the tougher business climate of the 1990s and
changing relationships between agencies and their clients.
Some observers say it is a significant early example of a move by American
business towards a much more fluid structure - the so-called 'virtual
corporation'. Cynical advertising industry rivals dismiss it as an elaborate
smokescreen to hide cuts at Chiat/Day following the loss of some big
accounts.
Whatever the motivation, the move is unusual - and traumatic for staff:
individual workplaces are being abolished. No more will photographs of
smiling, gap-toothed children adorn parents' desks, or favourite cartoons
decorate their walls.
Chiat has always been an innovator. In 1976, he abolished formal offices at
the agency, replacing them with small, open-plan cubicles, even for senior
members of staff. Now he is doing away with the cubicles, replacing them
with a number of public meeting places. These include:
Project rooms, dedicated to a particular client, where staff will attend
account meetings.
A central library, equipped with the latest computer equipment, with files
stored on CD-Rom discs.
Locker rooms, where staff can store personal items, and work cubicles, which
they can use on an ad hoc basis.
A large common room/restaurant, with comfortable armchairs, a pool table and
ping pong. Says Chiat: 'It will be warm and welcoming, a place to hang out .
. . to go and get information.'
If this sounds rather like a university campus, so it should. Chiat argues
that conventional businesses are run too much like schools, where pupils sit
at desks all day and are subject to close supervision. He wants Chiat/Day to
be more like a college, where 'you can say 'Here is the assignment. Go do
it. Come back and you'll be graded'.' In other words, staff will be given
greater responsibility for their work and movements, or 'empowered', to use
the management jargon.
They will be mobile, and when they do not need to be in the building they
will be free to work from home, their car or a client's office.
The new system, which is also being introduced in Chiat's New York office
and will eventually reach its London branch, follows a study of work
patterns within the agency and has been made possible by recent innovations
in mobile communications.
Instead of having a desk with a fixed phone and computer, staff will be
equipped with their own personal phone numbers, cellular phones and notebook
computers. Filing cabinets will also disappear, as documents and letters
will be scanned into the firm's computer network.
Chiat argues that this is a much more efficient use of time and space.
Chiat/Day's staff already spend much of their time away from their desks, in
meetings or on the road, and it takes a long time to contact someone by
phone.
'The phone,' he says, 'has become a symbol of non-communication rather than
communication because people are never in their offices.' With a cellular
unit, they are always in touch.
The redesign is unique to Chiat/Day, though when it was planning the move
the agency discovered a Finnish company, SOL Cleaning Service, which had
already implemented a similar scheme, apparently with considerable success.
Chiat hopes the new system will keep the agency 'ahead of the curve' as big
changes rock the advertising industry. Advertisers, he says, are reassessing
the cosy relationship they once had with a single agency, and are looking
for greater creativity at lower cost.
Chiat reckons that 'it is just a matter of time before everyone is reviewing
their relationship'. And to succeed, agencies will need to show they
understand a client's businesses and are contributing to its success, as
well as holding down their costs.
He argues that the new office plan - which he calls 'team architecture' -
will encourage more interaction between staff members, leading to better
teamwork and creativity.
He is anxious to dispel the widespread notion that the scheme is designed to
make staff work from home. 'It is not about telecommuting. It's about
working differently while you are in the office.'
He hopes the lack of a desk will encourage staff to spend more time out of
the building with clients. 'We want them focused on the client's business,
not internal issues of who has the better office.'
In spite of the initial cost of new capital equipment, the system should
have a financial pay-off since it requires less office space.
Chiat reckons he can service around 200 staff with roughly 30,000 sq ft of
space, compared with around 100 employees under a conventional layout. The
system is also more flexible, so he can increase his headcount without
raising leasehold expenses.
But the move to team architecture seems a considerable gamble. The
disappearance of desks - a form of office security blanket - could hurt
staff morale, which is particularly critical in advertising.
Chiat acknowledges the transition will not be easy. 'The change is
monumental. I don't think any of the people implementing it have any sense
of how much despair there's going to be, how much trauma there's going to
be, and the period of time it is going to take for people to feel
comfortable with this concept.'
But he's convinced that they will eventually.
