FT  01 AUG 94 / Leading Article: Outing the insiders
The Department of Trade and Industry's decision last week not to take action
over allegations of insider dealing involving the former deputy chairman of
the Conservative party, Lord Archer, provided an unrevealing conclusion to a
bizarre episode. Whether the move by Trade Secretary Mr Michael Heseltine to
publicise the investigation cost the ever-controversial Tory peer a
ministerial post remains a matter for conjecture. But at a more mundane
level the saga raises questions, once again, over the extent to which the
approach to insider dealing in the UK stands up.
In the nature of things insider dealing is difficult to prove. It is not a
victimless crime, though contrary to popular belief the biggest losers from
insider dealing tend to be market makers rather than small investors. In the
open, international environment that followed the liberalisation of the old
London Stock Exchange, the club ethic ceased to offer workable penalties. If
insider dealing had not already been made illegal in 1980, new legislation
would anyway have been needed after Big Bang.
The paradox that confronts legislators is that insider dealing arguably
makes for more efficient pricing. This is because the practice causes
information to be reflected more quickly in share prices. Yet such
efficiency is gained only at the cost of some loss of investor confidence in
the market itself. It is no coincidence that in many countries where insider
dealing has been rife - for example, in southern Europe - stock exchanges
have remained backwaters in their domestic economies. Companies have
suffered from the adverse impact on the availability and cost of capital.
Weak rules
Equally important, from the point of view of London's international role, is
that the preferred rules of the international capital markets are American
ones. Most US institutions, while hostile in principle to over-regulation,
regard weak insider dealing rules with unease.
The case for legislation is thus powerful. Yet controversy remains
inescapable because of difficulties of definition and proof. No one can be
certain of the scale of the problem - although the large share price
increases that precede so many takeover bids suggest that it is substantial.
The fact that a mere 34 prosecutions in 14 years have delivered just 23
convictions and 29 acquittals invites unflattering comparison with the
record of the US Securities and Exchange Commission.
UK record
In an attempt to improve the UK's record, the government has refined the
insider dealing rules in the Criminal Justice Act, which came into effect on
March 1. But although the act considerably widens the definition of an
insider and of inside information, it remains to be seen whether it delivers
more convictions. The central difficulty facing prosecutors - establishing
that someone knew that he had sensitive unpublished information - remains as
high an obstacle as ever.
None of the remaining policy options are foolproof. Encouraging companies to
reveal more information in order to reduce the potential value of insider
trading is subject to obvious constraints where the information could be
commercially damaging. Publicising all tentative bid approaches would create
a false market.
Another option would be to remind traders that they are being watched with
increasingly sophisticated technology, and hope that this would act as a
deterrent. The London Stock Exchange has made much of its ability since
November, to identify the names of brokers' clients soon after they deal in
shares - a blunt sanction, but one that nonetheless bears thinking about.
A third route would be to give the authorities at least some of the tools
enjoyed by the SEC. Unlike its British counterparts, the SEC acts as both
investigator and prosecutor, and can bring civil prosecutions where the
burden of proof is lower than that in criminal cases. Plea bargaining
frequently then leads to fines and to the surrender of profits without
admission of guilt. The approach is at least flexible and the punishment is
more appropriate to the crime. These are both merits which ministers would
be ill-advised to ignore.
