FT  08 JUL 94 / Paris intelligence chief replaced after bugging Socialist
meeting
Mr Charles Pasqua, France's interior minister, yesterday replaced both the
head of Paris's political intelligence service and his subordinate who
eavesdropped on a confidential meeting of the opposition Socialist party on
June 19 when Mr Michel Rocard was ousted as party leader.
In what has inevitably been dubbed 'Pasquagate', after the famous 1972 case
of political bugging in the US, Mr Pasqua first brushed aside furious
Socialist charges of 'espionage' by telling the National Assembly on
Wednesday that the eavesdropping was 'an isolated, individual initiative' by
a member of the Renseignements Generaux (RG).
But after the parliamentary leader of his own Gaullist RPR party also called
the affair 'a serious threat to democracy', Mr Pasqua announced he was
moving the two RG policemen to other duties, before waiting for the
conclusion of an internal inquiry.
MPs' sensitivity was already heightened by the revelation in this week's
issue of the satirical newspaper, Le Canard Enchaine, which also broke the
Pasquagate story, that one of their number, Mr Bernard Tapie, the maverick
businessman, had his tele-phone line bugged on a judge's order.
From this telephone-tapping the judge learned that Mr Tapie was planning a
trip to Rwanda to avoid prosecution and had him hauled out of bed and
charged last week.
As a result, the National Assembly passed a bill early yesterday ordering
judges to advise the speakers of the parliament's two chambers before
tapping MPs' telephones.
Ironically, Pasquagate was leaked by members of the RG who disapproved of
their colleague's action in installing himself in an empty translation booth
and telephoning through news of Mr Rocard's problems to police headquarters.
The mission of the RG (literally, General Information) is to act as the
'eyes and ears' of a French state, traditionally keen to control a society
that often seems to take it by surprise.
The activities of this plain-clothes force of some 3,800 range from serious
intelligence work in anti-terrorism, to gathering information on leaders of
political parties, companies, unions and the professions, and to
fore-casting election results.
In the last week of any French election campaign, publication of regular
opinion polls is forbidden. But everyone gossips about what the RG - which
continues its inquiries right up to election day - is predicting.
'The government needs to know what is happening in the country,' an Interior
Ministry spokesman said yesterday, 'and often we need information that is
more precise than appears in the press.' The press is, however, one of the
12 areas on which Paris's 1,200 RG officers target their attention. The RG
seeks, for instance, to find out what sensitive stories journalists might be
working on, and there is always an RG employee waiting at print works to
scoop up a first edition to ensure the prime minister, or minister, gets his
copy on time.
