FT  13 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: BHP's Chilean copper mine set
to become world's biggest
Another expansion of the Escondida copper mine in Chile is almost certain to
go ahead to boost its annual output to 800,000 tonnes of the metal a year.
This would put it ahead of Chuquicamata, also in Chile, as the world's
biggest copper mine and make Broken Hill Proprietary, Australia's biggest
company, which entered the copper business only five years ago, the world's
major producer of traded copper.
Mr John Prescott, chairman of BHP, says he has 'a high degree of confidence'
that the Escondida partners will give the go-ahead for the expansion within
the next few weeks.
The mine, jointly owned by BHP (57.5 per cent), the RTZ Corporation of the
UK (30 per cent), JECO, a consortium of Japanese smelters (10 per cent) and
the International Finance Corporation (2.5 per cent), is still in the throes
of a second-stage expansion, from 320,000 to 480,000 tonnes, scheduled to be
completed by September.
The third-stage expansion would be completed in two years and analysts
suggest the capital investment required would be minimal compared with the
profits generated.
Mr Prescott brushes aside suggestions that Escondida will be contributing to
a glut of copper concentrate (an intermediate material) that will depress
the metal's price at the end of the 1990s. He says Escondida talked to all
its customers before considering the next expansion phase and 'we seem to be
getting a commitment (from them to take) the tonnage we intend to produce'.
In view of this commitment by customers, BHP feels under no pressure to
build its own copper smelter in Chile.
BHP's small Island copper mine in Vancouver, Canada, will run out of ore in
1995-96 and the company has no expansion plans for Ok Tedi, the mine in
Papua New Guinea, in which it had boosted its shareholding recently to a
controlling interest. However, it bid unsuccessfully for the El Abra copper
deposit in Chile and, according to Mr Prescott, 'we are looking at every
opportunity (in copper) that comes up'.
Mr Prescott, in London to talk to customers and investors, says BHP's move
to spread its operations into high-value minerals such as platinum and
diamonds is going smoothly. He expects the Zimbabwe government to give final
approval soon for the Hartley platinum project, which has an initial planned
production rate of 150,000 ounces of platinum and 110,000 ounces of
palladium from mid-1996. BHP's partner is Delta Gold, another Australian
company.
A proposal to link all the platinum operations on the Great Dyke in Zimbabwe
 -where RTZ and the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa also have
projects - has been shelved, however. 'Our mine will be developed,' Mr
Prescott insists. 'It makes sense on its own. It might make more sense if it
was all put together as a joint venture. But it was an idea that did not get
mutual support.'
Although it now looks increasingly likely that BHP may start mining diamonds
in Canada's North West Territories, BHP has still to decide how the gem
rough (uncut) diamonds will be marketed. About 80 per cent of world trade in
such diamonds is controlled by De Beers' Central Selling Organisation but
Canadian companies are forbidden to join cartels. Mr Prescott says: 'We
won't be going into the diamond business without understanding how we will
market them. We have to recognise the (unfavourable) attitude to the CSO in
various parts of the world if we want to deal with them or they want to deal
with us. That is something we will have to address.'
Mr Prescott admits that cuts in contract prices for iron ore, manganese and
coal recently agreed with Japanese customers will have a substantial impact
on BHP's profit but it is working to overcome this.
He says: 'We are a low-cost producer, especially of coal and manganese, and
we can only maintain that position if we continue to invest. I am certainly
concerned about recent trends in long-term prices. But the Japanese are our
most important customers and they must be treated as our most important
customers.'
