FT  29 OCT 94 / Private View: A sanitary worker in the gene pool
Genetics has had an ugly history, dating from the days when theories were
built on a naive interpretation of Darwin - or pure prejudice - rather than
on scientific knowledge.
Today there is a great deal more knowledge and the promise of medical
breakthroughs. But there is also, says Steven Rose, a danger that bad old
thinking will be revived while irresolvable ethical dilemmas are being
created.
Professor Rose is a biologist of the brain who studies memory by teaching
day-old chicks (they learn fast and don't need telling twice), then opening
up their brains to see what has been going on inside.
He is probably better known, however, for the clarity of his popular science
writing (The Making of Memory won last year's Science Book Prize) and better
still for his campaign against what he calls the 'neurogenetic
determinists'.
By this he means the people who, in a world desperate for simple
explanations and instant cures, claim the answer lies in the genes.
I asked him: are you saying their claims are wrong, or merely premature?
'Some are premature, some are right, some are wrong,' he replied. 'But in
all cases I would argue they are being grossly oversold and overhyped.'
He went on: 'Although all of us use the phrase 'genes for . . .' as a
shorthand, of course there is no gene for anything in this sense.
'What a gene does is code for a particular protein not a piece of protein.
People talk about genes for blue or brown eye-colour. In fact many thousands
of genes go to determine the pathway which ends up with a blue or brown
eye-colour. What's different between people with blue eyes and brown eyes is
that one of the genes along the pathway is different. So it's a gene which
helps determine a difference, rather than a gene 'for' something.'
It sounded like a distinction without a difference until Rose explained that
even 'single-gene' medical disorders can adopt many forms, while their
severity depends on all the other genes in the system.
Rose is saying that the answers provided by molecular biology can only be
partial answers. Organisms - especially human beings - need to be studied as
a whole.
'Genes are one-dimensional, while the organism is four-dimensional and we
don't go from one dimension to four in a very simple way,' he said.
Gene-sequencing was a skilled but repetitive business quite divorced from
the organism in which the biochemistry was going on.
'That really worries me as a biologist, as an educationalist, quite apart
from the politics.
'It was Jim Watson (co-discoverer of the DNA double helix) who said that it
was so simple it could be done by a team of monkeys . . . It wasn't me who
said that.' He laughed.
Even supposing a clear causal link between gene patterns and medical
conditions, what was to be done with the knowledge? Suppose you could
predict that a foetus had a 30 per cent chance of developing schizophrenia
at the age of 18, the knowledge itself would change the way the child grew
up. Would it lessen, or increase, the chances of schizophrenia developing?
'My criticism of molecular geneticists is that they are really handling
human time-bombs of information and they don't begin to understand the
complexities of what they are trying to unravel, even in the simple cases.'
As for research into the genetics of social behaviour, Prof Rose is not so
much alarmed as scornful.
'To look for a genetic explanation for phenomena like violence in society is
the classical story of the drunk looking for the key under the lamp-post
because that is where the light is.
'But if the key isn't there, then it's stupid to look there. It's
clever-stupid but it's stupid nonetheless.'
Researchers had claimed there are genes 'for' homosexuality, aggression,
alcoholism, even homelessness. This, said Rose, is the fallacy of
reification - making a thing out of a process. Congruences or consequences
were mistaken for causes, methodology was elevated into a philosophy.
If there were gene markers which tallied with the experience of being
homosexual that was 'an interesting observation,' he said. 'But it doesn't
account for the nature of homosexuality in society, it doesn't provide an
explanation of the meaning of homosexuality or a statement of how we should
treat it.'
In the US, where the homicide rate among 16 to 19-year-old males had doubled
in 10 years, they were worried about violence.
'I say as a scientist there is no conceivable genetic explanation for that
doubling. It's stupid to look at genetics. We should look at the guns, or
the social conditions which foster violence.'
Rose is a materialist with no time for supernatural explanations. But he is
a materialist who wants to distinguish the levels - and define the limits -
of scientific explanation.
'Look, I wouldn't want to evoke biology to explain the Tel Aviv bombing,' he
said. 'Or the conflict between the Serbians and the Moslems. I don't think
measuring dopamine levels in Dr Karadzic's brain is actually going to help
tell us anything.'
After a First in biochemistry at Cambridge and research at Imperial College,
London, Rose was recruited by the Open University. His wife Hilary (he calls
her his 'partner') is a feminist sociology professor; Rose says he is much
influenced by the 'feminist cognitive critique'.
He pays attention when animal rights campaigners tell him that cutting the
heads off day-old chicks diminishes him as a human being, and was a founder
of the Society for Social Responsibility in Science.
Brought up in an Orthodox Jewish family in London he was, he says, an
atheist at the age of eight. On that birthday he was given a chemistry set
and a copy of Darwin's Origin of Species. His father, returning from the
second world war, was for a while anti-Fascist organiser for the association
of Jewish ex-servicemen.
With this kind of curriculum vitae, it seemed fair to ask him whether his
criticism of molecular biology is, at bottom, emotional.
'Some of the questions being asked have the appearance of being scientific,
but are not,' he said. 'In other cases it is desperately important to get
the right answer - the causes of schizophrenia, for example. But studying
the genetics of schizophrenia is not the best way of doing it.
'I'm not against doing it. But I am in favour of assembling research
priorities, and our priorities have to be set in a social context. People
say Dollars 3bn for the human genome programme is trivial. But to shift
funding away from research into the whole organism is I think a mistake in
priorities.'
Is it that politicians do not understand biology or that biologists are
highly political people?
'Oh, I think that all scientists are in that sense highly political. You
have to argue for funding. You go where the money is.'
I reminded him of a letter he and his wife wrote to The Guardian earlier
this month protesting about a 'provocative display of authoritarian police
power' at the last demonstration against the Criminal Justice Bill.
The professor laughed ruefully, but remained unabashed. 'My whole life has
been a passionate concern with two things at the same time,' he said. 'One
is to understand the world and the second is to change the world where I see
what I believe to be injustices. Science is a way of doing both.'
We discussed the revival in the US of the debate about IQ, race and class, a
touchstone in any genetic debate.
Rose said it was a fallacy to think that IQ was a fixed property.
Intelligence, like memory, was not 'a lump of something' and the IQ test was
a variable device useful for particular purposes.
'If you say that IQ is fixed in the genes then you have an ideological
defence of the status quo of a society divided by wealth, poverty, class,
race and gender and you offer the possibility of spurious technological
fixes.'
Are you not politically predisposed to believe that people of all races are
born on average equal?
'What I am scientifically predisposed to do is to reject the concept of race
in the genetic sense as having any real meaning.
'Race clearly has a great deal of social relevance. What defines it in
contemporary society has very little to do with genetics. That is, the gene
distribution and gene frequences between any two 'white' individuals are as
different as between any white and any black individual.'
Rose does not believe in arguing about nature versus nurture. His ambition
is what he calls a 'synthetic biology' in which different levels of
explanation, from the molecular to the social, are conjoined. I asked him if
he had any sympathy for the so-called anti-science movement.
'Because western science has insisted on this rigidly reductionist approach
it does prevent us understanding the richness of human experience.
'I think there is an understanding of the human condition which is given to
us by novels, by philosophers, by religious writing, and one can't discount
that.
'You may argue that you can understand more about memory by reading volume
one of A la recherche du temps perdu where Proust rediscovers memory in the
taste of the madeleine cake than by anything I'm doing with the chicks.
'People understand different things about memory, and I can't handle those
in terms of biochemistry. What I want to do, desperately, is to be able to
put the two of them together, to unite the fractured halves of our lives, to
put science back into the service of humanity, to give an integrated
understanding of the world.
'In that sense one's got to listen to what the critics of science are saying
and try and address their concerns even if you don't agree with their
solutions.'
