FT  18 APR 94 / Survey of Singapore (11): A means to an end - Education is
geared to expanding economic output
Listening to Mr Er Kwong Wah, the top civil servant at Singapore's education
ministry, is enough to turn his counterparts in many other parts of the
world green with envy.
His ministry's SDollars 3.2bn budget accounts for 4 per cent of gross
domestic product and a fifth of total government spending, second only to
defence. And, he makes clear, there is plenty more where that came from. 'We
have no problem getting money, providing we can show a case for it. If we
need a bigger share of GDP, I'm pretty confident the government will provide
it.'
As his comments imply, Singapore worships at the shrine of education.
Although schooling is not legally compulsory, in a country where the
attendance rate nudges 100 per cent, it scarcely needs to be. Almost two
thirds of school leavers go on to obtain a university or polytechnic degree,
one of the highest proportions in Asia.
However, this is a religion with a distinctly worldly purpose. It is
dedicated explicitly to nurturing the resources required for continued
expansion of national economic output.
Mr Er, asked about his philosophy of education, gives a reply which seems
more suited to a plant manager than to a pedagogue. His priorities, he says,
are set by the country's department of trade and industry: 'We have to
produce the products which fit into the department's system.'
The result is an education machine which is strongly biased at all levels in
favour of scientific, technical and business skills.
Computer training begins at the age of four and Mr Er's ministry is
investing SDollars 750m to equip every school with a computer room and
language laboratory. More than three quarters of all university students
major in engineering, science, business administration or accounting.
And education does not end with full-time schooling. Companies are required
by law to pay 2 per cent of turnover into a special fund, on which they may
draw to finance employee re-training. Teachers, whose pay is pegged to that
of civil service engineers, do an average of three weeks' in-service
training a year.
As a result, even the least talented school-leavers are equipped with a set
of basic skills, and the more able are highly numerate and technically
adept. Many companies operating in Singapore say this produces workforces
which are not only professionally well-qualified and dependable, but
extremely adaptable.
So much so that Apple Computer, for instance, is able to rely on temporary
staff to fill half the 2,000 jobs at its Singapore plant, adjusting the
numbers at short notice in line with demand. The company also moves
permanent employees between jobs every two to three years. Indeed, it says
it has to, to fulfil their career ambitions.
However, impressive as Singapore's education and training record is, it is
not flawless. The most frequent complaint from companies is a chronic
shortage of capable senior managers, ready to take risks, exercise
initiative and shoulder a broad range of responsibilities.
As a consequence, experienced local managers can virtually name their own
price. Mr Nobu Watanabe, who is in charge of Sony's operations in Singapore,
says higher-level salaries far exceed those at the company's UK operations,
which he previously headed.
Companies have responded to the challenge in different ways. Some, with
government approval, have imported managers from other countries. Others,
such as Motorola, say they have simply got by with much leaner management
teams than at home.
Sony, by contrast, has embarked on an ambitious 10-year programme to groom
its own local top management. However, Mr Watanabe says he fully expects
half of them to leave the company and he will treat the investment incurred
as a pro bono contribution to Singapore's economy.
The scarcity may simply reflect the fact that Singapore is still too young a
country to have produced many experienced home-grown managers. However, some
critics blame the education system's heavy emphasis on technical proficiency
and learning by rote.
'It is very rigorous,' says Mr Liew Mun Long, managing director of L&amp;M, a
leading construction group. 'Engineers in the US and Britain have a much
broader outlook. Even in business schools, the approach is very
textbook-based. If we want engineers to develop into managers in mid-career,
the system must open up a bit.'
That argument points to a larger, longer-term question, which is starting to
provoke a low-key debate. How conducive are the highly practical disciplines
instilled by Singapore's education system to genuine innovation and
creativity? Could the country ever aspire, for example, to produce a Nobel
prize winner?
Mr Philip Yeo, chairman of the Economic Development Board which manages
national industrial strategy, gives a blunt answer: 'I don't see that day
coming. Nobel prizes don't create jobs. Some people call us Singaporeans
pure economic creatures, and they are right. We don't believe in woolly
stuff, but in what we can get for our money.'
Some younger technocrats are less sure, however. They point out that the
country's industrial dynamic is propelling it towards more sophisticated
information-based service businesses and wonder how effectively a skill base
heavily oriented towards precision engineering will cope with these less
tangible challenges.
The final uncertainty is about the longer-term social implications of the
education system. Many parents express concerns that its pressure-cooker
atmosphere and increasingly competitive nature are imposing heavy strains on
their children.
Some also think the system, in which students are streamed by ability at an
early age, is in danger of becoming too stratified. Mr Er says there is
flexibility for children to move between streams, but also concedes that
some individual schools enjoy an elite status. However, he says, this has
been the case for many years.
