FT  17 DEC 94 / Mystery clouds Oslo bourse chief's sudden death: Shocked
friends defending Erik Jarve, who drowned earlier this week, say he was not
the sort of man who would commit suicide
Norway's financial community is still in shock over the sudden dismissal and
subsequent death earlier this week of Mr Erik Jarve, president of the Oslo
stock exchange.
As the atmosphere in Oslo's tight-knit financial community grows
increasingly tense, the circumstances surrounding the death are quickly
becoming muddied by mystery and accusation. Friends say it is unlikely he
would have committed suicide, as seems to be the case, by drowning himself
in a fjord near his holiday cabin south of Oslo.
The bourse administrators, though stunned by the death, insist he was asked
to go as he had abused his position to advance the job prospects of a close
family member.
Oddly, the initial reaction to his death by the bourse board, the exchange
executive, had been to cancel an external investigation it ordered into the
affair when it dismissed Mr Jarve on Monday.
Early on Tuesday morning Mr Jarve, 50, was found drowned. It is believed he
committed suicide but some in the financial community think his death may
have been accidental. People who knew him well say it was hard to
distinguish between Mr Jarve's personal and professional lives, but it was
unthinkable that he was corrupt. He did not trade in securities. 'He lived
for the market. That was his entire life. He transformed the bourse in just
over a decade to computers from paper,' claims one broker who worked closely
with him.
'There seems to be more to the case than has been revealed,' another broker
says.
Even the bourse board praised Mr Jarve's work and accomplishments. 'Mr
Jarve's clairvoyance, expertise and patience has been pivotal to the
development and modernisation of the exchange. The entire financial
community owes him a great many thanks for the work he has done to develop
the Norwegian securities market into a competitive market,' the board said
after his death.
But his friends are angry at the way he was treated by the board on Monday,
given his solid reputation and his 25 years of service at the exchange. They
believe it was careless of the board not to have gauged the effect the
sacking would have on him.
'He was of the old school', a broker says. 'Things went strictly by the book
with him.'
The board has offered a straightforward explanation of its actions. Ms
Elisabeth Wille, chairman, explained that Mr Jarve was dismissed for a
number of undertakings from which he personally benefited.
The board claims that last March Mr Jarve employed a close family member at
Oslo Bourse Information (OBI), a subsidiary of which he was the chairman.
The family member was employed at OBI until October.
The appointment was not cleared by the board and the family member did not
have the necessary qualifications for the job, it claimed. In June the same
family member completed two Unix computer programming courses which were not
relevant to his OBI job but for which expenses were charged against bourse
accounts, the board said.
But if employing a family member is reason enough to ask Mr Jarve to go,
friends say, why wait until Monday? 'The family member was, after all, at
the bourse and could be seen every day,' they stress.
In September the bourse agreed a NKr51m (Pounds 4.7m) contract with Logica
UK, a computer software company, to complete the development of a new
trading system. According to the board's explanation this week, Mr Jarve was
not involved in the negotiations of the contract but held private
discussions with Logica in which it was agreed that the family member would
be employed by the UK company for two years and that his salary would be
built into the trading system contract.
Once again, friends counter the implied board accusation of improper
behaviour. Perhaps, they say, Mr Jarve was preparing the family member for a
job as a technician for the new system once it became operational and, if
this was the case, was it not then bourse business?
The board also said Mr Jarve had charged against bourse accounts expenses
incurred by the family member while moving to London and the subsequent
expenses incurred while living there when working for Logica.
The board said Mr Jarve had also arranged for the family member to receive a
salary from OBI for October and November, even though the family member had
already begun working at Logica.
In all, the costs associated with these undertakings totalled about
NKr300,000, which the board said had been to Mr Jarve's benefit.
What cannot now be known is whether Mr Jarve knowingly crossed a line
distinguishing his business from that of the bourse's.
What is clear is that his relations with the board had been strained for
more than a year. It is understood there was criticism of his expensive
lifestyle and that it was felt he travelled abroad too frequently to attend
events related more to the international marketplace than to the Oslo
bourse.
It is also understood that there were tensions between Mr Jarve and domestic
brokers who wanted more influence in the marketplace.
'He (Mr Jarve) had his enemies. . . but they were brokers who wanted more
say in things,' a broker says.
Early last week Ms Wille was informed by a bourse employee of 'financial
irregularities' connected to Mr Jarve and the bourse. Ms Wille then told Mr
Tom Vidar Rygh, vice-chairman of the board.
On November 8, believing those allegations to have been confirmed, Ms Wille
informed Mr Arent Henriksen, chairman of the Bourse Council which oversees
the board.
On Monday Mr Jarve was called into a private session with Ms Wille and Mr
Rygh to answer the allegations. After a brief period he returned to his
office, and shortly after left the bourse in a taxi to go to his cabin. Ms
Wille then called a meeting of the board in which she spelled out the
allegations against Mr Jarve and told them he had been dismissed. This was
followed by a meeting of the council, which was informed of the affair.
Ms Wille said Mr Jarve was offered a suspension while KPMG Peat Marwick, the
bourse auditor, undertook a further probe into the affair. She said Mr Jarve
rejected the suggestion so it was decided he would be dismissed immediately.
The probe has now been suspended indefinitely.
After Mr Jarve had left the bourse, a note was found in his office by
officials who say it suggested he might have been contemplating suicide.
Alerted by the note, Mr Jarve's brother visited him at the cabin but Mr
Jarve asked to be left alone. The brother called the cabin later that
evening but there was no answer. When he drove to the cabin Mr Jarve was
found in the fjord.
