FT  07 MAR 94 / Mitchell sets sights on public service
Washington may still be digesting the impact of the stunning decision last
Friday of the Senate's most powerful Democrat not to seek re-election. But
Mr George Mitchell himself is portraying his decision as entirely logical
and personal.
In several interviews in his native Maine over the weekend the majority
leader, who is 60, confirmed that he could be interested in two new
challenges; as commissioner of baseball, a position that has been vacant for
two years, or as a judge on the US Supreme Court when the next opening
occurs, possibly later this year should a justice, most likely Mr Harry
Blackmun, retire.
But he denied he was pulling out of politics because firm private offers on
either score had been made to him. Instead, he maintained that: 'I never
intended to remain permanently in the Senate' and that 'at least for myself,
turnover in office is a healthy thing'.
He told the New York Times: 'I have not ruled out public service. In fact I
have specifically ruled it in.' He said the Senate had its frustrations, but
there had been 'great rewards' in the majority leader's role, which he has
held for six years.
The general consensus is that Mr Mitchell, appointed to the Senate in 1980
to fill the unexpired term of Mr Edmund Muskie when the latter became
secretary of state, has been an effective, if partisan, director of his
chamber, both in opposition to the policies of President George Bush and as
a proponent of President Bill Clinton.
When Mr Clinton took office, Mr Mitchell was instrumental in winning votes
on the budget and the North American Free Trade Agreement.
His departure does not make things easier for either the president or the
party. The most immediate consequence is to raise fresh doubts over the
Democratic 56-44 majority in the Senate. Mr Mitchell was considered certain
for re-election, but the early favourite to succeed him is Congresswoman
Olympia Snowe, the Republican and wife of Governor John McKernan.
Mr Mitchell is the eighth senator - and fifth Democrat - to announce
retirement plans this year.
Another senior Democratic senator, Mr David Boren of Oklahoma, is also
considering leaving to become head of the local state university.
Although there is no suggestion that Mr Mitchell will now devote any less
energy to Mr Clinton's legislative programme, the struggle to replace him
threatens to be a diversion in the coming months, since there is no clear
heir apparent.
The next-in-line in the Democratic hierarchy is Senator Wendell Ford of
Kentucky but interest has already been expressed by younger senators,
including Mr John Breaux of Louisiana, Mr Tom Daschle of South Dakota, and
Mr Jim Sasser of Tennessee. Mr David Pryor of Arkansas, long close to the
president, may also command support.
