FT  25 MAY 94 / Competitiveness - The White Paper: Manifesto wins praise but
more action is urged - The industry view
Industry representatives welcomed a manifesto for industry, but were
disappointed at the shortage of new initiatives.
They claimed the thrust of the paper was the outcome of their lobbying
efforts, and welcomed it as a clear statement of the government's industrial
policy and a frank analysis of Britain's competitive position.
But Mr Heseltine's emphasis on the government's priorities rather than on
new initiatives brought warnings that the value of the paper would come only
in the measures that followed it.
Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry,
said: 'This year's Budget will show whether the government is seriously
committed to the priorities set out in the white paper.'
The few areas where new measures were outlined prompted a mixed reaction.
Mr Graham Mackenzie, director-general of the Engineering Employers'
Federation, said the additional resources for apprenticeships were of
'paramount importance' to manufacturing industry.
But others were less fulsome in their praise of the renewed emphasis on
technical training.
Mr Patrick McHugh, manufacturing industry partner on the consultancy side of
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, said: 'Training and education support needs to be
targeted at senior management if it is to give British industry a
competitive edge in business.'
There was also criticism of the role of the government's single-market
compliance unit, set up to help exporters to European Union countries find
their way through legal systems abroad. The unit will concentrate on
'working for tighter new rules'. This was of little use to manufacturers who
wanted help as problems arose, said Mr McHugh.
However, the paper's declarations on the importance of de-regulation brought
congratulations from the vigorously free-market Institute of Directors.
Mr Peter Morgan, IoD director-general, described the government's proposals
as having 'put business back on track to create an enterprise Britain'.
The EEF was more uncertain of the paper's overall merits, with Mr Mackenzie
pointing to the remaining 'strategic vacuum in many areas of UK industrial
policy, including transport and infrastructure'.
Mr Graham Thelwall-Jones, chairman of Liverpool Chamber of Commerce, said
industry needed cheaper money. The government would achieve more long-range
planning and investment if it paid more attention to avoiding future wide
fluctuation of interest rates.
There also needed to be greater recognition of the energy cost burdens borne
by British industry, said Mr John Cox, director-general of the Chemical
Industries Association.
He described the paper's reference to the benefits of privatisation of
electricity and gas as 'complacent'.
Meanwhile, a number of trade bodies expressed disappointment at the absence
of any measures to strengthen channels of communication between themselves
and the government.
