FT  24 JAN 94 / Arts: Roving singers offer new blend of recordings - A
virtuoso display by an amateur choir
Presumably there still are amateur choirs up and down the country which
pride themselves on singing unaccompanied choral music, but we do not hear
much of them on recordings any more. The rise of the professional chamber
choir - a striking feature of musical life in recent years - has put paid to
that.
These new choirs are made up of roving freelance singers, who move from one
group to another as and when they are needed. The singers know each other
well and can re-group into perfectly-blended ensembles on demand. They are
professionals in every sense, each with an accountant behind his or her
shoulder.
Depending on the music being performed, about four of each voice make up a
choir, the altos being women or men as preferred, sometimes a mix of each.
The Sixteen, founded and directed by Harry Christophers, keeps close to that
total, as its name implies. Its altos are all men, sweet-toned, but not
often making their presence felt. Otherwise the choir's singing at the Queen
Elizabeth Hall on Thursday was clean, accurate, expressive - professional in
the best sense.
At its finest it gave a virtuoso display of what a choir like this can
achieve. The re-issue of the original recordings of Benjamin Britten's
unaccompanied choral works in the past year or two has been valuable as
historic material, but how bumbling they sound by comparison, how
delightfully amateur. Britten wrote brilliant music for choirs and a couple
of Sunday afternoons in the church hall are not enough to get it right.
The Sixteen is engaged on recording all the composer's choral music, which
means the singers have it on the tips of their tongues. The central section
of the Hymn to St. Cecilia whisked past, a model of lightness, as each fugal
entry chased after the one before. The late cycle of medieval lyrics, Sacred
and Profane, is not among Britten's best work, but it sounds far more
convincing when its close-packed dissonant harmonies are sorted out as
clearly as they were here.
For this all-English programme Britten was paired with Purcell. Heard in
close proximity, Purcell is revealed as the more ambitious in his response
to the words. In just a few minutes the anthem 'Blow up the trumpet in Sion'
covers an enormous amount of ground, from brassy choral fanfares to
mourning, to affirmation.
The Sixteen has all this well within their grasp, though Christophers moulds
the music so suavely that his performances can sound over-cultivated. Solos
from within the choir were confidently taken.
The Sixteen is sponsored by Quad Electroacoustics Ltd
