FT  07 DEC 94 / Recruitment: Proving a point withoutformal certificates -
The need for paper qualifications is becoming less important in some areas
of selection
How much should we insist on formal qualifications to do particular jobs?
How much do they obscure objectivity in assessing people's ability to carry
out work?
The Employment Service, a UK Civil Service agency which runs high street job
centres, has gone some way towards answering these questions by dispensing
with the need for paper qualifications such as GCSEs for most of its
entrants.
It happened about three years ago when the service, anxious to attract a
broader range of job candidate, including more ethnic minorities, older
applicants and women returners, designed an application form that sought to
identify people's particular job competencies.
We can define competencies - civil service psychologists call them widgets -
as those skills, abilities or behavioural traits that differentiate levels
of performance in a job.
Psychologists looked at the typical Employment Service roles and identified
nine prime competencies most useful for doing the job. One of them,
numeracy, in fact, was not identified as being so important, but the
Treasury, which had a hand in sanctioning the exercise, insisted on that
one.
The nine competencies included such qualities as getting on with people,
oral communication skills, planning work with the right priorities, and
managing change. 'We found that educational qualifications weren't terribly
good predictors of people's ability in these areas,' said Roger Cross, a
principal psychologist in the service who worked on the new entry
requirements.
These were then incorporated into a new application form, notable
principally for its omissions. Nowhere does it ask for educational
qualifications. Instead it poses questions, based on the identified
competencies. For example, in a sectioned designed to discover a candidate's
ability to get on with people it says: 'Executive officers have to be able
to deal with people, relate to colleagues and the public, even in difficult
circumstances. Please give an example of how you have had to deal with
difficult or unco-operative people.'
When confronted with the new application forms, candidates found them
difficult at first, said Cross. 'It was a cultural shock to people used to
filling in forms based on qualifications and CVs to actually have to think
about some of these things,' he said.
The downturn in unemployment since the new system was introduced has meant
that the service has had comparatively few new recruits in the past three
years with which to form a clear picture of its effect on adverse impact.
While switching from qualifications to competencies may have reduced the
adverse impact of other types of entrance requirement on certain groups, it
is not thought to have led to a significant increase in ethnic minority
recruitment. That may in part be because the service has not got the message
through to potential candidates, but another problem is likely to be in the
identified competencies which expect candidates to demonstrate good verbal
and communications skills.
Validity tests, however, have shown favourable results in the quality of
candidates. Competency-based recruitment and assessment is now becoming
quite common in the Civil Service although most departments would take a
more traditional approach to the possession of educational qualifications.
The Employment Service itself now uses competency-based recruitment in all
of its high volume recruitment covering junior management and administrative
grades, and some private employers are starting to use them in recruitment,
usually, however, alongside requirements for paper qualifications.
An addendum to the points on qualifications. I was told the other day about
a City investment bank which was recruiting new traders. On the section of
the application form seeking information about qualifications one candidate
simply wrote: 'I have been an unqualified success in every job I have
undertaken.' The employer recruited him and he went on to become one of its
best traders.
The table (left) is compiled from P-E International management consultancy's
1994 survey of executive salaries and benefits in the UK. It was carried out
in July and covered nearly 9,000 executive grades ranging from chairman to
junior manager employed by 662 companies.
The extract covers fringe benefits typically awarded in UK executive ranks.
It's interesting to note, if you look at the figures, that the rule seems to
be the higher people are paid, the more chance they seem to have of getting
benefits. The complete report, which includes data on salaries and bonuses,
costs Pounds 400 and can be obtained from Karen Gallagher at the
consultancy's address, Park House, Wick Road, Egham, Surrey TW20 OHW,
telephone 0784 434411, fax 0784 476369.
