FT  21 JAN 94 / Guinness restructures alliance with LVMH: 24% interest in
French company to be sold for Pounds 1.3bn
Guinness, the UK drinks group, and LVMH, the French cognac and luxury goods
company, announced sweeping changes to their seven-year alliance yesterday
to provide 'a secure and stable basis for a continuing long-term
partnership' in the international wines and spirits industry.
Guinness is selling its indirect 24 per cent interest in LVMH, held through
Jacques Rober and Christian Dior, to the Arnault Group for Pounds 1.323bn.
The UK group will acquire a 34 per cent stake in Moet Hennessy, the LVMH
cognac and champagne business, for Pounds 902m. LVMH, in turn, will reduce
its holding in Guinness from 24 per cent to 20 per cent by June 30.
Mr Tony Greener, Guinness chairman and chief executive, said the moves
focused the partnership on the strategic development of their spirits and
wines businesses. 'Guinness will no longer have an interest in LVMH as a
whole . . . we will not be part of any new direction, media or other, that
they pursue in the future. We believe in sticking to our knitting.'
Cross-shareholdings had provided an initial solid base for the alliance, he
said. But if it had not been changed 'there was a likelihood that the
different aspirations for the development of the two companies would lead to
divergence and, potentially, friction'.
The changes were welcomed in the City of London, where investors have become
increasingly concerned about the effects on Guinness of recent moves by Mr
Bernard Arnault, LVMH chairman, into publishing and fashion.
Guinness shares rose 49p to close at 521p, but shares in LVMH fell FFr138 to
FFr3,899.
The deal will yield net cash of Pounds 416m for Guinness that will be used
to reduce borrowings to Pounds 1.4bn and gearing from 47 per cent to 37 per
cent. Annual cash flow will be improved by Pounds 14m, but earnings per
share will suffer minor dilution.
Mr Greener said the group expected 1993 profits of Pounds 905m, 4 per cent
ahead of 1992, before a UK pension charge of Pounds 30m and exceptional
charges, mainly non-cash, of Pounds 173m arising from the restructuring.
The new relationship, which ensures that Guinness can prevent any outside
takeover of the Moet Hennessy cognac and champagne brands, would strengthen
the companies' joint trading ventures, Mr Greener claimed.
The group has 17 joint trading ventures - combining Guinness brands such as
Johnnie Walker Scotch whisky and Gordon's gin with LVMH's Hennessy cognac,
Moet Chandon and Veuve Clicquot champagne - that cover the US and Mexico,
Japan, China and other Far Eastern markets.
They contributed about 25 per cent of the Pounds 769m profits in 1993 of
United Distillers, the Guinness spirits division.
Heady cocktail, Page 17
Lex, Page 18
London stocks, Page 36
