FT  12 MAR 94 / Poland in deal with banks to cut debt
Poland and its London Club commercial bank creditors yesterday signed an
agreement in principle for the reduction and rescheduling of Poland's
Dollars 13.2bn (Pounds 9bn) private sector debt, allowing the country to
return to the international capital markets.
Details of the agreement, reached after four years of negotiations, will
probably take until September to finalise. It was signed in Frankfurt
between Dresdner Bank, representing more than 300 foreign bank creditors,
and Mr Krzysztof Krowacki, Poland's foreign debt negotiator. The debt
reduction will cost the banks about 42.5 per cent of their outstanding loans
and unpaid interest, according to Dresdner Bank, which has led the London
Club talks. The exact figure will depend on the mix of repayment methods
chosen by creditors from options established by the agreement.
The reduction is well below the 50 per cent write-off sought by Poland as
required by the terms of its April 1991 Paris Club agreement with government
creditors.
The Paris Club agreed a two-stage, 50 per cent reduction in Poland's Dollars
33bn official debt, contingent on Poland's compliance with strict
International Monetary Fund budgetary targets. It obliged Poland to seek
similar terms from its bank creditors. Poland faces annual debt servicing
charges of about Dollars 4.5bn by 2005 under the Paris Club deal.
The commercial banks refused to consider themselves bound by the Paris Club
terms and insisted that Poland could pay more.
In recognition of Poland's short-term budgetary restraints, however, the
London Club agreement is graduated with higher repayments in later years.
The deal will cost Warsaw Dollars 400m a year on average over the first five
years of a 30-year repayment period, Dollars 520m a year over the first 10
years and Dollars 600m a year over the first 15 years. Poland will offer to
repurchase part of its Dollars 9.3bn principal debt and Dollars 3.8bn
overdue interest at a price to be announced by Warsaw.
Mr Krowacki said the agreement, which will cost Poland an estimated Dollars
1.3bn in 1994, signifies the normalisation of the country's financial
relations. 'Without such an agreement, Poland would have had to renegotiate
its Paris Club agreement and that would have been suicidal,' he said.
The World Bank has set aside Dollars 500m to help Poland finance the deal.
The IMF has agreed to provide Dollars 300m. This leaves Dollars 500m to be
financed this year from Poland's official and banking system reserves, which
currently stand at about Dollars 7.6bn.
