FT  21 SEP 94 / Lonrho film sale probed by Bank
The Bank of England is investigating whether Lonrho breached United Nations
sanctions by selling a film about the Lockerbie bombing to an Egyptian
company with links to Libya.
The outcome of the probe is likely to have an important influence on the
battle between Lonrho's joint chief executives, Mr Dieter Bock and Mr Tiny
Rowland.
Mr Bock wants to depose Mr Rowland, who took a personal interest in both the
making and disposal of the film.
Three weeks ago Mr Bock's position in the company was weakened considerably
when his fellow directors forced him to abandon a plan to propose at a board
meeting that Mr Rowland should be stripped of his executive powers.
He is likely to try to regain the initiative in the battle for power by
arguing to the international trading group's board that Mr Rowland is
responsible, if sanctions are found to have been breached.
The investigation into the film sale is being carried out by the Bank of
England's Sanctions Emergency Unit, whose role is to ensure that the
financial aspects of UN sanctions are not breached by UK entities.
Under the latest version of the sanctions, introduced on December 1 last
year, UK companies are required to seek the Bank's permission before
'parting with . . . investments to . . . a Libyan person (a company or
individual)'. The Bank's permission in this case was not sought.
The nearly completed film argues that the Libyans were not responsible for
the bombing of Pan Am flight 103. Its Pounds 632,948 budget was financed by
Lonrho's Metropole subsidiary, which is a third owned by the Libyan Arab
Finance Company.
Earlier this year, after Mr Bock complained about Lonrho's involvement in
the film, it was sold to a Cairo-based company, the Joint Arab International
Investment Company, or Jaico, for Pounds 200,000. On April 7, Barclays Bank
in Birmingham received Pounds 199,989 from the Cairo branch of Arab
International Bank, Cairo.
However, the signatory on the sale agreement on behalf of Jaico was Mr
Mohamed El Huwej, who is chairman of Lafico, the main investment vehicle of
Colonel Muammer Gadaffi, the Libyan leader.
Because of this apparent connection between Jaico and Lafico, Mr Rowland was
formally requested by Mr Martin Bolland, Metropole's managing director, to
obtain a written statement from Mr El Huwej on his relationship with Jaico.
