FT  27 JUN 94 / Student loans 'get Pounds 250m subsidy'
Student loans include a state subsidy of Pounds 250m a year, and should be
replaced with loans repaid via the tax system, says a report published
today.
The report, published by the Institute of Economic Affairs, a free-market
think-tank, says loans should charge a 'real' rate of interest which would
include a premium over the present repayment rate, which is pegged solely to
retail price inflation.
The government intends to increase the proportion of students' living costs
funded via repayable loans - rather than grants - by 10 per cent for each of
the next three years. It aims to ensure that parents and students pay a
greater share of the costs.
A quango, the Student Loans Company, administers the loans, which are
repayable in fixed instalments after students have graduated. They are
excused making any repayments if their income is less than 85 per cent of
the national average.
Professor Edwin West, author of the IEA report and professor emeritus of
economics at Carleton University in Canada, says: 'The amount that is
repayable remains obscure. Judging by Britain's current loan system, new and
disguised forms of government subsidies or grants are quickly emerging and
are taking the form of increasing costs associated with the present loan
structure.'
Students, typically graduating with loans valued at Pounds 2,150, and then
taking three years to reach the income threshold at which they have to make
repayments, will in effect enjoy a grant of Pounds 304, he says.
Their freedom from 'real' interest rates while they are repaying their loan
will give a 'total exemption from all 'real' interest of something
approaching Pounds 500 per student - about 22 per cent of the value of the
original principal'. He calculates that the 500,000 loans made in the
1992-93 academic year involve a total grant by the state of Pounds 250m.
He says that instead administrative costs should be cut by linking loans to
the tax system. Graduates on lower incomes would therefore repay more
slowly, in smaller amounts.
Britain's Student Loan System in World Perspective. IEA, 2 Lord North
Street, London SW1P 3LB. Pounds 4.50
