FT  24 MAR 94 / International Company News: Banking shake-out heralds new
era - The former chief of the Bank of Tokyo talks to William Dawkins
Japan's banking system is on the threshold of a shake-out in which some
weaker players will be forced to merge, but from which the larger ones could
emerge strengthened.
That is the assessment of one of the industry's most experienced operators,
Mr Yusuke Kashiwagi, 76-year-old senior adviser and former chairman of the
Bank of Tokyo. The banking system is only just beginning to face up to the
lessons of the collapse of the sharp rise in property and share prices of
the late-1980s, fuelled by its own intemperate lending, he says.
The largest banks will in the next few years complete their retrenchment. On
the back of a recovery in the Japanese economy, they will relaunch
themselves as big international competitors, says Mr Kashiwagi, defying the
gloomier commentators.
'Over the next 10 years, the Japanese economy will be a good performer.
Labour will be available and productivity will go up. There will be plenty
of savings, interest rates will rise, inflation will be low, which means we
will have a strong currency. We will have growth with stability and this
means that Japanese banks will once more go into international business in a
big way,' he explains.
A related development will be the continued gradual breakdown of the
Japanese banking industry's uniquely segmented structure, Mr Kashiwagi
predicts.
Larger banks appear to be well on the way to running down the bad debts
inherited from the 1980s bubble, but this is not so for the smaller regional
institutions and agricultural co-operative banks.
'We financed the bubble. Maybe it could have been avoided,' says Mr
Kashiwagi.
'One culprit was the tremendous competition in the banking system, which
meant we were not as careful as we should have been in screening loan
applications.'
Most banks are still struggling with the problem of providing for the bad
assets inherited from the bubble days, though the Bank of Tokyo was less
affected than most, if only because it was too busy tackling bad sovereign
loans made to developing countries to get drawn into the lending rush.
As part of this, most Japanese banks are now working hard to slim costs,
through staff reductions and organisation changes. The big danger, Mr
Kashiwagi warns, is that banks will be lulled by Japan's low interest rates
into restructuring less toughly than they should. Falling rates reduce the
cost of carrying bad loans. 'This is an opportunity and one must be sure to
benefit from it, not to dissipate the gains,' he says.
