FT  10 SEP 94 / Message of hope and fellowship: The IRA's declaration of a
ceasefire and the prospects of peace are important to many Americans.
Nicholas Woodsworth visited an Irish society in Boston to see how the news
was received
Walk into the headquarters of the Emerald Society in a suburb of Boston,
Massachusetts, and you will start to understand why the US president, Bill
Clinton is so exercised about Ireland. This is a hall, soaked in Liffey-side
nostalgia, with shamrocks and bright Kelly green curtains. It is the meeting
place for one of the 4,000 Irish-American organisations. The number of US
citizens claiming Irish descent has been growing rapidly and is now thought
to have reached 44m.
The sense of fellowship with their compatriots across the water has been a
great source of strength for the republican cause in Northern Ireland - and
a source of cash to arm the IRA terrorists. So the IRA's declaration of a
ceasefire and the prospects of peace are a matter of some importance to a
very large body of Americans.
In Boston's Emerald Society hall they are men of substance: large of girth,
loud of voice and confident of manner - the patrolmen, deputies, sheriffs
and constables of the Boston city police force.
They meet under an Irish flag at the front of the hall. A mural of the Irish
Dail decorates one wall, the blazons of Ulster, Leinster, Munster and
Connacht the other.
But when at the society's meeting this week Constable Tom Brown made his way
round the hall with copies of the US-published Irish Echo, the glow was
dimmed. It was not that anyone present was unhappy with news of the IRA
ceasefire but, if violence has come to a halt across the water, it has not
stopped in Boston. Some officers were still in the ceremonial kilts, spats
and argyll socks of the Boston Police's Gaelic Column, after the the funeral
of a slain Boston policeman, the third to be killed in as many weeks.
'We are absolutely sick of violence,' said Brown. 'We have seen too much of
it ourselves. It doesn't matter where policemen and innocent civilians are
being killed. It must be stopped in Ireland, and at any cost.'
Had Brown's views on the IRA been sounded out a decade ago his response, he
admits, would have been very different. For many years he has been a member
of Noraid, the Irish-American organisation responsible for much of the
funding of IRA activities. Still a Noraid member, he acknowledges that
Irish-American support for IRA violence has dwindled sharply, both
emotionally and financially, in the last two or three years.
Noraid, Brown says, now supports the ceasefire and will work for a
negotiated settlement. If the price of peace is the Irish Republic's
relinquishment of its territorial claim to Ulster, that, as far as Brown is
concerned, is acceptable. 'Compromise is what it is all about,' he affirms.
'Both sides are going to have to bend.'
The vast majority of policemen in the Emerald Society feel as Brown does -
they have as much fear as any Americans of growing levels of violence, and
no illusions as to its romance or benefits.
'I admit it, I was a Republican punk,' smiles policeman Dan Ring. 'I used to
be a member of the Charlestown (a Boston suburb) Liberation Army. The CLA
would go around spray-painting 'Kill the Brits' and persuading, more or less
politely, local residents to contribute to the cause. That's all over - I
grew up and became a cop. In 1992 I was on holiday in London when the IRA
Christmas bombing campaign began. I was worried for the bobbies, for
chrissake. Me, Irish Dan Ring] But a cop's a cop whoever and wherever he is.
I still believe in uniting Ireland, but not by the gun.'
If Irish-Americans have any hesitancy about the ceasefire, it is not
generally based on any clear appreciation of the complexities of
contemporary Irish economics or politics. They are instead felt at gut
level, and are old ingrained views inherited over generations from forbears
forced to emigrate from Ireland a century ago. Most reservations are
expressed, now as they were then, in terms of mistrust of British
intentions; as Americans the policemen of the Emerald Society freely admit
that they wholly fail to understand religious division within the same
ethnic community.
But, as Americans, they are quick to come up with a simple solution that is
neither political nor religious - most Emerald Society policemen believe,
perhaps rightly, that a quick, large fix of money would do wonders for the
old country.
'Ireland needs money, but it shouldn't come from the US tax-payer's pocket,'
said 'Dapper' O'Neil, the conservative Tammany Hall-style Boston city
councillor who, as the city's chairman of the committee on public safety,
had come to address the Emerald Society after the funeral. 'We've got too
many problems here and too many social programmes that are ruining the
country.'
Affirmative Action, the social programme that gives a head-start to
disadvantaged minorities in the US, is not the way to go in Northern
Ireland, Emerald Society members believe. They have seen it create too much
bitterness against blacks in their own community. Nor is any other social
aid programme likely to succeed. Instead, it is good old-fashioned private
enterprise and investment that they believe offers Ulster its greatest
chance.
'Look at the thousands of Americans who visit the Republic every year',
notes policeman Jack Sheridan. 'Bill Clinton can't change Ireland. What will
change Ireland is if there is a peace long enough to bring tourism,
investment, jobs and prosperity.'
Miles away, in downtown Boston, Irish-American businessmen seem to agree. At
the Irish-American Partnership, a non-sectarian organisation claiming 7,500
US members and promoting employment and economic growth on both sides of the
Irish border, Joseph Leary speaks enthusiastically of the 375 US company
subsidiaries based in the Irish Republic; less than 40, on the other hand,
are to be found in Ulster. That imbalance would change radically, he feels,
if a stable political environment developed in the future.
Will it? Most Irish Americans, given the enchantment lent by distance,
believe some sort of point-of-no-return has been crossed. But the biggest
problem, in former Charlestown Liberation Army policeman Dan Ring's view, is
not international negotiation, US funding or British recalcitrance or any
other external factor. 'It's the Irish themselves. I should know. We hate to
give way. We are the stubbornest bastards in the world.'
