FT  20 JAN 94 / Japan faces ballot on reform after compromise talks fail
Japan's governing coalition is to call a parliamentary vote on plans to
reform the scandal-prone political system.
The decision follows the collapse last night of negotiations for a
compromise with the opposition Liberal Democratic party.
If successful, the ballot in a committee of the upper house of parliament
will pave the way for a vote by the full house by the end of the week. That
is the final stage before the enactment of the four bills, which will bring
the biggest change to the organisation of Japanese democracy since the war.
Political suspense of this kind is relatively new to Japan, after 38 years
of LDP rule which ended last July. The horse-trading has forced the
government to delay an urgently needed package to stimulate the economy.
The vote will be close, as the upper house majority of the seven-party
coalition is smaller than that in the lower chamber, where it won a showdown
about reform two months ago. It also faces defections from both sides of the
upper house.
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime minister, said last night he was still prepared
to meet Mr Yohei Kono, LDP president, in a final attempt to strike a deal.
'Even if the upper house committee votes on the bills, we're still going to
have our leadership talk.'
Members of the coalition and the LDP had made little progress during three
meetings earlier in the day. If the bills do not pass parliament by midnight
tomorrow they will expire, making it very hard for Mr Hosokawa to meet his
self-imposed deadline of achieving political reform by the end of the month.
Yet Mr Hosokawa's scope to strike an eleventh-hour deal on reform with the
LDP is limited by the risk he runs of offending the Social Democratic party,
the coalition's biggest partner. Also, Mr Kono is so unpopular in his own
LDP ranks, and his party so divided, that he might be incapable of enforcing
any deal.
Several LDP members opposed to reform suggested Mr Kono might face a vote of
no confidence. Yesterday's talks centred on an LDP proposal that the number
of lower house members elected from single-seat constituencies should be
increased from the coalition's planned 274 to 280, and those chosen by
proportional representation from 226 to 230.
The LDP compromise would create a 510-seat parliament, nearly the same size
as the current (511-seat) chamber, so neutralising opposition from
politicians who fear losing their seats.
The LDP wants the coalition to lift the proposed ban on corporate funding
for individual politicians, a change calculated to suit the LDP. It also
wants the coalition to maintain the ban on house-to-house canvassing.
