FT  18 JUN 94 / Finance and the Family: Gilts fall on hard times - Why
investors may well remain wary of bonds
Are there any reasons to be cheerful about the UK government bond market?
After all, it keeps on falling, despite the occasional respite, and probably
has still further to fall.
The answer depends on whether inflation and interest rates remain low. Even
then, the battered investor might take a lot of persuasion to return to
gilts.
The yield on long-term gilts has risen by more than 2 percentage points
since the beginning of the year, to 8 1/2 per cent, and their price has
crashed by more than 20 per cent. Why? 'It was just an unfortunate
combination of events. There's no single explanation,' says Ian Shepherdson,
an economist at Midland Global Markets.
'The initial sell-off began when the hedge funds ended their feeding frenzy
after pushing bond prices up to unsustainable heights and decided to take
their profits and move on.' Hedge funds are large pools of speculative
capital which are switched between financial markets to exploit short-term
opportunities.
Then came a succession of events, beginning with the move on February 4 by
the Federal Reserve, the US central bank, to put up short-term interest
rates.
'This signalled the end of the low interest rate era. Funds flowing out of
US suddenly changed direction,' says one City analyst. 'Investors, afraid
that the dollar would soon rise, quickly dropped bonds denominated in
European currencies.'
The markets were particularly unnerved by the fact that the interest rate
rise came when most inflation indicators were pointing downwards. 'That
suggested that the authorities knew something the markets did not,' says
Shepherdson.
The UK base rate cut on February 8 was taken very badly by the gilt market.
'Maybe it was justified on fundamental grounds,' the analyst says. 'There
had been some decent activity numbers.
'The problem was the timing and the subsequent revelation that Eddie George
(governor of the Bank of England) didn't want it. It was seen as blatant
political manoeuvreing.'
Next came anxiety over rising earnings figures, which were seen as a
precursor to rising inflation. Finally, there was the Conservative party's
protracted political woes, which added to uncertainty and scared off many
investors.
Many believe this succession of 'unfortunate' events has changed the
fundamental nature of the gilt market. City analysts say investor confidence
has been damaged in a way they have never seen before. What, then, will it
take to restore confidence in gilts?
One answer comes from Simon Briscoe, an economist at SG Warburg: 'There has
to be continued low inflation and low average earnings numbers, more subdued
consumer activity, and a slowdown in the housing market.'
Data published last week showing a drop in earnings, subdued growth in the
retail price index and a marked fall in construction orders, was duly
welcomed by gilts.
'If this continues, then there is no doubt that current yields are extremely
attractive,' says Briscoe. He is confident that inflation and interest rates
will remain low for the remainder of the year, although he thinks the
outlook for gilts is less favourable beyond that.
Another necessary condition for a recovery in gilts is a slowdown in the US
economy in order to retard the rise in official US interest rates and dampen
any propensity the dollar might have to rise.
Investors also have to be convinced that all the speculative positions have
finally been unwound. 'That will probably happen when speculators come to
show their half-year results at the end of June,' says Ste-phen Lewis, of
London Bond Broking.' Investors also have to build up large amounts of cash
before they are ready to invest - and that will take a month or two yet.'
Analysts agree the UK's political uncertainty must end. Recent talk of tax
cuts to boost the standing of prime minister John Major 'would be the last
thing the gilt market wants,' another analyst says. 'It would not smack of
sound political management.'
There are signs of optimism among some investors, though. Barry Woolf,
investment director at Mercury Fund Management, says: 'We have been gently
adding to gilts at this level. All bond markets are going to remain highly
volatile but, provided we are right on the fundamentals, there's money to be
made in gilts.'
The problem is that even if all these conditions are met, the large
institutional investors with the funds to change market sentiment may still
be wary of committing themselves after having their fingers burnt so badly.
In his Mansion House speech in the City this week, Kenneth Clarke, the
chancellor of the exchequer, pledged that the government would not create a
new boom and bust cycle generating a 'fraudulent, inflationary, feel good'
factor among voters. 'We will cut taxes again,' he said, 'but only when we
can afford to do so.'
The impact of Clarke's words was softened, however, when George warned that
interest rates would have to move upwards at some time in the future 'to
maintain the (economic) expansion at a sustainable pace'. This might hardly
have been news, but it would not have encouraged the gilt market.
There are reasons to be cheerful, and the chancellor will continue to do his
best to keep investors' spirits up. But with the market in its present
nervous state, needing several pieces of good news to offset every single
bit of bad news, it will take a lot of good news to convince investors to
take their first tentative steps back into gilts.
