FT  23 MAY 94 / The Lopez affair becomes a saga: A cycling nymph and a
silent Swede put under the spotlight
In the lengthening drama of the Lopez affair, there have already been many
episodes in which things have not always been quite what they seemed. So it
was with the cycling nymph, the muscular detective, the silent Swede and the
sacked motor industry executive who joined the saga last week.
They made their entrances in a scene carefully stage-managed by Volkswagen,
the automotive group whose production chief, Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, is under criminal investigation based on suspicions that he and
colleagues stole industrial secrets from their former employer, General
Motors.
Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, got wind of things to come when it
received a list of questions from Stern, the popular weekly magazine, from
which it was apparent that Stern, working with the ARD television station,
had learnt that Opel lawyers last year set private detectives on the
suspects' trail. Spiegel magazine, always well informed on the case, ran a
pre-emptive story in its May 16 issue, featuring a girl and her bicycle. Ms
X, working for the PSS private detective agency, last summer apparently
suffered a puncture outside a Braunschweig house occupied by two of Mr
Lopez's lieutenants and fellow suspects, Mr Rosario Piazza and Mr Jorge
Alvarez.
The gallant young Piazza helped, drove her back to her hotel. Telephone
numbers were exchanged, and there versions of subsequent events diverge
sharply.
On May 17, Volkswagen moved. The suspects' five lawyers issued a statement
directed at Ms Dorothea Holland, the state prosecutor in charge of the
official case. It listed a series of 'indications' calling into question her
impartiality and professional standards in relation to the activities of the
cyclist and her fellow private eye, Mr Jean-Louis Royet. The thrust of the
claims was that information on the use of private detectives and the
information they gathered had been kept - against the rules - from VW's
legal representatives. Mr Gerhard Schroder, a member of the VW supervisory
board and prime minister of the state of Lower Saxony, which owns 20 per
cent of VW, simultaneously broke months of silence with a suggestion that
the official investigation should be closed.
Mr Royet, a heftily built martial arts fan and a part-time private detective
at PSS (run by his wife, Dagmar) had in the interim also proved to be a
full-time officer in the Rhineland-Pfalz state criminal investigation
bureau. The expose was to cost him his badge.
He made his first full appearance in the ARD broadcast, 'The Battle of the
Giants', transmitted last Wednesday. He had been photographed at work last
summer in Braunschweig. Also featured was an indignant Mr Eberhard Kempf,
the lawyer acting for Mr Alvarez, who also (as Opel pointed out) had acted
for the journalist who made the programme. Then there was another new
character, Mr Hans Huskes, recently fired from his post as a senior
executive at GM Europe. He, as GM was to reveal in the interim, was being
investigated by the Swiss authorities for unspecified alleged professional
crimes.
His contribution to the film comprised mainly a declaration of faith in Mr
Lopez. He provided a human touch in a programme dominated by journalistic
speculation and interspersed with shots of four cardboard boxes which once
contained documents and other data allegedly stolen from GM. Found last
June, they are now held in a police evidence store.
One former resident in the house where the boxes were discovered (vacated by
co-tenants Mr Piazza and Mr Alvarez shortly before the discovery) said he
recognised only three. There were distorted echoes here of VW's claims of
last year that 'evidence' could have been planted, but no more than
innuendo. The film moved on to a Mr Andersson, a Swedish engineer, filmed
sitting in his car as the reporter yelled in German: 'Now you have another
chance to tell the truth]' Mr Andersson, the man who handed the boxes to the
police, and who is believed to speak only Swedish and English, reversed
away.
Although the Stern article, the ARD programme and the lawyers' statement
were clearly linked and co-ordinated, they yielded some effects which VW
might count as 'positive'. Most important, the events prompted the legal
authorities to forbid the investigating office to issue any further press
comments. An erratic trickle of information from Ms Holland - virtually all
apparently damaging to the VW side - has accelerated lately. VW may draw
some small comfort from having at last managed to score a few points in the
media campaign.
But the lawyers' attack on the credibility and impartiality of Ms Holland,
despite the backing from the political weight of Mr Schroder, who has
ambitions to be federal chancellor, foundered. All the charges were promptly
and convincingly dismissed by her superior, Mr Hans-Christoph Schaefer, head
of the state of Hesse's prosecution service.
Following Mr Schaefer's intervention, Ms Holland, the character around whom
much of the action has revolved, is off the stage until the denouement. The
question now is whether the protagonists have the will to continue the
public battle. Neither seems to have any inclination to be seen to be
backing off, but both know it is likely to be some months yet before Ms
Holland makes her next and decisive entrance.
