FT  10 SEP 94 / Markets: Investments that spell danger - Serious Money
American pundit Benjamin Graham compared the stock market to a manic
depressive. 'Mr Market' was always ready both to buy and sell, but his share
price quotes veered from the ridiculously high to the absurdly low as his
excessive optimism about company prospects gave way to equally exaggerated
gloom.
The chart on page III suggests that, if all markets have a touch of the
manic depressive about them, emerging markets are an extreme case.
This patient is highly unpredictable and dangerous to know. For the average
private investor, that means investing through a broadly-based fund and
staying aboard for the long term. Trying to take advantage of manic
depressive market swings is a mug's game.
Warrants were one of investors' favourite toys last year - but toys can be
dangerous. This week, the price of BTR's 93-94 warrants tumbled from 87p to
45p as bad results at the conglomerate knocked its ordinary shares back by
44p to 338p.
The fall in the price of the ordinary shares was only 11.5 per cent. So, why
did the warrants nearly halve?
These particular warrants give investors the right to buy ordinary shares in
BTR at 288p, but this right expires in October. The brevity of this
remaining period is the main reason the warrant price responded so
dramatically to the move in the underlying share price.
Add the warrant price (45p) to the subscription price (288p) and the
warrant-holder can buy BTR shares for an effective 333p, close to the
present share price.
When warrants get very near the end of their life, they tend to move penny
for penny with the share price - as the 93-94 BTR warrants did. But warrants
with longer to run normally sell for more than the conversion sums would
suggest. For the extra time itself is valuable, and this 'time value' tends
to act as a buffer to the warrant price.
Longer-dated warrants do not normally react as sharply to movements in the
underlying shares as ones near expiry.
Many people first get their warrants as an add-on to a new issue
(particularly investment trust issues) or as part-payment in a bid. What
they need to remember is that the riskiness of these warrants might well
increase as they age. All warrants are potentially dangerous.
Short-dated warrants are the most explosive, though. Selling your warrants
when they still have a couple of years left can prevent some last-minute
upsets.
Foreign income dividends (Fids) are a wet towel subject but they are getting
more popular with companies. The trail-blazer came from BAT in March; Coats
Viyella, Burmah Castrol and RTZ all joined in this week. So, it is worth
understanding the rules.
Fids are suitable only for companies getting a large proportion of profits
from overseas. Some such companies used to face an abnormally high tax
charge because their mainstream corporation tax liability did not suffice to
cover tax paid on dividends. A Fid carries a normal 20 per cent tax credit,
but tax-exempt shareholders cannot claim a rebate.
Very broadly, if a company paying a Fid pays the same net dividend as one
paying an ordinary dividend, investors paying tax get the same amount, but
tax-exempt shareholders get less from the Fid than they would from an
ordinary dividend. Tax-exempt shareholders include large investors such as
pension funds, private shareholders whose low income takes them out of the
income tax net, and personal equity plan-holders.
Companies are tending to increase their net Fid dividend payments by 25 per
cent in order to make good the cut in income of their tax-exempt
shareholders. This attempt to level the playing field in practice tilts it
in favour of tax-paying investors, for they actually benefit from the
dividend increase.
Shunting your holdings around to get potential Fid-payers outside your Pep
is a hassle. But the discrepancy could be worth bearing in mind when
deciding which companies to put into your Pep in the first place.
The sums, courtesy of BZW, are:
1. For a UK dividend received of 80p. A basic rate (20 per cent) tax-payer
gets 80p, a higher rate (40 per cent) tax-payer gets 60p, and a Pep-holder
gets 100p.
2. For a Fid received of 80p. A basic rate tax-payer gets 80p, a higher rate
tax-payer gets 60p, and a Pep-holder gets 80p.
3. If the company pays a Fid but increases it to 100p. A basic rate
tax-payer gets 100p, a higher rate tax-payer gets 75p, and a Pep-holder gets
100p.
Apologies for the headache.
