FT  03 MAY 94 / Dirty tricks alleged in soap war: The renewed battle for the
Pounds 6bn European detergents market
This week sees the official outbreak of a detergent war in the UK. The
launch of Persil Power, Unilever's new super-concentrated washing powder, is
no ordinary marketing exercise. At stake is leadership in a Pounds 6bn
European detergents market, lost a few years ago to Unilever's arch-rival,
Procter &amp; Gamble of the US.
Some of the early skirmishes in the war have been distinctly odd. Procter
executives last week claimed in the Netherlands that the new detergent made
clothes disintegrate, or words to that effect. Unilever's Dutch subsidiary
promptly took Procter to court to stop the allegations.
Even odder is the way the row originated. As soon as the new powder appeared
on the shelves in test marketing, Procter bought some. It then went to
Unilever and expressed 'serious concerns' about the product's safety.
According to Unilever, Procter asked that the launch - the culmination of
Pounds 100m of capital investment - should be cancelled. Unsurprisingly,
Unilever refused. Its executives now mutter darkly that Procter, a
notoriously tough competitor, is using dirty tricks in an attempt to wreck
the launch.
The charge is one which Procter rebuts. In any other industry it would seem
the natural explanation. Suppose, for instance, one of the big brewers
launched a new lager which turned teeth green. The other brewers would sit
back and await the market's revenge. The last thing they would do is
helpfully point out their rival's mistake and suggest it withdraw the
product.
But detergents, Procter argues, are different. It told the FT: 'Our main
concern is that fabric damage occurs progressively and a significant
proportion of consumers regularly switch brands, with the result that P &amp; G
products could be blamed for damage which in reality may have been caused by
another product.'
If the implication is that the detergents industry is in the habit of
conferring in this way, Unilever denies it. 'This is a notoriously
dog-eat-dog industry,' a Unilever executive said yesterday. 'We don't talk
to each other before things happen. This is unprecedented.'
The two companies, the world's largest in detergents, have fought each other
around the globe for decades. Historically, Procter dominated in North
America and Unilever in Europe.
In the 1980s this was a fairly comfortable arrangement for Unilever.
Vigorous action stemmed earlier losses in the US, while its European lead
was maintained. But in the 1990s things have gone wrong on both sides of the
Atlantic. It lost ground in the US and earlier this year announced heavy
rationalisation there and the possible withdrawal from some market sectors.
In Europe, the unthinkable happened. Concentrated washing powders arrived
and Unilever fumbled their introduction, losing its market lead.
Definite figures are hard to come by, but Unilever concedes that Procter is
'several points' ahead. The sums involved are formidable: between them the
two companies have 60 per cent of the Pounds 6bn market.
In seeking to regain ground, Unilever has for the first time produced a
pan-European washing powder, one which is claimed to wash more gently at
lower temperatures and to be more environmentally friendly. As the scale of
the exercise is unprecedented, so too is the competitive threat. To judge by
last week's shenanigans, Procter might just conceivably be rattled.
