FT  18 JUL 94 / Ne'er the rose without the thorn: Blair as leader would
revive the UK Labour party, but tensions would remain just below the surface
This week Mr Tony Blair will be anointed leader of the Labour party. That
much is certain in the unpredictable world of British politics.
Those on the unreconstructed left who believe the party might rediscover,
even now, its collectivist dreams by choosing Mrs Margaret Beckett or Mr
John Prescott have until Thursday's announcement to cherish their delusions.
Mr Blair's election will change the character of his party - and the
landscape of British politics. Her Majesty's loyal opposition will have a
leader preoccupied with the future, not shackled by the past.
Let's not get carried way. It is no use trying now to predict the outcome of
a general election which might not happen until 1997. Mr John Major has
defied the pundits more than once. The economy looks better by the day. Mr
Blair may be brimming with ideas but the 41-year-old former public schoolboy
lacks experience.
And if no one can doubt the direction in which he intends to take Labour, it
is far less certain how fast he can travel in replacing socialism with
social democracy.
After four election defeats, the party seems to have realised it is time to
grow up. How else could it have come to the conclusion that the
standard-bearer of its so-called modernisers' tendency was the only
realistic choice to succeed Mr John Smith?
But many in its ranks are still reluctant to give up the simplicities of
political childhood. As the candidates have trudged around the country
seeking the support of party and trade union activists, Mr Prescott's call
for a return to full employment has struck an emotive chord. Mrs Beckett has
reasserted the leftwing principles most thought she had buried long ago.
The smart betting at Westminster is that Mr Prescott will displace her as
deputy leader. Either way, the 1m party members and trade union levy payers
expected to participate in the contest will vote with their heads for the
leader and their hearts for the deputy.
Mr Blair has remained publicly neutral. The truth, probably, is that he
would prefer neither candidate.
Mrs Beckett is too much a creature still of the hard left. Mr Prescott is
far more intelligent than he sometimes sounds; and he is loyal. But his
traditionalist bluntness jars with the soothing rhetoric of the modernisers.
Mr Blair is tough. His youthful good looks and the Bambi jibes belie the
inner certainty which distinguishes political leaders from those they lead.
He has the support of the vast majority in the shadow cabinet and of the
party's MPs.
Thanks to the grip on the party machinery established by the then leader, Mr
Neil Kinnock, during the late 1980s, he will command also a large majority
on the National Executive Committee.
He is already planning his own changes to the way the party shapes its
policies. He sees the cumbersome policy commissions driven by the party
headquarters in Walworth Road as introspective and stifling of innovation.
He intends to provide room in the machinery for the more original ideas of
left-leaning think-tanks, such as the Institute for Public Policy Research,
and of free-thinking backbench MPs like Mr Frank Field.
So his deputy's power will be limited to a capacity to make life
occasionally uncomfortable, rather than seriously to obstruct. Mr Gordon
Brown, the modernist shadow chancellor who stood aside to allow Mr Blair a
clear run at the leadership, will have more influence than either candidate.
But first the new leader must define his project.
The campaign has told us more than his critics allow about his ambitions. He
has not provided a blueprint for the party's general election manifesto. Nor
has he answered the persistent questioning of those who insist he should
spell out, at least two years before the election, just who might or might
not pay more in tax if he reaches 10 Downing Street.
Instead Mr Blair has stuck resolutely to elaborating a set of basic
principles. In six speeches since the start of the campaign, he has added a
series of policy signposts rather than specifics to the philosophical
framework.
The approach has irritated those who believe that politics is about detail
rather than direction. It has worried some of Mr Blair's own admirers, who
think he has been more cautious than necessary in sketching out the
modernist agenda. He is unrepentant. He acknowledges the caution but has
told close colleagues there is also careful calculation.
Labour has spent the past decade chasing the Conservatives. The piles of
ideological baggage left behind by repeated accommodations with the
government have not been replaced with any fresh analysis of Labour's
purpose.
During the 1980s, it promised not to renationalise, admitted half-heartedly
there was something to be said for the market economy, stripped its
manifestos of pledges to soak the rich. It then added in a few random
commitments to spend, say, a few billion pounds extra on child benefit and
pensions.
Mr Blair's contention is that Labour needs a coherent prospectus. The
electorate above all wants to know where it is coming from. That means being
comfortable with a set of its own ideas, not combining grudging
accommodations with the Tories with a clutch of pledges drawn from
rose-tinted images of a socialist past.
He regards building enough credibility to win the next election as a
three-stage process. Labour must first redefine its core principles. It
needs then to construct a policy agenda rooted in that intellectual
framework. Finally, it must offer the electorate a series of 'flagship'
policies to illuminate the link between principle and practice.
His aim during the campaign has been to concentrate on the first task while
pencilling in the outlines of the second. The detailed policies can wait
until much closer to the general election.
Hence the constant repetition now of the central Blair message: that
Labour's purpose is to reconnect individual aspiration with the actions of
government. The party must reposition itself as one concerned not to
constrain but to promote individual opportunity by reawakening faith in the
notion of society. In Mr Blair's own phrase: 'The simple case for democratic
socialism rests on the belief that individuals prosper best within a strong,
active society.'
That means Labour cannot any longer be about offering fixed economic
prescriptions or old-style collectivism. Nor can it apply to the rapidly
changing world of the 1990s the ideology of the 1960s or 1970s.
The speeches have carried a series of more particular messages. Labour must
embrace the 'dynamic market economy'. It must forget its old hang-ups about
state ownership and abandon the notion that governments can pick industrial
winners. It must understand that it is impossible to insulate Britain from
the realities of global competition.
In education, the priority should be to raise standards rather than indulge
the political correctness which allows schools to blame social deprivation
for poor performance. Labour must understand the purpose of the welfare
state is not to create dependency but to provide escape routes. The
unemployed have responsibilities as well as rights. The role of the state is
to help them find work through training or childcare provision, not pay them
to be idle. Criminals, meanwhile, should expect to be punished rather than
excused.
In Europe, the British have no choice other than to be positive and
committed about closer European co-operation. The government must maintain
strong and credible defences.
Less controversially for members of his own party, Mr Blair has put constant
emphasis on the role of education and training in promoting both faster
economic growth and individual opportunity. He has promised to close
existing loopholes to make the very rich pay at least some tax. He has
pledged to overhaul and eventually replace the House of Lords and to devolve
political power to Scotland, Wales and the English regions.
The strategy has been derided by the Conservatives. The
Labour-leader-in-waiting has been renamed Tony Blur. Ministers are prepared
to demand answers to a barrage of detailed policy questions the moment his
election is confirmed.
But, overall, the Tory response has betrayed the government's own
uncertainties. The initial instinct has been to attack Mr Blair as another
of Labour's chameleons, willing to twist and trim to win a few more votes
but at heart an unreconstructed socialist. He is said to be a man of
sound-bites not substance, a creature of the sharp-suited media men who
tried to hide Mr Kinnock behind the party's Red Rose image.
But there is private acknowledgement that the easy points which could be
scored off Mr Kinnock's policy U-turns are no longer on offer. Sure, Mr
Blair stood in the 1983 general election on a platform of withdrawal from
the European Community. Sure, there are quotes to be found which reveal he
has not always been quite so modern about nationalisation or trade union
power. And doesn't he even now support the minimum wage?
The problem is that this fresh-faced Oxbridge graduate simply does not look
or sound like a closet Trotskyist. He has never been one.
Nor does Mr Major's government appear confident of where it should position
itself to win back the disillusioned voters of middle England.
The prime minister told his supporters at Westminster earlier this month
that their priority must be to dispel the impression of convergence between
a post-Thatcherite Tory and a Blair-led Labour party. He has not spelt out
how.
Some among his cabinet colleagues believe the government must move further
to the right to give definition to the choice facing the electorate. It must
sustain the Eurosceptic flavour in its approach to Brussels, which saved it
from catastrophe in the European elections last month. Above all, it must
start cutting taxes again well before the election.
Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, and Mr Ian Lang, Scottish secretary, are
among others around the cabinet table who take a different tack. They fear
that vacating the centre ground will hand to Labour the votes of the
discontented skilled and middle classes whose preference will decide the
election.
Others still - Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, is the most prominent -
favour a delicate balancing act, promising both to address the new
insecurities of middle England and to deliver another burst of Thatcherite
radicalism.
Mr Blair draws comfort from the confusion. He should not be complacent. He,
too, has to take his party with him.
By and large, it has been receptive, occasionally even enthusiastic. After
15 years of opposition, most in the shadow cabinet don't want to give up
again the chance to climb each night into one of those swish ministerial
cars rather than stand in the taxi queue for King's Cross.
The generation of Labour MPs which entered Parliament in 1992 has changed
the political balance of the party at Westminster. The newcomers,
particularly those who won marginal seats, are well attuned to political
realities. The once vibrant Campaign Group of hard-left MPs discovered last
month that it could not muster even enough votes to nominate its own
candidate for the leadership race.
More importantly, the one-member-one-vote system under which the election is
being conducted, has deprived the trade union leaders of their influence.
The executive of the Transport and General Workers Union made a fool of
itself by backing Mrs Beckett at the outset. Others, more wisely, have kept
their counsel.
But these are early days. Many in the Labour party share the weaknesses of
the reformed alcoholic. How easy it would be to slip back into making just
one or two big new tax and spending pledges; to buy peace with the party's
union paymasters with a promise to sweep away the Tories' employment law; or
to spell out just how Labour would insulate the low-paid from the realities
of the marketplace.
Admirers who have applauded Mr Blair's agenda during the campaign often have
been unwilling to own up to the hard truths that lie behind it. A reformed
welfare state means an end to easy generosity. A modern economic policy
implies an acceptance that there is no pot of gold to be found by putting up
the top rates of income tax. Some time soon, the party will have to own up
also to the fact that the idea of returning schools to the control of Labour
local authorities is not exactly a vote-winner.
The risk has been evident in Mr Blair's own speeches. There has been a
suppressed tension as the prospective leader has sought to balance the
demand for change with reassurance to his party's traditionalists. For all
his rhetorical skills, the joins show.
Too often Labour has discovered too late that its own concept of
modernisation lags well behind the expectations and aspirations of the
electorate.
Mr Blair has done well over the past six weeks. So has his party. He is
right to judge that the voters are more interested in ideas than detail. But
six weeks is a short time in politics. This has been the easy bit. Labour
must now show it can face up to the hard truths. Mr Blair will discover that
leading his party is a great deal tougher than being chosen to lead it.
