FT  18 JUL 94 / Survey of South Africa (31): On the touch-line - Foreign
investment
More talk than action sums up South Africa's recent record of foreign
investment. Most of the action has come in the past 18 months with a surge
of portfolio investment and a large number of franchise and other non-equity
deals.
A recent independent survey concludes: 'Most companies are adopting a
wait-and-see attitude', avoiding manufacturing and keeping their investments
relatively small.
Many foreign companies have established a low-profile presence in the
country in anticipation of an improved business climate from 1995 onwards.
The main action has been on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. In the 15
months to March 1994, net inward investment on the JSE totalled R8.9bn,
almost two-thirds in gilts and the balance in equities. This compares with
substantial net foreign selling, especially of equities in the 1990-1992
period.
The same survey, which warns that it may not have tracked down all post-1990
foreign investment, lists 17 first-time new investors, including Vodafone of
the UK and Alcatel of France in telecommunications, Daewoo of South Korea in
household goods, Mr Tony O'Reilly's Independent Newspapers of Ireland in
publishing and Digital Equipment of the US in computers.
Another seven are listed as returning companies - those that divested in the
1980s for political reasons. This list includes leading players such as IBM,
Procter &amp; Gamble and AB Electrolux of Sweden.
Another important participant who stayed behind, BMW, has brought in R100m
in new capital to expand its Rosslyn vehicle-assembly plant.
There has been a good deal more activity in the field of indirect investment
 -distribution, franchise and licensing deals. This list is dominated by the
returnees - Apple, Honeywell and Novell in computers; Volvo and Peugeot in
cars, and Morgan Stanley, Citibank and Warburgs in banking. Significantly,
the largest single category, of some 36 companies, is made up of those
intending to invest or reinvest. Here, too, the list reads like a Who's Who
of global business: Ford, Motorola, Heinz, Philip Morris, Wang, AT&amp;T,
Ericsson, NEC, Coca-Cola and Pepsi.
The conventional wisdom is that this cautious trend, with its emphasis on
indirect investments with minimal equity involvement, such as franchising,
will continue for another 18 months to two years. The broking community is
bullish about portfolio investment prospects, especially once the financial
rand is abolished. But direct investment is seen, in the words of Mr
O'Reilly, chief executive of Heinz, as a 'postponable event'.
How postponable was outlined at last month's World Economic Forum meeting by
Mr Frank Savage of Alliance Capital Management International. Mr Savage put
up a 10-point wish list of conditions that foreign investors want to see in
South Africa: financial rand abolition, the removal of exchange controls,
removal of limitations on foreign ownership, no capital gains taxes,
non-inflationary budgets, lower tariffs, reform of the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange, anti-trust legislation, black economic empowerment and
consolidation of the government of national unity.
Almost all of these are on the new government's agenda - the one exception
being the probability of some form of capital transfer tax. But it will take
years to translate an agenda into action.
While the foreigners sit on the touch-line, domestic investment has started
to recover. In March, Nedbank's Economic Unit, relying on public
announcements, estimated new and continuing capital projects worth almost
R100bn (Dollars 27bn at present exchange rates), over the next six years.
This estimate includes an adjustment of 10 per cent a year for inflation.
Community and social projects (R35bn) make up the largest single chunk,
followed by energy and water projects (R21bn) and manufacturing (R13 bn).
In the past, South Africa's investment record has fallen short on two
counts. Even when it was investing more than comparable middle-income
economies such as Brazil, Chile and Mexico - averaging 26 per cent of gross
domestic product in the early 1970s - output and employment growth did not
respond proportionately, because of growing capital intensity.
In the 1980s and 1990s, the problem was less the efficiency of investment
than the steep decline in volume. By last year investment was down to 15.2
per cent of GDP, touching bottom in mid-year, since when there has been some
recovery.
To grow at 5 per cent a year, the economy needs to invest more than 25 per
cent annually - implying a shift of more than 7 per cent of GDP from
consumption to savings. Part of this shift can be funded from offshore, with
foreign capital, but achieving the domestic transfer of resources while
simultaneously satisfying expectations will be a formidable task.
