FT  27 MAY 94 / Technology: Red, white and better all over / A look at the
latest improvements in blood products, in a continuing series on drug
advances
The blood products sector used to be a quiet backwater of the healthcare
business. Now, it is a rapidly growing money-spinner. The engine of change
has been biotechnology, and the treating of blood disorders has created the
first superstar of that business, California's Amgen.
Five years ago, blood products meant substances derived from blood. These
would be used in blood transfusions and as supplements in conditions such as
haemophilia (uncontrolled bleeding).
But the business suffered from high costs, owing to the laborious nature of
collecting blood from donors, a lack of patent protection which in turn
limited prices, and periodic scandals over contamination. Few of the big
pharmaceuticals companies bothered to get involved.
What biotechnology did was to make possible the high-volume manufacture of
some of the components of blood, even those that appear in only minute
quantities in the body.
Two big-selling products have been developed so far. The most dramatic sales
have come from erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone produced naturally by the
body which Amgen has synthesised and commercialised as Epogen.
EPO is used to treat anaemia, a condition which can arise when not enough
EPO is made by the kidneys. EPO travels via the bloodstream to the bone
marrow were it stimulates the production of red blood cells. It is these
cells which carry oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body.
For more than 30 years, patients with kidney disease have received dialysis,
a mechanical treatment that mimics much of what the kidney does. But
dialysis machines do not make EPO, so the patients develop anaemia.
In the past these patients have received blood transfusions, an expensive
and laborious procedure that carried risks of infection and other
complications. Today the shortage of natural EPO can be addressed directly
by Epogen. Amgen says that 80 per cent of dialysis patients in the US now
receive the drug.
The second new drug stimulates the development of white blood cells - a
central component of the body's immune system - rather than red. Granulocyte
colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) also works by stimulating the bone marrow,
but this time to produce white blood cells.
G-CSF is sold by Amgen as Neupogen. It is used in the treatment of cancer
patients because chemotherapy damages the bone marrow and with it the body's
defence mechanisms.
Chemotherapy patients are especially vulnerable to infection. Giving them
G-CSF not only allows them to improve their defences against infection but
means that more of the chemotherapy agent can be used to try to deal with
the cancer.
Both Epogen and Neupogen are made by the complicated, but now well-tested,
techniques of genetic engineering. Scientists analyse human EPO and identify
its components. With that knowledge, they can calculate the shape of the
gene that triggers the production of EPO and scan thousands of human genes
to search for it.
Once the correct human gene is identified, it is put in the ovary of a
hamster. The egg that the ovary later releases is capable of making EPO. It
divides many times and a master cell bank is built up.
For large-scale manufacturing, cells from the master bank are nourished in a
fluid. As they grow they secrete EPO. The fluid is periodically removed and
the EPO extracted, purified and bottled.
Amgen received its first patent for this process in October 1987. Less than
two years later, the US Food and Drug Administration approved its use for
kidney patients. Neupogen was approved by the FDA in 1991.
The drugs are among the most effective on the market today because they are
chemically identical to natural products of the body. As natural products
they cannot be patented and cannot easily be improved upon. Amgen protects
its discovery through patents on the manufacturing method and the uses of
the drug.
These patents are effective enough to have shut out competition and allow
high prices to be charged. One course of Neupogen costs about Pounds 800,
for example, and a cancer patient may need several courses.
The pay-off is that patients are far less likely to have to come back into
hospital to be treated for an infection that the white blood cells would
normally have fought off. That saves money on both hospital beds and the
cocktail of antibiotics that would have to be administered.
The combination of high price and potential savings to buyers translates
into big profits for Amgen: the first three months of this year saw pre-tax
profits of Dollars 93.5m (Pounds 62.3m) on sales of Dollars 345.7m.
The success story has barely begun. According to analysts at stockbroker
Lehman Brothers, by 2000 Epogen will be the world's best selling drug with
Neupogen not far behind in third place. Their combined sales will be more
than Dollars 5bn a year, roughly the level of the UK National Health
Service's annual budget today.
The successes of Neupogen and Epogen have now attracted other companies into
research and development programmes. They include Sandoz of Switzerland,
which has signed research agreements with North American biotechnology
research centres Terry Fox Laboratories in Vancouver and Systemix in Palo
Alto, California.
One of the most advanced research programmes is at British Biotechnology, in
Oxford. It is trying to combine the effectiveness of both Epogen and
Neupogen by defending the bone marrow against damage.
This can be done by first recognising that chemotherapy agents kill cancers
by destroying cells that are dividing. Chemotherapy does not distinguish
between cancer cells and others that are dividing, such as hair, which is
why cancer patients often lose their hair.
Bone marrow contains the cells, called stem cells, that divide and develop
into a range of blood cells - red, white and the platelets which cause
clotting.
British Biotechnology's programme is to develop a drug that temporarily
switches off the division of stem cells. The chemotherapy agents will then
leave the stem cells untouched and when the therapy is finished, they can be
switched on again.
'Rather than a treatment for the damage caused by chemotherapy, it is a
prophylaxis or prevention of the effect,' says Peter Lewis, director of
research and development at British Biotechnology.
The company is not the only one developing a stem cell protector. Sandoz,
Sweden's Astra, and T-Cell Sciences, a California biotechnology company, are
close behind. The pharmaceutical industry knows that there is a huge market
to be tapped.
This is a far cry from a decade ago when Epogen and Neupogen found
themselves in virgin markets. There were no products they could compete with
and there were no sales forces or doctors accustomed to selling or buying
treatments.
Amgen established a series of licensing deals and joint ventures with big
drugs companies even though many companies were sceptical. 'It was a
completely novel drug,' explains Paul Hooper, UK marketing director for
Swiss company Roche, now Amgen's joint venture partner in Europe for Epogen.
Another company, one of the largest in the US, turned down the chance to be
a licensee. 'We didn't recognise its potential,' says a former senior
executive. 'Later I felt like the record company man that turned down the
Beatles. I won't be making that mistake again.'
The series continues next month with a look at pain killers.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                  WORLDWIDE BLOOD FACTOR SALES
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       1992     1993
                                                      Dollars  Dollars
Company              Brand            Generic            m        m
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Amegen               Neupogen         G-CSF             544      719
Amgen                Epogen           erythrpoietin     505      587
Johnson &amp; Johnson    Procrit/Eprex    erythrpoietin     450      525
Chugal               Epogin           erythrpoietin     225      270
Sankyo               Gran             G-CSF             162      194
Sankyo               Espo             erythrpoietin     162      183
Chugal               Neutrogin        G-CSF             117      134
Immunex              Leukine          GM-CSF             26       42
Green Cross          Leukoprol        M-CSF              29       28
Sandoz               Leucomax         GM-CSF              7       20
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Datamonitor
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
