FT  07 DEC 94 / 'Honest broker' on course for Treasury: Robert Rubin is
likely to adopt a conservative line if he assumes the economic reins in the
US
At 73, Mr Lloyd Bentsen has always seemed an outsider in the youthful
administration of President Bill Clinton. It was not just his age that set
him apart, however. His conservatism, his instincts for the dynamics of
Congress and his impatience with the White House's interminable policy
debates have all distinguished him.
They are qualities that the Clinton administration may need more than ever
as it faces the prospect of two years of intense ideological confrontation
with the new Republican majority in Congress.
Since their electoral defeat last month, Democrats have been trying to
figure out where they went wrong, and where they need to go to recover.
White House staffers debate feverishly over whether the president would be
better off veering left or right.
In this climate, Mr Bentsen's influence had seemed sure to grow, partly
because of his ability, demonstrated in six years as chairman of the Senate
finance committee, to work with the Republicans, and not least because he
has always seemed to be one of the few people who can force the Clinton
administration to make up its mind.
That is a quality shared by Mr Robert Rubin, 56, who will be nominated to
succeed Mr Bentsen as Treasury secretary. There will be no sharp difference
in philosophy between the two men.
When Mr Clinton asked Mr Bentsen in 1992, just after his election victory,
whom he should name to the Treasury, Mr Bentsen suggested Mr Rubin. Mr
Rubin, in turn, suggested Mr Bentsen. 'Ever since, Bob Rubin has insisted
that he had more influence with the president than I did,' Mr Bentsen said
yesterday.
Senate confirmation cannot be taken for granted with the pugnacious Senator
Alfonse D'Amato taking over as chairman of the Senate banking committee, but
there is no immediately obvious reason why Mr Rubin should face confirmation
difficulties.
A former chairman of the Goldman Sachs investment bank, Mr Rubin turned his
newly created position as head of the National Economic Council into an
essential centre for co-ordinating the work of often competing agencies such
as the Treasury, the US trade representative's office, the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Commerce Department. At a ceremony at the White
House yesterday, Mr Clinton called Mr Rubin 'the consummate honest broker'.
Mr Rubin will take the lead next year in the battle with the Republicans
over fiscal policy, and has served warning that he will demand that any tax
cuts be paid for by offsetting tax increases or spending cuts.
One of the secrets of his success in co-ordinating economic policy has been
his own modesty, which has helped to bring competing agencies together
without fear that the NEC would steal their thunder. That modesty is so rare
for Washington that the task of replacing him at the NEC is a difficult one.
The loss of Mr Roger Altman, another Wall Street investment banker who was
Mr Bentsen's deputy at the Treasury until he was forced to resign amid
charges that he had misled Congress over the Whitewater affair, is now
sorely felt.
Mr Rubin's two deputies at the NEC are Mr Bo Cutter, who has taken the lead
on trade policy, and Mr Gene Sperling, who is in charge of domestic policy.
But neither is expected to step up to the top job. Instead, the most widely
mentioned candidate is Mr Erskine Bowles, who founded his own investment
bank in North Carolina before being appointed head of the Small Business
Administration by Mr Clinton. A rising star in the administration, Mr Bowles
recently moved over to the White House as deputy chief of staff.
An economic team headed by Mr Rubin, Mr Bowles and Ms Alice Rivlin, budget
director, backed by Mr Leon Panetta, the White House chief of staff and Ms
Rivlin's predecessor at the Office of Management and Budget, seems likely to
keep the administration on a conservative economic and fiscal course.
But the course may be harder to steer over the next two years than it has
been over the last two, when rising employment and low inflation have kept
the economic indicators favourable.
Mr Bentsen's successor faces the prospect of a slowing economy and the
possibility either of a resurgence of inflation or of the beginnings of a
recession.
Against this background Mr Rubin may be hard pressed to fend off the demands
of Mr Clinton's political advisers and core Democratic supporters on the
left and in the trade unions, and avoid the temptation of getting into a
bidding war over tax cuts with the Republican Congress.
Mr Bentsen, whose resignation will take effect on December 22, will return
to Texas to relaunch his business career. Mr Frank Newman, the current
deputy Treasury secretary, will serve as acting secretary until Mr Rubin is
confirmed.
Mr Bentsen has promised to come back to Washington frequently to be part of
what Mr Clinton called 'a seasoned kitchen cabinet'. 'You bet I'm not
retiring. I think you rust out before you wear out,' he said.
