FT  01 DEC 94 / Parliamentary lunacies: British MPs' voting rules and
working practices are unnecessarily archaic
When will our politicians grow up? To judge by this week's House of Commons
vote on the Brussels budget, we have a long wait. No, I am not referring to
the substance or otherwise of Mr John Major's little local difficulty with a
bunch of Tory Europhobes who think Britannia still rules the waves. Nor is
this the occasion to think aloud about how Mr Tony Blair can reconcile a
pledge to keep Labour at the heart of Europe with voting against a financial
agreement he supports. We expect those sort of shenanigans from our
political masters.
What was sad on Monday evening was the sight of sick, and in some cases very
sick, MPs being forced to turn up at Westminster to vote on the issue. To
prove politics is a serious business, government and opposition felt it
necessary to haul their supporters from hospital beds to demonstrate in
person their loyalty. It didn't matter that friends fear for the life of one
of those who dragged himself through the voting lobbies; nor that another
was too ill to leave the car which had brought him to the Palace of
Westminster. The electorate expects such sacrifices of its legislators.
One or two MPs attempted a rational explanation. The vote on Britain's
contributions to the European Union had been turned by Mr Major into an
issue of confidence. If the government had lost, there would have been a
general election. With stakes so high, Mr Blair could not be blamed if he
refused the normal 'pairing' arrangements under which the votes of the sick
are deemed to cancel each other out.
Pull the other one. No one thought the government would lose. Mr Blair said
as much on numerous occasions even before the debate started. Once the
Ulster Unionists said they would back Mr Major, the only interesting
question was the number of Tory rebels who would be thrown out of the party.
Fair enough, conceded an old-timer. But you had to have a sense of history
about these things. Remember that Mr James Callaghan had fallen in 1979 only
because he was stupidly decent enough not to force a dying member of his
party to turn up for the fatal confidence vote. In those good old days of
minority government during the late 1970s, the courtyard of the Commons had
been full of ambulances during every vote.
So Mr Major, now shorn of his paper majority, cannot be let off the hook
which impaled Mr Callaghan. Anyway, chipped in a cabinet minister (yes a
Tory this time), the atmosphere, the uniqueness of the whole place, depended
on these moments of high drama. If we were not careful, someone would
suggest electronic voting to replace the time-honoured tradition of MPs
stumbling or being pushed in wheelchairs through the voting lobbies.
There is, of course, a simpler explanation. The powers-that-be in the
government and opposition whips' offices (there is no party politics in any
of this) will not change the present system because they trust no one. Any
arrangement which allowed the very sick to be 'paired' off instead of
turning up for important votes would depend on MPs being truthful. Some
would abuse the system by pleading the merest hint of a cold as sufficient
excuse to avoid the journey to Westminster. Even if MPs were honest about
their state of health with their own sides, you could hadly expect the
opposing whips' offices to tell each other the truth.
The same undercurrents of mutual mistrust and misguided defence of ignoble
tradition percolate the long-running debate over MPs' working hours and the
introduction of a more rational allocation of time for parliamentary
debates. For laws to be well made, it seems our legislators must preserve
the scope for late-night procedural ambushes and backroom deals between the
whips' offices.
In the next few weeks the government will announce one or two modest
reforms. Parliament will meet occasionally on Wednesday mornings. MPs will
be given more Fridays off, so that those from far-flung seats can spend more
time with their constituents. But the essential lunacies - time off in the
mornings for part-time jobs in the City and Law Courts, followed by
late-night sittings and endless wrangling over the timetable for legislation
 -will remain. So too will the voting rules which, before her death earlier
this year, obliged Ms Jo Richardson, the Labour MP, to spend the evenings of
all important debates in an ambulance parked next to the voting lobbies.
To change all this, it seems, would be to demystify Parliament, to remove
the essential adversarial quality of life at Westminster. Worse still, our
legislators might be obliged to take each other at their word. And the
politicians pretend to wonder why the voters don't trust them.
