FT  06 JUL 94 / Leading Lloyd's dissident admits bankruptcy
A leading campaigner for dissident members of the Lloyd's of London
insurance market yesterday said he had been driven into bankruptcy.
Mr Christopher Stockwell, the outspoken chairman of the Lloyd's Names
Associations Working Party, was served with a petition for nearly Pounds
2.9m by a bank ultimately controlled by the family of Mr John Latsis, the
Greek shipping billionaire.
The move is not directly related to Mr Stockwell's participation in
underwriting syndicates at Lloyd's, but means it is unlikely he will be able
to pay off any of his outstanding debts to the insurance market.
It may also add to pressure by some groups for his removal as chairman of
the association, which has acted as an umbrella group for loss-making Names
taking legal action. Names are the individuals whose assets have
traditionally backed the market.
Mr Stockwell said yesterday that the bankruptcy was caused by his inability
 -because of demands from Lloyd's syndicates - to pay off loans secured
against his personal assets. He said he planned to continue in his
campaigning role. 'There are a great number of younger Names who have got
both Lloyd's losses and consequential losses,' he said. 'I am very sorry
about (the petition). It is very unpleasant for any Name. It is not a
situation anyone would set out to create.'
He said he had already paid out 'hundreds of thousands of pounds' to Lloyd's
syndicates until running out of money last year and his outstanding debts
were Pounds 2.5m 'and rising very fast'. He had also applied for 'hardship',
a Lloyd's scheme designed as an alternative to bankruptcy.
Lloyd's said yesterday that it was aware of the bankruptcy but stressed it
had taken no part in the petition, which was being handled by the Official
Receiver's office. Any syndicates owed money would rank alongside other
creditors including a number of banks.
The petition was served by the Private Bank &amp; Trust Company, a London-based
bank. Its directors include the son and one of the daughters of Mr John
Latsis, the Greek shipping magnate.
The bank specialises in providing banking, fund management and advisory
services to private clients with considerable wealth and is ultimately owned
by the Latsis family.
Mr Stockwell owned a number of property and furniture companies, including
Stockspring, which owed money to Private Bank and was placed in receivership
in 1991. He was paid Pounds 59,000 in salary and expenses last year in his
role as chairman of the Lloyd's Names Associations Working Party.
He was several years ago subject to an earlier bankruptcy petition by
Kingham Hill School in Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, but reached an
agreement with creditors.
