FT  03 MAR 94 / C&amp;W seeks Ireland venture
Cable and Wireless has this week made an offer to Telecom Eireann, the Irish
state telecommunications company, to establish a joint venture in Ireland
which would handle the bulk of the country's international calls.
Although details have not yet been released, it is understood that the
British group is prepared to invest several hundred millions of pounds for a
minority stake in the new venture, leaving Telecom Eireann with a
controlling interest.
A spokesman for Cable and Wireless said last night that a proposal was
submitted earlier this week to Telecom Eireann and the Irish government to
establish 'a strategic alliance' between the two companies.
The proposal comes after almost a year of negotiations, following a bid last
May by Cable and Wireless to take a 25 per cent stake by Telecom Eireann.
That bid was rejected by the government following fierce political
opposition to any privatisation of the state-run monopoly.
At the time, Mr Brian Cowan, the minister for telecommunications, said
'privatisation is not on the agenda'. In a statement last night Mr Cowan
confirmed that Telecom Eireann has been in talks with 'many overseas
telecommunication companies' with a view to establishing a joint venture.
Any eventual agreement, he said, would ensure that Telecom Eireann remained
'in effective public ownership'.
The Irish utility has debts approaching IPounds 1bn (Dollars 959m), and
independent analysts believe that a strategic alliance of the sort being
proposed by Cable and Wireless will be vital for the future of Telecom in a
deregulated EU market.
Privatisation is a highly sensitive political issue in Ireland however, and
even a partial privatisation of Telecom's lucrative international business
is likely to run into stiff political opposition especially from the Labour
party, the junior partner in the coalition government.
A joint venture with TE would be a logical step for C&amp;W in its bid to expand
in Europe. Although its main concern is Hong Kong Telecom, which last year
accounted for two-thirds of its pre-tax profits, it owns Mercury, the main
rival to British Telecommunications in the UK, and has interests in Sweden
and the Baltic.
