FT  07 JUN 94 / Government Bonds: Treasuries extend gains as policy worries
subside
US Treasury bonds yesterday extended gains struck in Friday's surprising
rally, with the market growing more confident in the conviction that
monetary policy was on hold for the summer.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  15/32 higher
at 88 3/16 , with the yield dropping to 7.22 per cent. On the short end, the
two-year note was  5/32 better at 100 3/16 , to yield 5.756 per cent.
The continued improvement gave rise to speculation that the bond market's
long slide, triggered by the Federal Reserve's policy shift four months ago,
was finally drawing to an end. Traders were encouraged by an article in The
New York Times which reinforced the view that the series of four interest
rate increases this year had succeeded in slowing the economy.
The story quoted three of the Fed's five governors as saying that inflation
was in check. The officials also said they did not consider the big drop in
the unemployment rate announced on Friday as alarming in the context of
other statistics pointing to slower growth.
The market was given additional support by declining commodity prices and a
stable dollar.
Traders linked further progress by bonds to the ability of the market to
push the yield on the 30-year issue below 7.20 per cent, a critical level of
resistance. It was hovering just above that point late in the day.
A nervous tone returned to the European government bond market yesterday, as
prices fell back after an early rally.
German bunds ended half a point lower after a strong start, when hopes of
returning investor interest faded. Dealers reported a spate of buying on
Friday and early yesterday, but buyers disappeared when 10-year bund yields
were pushed significantly below 7 per cent once again.
Mr John Hall, an international economist at Swiss Bank Corporation said that
'below 7 per cent (for 10-year bonds), the attraction for end-investors
isn't there'.
The bund market had been encouraged by a recovery in the US market on
Friday, and by comments by Bundesbank president Mr Hans Tietmeyer, reported
in a German financial newspaper, on Monday. Mr Tietmeyer said he hoped to
see west German inflation fall below 2 per cent during the course of 1995.
However, further buying failed to materialise, and German bond prices fell
back again. The pattern of 'poking a head above the parapet in the morning,
only to find that the momentum wasn't there' is typical of European bond
markets currently, said Mr George Magnus, an international economist at SG
Warburg.
The German market continues to under-perform the US market, with German
bonds now yielding just three basis points below 10-year US Treasuries.
'Germany has decoupled from the US market, but in the wrong direction,' said
Mr Hall.
Gilts opened strongly on the back of the recovery at the end of last week
but were dragged down in later trading by lack of demand.
'There is no conviction in the market,' said Mr Simon Briscoe, UK economist
at SG Warburg. 'There was some buying in the morning but then no follow
through.'
The fall in German government bonds and data showing a stronger than
expected rise in net lending to UK consumers added to the nervousness.
'The lack of confidence is so widespread that it is unlikely that events
this week will provide any support for gilts,' said Mr Briscoe.
'The political situation is a cloud on the horizon, the trade figures are a
concern and there will have to be a marked slowdown in industrial production
for those figures to help gilts,' he said. The long gilt future was down
9/16 point at 101 7/16 in late trading.
French government bonds ended slightly lower yesterday, dragged lower by
profit-taking and the decline in Germany.
They marginally outperformed German bunds with a slight narrowing of the
spread between the two in favour of French bonds.
Analysts said events in Germany were likely to continue to dominate for the
remainder of the week, although French industrial production and inflation
figures due later this week could provide support.
