FT  11 JUN 94 / Gardening: Miracles on view at visiting time
Whatever the state of your own garden, you can now go and visit someone
else's. This weekend and the next three, thousands of gardeners will
circulate between each other on the roads of England and Wales; four golden
weekends of garden-watching stretch ahead, helping to take the strain off
weekend guests, in-laws and, with luck, the dog.
There are more than 3,500 possible visits, most of which are listed in the
National Garden Scheme's indispensable yellow book. Priced at Pounds 3, this
year's edition is in the shops and belongs on every car dashboard - your
guide to other people's miracles and muddles, some excellent teas and, last
year, a contribution to charity which reached Pounds 1.5m.
Although most of us keep our houses firmly shut, we open gardens. The
Englishman's home is still a castle but the Englishwoman's rose garden
strives to be shown off on Sundays to anyone who will pay Pounds 2. It even
seems to be selfish nowadays to keep a garden secret; people behave as if
your hard work was also their heritage and the question is when can we come,
not whether.
Visiting raises our ideas of the possible; until you have seen the best, you
cannot set your own standards. It is also a test of the visitors, quite
apart from the rascals who steal plants.
Ever more visitors are shoppers, looking piecemeal with themselves in mind.
What is it, where do I buy it, where can we put it, why cannot we have a
laburnum walk?
Self-centred visiting is not very restful and obscures the whole for the
sake of the details. It is not the best way of improving your own design.
Remember that other people's soils and sites are not yours and that some of
the best gardens are those which you cannot imitate.
Even if you dislike them, ask yourself how you would have done it
differently in the particular setting; experiments widen our range and stop
a visit from being a waste of time. The mistake is to travel around
intending to copy and transplant every good idea on to your own site,
whether or not it belongs there.
Which of all those gardens are on my short list for mid-summer visiting? Of
those operated by the National Trust, the tops have to be Powis Castle on
the Welsh borders, at its best in late July; and Sissinghurst in Kent, at
its best in the rose season of late June.
The weather is still playing marvellous havoc with past planning and
groupings of colour. The sequence of mild winters and unusual summers
continues to bring out flowers at unexpected moments; this year's climbing
roses began early, whereas the peonies have held back and the catmint has
jumped ahead by a fortnight. If a garden's borders look unbalanced, blame
the season.
Everyone knows their own area best, but I would begin with advice for the
north and south-west. The huge gardens at Newby Hall, near Ripon, are worth
anyone's money on their daily openings (except Mondays).
In Somerset, the wonderful sight of Hadspen, near Castle Cary, has continued
to be upgraded with particular magic in the last five years; it is open from
Thursday to Sunday and could be combined on July 2 and 3 with Kingsdon, near
Somerton, another mecca for plant-lovers with a tantalising nursery.
Between north and south, I see most clearly as far west as the area around
Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire. The Priory, Kemerton, is open tomorrow and
every Thursday until late September, whereas the Old Manor House at Twyning
is open on Monday afternoons, not Sundays, throughout the flowering year.
The Priory raises all our ideas of colour and grouping in a long border; the
Old Manor combines the skills of a great grower of small, hardy plants with
walls, fruit trees and an artistic eye.
Gardens which have run in families have the particular attraction of
maturity and continuity. Two of my favourites are Hodges Barn, Shipton
Moyne, Gloucestershire which Mr and Mrs CN Hornby are opening on Mondays,
Tuesdays and Thursdays with a special Sunday on July 3.
On the way, you can combine it with the glorious garden at Kiftsgate Court,
just below Hidcote near Chipping Camden. It is now in its third generation
of family management, female-driven, and right at the top of my personal
sources of pleasure and understanding.
Other gardens are ageing with their famous owners and need special attention
because time might be running out.
Tomorrow is your chance to see the backbone and plantings at Haseley Court,
in south Oxfordshire, made famous by Mrs CG Lancaster for a generation of
gardeners since the 1960s.
I would also use the last Wednesday in June to visit the fine garden at the
Old Rectory, Burghfield, near Reading. Its sense of style and formal
informality have changed the horizons of so many of us. On June 12 and 22,
you can prepare at Towersey Manor, Oxfordshire, where wonders have been
worked since 1974 on clay and a flat site.
On June 26, another Old Rectory at Farnborough, on the Berkshire downs, will
be showing off the roses, deutzias and clematis under Mrs Michael
Todd-Hunter's artistic management.
Tomorrow and on July 3, connoisseurs will have marked down the Old Rectory
Cottage, Tidmarsh, also in Berkshire, where Mr and Mrs AWA Baker have
collected, raised and grown such a fascinating range of unfamiliar hardy
plants.
When rectors leave rectories, gardeners move in and resurrect them. Off the
Old Rectory circuit, there is plenty to see in the manors and main houses of
Hampshire and Sussex villages.
On June 19, Bramdean House, near Alresford off the A272 in Hampshire, is
open. Nearby Hinton Ampner House, now under the National Trust's management,
is another favourite and is opening specially on Sunday June 26. Further
south at Boldre, near Lymington, Peter Chappell's garden and nursery at
Spinners open Wednesday through Sunday from July 1 onwards and remain an
important source of unusual and desirable plants.
Christopher Lloyd is one of the few gardening writers to risk visits from
his public and Great Dixter, at Northiam in East Sussex, is open
particularly on Sundays in July and August for charity.
From 40-acre parks to town gardens as small as Mrs A. Dexter's masterpiece
at 23 Beech Croft Road in Oxford (open only by appointment), there are sites
of all scales and styles which confirm that at least a fraction of the
British really are gardeners in the way the rest of the world pre-supposes.
Go and look - but do not go only to imitate.
