FT  13 OCT 94 / Markets Report: UK interest rate prospects improve further
The recent turnround in UK interest rate expectations continued yesterday on
the back of good inflation figures and bullish comments from Mr Eddie
George, governor of the Bank of England, writes Philip Gawith.
The December short sterling contract closed at 93.55 yesterday, 40 basis
points higher than the beginning of last week, while the March contract was
55 basis points up at 92.79.
The dollar slipped below Y100 again to finish at Y99.885 from Y100.325.
Against the D-Mark it ended at DM1.5421 from DM1.5466. In New York it closed
at Y99.75 and DM1.5407.
The Russian rouble staged a recovery on the exchanges, rising by 5.1 per
cent to Rs3,736 per dollar, from Rs3,926, after plunging 33 per cent from
the start of the month.
The Scandinavian currencies were weaker, with an opinion poll suggesting
that Swedish voters might reject membership of the European Union dragging
down the krona and taking the Finnish markka with it.
The D-Mark was generally firmer all round, while sterling lost some ground,
with the trade weighted index closing at 79.9 from 80.1.
The catalyst for the improvement in short sterling was data showing annual
retail inflation in September at 2.2 per cent, down from 2.4 per cent in
August. Mr George later cheered the market further when he said: 'It would
be extraordinary if we had strong acceleration of inflation with such slow
money growth (in the larger economies).'
Sentiment remains bearish; the market is discounting three-month money at
6.45 per cent by Christmas, compared to 5 7/8 per cent currently. The same
point emerges from looking at the options strike prices for the December
contract, which shows most of the open interest contracts are found at
93.50, 93.75 and 94.00. This shows that most investors expect three-month
rates to be in the 6 to 6.5 per cent range at the end of the year.
Most economists are less pessimistic in their outlook than the market, with
many holding to the view that there will be no further increase in interest
rates this year. This is based on the assumption that the economy has slowed
quite sharply in the third quarter.
In spite of the market's lingering bearishness, the turnround over the past
10 days has been considerable. Analysts attributed this large move to the
fact that the market was correcting itself from a very oversold position.
The speed and extent of the correction has been such, however, that there
are already concerns that the market might be approaching overbought levels.
The same is not necessarily so for sterling. Mr Jeremy Hawkins, chief
economist in London at Bank of America, comments: 'In the longer term it has
to be good for sterling if the UK emerges as a low inflation economy.'
The dollar's dip to a low of Y99.65 was prompted by the receding prospect of
the dollar receiving safe haven support from conflict in the Gulf.
Other factors contributing to its weakness were talk of dollar sales from Mr
George Soros's Quantum fund, and possible selling interest from Kampo, the
Japanese postal life insurance bureau.
Comments from Mr Yasushi Mieno, the Bank of Japan governor, that Japanese
lending rates could be expected to rise, also helped the yen.
A further threat to the dollar comes from Germany. The D-Mark has been
fairly weak for the past month on fears that Chancellor Kohl's coalition
might not be returned with a working majority. Should he win this weekend's
election, however, the D-Mark is likely to benefit, and the dollar will
suffer.
On the other hand, some observers believe the dollar may benefit from Mr
Clinton's decisive action in the Gulf. They reason that this could help the
Democrats in next month's mid-term congressional elections.
If this helped them maintain control of the Senate, the possibility of a
stalemate between the legislature and the executive would be avoided. This,
the argument goes, would make dollar assets, and hence the dollar, more
attractive.
The Bank of England provided Pounds 1.124bn assistance, Pounds 474m at
established rates, to UK money markets, compared to a Pounds 1.1bn shortage.
Overnight money traded between 5 and 6 3/4 per cent.
German call money was steady at 4.90/5 per cent ahead of today's Bundesbank
council meeting. No shift in official rates is expected.
