FT  07 DEC 94 / Survey of Zimbabwe (2): Sense of drift in economy - A look
at the disappointing impact of structural adjustment
As Zimbabwe's first five-year structural adjustment programme nears its end,
it is impossible to escape the sense of drift and vacuum in economic
policymaking.
In part, this is a function of the political cycle, with elections scheduled
for March next year, and also of the prolonged illness of Mr Bernard
Chidzero, the long-standing finance minister, who did so much to launch the
programme.
Political change in South Africa is leaving its mark as major multinationals
ponder restructuring their African operations. There could be far-reaching
consequences for Pretoria's neighbours, especially Zimbabwe, which is
particularly vulnerable to marginalisation.
Nor will it be easy in the run-up to the elections for the politicians to
sell a second instalment of a politically unpopular programme, though
another five years, followed almost certainly by a third phase of ESAP
(Economic Structural Adjustment Programme) will be needed to finish the job.
Above all, structural adjustment in Zimbabwe is being re-examined as
non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and politicians criticise the
programme's failure to alleviate poverty.
Indeed, just about any index shows that poverty has deepened since the
programme took off four years ago. Real incomes are lower now than at
independence 14 years ago, unemployment has quadrupled and now exceeds 30
per cent, and non-farm real wages are at their lowest level for a quarter of
century.
While much of this can be blamed on the 1992 drought, and on a sluggish
global economy, many in the NGO constituency, in academia, the trade unions
and on the political left, blame ESAP. The programme is flawed: the
assumption that manufacturing industry would 'lead' economic growth in the
1990s has turned into an angry debate over deindustrialisation. The
preoccupation with short-term goals, laying off 25,000 civil servants,
ignores the software side of the structural adjustment equation and the
country's deteriorating institutional capacity, especially in the public
sector.
The neglect of regional issues has now been cruelly exposed by South
Africa's return to respectability, as well as by Zimbabwe's optimistic
projections of macroeconomic targets for exports, growth, inflation and
public sector deficit reduction, none of which has been met. The flaws have
been compounded by sluggish implementation, especially in the public sector,
while institutional reforms are behind schedule.
Deregulation and liberalisation are on, or ahead of, target in respect of
prices, labour relations, investment, the exchange rate and some foreign
trade reforms, with quantitative import controls having been abolished and
most current account payments freed, though dividend remittances for
pre-1993 companies are still restricted to 50 per cent of after-tax
earnings.
In both the public sector and, especially, manufacturing industry,
structural change has been minimal. Scarcely a week goes by without fresh
calls from industrialists for new export incentives and a cut in interest
rates, while the politicians proffer repeated excuses for their failure to
bite the bullet of fiscal reform.
Privatisation, the central plank of ESAP II, has got no further than the
drawing board. The recent decision to shift surplus funds from Noczim, the
state monopoly fuel procurement company, to the financially-strapped
state-owned cargo airline, Affretair, illustrates the lack both of coherence
and transparency in public sector finances.
Under ESAP, the budget deficit should have been reduced to 5 per cent of GDP
by mid-1995 and although this remains the target, it assumes that ZDollars
1bn of state assets will be sold off by next June, and, more importantly,
ignores some ZDollars 2bn of parastatal losses. If these are taken into
account, the deficit would rise to over 10 per cent of GDP.
The key to fiscal reform is reduced state spending, rather than increased
revenue. Although personal and corporate tax rates have been cut since 1991,
high inflation and fiscal drag have ensured that the tax burden continues to
deter initiative and investment. Modest progress has been achieved on
spending, which is down to 40.8 per cent of GDP from 45 per cent at the
start of the programme. But the government's reluctance to slash military
spending - the third largest item in the budget (3.5 per cent of GDP) and
restructure the parastatal sector to eliminate losses, has plunged Zimbabwe
into a classic debt-trap situation.
Public sector debt now exceeds GDP, while interest charges are estimated at
14 per cent of GDP; central government interest payments absorb 18 per cent
of the budget, second only to education. Without debt reduction and
parastatal reform, there is little room for manoeuvre on the fiscal front,
other than the cuts in military spending promised by Mr Mugabe last May, but
unlikely to see the light of day until after the elections, if then.
The promised sale of state assets, presumably some of government's shares in
such companies as Delta Corporation (beverages, retailing and tourism),
Astra Corp (former Zimbabwe subsidiary of the South African Barlow group)
and Zimbabwe Financial Holdings (one of the top three commercial banks), to
fund recurrent spending rather than reduce debt underlines the precarious
fiscal balance.
The government claims to have cut subsidies but only by leaving some
ZDollars 2bn of parastatal losses off the balance sheet while classifying
numerous other payments to parastatals as loans and investments.
If all these are taken to account, the subsidy bill exceeds ZDollars 3bn or
6.5 per cent of GDP. Clearly there are major savings opportunities here, but
only when parastatal reform goes beyond the cosmetics of setting up 100 per
cent state-owned companies.
The two major lossmakers are the Grain Marketing Board, partly because it is
required to stockpile 945,000 tonnes of maize as a food security reserve,
and the state-owned steel company, Zisco. Official attitudes towards
privatising Zisco are seen in a recent parliamentary select committee report
which, after lambasting political interference and mismanagement, calls for
a 'limited' sale of equity in Zisco and the flotation of the company on the
Zimbabwe Stock Exchange.
But Zisco, with over ZDollars 2bn in debt and negative net worth is in no
shape for flotation, especially if control is to remain in state hands.
Meanwhile privatisation and the sale of state shares in public companies are
becoming entangled in the increasingly acrimonious debate over
indigenisation. Nearly 15 years after independence, black business claims
that 90 per cent of the economy is still in white and foreign hands. The
numbers are spurious given that the state accounts for a third of GDP, but
though blacks are increasingly in charge managerially, they have little
direct ownership control.
Given the challenges facing Zimbabwe for the rest of the century and beyond,
it is a depressingly sterile debate, with vociferous black organisations -
the Indigenous Business Development Centre and the Affirmative Action Group
 -preoccupied with shuffling ownership of existing assets rather than the
creation of new wealth, output, exports and, above all, jobs.
The government, while happy to champion indigenisation, a surefire
votewinner, is doing little to help. When (rather than if) it comes to
privatise, it will face intense pressure to sell to black investors and
entrepreneurs, most of whom will not have the funds.
Some type of investment trust linked to a more vigorous venture capital
industry is needed to satisfy the business community's aspirations, but here
too there are few signs of vision or leadership. Monetary growth (46 per
cent so far this year) fuelled by offshore borrowings, capital inflows and
the fiscal deficit, is being sterilised by ZDollars 3bn in central bank
issues of special and treasury bills. The net result is real interest rates
of about 10 per cent and a fall in real private sector borrowing.
It is hardly surprising that investment, outside mining and tourism, is
flagging and that, once again, GDP growth will fall behind target. Exports
should surge next year, mainly in mining and agriculture, resulting in a
further improvement in the balance of payments on current account.
Part of the explanation is limp import demand, itself a consequence of flat
investment, especially in manufacturing. Official forecasts predict growth
of 4 per cent since GDP will not regain its 1991 levels until 1996, while
per capita incomes will return to pre-ESAP levels only in 2000.
Growth should exceed 5 per cent in 1995 on the strength of the commodity
price rebound, expansion in gold mining, firmer tobacco prices and continued
recovery in manufacturing. But unless the authorities get to grips with
excessive monetary growth, interest rates and inflation - projected to
average 24 per cent this year against an ESAP target of 10 per cent - the
investment response will remain weak.
A sound infrastructure, considerable potential in mining, agriculture and
tourism, and a vibrant private sector give Zimbabwe a better chance than
most sub-Saharan countries to make a success of structural adjustment. But
the 1990s strategies needed to penetrate global markets, especially in
manufacturing, and the commitment and leadership necessary to tackle public
sector reform are missing.
In the absence of new blood and a more market-driven culture, reform will be
hamstrung by the combination of inertia and the ideological baggage of past
commitments to 'socialist transformation'.
