FT  15 APR 94 / Treasury warns ministers to rein in spending
The Treasury has fired the first shots in this year's public spending battle
with a warning that there will be no room for tax cuts before the general
election unless ministers rein back a threatened overshoot in Whitehall
budgets.
The cabinet's EDX spending committee was reconvened this week by Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the chancellor, to be told that recent spending trends are
jeopardising the targets set in last November's Budget.
Meanwhile, Mr Michael Portillo, the chief secretary, told cabinet colleagues
to provide analyses of the impact on their programmes of possible reductions
of 2.5 per cent and 5 per cent in their budgets.
Amid alarm over a failure to curb social security spending, ministers
believe the existing targets will be met only through a clampdown on
public-sector pay for the third consecutive year.
But some departments are treating the Treasury's warning as a predictable
pre-emptive strike ahead of expected confirmation next week that that public
borrowing has undershot the Pounds 50bn predicted for last year. Mr Clarke
is determined that lower-than-expected borrowing should not provide an
excuse for a relaxation of spending controls.
The Treasury is also concerned that Mr John Major's precarious political
position has led the prime minister to come down on the side of the spending
departments in recent Whitehall battles over new commitments. But Mr
Portillo's fundamental review of underlying spending trends is in turn
coming under fire for failing to deliver promised large savings.
Some ministers are also complaining that the latest Treasury clampdown will
dilute the impact of the government's planned white paper on competitiveness
scheduled for mid-May. It has ruled out pledges for extra spending on
training, infrastructure and industrial support policies.
Mr Clarke reconvened EDX early in an effort to push through a rapid
endorsement by the full cabinet of another tough spending round. He wants
agreement on the parameters for the round by mid-June.
The Treasury's starting point in setting overall targets for the next three
years is that the cash figures of Pounds 263bn and Pounds 272bn pencilled in
for 1995-96 and 1996-97 must remain absolute ceilings. It also wants a
figure for 1997-98 that keeps the annual growth rate in real, or
inflation-adjusted, spending at well below 1 per cent.
In spite of cutbacks in invalidity and unemployment benefit, the Pounds 85bn
social security budget still appears likely to grow faster than the economy
as a whole.
Mr Portillo also warned the Pounds 11bn education budget and the Pounds 30bn
health budget may overshoot the targets set last autumn.
Clarke forecasts steady recovery, Page 10
The axemen slumber, Page 20
