FT  01 MAR 94 / People: 'Thinker rather than doer' needed at Fenner
Fenner, the Hull-based industrial group, is hoping to appoint a chief
executive by the end of April, filling the gap left by Julian Bigden, who
returned to the US in December after less than a year as managing director.
The appointment of a chief executive will be an important step for Fenner
after a year of senior management changes. Bigden had been appointed
managing director in February last year by Peter Barker, the former
executive chairman, and replaced Tom Brown who resigned unexpectedly.
But in May last year Barker himself announced his retirement. Colin Cooke
was appointed non-executive chairman in June and Bigden has now returned to
his previous job running Fenner's highly-successful US polymers operation -
a responsibility which he had retained when he moved to the UK.
His departure was said by Cooke to be 'very amicable', although it is
understood that Cooke was much happier with Bigden as a business manager
than as a managing director.
Cooke, who is also executive chairman at Triplex Lloyd, says Fenner has
three candidates in mind for the job of chief executive.
He is looking for a 'thinker rather than a doer' as chief executive, to
provide strategic leadership without interfering with the three main
divisional heads as they try to exploit growth opportunities.
Fenner is now being run on a day-to-day basis by Mark Abrahams, finance
director, and Michael Howell, a director of Arlington Capital Management who
joined Fenner's board in November.
A big challenge for the new chief executive will be to resolve the future of
Fenner's largest business, power transmission, which lost Pounds 1.8m in the
year ended September 30 and was largely responsible for a fall in overall
pre-tax profits from Pounds 11.3m to Pounds 9.6m.
Talks on a possible sale of the division broke down in December, and Fenner
is now concentrating on improving the unit's profitability.
This would make it more attractive to another purchaser.
However, it remains a relatively low-margin operation and lacks the growth
potential of Fenner's other specialist engineering businesses.
