FT  22 JAN 94 / Epic tale with long shelf-life: The latest twist in the saga
of the British Library construction project
First it was the shelving, which scattered books and documents into open
space; then the wiring, which short circuited. Now it is the sprinklers,
which seem susceptible to rust. The construction of the new British Library,
one of the UK's biggest postwar building projects at an estimated cost of
Pounds 450m, seems to be becoming a metaphor for a nation in decline.
The saga of the library is a story of bureaucratic bumbling. The architect,
Colin St John (Sandy) Wilson, made his first tentative sketches for a
modernist Behemoth, softened by red brick, in 1962. The go-ahead for a
project, costed at Pounds 116m, came from Shirley (now Baroness) Williams in
1978. Margaret (now Baroness) Thatcher, influenced by the fact that her old
Oxford chemistry professor Fred Dainton was a leading advocate, finally gave
her approval 10 years later - although she caved in to Treasury pressure and
agreed a scheme which halved the size of the library, and added only 74
extra seats to make a total of 1,176.
As the projected costs have increased so have the delays, and now Dr Brian
Lang, chief executive of the library since 1991, is reluctant to commit
himself to a definite opening date. However, if the problems over the wiring
can be resolved, he is still hopeful of taking possession early next year
and welcoming the public in 1996.
Dr Lang is like a bridegroom waiting at the altar. His office is a prefab on
the St Pancras site and he is inextricably involved with the building, but
he accepts no responsibility for it. The Department of National Heritage
pays the bills - an estimated Pounds 52.5m in 1994-95 - and resolves
disputes among builders. Dr Lang's problems start if the British Library is
found wanting when its users move in.
Until the new setback over the sprinklers, which could take six months to
put right at an extra cost of Pounds 250,000, Dr Lang was feeling mildly
optimistic. Indeed there were plans to promote to the media a new,
on-target, building, and to take down the protective barrier on the Euston
Road, allowing the public to see the attractive Italian piazza which leads
to the library.
The confusion during the early stages of construction over the management of
the site had been much simplified when the formerly government-owned
Property Services Agency was privatised in 1992, and bought by construction
group Tarmac. The PSA had interfered constantly with its appointed site
manager, Laing, while only co-operating fitfully with the then Office of
Arts and Libraries, the ministry responsible for the scheme. In the same
year the OAL disappeared into the weightier Department of National Heritage.
A project director was appointed and Dr Lang says 'things are now much
better'.
At the same time the government seems to have decided that so much had been
invested in the library that it might as well finish it. The new minister at
the Heritage Department, Peter Brooke, was more of a books man than his
predecessor.
This has caused some anguish in the wider arts world which believes that the
funding of orchestras, theatres and dance groups has been sacrificed for the
mountain of bricks on the Euston Road. Mr Brooke found an extra Pounds 16.5m
from his department's budget for building costs in 1994-95, and the annual
grant-in-aid for day-to-day running of the British Library has risen from
Pounds 72.1m to Pounds 80.4m. But another of his responsibilities, the Arts
Council, paymaster to the performing arts, suffered its first ever cut in
funding, of Pounds 3.2m.
To justify the rise in the British Library grant, Dr Lang cites the
additional costs that are likely as it prepares to move out of its old home
in the British Museum, and 18 other buildings in London. He cannot yet
tackle the task of transporting 12m books into St Pancras. But he has pushed
through the completion of the British Library's northern base at Boston Spa,
near York, which will house 6m books; proceeded with automating the
cataloguing system; and is attempting to dispose of the surplus buildings in
London. At the St Pancras site, he contents himself with devising furniture
layouts.
Boston Spa enables Dr Lang to keep the Treasury sweet. By selling
information to business and academia, the library has increased its
revenues, and during 1992-93, in spite of the recession, receipts reached
Pounds 27m - up 3 per cent on the previous 12 months.
So while the short-term difficulties over sprinklers and wiring hark back to
the bad old days of the development, the political climate has improved
slightly in the library's favour. It has also been helped by the
transformation of the St Pancras area. When the site was selected it was a
wasteland. But the adjacent St Pancras Hotel, a Grade One listed Victorian
building, is being refurbished as offices and will act as a sympathetically
towered partner to the library.
Dr Lang is hoping that money from the planned UK national lottery will pay
for a visitor centre, a home for the National Sound Archive, and a bindery -
enabling the British Library to attract an estimated 1m visitors a year.
But the history of the library is a tale of hopes confounded. When it
eventually opens, the complaints may start as scholars, unhappy about being
decanted from Panizzi's beautifully domed room in the British Museum, fight
over the 150 terminals which will give access to behind-the-scenes staff who
will supply books and documents through a mechanical delivery system. More
obscure books will still be kept in Boston Spa, where the cost of storing a
book is 50p a year compared with Pounds 1.50p at St Pancras. But the
distance means at least a two-hour delivery time to London. The library will
remain a cultural football for decades to come.
