FT  05 OCT 94 / IMF/World Bank in Madrid: Visitors' advice upsets the hosts
The Spanish hosts have taken offence at some of the robust economic advice
handed out by IMF experts.
Members of Spain's moderate Socialist government, doubtless feeling the
pressure from large-scale street demonstrations against the two
international bodies and their impact on developing countries and the
environment, hit out at the 'ultra-liberal' IMF recipes proposed for Spain's
own economy.
Recommendations put forward by IMF experts at the weekend included freedom
of companies to hire and fire workers and cuts in pensions and other social
benefits.
Spain earlier this year introduced measures to ease the notoriously strict
rules governing redundancies, but is reluctant to incur further wrath from
trade unions by pushing its reforms further at present.
Mr Jose Antonio Grinan, labour minister, said it was 'shameful and wrong' to
present as scientific truth something that was 'no more than political
opinion'. Junior employment minister, Mr Marcos Pena, used stronger
language, calling the proposals 'financial fundamentalism'.
Mr Candido Mendez, leader of the UGT trade union, said the ideas were just
'stupid'. Even the conservative opposition Popular party said the proposals
for unrestricted hiring and firing were 'excessive'. Only Mr Jose Maria
Cuevas, head of the CEOE employers' federation, said such measures were
'absolutely necessary'.
Mr Jorge Hay, general manager at Banco Central Hispano and a former World
Bank official, said he could not understand the criticism, saying Spain was
a successful example of the services provided by the two institutions.
'Spain owes a lot to the IMF,' he said. 'The first milestone marking the
modernisation of the country was the IMF mission of 1959; we have
subsequently had two standby agreements.
'The World Bank has given Spain a dozen loans that in current terms would be
worth Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.2bn) and which have helped Spain rebuild its
infrastructure and develop agrarian projects and education.'
