FT  22 DEC 94 / Rate review will harm London, says City: Relief scheme to
soften impact for northern cities
London's international competitiveness will be damaged by next year's
business rates revaluation, the Corporation of London said yesterday as the
first details of new rateable values were revealed to local authorities.
Rateable values for inner London offices have been cut by 59 per cent in the
new revaluation, which takes account of the decline in the property market
since 1988, when the last revaluation took place. But the transitional
relief scheme announced last month in the Budget means that cuts in rate
bills for large buildings will be limited to 5 per cent after inflation.
The relief scheme is meant to soften the impact of the revaluation on
northern properties, where rateable values for office blocks will increase
by 50 per cent on average. Next year, increases in rates payable will be
limited to 10 per cent, indexed for inflation (7.5 per cent for small
business properties).
London businesses will in effect pay for this relief by foregoing cuts in
rateable value.
Mr Michael Cassidy, chairman of the corporation's policy and resources
committee, said: 'Clearly ministers have decided there's political benefit
in giving Treasury money to northern cities yet again.'
The corporation said the rates bill for one office block in Bishopsgate
would only drop from Pounds 5.4m to Pounds 5.2m next April, when the new
values come into force. If the transitional relief scheme had not been in
operation, the rates bill would have fallen to Pounds 2.7m.
Mr Cassidy added: 'We were planning to use the prospective reduction in
rates as one of our selling points to attract businesses into London.
There's a perception abroad that the property tax burden in the UK makes us
less competitive.'
Figures from the Institute of Revenues Rating and Valuation, the
professional body of surveyors and valuers, show that inner London is the
only English region where rateable values will fall (by 40 per cent on
average). Elsewhere rises vary from 34 per cent in the West Midlands and 32
per cent in the north-west to 5 per cent in outer London and 2 per cent in
the south-east.
Mr Cassidy said the transitional relief scheme could provide a strong
incentive to build new office blocks, as buildings completed after April
next year would immediately take on the new rateable values. Neighbouring
properties still contributing to the scheme might have double the rates
bill.
All rateable values, compiled by the Valuation Office, a government agency,
will be available from local authorities from January 3. However, the
authorities do not have to inform businesses of their total bills until
March.
Blow for London, Page 9
Lex, Page 16
