FT  26 APR 94 / Survey of A-Z of Computing (13): Rival for desktop systems -
Laptops
It is fast becoming one of the accepted facts of personal computing life
that the laptop computer is an acceptable replacement for the desktop
system.
Many companies now equip their executives (and not just the ones 'out on the
road') with such machines, and the benefits are clear to be seen. But this
trend is bringing with it some problems that are not, at first, apparent.
If an executive becomes more dependent on a laptop system, remote
communications with the corporate network become more important, and once
out on the road the reliability of the computer is a cause of concern.
Over the last year or so, the laptop computer has made a breakthrough as a
real alternative to desktop systems. The specifications of some of the
newest systems are equal to any desktop PC.
The latest system from the current market leader Compaq (according to market
research company, Dataquest) is its LTE Elite. This can sport up to 24
megabytes of memory, up to 510 megabytes of hard disk storage, a 9.5 inch
colour display and the latest, fastest implementation of Intel's 486
processor, the IntelDX4.
This is equivalent to the best desktop machines but is about the size of a
fat, A4 magazine, weighing around 6.5lbs.
Even advanced PCs used in design work are under threat from the laptop
invasion. The UK company, Tadpole, is leading the assault recently producing
its latest SparcBook. The company has also launched the PowerPC-equipped IBM
N40, which it designed and is manufacturing.
As laptops become standard equipment for executives, reducing their weight
and size have become particular targets for manufacturers. The 'notebook'
and 'sub-notebook' classes of laptop are regularly introduced, with
manufacturers vying to have the best specification in the smallest
functional form. Full PC specifications still brings some size limitations,
and machines such as Toshiba's T3400CT mark the current typical limits. This
is 20 per cent smaller and 30 per cent lighter than a classic laptop, but
holds a 486SX processor, up to 20 megabytes of memory and a 120 megabyte
hard disk.
For an increasing number of users the power of the laptop is only part of
the story. For the machine to be a genuine replacement for a desktop system
(where the executive has it as their only machine, whether at the office, on
the road or at home), much more is now needed.
The ability of the user to connect easily to the office network is a
priority. This can be achieved with a desktop docking system which
automatically seeks to update files. But one problem with deskstations, is
matching the files stored on the two systems. Apple's DuoDock, a deskstation
and PowerBook laptop combination, has software routines that specifically
seek out changes to files and update the relevant system.
MODEM LINKS
Connecting to the host system via a telephone and a modem is another
important capability, but this is not as easy as it sounds.
Network systems are only just starting to be able to handle connections of
this type for simple tasks such as file transfer and e-mail.
More complex tasks that require the use of network services, such as remote
printing, scheduling meetings or accessing a database can cause problems if
the remote computer is not managed properly.
A variety of solutions are appearing, ranging from simple bulletin board
systems for messaging, to networked servers dedicated to managing incoming
calls from remote laptops.
Remote communications may prove to be the solution for the other big problem
with laptops: the reliability of the machines.
Desktop systems have maintenance contracts with fast support, but a laptop
user can be in Oswestry one day, and Rome the next, making maintenance a
significant problem. It is also one for which no watertight solution has yet
been found by either suppliers or insurance companies, save machine
replacement and insurance against loss of data.
Remote users may be able to keep all their relevant data on the network.
Then in the case of a failure a replacement machine could be loaded as
required. But this would require users to backup every transaction as it
occurs, which is an unlikely scenario.
