FT  30 JUL 94 / Clinton faces a fierce attack over Whitewater
Republicans in the US Senate yesterday launched a series of savage attacks
on President Bill Clinton, his administration and even Mr Robert Fiske, the
Whitewater special counsel, for failing to come clean on the affair.
Senator Al D'Amato of New York charged the White House had 'concealed,
disguised and distorted the truth, all in the service of politics and the
president's self-preservation.' He also accused Mr Roger Altman, deputy
treasury secretary, of deliberately misleading Congress last February in
testimony about his contacts with White House officials over criminal
investigations into Madison Guaranty, the failed Arkansas savings and loan
company at the heart of Whitewater. The affair stems from the first family's
land and financial dealings in their home state in the 1970s and 1980s.
The hearings of the Senate banking committee contrasted sharply with those
earlier in the week by its House counterpart, where Congressman Henry
Gonzalez, the Democratic chairman, controlled both statements and questions
tightly.
Technically on the agenda yesterday was testimony by police and medical
officials on the circumstances of the suicide last summer of Mr Vincent
Foster, then deputy White House legal counsel. But each member of the
committee was permitted a lengthy opening statement before any witnesses
were summoned.
Senator Lauch Faircloth of North Carolina, citing old professional contacts
between the special counsel and Mr Clinton's legal representatives, accused
Mr Fiske of 'hiding information that would be embarrassing to the Clintons.'
In an interim report, Mr Fiske, a Republican, exonerated administration
officials of any criminal wrongdoing in the Madison affair and found that
the death of Mr Foster was a clear case of suicide.
This conclusion was endorsed yesterday by Mr Larry Monroe, an FBI special
agent, who testified that forensic and other evidence offered 'irrefutable
proof' that he had taken his own life and that his depression could not be
ascribed to concerns about Whitewater.
But Senator D'Amato hinted at further dark conspiracies when it was
announced that a park service policeman due to testify yesterday was 'out of
town.' He did not appear contrite when advised that the policeman would
appear on Monday.
