FT  17 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Regalian returns to the black with Pounds
2.75m
Regalian, the residential property developer, has returned to profitability
after two disastrous years, with Pounds 2.75m before tax for the 12 months
to March 31, compared with a loss of Pounds 83.5m.
It also announced that it had submitted a bid to redevelop the 2.5 acre site
of the Royal Brompton Hospital, London, and was looking for other
development opportunities in what it sees as an increasingly buoyant market.
During the year debt was reduced from Pounds 62m to Pounds 13m - it has
since fallen to Pounds 5m - and the group was able to write back some
provisions which enabled it to return to the black.
Some 239 houses and apartments were sold during the year, helping to
increase turnover from Pounds 57.8m to Pounds 63m.
It has sold 19 out of the 20 apartments in Kensington Palace Gardens,
London, the ambitious luxury development which had led to about Pounds 20m
of provisions the previous year.
Overall, about Pounds 8.7m of previous provisions for property developments
were released, after the company had taken Pounds 52.9m of provisions in
1992-93. Mr Bob Perdeaux, finance director, said further write-backs this
year were unlikely.
Administrative expenses fell from Pounds 4.05m to Pounds 2.76m, reflecting
lower staff levels, but also a cut in directors' salaries. Interest payments
fell to Pounds 2.97m (Pounds 10.8m).
Regalian has reflected the confidence in the residential market recovery by
lining up Pounds 20m of new banking facilities to fund expansion.
Mr David Goldstone, chairman, said the company had in place a development
programme with 'an estimated realisation in excess of Pounds 110m,' over the
next three years.
Planning consent had also been received for a 1.52m sq ft office and
residential development in Bishopsbridge, Paddington.
Mr Goldstone said he was confident that it could be sufficiently pre-let to
enable Regalian to proceed within 'the reasonably near future.'
Regalian is currently unable to pay dividends, due to a deficit on its
profit and loss account. It plans to seek court approval for a
restructuring, which would enable it to pay a final dividend next year.
