FT  24 JUN 94 / Britons held by Kashmir militants set free
Two Britons held by Moslem militants in Kashmir for 17 days were set free
unharmed yesterday.
Mr Kim Housego, 16-year-old son of a former Financial Times correspondent,
and Mr David Mackie, a 36-year-old London video director, were released to
local journalists who delivered them to Mr David Fitton, a British diplomat,
in Srinagar, summer capital of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
'We were treated well the whole time. They gave us plenty of food and extra
blankets,' Kim Housego said. The militants, numbering about 20, had moved
hideouts frequently since kidnapping the pair while they were on separate
trekking holidays.
Four Kashmiri journalists were summoned yesterday to Anantnag, south of
Srinagar. Eight militants, some of them armed, handed over the Britons and
insisted they should not be taken to the police in Anantnag but be delivered
to their families in Srinagar. David and Jenny Housego, Kim's parents, were
in Anantnag awaiting the release, but eventually heard that their son and Mr
Mackie were free and in Srinagar.
Mr David Housego, former FT New Delhi correspondent and now a Delhi
businessman, was at the centre of attempts to secure the release. Operating
from a houseboat in Srinagar, he secured an undertaking from the Indian
authorities to refrain from actions which could jeopardise a safe release
and travelled into the mountains to meet the militants last weekend.
There had been signs release was imminent for several days. But efforts
appeared to have been set back on Monday by the murder near Anantnag of Mr
Qazi Nissar, a Kashmiri Moslem leader acting as an intermediary with the
kidnappers. The murder, which caused public outrage in Kashmir, appeared
unconnected with the kidnap. Mr Housego yesterday described Mr Nissar as a
'generous and warm man'.
Messages from the Pakistani government and Pakistan-based militant groups,
calling for release of the captives, had clearly influenced the kidnappers,
Mr Housego said.
The Harkat-ul-Ansar group took responsibility for the kidnap although its
leader in Pakistani Kashmir called for the captives' release. The
kidnappers' demand for release of three jailed leaders was quickly dropped
as they saw they had no support.
Kashmiri militant groups, who oppose Indian rule in the disputed territory,
have been embarrassed by the kidnap; they saw it as hampering their efforts
to publicise alleged human rights violations by Indian security forces in
Kashmir. Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, expressed his delight at the
release and thanked the governments of India and Pakistan for their
'co-operation and support'.
