FT  14 JUL 94 / Police break up protest at German nuclear waste site
Several hundred German police moved at dawn yesterday to clear some 400
protesters from a makeshift village outside Germany's proposed nuclear waste
disposal site, in an escalation of the campaign against nuclear energy.
The confrontation comes as the first delivery of highly radioactive nuclear
waste is expected at the remote Gorleben plant on the banks of the river
Elbe, where it is supposed to be stored temporarily pending a legal decision
on how to dispose of such waste permanently.
Fears of violence evaporated when police approached the impromptu roadblocks
unarmed, and the demonstrators offered only passive resistance. But they had
to be carried away from the site before bulldozers moved in to clear the
road.
It was uncertain last night how soon nuclear waste deliveries could start,
because the protesters had dug tunnels under the entrance roads at the
Gorleben site, although the storage plant itself is protected by massive
security fences.
Failure to resolve the question of nuclear waste disposal in the face of
anti-nuclear protests has left the industry's future in Germany in doubt.
Attempts to negotiate an overall energy consensus, involving the electricity
industry and state and federal governments have broken down. Local
authorities and the Lower Saxony state government have been pitted against
the federal government in Bonn, causing a stalemate over waste disposal
plans for almost 20 years.
The Lower Saxony authorities, who are in control of the state's police under
the German federal system, instructed them this week not to charge
protesters with any offence. But the local council in the Gorleben area
banned any public assembly, giving police the excuse to move in.
Low-level nuclear waste is already stored at the Gorleben site, but
temporary storage of high-level waste has been blocked by repeated and
extended planning inquiries organised by Ms Monika Griefahn, the Social
Democrat environment minister in Lower Saxony.
She admitted recently her efforts had been exhausted, and the first
vitrified glass containers of high-level waste from the Philippsburg nuclear
reactor in Baden-Wurttemberg are expected imminently, with the approval of
Mr Klaus Topfer, environment minister in Bonn.
The so-called Castor containers are to be kept in a huge warehouse, in
conditions of strict security, pending a decision on permanent disposal.
That has hitherto been banned under German law, which favoured recycling. In
the meantime, most nuclear waste from Germany's nuclear power stations is
being sent to reprocessing plants in France and Britain, to be converted
into plutonium and re-used in the nuclear system.
Any question of permanent disposal of nuclear waste at Gorleben - in a salt
mine currently being dug for the purpose - remains in doubt because of
opposition of local authorities. The Lower Saxony government wants to link
any decision on use of the site to a comprehensive plan to phase out all
nuclear power production in Germany.
Until German authorities at state and national level can agree on nuclear
waste disposal, the industry will depend on its reprocessing contracts with
France's Cogema and BNFL's Thorp plant at Sellafield to recycle waste. But
if they reach agreement on the Gorleben project, a second phase of those
contracts after the year 2000 may be unnecessary.
