FT  25 FEB 94 / Can Europe Compete?: Gains via R&amp;D, market share and
cost-cuts - Three leading European manufacturers employ very different
strategies against their international competitors / Roche
The Swiss pharmaceutical giant Roche is an example of European industry at
its most effective. Last year, the steady rise in its share price made it
the most highly valued drug company in the world, overhauling Merck of the
US.
Roche's success is based on the performance of European workers at home and
European managers abroad. Swiss-based researchers have discovered a wealth
of commercially valuable drugs. Roche has also proved shrewd in acquiring
assets overseas, notably Californian biotechnology company Genentech.
The achievement owes much to the immense and, no doubt, excessive
profitability of the international drug industry, which governments around
the world are now seeking to control. The results for Roche have been
extraordinary.
Its spending on R&amp;D has been heavy even by the standards of its industry: in
1992, for instance, its pharmaceuticals research bill came to SFr1.6bn
(Dollars 1.1bn), or 24 per cent of its pharmaceutical turnover.
It was also able to plank down Dollars 2bn in 1990 for 60 per cent of
Genentech, a company which had only Dollars 500m in sales and very little
profit. Despite all that, Roche has cash and securities currently estimated
at SFr20bn (Dollars 13.5bn).
In the field of conventional drugs, it is worth recalling that Roche's
success represents a fairly recent comeback. It had a previous glory phase
in the 1960s, based largely on the tranquilliser Valium.
As Valium went off patent, Roche spent heavily on the search for replacement
drugs. For a while, it seemed the money was being wasted. The real strength
of the resulting research pipeline has become apparent only recently.
Roche has also built a formidable position in hospital drugs, claiming to
sell more drugs to US hospitals than any other company in the world.
At the same time, the purchase of Genentech was a particularly bold
strategic move, since biotechnology is a field in which the US has a clear
lead over Europe. Roche has thus hedged its bets against a possible
shortfall in European technology.
