FT  11 JUN 94 / Arts: Pianists of distinction
Murray Perahia was greeted by a packed Royal Festival Hall on Wednesday for
his first solo recital there since his enforced two-year absence from the
concert platform, the result of a thumb injury complicated by infection. His
return is a cause for rejoicing - musicianship of his calibre is all too
rare today.
Some lapses in the opening Bach Partita No. 2 did not lessen the
characteristic Perahia poise. His interpretation was refreshingly free from
mannerism - thoughtful rather than 'profound' - but it remained
unpersuasive. Perahia was happier with the Classical elegance of Beethoven's
first Sonata in F minor Op. 2 No. 1, and he also caught the forward-looking
storminess of the finale in a performance full of interest.
Perahia's two Brahms pieces had warmth and subtlety, but he was on best form
for the evening's second, all-Chopin half. His manifold strengths intersect
in this repertory: the three Mazurkas danced infectiously, the Berceuse in D
flat was delicate, and the two contrasting Op. 10 Etudes had poetry (No. 3
in E) and fire (No. 4 in C sharp minor). The Ballades (Nos 1 and 3) balanced
grace and grandeur. In sum, a catalogue of Perahia's qualities.
The following evening at the Wigmore Hall, Marc-Andre Hamelin's utterly
different but no less rewarding brand of pianism was heard in an exotic
programme. The young Canadian has carved a name for himself playing music of
sensational virtuosity - though his approach is unshowy - and exploring the
byways of the repertory; this recital, entitled 'The Concert Room' was the
first of three in his 'Virtuoso Romantics' series. Devised for him by Ates
Orga, the programmes - which would have been unfashionable and even
Pianistically Incorrect a few years ago - celebrate the Golden Age of piano
playing.
Four of the five works were super-Romantic transcriptions, but Hamelin
opened with Godowsky's 1927 Passacaglia in B minor on Schubert's Unfinished
Symphony, 44 variations of mostly staggering difficulty; this was only its
third London performance. Hamelin's wizardry defies the laws of nature, but
it is a mark of his seriousness that he used it only to illuminate the
composer's musical intentions. An aura similar to the one that surrounds
Godowsky attached itself to Alkan - the only pianist Liszt is said to have
feared - whose transcription of the first movement of Beethoven's Piano
Concerto No. 3 came next. Hamelin set up an impressive dialogue between
'piano' and 'orchestra', and took the notorious Alkan cadenza in his stride.
In the second half, the sheer brilliance of a Paganini-Liszt Etude was
tempered by a dreamy performance of Balakirev's arrangement of the Romanza
from Chopin's first Piano Concerto. More familiar territory was reached in
Liszt's glorious transcription of the Tannhauser Overture, dazzling and
delicate by turns.
Hamelin's 'Virtuoso Romantics' continue of June 16 ('Grand Opera and Song')
and June 30 ('The Salon').
