FT  07 APR 94 / Economic Viewpoint: Drug abuse tackled the wrong way
What business has an economist or economic commentator to write about drug
abuse and the case for decriminalisation? The first and most obvious reason
is that drugs make up one of the world's largest industries. International
trade in illegal drugs is estimated at Dollars 500bn a year. The turnover of
the criminal firms which run the world's illegal drugs traffic is higher
than the national income of 50 of the world's 70 leading nations.
Secondly, and more controversially, economists start with a presumption that
the consumer is the best judge of his or her own interests. It is a
presumption that can be overthrown in extreme cases; and the costs imposed
on other people from widespread drug consumption need attention. But at
least the starting point favours competitive market approaches against the
heavy hand of regulation.
Thirdly economists are concerned with analysing markets, including
government intervention in them. They can thus contribute to understanding
the effects of attempts to criminalise production and consumption of
products, whether alcohol in the US in the 1920s or other addictive drugs
today.
Measures to reduce supply - such as customs seizures, fines, imprisonment or
confiscation of assets - act as a tax on suppliers. The risks are much
greater than in a normal market, and the prices at which the drugs will be
supplied are correspondingly higher. The trade becomes a high-risk,
high-reward one in which criminal gangs have an advantage over normal
traders. They have every incentive and opportunity to collude to exclude
outsiders to keep the surpluses they can earn over and above those they
could gain from normal activities.
To take an example. One gram of heroin of 40 per cent purity is said to have
a street value of Pounds 80. If it were available as a gram of pure heroin
it might sell in the illicit market for Pounds 200. By comparison, legal
supplies of heroin cost the NHS less than Pounds 6 per gram.
The demand side is more controversial. But if demand were very sensitive to
price over the relevant range, then high prices would already have reduced
the problem of addiction to modest proportions. The fact that it has not
supports the view that demand is very inelastic for addicts and drug
dependants - that is what these words mean.
Given a high-risk, high-price market for products with an addictive quality,
one would expect present worldwide restrictive legislation to encourage
criminal activity. The addicts steal to pay for their drugs; and suppliers
will stop at nothing to maintain an enormously lucrative trade.
Things were not always thus. In the early 19th century, British governments
actively supported drug traders, for instance in the Opium Wars against
China. Draconian anti-drugs laws are fairly recent and have largely been
spearheaded by the US. British legislation dates back mainly to the
Dangerous Drugs Act of 1920.
In Hong Kong, Thailand and Laos, anti-opium laws were enacted over the
period between 1950 and 1980. The result was a switch from traditional opium
use, contained and controlled by local custom, to heroin, which is less
bulky and more profitable.
In the Andes, cocaine has replaced the traditional and less harmful chewing
of coca leaves. In Colombia, three presidential candidates have been
murdered for drug-related reasons. The drug trade is now the largest single
support for organised international crime; and about half the murders in the
US are drug-related. In Britain the problem is not (yet) on the same scale;
but drug-related theft may amount by value to half of all theft.
The analysis and facts so far cited all come from a new paper, Winning the
War on Drugs: to Legalise or Not? by Richard Stevenson, director of the
Liverpool University Health Economics Unit, and published today by the
Institute of Economic Affairs (Pounds 8.50). So careful, however, has the
IEA been in treading on this minefield that the paper also contains two
comments by medical practitioners eminent in the field. Professor Julius
Merry, a professor of clinical psychiatry at St Thomas's Hospital, agrees
with Mr Stevenson, who comes out for careful legalisation. A second
commentary written jointly by two psychiatrists and a criminologist
disagrees strongly. But even it favours some liberalisation of policy and
practice.
We have, of course, been here before. Witness the history of alcohol
prohibition in the US in the 1920s, as summarised in the 15th edition of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica. 'Prohibition brought into being a new kind of
criminal: the bootlegger. The career of Al Capone was a dramatic instance of
the development of bootlegging on a large scale. His annual earnings were
estimated at well over Dollars 60,000. The rise of the bootlegging gangs led
to a succession of gang wars and murders. A notorious incident was the St
Valentine's Day massacre in Chicago in 1929 when the Capone gang shot to
death seven members of the rival 'Bugs' Moran gang. Historians of the
underworld, however, suggest that by the late 1920s bootlegging was on the
verge of semi-monopoly control and the end of gang wars was approaching.'
The Encyclopaedia does not mean criminality was ending, but that there were
signs of the bootleggers agreeing on sharing what they might have called
'the loot' and the IEA 'the economic rent'.
Some effects of the official war against drugs are the opposite of those
intended, even from the point of view of drug users. The high price of
illegal drugs encourages injection, which is the most economical but also
the most hazardous method. 'At high prices, users are more likely to share
doses and needles, so the risk of transmitting disease is increased.'
Another response to high prices is to become a small dealer and sell to
friends, thus spreading the habit.
Although alcohol consumption fell in the US after prohibition ended, this
may have been due to special circumstances, such as the Great Depression. An
economic observer ought to concede that, if drug prices were lower, there
could be more casual experimentation - not that the law prevents 30 per cent
of young people from occasional use at the moment. It is a matter of
choosing between this risk and the growing sub-culture of criminality and
addiction.
Legalisation in one country also has its problems. One danger would be the
kind of drug tourism seen in Amsterdam. More seriously, the Colombian
cartels and the billions of dollars in laundered money would continue to
exist so long as the US continued its anti-drugs crusade. But here, at
least, there may be a glimmer of hope from the less straight-laced Clinton
administration. The US surgeon-general, Dr Jocelyn Elders, has urged a study
of legalisation.
No-one, whatever his speciality, can predict the consequences of a large
legislative leap into the dark. Two kinds of gradualism are possible. One is
that already practised by some local British police forces: they do not
prosecute for possession of small quantities of drugs but advise addicts to
enter treatment. A more rule-of-law approach would be to experiment with
legalising softer drugs and imposing the kinds of tax already borne by
alcohol and tobacco.
Stevenson provides an analogy in the case for legal abortion: 'Abortion is
tragic but, given that it will occur in any circumstances, it is better that
it should be performed competently. In the same way it would be better if
everyone could cope without mind-altering drugs, but prohibition is
unenforceable. If some people insist on using drugs, it is better that they
should buy them from law-abiding businessmen rather than criminals, and
better still if they can be integrated into society and brought under
medical supervision if it is needed.'
