FT  13 OCT 94 / Brussels approves Pounds 1.33bn rescue for Bull
The European commission yesterday approved state aid totalling FFr11.1bn
(Pounds 1.33bn) for Groupe Bull, clearing the way for a rescue package for
France's loss-making computer group and its eventual privatisation.
Mr Karel Van Miert, the competition commissioner, said the decision complied
with community guidelines on state aid for rescuing and restructuring
companies, and that he was confident this would be a one-time, last-time
payment.
Yesterday's ruling will raise again the sensitive subject of state aid and
the commission's commitment to stop market distortions. But the Bull case
prompted less anger than a decision earlier this year to approve a capital
injection of FFr20bn for Air France, the state-owned airline.
The commission said that none of Brussels' 17 commissioners had opposed the
payment. 'Subsidies can have a positive effect on employment and
competitiveness in Europe without damaging other business,' the commission
said.
Rival computer groups expressed resignation to the commission's ruling. 'We
have always said that are against state aid because we want a level playing
field,' said ICL, the UK computer group controlled by Fujitsu of Japan. But
the company had not lobbied strongly in this case. 'We have undertaken our
own restructuring and are much further down the road than Bull,' a spokesman
said.
Mr Gerard Longuet, the French industry minister, welcomed the decision and
said the government hoped to privatise Bull in coming months. 'The green
light from the commission is an important step in Bull's recovery,' he said.
A tender would be launched over the next few weeks for financial and
industrial groups seeking to take shares in the computer company.
The company, along with its state shareholder, is already engaged in
negotiations with potential partners.
Bull yesterday declined to comment on possible investors, although industry
observers believe NEC could increase its 4.4 per cent stake. the French
group. IBM, which holds 2.1 per cent of Bull's shares, has indicated it is
reluctant to raise its investment.
Mr Van Miert said he was satisfied Bull passed five key tests on which he
based his decision to allow the aid to be paid. These were that; the company
must be restored to profitability within a 'reasonable' time; measures must
be taken to offset any adverse effects on competitors; the aid must be kept
to the strict minimum needed; the restructuring plan must be implemented in
full; there must be detailed reports to monitor progress.
The French government has argued that capital injections are a vital element
in a restructuring package aimed at restoring the group to profitability
after accumulated losses of more than FFr15bn since 1989. Of the FFr11.1bn
pledged to Bull since 1993, all but FFr3.1bn has been transferred to the
company.
According to Bull, the restructuring measures, which include job cuts, the
reduction of its Paris sites, and the re-organisation of the company into
separate profit centres, have already yielded results. In the first half of
the year, losses were reduced to FFr843m compared with FFr1.98bn for the
first half of 1993.
