FT  24 DEC 94 / QE2 refused safety certificate in US
The US Coastguard refused to give a safety certificate to the Queen
Elizabeth 2 cruise ship yesterday, leaving her trapped at a New York
quayside hours after she was due to sail for the Caribbean.
The move is highly embarrassing for Cunard, the cruise line that owns the
QE2. It follows questions about safety raised by passengers on board the
liner, which sailed from Southampton to New York this week with a refit
incomplete.
The coastguard's grounds for refusal included the presence of obstacles in
passageways. This was understood to refer to the building materials being
used for the Dollars 45m (Pounds 28.8m) refit.
During the transatlantic voyage, which began last Saturday, angry passengers
complained that the failure to complete the refit before the vessel sailed
had resulted in 'building site' conditions, cabins without water and closed
amenities.
When the QE2 arrived in New York at 8pm on Thursday evening, some passengers
complained that safety had been jeopardised because corridors and emergency
exits were blocked by building materials and debris.
One passenger, Mr Andrew Coad, a vice-president for global equities systems
at Wall Street securities house Merrill Lynch, said on arrival in New York
that he and others planned to file a class action lawsuit against Cunard
citing the safety issue.
Mr John Olsen, Cunard's chief executive, strongly denied that safety had
been jeopardised. 'We take great care with this sort of thing,' he said. 'We
are not compromising our safety standards, and we have had a Marine Safety
Agency inspector on board who signed a safety certificate (in Southampton).'
The MSA is the British government agency responsible for safety at sea.
The US Coastguard also said there were openings in draught stops in the
ventilation system, which close during fires to prevent the passage of
flames and fumes, and there were holes in fire-containment bulkheads.
Speaking from on board the QE2, one passenger, who asked not to be named,
said passengers were 'bitterly disappointed' by the latest delay. He said
Cunard had offered to repatriate any passengers who did disembark, and give
them a free cruise next year.
The QE2 had been due to leave New York at midnight on Thursday for the
Caribbean, but was still lying at the passenger ship terminal on Manhattan's
west side in the early afternoon yesterday.
Cunard in New York said: 'The coastguard said refurbishment work needed to
be completed. We expect the QE2 to sail at 6pm (New York time).'
Nightmare on QE2, Page 4
