FT  30 AUG 94 / Survey of Malaysia (1): Full steam ahead - Malaysia is still
developing at breakneck speed but problems lie ahead
Showing few signs of strain, Malaysia continues to canter towards its goal
of full industrialisation by the year 2020. Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the prime
minister and driving force behind the country's modernisation programme, can
point to a long table of impressive statistics.
For the sixth year in a row Malaysia's gross domestic product expanded by
more than 8 per cent in 1993. GDP growth this year is officially forecast at
8.4 per cent, though many feel it could be over 9 per cent. The Malaysian
economy has been transformed: in 1970 commodities, mostly rubber and tin,
made up the bulk of exports. In 1993 manufactured goods accounted for more
than 70 per cent of exports.
Malaysia, with only 19m people, is now the world's 19th biggest trading
nation. It has become one of the hubs of the global electronics industry and
manufactures a wide range of other goods, from motor cars to condoms, haute
couture fashions to household furniture. There is virtual full employment
and per capita incomes have risen from Dollars 350 in 1970 to close to
Dollars 3,000 today.
Dr Mahathir does not think the country is setting its sights too high. 'We
are not an ambitious upstart. We are in fact very modest,' he says.
But while the short term outlook remains rosy, serious problems could put
the industrialisation plans off course. Malaysia's development has reached a
plateau. With severe labour shortages in many areas and wages rising, the
country is facing growing competition from lower cost producers such as
Indonesia, Vietnam and China.
Malaysia's economic growth has been driven by its success in attracting
large amounts of foreign investment. Despite a pick up in investment
approvals this year, investment in the economy is still well below the
levels achieved earlier in the decade. Some potential foreign investors have
become nervous as Malaysia has allowed political disputes with both
Australia and Britain to spill over into the business arena.
The next phase of Malaysia's development will be dependent on a transfer
into more high tech, value added industries. One concern is that Malaysia's
industrial base is too narrow - largely dependent on a sector which is still
overwhelmingly dominated by foreign multinational companies.
Electronic goods now make up about 40 per cent of Malaysia's total exports.
While progress has been made in promoting linkages between Malaysian based
multinationals and local manufacturers, well over 50 per cent of the value
of electronic exports is made up of imported goods. Another problem is the
reluctance of foreign companies to transfer technology and so help Malaysia
up the high tech ladder. Part of this is due to the multinational companies'
wish to keep their core industrial processes captive. But it is also due to
shortcomings within Malaysia.
Malaysia's education system has failed to keep pace with recent economic
changes. The country has more than 1m immigrant workers, many of them
illegal, labouring on plantations, construction sites and in low technology
factory jobs. Such a large immigrant workforce is already posing a challenge
to the country's delicate racial and religious balance and to its social
services.
But the real squeeze on labour is at the higher, more skilled end of the
market. Many Malaysians still show a strong reluctance to go into higher
education. The proportion of students aged 20-24 in tertiary education is
about 7 per cent, compared with 11 per cent in Indonesia, 16 per cent in
Thailand and 28 per cent in the Philippines.
Malaysia risks being caught in a medium technology trap: it lacks the all
important human resources to follow the path into high tech of countries
such as South Korea and Taiwan. Allied to this is a serious shortfall in R&amp;D
spending: present spending in Malaysia is less than one per cent of GDP,
compared with two to three per cent in developed countries.
Problems in the education sector are mainly related to the majority Malay
community. Senior officials now openly refer to a Malay educational crisis.
By not investing in education the Malays risk losing their stake in the
country's future.
Traditionally the Chinese, who account for about 35 per cent of the
population, exercised a large degree of control over the economy. In the
early 1970s the government, in response to serious race rioting, introduced
its New Economic Policy (NEP). The aim was to eradicate poverty and increase
bumiputra, or indigenous Malay, participation in the economy.
Malays were favoured in education, in government jobs and other fields. They
were given preferential and highly lucrative share allocations as the
government embarked on a widescale late 1980s privatisation programme. The
NEP was a partial success: according to official statistics bumiputras
controlled more than 20 per cent of corporate activity by 1990, up from
fewer than 5 per cent 20 years earlier.
Dr Mahathir berates bumiputras for their 'get rich quick' mentality and
failing to make long term investments. Yet government policies have tended
to encourage Malay dependence on official favours.
A new National Development policy (NDP), covering the years 1991-2000, puts
more emphasis on growth and market forces as a means of achieving some form
of economic equilibrium between the races. But recent figures show that,
since the advent of the NDP, the bumiputra share in the corporate sector has
declined.
There is concern that, despite job shortages, a substantial portion of the
younger generation are not working or studying - threatening the country's
onward growth. Similar fears are expressed by other Asian governments. The
west serves as a convenient whipping horse and is blamed for spreading moral
decay and indiscipline. In reality the younger generation is less receptive
to constant calls for more hard work and is not so willing to kowtow to its
elders.
In Malaysia's strictly hierarchical system, there is little room for
alternative voices or for questioning the direction of government policy.
People feel there is a lack of transparency and accountability.
The government has control over most of the media. Dr Mahathir's United
Malays National party (UMNO) has dominated government since independence
from Britain in 1957. Dr Mahathir has been in power since 1981.
The past year has seen its share of scandals, but Dr Mahathir's government
has escaped unscathed. Bank Negara, the central bank, disclosed in March
that it lost MDollars 5.7bn (Dollars 2.22bn) in foreign currency
transactions last year. That followed foreign exchange losses of nearly
Dollars 10bn in 1992, though the overall losses may have been considerably
higher. Mr Lim Kit Siang, an opposition leader, described the misjudged
currency dealings as the 'the greatest financial scandal in Malaysian
history'.
Bank Negara's governor and some senior officials resigned. But the
government quickly closed the book on any official enquiry into the affair.
The prime minister is strongly critical of what is called 'money politics'.
Yet the small and divided opposition says that it is Dr Mahathir's UMNO
party, through political handouts at successive elections, which has
encouraged the growth of political corruption.
Dr Mahathir advances the idea of Malaysia Inc, tirelessly travelling the
world with a bevy of corporate leaders in pursuit of business opportunities.
The problem is that political connections are often felt to be more
important than company balance sheets.
The Kuala Lumpur stock market, now southeast Asia's biggest in terms of
market capitalisation, rose by 98 per cent last year. Part of that rise was
due to Malaysia's strong economic fundamentals and the activities of well
managed, cash rich companies. But the most lively stocks were those known
less for their corporate expertise than for their connections to senior
politicians.
Malaysia's leaders, flush with the success of recent years, are confident
that they are steering the country on the right path. But their carefully
laid plans could go seriously off course unless pressing economic, social
and political problems are tackled.
