FT  15 NOV 94 / Kohl lays out plans for next four years
Chancellor Helmut Kohl yesterday unveiled his programme for the next four
years in government. The document outlines measures to combat unemployment
while keeping a tight control on government expenditure.
After almost three weeks of negotiation between his Christian Democratic
Union, its more conservative Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social
Union, and the liberal Free Democratic party (FDP), the government has
pledged to reduce the federal bureaucracy by at least 1 per cent a year -
around 13,000 jobs - and to do all it can to increase privatisation at state
and municipal level.
Efforts will also be made to reduce the proportion of gross national product
consumed by government spending from 51 per cent to 46 per cent, where it
was before German reunification in 1989.
Laws to combat crime would be updated and efforts made to introduce
Europe-wide measures.
Mr Rudolf Scharping, leader of the opposition Social Democratic party, said
the programme agreed by the three parties had avoided discussion of all
important issues. It was a 'coalition of weakness', he said.
He said the new laws for foreigners - the one subject on which the coalition
had been specific - amounted to a 'political and legal nothing'. They would
give third-generation immigrant children dual nationality until 18 and then
offer them full citizenship if they give up their foreign passport. The
Inter-Cultural Council in Germany said: 'This attempt, allegedly to make
integration of foreigners easier, will do nothing to change the fact that 7m
foreigners live in this country with diminished rights.'
The new cabinet is expected to contain 16 ministers, two fewer following
fusion of the education and science ministries and the ministries for family
and women. No important changes are expected, but Mr Kohl would not name his
new team until he has been confirmed as chancellor in a Bundestag vote
today.
The FDP, which has been under pressure to cede ministries following its poor
election result, will hold on to the foreign, economics and justice
ministries. It remained unclear whether Mr Gunter Rexrodt, FDP economics
minister, would keep his job or have to give way to forces within the party
who want him out.
Feverish speculation continued yesterday about whether Chancellor Kohl would
be re-elected as chancellor given that he can only afford to give away four
votes without losing the absolute majority. To avoid any last minute mishaps
all Bundestag deputies were told to report to Bonn last night.
