FT  17 FEB 94 / Ulster Unionists set out north-south proposals
The Ulster Unionist party's proposals for a political settlement in Northern
Ireland will argue that north-south relations should be maintained by ad hoc
meetings between Irish ministers and representatives of a devolved Ulster
assembly, rather than by separate institutions.
This indication of the gulf that still separates participants in the
political talks on the province's future emerged at Westminster yesterday as
London and Dublin sought to maintain pressure on republican leaders to make
a positive response to the Downing Street declaration.
Northern Ireland secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew said in Omagh that Sinn Fein,
the IRA's political wing, was lagging behind public opinion. It faced 'only
one rational choice' in accepting the joint declaration.
This message was supported by Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister,
who said he believed the Northern Ireland secretary had recently given
enough clarification to clear up any outstanding matters.
Mr Reynolds said in Dublin that he hoped Sinn Fein would give a positive
response as soon as possible.
It emerged at Westminster that the government is taking fresh soundings from
MPs about the functioning of its ban on broadcasting the voices of Northern
Ireland terrorists or their supporters - less than two weeks after
announcing restrictions would stay in place.
Last Sunday's television interview with Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein
president, on ITV's Walden programme is understood to have heightened
concerns that the ban can work in the terrorists' favour by allowing their
words to be spoken by actors while ruling out aggressive questioning.
It is thought highly unlikely that a move to lift the restrictions would
come before Sinn Fein's annual conference later this month. Such a move
would face stiff resistance at Westminster.
Downing Street said it did not think there were any 'present plans' for a
change.
The UUP proposals - to be published this month - focus mainly on the
internal government of the province. They are expected to flesh out the
'blueprint for stability' proposed by Mr James Molyneaux, the UUP leader,
last March.
The UUP is to send a delegation to the US later this year for talks with
politicians and business people.
The decision follows the highly publicised visit last month to the US by Mr
Adams. Mr Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist party, has also
said he intends to visit the US.
