FT  15 MAR 94 / Wary combatants seek end to phoney peace: The search for a
route to talks
The Britsh and Irish prime ministers, Sinn Fein and the Provisional IRA are
all agreed. The best chance for a lasting peace in Northern Ireland lies in
talks between war-weary combatants in a never-ending conflict. But there
ends the meeting of minds.
The IRA and Sinn Fein know full well that there is mounting popular pressure
for peace and want to be seen wanting to talk. The British and Irish
governments, in spite of the almost daily mantra declaring the peace process
waits for no one, would also prefer to talk. The two sides, to the
embarrassment of the British government, have already done so.
But how to get there again without one or the other losing face is the
dilemma now confronting both. Unless there is a way through, the conflict
could be set for another long, bloody phase.
London and Dublin stand apparently indivisible in their determination not to
talk to terrorists until the violence ends. Dublin, always more ready than
London to offer explanation of the joint Downing Street declaration,
believes there is no more room for further clarification and is increasingly
contemptuous of the republican position.
Sunday's equivocal, late-night statement from the IRA - issued from Dublin
and signed by the apparently flexible if fictitious 'P. O'Neill' of the
Irish Republican Publicity Bureau - avoids an explicit rejection of
December's Downing Street declaration. But it leaves the chances of lasting
peace as elusive as ever.
The triple onslaught at Heathrow airport - arguably attracting more column
inches and political outrage at Westminster than would a dozen murders in
Ulster - taken together with the IRA's first formal response to the
declaration, seem to provide a clearer picture of the next, presumably
agreed, phase in republican strategy.
The mortars at Heathrow - irrespective of whether they were doctored to
minimise injuries - were not to be a final flexing of military muscle before
a ceasefire. The attacks can be seen as part of the pattern of
'spectaculars' predicted by Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president. They are
likely to continue.
The IRA and Sinn Fein clearly believe the British government can eventually
be made to give further ground. The prime objective of republicans now is to
return to the position nearly a year ago when, after lengthy, secret
contacts between the two sides, they believed the British government was
preparing for detailed peace talks.
But if peace is on its mind, the republican movement appears convinced that
 -having made considerable progress while violence continues - it can expect
the two governments to give further ground under duress.
The IRA's Dublin statement, greeted variously as a sign of hope or of
contemptible cynicism, blames the 'negative attitude' of the British
government for lack of progress.
The mortars have triggered renewed calls for the government to do something
to re-energise the London-Dublin initiative, while underlining how limited
are ministers' options for mounting an instant military or political
response.
London's desire for rapid progress on political talks has been stymied both
by the tendency of the constitutional parties to retreat to entrenched
positions in readiness for June's European elections and by Dublin's
reluctance to show its hand over relations between north and south.
On security, any dramatic response by London - such as internment - is ruled
out. Besides handing the IRA a propaganda victory, it would give the lie to
past assertions that co-operation between London and Dublin on such matters
is already extremely good.
Downing Street yesterday signalled some fresh efforts in this area by
revealing that new discussions with Dublin aimed at making co-operation
'even more effective' would urgently take place at official level.
The government yesterday restated its position that there would be no
negotiations before the IRA ended its armed campaign. But whatever it says
in public, further secret contacts with republican leaders can never be
ruled out.
When last year's sequence of secret messages between London and the
republican movement was exposed in November, Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern
Ireland secretary, insisted that these had not amounted to negotiation, a
formula which could be repeated.
But whatever the next step, it can now be seen that the Downing Street
declaration - irrespective of its longer-term value - has failed to make an
early breakthrough in the search for peace. The prize remains great but the
fight seems nowhere near over.
