FT  19 APR 94 / Leading Article: Brands on the run
A year after the startling decision by Philip Morris to cut the US price of
Marlboro cigarettes, this response to collapsing sales looks much more than
an isolated incident. Makers of most other branded consumer goods, from food
to toiletries, are finding that consumers are increasingly reluctant to pay
premium prices for their products.
The latest evidence of the manufacturers' discomfort is their campaign to
amend the UK trademarks bill, which received its Commons second reading
yesterday, so as to prohibit retailers from selling 'copycat' own-label
versions of their brands. The manufacturers' concern is understandable,
given the increasing success of keenly priced own-label ranges. However,
such a ban would probably offer only a temporary palliative. Nor will
economic recovery automatically reverse the industry's recent misfortunes.
The surge in consumer spending which inflated branded manufacturers' profits
and spurred a takeover frenzy in the late 1980s blinded them to fundamental
shifts in their industry. What today seems a golden age was actually the
swan song of outdated business methods.
Many companies are still struggling to escape from an industrial time warp.
As some admit, their priorities have been dictated too much by the need to
keep costly mass-production lines busy and not enough by market demand.
Their much-vaunted marketing departments have often become inward-looking
bureaucracies, cut off from the real world. Innovation and consumer
responsiveness have suffered as a result.
Many western industries, such as US car manufacturers, have grappled with
similar problems since the early 1980s. Consumer goods producers have
avoided them until recently for two reasons. One is the increasingly
oligopolistic structure of their markets, in many of which no more than
three suppliers can survive profitably. The other is the lack of effective
competition from Japanese and other Asian manufacturers, few of which have
so far ventured onto international markets.
But recession and the steadily growing power of supermarket chains have
changed all that. This is especially true in the UK, where centralised
buying and distribution have enabled supermarkets to drive increasingly hard
bargains. Furthermore, their electronic sales information systems provide
detailed marketing data long before it is available to manufacturers. As a
consequence, a traditional contest between customers and suppliers has
become a battle between their different brands.
It is little consolation to manufacturers that not every supermarket has
made the formula work, nor that they can still dominate unsophisticated
retailers in the emerging economies where sales are growing fastest. Modern
retailing technology moves quickly across borders, while the profits
available from own-label ranges will encourage supermarkets to keep
experimenting with them.
Many manufacturers have sought to restore battered margins by cutting costs.
Some are re-organising their marketing. However, their brands will once
again command historic price premiums only if they are backed by products
which are genuinely novel, distinctive and of superior quality. In an era
when technology and innovation are easily appropriated by competitors, that
requires unrelenting effort and constant corporate renewal. But companies
which shrink from the commitment will doom their brands to extinction.
