FT  14 JUN 94 / Protest at Emap's move on Trans World
Directors of Trans World Communications, the leading UK commercial radio
group, yesterday sought legal advice after Emap, the media and exhibitions
group, said it planned to buy the 22 per cent of the company owned by Mr
Owen Oyston.
Mr Oyston, a millionaire businessman, has agreed to sell his stake at 181p a
share if an offer is made to Trans World shareholders between now and June
22. Emap, which already owns nearly 30 per cent of Trans World, is seeking a
recommended offer at 181p which would value the group at around Pounds 70m.
If agreement cannot be reached, it is likely to push ahead with a hostile
offer.
Controversy was growing last night because an Emap takeover of Trans World
would breach the legal limit on the number and size of commercial radio
licences which can be held by one company.
Under broadcasting legislation, no company is able to hold more than six
large licences - each broadcasting to more than 1m adults. The combined
group would bring eight such licences under one roof including Radio City in
Liverpool, Kiss FM in London, Radio Piccadilly in Manchester and Radio Aire
in Leeds.
The Radio Authority, the industry regulator, has agreed, however, that an
'ownership structure' can be put in place for part of Emap's existing radio
interests to enable it to comply with the rules.
It is believed that a number of Emap's smaller licences would be put into a
Pounds 100 company set up by Schroders, the merchant bank. The company, in
which Emap could probably have a 49 per cent stake, would own the licences,
leaving the media group with operational control.
Critics said last night the decision opened the way for anyone to try to get
round the ownership rules, which are designed to limit concentration of
ownership in commercial radio.
Trans World directors will be looking at the possibility of seeking a
judicial review of the Radio Authority's decision, and a complaint to the
Takeover Panel has not been ruled out.
The Radio Authority has told the government that the licence system, which
is operated alongside a points system - no company can own more than 15 per
cent of all the points in the system - should be changed.
The authority's acceptance of Emap's proposal is the second controversial
decision it has made recently. It approved a takeover purchase by Reuters
Holdings, the media and information group, of London News Radio, which picks
up the two London broadcasting licences of LBC this autumn. This means that
Reuters - which applied unsuccessfully for the licences - has taken over the
winning company before it has gone on air.
