FT  13 APR 94 / World Stock Markets: Singapore banks on safe and steady
reputation /- Finding a fundamentally strong market
Singapore's stock market has a dull reputation in comparison with its more
volatile neighbouring bourses, with Kuala Lumpur, Bangkok, Manila and
Jakarta delivering far more adrenalin per share to adventurous traders.
But when other markets in south-east Asia become nervous, Singapore - safe
and reasonably steady - begins to look more attractive.
Overwhelmed by a record breaking bull run in late 1993 and early 1994,
south-east Asia's stock markets have been jolted back to earth in recent
weeks. In the second half of last year foreign funds, mainly from the US,
flooded into Singapore and other regional markets. A combination of rising
interest rates in the US and falling bond prices have caused a sizeable
chunk of those funds to be withdrawn recently.
Kuala Lumpur, which advanced nearly 100 per cent in 1993, has been helped by
a rebound in the past two days but has still fallen by about 20 per cent so
far this year. Singapore, which rose just under 60 per cent in 1993, has had
a softer landing, declining about 8 per cent since January 1.
This week there were signs of a recovery in Singapore as the market found
favour with foreign investors seeking a safe haven for their funds. Analysts
say a 3 per cent advance by the local Straits Times Industrial index on
Monday, followed by a 2.3 per cent gain yesterday to 2,233.66, was mainly
due to Japanese investors, worried about developments at home in the wake of
the resignation as prime minister of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, moving funds into
Singapore.
'Investors are less adventurous now,' says Mr Paul Schymyck, regional
economist at Smith Barney Shearson, HG Asia in Singapore. 'People are
becoming more realistic, less carried away by market euphoria. They are
looking at the fundamentals - and in Singapore the fundamentals still appear
very sound.'
The buoyant stock market, coupled with strong growth in the overall
financial services sector, helped to propel Singapore's economic growth to
9.9 per cent last year. A repeat performance is unlikely in 1994, although
the government is forecasting a still very respectable 6 to 8 per cent
growth rate.
Other countries in south-east Asia saw foreign investments, viewed as an
important barometer of overall economic confidence, drop sharply last year.
But inward investment into Singapore has continued to increase.
Companies continue to show strong earnings growth, with the four main banks,
among the republic's biggest listed companies, showing pre-tax profits up
between 40 and 50 per cent last year - much of it due to the buoyant stock
market activity. While that performance is unlikely to be repeated in 1994,
banks are now using their considerable resources to expand overseas and
strong earnings will come from increased regional loan business.
Singapore is sitting on a mountain of savings: it has foreign exchange
reserves of well above Dollars 40bn and funds in the central provident fund,
a compulsory savings scheme, are now SDollars 52bn (Dollars 34bn).
There was a local rush for shares in Singapore Telecom, the biggest listed
company, which was partially privatised last year. The ST float, which
valued the company at SDollars 70bn or about 80 per cent of the market
capitalisation of British Telecom, was evidence of how much liquidity there
was in the local market.
The government relaxed Central Provident Fund rules to allow Singaporeans to
use increasing amounts of the funds to buy ST and other shares. Most traders
feel that there is now too much liquidity chasing too few shares. There was
disappointment when the government, in its February budget, announced that
there would be no more big flotations of state companies for two years.
Frustrated investors show an increasing tendency to invest in other markets.
More than 50 per cent of the market's turnover is in Malaysian stocks,
traded over the counter.
Singaporeans are also looking further afield: the Bank of Thailand says that
they formed the biggest group of foreign investors in the Bangkok market in
1993, with the Singapore Investment Corp, the state investment agency,
leading the charge.
'Liquidity is never going to be a problem in Singapore,' says one local
broker. 'The difficult part is finding enough solid companies to invest in -
at a reasonable price.'
