FT  28 MAY 94 / Finance and the Family: A new world of margins - With
rolling share settlement near, Norma Cohen looks at possible credit changes
Ever since the Wall Street crash of 1929, stockbrokers have been just a
little anxious about lending their clients money to buy shares. At that
time, clients were extended cash for large stock purchases after providing
collateral sometimes worth as little as 10 per cent of the value of the
investment.
Needless to say, when share prices began to plummet, brokers asked for
additional collateral which the clients could not provide. The rest is
history - and not for nothing has the US had stringent regulations ever
since on what is known as margin trading. The rules, enshrined in the
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (section 7), spell out how much
collateral brokers need from their clients in order to buy shares for them
on credit.
Some 60 years on, margin trading is an indelible part of the private
investor's landscape, accepted as simply another ordinary feature in the
course of doing business. Now, with the advent of 10-day and five-day
rolling settlement, UK stockbrokers are for the first time having to
consider if they, too, will need special arrangements for extending credit
to clients.
The first phase starts on July 18. Ten business days later, payment will be
due for any shares bought on that date - a much speedier settlement rate
than the gap of two to three weeks with which investors have become
comfortable. If, after July 18, a client's cheque does not clear on time,
the broker will have two choices: extending his own credit to settle the
agreed share purchase or 'failing' to complete the trade.
Since that costs money and leaves investors without the shares they wanted,
a credit extension by the broker on the client's behalf makes sense. That is
the gist of margin trading.
Geoffrey Turner, chief executive of the Association of Private Client
Stockbrokers and Investment Managers, says the organisation has set up a
committee to study the implications of margin trading.
Securities regulators are, however, being more cautious. At present, the
Securities and Futures Authority - the self-regulatory body for stockbrokers
and futures dealers - requires clients to provide collateral equal to 100
per cent of any credit extended.
Recently, the SFA altered its rules slightly; now, stockbrokers must ensure
that any collateral held can be liquidated if necessary. They must also take
care they have greater certainty of their rights to title if a client does
not repay the loan.
John Dolan, a securities lawyer with Merrill Lynch International in London,
says: 'Margin trading is widely accepted in the US by sophisticated private
investors.' Merrill operates what it calls an Investor CreditLine Service
for investments outside the UK which complies with the regulations of the US
Securities and Exchange Act.
While different brokerage companies will offer different terms for various
aspects of the business, they are all the same in two respects: the
percentage of the purchase price which can be borrowed, and the value of the
collateral provided against the loan.
Merrill's product, like most others in the US, allows the investor to open
an account. While that is in surplus, the investor can earn a rate of
interest. While it is in deficit, the investor is charged interest. These
accounts allow investors to make larger purchases of shares in a bull market
than they might otherwise be able to.
Investors also can sell shares short - that is, to dispose of shares they do
not own - and buy them back later at a lower price in a falling market using
their margin account.
Although this strategy is fraught with dangers if the market goes the wrong
way, sophisticated private investors in the US may be able to utilise
techniques such as stop loss orders to limit the damage.
To understand how margin works, it is helpful to examine Merrill's product.
Let us say you buy Dollars 10,000 worth of shares and leave them on your
account. For shares worth Dollars 10 each or more, Merrill will allow you to
borrow a sum equal to half their market value if you use those shares as
collateral. Shares worth from Dollars 3 to Dollars 10 each allow you to
borrow up to 50 per cent of the market value of an additional purchase, but
those under Dollars 3 give no borrowing power.
Merrill's client agreement spells out the amounts of interest to be charged
on the credit extended. But if the value of the shares Merrill is holding as
collateral falls, the firm will make a 'maintenance call'.
For higher value shares, the market price must always be at least 30 per
cent of the value of credit extended, while lower value shares must not fall
below Dollars 3 each. Should these levels be breached, you will have to
provide additional collateral - either that or Merrill has the right to sell
the existing collateral in your account.
Clearly, the advent of margin trading in the UK could do more than simply
help investors pay for shares more promptly; it could help sophisticated
investors engage in far more speculative trading strategies than they are
accustomed to. The question is whether the advent of speedier share
settlement in the UK will open the door for a bigger host of opportunities
for investors than they had ever dreamed possible.
