FT  16 DEC 94 / Cabinet quarrel grows over Hercules order
A decision by the British government to purchase more than a handful of new
Hercules transport aircraft would severely damage UK participation in the
development of the European Future Large Aircraft, British Aerospace warned
yesterday.
The warning came as a cabinet-level row over how the RAF should set about
replacing its ageing Hercules fleet appeared to gather momentum at
Westminster.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, is understood to be pushing for up to
half the current 60-strong Lockheed Hercules fleet to be replaced with the
same company's C-130J aircraft.
But Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, is believed to
favour refurbishment of the current fleet, which the RAF says will need
replacement from 1996. This would enable a decision on a long-term
replacement to be delayed until 2002, when the FLA - for which BAe will
build the wings - becomes available.
If the C-130J is chosen, Mr Heseltine is understood to feel that a maximum
of 15 aircraft - equivalent to an operational RAF squadron - should be
ordered. This would minimise the risk of undermining the FLA's chances of
competing with Lockheed for future orders.
The controversy over the aircraft order came amid signs of a fresh split in
the cabinet over whether the government should offer a referendum on the
next stage of European integration.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, has won Mr Heseltine's backing for an
intense behind-the-scenes effort to persuade Mr John Major not to appease
the Tory right by committing the government now to a referendum. Mr Clarke
has told colleagues it would be 'idiotic' to promise a plebiscite without
knowing what, if any, proposals there will be for significant changes to the
structure of the EU.
If Mr Rifkind and Mr Heseltine can reach agreement over the Hercules
replacement, their decision could be rubber stamped by the cabinet, possibly
as soon as next week. But they are said to be far apart at the moment. One
former minister spoke of 'irreconcilable differences' and said he understood
the position was 'deadlocked'.
