FT  16 MAY 94 / World's whales worth more alive than dead: International
Whaling Commission meeting
Whales are worth more alive than dead, UK and US officials will argue when
they meet in Mexico tomorrow ahead of the annual meeting of the
International Whaling Commission.
Potential revenues from whale watching - an increasingly popular form of
tourism - could soon reach several hundred million pounds worldwide,
officials are likely to claim.
The issue is likely to be one of the flashpoints at this year's meeting,
whose formal sessions begin next week.
The break-up of the IWC - which regulates the catching of the 12 species of
'great whale' - is possible if growing disputes between whaling and
non-whaling countries are not resolved, environmentalists have warned.
Iceland has already left the IWC in protest at the body's moratorium on
commercial whaling, introduced in 1986. Last year Norway declared that it
was not bound by the moratorium, while Japan continues to press for the ban
to be lifted.
Countries with strong animal rights traditions, such as the UK and US, have
begun exploring whether potential revenues from whale watching will prove a
powerful enough argument to block the resumption of commercial whaling.
Controversy at this year's meeting will also focus on:
Proposals for a whale sanctuary around Antarctica.
Japan's demand for a quota of 50 whales to be caught in its coastal waters
this year.
The reliability of the 'revised management procedure', the IWC's complex
model of how many whales could be caught without damaging stocks.
Proposals for the southern sanctuary are officially sponsored by the UK, the
US, France and Australia, but agreement may be elusive given fierce
opposition from Japan and from some non-whaling Caribbean countries which
have sided with Japan on past contentious issues.
The Japanese request for a 50-whale quota - in addition to its plans to
catch around 300 whales for scientific research - will also attract
opposition. Some countries argue that the quota, intended to help coastal
villages, does not qualify as aboriginal whaling, which is permitted by the
IWC.
However, the fiercest rows are likely to centre on the scientific model for
'sustainable whaling.'
Norway argues that the model, which has had years of development, would
never allow so many whales to be caught that stocks would be jeopardised.
However, the UK is pressing for more research, in the light of new evidence
that the former Soviet Union seriously under-reported the number of whales
it caught in the 1960s and 1970s.
Some non-whaling countries have indicated that even if the IWC approves the
model they may not back commercial harvesting of whales. Methods for
'humane' killing and for verifying the numbers caught still remain to be
settled, they argue.
