FT  07 MAY 94 / Finance and the Family: Drive safely on the Continent -
Bethan Hutton has some tips for drivers
Although the Channel Tunnel opened for a very exclusive clientele this week,
it will be a while before British drivers start pouring through the Chunnel
en masse. But thousands of drivers will pile on to ferries and hovercraft
this summer.
In a continental Europe supposedly without borders, you might think driving
there should not require any more special planning than a long-distance trip
within the UK. Unfortunately, car insurance and breakdown cover which are
perfectly adequate in the UK can leave you exposed to all sorts of trouble a
few miles across the Channel.
Green proof-of-insurance cards were not consigned to the dustbin at the end
of 1992; French police have been known to fine foreign motorists caught
without one far more recently. And police in Spain can jail you after an
accident, so it is wise to travel with a bail bond.
Breaking down on the M25 is enough of a nightmare - but being stranded on
the hard shoulder of the Paris ring road could be 10 times worse. The
biggest selling point for the AA, RAC, Europ Assistance, National Breakdown
and the other rescue services is the promise of a friendly, English-speaking
voice on the other end of the emergency telephone who can summon help
anywhere in Europe.
Some of the services have their own rescue patrols, while others use a
network of local companies. All promise a speedy roadside response and will
tow your car to a service station - or, if necessary, return it to the UK.
Extras to look for are: emergency credit facilities; additional
accommodation costs; car hire or other onward travel costs; despatch of
spare parts from the UK; and provision of a driver if the only one in your
group is incapacitated.
The AA charges Pounds 30.50 for one week's car-only Five Star cover for
Europe while the RAC's equivalent Eurocover costs Pounds 40.95 for between
five and nine days (Pounds 3 off for existing RAC members). National
Breakdown's Blue Riband scheme would cost Pounds 31.25 for the same period
and Europ Assistance would charge Pounds 25.50 for seven days. If you just
want to go to Ireland, it could cost less. There are often supplements for
cars more than 10 years old, and caravans or trailers.
Carrying a green card is no longer a strict legal requirement (although this
message might not have filtered through to the more rural police forces),
but it is still sensible to take one in case you have an accident or are
stopped by police. You should always tell your insurance company before
taking the car abroad; otherwise, you could find your cover restricted to
the third party legal minimum.
If you have comprehensive cover in the UK, you will probably want to extend
this for overseas trips. Some insurers include European cover free while
others charge up to Pounds 50, according to brokers Telesure. A few, such as
General Accident, issue a European certificate automatically with policy
documents. Very frequent travellers or those spending extended periods
abroad - such as second-home owners - may have to make special arrangements
with their insurance company.
Most of the breakdown cover packages allow you free rein to wander as far
afield as Moscow or Morocco, but a few corners of Europe are out of bounds:
the former Yugoslavia and Albania are among likely exclusions. If you are
planning an adventurous itinerary, check before you go.
Insurers can be more restrictive, and some start charging more than their
standard European rates if you venture into, say, Turkey or Romania. As
usual, it is best to make inquiries before setting off if there is a chance
you could stray outside the European Union.
Some pieces of equipment, such as a warning triangle and in-car first aid
kit, are compulsory in many places and recommended in any case. There are
also a few quirks you should know about. It is illegal to carry spare fuel
in Italy, Luxembourg, Greece and Turkey, and you must carry spare headlamp
bulbs in Spain.
Motoring organisations such as the AA and RAC have leaflets on motoring
regulations, speed limits and equipment required by law in the countries
visited most often by UK tourists. On-the-spot fines for breaking the rules
could make a large dent in your holiday spending money - and traffic police
do not always accept credit cards.
Sales of unleaded petrol in the UK have overtaken the leaded variety but the
same is not true in all parts of Europe: unleaded can be hard to come by off
the beaten track in Spain, Italy and eastern Europe.
Leaded fuel can cause expensive damage to catalytic converters so it is a
wise move to fill up with unleaded before crossing borders and, indeed,
wherever it is available.
Travel insurance is also a must, particularly to cover medical and legal
expenses.
