FT  24 AUG 94 / World Trade News: Arab-Israeli agreements prise open way for
greater trade ties - Israel predicts a regional common market
After decades of Arab economic isolation, Israel's gradual normalisation of
relations is being cemented by trade agreements which are paving the way to
a commercially interdependent Middle East.
Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, has predicted the development of
a regional common market, while Crown Prince Hassan of Jordan has advocated
'a Middle East marked by the free movement of people, capital and goods
across national frontiers'.
Such a vision is unlikely to materialise for many years, with Israel opposed
to the free movement of labour and bound by possibly incompatible trade
accords with the US and European Union. Arab states also fear Israeli
economic domination.
However, the newly emerging trade patterns between Israel, the Palestinians
and Jordan provide what Mr Ehud Kaufman, a senior Israeli economic
negotiator, describes as 'the first building blocks' for wider Arab-Israeli
co-operation.
Israel's custom union with Palestinians and last week's unilateral trade
concession allowing Jordan to export Dollars 30m of goods a year into the
Israeli-occupied West Bank will provide immediate economic benefits to
Israel's Arab neighbours.
Mr Ezra Sadan, an Israeli economist, predicts that Palestinian exports to
Israel - now worth Dollars 150-200m annually - will return to the annual
growth rates seen in the 1970s of about 16 per cent.
For Israel, the deals offer political gains, in the form of the greater
security brought by increased Arab-Israeli trade links and as possible
encouragement for other Arab states, such as Syria and Lebanon, into peace
treaties.
Israel also hopes trade concessions will encourage the EU and the Far East
to open up to Israeli exports in the interest of consolidating Middle East
peace.
Under the Palestinian-Israeli agreement, Israel and the self-rule areas of
Gaza and Jericho are forming a free-trade customs union, protected by a
common tariff barrier. The customs union will be extended to the rest of the
West Bank after Palestinian elections due mid-December, but Palestinian
agricultural produce has already begun flowing freely into Israel.
Israel says rising Palestinian agricultural exports to Israel - now worth
Dollars 150-Dollars 200m annually - has provoked a backlash from Israeli
farmers and forced the government to allocate Shk250m (Dollars 83m) in
compensation and export incentives.
Israel has also granted the Palestinians exemptions under the customs union
to import limited quantities of basic food items and high priority inputs
for construction and development at their own customs rates. In addition,
the Palestinians will have VAT of 15 per cent compared with Israel's 17 per
cent, import some consumer goods, such as cars at their own rates and sell
petrol at a pump price 15 per cent lower than Israel's.
The short-term concessional agreement with Jordan allows Jordanian exports
without a reciprocal opening of Jordan to Israeli exports. The move reflects
Jordan's concern about the affect on its protected import substitution
industries of a two-way opening of trade.
The measure will have little impact on Israel's economy and is an important
victory for Israel in its continuing battle to erode the Arab economic
boycott. However the move will only last until Israel hands over the West
Bank to Palestinian self-government. Jordan would then have to negotiate a
permanent trade accord with both partners of the customs union.
Traditional Jordanian-PLO political rivalry remains formidable and
Palestinians may also object to Jordanian competition on economic grounds,
with the few goods that Israel would wish to buy from Jordan likely to
compete directly against Palestinian goods. Arab states are also reluctant
to integrate their economies with Israel - fifteen years after the
Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty non-oil trade with Egypt is only worth about
Dollars 10m.
