FT  12 OCT 94 / US machine tool 'opportunity'
The US machine tool industry, in steep decline for more than a decade, has
an opportunity to recapture a significant share of the global market it used
to dominate, according to a report published yesterday by the
California-based Rand research institution.
Machine tool builders in the US are benefiting by a strong surge in demand,
technological advances and corporate restructuring, along with setbacks to
rivals in Japan and Germany, says Rand's Critical Technologies Institute.
The Dollars 4bn (Pounds 2.5bn) US industry is relatively small and
fragmented, but is strategically important.
'A weak domestic industry means that the US risks losing access to the
latest manufacturing technologies,' says the report.
The US accounted for about 19 per cent of world machine tool production in
1981. However, by 1992, its share had slipped to about 8 per cent and its
position in the industry from first to a distant fourth behind Japan,
Germany and Italy.
In 1992, concerned by the US producers' collapse, Congress directed Rand to
produce the report. It says Japanese producers filled orders more quickly
with cheaper, more reliable products when US demand picked up after the
1981-83 recession.
In contrast, the US industry failed to rebound for various reasons. These
included a lack of enough big producers, weak export capacity, and poor
performance in the translating of technological research into market
advantage.
Many of these barriers remained but recent developments suggested a brighter
future. In particular, domestic demand rose 25 per cent last year.
The report suggests the US government could foster development of local
co-operative networks among small and medium-sized machine tool makers and
users, invest in the manufacturing infrastructure so as to bolster the
translation of research leadership into a production edge, and help US
machine tool builders compete internationally.
The Decline of the US Machine Tool Industry and Prospects for its
Sustainable Recovery: Vol 1; from Rand's Distribution Services, PO Box 2138,
Santa Monica, CA, USA 90407-2138; Dollars 28 including appendices.
