FT  30 AUG 94 / Leading Article: The prize of Mideast peace
It is still too early to be fully confident that the Middle East peace
process is irreversible, but timely to assert that the prize is now almost
within the participants' grasp. The symbolism of the Madrid conference in
1991, the handshakes between Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister of Israel,
first with Mr Yassir Arafat of the PLO, and more recently with King Hussein
of Jordan, could be greeted with scepticism for so long as there were no
tangible changes on the ground. But those changes are now happening.
Israeli troops have withdrawn from a small part of occupied territory, and
Israel is handing over important civil powers to a Palestinian authority. Mr
Arafat is back on home soil, backed by substantial pledges of international
aid. Tourists are already taking advantage of the new border crossing
between Israel and Jordan. King Hussein's embattled economy will soon begin
to benefit from debt forgiveness of as much as Dollars 2bn over the next
three years. Plans are being laid for roads linking Jordan and Israel and
schemes for sharing electricity, airports and port facilities. Populations
may not yet feel the benefits, but governments can begin to see the
dividends of peace.
The desire to realise those dividends should provide the strongest incentive
for maintaining the momentum among those leaders already committed to the
peace process. Mr Rabin, Mr Arafat and King Hussein find themselves in the
same boat, albeit not yet rowing in precisely the same direction. They need
the process to succeed for the overwhelming reason that personal, party and
dynastic futures may depend on it. They are aware equally that the lack of
an agreement between Israel and Syria could threaten further progress and,
at worst, undermine what has already been achieved.
High ground
Mr Rabin's calculations over the next few months will be crucial. He holds
the high ground - literally on the Golan heights and politically at home
where the most hawkish elements of opposition are in increasing disarray. Mr
Rabin and the Israeli public know the price demanded by Syria, which is an
eventual full withdrawal from the Golan. The timing and terms of that
withdrawal, through which Israel can be reassured of Syria's long-term
commitment to peace, are at the heart of US mediation efforts. The gap is
narrowing, must be bridgeable, and if closed would not just inject a new
surge of optimism into the peace process but would encourage the belief that
other apparently irreconcilable issues, such as the future status of
Jerusalem, might one day be resolved.
Old sureties
The clock is also ticking for President Hafez al-Assad in Damascus. The old
sureties, such as the support of Moscow, have gone. King Hussein has set his
own agenda, without reference to Syria. Improved relations with Washington
will not bear much-needed economic fruit for Syria until there is progress
in the negotiations with Israel. Mr Assad may have crushed Islamic forces at
home, but he is riding the Hizbollah tiger in southern Lebanon which could
yet cause him severe embarrassment. To enhance the prospects of the Alawite
minority's maintaining its dominance after his departure, Mr Assad needs to
bequeath a more stable future than a continuing, debilitating conflict with
Israel.
In Syria, as in Egypt, Jordan, liberated Palestine, the occupied
territories, Lebanon, and Israel, the most vigorous opponents of the
compromises needed to secure peace are also those who would expect to
benefit most politically from the failure of the present process. The closer
peace comes, the more desperate and dangerous those forces will become, as
recent bombs in London and Buenos Aires have shown. The proper response must
be greater vigilance, restraint (especially by Israel), and more emphatic
efforts to eradicate the conditions which breed such extremism: occupation,
poverty, and the absence of hope for a better future. The next steps are
clearly signposted. Israel must speedily complete its withdrawal from most
of the West Bank, and Mr Arafat should stop complaining about the
conditionality of aid and use what is available as rapidly and effectively
as possible. If at the same time the US steps up its efforts to broker a
deal between Israel and Syria, the prize will be truly within reach.
