FT  08 JUL 94 / Health reforms under fire in report from ombudsman: NHS
attitude to complaints provokes Commons exchanges
Pressure on the government over reform of the National Health Service
intensified yesterday with a report from the health ombudsman condemning the
handling of patients' complaints.
Mr William Reid, health service commissioner, described some cases he had
investigated as an 'abrogation of responsibility and neglect of management'.
His report criticises staff who are resentful of complainants and ignorant
of procedures and use of 'words rather than actions' in delivering a quality
service.
The report, which followed repeated attacks on the NHS reforms at this
week's British Medical Association conference, provoked immediate Commons
exchanges. Ms Margaret Beckett, acting Labour leader, accused Mr John Major
of presiding over a record level of complaints in the NHS.
The prime minister promised that ministers would take the report seriously.
Mr Reid's report reinforced speculation at Westminster that Mrs Virginia
Bottomley, the health secretary, will be moved in the forthcoming cabinet
reshuffle.
It is particularly embarrassing for the government because it suggests the
NHS reforms have contributed to the problem. It says many complaints arose
from poor communication, 'aggravated by splitting health care into many more
separate organisations'.
Serious problems in handling complaints persist in spite of government
efforts to give a higher priority to relations with patients.
Mr Reid says that far too often he found cases which showed a disregard for
the needs and care of fellow humans.
Staff were often ignorant of health department advice on how to admit
patients, give them adequate care and discharge them. Although there was a
legal requirement for members of health authorities and hospital boards to
receive quarterly reports on complaints, this was often ignored at local
level. 'A quality service is about devoting personal attention to individual
patients. Policies and procedures are useless if that essential human
element is missing,' says the ombudsman.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, called on the government to
produce an action plan to tackle the 'growing complaints crisis'.
'We are told that the health service is employing the best of modern
management practices, yet repeatedly it emerges that patients are continuing
to lose out,' he said.
The report shows that there was a 12.8 per cent increase in complaints to
the ombudsman between 1992-93 and 1993-94.
Ministers will, however, draw comfort from Mr Reid's comment that complaint
levels remain 'remarkably low' in relation to the volume of NHS activity.
