FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (14): An acutely sensitive hot spot - In
the Russian-speaking border town of Narva, where Slav and Nordic worlds
meet, old resentments are never far below the surface
Travel to Narva from the west, and you will be struck by the grim monotony
of the apartment buildings, by the paucity of decent shops cafes or anything
else to relieve the dullness of the scene. But the sensations are quite
different when you cross the Narove River and enter the town from Russia
under the awesome shadow of a white medieval tower which for centuries was
the outmost bastion of Nordic power.
Compared with the adjacent bits of Russia, the pavements look cleaner, the
roads better maintained; and the visitor is grateful for a restaurant that
can serve up a tasty enough version of steak, egg and chips, and would not
disgrace a depressed Belgian mining town.
Narva has often been a nodal point between the Slav and Nordic worlds. In
1700, Peter the Great suffered a humiliating blow when the army he sent to
the town was routed - it was this defeat which spurred him to wrest the
whole Baltic region from the Swedes.
Today, the town is once again an acutely sensitive spot, for there is
nowhere else in independent Estonia which has such a high concentration of
ethnic Russians. Barely 3,000 of the 82,500 townspeople are of Estonian
origin. And if relations between the Estonian authorities and the
Russian-speaking community should ever break down irretrievably, this is
where the break will come.
Just over the river - and the border - lies the Russian fortress town of
Ivangorod, which in Soviet times formed a single conurbation with Narva.
Because it views itself as legal successor to all the territory of the
pre-war republic, Estonia formerly asserts sovereignty over Ivangorod. And
there are hotheads in Russia who also want to re-unite the towns - by taking
Narva back. So Narva is the place where Estonia's biggest internal problem
can be seen in sharpest relief.
Since language skills have been made a criterion of Estonian citizenship,
more than 400,000 of the republic's inhabitants have failed to quality for
passports. Essentially, these people are Soviet-era immigrants brought to
the Republic by the Communist regime as soldiers or workers in new
industries.
They are the reason why the ethnic Estonians share of the republic's
population has fallen from 88 per cent in 1940 to just over 60 per cent
today. And 'immigrants' and their families form the overwhelming majority of
the population of Narva, where only 12 per cent of residents have qualified
for Estonian passports.
Although Estonia has convinced several pan-European bodies that its laws do
not violate human rights, the de facto situation is a peculiar and
potentially dangerous one.
About one Estonian resident in three can complain that he is subject to
'taxation without representation.' The non-citizens are agents in the
Estonian economy - as tax payers or social benefit collectors - and subject
to Estonian law, but they have no input into Estonian policy.
For many members of the minority, discontent over their legal status is
assuaged by relative material well-being. A Russian factory worker in
Tallinn is still better off than his counterpart in St. Petersburg - but
that factor hardly applies in Narva. One in three residents is a pensioner,
relying on an income that is barely above the poverty line. And Narva's
factories, once show pieces of Soviet industry, are in difficulty.
The sensitive Baltiits, which makes equipment for handling uranium, has work
for barely 1,000 of its 5,000 employees. Its best hope probably lies in
marketing high technology medical apparatus.
Less than half the 12,500 workers at Kreenholm, a giant textile factory, are
gainfully employed. It has become virtually impossible to procure the basic
raw material, cotton from central Asia, for the simple reason that it gets
stolen on the way through Russia.
After dipping into insolvency, Narova, a furniture factory, is struggling
back on to its feet, thanks to partners in Israel and new customers in Hong
Kong. But its chairman, Mr. Valery Myachin, says it has been an uphill
struggle to wean his 1,500 employees off the Soviet habit of production for
production's sake.
Political tension came to a head last summer when the Estonian parliament
passed a law requiring all inhabitants to apply for citizenship or residents
permits, a move that appear to mean expulsion for those who failed to
qualify for either.
In a stinging rebuke, President Yeltsin accused the Tallinn authorities of
practising 'ethnic cleansing' and apartheid. He warned that they would bear
the 'entire responsibility' for any breach of public order.
His adviser, Mr. Sergei Stankevich, went even further: he warned that the
Russian minority would reserve the option of 'self determination' if its
rights were trampled upon.
Translated out of Soviet language, these threats were clear enough unless
Estonia was a little kinder to its Russians, Moscow might sponsor a local
'independence' movement within Estonian territory which could tear the
Republic apart - that is exactly what Moscow has done in Georgia and
Moldova, with tragic results. In both those cases, Moscow made the
calculation - correctly - that the Republic authorities would over-react to
the situation.
So the challenge for the Estonian government is how to avoid falling into
the same trap. Events appeared to be moving in an ominously familiar
direction last year when pro-Russian politicians defied Tallinn and staged a
referendum on 'autonomy' for the town. And organisers claimed that over half
the adult population passed ballots; the Estonian authorities - who urged
residents not to vote but did not physically prevent them - dismissed this
figure as an exaggeration.
Tension in Narva has eased since it became clear that most ethnic Russians
in Estonia will, in practice, receive residents permits for another five
years. Another stabilising factor was the outcome of last October's fighting
in Moscow, and the defeat of the 'parliamentary' forces which had always
been keen sponsors of the most militant factions in Narva.
But resentment is never far below the surface. Estonian law allows resident
aliens to vote in local elections, but not national ones. And even in local
ballots, only citizens may stand for office.
So Narva's old town council, elected under Soviet procedures, has recently
been replaced by a new municipal authority in which the key figures are
Estonian or at least pro-Estonian. The new authority maintains that its
predecessors and their friends in local industry, deliberately turned away
foreign investment proposals because economic discontent suited their
political book.
'The old leadership wanted social tension, so they could call meetings in
the central square and whip up false rumours,' says Mr. Ants Liinets, the
Municipal Secretary. 'It was easier for them to do that when the local
economy was in serious difficulty.'
The challenge for the new administration is to boost local living standards
to the point when the populace no longer provides tinder-dry material for
Russian nationalist firebrands - from the town or further afield.
