FT  05 OCT 94 / PNG will float kina next week
Papua New Guinea, the resource-rich but economically troubled Pacific
nation, is to float its currency, the kina, from next Monday. It will be the
first time the currency has floated since the country gained independence in
1975.
The decision, announced yesterday by Prime Minister Sir Julius Chan, follows
a 12 per cent devaluation in the kina less than a month ago. 'At that time,
the government was hopeful this devaluation would stop speculation and allow
the kina to settle at a fair market rate,' the prime minister said.
'Unfortunately, since Sept 11, there has been further speculation,
culminating in recent days in a major attack on the kina ..The government
has decided it is no longer willing to pit the international reserves of the
country against the seemingly unstoppable urge of international speculators
to drive the currency lower.'
Papua New Guinea's foreign exchange market closed with immediate effect
yesterday and will not reopen until Monday. Local banks will provide limited
foreign exchange for emergency purposes. From October 10, the kina's value
will be set by five commercial banks, with the Bank of Papua New Guinea
continuing to play a supervisory role.
Sir Julius, describing the decision to float the currency as the most
important since independence, acknowledged there could be short-term
inflationary implications, causing wage pressures to mount in the medium
term.
'Shortly after the float takes place, the country's finance minister will
issue a statement setting government wages policy for public-sector
employees,' the prime minister added.
Papua New Guinea's problems had been mounting under the previous government,
headed by Mr Paias Wingti. The government deficit had been rising
alarmingly. New mining and petroleum projects at Porgera and Kutubu provided
extra revenue in the early 1990s, but their contributions are beginning to
ease off.
Earlier this year, Mr Masket Iangalio, the former finance minister, warned
PNG could be headed for bankruptcy if remedial action were not taken. He
handed down a 'mini-budget' last March, in an effort to redress the problem.
