FT  04 MAY 94 / Survey of Greater Philadelphia (1): Rescued from the brink
of disaster - The municipal budget has been restored to health, writes
Patrick Harverson. Now the city hopes that the continuing loss of jobs can
be halted
'Philadelphia', a Hollywood movie about a lawyer with Aids who sues his firm
for unfair dismissal, was released last year to rave reviews. Tom Hanks won
the best-actor Oscar for his performance as the lawyer.
The film was made almost entirely on location in Philadelphia, and the city
has a story to tell of its own. Philadelphia's story has earned rave
reviews, too, and its leading man, Mayor Edward Rendell, would win an Oscar
for best mayor if awards were given for municipal governance.
The Philadelphia story is about a city that comes back from the brink of
disaster to emerge as a bright spot on the sometimes bleak landscape of
urban America. Three years ago, the city faced financial ruin. Today, it has
recovered to a point where the city will soon report a budget surplus for
the second consecutive year. Jobs growth in the metropolitan region is
picking up after a prolonged slump, and a huge new convention centre is
attracting thousands of visitors to the downtown area. Philadelphians,
notoriously difficult to please, are now proud of their city.
The contrast between the current bright outlook, and the dark days of the
early 1990s, could not be greater. At the start of the decade, years of
falling local payrolls, a shrinking tax base, declining federal assistance,
local political gridlock, an ever more costly city bureaucracy, and swelling
social problems had reduced Philadelphia's finances, and its self-esteem, to
tatters.
By early 1992, the situation had deteriorated so far that the city faced a
deficit of Dollars 230m, out of a budget of Dollars 2.4bn. Philadelphia
could not meet its bills, and the rating on its bonds had been reduced to
the level of junk by Wall Street.
In January 1992, Mr Rendell, Philadelphia's newly elected democratic mayor,
understood that the situation was desperate. 'In USA Today (a national
newspaper) on the day I was inaugurated, there was a little blurb on the
front page that said I would inherit the worst municipal financial horror
story in America. When I read that, I almost told the fellow who was driving
me to the inauguration to take me down to Atlantic City so I could blow off
the day and play the blackjack tables.'
Mr Rendell resisted the temptation, not least because he had campaign
pledges to keep. He won the mayoral election after promising to do what
previous administrations had never done: cut spending to balance the budget,
reform municipal government, and do everything possible to promote economic
development in the region.
At the heart of the city's immediate problems in 1992 was the escalating
cost of local government. With the crucial support of John Street, the
powerful president of the city council, and after facing down a brief
municipal workers strike, the new mayor eventually won a series of
money-saving concessions from city unions. They included a two-year pay
freeze; a reduction in paid public holidays; big changes in work rules and
practices; agreement on the privatisation of some city services; and cuts in
union health plans.
The concessions cut almost Dollars 100m from the city's annual budget. Along
with Dollars 84m in savings achieved from management streamlining, Mr
Rendell was on his way to balancing the budget. As he now proudly recalls:
'By June 30, 1993, 18 months after we started, we had a Dollars 3m surplus.
And we did it without raising one nickel of taxes.'
Solving the budget crisis was important not just in purely financial terms.
After years of mismanagement, the image of a competent municipal government
at City Hall helped repair Philadelphia's tarnished image, in the eyes of
locals and those from outside.
After balancing the budget, the Rendell administration wasted little time in
building on its success. The savings from the union concessions were part of
a five-year fiscal plan intended to ensure the city's finances were
stabilised over the long term. The plan was praised on Wall Street, which
has since raised the city's bond ratings to just below the level of junk,
and won the approval of the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Co-operation
Authority, the state agency which - in return for budgetary oversight - has
helped raise funds for the city during its crisis.
That the five-year plan is still on course has a lot to do with the revival
in the fortunes of the local economy. After lagging slightly behind the rest
of the nation, employment in the metropolitan region is now rising for the
first time in three years.
Local economists hope that jobs growth will prove sustainable. The greatest
strength of the Philadelphia region's economy is its diversity. Once
dominated by heavy manufacturing, the metropolitan area is now home to a
broad spectrum of businesses, including a particularly heavy concentration
of healthcare, pharmaceutical and bio-technology companies. Industries also
represented in the region include oil and chemicals (Sun Corporation, Rohm &amp;
Haas), telecommunications (Bell Atlantic), computer technology (Unisys),
food manufacturing (Campbell Soup, in nearby Camden, New Jersey) and finance
(Cigna, CoreStates).
While many of these are located outside the city centre, downtown
Philadelphia is enjoying its own renaissance. The new Dollars 523m
convention centre is providing a boost to local businesses. Tourism is on
the rise, and Dollars 280m will soon be spent on developing an 'Avenue of
the Arts' in the heart of the city. Also, there are hopes that by late 1995,
riverboat gambling will arrive on the Delaware River.
Yet the Philadelphia story has its dark side. The city has its fair share of
urban ills - high rates of poverty, unemployment, crime, homelessness and
drug abuse, and poor quality public education. The scars of neglect in many
of its neighbourhoods are as bad as any in urban America.
Mayor Rendell, often criticised for paying too little attention to the
problems of deprived areas, knows the hardest task is ahead. In the past, he
has likened the problem to a man suffering from cancer and a gunshot wound.
As Stephen Mullin, the city's director of commerce, explains: 'The first
thing you have to do is deal with the gunshot wound. And we've done that.
We've basically righted ourselves. We're not Beverly Hills, or some fat-cat
city, but we have gained significant control over our costs. Now, the
question is: what's the story with the economic base of the city?'
The story with the economic base of the city - as opposed to the suburbs,
where business generally flourishes - is that jobs are still being lost at
too rapid a rate. Philadelphia's employment base has suffered the loss of
263,000 jobs since 1970, 110,000 in the last seven years alone. That is too
many jobs gone in a city with a total population of only 1.6m (out of 5.7m
who live in the entire metropolitan region).
Next year, Philadelphia will lose about 7,000 more jobs when the Pentagon
closes the naval yard. As Mr Rendell says: 'We need to generate the type of
economic development that will employ local people. If we don't do that,
with all the successes that we have achieved in Philadelphia, we're not
going to make it.'
Today, Mr Rendell hopes that a combination of local and national efforts
will break the 25-year trend of declining employment. On the local level,
the administration has launched an economic stimulus programme which will
spend Dollars 1.5bn over the next three years to generate economic
development. At some stage, that programme must include lowering the city's
wage tax, which is so unpopular with local businesses. On a national level,
Mayor Rendell hopes that the federal government will adopt a new urban
agenda that provides not financial aid, but a range of incentives to lure
private sector businesses back into the cities.
For all of its triumphs so far, building a lasting revival in the city's
economy is the Rendell administration's toughest challenge yet. As Mr Peter
Hearn, a former political opponent of the mayor and a leading Philadelphia
lawyer, puts it: 'The mayor has hit a grand-slam home run in each of his
first two years. But to really have an impact on Philadelphia in the
long-term, he has to do that every year.'
