FT  20 DEC 94 / Bomb find poses fresh threat to peace process
The Northern Ireland peace process appeared to be in danger of stalling
yesterday, with republicans forced on the defensive after the discovery of a
bomb in County Fermanagh. It is the first such incident since the IRA
ceasefire three months ago.
An explosive device containing 2lb of Semtex explosive was discovered in a
furniture store in Enniskillen. The IRA, in a short statement yesterday,
denied responsibility for planting it.
The possibility that the Irish government would reverse its decision to
place a block on the pre-Christmas early release of IRA prisoners was last
night thought to depend on whether the IRA denial was accepted by Dublin.
The new justice minister, Ms Nora Owen, said she hoped to make a statement
in the next few days.
The find overshadowed yesterday's second session of exploratory talks
between British officials and Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing. It will
underscore British demands to see the issue of the decommissioning of arms
and explosives resolved before Sinn Fein is invited to engage in full
political talks with the government and other constitutional parties.
The issue is likely to be high on the agenda at today's meeting between Mr
John Major, the UK prime minister, and Mr John Bruton, the new prime
minister of the Irish Republic.
The find is the first evidence of the use of Semtex since the IRA ceasefire
at the beginning of September. The IRA is the only paramilitary organisation
believed to possess such material.
Mr Martin McGuinness, who led the five-strong Sinn Fein delegation at
yesterday's talks, refused to condemn the action. He said: 'It was an
incident of no great significance, and it certainly won't affect the peace
process.'
He suggested the incident might have been part of a 'dirty tricks operation'
designed to implicate republicans in violence.
Mr Michael Ancram, Northern Ireland political affairs minister, expressed
disappointment that Sinn Fein, as a democratic party, had declined to
condemn the action. He said Sinn Fein had requested a further meeting in
January.
Mr Ken Maginnis, the Ulster Unionist MP, described the attempted bombing as
'a carefully orchestrated IRA operation to intimidate the British government
into agreeing unjustified concessions'.
Mr Bruton, speaking in Dublin before leaving for today's talks in London,
said he was 'saddened' by the incident, but he stressed there were 'certain
unusual aspects of the incident, which made it unclear who was involved'.
