FT  16 JUL 94 / Lunch with the FT: The appeal of a celebrity lawyer -
Christina Lamb meets Alan Dershowitz, controversial advocate to a string of
famous clients
At first sight the Harvest restaurant in a small alley near Harvard
University offers little of note beyond some colourful murals depicting a
swirling mass of fruit and vegetables. Lunching there with Harvard law
professor Alan Dershowitz, however, it takes on a whole new complexion.
Often described as America's most controversial lawyer, Dershowitz has
handled a succession of high profile appeals for famous felons. His
celebrity clients include junk-bond king Michael Millken, tax-evading New
York hotelier Leona Helmsley, and former boxing champion Mike Tyson. And he
brings all of them to lunch at the Harvest. 'This place holds a lot of
memories,' he told me. 'I was here last week with Mia Farrow. I've eaten
frequently with Claus von Bulow at that table over there and this one with
Mike Millken.'
Today he has arrived late and slightly breathless from working on the appeal
to reduce Tyson's sentence. Full of energy in a nervy Woody Allenesque way,
his mop of curly red hair and casual dress make him look younger than his 54
years and surprisingly undaunting for a ruthless superlawyer said to be
capable of securing a suspended sentence for Jack the Ripper.
Though he describes himself as an agnostic, he is so proud of his Jewish
identity and Orthodox upbringing in Brooklyn that he wrote a best-selling
book about it called Chutzpah. In his house he has a framed piece of barbed
wire from Auschwitz as well as paintings from the Jewish ghetto, and he
checks on the ingredients before ordering vegetable soup followed by anchovy
tart with chicory and fennel salad.
'It's very difficult to get good kosher food around Harvard,' he complains.
'I got so fed up that I actually started my own deli. It was very popular
among students but we were losing Dollars 2 a sandwich so had to close
down.'
Fiendishly bright, it is surprising to learn that in his teenage years he
was regarded as a troublemaker and academic failure. Having just squeaked
into Brooklyn College, he discovered his true calling in law, going on to
Yale where he graduated first in his class. At 28 he was appointed tenured
professor at Harvard - the youngest in the Law School's history - and became
an appellate lawyer because he says, 'it fits in best with my teaching
schedule'.
His reputation as a lawyer of last resort began as defence for a series of
controversial characters from porn stars to Soviet dissidents. In 1982 he
hit the headlines after Claus von Bulow hired him to overturn a 30-year
sentence imposed for trying to murder his wife Sunny with insulin
injections. The call came on April Fools' Day and initially Dershowitz did
not believe it was really von Bulow. Warning him: 'I'm not a hired gun', he
put together a team of his best students and secured a reversal of the
conviction on a technicality. Reversal of Fortune, Dershowitz's book on the
case, became a successful film.
It was seeing the movie that made Lori Millken decide that he was just the
man to help her husband, former head of high yield securities for Drexel
Burnham Lambert, who had been sentenced to 10 years after pleading guilty to
violating federal security laws.
Dershowitz seems to relish being seen as the St Jude of legal lost causes:
'It's a great challenge to be the last stop before the gas chamber. The
justice system is only as good as it is toward the worst person.'
I ask if he deliberately chooses guilty clients. He replies: 'Every lawyer
prefers innocent clients but there are just not that many innocent guys
around.'
Does it makes any difference whether they are guilty as to your chances of
getting them off?
'It didn't use to. You could always get people off on a technicality or
constitutional hitch. Now it's not so easy.'
In one of his books he wrote about a recurring nightmare in which Josef
Mengele asked him to be his lawyer. I ask if he would feel bad about getting
a murderer let loose in society.
He smiles: 'Court cases are not so black and white as portrayed on TV or in
movies. In the Mike Tyson case the girl claims she got on top of him in
order to escape. But she didn't say that at the time.'
Surely, though, he must form an opinion about a client's innocence. 'Yes, I
do,' he says, intriguingly. 'Von Bulow I'm absolutely convinced is innocent.
But you never know. I remember when we got some forensic evidence in his
favour and I said to him 'Now I know you're innocent'. Claus smiled and said
'Alan, you don't know. Only two people in the world know that - me and
Sunny, and she's in a coma'.'
As Dershowitz makes no secret of his dislike of the Establishment, I wonder
if he likes the people he represents. 'Yes,' he replies 'I'm close friends
with von Bulow, Millken is really sweet.' He does not feel the same about
Leona Helmsley: 'She's bitchy, and I use the word advisedly. But that's why
I liked defending her. I felt she was being punished for how she is, like a
female Donald Trump, qualities that in a man may have been admired.'
Reward comes in the shape of fat fees - about Dollars 450 an hour - much of
which goes on his art collection. But Dershowitz claims his most gratifying
case was that of Soviet dissident Anatoly Shcharansky, which he worked on
unpaid for nine years to free him from prison. Why? 'Our ancestors came from
the same part of what is now Ukraine.'
He gets hundreds of requests each week from potential clients. 'Every case
you see in the media comes across my desk,' he says, 'but I'm lucky because
I have a full-time career as professor so can pick and choose. I try to do
precedent-setting things which will be useful in class. I wanted Tyson
because date rape is a cutting-edge issue. Along with abuse it's one of the
least reported and most falsely reported crimes.'
Dershowitz has a new book about to be published - The Abuse Excuse - and he
is completing a novel, The Advocate's Devil, as well as a sequel to
Chutzpah. He says: 'There's nothing I like better than sitting in my study
writing and listening to opera, with Ella (his four-year-old daughter)
playing on the floor.'
He even has spare time, in which he is writing an opera. 'My secretary
calculates I write one million words a year - all in felt tip.' I ask if he
is a publicity junkie. 'I use it as a tool,' he replies. 'Usually, when I
come into a case my clients are getting a very bad press, so I try to get
them portrayed in a better light.'
Some would say you are the one getting all the publicity.
He laughs. 'The one person I cannot defend is myself.'
