FT  06 OCT 94 / MoD abandons plan for housing trust
The Ministry of Defence has abandoned plans to privatise Pounds 3.5bn worth
of housing stock by setting up a non-profit trust. It has appointed NatWest
Markets, the investment banking arm of the clearing bank, to advise on new
options.
The ministry blamed 'technical difficulties' for the shift and yielded to
the Treasury view that a trust would not provide a suitable vehicle for a
private-sector solution. It said: 'The question was whether a trust could be
classified as a private-sector entity.'
The MoD said NatWest Markets would advise on fresh options to improve the
management of its property and transfer the whole of the married quarters'
estate - 68,000 homes - to the private sector.
NatWest Markets has a purely advisory role which will last only a few weeks,
but it will be well-placed to act on behalf of the MoD in an eventual
transaction.
The ministry is seeking a sale-and-leaseback transaction which would provide
funds to offset cuts in the 1995-96 defence budget while giving it the use
of the majority of the properties.
NatWest is expected to look at a range of strategies, from transferring the
homes to a company which would be sold in an initial public offering to
partial privatisation. It might recommend no action.
The size of the transaction will depend on the terms of the leaseback or
rentback arrangement but an MoD housing sale could be one of the last big UK
privatisations.
According to the MoD and the official valuer the gross value of the housing
stock is Pounds 3.5bn. The MoD has budgeted for Pounds 500m of revenue from
housing privatisation in 1995-96 and investment bankers say that the
proceeds could go as high as Pounds 2bn.
The MoD has set a demanding timetable since deciding to review its
initiative on housing. It invited financial advisers to pitch for the
mandate in September and NatWest Markets is due to make its recommendations
before the end of this month.
Three banks, NatWest Markets, US investment bank Morgan Stanley and UK
merchant bank Lazard Brothers, are believed to have made it to the shortlist
and a 'bake-off' - a final pitch - last week.
Morgan Stanley, one of the most active US investment banks, came runner-up.
NatWest Markets capitalised on its combination of experience in UK
privatisations and of raising finance for housing associations. It acted as
a global manager for the third British Telecom share offering and earlier
advised the government on the privatisation of BAA, the British airports
authority.
The bank is the biggest raiser of debt finance for housing associations,
with a total of more than Pounds 2bn.
