FT  22 AUG 94 / Equity Markets: Downwards drift looks set to continue - New
York
The Federal Reserve appears to have further clouded the outlook for equities
as the summer draws to an end.
In the aftermath of last week's credit tightening, two camps have formed on
Wall Street. Their analyses differ but their uneasiness is mutual. As a
consequence, a downward drift in share prices, which began the day after the
policy announcement, is likely to continue for some time.
The first of these camps fears the Fed, in choosing to push up interest
rates, has locked into a course that will lead analysts to revise downward
their forecasts on corporate profits as the second half progresses.
The second group is convinced that the Fed has not done enough to slow the
economy, setting the stage for a further strike on rates within the next
three months. This view was buttressed last Thursday by suggestions of
continued growth and higher inflation contained in a monthly survey of
business conditions in Philadelphia.
'A negative can be seen in either side,' says Mr Thomas McManus, stock
strategist at Morgan Stanley in New York, who suggests both views are
essentially on target.
On one hand, the steepness of the yield curve on the extreme short end of
the Treasury maturity range indicates to Mr McManus that inflationary
expectations among investors remain very high. Such pessimism is likely to
make portfolio managers refrain from making fresh commitments until evidence
of a cooling economy emerges.
Expect no such indications this week. The calendar is clear of any important
economic releases until next Thursday, when the National Association of
Purchasing Management is due out with its latest reading on the
manufacturing sector. The following day will bring August employment data,
considered the most reliable barometer of the economy's strength.
Meanwhile, Mr McManus points out, historical trends suggest the shift to
tighter money last winter will start squeezing corporate profits this
quarter, which would deflate even the most bullish investor. The implication
is that a continued consolidation in share prices is almost inevitable.
'The sooner the economy starts to show clear signs of softening, the sooner
the market can rally,' the Morgan Stanley analyst says. 'But before the
signs of softening become widespread, there will first be a round of
downward revisions.'
All is not gloomy, however. An atmosphere of falling rates and restrained
profits could benefit consumer non-durable stocks, which usually exhibit
slow, steady earnings growth. That category includes two sectors - food
products and pharmaceuticals - which have been the focus of the recent
flurry of takeover speculation.
