FT  23 JUL 94 / Top civil servants: Permanent Whitehall secretaries
Sir Robin Butler: cabinet secretary and head of the home Civil service
Aged 56. Oxford. Former Treasury official in charge of public expenditure.
Principal private secretary to Margaret Thatcher 1982-85. The perfect
mandarin from top to toe, he has presided over far-reaching reforms of
Whitehall while defending traditional civil service values. A keen
sportsman, he has been known to cycle to work from Dulwich.
Sir Terry Burns: Treasury
Aged 50. Manchester. Joined the civil service in 1980 from academia. Chief
economic adviser under Geoffrey Howe, Nigel Lawson and John Major. Is
guiding the Treasury into a more strategic role in Whitehall. Another keen
sportsman who supports Queens Park Rangers.
Sir David Gillmore: Foreign Office
Aged 60. Cambridge. Former teacher who became head of the Diplomatic Service
after postings in Moscow, Vienna and Malaysia. One novel published. To be
replaced by Sir John Coles from August.
Richard Wilson: Home Office
Aged 51. Cambridge. Spent most of career in Energy, before moving to the
Treasury in 1990. Moved to Home Office this year after two years as
permanent secretary at Environment. Water colourist and possible successor
to Sir Robin Butler.
Sir Christopher France: Defence
Aged 60. Oxford. Treasury man who spent time at the Electricity Council and
Ministry of Defence before heading Department of Health. Principal private
secretary to Tony Barber and Denis Healey. Recreation: 'Keeping the house up
and the garden down.'
Sir Peter Gregson: Trade and Industry
Aged 58. Oxford. Career civil servant in the DTI and its predecessors.
Private secretary to Harold Wilson and Edward Heath. Secretary to National
Enterprise Board 1975-77. Permanent secretary at Energy Department 1985-89.
Valerie Strachan: Customs &amp; and Excise
Aged 54. Manchester. Joined Customs &amp; Excise from university, but also spent
time in the (short-lived) Department of Economic Affairs, Home Office and
Treasury. Recreations: Scottish Country Dancing. On board of companions of
Royal National Lifeboat Institute.
Sir Anthony Battishill: Inland Revenue
Aged 57. London School of Economics. Career spent shuttling between Inland
Revenue and Treasury. Principal private secretary to Denis Healey and Sir
Geoffrey Howe.
Andrew Turnbull: Environment
Aged 49. Cambridge. A Treasury man, in charge of European exchange rate
policy on Black Wednesday. Principal private secretary to the prime minister
1988-92, serving both Margaret Thatcher and John Major. Possible successor
to Sir Robin Butler.
Nicholas Monck: Employment
Aged 59. Cambridge. Another Treasury man now running a Whitehall department.
Principal private secretary to Denis Healey.
Patrick Brown: Transport
Aged 54. School of Slavonic and East European Studies, London. After eight
years with Carreras, the tobacco manufacturer, he joined Urwick Orr and
Partners as a management consultant. Joined the civil service in 1972. Chief
executive of the Property Services Agency 1990-91.
Sir Timothy Lankester: Education
Aged 52. Cambridge. Joined the Treasury in 1973 after voluntary service in
Belize, an Oxford fellowship and the World Bank. Seconded to SG Warburg
1981-83. Permanent secretary at the Overseas Development Administration
1989-94, where blowing the whistle on the Pergau Dam affair appears to have
done his career no harm.
Graham Hart: Health
Aged 54. Oxford. Most of career spent in Department of Health and Social
Security, apart from periods in Scottish Office and Cabinet Office
think-tank.
Sir Michael Partridge: Social Security
Aged 58. Oxford. Entered civil service through ministry of pensions and rose
to top of Department of Health and Social Security with brief spell at the
Home Office in charge of police dept. Senior treasurer for the Methodists.
Richard Packer: Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
Aged 49. Manchester. Most of career spent in MAFF, apart from period in
Brussels in UK office at EC. Recreation: 'Living intensely.'
Richard Mottram: Office of Public Service and Science
Aged 48. Keele. Most of career spent in Ministry of Defence, which he is
tipped to head in the future. Star prosecution witness at trial of Clive
Ponting. Principal private secretary to Michael Heseltine during the
Westland affair. Played a central role on the options for change white
paper, the post-Cold War review of Britain's defence requirements.
Sir Thomas Legg: Lord Chancellor's Department
Aged 58. Cambridge. Barrister who joined the department in 1962. Assistant
solicitor, 1975. SE Circuit administrator 1980-82. Chairman Civil Service
Benevolent Fund.
Hayden Phillips: National Heritage
Aged 51. Cambridge. Home Office career ended with a spell in Roy Jenkins'
private office in Brussels. Moved to Cabinet Office, then Treasury where he
was in charge of civil service matters. Tipped to run a larger department.
John Vereker: Overseas Development Administration
Aged 49. Another Keele graduate. Spent most of career in ODA and
predecessor, with time at the World Bank and No 10. Deputy secretary at
Department for Education in charge of further and higher education, then
schools before returning to head ODA this year. Also tipped for greater
things.
Sir Russell Hillhouse: Scottish Office
Aged 66. Glasgow. Has worked in most departments in the Scottish Office,
with a period at the Treasury. Recreation: 'making music.'
Michael Scholar: Welsh Office
Aged 52. Cambridge. Treasury man struggling to clean up quangos in Wales,
but tipped for further promotion. Private secretary to Joel Barnett and
Margaret Thatcher. Spent two years on secondment to Barclays Bank
International. An accomplished musician, playing the piano and organ, and an
expert on Wittgenstein and Aristotle.
Sir John Chilcot: Northern Ireland Office
Aged 55. Cambridge. Rose through Home Office with period at the Cabinet
Office. Seconded to Schroders, the merchant bank, 1986-87. Possible head of
larger department.
