FT  11 JUN 94 / Property: How to salvage a living - Clive Fewins meets a duo
determined to save architectural antiques
Thornton Kay and Hazel Matravers reckon that 25,000 tons of reusable
building materials are buried in landfill sites in the UK every working day
 -and that there is money in telling people about the fact.
The money has been minimal and hard-won. But 2 1/2 years into their venture
the couple still voice their feelings with a passion.
'Many of these discarded building materials are architectural antiques more
than 100 years old. It is difficult to comprehend the continuing scale of
loss of our architectural heritage unless you are daily being asked to buy
or rescue it,' said Kay.
Today Kay, 43, does little buying or selling. But rescuing items of
architectural merit is his life's mission. In the 1970s, he was one of the
pioneers of the movement to salvage old building materials, and for 14 years
was a partner in a large Bath-based architectural antiques business.
Now he confines his activities to the two-person enterprise he calls Salvo]
As a publisher, a polemicist and a publicist for the recycling of old
building materials he works a minimum 80-hour week, which usually includes
an all-night session at his desktop publishing system.
Kay and Matravers produce a weekly bulletin called SalvoNews, a monthly,
Salvo, which takes an in-depth look at the world of architectural antiques
and reclaimed building materials, and an annual Salvo directory, which sells
to architects, conservation officers, designers and home handymen.
It is an exhausting exercise. Kay is frequently away researching and writing
articles in Scotland, Ireland and occasionally in Europe, all of which
feature in his publications. Matravers mans the phone, deals with
advertisers, scans numerous publications for news items for the publications
and looks after Sophie, the couple's three-year-old daughter. And it all
takes place from the couple's sparsely-furnished, two-bedroomed top-floor
flat in a listed Georgian terrace in the heart of Bath.
The Salvo directory, now in its second edition, sells at Pounds 5 and Kay
and Matravers make a gross profit of Pounds 3.75 on each. This year they
printed 5,000 and so far 3,500 have been sold, including 200 on the Salvo
stand at an exhibition in London's Olympia.
The subscription for the Salvo weekly and monthly is Pounds 50 a year, or
Pounds 20 for the monthly alone. Kay will not divulge the circulations which
he describes as 'very small'. 'However we mail to five countries and the
following seems to be growing,' he said.
'One of the problems is that architects are used to getting something for
nothing. It is hard attracting regular subscribers, so the number we print
each month varies, depending on whom we choose to send it to. Salvo monthly
is not likely to become a news-stand publication, but, given time, it has a
lot going for it. It covers many conservation issues and is the only real
alternative building magazine.
'We do not actively sell advertising space. We feel it would detract from
what we are trying to do,' Matravers said. 'But the advertising has grown
because people send us advertisements with cheques up front, and it is
growing.'
Kay's hope is that eventually all the 2,000 architectural antiques
businesses listed in the directory will pay for an entry. Enterprises listed
include ones in Jersey, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and a
handful in Australia. The directory also includes articles on leading
conservation organisations and a free listing of architectural thefts.
'Our objective is for around 5 per cent of building materials to be
reclaimed,' he said. 'At present in the UK the figure is less than 1 per
cent. If we could hit the 5 per cent figure I reckon it would create 50,000
permanent low-skilled jobs and 50,000 permanent jobs in highly-skilled
restoration work. This would be in addition to saving millions of perfectly
good bricks and countless miles of good quality pine flooring that is thrown
away daily.' In its first year Salvo made a loss of Pounds 3,000, in spite
of sales of Pounds 9,100 on the directory and SalvoNews. In its second year
the loss was reduced to Pounds 400, but Kay does not believe the company
will move into profit with the publication of the third edition of the Salvo
directory at the end of this year.
He and Matravers are living on savings. Kay is against borrowing, except for
a Pounds 50,000 mortgage on the flat. He has yet to take any money out of
Salvo and Matravers draws Pounds 3,200 a year, all of which goes on daytime
care for Sophie.
'The way things are going I'll probably drop dead after SalvoNews number
100,' Kay said. 'That gives me 19 issues to go. At that stage, if I'm still
alive, I shall have to take on some other work, or reduce the amount of
effort going into Salvo.
'But really I am confident we are doing the right thing - that somehow Salvo
will provide a living - even though at present I don't quite know how.' He
is working on an image database aimed at providing information to
architects, design and build companies and other interested parties on
buildings about to be demolished.
Kay added: 'If Salvo is successful in this we could become the Reuters, as
well as the unofficial mouthpiece, of the reclaimed building materials
industry.
'But to achieve this we need help. We need a philanthropist to back us
because we are not going to make any money in the foreseeable future.'
Salvo] PO Box 1295, Bath BA1 3TJ. Tel: 0225-445387. Until June 17 they can
be contacted in Manois, north-east France, on 010 33 25 29 20.
