FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - Finance and Investment
(8): Billion-dollar man the money markets fear - Profile / George Soros
George Soros is variously known as 'the man who broke the Bank of England',
'the JP Morgan of our time', and 'the world's highest paid businessman'
(last year, he reportedly earned more than Dollars 1bn).
Yet, whatever the sobriquet, the 64-year-old, Hungarian-born financier is
indisputably the most prominent professional investor of the late 20th
century. He is also one of this century's most successful.
His Quantum Group of hedge funds controls about Dollars 12bn, which Mr Soros
and his money managers invest in a wide array of markets, currencies and
securities. In the past 10 years, the funds, and their founder, have made an
enormous amount of money. At the same time, Mr Soros has forged a reputation
as an extraordinary philanthropist, donating hundreds of millions of dollars
of his own money to a variety of causes, most notably the rebuilding of
eastern Europe's shattered economies.
Mr Soros's best-known triumph is probably the Dollars 1bn profit he made in
a few weeks in 1992 by successfully anticipating a massive devaluation in
sterling. It was his short-selling of the pound which helped contribute
toward a huge plunge in the value of the UK currency, and its eventual
withdrawal from the European exchange rate mechanism. His funds also enjoyed
substantial gains last year after Quantum made more correct bets on world
bond and currency markets, bets that enabled the funds to report a near-70
per cent return to investors in 1993, the best year in an extended period in
which Mr Soros has earned for his investors average annual returns of around
40 per cent.
Some of those gains, however, have since been eroded by losses incurred this
year, due mostly to the rapid rise in international interest rates, and the
sharp deterioration in the value of the US dollar against the Japanese yen.
Losses on yen positions in February alone cost Quantum Dollars 600m.
While the recent losses do not match Mr Soros's most fabled setback - the
Dollars 800m he lost during the October 1987 stock market crash - they did
bring to an end a long run of successes, and demonstrated that even the most
experienced and astute of investors can be caught out by seismic shifts in
global financial markets.
That does not mean, however, that the influence of Mr Soros, and his funds,
has been waning. Quantum still commands a vast amount of capital which, if
invested heavily in one place, can have a dramatic effect upon the price of
a particular currency or market. Many investors still hang on his every
word, and central bankers know to fear the power of Mr Soros's huge, often
aggressive, funds.
Last year, for example, Quantum made a series of investments that made it
clear Mr Soros was betting on a rally in the price of gold. The
pronouncement was enough on its own to trigger a surge in the gold price.
Similarly, when he unveiled plans to invest in the stricken British property
market, the value of property shares on the London stock market jumped by 6
per cent, prompting some observers to call the end of the slump in British
property prices.
Although Mr Soros courts publicity when it comes to his charitable work in
eastern Europe and elsewhere, details about his funds' trading strategies
have traditionally been scarce. However, this April, after Mr Soros appeared
before a Congressional hearing on hedge funds, one of his associates
revealed that typically about 60 per cent of the Quantum funds are invested
in individual stocks, another 20 per cent is used to make big trading bets
on the direction of global interest rates and currencies, and the final 20
per cent is kept in highly conservative instruments, such as US government
securities and bank deposits.
It is the 20 per cent employed in 'macro' trading strategies that earns Mr
Soros and Quantum all the attention: partly because the funds borrow heavily
against the value of their assets to leverage billions of dollars into even
greater billions, and partly because the strategies the funds employ often
involve huge gambles on short-term movements in currencies and interest
rates, gambles that can sometimes - as in September 1992 - embroil financial
markets and leave central banks and economic policy-makers nursing bruises.
Yet, Mr Soros increasingly appears to be distancing himself from the
day-to-day running of the Quantum funds, which he leaves to money managers
such as his number two, Stanley Druckenmiller. Mr Soros prefers, instead, to
devote more of his time to philanthropic activities.
Whether his absence will substantially affect the performance of the Quantum
group remains to be seen, but Mr Soros knows that his ability to engage in
good works depends upon his ability to make money, so it is unlikely that he
will stray too far from the business of hedge fund management.
