FT  07 FEB 94 / UK Company News: Pentos to seek high street rent reductions
Pentos, the troubled specialist retailing group which includes the Dillons,
Ryman and Athena chains, plans to renegotiate the rent on some of its high
street stores.
The move, part of a series of measures designed to cut costs and improve the
group's performance, has emerged from a wide-ranging review ordered by Mr
Bill McGrath who formally took over as chief executive at the start of last
month.
As part of the strategic review, which is due to be completed by the end of
February, Pentos has been examining the costs of its 500 stores around the
UK, focusing on those where rental costs are substantially out of line with
current market prices.
Yesterday the company confirmed that Mr Frank Brazier, chief executive of
Pentos Retailing, had written to its landlords telling them that it had been
forced to pay December rents in three delayed payments because of 'the
unstainable burden' placed on the group's cash flow by losses in the three
high street store chains. In the letter Mr Brazier also warns landlords that
the group will be 'seeking their assistance in terms of rent concession
which will be requested shortly to enable the survival of the group.'
However, Mr Brazier's letter - and the unilateral decision to delay December
rent payments in particular - appears to have angered many landlords just at
a time when the group urgently needs their co-operation in reducing its cost
base.
Although Mr Brazier discussed the broad issue with Mr McGrath the new chief
executive favours consultation rather than confrontation and is understood
to be concerned about the impact of the letter.
In mid-December Sir Kit McMahon, who replaced Mr Terry Maher as Pentos'
chairman, warned that the group would incur a 'substantial' loss before tax
and exceptional items this year and pass the final dividend. He blamed the
expected deficit on tough trading conditions and, in particular, losses at
the Athena poster shops and increased interest costs.
Sir Kit added that 'substantial write-downs and charges will be necessary
and will be taken as exceptional losses in the current year.' Analysts are
expecting Pentos to announce pre-tax losses of around Pounds 40m for 1993,
including about Pounds 30m of exceptional charges.
