FT  28 JUN 94 / UK Company News: Norweb rises to Pounds 178m and looks to
expansion in non-core activities
Norweb, the Manchester-based regional electricity company, said it expected
a fifth of profits to come from unregulated businesses by 1998 as it
reported 1993-94 pre-tax profits of Pounds 178.3m, against Pounds 157.1m.
The company increased the full year dividend by 15 per cent and said its
target of achieving real dividend growth of 6 to 8 per cent annually until
the end of the decade remained in place.
Mr Ken Harvey, chairman, also said he expected dividend cover to go up from
the 3.3 times of 1993-94. This is already among the highest for any of the
recs.
The 13.5 per cent profits increase in the year to March 31 was achieved on
turnover of Pounds 1.47bn (Pounds 1.41bn). Provisions for restructuring were
increased by about Pounds 4m. Job numbers fell from 7,586 to 7,727 during
the year.
Earnings per share were 76p (64.6p) and the final proposed dividend of 16.3p
makes 23p (20p) for the year.
Explaining the company's non-core strategy Mr Harvey said the current review
of distribution by the regulator meant that price controls were going to be
tougher after next April. 'We are not going to get the growth from
distribution that we have had for the last four years.'
Mr Harvey expected the generation schemes at Gordonsville, in the US, Keadby
and Roosecote to contribute more than Pounds 20m operating profits by the
end of the decade and retailing to provide about Pounds 15m.
He added that following a 1.6 per cent reduction in July 1993 and a further
6 per cent cut in April domestic customers now had the lowest prices in
England and Wales.
Mr Brian Wilson, finance director, said the company had net cash of Pounds
30m at the year end, after taking Pounds 153m of government debt into
account.
COMMENT
Following East Midlands' decision to wind down some of its
post-privatisation acquisitions, Norweb has assumed the mantle of the most
adventurous regional power company. Through its Gordonsville acquisition it
is one of first to move abroad in a serious way, and the balance sheet
provides ample scope for more forays either overseas or into generation. The
company is also increasing its exposure to fully competitive markets by
building a telecommunications business and expanding in gas sales and
appliance retailing. The results showed that the stores business was moving
ahead, increasing profits from Pounds 6m to Pounds 7.1m - but with turnover
up by 34 per cent so it should be. Norweb has traditionally been one of the
best retailers among the recs but competition with the likes of Dixons and
Comet means even they are finding the going tough. A solid performance in
distribution, where profits rose 8 per cent, and supply, up 19 per cent, has
helped Norweb's shares to a 5.5 per cent prospective yield assuming 14 per
cent dividend growth this year. That makes it one of the highest rated
companies - not bad for a company with Norweb's ambitions.
