FT  03 DEC 94 / Major attacks separate assemblies
Labour's plans for a raft of constitutional changes including devolution for
Scotland and Wales were yesterday fiercely attacked by Mr John Major, the
prime minister.
In a speech indicating his determination to put the Tories' defence of the
constitutional status quo at the centre of the next election campaign, Mr
Major said Labour's commitment to separate assemblies for Scotland and Wales
would spell 'the beginning of the end for Britain'.
His comments were echoed last night by Mr Michael Portillo, the rightwing
employment minister. Underlining the potential for defence of the union to
provide a unifying theme across the party, Mr Portillo said the
Conservatives were 'first and foremost the party of the United Kingdom'.
He added that the people of Northern Ireland were guaranteed the decisive
voice in the province's future. The talks with Sinn Fein, the political wing
of the IRA, did not mean 'peace at any price'.
The prime minister, who also attacked opposition proposals for reform of the
House of Lords and a referendum on the voting system for Westminster, said a
legislative body in Scotland would be a 'recipe for constitutional chaos'.
It would breach 'natural justice' if Scottish MPs were able to vote in a
Scottish parliament on issues like health and education and then vote at
Westminster on policies affecting the same issues in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. The result would be the break-up of the UK.
Speaking at the annual Conference of Conservative Women, Mr Major accused Mr
Tony Blair, the Labour leader, of considering changes to the
first-past-the-post system for electing MPs for narrow political advantage.
He told the conference: 'They (Labour) will twist and change the voting
system to build an almost permanent alliance between Labour and the Liberals
with one purpose and with one purpose above all - to try and keep the
Conservative party out.'
Mr Major added that Labour's attacks on the Lords were designed to attract
'a few cheap cheers'. He went on: 'The fact is that the House of Lords works
rather well. It is an important brake on over-mighty government, an
important part of our constitution - and it is a good deal more popular, by
and large, than the House of Commons.'
He said that Labour's proposals would make the Britain which has existed for
the past 300 years unrecognisable.
