FT  24 NOV 94 / Clinton and Dole seal deal over US vote on trade pact
US president Bill Clinton and Republican Senate leader Robert Dole yesterday
announced a deal which paves the way for congressional approval of the
Uruguay Round trade pact. The pact, the result of over seven years of
negotiations between more than 100 countries, will usher in a new era in
world trade.
Leading trading nations, including Japan and the European Union, have been
waiting for US ratification of the trade pact before proceeding with their
own legislation to bring the accord into being.
Mr Dole, whose support is vital, promised to work for a 'big big vote' for
the deal in the Senate. A vote is scheduled for a week on Thursday. Sixty of
the 100 senators must approve a crucial waiver of budget rules for the
legislation to pass. Congress is to return for a special post-election
session to vote on the pact which would lower world trade barriers and
liberalise global trading. Mr Clinton said the US has moved 'one step closer
to gaining broad, bipartisan support for the Gatt'.
Mr Dole said: 'I will be writing a personal letter to each of my Republican
colleagues in the Senate . . . suggesting that in my view, we ought to be
all in support of Gatt when it comes up next week.'
He also said he had never attempted to 'kill the pact' but needed additional
safeguards to assure his constituents that new World Trade Organisation, to
be set up to arbitrate trade disputes, would not impinge upon US
sovereignty.
As part of the compromise, the administration has agreed to establish a
panel of federal judges to monitor dispute settlements in the WTO to ensure
US interests are protected.
Many trade experts fear the proposed panel could undermine the dispute
settlement provisions agreed under the Uruguay Round and other countries
might establish review panels.
Mr Dole's opposition to the trade accord had been unexpected because of his
history of supporting free trade. His stand posed a dilemma for the White
House, still reeling from recent election results.
Mr Dole emerged without administration support for lower capital gains
taxes. As a face saver, Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the treasury secretary, gave a
vague promise to 'review any proposal on capital formation that come out of
the 104th Congress'.
However, the administration gave Mr Dole assurances on continued funding of
farm programmes. Mr Dole's state, Kansas, is the largest producer of wheat.
The new review panel will be appointed by the president, the chairmen of the
House ways and means committee and the Senate finance committee.
The panel will review all final WTO dispute settlement reports adverse to
the US to determine if the organisation exceeded its authority.
Free traders jubilant, Page 4
