FT  07 JUL 94 / Blair spells out case for stronger EU
Mr Tony Blair, front-runner for the Labour leadership, yesterday cast
himself in the role of the discriminating pro-European by calling for a
different but positive vision of the European Union's future.
In his first detailed statement on an issue likely to dominate politics in
the run up to the next general election, Mr Blair said the economic and
political case for enhanced European co-operation had become stronger, not
weaker.
His comments came as the shadow cabinet decided not to oppose or seek to
amend legislation due next week to provide for the entry into the EU of
Sweden, Austria, Finland and Norway. Party officials said there was no
question of the party joining with Tory Euro-sceptics in any attempt to
wreck the bill.
In a speech to the Foreign Press Association, Mr Blair flatly rejected the
'false choice between a sort of bureaucratic federalism and a retreat into
isolation'.
Accusing the government of a 'minority mentality' which had left Britain
participating in Europe without influence, he said the country needed a new
self-confidence about its role.
The alternative to isolationism was not a headlong rush into a pan-European
state but 'a movement towards greater European co-operation, measured by
what is practically sensible and publicly acceptable but where public
opinion is led as well as followed'.
Mr Blair acknowledged the pre-occupations of the Maastricht treaty had been
overtaken by events - above all by the collapse of communism in eastern
Europe and the resultant prospect of an EU of 20 or more states rather than
12 or 16.
Britain should treat the intergovernmental conference in 1996 as an
opportunity to move beyond Maastricht and 'shape and re-state the basic
economic, social and strategic purposes of Europe'.
But political and economic forces continued to point in the direction of a
closer not looser association. 'The change in Europe as a result of the
liberation of eastern Europe may alter the shape of European co-operation
but it does not alter the reason for it.'
Turning to the party's position on a single European currency, Mr Blair said
that Britain must keep its options open to avoid the risk of exclusion from
economic and monetary union.
The timetable should be driven by economics and not by an artificial
political timetable. While exclusion would damage Britain's long-term
economic strength, the price of joining without genuine economic convergence
might be too high.
Britain should seek also to widen the focus of the economic policy debate in
the EU to other leading issues such as employment, infrastructure,
technology and education and training. The challenges to Europe's economic
future had to be faced collectively as well as individually.
