FT  13 JAN 94 / International Bonds: Hectic trading as borrowers rush to
take advantage of low rates
The recent flood of Eurobond issues showed no sign of abating yesterday as
borrowers rushed to take advantage of low funding rates while investors
continued to buy heavily in the hope that yields would continue to decline.
Most of the activity took place in the Eurosterling market, which saw Pounds
950m of fresh supply, and the reviving Ecu sector, where more than Ecu1bn of
new bonds were issued. In total, some 25 issues were launched.
Barclays Bank kicked off a hectic day in the sterling sector with its Pounds
500m of 10-year bonds via joint lead managers BZW and Salomon Brothers. The
bonds were priced at 30 basis points over gilts and, according to the lead
managers, met with good investor demand, especially from investors in Europe
and eastern Asia who were attracted by the UK currency's recent strength.
Overseas interest in sterling assets has been spurred by the pound's recent
rally. Sterling yesterday reached its highest level against the D-Mark since
September 1992 at DM2.613, and many investors expect that trend to continue
amid further signs of economic recovery in the UK. Some expect UK interest
rates to be cut if the currency firms much further, which would give an
added boost to sterling bond markets. 'Whichever way you look at it, you
have a 'win-win' situation,' said one observer.
Close on the heels of the Barclays issue came three five-year sterling
deals. The Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester Building Society issued Pounds 150m of
five-year floating-rate notes paying interest of three-month Libor plus 10
basis points, which saw solid demand from UK and continental European
investors, an official at lead manager Kleinwort Benson said.
Another two straight bonds followed, driven by attractive swap opportunities
in the five-year area. The Dutch bank, De Nationale Investeringsbank, issued
Pounds 150m of five-year bonds at 30 basis points over gilts via Samuel
Montagu. That compared with a 45 basis-point spread over gilts for the
Pounds 150m five-year bonds for the Nationwide Building Society, which was
launched shortly afterwards via Baring Brothers.
Syndicate managers expect more sterling issuance in the next few days,
including a 25-year bond for Lloyds Bank totalling around Pounds 300m.
Meanwhile, the Ecu market continued its comeback, absorbing five issues
worth Ecu1.07bn with relative ease, helped by the market's resilience
following the French government's auction of Ecu990m of five- and 10-year
OATs.
'There's very real investor demand for current-coupon Ecu bonds - retail
investors like to see a fresh name priced below par,' said a syndicate
manager. Moreover, with some Dollars 16.2bn worth of Ecu bonds maturing this
year, the deals provide much-needed liquidity after the recent dearth of Ecu
issuance.
BellSouth Capital Funding Corporation's Ecu125m of five-year bonds met with
strong retail demand in continental Europe, especially Switzerland, a
syndicate official with lead manager Morgan Stanley said.
The remaining issues all had seven-year maturities: Ecu200m for the Caisse
Francaise de Developpement via joint lead managers BZW and Goldman Sachs;
Ecu200m for KFW International Finance via Goldman Sachs; Ecu300m for Credit
Foncier de France via Paribas Capital Markets, and Ecu250m of bonds for UK
Pass-Through Securities via Morgan Stanley.
The market was awash with rumours that Canada will launch Dollars 2bn of
five-year floating-rate notes today, priced at between 15 and 20 basis
points below three-month Libor.
Syndicate sources said that Goldman Sachs, UBS and CS First Boston have been
awarded the mandate for the issue.
The D-Mark sector had to digest another large bank issue, DM1bn of 10-year
bonds for Bayerische Landesbank, via Bayerische Landesbank and UBS. The
issue, syndicated by a small consortium of non-German banks, was placed
mainly outside Germany. While the pricing was fair, recent heavy supply of
10-year bank bonds may mean that the paper will only be absorbed slowly,
said an official with one of the deal's co-managers.
The French franc sector saw the launch of FFr2.5bn for the triple-A rated
Caisse Nationale des Autoroutes via J. P. Morgan and Societe Generale. While
the issue was 'not a blow-out', it was seen to be fairly priced and met
interest from European investors attracted by franc's strength, a syndicate
official said.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange is to offer options on the Nasdaq-100
index, a popular over-the-counter stock index, from January 28. The
Nasdaq-100 index has a 94 per cent price correlation with the Nasdaq
Composite Index.
