FT  05 APR 94 / Leading Article: Not much of a ceasefire
The three-day ceasefire announced by the Irish Republican Army and due to
start today is not a breakthrough for peace. The British prime minister was
right to call it cynical. His Irish counterpart was correct to express
dismay at the failure of the terrorists to lay down their arms once and for
all.
Both Mr John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds have signed a document intimating
that all is possible after a genuine declaration of a permanent ceasefire,
and nothing before it. This should be definitive. It would be a mistake to
heed the siren voice of Mr Gerry Adams, the principal apologist for the IRA,
who promises, in a thousand different ways, that if only the British and
Irish prime ministers would stand on their heads, a more prolonged cessation
of violence might follow.
Just meet the IRA, or Sinn Fein, its political wing, says Mr Adams. Such
contacts have taken place before, and they can begin again. If, absent a
permanent ceasefire, negotiations are ruled out, then let the parties
discuss clarification of the Downing Street declaration. If clarification is
rejected as a euphemism for negotiation, let there be less well-defined
conversations, perhaps between a representative of the British government
and one from IRA/Sinn Fein, perhaps for an hour. If not an hour, perhaps for
a shorter period.
It is easy to see what Sinn Fein is trying to do. The two governments must
be shown to have succumbed to the arguments of the terrorist. They must
blink first. The proposition that violence pays must lie on the negotiating
table, to be used again if the negotiations are not going Sinn Fein's way.
The republican case can thus be pressed to its unswerving conclusion, namely
the unification of Ireland, with or without the consent of the electorate of
its northern province, this being the very point on which no British
government can or should budge.
Saving face
There is another view. It assumes or at least hopes that the IRA is
genuinely anxious to make peace and that it requires a meeting to save face.
If so, there might be a case for considering Mr Adams' offers. Some
respectable participants in Irish affairs argue thus. The 72-hour
post-Easter peace represents an ideal opportunity to test Sinn Fein's
intentions, proclaims Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and
Labour party. Mr Hume is widely respected for his earnest efforts to bring
the IRA and Sinn Fein into negotiations. Call the Adams bluff, he argues
persuasively. If a lasting cessation of violence is not thus achieved, then
he will ensure Sinn Fein's isolation from democratic politics. Cardinal
Cahal Daly, the Catholic primate of all Ireland is another who believes that
some within Sinn Fein genuinely desire to end the violence.
Derisory offer
This argument, sadly, is not supported by the facts. As an earnest of
peaceful intent, a three-day break from what its adherents call the armed
struggle is, after 25 years of bloodshed, derisory. Had the IRA called a
six-month truce, it would be more difficult to dismiss the case for starting
low-level official talks on the modalities of negotiating a permanent peace.
Mr Hume's pleas are sounding more desperate. Cardinal Daly acknowledged in
his Easter message that most people are deeply disappointed that the
ceasefire will last for such a short time. 'The credibility of the Sinn Fein
commitment to peace is steadily ebbing away,' he said. The Irish government
appears to concur.
The British government is in a more awkward position. The prime minister is
under challenge within his own party. If he stands by the joint declaration
and dismisses the arguments for talks with Sinn Fein he will be accused of
trying to show his strength of purpose over Ulster this week, having failed
to do so over the European community last week. This is a burden Mr Major
must bear. He knows it would be wrong to succumb to Mr Adams' temptations.
He must also be aware that to do so would be taken by his party as
overwhelming evidence of weakness under pressure.
Meanwhile, if Mr Adams genuinely wants something significant to emerge from
72 murder-free hours, he should use the time to publish a clear statement of
what his organisation means when it demands clarification of the Anglo-Irish
declaration.
