FT  07 JAN 94 / International Bonds: AT&amp;T leads Eurodollar activity
The Eurodollar sector saw plenty of activity yesterday, with new issues from
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph and the Canadian Wheat Board.
At the same time, market participants were also anxious to see how Abbey
National's previously-announced Dollars 1bn three-year deal performed after
it broke syndicate yesterday morning.
AT&amp;T launched a Dollars 400m, five-year deal which was priced to yield 25
basis points over the relevant US Treasury bond.
CS First Boston, the lead manager, said that the deal had met good demand,
adding that retail interest should be strong given the familiarity of the
AT&amp;T name.
'AT&amp;T doesn't trade on its credit rating (which is AA3/AA) but on its name,'
said one syndicate official.
The rally in the US Treasury bond market yesterday helped to support the
issue.
By mid-afternoon the bonds were trading at 99.80-99.85, up from the re-offer
price of 99.595 and maintaining their yield spread over the US Treasury
bond.
Among the other Eurodollar issues, Abbey National's large, three-year deal
broke syndicate yesterday.
The spread over the US Treasury bond widened to 34 1/2 basis points from 32
basis points, according to one of the lead managers.
Other syndicates said that they had quoted slightly wider spreads and argued
that there was insufficient demand for such a big deal.
With the abolition of the 'three-month lock-up rule' for sovereign Euroyen
issues at the start of this year, the international bond market has seen a
surge of activity in the Euroyen sector this week.
Yesterday saw the launch of a 15-year Euroyen issue for Republic of Austria,
which is a triple-A rated borrower.
Goldman Sachs, one of the joint bookrunners, said that by tapping this
maturity, Austria had launched a 'pioneering deal', given the absence of
such long-dated non-JGB issues.
Syndicate officials said that the deal had met good demand from both Europe
and Japan.
Investors were said to be looking for appreciation of the yen and the
prospect of a further rally in the Japanese bond market, in view of the weak
state of the Japanese economy and the need for a further cut in interest
rates.
The bonds were priced to yield 65 basis points over the 10-year JGB, giving
an annual yield of 3.82 per cent. However, by late afternoon the price had
fallen to 99.02-99.07 from 99.21 at issue.
In the sterling floating rate sector, Ford Credit Europe launched its second
issue - a Pounds 100m deal with a five-year maturity and a coupon of
three-month London interbank offered rate plus 25 basis points.
Syndicate officials predict that investors will start to move more
aggressively into sterling floating rate issues as the potential for further
cuts in the UK base rate appears to lessen.
Mr Simon Best of Baring Brothers, lead manager for the issue, believes that
the sterling floating rate area will prove interesting this year for two
reasons: about Pounds 1.7bn of building society paper is due to reach
maturity in 1994, and there is a lot of paper with a 5 per cent floor that
is at risk of being called.
The Ford Credit Europe deal provides investors with a pick-up in yield of
between five and seven basis points over building society paper of a
comparable maturity and credit rating, according to Baring Brothers.
Hydro-Quebec, one of Canada's two biggest electric power utilities, plans a
CDollars 1bn global public offering of 10-year bonds to be distributed in
Canada, the US, Europe and Asia by an international underwriting group,
writes Robert Gibbens in Montreal.
The paper will be guaranteed by the Province of Quebec and registered with
the US Securities and Exchange Commission. Merrill Lynch and ScotiaMcLeod
will be joint managers of the issue, with Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, Wood
Gundy and Yamaichi International (Europe) as co-leads.
Terms for the issue are expected to be set by January 15, depending on
market conditions.
Nearly half of the issue is expected to be sold in Canada. The utility's net
new debt issues this year will total around CDollars 3.25bn.
Calex, a Slovak state-owned producer of refrigerators and freezers, has
launched a Dollars 21m, three-year issue, marking the first time that a
Slovak company has issued a corporate bond in the international market, Sara
Webb adds.
The bonds, which have a coupon of 7 7/8 per cent, were priced to yield 325
basis points over the three-year US Treasury bond.
Nomura, which lead managed the deal, said that the proceeds would be used to
complete the financing of a new production line for ozone-friendly
compressors and insulation equipment.
The bonds are guaranteed by the government.
