FT  11 JUN 94 / Hang-ups and hesitation: Asian relations are on the line
over North Korea
The confrontation over North Korea's nuclear capabilities has sparked
diplomatic shuttling on a scale previously unknown in Asia. Behind it lies
an awareness that more than the avoidance of war - though that in itself is
a grave enough task - is at stake.
At the end of a week of intense discussion centring mainly on Beijing,
Japan's foreign minister, Mr Koji Kakizawa, today goes to Seoul and on to
Beijing. He will discuss US-led moves to impose economic sanctions on North
Korea over its refusal to allow international inspections of its nuclear
facilities.
If a second Korean war does break out, the diplomatic efforts will have been
futile. But if war is averted, the episode could mark the beginning of a new
era in which Asian countries increasingly try to deal with problems among
themselves.
Repeated efforts by the US to coax North Korea into opening its nuclear
plants to inspection have failed. It is now calling for economic sanctions
to punish Pyongyang, but many Asians doubt the effectiveness of such
measures and fear President Kim Il-sung, North Korea's dictator, could be
provoked into war. They are nervous about even more hawkish voices being
raised in the US Congress.
Pyongyang says sanctions would be considered an 'act of war', suggesting it
would attack South Korea or Japan. Amid renewed suspicions that it may be
diverting plutonium into nuclear bombs, Tokyo and Seoul, as well as Beijing,
North Korea's only ally, have been forced to assume new responsibility to
allay the region's greatest security threat.
The crisis marks an important test of the future balance of power between
highly nationalistic countries with long histories of mutual animosity and
suspicion: China, with its growing economic and military muscle; Japan, with
its habitual reticence about involvement in international security issues;
and South Korea, which lies awkwardly between them and is keenly aware of
its vulnerability - its capital, Seoul, is only 35 miles from the border
with the North. In all three countries, there is debate on how best to
approach Pyongyang.
Beijing is now making no attempt to disguise the fact that it is at the
centre of attempts to calm the Korean stand-off. It is apparent that the
highest levels of the Chinese leadership are engaged.
China had for months avoided a conspicuous public role, except to counsel
against sanctions. But this week it played host to North Korea's chief of
staff and announced that the two countries were bound 'like teeth and lips'.
Though China helped to draft a UN statement on May 31 that further measures
would be taken to achieve compliance with UN nuclear safeguard requirements,
Chinese officials have also counselled against sanctions that might provoke
confrontation. This 'constructive ambiguity' is designed to avoid moves that
might further isolate Pyongyang and risk its destabilisation.
Beijing believes dialogue and diplomacy still have some distance to run. It
is advocating a carrot and stick approach, and believes the carrot should be
appealing enough to encourage North Korea to accede to demands for access to
its nuclear sites. This would include formal recognition by the US as well
as international aid.
However, western officials who have been in detailed discussions with the
Chinese are in no doubt that, if diplomacy fails, Beijing will go along with
sanctions, either actively or by abstaining on a Security Council vote.
'The stage has been set for China to go along with sanctions, as long as the
Chinese first are convinced that efforts to resolve the issue are serious
and earnest,' said one western official.
Japan shares China's belief that negotiations and promises of economic aid
are the way to bring North Korea round. Mr Tsutomu Hata's weak minority
government will reluctantly agree to join in with sanctions, but Japan would
prefer to issue a warning first and has doubts about cutting cash transfers
from North Koreans in Japan.
The hawks like Mr Ich-iro Ozawa, the backroom strategist of the government,
argue Japan must face up to the greatest test of its ability to help solve
an international crisis since the invasion of Kuwait. Diplomats painfully
recall the derision Tokyo attracted by contributing cash but not soldiers to
the Gulf conflict.
Pragmatists, however, argue that Japan can ill afford to clash with China,
an increasingly important trade partner.
Japan can scarcely duck the question of sanctions because they would be
ineffective if it failed to take part. Japan is North Korea's second-largest
trade partner after China.
The government does not wish to offend more than 700,000 North Koreans
resident in Japan. Mr Hata is likely to refuse reported US demands for a
block on the estimated Y62bn (Pounds 395m) a year which they carry in their
pockets when they visit their homeland, though it will be able to block
direct bank transfers, estimated at a paltry Y10bn.
If Mr Kakizawa, the foreign minister, fails this weekend to overcome
Beijing's resistance to sanctions, Japan faces the uncomfortable prospect of
being asked to join the US and South Korea in sanctions without Chinese
support, outside the framework of the UN.
Mr Hata could probably summon a majority in parliament for non-UN sanctions,
but may have to pay a heavy political price to the opposition Liberal
Democratic party.
Though the South Korean government decided this week to join the US in
vehement calls for sanctions, it too faces domestic political pressures over
this policy.
The move was a victory for conservative government officials who have
criticised Seoul's weakness in confronting Pyongyang. But others both inside
and outside the government question whether sanctions will achieve much.
They believe sanctions would not have much immediate impact on the North
Korean economy, which is largely self-sufficient owing to the country's
juche (self-reliance) ideology. A trade embargo by only the US, Japan and
South Korea is seen as even less effective. China provides 75 per cent of
vital oil and food imports, and is expected to permit cross-border trade for
as long as possible because it fears North Korea's internal collapse could
cause millions to flee to China.
There is little doubt in Seoul that sanctions would force North Korea to
withdraw from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, ending any possibility
of Pyongyang accepting international nuclear inspections in the future.
The South Korean government's difficulty in joining sanctions is heightened
by public scepticism about the nuclear threat from the north, as well as
about Washington's motives. Many South Koreans, mindful of Japan's 1910-1945
colonial rule, believe Tokyo, not Pyongyang, poses the biggest potential
threat to them. Against this background, growth in Chinese influence over
the Korean peninsula may be one of the effects of the present confrontation.
That these debates are taking place within and between Asian countries is
perhaps just as important as the crisis they are addressing. They may,
provided there is no war, forge regional mechanisms for dealing with
disputes and help to establish a new order in Asia - in which the US may
have a reduced role.
Report by John Burton in Seoul, William Dawkins in Tokyo, Alexander Nicoll
in London and Tony Walker in Beijing
