FT  23 MAY 94 / Business Travel: You don't have to feel in the dark -
Richard Tomkins offers tips on finding your way around the confusing New
York subway
Riding the New York subway is tantamount to signing a suicide note, right?
If you are not shot by a drug-crazed psychopath, you will surely be knifed
in a mugging or caught in the cross-fire between warring urban tribes.
Actually, if that ever was the case, things have changed a bit. A sustained
anti-crime campaign that began on the New York subway in 1990 is paying off.
The city's transit police say that, of the 1,960 homicides that took place
in New York last year, only eight were committed on the subway - from which
they draw the slightly wayward conclusion that you are much safer below
ground than you are above it.
Whatever the statistics, visitors to New York need have no hesitation in
using the subway to get around. Nowadays the system is not only safe, but
after years of heavy investment, it has become reasonably reliable. On
longer trips up and down Manhattan, it is much faster than a taxi. And at a
flat fare of Dollars 1.25 a trip, it is cheap.
On the other hand, it is not one of the world's most user-friendly subways:
signposting is poor and the system has several quirks. So, for the novice,
here are a few tips.
First, there are no tickets. Instead, you buy metal tokens from booths at
the station entrances and use them to operate turnstiles leading to the
platforms. There is no discount of any sort for bulk purchases. An
electronic pre-payment card (the Metrocard) is being phased in, but it does
not yet work at all stations.
While at the token booth, be sure to pick up a subway map because they are
scarce on platforms and trains. As you will see, most of the lines run on a
north-south axis underneath the big avenues, so the system is rarely much
use for cross-town journeys.
A big source of confusion to visitors is the way the trains and lines are
described. Officially, the trains carry numbers or letters to tell you where
they are going (for example, the number 1 train or the N train). But they
are also named after the avenues they follow (such as the Lexington Avenue
Express or the Broadway Local). And the lines are still widely known by the
initials of the companies that built them - hence, the IRT, the BMT and the
IND.
Note that there are two types of train: locals, stopping at all stations,
and expresses, stopping only at the main ones. Different trains often share
the same tracks, so it is important to check the train's number or letter
before you get on. If in doubt, ask: once they are convinced that you are
not going to kill them, New Yorkers are extremely friendly.
You should feel perfectly safe on the subway in Manhattan throughout the day
and evening, although, as in any big city, it makes sense to keep an eye on
your personal belongings. If for any reason you feel apprehensive, you can
sit next to the conductor's cabin in the centre of the train.
Finally, one quirk that all repressed engine-drivers should experience is
the carriage configuration that enables passengers to stand next to the
driver's cab at the front of many trains. Top tip is to do this on the B
train to Brooklyn. That way, you can play engine-driver as you go rattling
over Manhattan Bridge and enjoy an excellent view of the Manhattan skyline
as you come back - assuming, of course, you can elbow the other children out
of the way.
