FT  25 JAN 94 / International Company News: Squeeze on returns ignites paper
prices battle - Publishers and packagers are resisting moves by pulp
producers to charge more
An intense struggle is unfolding between the world's pulp and paper
producers and their customers.
The producers are determined - and in many cases desperate - to push through
price increases after more than four years of stagnant or falling returns.
Their customers, as always, are putting up a fight. Hard-pressed newspaper
and magazine publishers are reluctant to accept price increases until they
are more confident of a rebound in advertising. Falling paper prices have
been a key reason - together with declining interest rates - for their
ability to contain losses or restore profitability.
However, early signs suggest the balance of power in the pulp and paper
industry is shifting towards the producers.
The wood pulp market was ignited in early December by disruptions in
supplies of birch logs from Russia, which are used by Scandinavian mills to
produce hardwood pulp.
The firmer tone has, unexpectedly, spread to softwood pulp, with some
European buyers paying USDollars 430 a tonne for northern bleached kraft
pulp, up from Dollars 395 late last year. If these increases hold, they are
likely to trickle down into higher prices for many grades of paper.
Paper prices already show signs of firming. A modest rise in European
newsprint prices (or to be more precise, a cut in discounts), which took
effect at the beginning of January, appears to have stuck.
Even some consumers acknowledge that North American newsprint prices are
likely to edge up in March for the first time in four years, though not by
anywhere near the 11 per cent demanded by producers. Mr Bill Hee, who buys
newsprint for the Gannett newspaper group, says most publishers have been
expecting a price rise of about 5 per cent.
Linerboard, used in corrugated packaging materials, has gone up from about
Dollars 290 to Dollars 315 a tonne in the past three months. Several
producers have announced further price increases from February 1.
Mr John Maine, vice-president at Resource Information Systems, a
Virginia-based consultancy, predicts prices of most grades of paper will
climb by about 5 per cent in North America this year, with an increase as
high as 8 per cent for strong-growth products such as uncoated business
papers.
Mr Denis Christie, analyst at James Capel in London, forecasts price rises
as high as 10 per cent in European countries where weak currencies push up
import costs.
These views are mirrored in the share prices of leading pulp and paper
producers.
Since the New Year, International Paper, the biggest North American paper
company, has bounced up from Dollars 67.75 to Dollars 74 3/8 on the New York
Stock Exchange. Abitibi-Price, the Canadian newsprint producer, has jumped
from around Dollars 9 at the beginning of December to Dollars 12.75.
Nevertheless, the recovery remains shaky. 'The market is still not as rosy
as we thought it would be,' says Mr Mark Gibson, vice-president for paper
marketing at Fletcher Challenge Canada. Mr Gibson adds: 'we're still running
into a barrier' in efforts to raise newsprint prices.
The slump in the Japanese economy has cut paper exports from the west coast
of North America, encouraging mills to dump more material into the domestic
US and Canadian markets.
Mr Barry Minerth, director of printing and paper at Time Inc, the US
magazine publisher, acknowledges that 'all the producers are feeling an
extraordinary need to try and increase prices'.
However, he says that magazine advertising has yet to stage a firm rebound.
'I think we've convinced people that to try and put forth a price increase
at this time is not a wise idea.'
If the North American producers are overly ambitious in pushing up prices,
they risk driving customers into the arms of Finnish and Swedish suppliers.
Scandinavian mills have become increasingly aggressive in foreign markets as
their currencies have tumbled over the past 18 months. Rising demand for
paper as European and North American economies expand is only part of the
reason for producers' cautious optimism.
Mr Maine forecasts that newsprint sales volumes will rise by between only 1
and 2 per cent in North America this year. However, he believes that should
be enough to make a price increase stick, given tightening supply prospects.
Pulp and paper markets have been bedevilled for the past four years by
producers' inability to hold down capacity. Many paper machines have been
closed down for months at a time, only to be restarted at the first sign of
a pick-up in sales.
Some mills have even raised capacity at relatively low cost, for instance,
by increasing the operating speed of their machines.
However, producers, especially in Canada where paper machines are older and
smaller than in the US and Scandinavia, are under growing pressure to face
reality. 'A lot of the banks are losing patience,' says Mr Gibson.
Prices for some grades, notably newsprint and uncoated groundwood papers,
are insufficient to cover either normal fixed and operating costs, or the
expensive investments required to meet increasingly stringent environmental
standards, such as higher content of recycled paper, lower dioxin emissions,
and reductions in the use of chlorine as a bleaching agent.
The pressures are vividly illustrated by the new Gold River newsprint mill
in British Columbia, jointly owned by Canadian Pacific Forest Products and a
group of US publishers.
The mill, with an annual capacity of 200,000 tonnes a year, failed to
re-open after the Christmas holidays after the owners and their lenders were
unable to agree on terms for a short-term funding package. Other
hard-pressed producers may find themselves in a similar plight as 1994
progresses.
