FT  09 JUL 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Hooked on glassblowing - Simon
Walsh on one woman's return to apprenticeship
In 1979, Siddy Langley was running a successful clothes shop, earning enough
to run a Morgan car and take six-week holidays in the Far East.
One weekend something happened to change her lifestyle to that of a Pounds
20-a-week apprentice having to find Pounds 22 a week for train fares. Yet
she has never once regretted that change.
'I heard that Peter Layton was giving weekend glassblowing courses at his
London Glassblowing Workshop in Rotherhithe. I thought it would be fun.
'That was it, I was hooked. On the Monday morning I put my shop on the
market, and committed myself to a three year apprenticeship.'
Today, she and Alchemy Glass, the business she established in Maidenhead,
Berkshire, in 1987, are known by top department stores from London to Tokyo
for the exclusive designs in glass which she creates in her studio.
'During my apprenticeship I was on Pounds 20 per week and it was costing me
Pounds 22 per week to travel up to London every day.
'The craft council sponsored me for a while, which made life an awful lot
easier, and I waitressed in the evenings. After a certain time, I was able
to sell my own work and that also helped.
'Everybody thought I was crackers. Now everybody says aren't I lucky,
because I'm doing something I love.'
In the first year of trading, Alchemy Glass showed a turnover of around
Pounds 28,000 to Pounds 30,000. By April of 1994 that figure was nearer to
Pounds 70,000.
'After three years of apprenticeship I worked with Peter for another six on
a self-employed basis, so when I came to set up my own studio I had a
rapport with the galleries, because they knew my work.
'That was a very good period for me, as it helped me get my name known
relatively painlessly. If I had had all the expenses of my own studio to
cope with then, it would have been a lot harder.
'I borrowed a lot of money because I wanted to buy good equipment from the
outset. Financially that has paid off hands down. I have had very few
occasions when production has been held up for repairs or maintenance.'
The original loan from Midland Bank was Pounds 50,000. The studio was built
from scratch, and the furnace alone cost around Pounds 10,000, but it was so
well designed by Peter Howard, its maker, that it cuts gas consumption by 50
per cent - just as well, as it has to burn 24 hours a day every day of the
year.
'I currently pay my gas bill by monthly standing orders, so I get no nasty
shocks, and they come to Pounds 254 per payment. I know of another studio
just starting up and using a cheaper, conventional furnace, and they are
paying nearer Pounds 1,000 a month.'
In 1990, Siddy made a first approach to the Japanese market, and is now
selling to Takashimaya and Matsuzukaya, two prestige department stores in
Tokyo.
'I had one contact in Japan as my brother lived there at the time. So having
accommodation made life a lot easier.
'I hired an exhibition room in Yokohama and had invitations printed. It was
a little bit daunting because the costs are enormous. If I had realised how
expensive it was going to be, I might not have started.'
Shipping her work to Japan was enormously expensive, as
was hiring the room and providing a buffet.
'I had an enormous bill from the florist, getting on for a couple of hundred
pounds. That was something I hadn't worked into my calculations.'
But once again, a heavy initial outlay proved to be money well spent.
'It was an enormous success, it was a sell-out show, and it drew enormous
orders which kept me busy all through the summer of that year'.
Takashimaya and Matsuzukaya are still regular customers, ordering twice a
year, at around Pounds 10,000 a time - but a minor cultural difference had
to be ironed out first.
'The Japanese wanted everything to fit in particular sized boxes. That
seemed strange to me, because they were effectively paying a premium for the
uniqueness of the one-off pieces.
'At first this made doing business very difficult, but eventually they
accepted that some of the pieces were individually crafted, and they have
certainly been very pleased with them.'
Japan has been very good to Langley, so good that she is learning Japanese.
She began out of necessity, using a very amateur style tape. Now she is
going to proper classes and learning to read and write.
'When you are in Japan it's not too bad, but telephoning can be very tricky.
When I have got some more Japanese under my belt I will find it much easier
to approach some of the other stores,' she said.
While Siddy prided herself on being very efficient, answering letters by
return and keeping a good filing system, this proved to be a false economy.
When she thought about how many saleable items she could have spent the time
making, it became obvious that it was time to employ someone part-time to do
the paperwork.
She made the right choice, and Cheryl Owen is still looking after the
administration.
In 1992, the birth of her daughter compelled Siddy to take on one full and
one part-time assistant glassblower. But she found they quickly paid for
themselves.
'Richard Price, my full-time assistant, is prepared to sit down and make 30
identical pieces. I couldn't do that - after the first three I'd get bored.
Now I can market in different ways.
'The way that I saw the business developing, is that I would concentrate on
the larger more time-consuming one-off pieces, whereas the more uniform
pieces would be done by Richard, and my part-timer, Julia Donnelly.'
Meanwhile, history could repeat itself in Europe: Siddy's brother is
planning to move to Zurich.
'Once my brother is living in Zurich, I will have my base in Europe, so it
will be a lot easier for me to go over there and tackle Germany and
Switzerland.'
Alchemy Glass, Latimore Studios, North Town Moor, Maidenhead, Berkshire.
Tel: 0628-39779
