FT  07 JUN 94 / Technology: Old bugs learn new tricks - Oil a l'orange is a
tasty dish for some
Edward Billington, the Liverpool sugar merchant and foods group, appears to
have found a way to make waste oils, tars and other unwanted hydrocarbon
stains and contaminants more palatable - not to humans but to bacteria.
The development offers a more environmentally friendly way of cleaning
grime-prone surfaces like garage, workshop or factory floors, or petrol
station forecourts.
It also works on contaminated ground, where hydrocarbon waste has soaked
into soil, giving an alternative to digging out the earth and dumping it.
Using bugs to devour hydrocarbons has been practised in sewage farms for
decades but problems arise when the waste comes in an emulsion or suspension
after the oils have been dissolved in detergents.
Bacteria are put off by the taste of the detergent and the digestion process
becomes inefficient. Most producers of effluents tend to accept the
situation and pay their local water authority extra to compensate for the
problem.
The principal ingredient of Billington's process is a natural solvent called
Pronatur, made from waste orange peel. Billington unveiled it last year
after it bought the small company which had developed the solvent. It has
since invested Pounds 200,000 in a new factory in Bootle - twice the sum
planned originally because sales of the solvent are growing faster than
expected.
One of the solvent's properties is that it is immiscible in water. This
means that if it is used to clean oil-stained concrete, it can be washed
down the drain with water and easily separated from the water in interceptor
pots.
In porous material like shingle or soil, a spray of water helps the solvent
and bacteria soak in and do their work. In either case - solid surfaces or
porous media - the final chemical products are carbon dioxide and water.
The solvent smells like oranges and seems to appeal to oil-devouring bugs.
The system has been demonstrated during trial cleaning of stained concrete
and railway track at Tyseley depot in Birmingham.
The trials were evaluated independently by Derby University's Environmental
Impact Analysis Group and seem to support Billington's claims for its
product and systems.
When the trials started, the chemical oxygen demand (COD) of Tyseley's
effluent was 12,144 mg/l, more than 20 times above the permitted level. By
spraying with Pronatur and water and then adding bacteria to dissolve the
waste hydrocarbons, the figure dropped to 4,286 mg/l after a week and 88
mg/l after three weeks.
The hydrocarbon content of the effluent went from 470 mg/l to 54 mg/l in the
period. Glycol readings plunged from 7,610 mg/l to less than 1 mg/l, while
the pH moved from a highly alkaline value of 12 to 6.82 - barely on the
acidic side of neutrality.
'We are now selling do-it-yourself kits to industry, plus training, so
companies can carry out this cleaning as a simple, cheap, maintenance
routine,' says John Hassett, Billington's chief executive.
Richard Monbiot, technical director of Pronatur Products, a Billington
subsidiary, says the aim will be to undercut cleaning contractors, where the
main cost is labour, and obviate the need to pay extra to water authorities
for effluent treatment because consent levels cannot be attained.
In the Tyseley railway depot case, effluent charges had been Pounds 20,000
over six months. The new system cost Pounds 10,000 to get everything
thoroughly clean, while continuing maintenance will be a fraction of that.
However, while Pronatur is gaining ground among big companies, Monbiot says
medium-sized and smaller companies are sticking to trichlorethane, its
entrenched rival. But Billington believes that companies may be forced to
change by law, as environmental controls tighten over synthetic chemical
solvents.
'Big companies are greener and are more likely to act earlier,' Hassett
says. Pronatur has attracted interest in the US and Europe, where
distributors are in place, and also in Japan.
