FT  04 FEB 94 / Chorus of the master mudslingers: Dirty campaigns and
uncertainty mean German election results are unlikely to be clear-cut
If anyone thought that Germany's marathon election year was going to be a
good, clean-cut campaign about issues, they need to think again. The
mudslinging has only just begun.
First it was about supposed revelations from the personal files of the late
Chancellor Willy Brandt, casting suspicion on his colleagues in the Social
Democratic party (SPD) as alleged fellow-travellers with the East German
communists.
This week it was the old story suggesting that Mr Johannes Rau, elder
statesman of the SPD and the party's candidate for federal president in May,
was given electoral support by the former East Germans in the 1986 general
elections.
In retaliation, Mr Wolfgang Schauble, parliamentary leader of Chancellor
Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union and its Bavarian sister-party, the
Christian Social Union, stands accused of having promised to 'respect' East
German citizenship (which the west refused to recognise officially) as part
of a deal to stop the flow of asylum-seekers across the inner-German border.
Mud was also flung at the Berlin city leader of the Free Democratic party
(FDP), the minority partner in the ruling coalition. She was forced to
resign over the so-called 'Figaro affair', in which she is alleged to have
charged her hairdressing bills to the party funds.
To an outsider, it all appears remarkably arcane and irrelevant. To many
voters in eastern Germany, voting in a western democratic system for only
the second time, it looks the same. But it does give an indication of the
political backbiting still to come.
Mr Rudolf Scharping, the SPD's new leader and youthful challenger for the
chancellor's job, warned his party faithful last week that the campaign
could rapidly degenerate. 'We all know that when it really comes to the
crunch, when it is a question of hanging on to power itself, the CDU and CSU
will fight ruthlessly to protect their position,' he said. 'The past days
have given us a foretaste of what is to come.'
There is an awful lot to play for, with 19 separate elections on the cards:
from the state election in Lower Saxony on March 13 to the general election
for the Bundestag on October 16, via the electoral college vote for state
president in May, European elections in June, and a string of state and
local polls.
Given a rising tide of disaffection in the electorate at large for the
entire political establishment, and a whole new area of uncertainty in
former East Germany, predictions are still a risky business.
There is no decisive lead in the polls between the broad blocks of left and
right, although the opposition Social Democratic party clearly has the edge
at the moment. More confusingly, there is a range of parties that could
attract protest votes, ranging from the well-established Greens, through the
former Communist party in the east - the party of Democratic Socialism (PDS)
 -to the far-right Republicans, and at least two anti-party citizens'
movements.
Not only is a messy series of campaigns in prospect, but a messy outcome
too.
The most cautious opinion poll, the Politbarometer broadcast every month by
the ZDF television station, puts the SPD on 39 per cent support, the CDU/CSU
on 36 per cent, the Greens on 10 per cent, and the FDP on 6 per cent - 'if
there were general elections next Sunday'.
That means that neither leftwing (SPD-Green) nor rightwing (CDU/CSU-FDP)
coalitions would be able to gain a clear majority in the Bundestag, the
directly elected lower house of parliament, in October. It would only take
one or two protest parties to gain the 5 per cent of votes needed to get
into the Bundestag, to make a grand coalition of left and right - SPD and
CDU - unavoidable.
The fact is that west Germany - the old federal republic - is evenly split
between left and right. According to the other main polling organisation,
the Allensbach Institute, the SPD is on 38 per cent support, as against 36.4
for the CDU/CSU, in the west as a whole. The real difference between them
lies in the east.
That was where Chancellor Kohl won his re-election back in 1990, and that is
where he has seen his party support slump from almost 42 per cent then to
less than 20 per cent today. In the recent local elections in Brandenburg,
he suffered the ignominy of coming third, with the former Communists getting
more support. The opinion polls confirm that trend.
There is widespread bitterness in the east at the failure of western
politicians to realise the extent of the post-unification trauma they have
suffered. It centres above all on unemployment, and the fact that in
hundreds of small towns and villages, effective joblessness is anything from
50 to 70 per cent of the potentially active labour force. Before 1989,
unemployment did not officially exist there.
That bitterness has hit the CDU most of all, and the SPD should reap the
benefit. But the Social Democrats' party organisation is weak in the east:
they had to begin from scratch, because the old Social Democratic party had
been forcibly merged with the Communists. Party managers fear they may fail
to exploit the full potential of the protest.
The same is true in the west. Given the sharpest recession since the postwar
economic miracle in Germany began, the opposition should be coasting to
victory. In fact, the SPD is struggling to break the 40 per cent barrier.
The challenge for Mr Scharping is to demonstrate that his party is
regierungsfahig - fit for government. He has to persuade an essentially
conservative electorate that his party's reputation for internal squabbling
and utopianism is no longer true.
In the eight months since he became leader, he has made considerable
progress. He has whipped his fellow leaders, like the erratic Mr Oskar
Lafontaine, his chief economic spokesman, and the ambitious Mr Gerhard
Schroder, premier of Lower Saxony, into line. He has distanced himself from
any firm commitment to an SPD-Green coalition, which might scare off
middle-of-the-road voters. He has yet to put a foot wrong.
That is the problem for Chancellor Kohl, who exudes self-confidence in spite
of being the least popular of all Germany's leading politicians.
Mr Kohl is seeking to counter this unpopularity by presenting himself as the
safe hand on the tiller in uncertain times. His theme is security - from the
external instability of eastern Europe and Russia (ultra-nationalist leader
Mr Vladimir Zhirinovsky's rise in the Russian elections is a big bonus), and
from the internal instability of economic recession. He knows that voters
normally opt for conservatives in times of trouble.
What is most worrying for his advisers is that even that safe bet seems in
doubt. According to another recent poll, 35 per cent think the SPD can lead
Germany out of the economic crisis, against 29 per cent for the CDU. As for
the party leaders, 36 per cent see Scharping as the better man for the
economy, as against 23 per cent for Kohl. The chancellor only scores better
on foreign policy (45 per cent) and the threat from Russia.
The other danger for the chancellor is that the election marathon might
produce a negative momentum, with the SPD scoring well in the state
elections, and building up an unstoppable drive to the Bundestag poll. That
was why the CDU resisted bitterly a move to hold early elections in
Saxony-Anhalt, where its feeble coalition with the FDP seems certain to lose
power. 'The danger of two SPD victories in March - in Lower Saxony and in
Saxony-Anhalt - could have been fatal,' according to one of the chancellor's
close aides.
Things still look pretty bleak for Mr Kohl. The European elections in June,
combined with an array of local council elections on the same day, may well
produce a big protest vote. All the established parties fear a good showing
by the extreme rightwing Republicans in the European poll, when voters feel
less constrained by any sense of responsibility.
Between now and then, Mr Kohl has to use all his political wiles to try to
turn the polls around. He is exploiting his opportunities for statesmanship,
such as his recent trip to Washington, to the full. But the German elections
will be decided above all by domestic issues, by measures to tackle
unemployment, law and order, and immigration.
At this stage, the most likely outcome must still be a grand coalition, with
a significant protest vote - including many who simply stay at home - above
all in the disenchanted east.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
GERMANY'S 1994 ELECTION MARATHON
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
    March 13     Lower Saxony             State parliament
    March 20     Schleswig-Holstein       Local councils
      May 23     Federal convention       Federal president
     June 12     All Germany              European parliament
                 Baden-Wurttemberg        Local councils
                 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern   Local councils
                 Rhineland-Palatinate     Local councils
                 Saarland                 Local councils
                 Saxony                   Local councils
                 Saxony-Anhalt            Local councils
                 Thuringia                Local councils
     June 26     Saxony-Anhalt            State parliament
September 11     Brandenburg              State parliament
                 Saxony                   State parliament
September 25     Bavaria                  State parliament
  October        Mecklenburg-Vorpommern   State parliament
                 Thuringia                State parliament
                 North Rhine-Westphalia   Local councils
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  OCTOBER 16     ALL GERMANY              BUNDESTAG
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
