FT  01 AUG 94 / Rabin urges Syria to make peace move
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, yesterday urged Syria to make
the next moves towards peace in the Middle East, renewing his calls for
direct negotiations with the Syrian leadership and for a public gesture to
persuade the Israeli public that Damascus was serious about reaching a
settlement.
His remarks followed a summit in the Egyptian resort of Taba with Mr Hosni
Mubarak, the Egyptian president, who recently returned from talks in
Damascus with Mr Hafez al-Assad, the Syrian leader.
Senior Egyptian officials have recently played down Cairo's role in the
Syrian-Israeli track of the peace talks, saying it would be 'detrimental' to
open too many channels of negotiation.
The sole forum for talks between the sides at present is the energetic
shuttle diplomacy of Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, who is
due back to the region on August 8.
Talks between Syria and Israel have remained locked over the issue of the
Golan Heights, from which Syria is seeking a full military withdrawal.
Israel in turn wants Syria to open full trade and diplomatic relations.
Mr Mubarak told reporters that Syria would 'never accept any peace treaty
unless there is total withdrawal from the Golan Heights', repeating Mr
Assad's crucial position in the talks with Israel. However, the Egyptian
president also said that he believed Mr Assad would prove 'much more
flexible' during Mr Christopher's next visit, though he declined to
elaborate.
Mr Rabin, who had come to 'exchange perceptions' with Mr Mubarak, according
to Israeli officials, reiterated his frustration at Syria's unwillingness to
meet Israelis directly and renewed his call for high-level talks.
He said he understood that Israel would have to satisfy 'a few requirements'
to reach peace but said that the Israeli people first required a clear
signal of Syria's peaceable intent, and that he could not discuss the extent
of an Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights until 'I know what I get in
return'.
He said: 'Syria has to do something in its public diplomacy, its public
utterances that will bring the Israeli public to be convinced that Syria is
eager to have a peace.'
The two leaders said they also discussed the highly sensitive issue of
Jerusalem - a matter which was also central to talks Mr Mubarak held with
King Fahd, the Saudi Arabian leader, during a weekend trip to the Kingdom.
Both leaders emphasised that the final status of Jerusalem would be
addressed only in permanent status talks with the Palestine Liberation
Organisation, which are due to begin in no later than two years. Mr Rabin
stressed that the recent acknowledgement of the special guardianship of King
Hussein of Jordan over Jerusalem - a matter deeply controversial with both
the Palestinians and some other Arab states - had not changed arrangements
in the city which had existed for the past 27 years.
Meanwhile, thousands of south Lebanese left their homes yesterday fearing an
Israeli strike against Hezbollah targets in retaliation for the recent spate
of anti-Jewish bombings.
Officials with Unifil, the United Nations observer force in the south, said
as many as 15,000 people - around 5 per cent of the population - had left
during the past week but said life continued largely as normal for those who
had stayed.
In Beirut, pro-Iranian Islamic militants said they would 'bombard
settlements' in northern Israel if the Jewish state launched retaliatory
attacks in the south.
This week marks the first anniversary of 'operation accountability' during
which Israel bombarded south Lebanon for a week in retaliation for Hezbollah
rocket attacks into north Israel. More than 120 people died in the
bombardment and 300,000 south Lebanese fled their homes.
