FT  17 AUG 94 / Business and the Environment: Watch on the Danube - A look
at Romania's bid to save a damaged delta
The World Bank is this month due to grant Romania Dollars 4.5m (Pounds 3m)
to help preserve the Danube delta, Europe's largest remaining wetland and
one of its most important wildlife sanctuaries, which is under increasing
threat from industrial pollution.
After years of mismanagement under Romania's former communist regime, the
delta's unique ecosystems are being destroyed by the pollutants and waste
accumulated by the River Danube on its 2,700km journey through the
industrial heartland of Europe.
The delta covers 580,000ha in eastern Romania and southern Ukraine where the
Danube splits into three main branches and enters the Black Sea.
For centuries, it has provided a sanctuary for rare birds, fish and
wildlife, as well as for persecuted human beings.
It is home to more than 75 species of fish, rare mammals such as the
European mink and wild cat, and an estimated 300 species of birds including
Dalmatian pelicans, pygmy cormorants, red-breasted geese, glossy ibis and
several kinds of egret and heron.
Its few thousand human inhabitants are mainly descendants of ethnic
Ukrainians and Russians driven out of tsarist Russia in the 17th and 18th
centuries because of their religious beliefs. In 1991, Unesco (the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation) added the delta
to its World Heritage list.
But the region is more than just an area of beauty and environmental
interest.
'The delta is a natural buffer between the Danube and the Black Sea,' says
Irina Luca, project officer for the World Bank in Bucharest.
'Its vegetation filters out pollutants and purifies water from the river
before it enters the sea. This is very important given the high levels of
pollution already found in the Black Sea.'
One of the first acts of Romania's post-communist government in 1990 was to
halt all building and land reclamation projects in the delta, to designate
the region a protected biosphere area and to set up the Danube Delta
Biosphere Reserve Authority to administer it.
The World Bank grant, made from its Global Environment Facility, will be
used to reverse some of the damage done in the past 50 years and to
strengthen the authority, which is based in the port of Tulcea where the
delta begins.
One aim of the five-year project is to restore reed banks and land reclaimed
by the communists for agricultural use to their natural state. Reeds, which
cover about one-third of the delta, are particularly important - it is in
compact reed banks that water from the Danube is trapped and filtered, says
Grigore Baboianu, the authority's executive director.
The country's former rulers saw the reeds as a cheap source of cellulose for
paper manufacturing. In the 1950s, plans were drawn up to harvest half a
million tonnes a year from the delta. Although this target was never
reached, Baboianu says large areas of reeds were destroyed or damaged by
heavy harvesting equipment.
Another important aim of the project is to prevent further damage to the
delta.
Around one-third of the World Bank grant will be used to strengthen the
authority's supervisory and administrative functions.
A law passed last December gave it wide-ranging powers, including
responsibility for licensing fishing and other commercial activities and the
right to fine those who fail to respect environmental protection rules.
Shipping and other companies, for example, can be fined for discharging
dirty water into the delta and individuals for fishing without a permit.
In practice, however, the authority has had insufficient funds to carry out
its tasks adequately. 'At the moment, we have just 90 wardens - one for
every 4,000-5,000ha - and no way of contacting them in the field,' says
Baboianu. The grant will be used to increase the number of wardens to 250,
to train them and to buy equipment such as boats, binoculars and radios.
Wardens monitor the environment and wildlife in their districts and check
that regulations are adhered to. The emphasis is on working with local
communities, which are among the poorest and most isolated in Romania and
whose people live from the land and from fishing and hunting. Most can only
be reached by boat.
Baboianu says: 'We do have problems with poachers and with people
misunderstanding our role, but we do not want to be seen as a force against
the people. We hope we can convince them to look on us as some kind of
ecological vet, helping preserve and improve the area for everyone.'
A greater problem is protecting the delta from pollutants in the Danube,
especially fertilisers, phosphates and nutrients used in intensive farming.
Their excessive use has led to eutrophication, manifested by an explosion of
algae.
'This phenomenon is very dangerous for us. Algae cover the surface of the
water and block light and oxygen for the more complex water plants and
animals below, eventually killing them,' says Baboianu.
This problem cannot be solved without co-operation from other Danube and
Black Sea countries, many of which, like Romania, are undergoing difficult
transitions to a market economy and can ill afford environmental clean-up
projects. 'We've made a start,' says Baboianu, 'but we can't look at the
delta in isolation. We also need to solve the problems upstream and
downstream.'
