FT  18 JUL 94 / Equity Markets: Issuers put deals on hold as turmoil takes
its toll - International offerings
A growing number of international equity offerings are being postponed,
cancelled, or cut in size, as the turmoil in the world's financial markets
this year takes its toll.
The heavy flow of new issues in the first half of the year, despite the poor
performance of underlying stock markets, has created severe indigestion in
the new issues market.
According to Euromoney, international syndicated equity offerings launched
in the first half of 1994 totalled Dollars 31bn. But while the flow of new
issues continued unabated, despite underlying market weakness, the demand
for paper has ebbed steadily.
The recent poor performance of high-visibility deals such as Italy's Ina has
sapped investor confidence, to the point where even issues priced at a
discount are not necessarily attracting buyers.
In the last week, Italian savings bank Cariplo's L1,650bn offering was
indefinitely postponed and South African insurance company Liberty Life
scaled back the size of its Dollars 360m to Dollars 500m global convertible
bond to Dollars 300m. Even then, the Liberty Life bonds have performed
poorly, ending the week at 98 bid, after being priced at 100.
Smaller deals are also suffering. Ayala Land of the Philippines last week
pulled its planned Dollars 100m offering of convertible bonds via Morgan
Stanley. It was the company's second attempt to tap the market, having
previously failed to bring an offering of global depositary receipts (GDRs).
'There are a lot of deals trying to sap up a limited amount of money, and
investors are being very choosy,' said one banker. 'It's not
market-specific; deals are being affected across all the markets.'
In part, however, the problem is a seasonal one. Although last year, the
market remained active throughout the summer, August is traditionally a
quite month for new issues. This year, many battered investors are saying
that they will not be buying new paper at least until September.
In the last few weeks, investment bankers have been spending a lot of time
on the phone to corporate treasurers, explaining why deals they have been
mandated to arrange should be put on hold.
For some companies, which may have already made investment decisions based
on expectations of the fresh funds, there is a stark choice between
postponing their offerings and selling shares at a heavily discounted price.
Some underwriters have been criticised for promising more than they can
deliver, in order to win mandates. But underwriters say companies are
usually understanding when they are told not to bring new issues, as the
fear of a failed issue usually overrides the need for financing.
The exceptions are the sizeable number of European governments which need to
raise funds through privatisations to finance deficits.
The adverse market conditions have already been exacerbated by governments
no longer operating an unofficial queueing system, whereby they time their
large privatisations to avoid a surplus of deals at any one time.
For cash-rich investors, there may be some bargains around. For example,
India's Dr Reddys Laboratories priced an offering of global depositary
receipts via Baring at a 29.3 per cent discount to Friday's close.
But even apparently cheap pricing does not necessarily attract buyers: the
deal still had to be reduced from Dollars 50m to Dollars 40m.
'The only thing you can say (to companies) is let's look at it again after
the summer,' said one investment banker. 'The stock markets are showing
signs of turning around, and when the secondary market comes back, the
primary market usually follows.
