FT  08 FEB 94 / World Trade News: World Bank urges Asian telecoms
liberalisation
Radical liberalisation of national telecommunications regimes is essential
to meet Asia's demand for improved communications, according to a World Bank
discussion paper.
The paper calls for the break-up of existing monopolies and the licensing of
competing telecommunications providers as 'probably the best way' to meet
the region's growing demand for telecoms services.
The discussion paper, written by Mr Peter Smith, a senior telecoms
specialist at the World Bank, and Mr Gregory Staple, a consultant to the
Bank, comes at a critical juncture in the development of policies for
improving telecommunications in the Asia/Pacific region.
While the region's more advanced countries - notably Japan, Australia and
New Zealand - have liberalised telecommunications rapidly in the past
decade, the region's less developed countries have moved more cautiously.
Asia's low-income countries are estimated to have barely 25m phone lines for
2.8bn people. Programmes for expansion are a priority, with governments
increasingly prepared to look beyond their state monopoly operator.
Several countries - notably Thailand - have pioneered 'build, operate,
transfer' projects, under which private operators, including overseas
companies, are granted concessions to provide infrastrucure and services in
specific areas.
Privatisation is also under consideration, notably in India, which could
lead to one of the region's largest flotations in recent years.
Even China, which has until now resisted pressure from overseas operators
willing to build networks, is considering licensing new entrants in a bid to
meet its goal of providing 17.5m new lines by 2000.
The World Bank study describes pragmatic policies of that type as important
but 'at best a partial solution'. 'More important than this 'top down'
approach are likely to be various 'bottom up' approaches, funded by a mix of
public and private capital, involving new concessions to independent
telephone companies.'
It argues that radical liberalisation alone will enable low-income countries
in the region to generate the estimated Dollars 90bn-Dollars 120bn needed
for advanced switching and transmission facilities to underpin network
modernisation.
The study, which is not official World Bank policy, also calls for improved
regulatory regimes to allow inter-connection between new and existing
networks and competition between operators.
