FT  16 MAR 94 / Survey of Information and Communications Technology (3):
Shoot-out between PowerPC and Intel's Pentium - Personal computers, the
technology battle intensifies
Apple Computer's introduction of the first PowerPC Macintosh personal
computers blows the starting whistle on what promises to be one of the
toughest technology competitions in the history of the personal computer
industry.
On the PowerPC team, together with Apple, will be Motorola and International
Business Machines. Together, the three companies have co-developed a
microprocessor architecture which they aim to establish as a new industry
standard for PCs. They face the reigning champions of the PC microprocessor
market, Intel and its league of PC-manufacturing technology partners, led by
IBM.
One of the most curious aspects of this contest is that IBM is playing on
both sides. Long a close ally of Intel, IBM is the largest manufacturer of
Intel microprocessor-based PCs and says it intends to remain so. However,
the computer company is also a co-developer and manufacturer of PowerPC and
has stated that the new technology is central to its future strategy.
This ambiguity aside, the contest is a straight-forward shoot out between
PowerPC and Intel's Pentium, the latest version of its long-established
'x86' microprocessor lineage.
PowerPC has a Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) architecture.
Theoretically, this suggests that it may be faster than Intel's Pentium.
However, PowerPC lacks the critical software base of Intel's microprocessors
and its performance in commercial systems is relatively unproven.
In contrast, Intel's Pentium has a huge head start in the marketplace as the
successor of the widely used Intel 386 and 486 microprocessors, the 'brains'
of most PCs in use today.
The Intel chips run Microsoft's popular MS-DOS and Windows operating system
software and the thousands of application programs designed to work with
them.
Apple's debut of PowerPC-based Macintosh computers will be a critical test
of the new technology. Apple is expected to launch three 'PowerMac'
computers ranging in price from about Dollars 2,400 to about Dollars 4,000
to replace its current 'Quadra' models aimed at business users. Apple says
that it intends to convert 40 per cent of its Macintosh shipments to PowerPC
by year's end, with the complete changeover occurring within three to four
years.
For Apple, the PowerPC represents an important transition from Motorola's
68000 line of microprocessors, which it has used since the introduction of
the Macintosh computer 12 years ago. Apple needed a new microprocessor to
keep pace with competitors using Intel's chips, but its decision to join
with IBM and Motorola in developing a brand new architecture makes the
transition more risky.
PowerPC's may have a speed advantage over Pentium. However, among existing
Apple customers the PowerMac may be judged as much for its compatibility
with existing Macintosh software as for its raw performance.
This could give the PowerPC a rough start in the personal computer market.
According to industry reports, about 90 per cent of existing Macintosh
software will run on the new Apple computers, but only via emulation
software which will significantly slow down performance.
Thus, although PowerPC may be theoretically capable of outpacing the Intel
Pentium, that may not be the practical experience of the first users of
personal computers based on the new microprocessor.
Apple says that about 75 application programs designed specifically for the
PowerMac will be available when the computers are introduced, and that
hundreds more are in development.
However, software companies are unlikely to make development of applications
programs for the PowerMac a high priority. Apple says that it expects to
sell up to one million PowerMac computers in the first 12 months. While this
would be a significant achievement for Apple, it presents a relatively
limited market for software designed solely for the PowerMac.
In contrast, Intel expects about 15 per cent of all PCs sold this year, or
approximately seven million units, to be based on its Pentium chips. Most of
the remaining 40m PCs will contain Intel 486 microprocessors. Thus,
Intel-based PCs represent a far larger potential market for software
applications than the PowerMac.
Therefore even if the PowerMac exceeds Apple's expectations, it will hardly
make a dent in Intel's dominance of the personal computer microprocessor
market.
Intel and its backers, meanwhile, are targeting Apple's existing market
share, aiming to take advantage of the uncertainties created by the
transition to PowerPC.
Apple, however, is not alone in its plans to offer PowerPC based personal
computers. IBM already offers a computer workstation based on the PowerPC
microprocessor. The company is expected to introduce a broad range of
'Power' machines for more general use, including portable PCs . But it is
not yet clear how IBM will position these products relative to its strong
Intel-based PC product line.
IBM is also actively seeking PowerPC endorsements from other computer
makers. The first, Canon of Japan, said recently that it will use PowerPC in
a new range of office computers and work with IBM and Motorola to develop
versions of PowerPC for use in hand-held and notebook-sized computers.
In Taiwan, PowerPC has attracted great interest among PC circuit-board
manufacturers. However, these sub-system manufacturers are unlikely to take
a leadership role in developing the PowerPC market. Instead, they tend to
wait for demand to develop in the US market.
'reference specifications' to PC manufacturers and software developers
interested in developing products around the new technology. Computers that
adhere to these specifications will eventually be able to run a smorgasbord
of operating systems and applications software, IBM says.
Microsoft has announced plans to port Windows NT to the PowerPC, and IBM's
new Workplace OS will run DOS, Windows, and OS/2 applications on the
PowerPC. PowerOpen, another 'multipersonality' operating environment, is
being developed specifically for PowerPC systems by Apple and IBM.
Together, IBM and Apple aim to establish a 30 percent share of the PC market
for PowerPC by the end of the decade, leaving Intel with perhaps 60 per cent
(the rest being clones of Intel microprocessors), down from about 80 percent
today.
Thus while PowerPC may somewhat diminish Intel's market share, not even its
most optimistic backers expect to overtake Intel's leadership in the
microprocessor market in the short term.
In the longer term, the outcome of the PowerPC versus Intel battle is likely
to depend as much on software developers as on the relative merits of each
type of microprocessor.
