FT  28 FEB 94 / Survey of Jamaica (11): Caribbean competition - Tourism is a
sunny spot in the economy
Tourism has been a bright spot in the Jamaican economy. With the markets
weak for its traditional exports - bauxite, bananas and sugar - growing
foreign exchange receipts from tourism have been an increasingly important
source of foreign exchange.
The industry generates close to Dollars 1bn a year in gross foreign exchange
receipts, according to government estimates. The estimated net receipts of
between Dollars 500m and Dollars 600m make it the single most important
source of foreign exchange in the economy. It employs about 26,000 people,
more than double the level of 10 years ago. Some 1.6m tourists arrived in
the country last year, 3.4 per cent up on 1992. The number of visitors
stopping over jumped 7.7 per cent to 979,000, while the number of arrivals
on cruise ships slipped 3.1 per cent to 630,000.
The tourism recovery came after two weak years at the end of the 1980s, and
difficult times for international tourism worldwide at the time of the Gulf
War and in the depths of the US recession. In Jamaica, it underlined the
heavy dependence on the US market.
According to Ms Camille Needham, general manager of the Jamaican Hotels and
Tourist Association: 'The US recession had a powerful effect that in fact
did us a lot of good. We decided that we could not have all our eggs in one
basket.'
At times in the 1980s, visitors from the US accounted for more than
three-quarters of all tourists making stopovers coming from the US. Visitors
from Canada accounted for a further 15 per cent. In 1992, 61.9 per cent of
visitors were from the US, 11.1 per cent from Canada.
The proportion of visitors from Europe has risen above 20 per cent; more
than half come from the UK, encouraged by the development of the charter
tour business. Numbers of visitors from regions such as Latin America and
Japan have also grown. Along with this, the seasonality of the trade has
been reduced. Most Europeans - unlike many holidaymakers from the northern
US and Canada - vacation in the summer months.
Jamaica's tourism business is not without its problems. Rising crime levels
(attacks on tourists have grown and two have been murdered in the country in
the last two years) attract bad publicity, which may deter visitors if the
situation becomes worse.
Some of the country's infrastructure - for example, the telephones and the
provision of electricity - has improved. But much remains inadequate.
'We have to improve the roads, reduce the number of potholes. Electricity
and telephone services have improved a lot. We are working on the water
situation but it's moving a bit more slowly,' says Ms Needham.
Part of the problem is that infrastructure has not kept up with the growth
of the industry. Much of the development has been haphazard and resorts have
not been planned. 'We have to think of planning and zoning to make the
resorts more interesting and attractive,' she says.
Other problems - such as air access to the region - are less under Jamaican
control. The future of Air Jamaica, the national airline, is uncertain. Mr
Omar Davies, the finance minister, says the government will stop providing
funds for the loss-making airline from the start of the new fiscal year in
April. Pan-American and Eastern airlines, which were the main carriers from
North America to the Caribbean, have collapsed, although American Airlines
has scheduled additional flights.
Furthermore, competition is becoming intense, and may become more so.
Several US states have started promoting themselves as holiday destinations.
Resorts in the Dominican Republic and Cancun in Mexico offer competitively
priced vacations. Cuba is attracting substantial hotel investment. Cuba
seems to offer an important medium-term threat, although its emergence as a
true competitor will depend on the lifting of the US embargo. Of all the
Caribbean islands, Cuba appears to offer most of what Jamaica has in sand,
sea and scenery.
'We can't compete with rates offered by Dominican Republic,' says one
Jamaican tourism official. 'We can't sell our rooms for Dollars 20-Dollars
30 a night.'
Despite this competition, there has been more of a co-operative approach to
Caribbean tourism in recent years. Once fiercely competitive, the resort
countries including Jamaica have implemented a big advertising programme in
the US to market the region as a single destination to potential north
American visitors. The tourist authorities hope that one spin-off may be the
development of more multi-centre holidays.
In common with other cruise ship destinations, there have been concerns in
Jamaica that cruise visitors do not provide enough benefit to the local
economy. However, a decision to increase the cruise ship passenger tax from
Dollars 10 to Dollars 15 has been delayed, apparently following pressure
from the cruise ship owners. Government officials have said that the
increase would be implemented over three years from January 1994.
