FT  05 OCT 94 / World Stock Markets (America): Dow tumbles on rate fears
Wall Street
After a subdued start, US share prices dropped sharply across the board
yesterday afternoon as apprehension about the prospect of another interest
rate increase spread throughout the stock market, writes Patrick Harverson
in New York.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed 45.76 down at 3,801.13, having
barely moved for the first three hours. Other indices moved in similar
fashion. The more broadly based Standard &amp; Poor's 500 relinquished 7.14 at
454.60, while the American SE composite shed 4.65 to 453.81 and the Nasdaq
composite was 13.58 weaker at 747.30. Trading volume on the New York SE was
a heavy 326m shares.
The equity market initially followed the pattern of trading on the bond
market, with stocks rising modestly at the bell in the wake of an upbeat
start by Treasury prices. On Monday, bonds fell steeply following signs of
rising inflation in the National Association of Purchasing Management's
monthly report, but yesterday morning they stabilised, thanks in part to
news of a 0.6 per cent rise in August leading economic indicators, in line
with expectations.
Inflation worries, however, were never far from the surface, and both the
bond and stock markets soon dropped back from their early highs. On Friday
the government is due to release the September employment report, and if the
report is stronger than expected, analysts believe the Federal Reserve will
sanction another increase in interest rates.
Those fears deepened after September car sales came in higher than expected,
and by the late afternoon heavy program selling had pushed the Dow more than
50 points lower, triggering the NYSE's 'circuit breakers' which limit
program trading. The breakers helped to lift the Dow back above 3,800 in the
last few minutes before the close.
Among individual stocks, the big three vehicle manufacturers were not helped
by the strong car sales numbers. General Motors, which announced a shake-up
of senior management in its North American division, receded Dollars 1 1/4
to Dollars 45 1/8 , Ford Motor dipped Dollars  3/8 to Dollars 27 1/8 and
Chrysler shed Dollars  5/8 to Dollars 44.
American Express put on Dollars  3/8 at Dollars 30 1/4 following reports
that it planned to cut as many as 4,800 jobs and more than Dollars 500m in
operating costs in a restructuring of its travel services business.
Carter-Wallace, the drugs and toiletry products group, firmed Dollars 3/8 to
Dollars 13 3/4 after announcing that it would take a Dollars 49m pre-tax
charge in the second quarter to cover the cost of redundancies, plant
closures and a restructuring of its laboratories unit.
Computer chip manufacturers suffered in the wake of negative comments about
earnings from Advanced Micro Devices on Monday.
