FT  24 MAY 94 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): The
growing pains of British horticulture - Potential for expansion will be
jeopardised if levy-funding of research is abandoned
Horticulture is one of the most under-rated sectors of British food
production.
It uses just 4 per cent of the total land area but produces goods with a
farm gate value of over Pounds 1.7bn, about half the total produced by
conventional agriculture on the other 96 per cent of the land. and it does
it virtually without European Union support.
Some industry insiders say it could increase output by a further Pounds 750m
over the next decade, given adequate encouragement and access to potential
advances in research and development.
The UK has a horticultural trade gap with other, mainly EU countries, of
some Pounds 2.3bn a year, so there would appear to be every reason to expand
domestic production. Britain imports 36 per cent of the tomatoes consumed in
this country, 48 per cent of the roses, 36 per cent of the chrysanthemums
and so on.
But this potential expansion - and even the status quo - could be threatened
if cash for researching and disseminating improved production techniques
dried up. The future of such work is in the balance this week, as is the
future of the levy-funded Horticultural Development Council, which
commissions and co-ordinates much of the 'near market' research.
The HDC is being subjected to its statutory five-yearly review by the
Ministry of Agriculture, the outcome of which will determine whether it
continues or is wound-up.
Yesterday representatives of about 30 horticulture industry organisations
met ministry officials to record their views on the future of the council.
Insider information in advance of the meeting suggested that they would back
its continuation 'to a man'. But they represented chiefly large-scale
operations. Some of the smaller growers among the 3,000 or so registered
horticulturalists are apparently not so happy.
The HDC requires each registered producer with gross sales of more than
Pounds 25,000 to declare his sales value each year. He is then billed for
half of 1 per cent of that gross as his contribution to council-co-ordinated
research and development efforts. This raises just under Pounds 3m a year
which, after modest administration costs, is all spent on selected 'near
market' research and the transmission of the resulting information to
growers.
The ministry, it must be said, spends some Pounds 15.5m on research geared
to horticulture, although it is mainly basic, as distinct from applied. The
HDC claims that if it did not ensure the 'application' much of the ministry
work would be wasted or, more likely, discontinued.
At a time when some horticulturalists, such as lettuce and tomato growers,
are making a loss on every box of produce, however, they are understandably
less than enthusiastic about increasing their immediate problems by paying a
statutory levy to the HDC.
Some growers are regularly tardy with their payments in any case and over
the last two years the HDC has spent over Pounds 30,000 on what it calls in
its accounts 'enforcement costs'.
Others, it is alleged, and they are not all small operators whose turnover
is below the trigger point, have not registered as growers and therefore
also avoid payment of the levy.
All of this raises the hackles of those who do pay promptly - especially
during periods of poor or non-existent profits - and leads them to question
if the council should be allowed to continue. In response, the HDC says it
is working on ways to ensure full registration but that, although the
ministry has information on all growers in the UK, it is legally prohibited
from making this available to the HDC for policing purposes.
The NFU, in its submission to the review, has identified non-registration as
one of the key points that require more attention.
It is, of course, almost inevitable in a volatile and multi-faceted
industry, that petty points appear to be major hurdles. For at any time,
some of the 80 different crops that fall within the HDC's remit will be
giving good returns while others make losses.
Last year, for instance, raspberry growers made a killing because normal
supplies from eastern Europe - particularly Yugoslavia, for obvious reasons
 -were not available. As a result, many UK growers have planted more canes.
These will come into full production in two to three years, by which time,
we must hope the Bosnians, the Croats and the Serbs may have resolved their
difficulties and once again be supplying raspberries to British markets.
Together with the increase in production from the new British canes, this
will probably bring about a glut on the market and prices and profits will
plummet. That is the way with horticulture.
Stiff competition for the British market is also coming, increasingly, from
southern countries within the EU. The climate in Italy, Greece, Spain and
Portugal means growers can produce many crops unprotected. In Britain, the
same crops can only be grown in expensive greenhouses with artificial
heating.
Nevertheless, British horticulturalists claim, domestic produce has
qualities that the competition cannot match - qualities that could be
further enhanced by the application of R&amp;D. It is widely recognised within
the industry that the HDC has done, and is doing, a good job. To most it is
inconceivable that it should be wound-up. Indeed, that is the message
ministry officials will have heard yesterday.
It is now up to ministers to respond to those representations by the end of
June. It is already clear that in the unlikely event that they kill-off
grower-funded HDC, the Dutch government-funded research establishment will
quickly be knocking on Britain's door. Initially, it will wish to sell its
expertise but, very soon, more of its produce, thereby increasing still
further the food trade gap, now running at a total of some Pounds 6bn a
year.
