FT  16 APR 94 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Misfit, psychopath, film critic
especially film and television critics - must be one of the most wretched
groups of people on the face of the earth. They are troglodytes, misfits,
odd-balls. Also highly dangerous. Many of them come from broken homes, you
know, and are astonished to have found any sort of employment, ill-paid
though it may be.
Film and television critics come in two basic shapes: tall and half-starved,
or mean, small and round. In my dealings with them I have become most wary
of the mean, small and round ones. The appearance of both sorts is
extraordinarily tiresome: cravats are much favoured, as are turtle-necked
sweaters, beige-coloured jackets and suede shoes stained by soup drops.
This is neither the time nor place to describe their various gloomy
orientations. But it would not be untimely to register my disgust at the
odiousness of their opinions, which can be amazingly uncritical.
In common with all sane people, I am relieved that the British government
has agreed to yield on the matter of violent videos, and that it will
introduce tougher laws to help prevent young children being exposed to
pornographic and violent films.
Retailers or distributors who sell or hire unclassified videos will be
liable to two years' imprisonment, with the prospect of a six-month sentence
for those who supply 18-certificate films to under-aged children. The
director of the British Board of Film Classification, James Ferman, said
this week: 'From now on, we are going to have to cut more and classify
higher . . . some (films) that would have had an 18 certificate may not be
given a video licence at all.'
This is long overdue. Only a pig on a pink cloud, you might think, could
still peddle the knee-jerk response that all censorship is vile and
misguided; or that 'artistic freedom' is so precious and indivisible that
the makers of wildly exploitative films are to be defended with the same
arguments and fervour that would be extended to the makers of Schindler's
List or Hamlet. This is poppycock, and highly fraudulent.
Yet all sorts of rubbish has been written, even in recent days, defending
film-makers' absolute freedom to wallow where they will. Film and television
critics are hugely culpable - the very people who have shown themselves so
ill-equipped to defend the rest of us, especially parents, from the garbage,
particularly graphic violence and sadism, served up by film-makers and
distributors grubbing for profits.
Critics write for each other. They see too many films. They are concussed,
confused and irredeemably coarsened.
Belatedly, I have been catching up with Michael Medved's book, Hollywood vs.
America, which is subtitled Popular Culture and the War on Traditional
Values. You do not have to agree with everything Medved says in order to
endorse his cut and thrust.
In the preface to the British paperback edition of his book he says, quite
accurately: 'Poverty, racism and marital breakdown are all enormously
complex problems that will require many years of effort for any discernible
progress to be made; reducing the levels of violence in the media, on the
other hand, should be quite easy.'
Himself a critic and screen writer, Medved broke ranks and rounded on his
colleagues for their sympathetic treatment of Peter Greenaway's film, The
Cook, The Thief, His Wife and Her Lover. 'When you look at the great reviews
for a loathsome little picture like this one, you can understand why so many
people don't trust film critics any more,' said Medved when the film opened
in the US. 'I actually feel ashamed to be part of this profession.'
He abhors, as I do, critics' penchant for describing camera-work, editing,
acting, set design - whatever - while ignoring, often, the morality of a
film's content or execution. 'The politically correct . . . notion is that
we should never dig deeper - to consider whether a given work is true, or
good, or spiritually nourishing - or to evaluate its impact on society.'
My remedy: banish all arts critics to the sports desk and make them write
about that. But it would be risky. Many editors would simply transfer their
sports writers to the arts desk, to write about film and dance. Sports
writers: now there is a bunch of psychopaths . . .
