FT  12 MAY 94 / Yeltsin seeks improved G7 and Nato deals
President Boris Yeltsin yesterday called for full participation by Russia in
the international organisations of the west, including an expanded Group of
Seven industrialised nations, and for a special deal to be negotiated with
Nato recognising the size and strength of its armed forces.
In exchange, he promised that he would not approve any increase in military
spending above the level of 1993, and reluctantly accepted that the ceremony
to mark the final departure of Russian troops from Germany would be separate
from the rest of the western allies.
He also specifically endorsed Germany's attempt to become a permanent member
of the UN security council.
Mr Yeltsin, on the first day of a three-day official visit to Germany, won
the backing of Chancellor Helmut Kohl in his call for full membership of a
G8 from next year. Mr Kohl also called for rapid moves to bring Russia into
the Gatt, and the Council of Europe.
However, Mr Kohl stopped short of offering Mr Yeltsin any precise
improvement in the 'partnership for peace' package proposed by the Nato
allies for all central and east European states.
The strains in relations between Russia and Nato were underlined yesterday
when Air Marshal Sir Richard Vincent, the chairman of the alliance's
military committee, abruptly shelved plans to visit Moscow.
While the postponement was officially attributed to 'scheduling problems',
it is understood that the Russian side was reluctant to delegate anyone of
sufficient seniority to organise the air marshal's reception.
This would suggest that even those Russian defence officials who feel
relatively sympathetic to Nato are reluctant, in the new nationalist
climate, to be seen holding high-profile meetings with western officials.
The two leaders were at great pains to stress their excellent personal
relations, in spite of the host of sensitive issues between them.
The Russian president admitted that the question of the departure ceremony
for Russian troops from Germany, scheduled for August 31, was one which
could 'destabilise the political situation in Russia'.
In the event, the two agreed to abandon an initial ceremony in the historic
town of Weimar - close to the site of the Buchenwald concentration camp -
and focus everything on a 'dignified ceremony' to be held in Berlin. Final
details have yet to be hammered out, but it will obviously stop far short of
the joint military ceremony with the other western allies sought by the
Russian commanders.
In return, Mr Kohl gave his endorsement to the Russian bid for full
membership of an expanded G7, instead of the current arrangement which gives
Russia involvement only in 'political' questions at the forthcoming Naples
summit.
