FT  07 DEC 94 / International Bonds: Borrowers launch short-dated deals in
variety of currencies
Activity in the eurobond market stepped up dramatically yesterday as
borrowers launched a large number of short-dated deals in a variety of
currencies targeted at strong demand from retail investors.
However, the market's main focus of attention remained South Africa's
Dollars 500m five-year global bond offering, which is expected to be
launched imminently at a spread of around 200 basis points over US Treasury
bonds.
South Africa's worldwide 'roadshow' officially ended yesterday with final
meetings with investors. 'We are now going through a book-building exercise,
focusing investors' attention on a spread in the area of 200 basis points,'
said a syndicate official at Swiss Bank Corporation, joint lead manager with
Goldman Sachs.
Pricing will be crucial to the success of the deal and will set a precedent
for the borrowing costs South Africa as a sovereign borrower and South
African public and private companies pay in future, dealers said.
However, 'people are finding it difficult to make direct comparisons (on
pricing) with other countries' debt,' said one trader. The strongest demand
is expected to come from the US, although South Africa's sub-investment
NAIC3 rating there means demand from US insurance companies will be weak,
dealers said.
The pick-up in activity yesterday was particularly marked in the Luxembourg
franc sector, with deals totalling just under LFr10bn. Dealers said this was
due to attractive arbitrage opportunities.
BNG, the Dutch bank, launched a Dollars 200m four-year offering priced to
yield 12 basis points over US government bonds. The issue met firm demand
from retail investors in Belgium and Switzerland and some institutional
investors in the Far East, lead manager Daiwa said.
The proceeds were swapped into floating-rate dollars and then into
floating-rate guilders, market sources said.
GECC, the financing arm of General Electric, launched a Dollars 200m
three-year deal priced to yield around 13 basis points over US Treasuries
led by UBS.
GECC was active in other sectors, with a HKDollars 500m five-year issue and
a ADollars 100m two-year deal.
Argentaria Global Finance launched Y40bn of six-year bonds. The deal was
prompted by the successful auction of six-year Japanese government bonds on
Monday which set the tone for a strong JGB market yesterday, lead manager
Nikko said.
