FT  20 AUG 94 / Property: Why bed and breakfast is just like getting married
 -So you want to take paying guests? Gerald Cadogan has a word with some old
hands
Lambing comes early for Elizabeth Courage at Rye Hill Farm, Slaley, in the
wilds of Northumberland. 'The four legs must be out before the two legs
arrive at Easter,' she says.
The two legs are the visitors in the guest-house on her farm. As local
chairman of the Farm Holiday Bureau, she is eager to show them Northumbrian
farming. 'But most people aren't interested. They like being on the farm and
talking about it in the evening. Next day, one snoop at a pig is quite
enough - which takes all of three seconds.'
Running bed and breakfast accommodation is relentless work. But, by b&amp;b
standards, she has a large operation.
Six letting bedrooms, converted from old farm byres attached to the
300-year-old house, sleep up to 16 people. All rooms have a bathroom. She
charges Pounds 18 a person nightly for twin occupancy and Pounds 20 for
single.
Sandwiches will be prepared 'any time' and she cooks dinner. 'But you can't
do that without six eating, and you must charge Pounds 10 a head.' She also
has a self-catering cottage for nine, equipped fully for the disabled and
costing from Pounds 250 to Pounds 600 a week, depending on the season.
Courage cautions, however, that b&amp;b is like marriage - it should not be
entered into lightly: 'If you worked out your earnings per hour, they would
be worse than farming.' But it makes a great difference to her income and
being able to bring up four children. It is a relief, too, that the b&amp;b
operation is not run in her own house; otherwise, she would have little
privacy.
Most of her visitors are British but 10 per cent are foreign, mainly from
Australia, the US and the Continent. 'They even ring up from Vancouver, to
ask where we are,' says Courage.
Six beds above ground level is the cut-off point for fire precautions and
for paying business rates. She has had to install self-closing fire doors
and she is registered for value added tax, which has one advantage: she can
claim relief for the VAT she pays on fuel (which smaller, unregistered b&amp;b
establishments cannot). She feels the ideal size, in terms of effort
required and final income, is six beds or under.
She keeps chickens, a pit pony, 80 ewes and pigs. It is a hard-working
smallholding and, although the visitors do not like to be too close to the
muck, they like the feeling of being close to farm life.
Courage would not dream, however, of paying the Pounds 600 that it costs
Mary Pen Wills at Fulford House in Culworth, Northamptonshire, to be a
member of the Wolsey Lodge chain of guest-houses. She says: 'I went into it
because I wanted my own money to do up the house and buy more expensive
curtains than I could otherwise afford.'
Wills says she had the space as the children had left home. 'And I wanted to
stay in our nice house.' It is a smart, if rambling, old place near the
village green with smart curtains, antique furniture and fresh flowers.
Her visitors stay in the house. She agrees that it is hard work but it does
produce some money - although she adds, cautiously: 'If you employ help
every day, you begin to wonder.' She has three double/twin bedrooms and
rooms cost from Pounds 45 to Pounds 56 (Pounds 28 to Pounds 30 for single
occupancy), dropping a little in winter.
Dinner costs Pounds 17.50 and, like Courage, she has a residential licence.
'We want to make it a dinner party for them,' she explains. But when there
are only two visitors, 'we eat with them. And Stephen (her husband) pours
drinks while I finish preparing dinner.'
Wills says that when you look at b&amp;b prices, you must bear in mind that
Pounds 22.50 upwards takes you into the 'gracious' range. Among the costs of
being gracious are keeping the house warm all the time and making sure the
carpets are not frayed. 'But we cover ourselves and have had fun and can
afford new things.'
With some help in the house, she is able to relax playing golf twice a week.
If she did not have the help, income would be higher.
The Wolsey Lodge scheme, with central booking for overseas visitors, is a
reliable source of guests. 'It is a little club, really, and worth it.'
Properties in the scheme are substantial; many are manor houses and old
rectories. They are vetted carefully for what they (and their hosts) are
like, and what they offer. 'We want the sort of atmosphere where our guests
are coming to stay with friends, and will be meeting more friends,' Wills
explains.
This seems to work, because they have many repeats. 'It is like a house
party. We have delightful people. And if they do not look too delightful
when they arrive, they are when they leave.'
Many come every year for meetings at the nearby Silverstone race track.
Other attractions are Oxford, Blenheim palace, the Cotswolds and
Stratford-upon-Avon. There are many garden enthusiasts - hers is a good one.
Others discover Northamptonshire, a remarkably unknown and rural county. She
likes to help visitors plan their trips.
The Wills family has run the guest-house for eight years and she has no
regrets about the work, although she adds: 'It is a two-person job. I could
not do it without help in the evening from Stephen (an oil-field marketing
consultant). The husbands are excellent at the Wolsey Lodge meetings. They
leap up and ask questions. They love it.'
Rye Hill Farm (Elizabeth Courage), Slaley, Hexham, Northumberland NE47 0AH
(0434-673259); Fulford House (Mary Pen Wills), Fulford House, The Green,
Culworth, Banbury, Oxfordshire OX17 2BB (0295-768304); Wolsey Lodges, 17
Chapel Street, Bildeston, Suffolk IP7 7EP (0449-741771). Guides to bed and
breakfast establishments in the UK can be found in most newsagents and
bookshops.
