FT  04 MAY 94 / Management: On the road to procrastination - Adrian Furnham
offers tips on how to perfect your decision-avoidance technique
Having to make important decisions causes considerable stress. Psychologists
in the 1960s made monkeys develop stomach ulcers and other signs of
corporate stress simply by forcing them to make decisions. In the now
notorious 'executive monkey' studies, otherwise carefree animals had to
choose between options with significant physical consequences such as
electric shock. The consistent monitoring and worrying led them to become
ill.
And so it is with the modern manager. Told constantly about the importance
of change, development, customer satisfaction etc, many middle and senior
managers long for a period of stability or as the prayer-book has it,
'eternal changelessness'.
The stress of decision-making quite naturally leads to the development of
numerous effective decision-avoidance techniques. Without doubt, the most
popular is to appoint a committee to help the delaying tactics. A good
decision-avoidance committee is a group of people who individually prefer to
do nothing and who collectively can meet and decide that nothing can be
done. Furthermore, the possibility of avoiding a decision increases in
proportion to the square of the number of members of the committee.
Committee behaviour positively facilitates decision-avoidance. Thus, as
Parkinson observed, the time spent on any item on the agenda is inversely
proportional to the sum of money involved. But committees can also handle
trivial matters promptly, while the important issues are delayed and rarely
solved. But from the delay perspective there is always one sure result; if a
committee meets over a long enough period of time, the meetings become more
important than the problem they were intended to solve.
People are unused to thinking in groups - they talk, argue, adjudicate,
compromise, joke - but they do not think. In consequence, a really new
creative idea tends to destabilise groups and upset consensus. The committee
is thus a group which is impelled to agree and is instinctively hostile to
that which is divisive or new.
Failing the decision-by-committee avoidance tactic, individuals can resort
to their own preferred approach. These avoidance techniques can be used by
the same individuals in different situations with equal effectiveness,
depending on the type and consequences of the decision and personality of
the decision-taker. Probably the six most favoured methods of avoiding a
decision are:
The temper-tantrum method. Here the decision-avoider regresses to the
behaviour pattern of a spoilt two-year-old. Call the decision-requester
names, stamp the foot, appear outraged or insulted or even apoplectic. If
possible weep with indignation. Often the surprised and embarrassed
requester will immediately step down.
The hush-hush method. Call the requester to one side, and in a
conspiratorial stage whisper, point out that he/she is rushing in where
angels fear to tread. Suggest that they clearly don't understand the latest
company figures, the real wishes of the CEO, the contents of the secret
corporate plan etc, and that requesting such a decision will make them look
naive, even idiotic. Threatened with this sort of career-limiting move, most
decision-requesters will back off.
The clarification method. This is the 'more details please' approach. The
person requesting a decision is asked to provide more specifically the
reason for, and the nature and consequences of, the possible options
available. This analysis-paralysis method is aimed at exhausting the
decision-requester as a fisherman exhausts a great marlin at the end of a
line. The request for clarification is potentially endless and had nothing
to do with actually gaining information. Most requesters eventually give up
and thus no decision is made.
The double-talk method. This method is favoured by those with a command of
consultant psychobabble or consultant-speak. The use of management jargon
can easily confuse those not fully conversant in this ambiguous language.
Try: 'But that's against the delayering, re-engineering ethos of this
company' or 'How does that square with empowerment quality-circles?'. The
aim is to confuse the requester.
The denial method. Delay is the deadliest form of denial but also the most
primitive. By denying that a decision has to be made and that a situation
requires change can be very effective. Said with the square-jaw of 'they
shall not pass', the denial technique, if consistent, has been known to be
highly effective.
The 'that's your problem shorty' method. This method is to hand the problem
straight back to the requester. The idea is to make them feel weak, selfish,
even demanding, but this requires skill in developing the appropriate degree
of hauteur. Handing the problem back to the requester needs to make them
feel they should either be adapting to the current situation or making the
decision for themselves.
Some might side with Victor Kiam, who noted that 'procrastination is
opportunity's natural assassin'. But decision-avoiders are more likely to
believe Thurber's 'He who hesitates is often saved'. Don't procrastinate -
learn a decision-avoidance technique today.
