FT  24 JUN 94 / Survey of Norway (14): On the fast track from Lillehammer -
The Winter Olympics may have opened a door for upmarket tourism
Norway has launched an ambitious campaign to encourage tourism, in the hope
of capitalising on the success of the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer earlier
this year. The target is the the big spender.
For 16 days in February, spectacular images of the country's unspoilt nature
appeared on television screens throughout the world. During the games no
fewer than 10,000 articles appeared in US newspapers alone.
No wonder superlatives abound to describe the country's natural beauty, from
the midnight sun in summer to the craggy snow-capped peaks in winter; and it
helped that, during the Olympics, the sun shone every day, melting heart of
almost anyone tuned in to Lillehammer.
Norway believes the country is just the place for people who want to get
back to nature and experience the good, clean, simple life. It certainly is
not a destination for the finicky tourist, who expects the level of service
and luxury found throughout continental Europe; and it is definitely not for
those with a meagre budget.
In 1993, more than 3m foreign tourists spent an estimated NKr16bn in Norway,
or some NKr1bn less than the revenue generated by fish exports.
If Norwegian tourists are taken into account, the spending spree reached
NKr55bn, according to the tourist board (Nortra). It calculates that, if
growth in tourism runs at an annual 6 to 7 per cent, by the year 2000
foreign tourists will contribute NKr23bn annually to the economy.
This year Nortra expects income from tourism to expand by 10 per cent, and
forecasts that no fewer than 4.5m visitors will head for Norway, more than
half of them this summer, and up to 80 per cent of them purely for leisure.
With tourism one of the country's fastest growing industries, many
Norwegians fear that an influx of holidaymakers could harm the environment.
But the foreign ministry's carefully targeted promotional campaign should
calm anxiety that droves of shallow-pocketed travellers will descend on
Norway's rugged mountains, craggy cliffs and myriad fjords.
According to a senior ministry official, the typical tourist visiting Norway
is seeking a 'special' holiday filled with culture, nature and culinary
delights (the country's rich seafood tradition offers everything from arctic
cod to salmon, as well as a wide range of whale dishes).
This tourist is at least 45 years old, travels without children and does not
mind packing wellingtons and rain gear. He or she would not normally
complain about prices, and is likely to be a mid-level executive and a
culture enthusiast.
'This is exactly the group we are targeting,' explained the ministry
spokesman. 'We have no plans to expand our marketing efforts to attract
youth, the masses or others outside this group, because our product could be
destroyed.
'We are not looking for the big numbers, but the big spenders. It's more
interesting for us to attract, say, a German executive who returns to Norway
year after year.'
According to a survey undertaken ahead of the games, the impact of the
Lillehammer Olympics alone - the so-called 'OL effect' - could increase
tourism by an estimated 5 per cent this year.
The foreign ministry began to devise its strategy for capitalising interest
in Norway long before the games ended, and it aims this year to undertake
substantial media campaigns in the US, Germany, the UK and other European
countries.
Last autumn, together with the Norwegian Soccer Association, it embarked on
a promotional campaign that is culminating during the current World Cup,
where a wide cross-section of foreigners has gathered. Plans include a
video-taped Norwegian current affairs programme for television, business
seminars, cultural events and presentations of Norwegian food.
There is also a three-year agenda of high-profile cultural events in the US
and Spain next year, and in Japan in 1997. These include a Norwegian film
festival, in co-operation with the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and
concerts by the Norwegian Chamber Orchestra and Trondheim Soloists.
Norway not only sees an opportunity to boost tourism by exploiting the image
conveyed to the world during the games, it also believes that business and
industry can benefit from the global exposure of the country's involvement
in other recent important events - for example, its role as mediator in the
historic peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organisation.
'There is a link between extensive media coverage and the export of
Norwegian goods and services,' said Mr Jan Egeland, state secretary of the
foreign ministry, who was directly involved in the peace negotiations.
In the three years before the Winter Olympics, tourism rose by 30 per cent,
helped by a surge in interest from Britain, Germany, Holland, and the US.
Yet, for all the efforts in marketing Norway abroad, there is work to be
done at home to remove awkward idiosyncrasies that can frustrate and
disappoint visitors. Nortra admits that there is some way to go in improving
the service-mindedness of Norwegians, to encourage them not to close shops
during holidays and weekends and other peak traffic periods, although
progress has been made in recent years.
Nortra disputes claims that Norwegian prices are on the whole far higher
than elsewhere in Europe, particularly when it comes to accommodation. It
urges visitors, for example, to negotiate prices for hotel rooms,
particularly in Oslo where capacity is normally abundant.
But tourists may be shocked to find that the cost of a half-litre of beer in
a pub can be more than NKr40 (Pounds 3.70) and that for a modest dinner for
two, including a bottle of table wine, they will have to pay at least
NKr700. A large pizza alone can cost up to NKr250.
Prices like these make extended stays for families almost prohibitive; and
many activities, such as concerts, cruises and mountain hiking, are geared
more towards adults than children.
One of the fastest growing segments of the domestic tourist industry is that
of the recreational vehicle traveller. But Norway acknowledges it is little
equipped to accommodate such vehicles; few RV parks exist, and there are few
chemical and waste receptacles for dumping effluent generated by RVs.
Nortra forecasts that between 60,000 and 100,000 RVs will motor around the
country this year, representing a 20 per cent increase over 1993. There are
about 970 inspected and classified camping sites, some of which offer
hook-up facilities for electricity, showers and toilets.
Camping fees range between Dollars 10 to Dollars 22 a night, while cabins
can be rented for Dollars 29 to Dollars 90 a night.
Not unexpectedly, Norwegian travel brochures make little mention of RV
facilities, but focus primarily on sightseeing by rail, boat, bus or car.
But if you drive, expect to pay the highest petrol prices in Europe, running
at about NKr7.50 a litre.
