FT  17 JAN 94 / Gaidar passes the poisoned chalice: The impact of the
decision by Russia's deputy leader
Mr Yegor Gaidar's departure from the future Russian cabinet even before he
had been officially asked to join it casts a cloud over the pace of economic
reform and leaves a question mark over the political direction and
composition of the government.
Mr Gaidar, first deputy prime minister, said he could not remain where he
had too little effect on policy, and where key decisions had been made
without his participation or knowledge. He instanced a draft agreement to
reunify the economies of Russia and Belarus, and the spending of Dollars
500m (Pounds 337.8m) on a new parliament building, 10 times more than is
spent to subsidise Russian culture in a year.
He also said: 'I cannot be at one and the same time in the government and in
opposition to it.' This is a reflection of the pressure put on him by his
colleagues in Russia's Choice, the liberal-conservative party which he heads
and which is the largest in the state duma (lower house). In a meeting of
the leadership a week ago it was suggested the party should no longer take
responsibility for government decisions with which it disagreed and which,
many of Mr Gaidar's colleagues think, helped achieve such modest results in
the December elections.
Leading members of the party had also expressed their reservations about Mr
Gaidar continuing to lead it: Mr Andrei Makarov, the prominent lawyer, said
last Thursday that Mr Gaidar should resign from his party post in favour of
Mr Gennady Burbulis, the former aide to President Boris Yeltsin.
Another resignation announced yesterday was that of Mrs Ella Pamfilova,
social security minister and also a member of Russia's Choice. The only
woman in government, she is a prominent liberal but not a cabinet
heavyweight.
Mr Boris Fyodorov, the deputy minister for finance, said yesterday he would
wait until today or tomorrow before deciding on his future. He repeated he
would not serve in government if Mr Viktor Gerashchenko remained chairman of
the central bank and said that he, too, was deeply concerned that the
agreement with Belarus - 'an agreement which effectively means the union of
two countries' - had been agreed in draft without reference either to the
cabinet or parliament.
However, his position is a complex one. He is, as he firmly said, 'not a
member of Gaidar's team' (and is not close to him). He believes he may be
able to get fundamental changes to the Belarus agreement which would make it
acceptable; and he has yet to talk to Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin on
whether he is to be given a place in the government.
One western economist in Moscow said yesterday that 'he could be
Chernomyrdin's last alibi for the west that reforms are continuing,' and it
might be made attractive for him to continue.
Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy premier for privatisation, is the only member
of the present government to have been confirmed in the next government. He
has said nothing publicly, but is reported to be prepared to stay at least
until spring, in the hope of advancing his privatisation programme. Mr
Gaidar said he should stay if he could - and added the same for Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, the foreign minister and Russia's Choice member.
The man mentioned openly yesterday as a replacement for Mr Gaidar is Mr
Grigory Yavlinsky, the prominent reform economist and leader of the Yabloko
group in the state duma. Mr Gaidar said that, in conversation with Mr
Chernomyrdin, the latter had raised Mr Yavlinsky as a possible replacement.
Mr Yavlinsky has already been wooed by the president's team, with offers of
ministerial posts and committee chairmanships for him and his party
colleagues - all of which have been refused.
A first deputy premiership is, however, on a different plane and may be
harder to refuse. On the other hand, taking responsibility for an economy
still in crisis may be a poisoned chalice he, too, would prefer to pass.
According to the Interfax news agency citing 'informed sources', Mr
Chernomyrdin has already decided that Mr Oleg Soskovets will continue to be
a first deputy premier with an industrial brief; that Mr Alexander
Zaveryukha will retain his responsibilities for agriculture as a deputy
premier; and that Mr Yuri Yarov, presently a deputy premier with diverse
responsibilities, will retain the title in charge of labour, employment,
education, science and other issues. If he retains these three relatively
centrist and even conservative men, only the post of deputy for the economy
remains open to a reformer.
The implications for reform are not clear.
Western economic observers do not believe that all is completely lost. 'The
peaks are never as high and the lows as low as is often thought in the
west,' said one observer. 'It seems radical reform is out now, and I
wouldn't be surprised by wage and price controls, more protectionism,
attempts to create large industrial amalgamations, directed credits and so
on. But reform is a generation long here. This might prolong the process of
getting there for a year or so'.
However, another said 'this could bring a lot of danger, if all the
reformers leave now or soon. It could mean a reassertion of a strategy of
control which would not work and which would be highly inflationary - and
that could seriously destabilise politics'.
