FT  17 SEP 94 / FT Guide for the Serious Investor (20): A bit on the
sideboard - Investing in furniture / A look at the continuing attractions of
antiques
Where have the big City bonuses of recent years gone? Many of the Pounds
250,000-plus windfalls have probably disappeared on such traditional
pleasures as a smart new home, a flash car, and perhaps a boat. But quite a
few merchant bankers and traders have spent up to Pounds 20,000 of their
surplus cash on items of antique furniture.
For many, a Georgian table and chairs, or a Regency bureau, are necessary
items of furniture which provide an intriguing conversation point at dinner
parties. But some will have caught the collecting bug. They will have heard
that good antique furniture is likely to prove a sound investment - much
more so than modern, or reproduction, furniture.
While the art market is only slowly recovering from the recession which hit
it hard in late 1990 and held its grip for almost three years, antique
furniture has retained its attraction, and prices for the finest items have
continued to rise. You can live without pictures, but everyone needs
furniture, and for the very rich antique furniture offers status, grandeur,
visual pleasure, and a steadily appreciating asset.
So in 1993-94 Christie's, which with Sotheby's dominates the world of fine
art auctions, increased its turnover in furniture by 44 per cent, and in
June and July sold furniture throughout Europe to the value of Pounds
16.6m., with 31 items selling for more than Pounds 100,000.
The seriously rich tend to buy French furniture of the period of Louis XIV
and Louis XV: showy, highly decorated,pieces with much gilding and
marquetry. Ideally the items can be confidently attributed to Boulle, the
great 17th century maker, or Riesener, his 18th century successor. Their
finest objects, designed for a royal palace, perhaps Versailles or
Fontainebleau, would cost Pounds 500,000 - or more: a bureau plat (table) by
Boulle, which recently graced the Paris home of Hubert de Givency, the
couturier, sold for almost Pounds 2m in Monaco last year.
To set off the furniture, the mega-rich would buy a French ormolu clock, and
decorative fixtures and fittings like Marie-Antionette's ormolu mounted
porcelain ewers, which sold for Pounds 1m this summer, and the Louis XV
Savonnerie carpet which made a record Pounds 1.32m.
French furniture and works of art of the late 17th and 18th century can be
found in the grandest Fifth Avenue apartments in New York, and in the houses
of the Fauborg St Germain in Paris. In the 19th century the British
aristocracy caught the habit, and much fine French furniture came to the UK
after the French Revolution. But in recent years there has been a change in
taste. The more restrained, more modestly priced, 18th century British
furniture has become widely appreciated. It is still mainly collected by the
British, and a few Americans, but it seems to suit a less flamboyant age.
The bulk of 18th and early 19th century British 'brown furniture' is rather
unexciting and has not risen much in price. But furniture which can be
attributed to an important maker, be it the designs of Chippendale, Adam or
the 19th century Bullock; or furniture which was originally ordered to fill
a great house; or which shows some originality, as in Regency or Gothick
designs, has become very collectable.
The radio and television industrialist, the late Sir Michael Sobell,
furnished his home with both British and continental furniture, but when
Christie's sold off his collection in June it was the British pieces which
did best. A pair of George III gilt lacquered and marquetry side tables sold
to the London dealers Mallett for Pounds 177,500, over three times their
estimate.
The strength of brand names was shown a few weeks later when a pair of
giltwood sofas, which Chippendale had provided for Brocket Hall, sold for
Pounds 254,500, a record for Chippendale sofas, and 12 chairs of Sheraton
design soared to a record Pounds 463,500. Buyers are becoming bolder and
more eclectic. Prices for 18th century pieces seem modest compared with the
Pounds 793,500 which secured a cabinet designed by Charles Rennie
Mackintosh, a record for any item of 20th century furniture. A chair by the
great Scottish arts and crafts stylist went for Pounds 309,500.
Even these prices are low compared with those paid for pictures, jewels, or
even antiquities: furniture has price potential. And the rich now have a
choice. In the past, their interior decorators insisted on French taste.
Then English 18th century became respectable. Now the finest objects of any
era, and of any nation, will not only look good in a suitable room setting,
but should also quietly appreciate in value.
