FT  15 NOV 94 / British Steel lifts payout as profits surge to Pounds 159m:
Analysts raise full-year forecasts as demand in Europe is expected to
strengthen by 5%
British Steel, Europe's second largest steelmaker, is raising its interim
dividend from 0.5p a share to 2p after a surge in half-year pre-tax profits
from Pounds 27m to Pounds 159m.
The company reported its best interim results since 1990/1991 yesterday. Mr
Brian Moffat, chairman and chief executive, said the rise in the dividend
reflected the better results and the more favourable economic outlook.
Prospects for the second half were encouraging, he said, and steel demand in
the UK and continental Europe was expected to grow by about 5 per cent this
year.
The company has indicated to analysts that the interim payout could
represent one-third of its total dividend for the year, pointing to a final
payment of 4p and a total of 6p. That compares with just 2p for 1993/94.
The City had been expecting a big rise in British Steel profits and in the
interim payout, and the shares closed 1p higher last night at 159 1/2 p.
Some analysts raised their profit forecasts. Mr Tony Lancelott at UBS, one
of the British Steel house brokers, lifted his forecast this year from
Pounds 375m to Pounds 400m, while Mr Tim Bennett at Birmingham-based Albert
E. Sharp raised his full-year forecast from Pounds 605m to Pounds 695m.
British Steel is benefiting from a worldwide increase in steel prices as
demand rises and supply is squeezed. Volumes and prices rose about 6 per
cent in the first half.
Mr Moffat said that, in D-Mark terms, continental European steel prices were
still about 10 per cent below 1989 levels, and steelmakers would be looking
to recoup at least that difference.
British Steel's UK plants are working at 95 per cent capacity, even though
UK steel demand is still 25 per cent below its 1989 peak.
Mr Moffat admitted there would be capacity constraints for British Steel as
demand rose, but said he had no regrets about the company's cuts of recent
years, which mainly focused on inefficient capacity.
Mr Moffat said steel demand in developing countries was growing by 5-7 per
cent a year compound, and already accounted for 43 per cent of total steel
demand worldwide.
'Opportunities will present themselves in growing markets,' he said.
British Steel, he said, would continue to press the European Commission to
resolve the subsidies issue, following the partial withdrawal of the
Commission's rescue plan for the industry.
He was encouraged by the refusal of Mr Tim Eggar, UK industry minister, to
endorse the latest proposal to support Eko Stahl, the east German
steelmaker. A rescue plan has to be agreed unanimously by EU industry
ministers.
Lex, Page 20; Details, Page 25
