FT  28 NOV 94 / Tory Eurosceptics switch to long-term strategy
The Conservative party's leading Eurosceptics yesterday shifted their sights
beyond the battle over the European Union budget to the ground on which they
will fight further moves to European integration.
Mr John Major was warned that his survival through the immediate crisis
engulfing the party would not weaken the resolve of a sizeable swathe of
Tory MPs to block the transfer of any new powers to Brussels.
The sceptics appeared increasingly divided about today's vote on higher
British contributions to Brussels. Many acknowledged pressure from their
constituency associations to support the government and several signalled
their intention to fall into line.
But other potential rebels were trying to rescue the rebellion by securing
commitments from at least 15 backbenchers that they would abstain rather
than vote for the EU finance legislation.
The hardliners, said to include Sir Teddy Taylor, Mrs Teresa Gorman and Mr
Tony Marlow, calculate that if the number of abstentions is larger than the
government's present Commons' majority of 14, Mr Major will be forced to
drop the threat to suspend any rebels from the parliamentary party. Their
assessment was flatly rejected by Tory party managers, who insisted that
rebellion on an issue of confidence would give Mr Richard Ryder, the chief
whip, no option but to exclude dissidents from the parliamentary party. On
that basis ministers hope the number of rebels can be squeezed down to half
a dozen or fewer irreconcilables.
The government's tactics have prompted a number of the sceptics to switch
their focus to the government's negotiating stance at the EU's
intergovernmental conference in 1996.
A shift to the right in the political centre of gravity on the Tory back
benches since the Maastricht treaty has strengthened the sceptics' case that
there should be no further transfer of sovereignty.
The central demands were listed yesterday by Mr Norman Lamont, the former
chancellor, who earlier this autumn raised the possibility of British
withdrawal from the union if it moved further along the road to a federal
Europe.
The principal aim is to persuade Mr Major to rule out any British
participation in a single European currency. Failing that the sceptics -
backed by a much bigger group of backbenchers and by some members of the
cabinet - are determined that the prime minister should promise a referendum
on economic and monetary union.
Mr Lamont's call for a government white paper to provide the basis for a
comprehensive debate in the party before the 1996 conference has support
stretching beyond the hard core of Eurosceptics.
In spite of assurances from Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, that
other European governments are not seeking a further drive towards
centralisation, the sceptics want to box in Mr Major well before the
conference.
Some insist that the outcome of the conference, as well as any decision on a
single currency, should be submitted to a referendum. Sir James Goldsmith,
the businessman and Euro-MP, yesterday announced plans to finance a new
political party aimed solely at giving people a say over whether Britain
should join a 'European superstate'.
Sir James, who is already giving financial backing to Euro-sceptics, accused
'fudging' politicians of blocking a referendum as bureaucrats in Brussels
stripped individual countries of their sovereignty to build a single state.
He said on BBC's Breakfast with Frost: 'The people have a right to vote.
They can force a referendum, they can bust the log-jam of the politicians.'
