FT  03 DEC 94 / A-Z of Personal Finance (20): Increases are still running
ahead of RPI - School-fee planning
Planning for school fees can be like shooting at a moving target. Despite
the traditions of many British public schools, none seems yet to have found
a way of capping its costs. Fees inflation has dipped slightly in recent
years, but still runs ahead of retail price inflation.
Various analyses of independent schools in recent years have made it clear
that you get what you pay for. Some of the most expensive boarding schools
still fared well in the FT's 'value-for-money' index of independent schools,
published last month, which compared schools' fees with their exam results,
with Eton finishing fifth. Eton is one of several boarding schools to have
raised its annual fees above Pounds 12,000 for the first time this year.
Multiply this figure by five, for the number of years your child will be at
secondary school, inflate it by around 10 per cent a year, take into account
any pre-prep and prep schools you may be thinking of, and the sum you will
require is at least comparable to the price of a house.
So how can the costs best be met? A recent rather drastic strategy saw the
actor Clive Francis selling his collection of the novelist Graham Greene's
first editions to help pay for his children's education. Greene was a friend
of the actor, and this was a considerable sacrifice.
Similar sacrifices may well be necessary for others, particularly if their
sights are set on a boarding school (day schools tend, on average, to be
only a third the price).
The financial services industry, spotting a growing market, now offers a
range of products specifically tied to school fees. Most of these are just
well-packaged ways of selling standard investment vehicles, such as
with-profits endowment policies or personal equity plans.
However, a few products are tied specifically to school fees, and offer
opportunities which would not be available in other financial plans.
These include educational trusts, offered by life offices, in which funds
can be invested tax-free, provided they are used to pay school fees - no
specific school or pupil need be named. Pay a fixed lump sum, and then the
trust guarantees a certain level of fees through a series of annuities
commencing at a certain point. But this can be expensive, as the guarantees
are costly to fund.
The trusts are tax-efficient to an extent, but advisers suggest they should
only be used for part of fees, and should be restricted to 40 per cent
taxpayers who have used up both their personal income tax allowances and
their annual capital gains tax allowance.
Loans, arranged by the Independent Schools Information Service *, also offer
a better deal than you can find elsewhere. Loans via either the Halifax
Building Society or Citibank are offered under the scheme, and can be drawn
down as and when you need to pay the fees - you do not need to take all the
money up front, as with a mortgage. No stipulations are made over how to
repay, so you are not tied to any particular investment vehicle. This should
also make for more efficient financial planning.
* Independent Schools Information Service: 0171 630-8793
