FT  06 MAY 94 / Tories accused of delaying gas report
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, yesterday accused the government of
delaying publication of a consultative report on the UK gas market for
electoral reasons.
The highly technical Department of Trade and Industry report was sent
yesterday to Mr John Major, the prime minister, and is expected to be
published on Monday.
In an indication of its political sensitivity, the report has been
circulated to senior cabinet ministers for comments on its attempts to
spread the benefits of de-regulation among consumers.
However, industry experts say it will be difficult to ensure that price cuts
are shared equally between large and small residential customers.
Mr Smith signalled that Labour would seek to make maxiumum political capital
out of the report by claiming at Commons question time that 12m people would
face higher gas bills as a result of de-regulation.
In angry exchanges, Mr Smith told the prime minister that 'delaying bad news
until after elections is the sort of behaviour which is bringing the
Conservative party into disrepute'.
Mr Major said there was no evidence to back forecasts of higher prices. He
said the Gas Consumers' Council had accused British Gas of 'scaremongering'
on the issue.
Mr Major said the consultative document would be published shortly and told
Mr Smith: 'You are taking a story and attempting to erect a scare to
frighten vulnerable people.'
He added: 'I suggest you have the grace to wait for that document.' He said
gas prices had fallen by more than 4 per cent in cash terms and 6.5 per cent
in real terms during the past year.
Ms Clare Spottiswoode, director-general of Ofgas, the gas industry
regulator, warned last month that she would publish a revised version of the
consultative document if it was not released by today.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, originally promised
publication early this year.
Issues canvassed in the document include whether prices will rise and how
the poor and elderly will be assured continuing supplies.
