FT  08 AUG 94 / Clashes prompt Cuban police to seal off port
Cuban police have blocked roads leading to Havana's port following a rare
outbreak of civil disorder in which police clashed with anti-government
protesters nearby and in two other parts of the city over the past four
days.
The clashes left two policemen dead and followed the hijacking of ferries by
Cubans fleeing to the US.
The police also increased patrols in the Plaza de Maceo and the Paula
Boulevard in Havana, the capital. This followed the arrest of several people
after supporters and opponents of the government had fought with metal bars
and sticks.
Describing the disorder as a US 'strategy' to entice Cubans to leave the
island, President Fidel Castro threatened to allow thousands of Cubans to
leave for the US. The US government has said Cubans should stay calm and not
be caught by a 'dirty trick' by the Cuban government.
There were indications last night that the US government was considering an
increase in its naval presence in the waters between the Caribbean island
and the Florida peninsula, to deter Cubans fleeing their country.
The clashes, unusual for Cuba in the past 15 years, were followed by what
diplomats in Havana said yesterday was a 'perceptible' increase in political
tension in the city.
It was not clear how the policemen were killed, but President Castro said
they were part of a contingent of officers which had tried to prevent a
group of Cubans from commandeering a ferry and taking it to the US.
A ferry, which was hijacked by Cubans two weeks ago, was intercepted by US
ships and 15 of the 30 people on board asked to be returned home. Another 76
people asked to be returned to Cuba when US boats intercepted another
hijacked ferry on Wednesday, with 32 asking to go to the US.
Mr Castro said at the weekend that his government had provided all
facilities for Cubans to emigrate to the US and that the latest disorder was
part of a US strategy intended to 'create discontent'. The US State
Department asked the Cuban government not to use force against dissidents
but Washington is apparently concerned about a possible flood of refugees.
