FT  28 APR 94 / Major backs Kohl over EU links with eastern Europe
Mr John Major signalled the start of a British drive to improve its alliance
with Germany yesterday based on a joint commitment to forge closer links
between the European Union and central and eastern Europe.
The two countries repaired strains caused by last month's disagreements on
EU voting rights, and Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, damped
expectations of a quick enlargement of the EU.
Both men emphasised the warmth of their personal relationship, with Mr Kohl
at pains to address Mr Major by the familiar 'Du' during a closing joint
press conference yesterday.
Mr Major's emphasis on the two countries' common interest in links with the
former communist bloc marked the opening moves in Britain's campaign to
shape the agenda for the EU's 1996 intergovernmental conference.
In a note of caution about enlargement plans, Mr Kohl said extending the EU
to the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia would take longer than
generally expected.
He said his government had not yet come up with firm plans on restructuring
of the common agricultural policy and the EU's funding for poorer regions to
accompany eastwards enlargement.
Underlining a joint commitment to reduce red tape in Brussels, the two
governments will set up a panel of business leaders to examine whether EU
legislation burdens companies with unnecessary regulations.
The idea, discussed by Mr Michael Heseltine, the UK trade secretary, and Mr
Gunther Rexrodt, the German economics minister, appears to be in its early
stages, as there is no agreement yet on who will take part in the panel.
In an effort to improve knowledge of the two countries' economic policies,
the UK Treasury and the Bonn finance ministry are to start exchanges of
senior officials for three to six-month secondments.
The UK government sees another round of enlargement as the key to shifting
the emphasis of change in the EU from the 'centralising' impulses, which led
to the Maastricht Treaty, to a looser confederation.
Senior British ministers are deeply concerned that the approach of the 1996
conference will open up an irreparable split in the Conservative party
unless they can be shown to be setting a decentralising agenda.
They took heart from Mr Kohl's public commitment to put competitiveness,
employment and deregulation at the centre of the six-month German presidency
of the EU which starts in July. Mr Kohl said he, too, opposed a
'centralised' Europe.
The chancellor denied that his interest in widening Europe to the east meant
he wanted to hold up plans for European monetary union.
Meanwhile, Mr Kohl said he had made no firm decision on who the Bonn
government would back for the succession to Mr Jacques Delors as president
of the European Commission. He refused to rule out the possibility that
Germany will back Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the avowedly federalist Belgian prime
minister.
German support for Mr Dehaene would probably sink the chances of Sir Leon
Brittan, chief EU trade negotiator and senior British commissioner.
Mr Kohl sought to rebut any suggestion that his absence from next month's
D-day celebrations was seen in Bonn as a slight.
Editorial Comment, Page 25
