FT  04 MAY 94 / Castro targets illicit profits
The Cuban government is expected to implement a series of fiscal and
monetary measures in the next six weeks, after a two-day meeting of the
National Assembly.
President Fidel Castro said at the end of the meeting, late on Monday, that
the success of the measures would depend on a new law to curb the country's
thriving black market and allow the confiscation of illicit profits.
Mr Jose Luis Rodrguez, finance minister, outlined a series of proposals but
said they might not be the ones to be adopted and implemented by the
government.
There was no indication of reforms to increase production or build up the
supply side of the economy, but the series of proposals included measures to
mop up excess liquidity, to reduce a growing fiscal deficit and to give the
state increased access to the hard currency circulating on the island.
The government is expected to impose a wider income tax, extending it to
many more than the few thousand Cubans who now pay. It also plans to impose
taxes on incomes earned abroad.
The proposals also envisage increases in bus fares and in water and postal
rates. Subsidies on a range of food and medicines would be cut, leading to
higher prices. Prices for alcohol, cigarettes and petrol for private
vehicles would rise. Free entry to sporting and cultural events would end.
The government would also invite Cubans to put their money on fixed deposit.
The government is contemplating creation of a new currency. This would be
convertible, as well as valid at the special and relatively well-stocked
Cuban shops which accept only hard currency. Cubans would be encouraged to
exchange foreign currency for the new peso, thus putting more of the hard
currency in the country under official control.
The government has been increasingly concerned at the rapid devaluation of
the existing peso. The official rate keeps it at slightly more than a US
dollar, but the street rate is close to Ps100:Dollars 1. The government says
nearly 12bn pesos are in circulation, four times the amount needed.
Many of the fiscal measures outlined would be aimed to reduce the monetary
overhang. This would be difficult, given the rate of monetary creation
implied by the government's own figures - a Ps4.2bn budget deficit last year
and nearly 70 per cent of state enterprises losing money.
Mr Castro said the new measures would not be popular, but that a 'disaster'
would ensue if they were insufficient.
He said that the success of new measures would depend on the crackdown on
black marketeers, who have been doing thriving business, mostly in food,
because of shortages in the shops. The government intends to seize their
property and profits.
Cuba's economy has shrunk by half since the collapse of the Soviet Union,
the Caribbean island's main trading partner. The problems were compounded by
the failure of the Cuban sugar harvest last year and a significant reduction
in foreign earnings.
