FT  29 AUG 94 / Equity Markets: Privatisations primed for centre stage in
Europe - International offerings
As the summer lull ends, governments and companies are preparing to launch
an onslaught of international equity offerings.
'The market will be off and running as soon as September starts - we'll see
issuance back at the levels we had earlier in the year,' says one equity
syndicate manager. The improved tone in most equity markets will improve
prospects for new issues, he says. Moreover, 'there is a lot of
institutional money waiting to be invested, most of which will go into
equities'.
Some traders are less sanguine, arguing that the weight of supply may put
pressure on issuers and lead managers to price deals attractively.
Moreover, politics may cause difficulties in some European countries. Italy
will remain vulnerable to political shocks as the budget debate is resumed,
while Sweden, Austria, France and Germany may be overshadowed by elections.
In Europe, privatisations are expected to take centre stage. 'The corporate
sector will have to be very nimble to manoeuvre around the large
privatisations, which will be the most important transactions,' says Mr
Charles Kirwan-Taylor, managing director of equity capital markets at
Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
However, some say the market may be overestimating the weight of
privatisations in the remaining four months of the year. 'There may not be
as many deals as most people expect - many of the large privatisations could
occur in 1995,' says Mr John Jensen, managing director, equity capital
markets at Merrill Lynch.
In France, the authorities have yet to decide whether their next
privatisation candidate is Renault or the insurer Assurances Generales de
France. If, as many expect, Renault goes first, the government has still
given little indication as to how much of its 80 per cent stake it wants to
sell.
In Germany, dealers are preparing for the Lufthansa sale, co-ordinated by
Dresdner Bank, which is expected to get under way in September.
The outlook is more cloudy in Italy, with dealers speculating over the
timing of the sale of electricity group Enel, and Stet, the
telecommunications group.
Finland's Kemira is expected to sell a Dollars 200m equivalent of shares via
Merrill Lynch, while traders continue to wait for the sale of Sweden's
Nordbanken, which has been held up by political manoeuvrings.
The eastern Mediterranean region, including Greece, Turkey and Israel, is
also expected to see new supply.
In Greece, the privatisation of telecommunications company OTE is likely to
be revived. Although there has been a heavy supply of telecommunication
stocks, OTE and other telecoms names are expected to be warmly received.
'Telecoms stocks are still generally popular - for one, they are
predictable; also, although there are more of them around, most of them
still offer above-average growth prospects,' notes Mr Kirwan-Taylor.
In Turkey, telecommunications group PTT and other utilities are expected to
issue new shares. In Israel, traders will watch for the Bezek, El Al and
Israel Chemical sell-offs.
Asia is likely to produce, among others, a large offering for Indosat, the
Indonesian telecoms group, and a deal for Taiwan's China Steel, both
expected to be led by Merrill Lynch. In India, a rush of new issues could
clog the market, making a successful comeback difficult for VSNL, the large
telecoms group. Its Dollars 1bn privatisation was pulled in May after it
failed to get the desired price. 'There is a risk that there will be so many
small deals that the market doesn't get a chance to consolidate and absorb
big deals,' warns Mr Kirwan-Taylor.
