FT  14 APR 94 / International Company News: St Barbara finds a philosophy
that pays off - The Australian gold producer is expanding production fast
Mr Alan Birchmore, once one of the key figures in Mr Alan Bond's
corporation, had a dream of building a London-based mining finance house.
That dream has faded. Instead he is concentrating his entire attention on St
Barbara Mines, a fast-growing gold producer in his native Australia.
Now 55, Mr Birchmore severed his links with the Bond Corporation before it
imploded. He quit when Bond International Gold was sold to Lac Minerals of
Canada in 1989. He judged then that London, still the mining finance capital
of the world, needed a new mining finance house following the disappearance,
via acquisition, of such groups as Selection Trust and Consolidated Gold
Fields.
His timing could not have been worse. London institutional investors had
watched the value of their investments in a number of small mining companies
launched in the 1980s dwindle away. And the gold price was on a seemingly
never-ending bear track.
Mr Birchmore says it took him about a year to realise that 'the mining
finance house idea was not feasible and that, instead, I had to focus on one
place'.
That one place is a 500,000-acre holding in the Murchison region of the
Western Australian gold fields. This area, not far from the town of
Meekatharra, is where St Barbara Mines is concentrating its activities.
Mr Birchmore is chairman of St Barbara which was established by Mr Ross
Atkins, a gold exploration expert who called Mr Birchmore in to sort out his
group's tangled finances.
Between them Mr Birchmore and Mr Atkins own 58 per cent of St Barbara via
their 100-per-cent-owned Bengal Star company. The next biggest group of
shareholders, with 8 per cent, are based in North America and are clients of
Mr Dick Pomboy, a Greenwich, Connecticut, money manager and enthusiastic
gold bug.
St Barbara stands apart from most other Australian gold companies in that it
owns all its equipment rather than relying on contractors to do the work.
Mr Birchmore says: 'This is an exploration-driven company - we will spend
ADollars 6m (USDollars 4.2m) this year - and having our own equipment means
the lowest possible costs.' That looks a clever policy at present because
the Western Australian gold rush has tied up every drilling rig.
St Barbara owns eight drilling rigs, each with its own driller, field
assistant and geologist, plus its own assay laboratory with the capacity to
handle up to 1,500 samples a day.
Mr Birchmore says: 'All the drills, all the geologists are in the same area,
within 150km of our Bluebird plant, working 10 hours a day. And when you are
drilling on gold fields all the time you are going to get gold.'
That philosophy seems to be paying off. Costs of finding gold are well below
the industry average - only ADollars 13.12 an ounce for the 166,160 ounces
of proven reserves added in the second half of 1993.
And at the end of March St Barbara reported spectacular results from
drilling on its prospect at Cuddingwarra, near Cue, which sent its share
price rocketing.
St Barbara said: 'The results from Cuddingwarra during the 1994 drilling
programme have been robust, in terms of width and grade, indicating the
presence of mineable ore in considerable volumes and at a substantial grade
(quantity of gold per tonne of ore).'
Drilling at Cuddingwarra was initially aimed at finding additional ore to
feed St Barbara's Bluebird mill near Meekatharra but, if the tonnages make
it worthwhile, St Barbara would consider a stand-alone operation.
The company is on track to produce at least 120,000 troy ounces of gold in
the financial year to end-June, making it a large producer by Australian
standards.
The Bluebird plant was recently expanded at a cost of ADollars 6m and, after
initial troubles, output is running at an annual rate of 150,000 ounces.
Reserves at the end of 1993 totalled 1.13m ounces, enough for a mine life of
seven and a half years.
