FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - Finance and Investment
(16): An economic think tank - OECD / Peter Norman expands on the
abbreviation
For years the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) has seemed to be the shrinking violet among the
international bodies set up after the second world war to manage the global
economy.
With its unmemorable name and awkward abbreviation, it has been easy to
dismiss the OECD as a mere talking shop, tucked away in one of the more
desirable residential areas of Paris.
But this grouping of 25 industrialised nations has acquired a new importance
since the end of the cold war marked the triumph of market-based economics
and gave a new spur to globalisation.
It may lack the financial resources of the World Bank or the tough
prescriptive mandate of the International Monetary Fund. Under the
leadership of Jean-Claude Paye, secretary-general since 1984, it has stayed
out of the public eye to an extent that has almost certainly damaged his
chances of reappointment. Other candidates for the top job have been Donald
Johnston, a Canadian politician, and the former UK chancellor Lord Lawson.
But this year's protracted tussle among member states to fill the post of
OECD secretary-general and the queue of applicant countries for membership
are signs that it has an important role to fill in an increasingly
interdependent world economy.
The OECD defies easy definition. It has often been described as the 'club'
of the industrialised nations. But the expression 'think-tank' gives a
better idea of its purpose. It is, in effect, a research institute serving
economic policy makers. More than 75 per cent of its FFr1.6bn (Dollars 290m)
annual budget is expenditure on personnel and pensions for its 1,900 staff.
About a third are professionals, most of whom are economists.
In a world where knowledge is increasingly seen as the key to economic
prosperity, the OECD has a unique role. Its work involves policy analysis,
gathering statistics and organising meetings. The flood of its publications
reflects only part of its endeavours.
The organisation facilitates the exchange and dissemination of knowledge
among policy-makers. Its secretariat provides non-partisan analysis on a
host of issues ranging from macroeconomic policy to trade, agriculture, the
environment, competition law, international investment, export credits,
education, tourism, taxation, migration, health and the impact of
technological change on society.
It is also one of the few places where officials from member countries can
exchange views without the risk of committing themselves or their
governments in negotiations. This helps clear up misunderstandings which
otherwise would bedevil international relations. OECD committees, meeting
away from the public gaze, have proves to be a good forum for stifling some
of the more stupid preoccupations of member governments that could otherwise
poison negotiations among states.
Its analysis has sometimes played an important part in clearing
international policy logjams. For example, its pioneering work on measuring
the cost of farm subsidies helped the agricultural part of the Uruguay Round
of multilateral trade negotiations to a successful conclusion.
Over the past year, the OECD has been in the headlines rather more than
usual. Mexico joined the organisation, the first new member for 20 years.
The way has been opened for separate negotiations on membership with the
Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia. The statement issued after
this year's annual OECD ministerial meeting in June held out the prospect of
South Korea, which already participates in many of the OECD's committees and
activities, becoming a member by the end of 1996.
As a further indication of the organisation's increasingly outward-looking
nature, the OECD agreed in June to step up the flow of economic assistance
to Russia. In particular, it will help develop the legal and institutional
infrastructure that Russia needs for a functioning market economy. It will
offer advice on economic restructuring and reform of Russia's tax and
statistics system as well as carry out a survey of the economy.
The OECD also intends to explore possibilities for co-operation with China
and maintain its policy dialogue with the fast growing, newly
industrialising nations of Asia and Latin America.
Bulgaria, Romania and Slovenia have asked for policy advice and the
organisation may help the Baltic states. Indeed, the organisation's work on
eastern and central Europe has expanded to such an extent that it accounts
for 10 per cent of its activities, as measured by the budget, compared with
nothing four years ago.
These ties testify to the high value placed on the OECD's output. The
organisation's ability to produce high quality economic analysis of value to
its varied member states was further highlighted this year in its 'Jobs
Study'.
Commissioned by governments in 1992, this underscored how dangerous
unemployment is for the future welfare of industrialised societies. To
tackle the crisis of 35m unemployed in the industrialised world, it provided
a compendium of 60 detailed policy recommendations to help member states
cope with economic change.
However, applying the lessons of the 'Jobs Study' in individual member
states will, officials say, be a 'huge piece of work'. It will be a further
strain on already limited resources which are having to cover a wide-ranging
programme of work.
