FT  06 MAY 94 / Austrian trade union bank faces inquiry
The Austrian state prosecutor has launched an investigation into the
country's large trade union bank Bawag - the country's fourth largest bank -
and its chairman, Mr Walter Floettl, following allegations made anonymously
by two of the bank's senior officials.
The officials have alleged that Mr Floettl concealed from the bank's
supervisory board high-risk trading activities undertaken by his son with
money from the bank and that he evaded taxes. The prosecutor's inquiries
follow another investigation launched just over a week ago by the finance
ministry after it was alleged that Mr Floettl had authorised loans worth
almost Sch21bn (Pounds 1.16bn) to Caribbean-based offshore companies run by
his son Wolfgang. The latter Floettl is said by the finance ministry to have
used the money for high-risk speculative financial operations on the
international debt market. The loans were not clearly disclosed in the
bank's annual report, say the authorities. Last Friday, Mr Anton Stanzel,
who is responsible for bank supervision at the finance ministry, said that
nothing had been found during the ministry's own investigation to suggest
criminal activity by the Floettls and Bawag (Bank fur Arbeit und
Wirtschaft).
Nevertheless, the ministry decided that further investigations were needed
to assess the risk and propriety of the transactions.
'There is no evidence of criminal activity, but investigations continue to
check that (all transactions) were done according to the banking act,' Mr
Stanzel said this week. 'There were very high risks involved,' he said. The
ministry's investigations are expected to be completed by the end of the
month.
The financial authorities are particularly concerned that the bank's
standing should not be damaged by the affair. The 70-year-old Mr Floettl has
strongly rejected any suggestions of impropriety on his or his son's part,
though he admitted the transactions that had taken place for nearly six
years were unconventional.
The bank, however, had not lost any money as a result, and he promised all
such positions would be closed by the end of this month, and the business
ended.
Mr Stanzel, said on Wednesday that about half of the money had been
returned, and he hoped the remaining positions could be closed without loss.
'We'll sleep better if this (the rest of the money) comes back,' Mr Stanzel
said. Ironically, until now the bank, with its traditional strong ties to
the unions and the social democrats, was regarded as one of the most
successful and conservatively run banks in Austria.
The social democrats, who pride themselves on their ability to be better
managers than their conservative rivals, now face damaging publicity which
comes only a few months before general elections due in October.
