FT  26 MAR 94 / Work, protest and affray: The causes of French youth unrest
Of course, I am angry,' says Martin, a student at Toulouse university. 'This
is the first time I have been on demonstrations. I am going to go on
protesting until the government listens.'
Yesterday it was Martin's Parisian colleagues' turn to show their anger at
the Balladur government's new law which allows young apprentices to be paid
less than the national minimum wage. The march, by more than 30,000 young
people in the capital, passed off without serious incident, because of - or
despite - the presence of 2,500 police in riot gear and another 800 in plain
clothes.
But in contrast to the largely Paris-based student uprising in May 1968  - a
possible parallel in everyone's mind - the protest marches over the past
four weeks against the youth wages law have been nationwide, touching small
towns as well as provincial cities such as Lyons and Nantes, where violent
clashes have continued all week.
When clashes erupted on March 17, for instance, the eyes of the France's
Paris-centric media were on the 30,000 students and assorted union members
who demonstrated in the capital; not surprisingly, because some shop windows
were smashed, cars burnt and youths arrested. But the final tally for the
day showed that no fewer than 200,000 protestors had turned out in the
provinces. This week, in the south-western town of St Gaudens, about 100
secondary school pupils demonstrated behind a banner reading 'Oppression of
Schools = Explosion'.
French students and their government may be listening to one another, but
each is certainly not understanding what the other is saying. For his part,
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur seems baffled by what is going on. He
insists that his wage reform is 'for the young, not against them'. He says
it is aimed at making the 25 per cent without jobs more employable.
It is true that he has somewhat watered down the February 24 decree. This
lumped all youth - those with and without higher education diplomas -
together as eligible for 'contrats d'insertion professionelle' (CIP), under
which they would be paid 80 per cent of the minimum wage, known by the
acronym Smic, in return for training provided by employers. On March 3, Mr
Balladur agreed that diploma-holders should get at least the Smic or 80 per
cent of any wage pact agreed within an industry sector. But three weeks
later, students still do not believe his repeated assurances that he is not
trying to 'devalue' their diplomas. 'I believe in your good faith,' he said
in an open letter in the nation's youth in the Liberation newspaper last
week, 'please believe in mine.' They don't.
So, Mr Balladur is now doing what he has rarely done over his first prime
ministerial year - standing firm. One reason is precisely that he knows he
must correct his reputation for caving in to pressure, particularly when, as
so often in France, the challenge comes from the streets. But a further
motivation is his belief that French youth cannot reasonably ask him to make
any further concessions.
Unless the students protests soon peter out with the advent of the Easter
holidays and spring sunshine, the ingredients are in place for a crisis that
could knock foreign confidence in the French economy and currency. Mr
Balladur himself seems almost fatalistic about this prospect, if his recent
comments about his political mentor, Georges Pompidou, are a guide. Mr
Balladur said he learnt from Mr Pompidou, for whom he worked in 1968, that
'sometimes it is necessary to let things go to boiling point (paroxysme)
before they can get back to normal'.
But Mr Balladur's ministers and those in his private office in the Matignon
have claimed publicly that they detect 'political manipulation' behind the
student protests. This may merely be paranoia. But the Socialist and
Communist opposition parties, as well as the unions, have made clear that
they want the repeal of the CIP. This has disappointed any hopes Mr Balladur
may have had that his public show of consulting the unions over the past
year would pay dividends in his hour of need.
More irritating for the Matignon is the public silence on the part of the
Patronat employers federation, whose only private comment has been to say
that few of its members will actually use the CIP. Even the few individual
employers, such as Mr Claude Bebear of the AXA insurance group, who back the
broad principles behind the CIP measure, also deplore its clumsy
presentation.
This theme of government clumsiness has been taken up, to still more
damaging effect, by virtually all the party and parliamentary leaders of the
ruling conservative majority who do not hold ministerial office. They
include Mr Valery Giscard d'Estaing, the leader of the centre-right UDF, and
 -ever with an eye on his forthcoming battle with Mr Balladur for the
presidential nomination - Mr Jacques Chirac, leader of the RPR gaullists.
Yet, the more convincing explanation for the crisis lies not in conspiracy,
but in a variant of Mr Balladur's favourite theme that France is a 'societe
bloque'. The most obvious blockage is the inability of so many young to
advance from school or university into gainful employment.
Most economists agreed with Mr Balladur's diagnosis that the Smic has helped
price lesser-skilled, and inevitably younger, workers out of the job market.
But where he is widely judged to have gone wrong is in discouraging students
from advancing themselves through higher education. 'Why should young people
be paid less to do the same job as others with the same qualifications?'
asks Mr Cyril Wone at Paul Sabatier university in Toulouse.
Such sentiments are widespread. 'People of our generation are finding it
harder than ever to find a job, whatever their level of qualification,' says
a student at the Sorbonne. 'There is a growing feeling that the future is
bleak.'
Paradoxically, the main organisers of the student protest come from a
section that has felt its future was not so bleak, at least not until Mr
Balladur stepped in.
This segment comes from the instituts universitares de technologie (IUTs),
set up in the 1960s inside universities, and the sections de techniciens
superieurs (STSs), set up to prepare secondary school students for technical
baccalaureats. These practical institutions, as their names suggest, have
had far more success in placing their diploma-holders in the job market than
older universities like the Sorbonne, with more generalist courses.
It is this technical 'aristocracy' that is most angry at Mr Balladur's
attempt to level youth wages downwards. It was the IUT in Paris' wealthy
16th arrondissement that organised the first February demo against the CIP,
but the rapid recent spread of IUTs and STSs around the country accounts for
the widespread nature of the student revolt.
Perhaps the most general blockage lies in France's political institutions,
which tend to thwart the sort of open debate that might have settled the
youth wage row in parliament and not in the street. Because France has a
weak parliament - and inside it a left-wing opposition that is numerically
small - the real debate about the CIP took place, not when the enabling law
passed the National Assembly last October, but months later with the
publication of the implementing decree. Moreover, what real opposition Mr
Balladur faces is to be found within his own massive conservative majority.
But in order to maintain the pretence of conservative unity, internal debate
 -of the kind that might have thrashed out problems with the CIP - is often
hushed up.
To compensate for this lack of political debate, Mr Balladur has reached
back to the habit of consulting, at least formally, with the trades unions -
a tactic he learnt under Pompidou. But time has moved on. Union presidents
are no longer the power, except in the state sector, that they were 25 years
ago. Today, more than before they are following, rather than leading, the
students. Among the latter steam has built up. And when that happens in a
societe bloque, there is always the danger of explosion.
