FT  05 AUG 94 / World Trade News: Mercosur four limp to customs union
signing - Bruising talks on the South American trade pact
The leaders of the four South American countries in the Mercosur trade pact
will today put their names to an agreement removing the remaining obstacles
to the implementation of a customs union on January 1 next year.
Officials have worked all week to iron out the sometimes daunting
differences between them in time for the summit conference in Buenos Aires
today. Although it is only three years since the presidents of Argentina,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay signed a treaty calling for the creation of a
common market by January 1995, reaching this objective has proved a long and
arduous undertaking.
More than once, negotiators threatened to derail the talks, with delegations
threatening to walk out unless their demands were met. When Uruguay
unexpectedly demanded more trade concessions from its partners this week, Mr
Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's outspoken economy minister, retorted: 'Mercosur
is Argentina and Brazil. Mercosur will happen with or without Uruguay.'
The four have failed to attain the aims stated in 1991 - when they signed
the original treaty - of creating a single market in which goods, capital
and people circulate freely. The inability to harmonise their chaotic
economies or compromise over trade and industrial policy has forced them to
adopt less ambitious objectives.
Presidents Carlos Menem of Argentina, Itamar Franco of Brazil, Juan Carlos
Wasmosy of Paraguay and Luis Lacalle of Uruguay will today agree to a
mechanism in which all tariff barriers to about 85 per cent of their trade
will be fully lifted on January 1. They will also adopt a common tariff
structure on imports from outside the region for these products.
Argentina and Brazil - which together account for 90 per cent of Mercosur's
gross domestic product and whose trade with each other more than doubled
between 1991 and 1993 from Dollars 3.02bn to Dollars 6.36bn - could not
agree on a similar arrangement for a range of high technology goods, mainly
computers, telecommunications equipment and capital goods. They agreed more
than a year ago that these goods - which account for 15 per cent of their
trade - would receive separate treatment.
However, they could not agree on how this would work. Argentina has
abandoned attempts to build a high-technology industry behind tariff walls.
Instead, it is encouraging its industries to import advanced equipment from
the US and Japan by abolishing all import duties. The Brazilians have a
larger intermediate-technology sector which they wish to build up, and
refused to lower tariffs significantly.
In the end, Argentina has had to bow to the Brazilians' superior bargaining
power and accepted a deal in which high-technology goods are to receive
tariff protection of 14-16 per cent up to 2005. Tariffs for other products
will range from 0 to 20 per cent.
Argentina realises that Brazil holds the key to Mercosur's future. It is by
far the largest economy in the region. Access to its large market is vital
for Argentina's manufacturing industry to gain economies of scale it needs
to survive in international markets. For 60 years, industry has gradually
atrophied since it was sealed off from international competition by trade
barriers.
In exchange, Argentina is understood to have gained concessions from Brazil
which is granting exceptions from Mercosur's free trade rules for large
parts of Argentina's manufacturing industry. Thus, Argentina's struggling
steel, paper, textile, sugar and petrochemicals industries will all be
protected from the full onslaught of larger and more efficient Brazilian
competition. Brazilian imports will receive the same treatment as imports
from outside the Mercosur area for five years.
However, progress over integration has come faster than many had expected.
For two years, headway was nearly impossible as Argentina adopted aggressive
free market policies to stabilise its economy. This unleashed rapid growth
while Brazil sank into hyperinflation and economic depression.
Argentina imposed import restrictions to reduce Brazil's rising trade
surplus. President Menem began flirting with the possibility of joining the
North American Free Trade Agreement. US President Bill Clinton politely
turned him down.
This, plus Brazil's decision to reduce its trade surplus with Argentina by
buying crude oil and wheat, its advance in trade liberalisation and apparent
conversion to free market economics have all cleared the air. Relations
which last year were tense, have relaxed, in spite of personal tension
between Mr Menem and Mr Franco.
The four have also agreed on a controversial accord over the treatment of
free trade zones. Argentina and Brazil have imposed an apparently one-sided
settlement on Paraguay and Uruguay in which their zones will not receive the
same privileges as those in Argentina and Brazil.
This has angered Paraguay and Uruguay, which as junior partners have always
felt at the mercy of the other two. However, as Mr Cavallo crudely reminded
Uruguay, they have little choice but to swallow their pride and accept their
neighbours' decisions.
