FT  05 SEP 94 / Letters to the Editor: Legislation has clearly proved to be
solution to cutting credit periods
Sir, You contend that countries with extensive legislation on late payment
typically have longer credit periods than in the UK ('Venturing capital',
August 25). You are right in one case - France has credit periods averaging
around 56 days compared with 31 in the UK. However, France has only recently
introduced statutory interest and other measures and long credit times are
more a factor of French culture than anything else. In all other cases, you
are wrong. Germany, The Netherlands, Sweden, Norway and Finland, all of
which have had extensive legislation against late payment for some years,
have shorter credit periods than in the UK, with the lowest being 20 days in
Germany. This has been confirmed by research from the Commission itself and
many other organisations, including Intrum Justitia.
You say payment periods in these countries have lengthened recently. True,
they lengthened by a few days due to the European recession, but in several
countries they are now improving again. Also, these few days one way or
another do not change the fact that all these countries have much lower late
payment periods than in UK, in some cases one third the length - payments in
Sweden are on average seven days late compared with 23 days late in UK.
Voluntary measures encouraging companies to pay on time are what you suggest
to deal with the serious problem of late payment. You neglect to mention,
however, that such voluntary measures have been tried in several different
forms by the Confederation of British Industry and the government for the
last seven or eight years with absolutely zero effect.
It appears very clear to me and obviously the European Commission, along
with almost every other western European government, that legislation is the
only solution. All the facts prove that where legislation has been
implemented it has improved the situation over the medium to long term. It
is therefore beyond me and many others why the British government should
insist on continuing with purely voluntary schemes. It seems strange that
the Financial Times should take the same view.
Bo Goranson,
chairman, Intrum Justitia,
Strawinskylaan 1013,
NL-1077 XX Amsterdam,
Netherlands
