FT  29 NOV 94 / International Company News: Ford returns to Samcor with 45%
stake
Ford of the US, the world's second largest vehicle maker, is re-entering the
South African market through the purchase of a 45 per cent stake in South
African Motor Corporation (Samcor).
Ford divested its equity interest in Samcor in late 1987 as part of a series
of withdrawals by US companies from South Africa in response to pressure
from anti-apartheid groups.
Samcor assembles Ford vehicles and some Mazda and Mitsubishi models. Ford
will hold an equal stake with Anglo-American Industrial Corporation, buying
31 per cent of Samcor's equity from Amic and a further 14 per cent from the
Samcor Employees Trust. This will leave AMIC and Ford both holding 45 per
cent with the remaining 10 per cent staying in the hands of the trust.
Mr Jim Miller, director of eastern Europe and export operations for Ford of
Europe, is to become Samcor group managing director and chief executive.
The deal, which has been expected for several months, in effect marks a
return to the situation that existed prior to Ford's disinvestment from
South Africa.
Samcor was formed in 1985 as a joint venture between Ford South Africa,
which had been founded by Ford Canada in 1933, and Anglo-American's existing
automotive interests.
Mr Wayne Booker, Ford executive vice-president of international automotive
operations, said he hoped the US group's direct involvement would prove to
be a spur to improved production and new export initiatives by Samcor.
'When I say Ford will re-establish its presence in South Africa, I mean it,'
he said. 'This is not only an investment. Our action symbolises Ford's
commitment to the South African market and the success of Samcor.'
Mr Booker declined to disclose the financing of the transaction, saying only
that it was a combination of new cash, new equipment and product investment.
It was revealed, however, that the Employees Trust had received R50m
(Dollars 14.1m) for the 14 per cent of Samcor equity it had sold to Ford.
Samcor is currently in fourth place among South Africa's seven main vehicle
makers. It has monthly sales of around 2,200 vehicles, trailing market
leaders Toyota, Volkswagen and Nissan, but ahead of Mercedes-Benz, Delta
(which manufactures Opel models) and BMW.
South African producers currently manufacture about 320,000 units a year, of
which passenger cars account for just over two-thirds. Almost all production
is for the local market.
The industry is under intense pressure, however, as South Africa begins to
dismantle its high tariffs on imported motor vehicles, currently about 100
per cent, in line with Gatt requirements. Manufacturers, organised labour
and the government are in negotiations to find an acceptable schedule for
phasing out most of the industry's protection over the next eight years.
