FT  31 AUG 94 / Markets Report: Currencies in tight range
Currencies yesterday moved in fairly narrow ranges ahead of tomorrow's
Bundesbank council meeting and the release of key US labour data on Friday,
writes Philip Gawith.
There was little fresh news for the market to chew on, aside from some US
data which had little impact on the dollar. The US currency ended in London
at DM1.5805, slightly down from Monday's close of DM1.5831. Against the yen
it finished at Y99.665 from Y100.225. In New York it closed at DM1.5765 and
Y99.615.
In Europe, the D-Mark was generally weaker as it suffered at the hands of
the firmer dollar. Markets were surprised by the decision of four French
commercial banks to lift interest rates and this saw the franc slip to
FFr3.4275 per D-Mark yesterday evening from a London close of FFr3.4223.
Sterling had an uneventful day, holding on to most of the gains made on
Monday as it rose in tandem with the dollar. The trade weighted sterling
index finished at 79 after Monday's 78.9.
The dollar showed little reaction to news of US July home sales and consumer
confidence figures for August.
Although the dollar is firmer after the recent rally, few analysts are
confident that it has turned the corner.
Mr Tony Norfield, UK treasury economist at ABN-Amro Bank in London, said the
reasoning cited for the dollar's recent rally - that it was following the
bond market, which improved on weaker than expected second-quarter GDP
figures - was flimsy.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank in London, said the dollar's
recovery on Friday had been mostly interbank driven, and had also been
related to the exercise of various options contracts.
He added: 'The upside movement we have seen in the US dollar does not look
sustainable. Fund managers are still broadly neutrally positioned and there
is no great incentive to go long dollars at the moment. Although the worst
for the dollar is certainly over, those who are calling for a big move up
will not get much of a hearing from financial institutions.'
Hopes of a breakthrough in US-Japan trade framework talks have supported the
dollar in recent days. But Mr Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High
Frequency Economics in New York, commented: 'It seems to us that Japan is
turning more pugnacious than compliant with US trade demands.'
Over the weekend, Japanese officials leaked a report that challenges the
US's strong moral line on government procurement. The report claims that
although Japan's sourcing of offshore contractors only amounts to 0.6 per
cent of public sector spending allocated, this is 10 times the percentage
the US spends.
Other observers, however, attach more significance to the dollar rally. Mr
Mike Norman, publisher of the Geneva based Economic Contrarian Update,
argues that 'Friday's dollar move was the start of a major turnround in the
currency'.
He said the market is short of dollars to the extent that there is
'absolutely no more firepower left on the downside'. The flip side of the
argument is that the short positions in the market 'will be providing the
buying power to move the dollar up'.
Analysts said the decision by four French banks to raise their base rates to
7.95 per cent from 7.70 per cent was a cry of despair at their increased
funding costs. Mr Avinash Persaud, currency strategist at JP Morgan in
Europe, said that while the move had market significance, it did not have
policy significance. The Bank of France is not expected to respond.
He predicted, however, that interest rates across the yield curve were
likely to rise. This could have a dampening effect on French bond and equity
markets, and hence on the franc. Mr Persaud predicted that the franc would
weaken back to the FFr3.43 level against the D-Mark.
Analysts noted that if the decision by the French translates into
generalised money market volatility in Europe, this could have the effect of
supporting the D-Mark.
PIBOR futures lost about 15 basis points after the banks made their
announcement.
Traders said the French rate move had a negative effect on the short
sterling market, which had otherwise traded quite firmly in recent days.
Investors, however, remain focused on the September 7 monthly monetary
meeting, which could herald a tightening of UK monetary policy.
Mr Richard Phillips, analyst at broker GNI, said two factors had supported
short sterling in recent days: the 'convergence' factor, and improved
psychology in the market.
The former is the fact that the price of the September short sterling
contract must converge on the cash price of three-month money as the expiry
date - September 21 - approaches. Currently, three-month money at 5 7/16
compares with the September contract discounting an interest rate of about
5.75 per cent.
The Bank of England supplied UK money markets with Pounds 474m liquidity, at
established rates, after forecasting a Pounds 450m shortage.
