FT  05 FEB 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Shelling out on growth - Partners
faced with losing Pounds 1m find their fortune in the garden
When Derek Spice and Jane Hanckel moved to Afton Manor on the Isle of Wight
in 1988, they needed to make money. They were in the process of losing more
than Pounds 1m - Pounds 200,000 on their former home in Virginia Water,
Pounds 500,000 at Lloyd's where Spice was a Name, and Pounds 500,000 in
shares in a motor-accessories company from which he resigned when it went
public in 1986. It went into liquidation in 1991.
At Afton Manor they offered bed and breakfast, opened a camp site and
imported a lorryload of cocoa shell as a mulch for their own and other
gardens.
B &amp; B meant breakfasts at 7am, and campers kept turning up at any time,
including weekends.
This experience focused their minds: 'We decided that the business with the
least aggro and most potential was cocoa shell,' said Hanckel.
They called the shell Sunshine of Africa and it has proved a winner: it was
made a 'best buy' in a Which? survey which compared it with garden mulches
based on tree bark, and it was used last February in a BBC gardening
programme. The partners expect to sell more than Pounds 1m-worth in their
current year.
The shells used are stripped from cocoa beans during the cocoa-making
process. When applied to the garden, they preserve moisture in the soil and,
when they break down, supply plant nutrients.
Cocoa makers normally sell the shell ground up for cattle food but gardens
need it to be as undamaged as possible. Unbroken shell takes up four times
the volume and so needs more lorries to move it - and it can require cocoa
factories to amend their manufacturing processes to avoid damage.
Spice and Hanckel financed the business themselves by selling their Porsche
and some life assurance policies. A picture of the Porsche hangs
nostalgically in their office.
The pair moved to the Isle of Wight because they liked the sense of
community: 'People were here because they wanted to be here. We had been
living near the M25 where, not surprisingly, we had the feeling people were
just going round in circles,' said Spice.
He had always used cocoa shell on his own garden, following the advice of
his father, a former managing director of Gill and Duffus, commodity
traders. After leaving Gill and Duffus, Spice's father had set up WG Spice
and Co, a cocoa processor at Hook in Hampshire, and Spice worked there for a
while. And so Spice initially went to Hook for cocoa shell supplies.
In February 1989 he and Hanckel advertised their produce, offering a minimum
of two 140-litre bags at Pounds 5 a bag and the Isle of Wight proved an
ideal test market. Gardeners used it and then their neighbours wanted it
too. Soon, Ventnor Botanic Gardens and the horticultural department at the
island's college became customers.
In a year, the partners sold 1,500 bags, five lorryloads. Articulated
lorries visited Afton Manor and unloaded the shell on the tennis court where
the gardener and two helpers shovelled it into sacks.
The next step was to sell Sunshine of Africa through garden centres. They
designed their own waterproof bags and a display stand, which helped Spice
to persuade four garden centres to order 150 bags on his first day of
selling.
They soon had deals with garden centres in all the main urban areas and by
March 1992 were advertising Sunshine of Africa nationally.
One difficulty was to match sales to the supply of cocoa shell: garden
centres like to place orders in September and take delivery and make payment
the following spring. The company now takes out bank loans, secured against
business assets, to help bridge this gap.
Spice and Hanckel lost an important supplier when the WG Spice plant at Hook
ceased production. A replacement supply was found when Nestle, the food and
drink group, agreed to sell the shell from a new processing unit at York.
The company expects to sell Pounds 1.6m-worth of cocoa shell in the year to
July, against Pounds 650,000 in the last year, and aims for a net profit of
between 10 and 12 per cent.
Shell prices have risen but the volume of business makes up for smaller
margins. The price in a garden centre is currently Pounds 9.99 to Pounds
12.50 for a 120-litre bag. It is also sold in three smaller sizes.
Other companies now supply shell for British gardens but Spice and Hanckel
were prepared for this, which is why they have sold Sunshine of Africa as a
brand, not cocoa shell as a commodity. With 90 per cent of the market, they
also expect interest from the bigger companies whose mulches were beaten
into second place in the Which? survey.
Their next plan is to offer licences and know-how to other countries: quite
a big step for a product that was test-marketed in the gardens of the Isle
of Wight.
Sunshine of Africa (UK) Ltd, Afton Manor, Freshwater, Isle of Wight PO40 9TW
(Tel: 0983-754575)
