FT  15 NOV 94 / Survey of Computers in Finance (4): Pushing back to
profitability - Finance industry attitudes are changing fast, says Nick
Temple of IBM
Nick Temple's translation earlier this year from chief executive of
International Business Machine's UK subsidiary to general manager with
responsibility for the company's business with the European financial
community is indicative of the changes reshaping the world's largest
computer company.
Mr Temple, 46, has been largely credited with pushing through measures which
have put the UK operation back on the path to profitability after two years
of heavy losses. Now he has returned to the business sector - the finance
industry - where he built his reputation in the 1980s as a tough,
no-nonsense manager with an acute understanding of the industry's direction.
It is an area of critical importance to IBM. Europe is its largest market
and the financial institutions among its largest customers.
The sector is in a state of profound change, he says - 'it would be wrong to
say the finance industry is coming out of recession, but its attitude is
starting to change very significantly. Priorities are fundamentally
different from only a year ago.
'Last year, heads of financial institutions were concerned about the
management of change, controlling costs and finding ways to get the maximum
benefits from their investment in information technology. Today, while the
management of change is high on the list, the real concern is how to
mobilise new technology to combat competition. Competition is starting to
become a real threat.'
The IBM mainframe computer remains the workhorse of finance industry data
processing, but the computer giant can no longer dictate its customers'
computing strategy as it did in the past.
Mr Temple prefers to talk about collaboration, partnerships and teamwork.
Some of his ideas are focused on the technological horizons: 'We are
planning to form partnerships with some of our customers to develop radical
thoughts about ways of working in the future.'
The 'information superhighway,' the convergence of computing and telecoms to
provide interactive multimedia services to the office and the home, looms
large in his thoughts. 'Suppose you were setting up an electronic bank from
scratch and you were defining an agent (a piece of software that you could
instruct to carry out your banking for you) on the information superhighway,
what would it be, how would it look and how would you go about doing it?
'This would be quite different from conventional ideas of home banking which
are simply extensions of what goes on in the bank branch.' He believes that
to make home banking attractive for customers who may be intimidated by
technology it will be necessary to combine it with other services - say,
home shopping.
Developments of this kind will have their own consequences. Conventional
retailers will have to work harder to make shopping a pleasure - or their
customers will use the superhighway in preference to physical shops.
Most of Mr Temple's attention, however, is directed towards more immediate
issues. He is a powerful advocate of improvements in risk management,
pointing out that the speed at which financial transactions are carried out
and transmitted over networks could and has led to fraud and disaster - 'if
it's not applied in the right way, the technology becomes a liability and
not an enabler.'
And he is concerned about the delays which most financial institutions face
in creating software to meet new business needs - 'data processing
departments in financial institutions have become unresponsive to business
needs. They seem less attached to the business imperatives. What we have to
do is construct building blocks, using object-oriented technology, from
which we can assemble solutions quickly.'
Object-orientation, a new fashion in software development, involves the
construction of storable, re-usable software modules. An obvious idea,
perhaps, but one whose time has come.
Mr Temple says IBM is now moving staff to work with customers on the
development of the building blocks. A key element is the establishment of a
design standard (architecture) for applications in the financial services
area which will mean that different applications will work comfortably
together - 'Financial Applications Architecture is a data and process
architecture. We have committed ourselves to developing applications using
this architecture, but we are also providing bridges into other environments
so it has to be fairly open.'
A number of software development centres are being established in
conjunction with large customers to ensure a good fit between the
applications under development.
Since taking over his new job in May, Mr Temple has been busy establishing
the principles of how the new IBM will operate internationally. The essence
of the plan is to be able to operate globally and seamlessly - 'if an
Italian customer wants something done in Australia, we will be able to do it
without cutting across national sensitivities,' he says.
The idea is to get rid of the stultifying layers of bureaucracy which have
contributed to IBM's corporate sluggishness in recent years.
While in the past three years Mr Temple has been chiefly concerned with
curing IBM's structural faults, he has some telling criticisms of the way
his customers do business.
'I think many of the big financial institutions are concerned about a lack
of connection with their customers. Not the big corporate bankers - they
have often excellent relationships with large clients. But retail banks have
poor relationships with their customers and, as a result, customer
satisfaction is poor.'
He believes that banks, in spite of years of investment in technology, have
not created effective customer information systems.
'If you walk into your bank as a gold star customer and you are asked to
fill in a form, then something is wrong,' he suggests.
'Retail banks have a poor understanding of which parts of the business make
money and which do not. If they don't understand the profitability of each
transaction, how are they going to manage customer loyalty?'
