FT  04 MAR 94 / Fund managers watch S African cliff-hanger with bated
breath: South Africa is on the threshold of an investment 'third wave'
A select group of visitors to South Africa with around half a billion
dollars to invest are following the country's nail-biting political
negotiations with particular interest.
They are 28 fund managers from some of the most prominent European and North
American investment institutions on a week long tour. They will be seeking
the answer to one question above all else: what are the prospects for a
stable, post-apartheid South Africa?
Signs are that the representatives from New York's Lazard Freres and Merrill
Lynch Asset Management, London's IDC International and Toronto's Goodman &amp;
Co, among others, have liked what they have heard from minister of finance
Derek Keys, the ANC's economics department, the Reserve Bank, and
businessmen such as Mr Meyer Kahn, chairman of South African Breweries
(SAB), and Mr Hans Smith, managing director of the steel-maker Iscor.
Mr Richard Jesse, at stockbrokers Martin &amp; Co, which arranged the visit,
says there is no doubt that even the most cautious foreign investors 'like
the concept' of investing in South Africa.
A successful outcome to the political negotiations currently under way would
remove much of the remaining unease about the country's investment risk. But
with elections so close, many will take the attitude that waiting a few
weeks more before committing funds 'can do no harm when you have been
waiting for 50 years'.
When they do take the plunge, South Africa is likely to see indirect foreign
investment which will dwarf the sums spent on shares since the lifting of
sanctions in September which saw records broken on the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange.
'The JSE has seen hundreds of millions of rands of foreign money. Now it
will see hundreds of millions of dollars,' says Mr Jesse.
The change in sentiment is dramatic (only 10 companies accepted Martin &amp;
Co's last invitation for a fund managers' visit in October), and has been
fuelled by the feverish interest in emerging markets.
Mr Miles Moreland of the London-based Blakeney Management, which specialises
in discovering 'new' markets, says South Africa is on the threshold of a
third wave of offshore share buying.
The first wave saw hedge funds and the 'more nimble, unrestricted' investors
buy South African shares for much of 1993, and move quickly to take profits
this year.
Then came the specialist Africa funds such as Morgan Stanley's Dollars 60m
(Pounds 33.3m) Africa Investment Fund, and Alliance Capital Management's
Dollars 100m Southern African Fund, listed on Wall Street on Friday.
Mr Moreland says the more cautious global investors, the large mutual and
pension funds, are about to follow. This comes about as much the result of
growing confidence in a growing South African economy as the JSE's
forthcoming inclusion in the International Finance Corporation's emerging
market index and Morgan Stanley International's developing market index.
The JSE in one of the world's largest stock markets by capitalisation (about
Dollars 170bn) but is under-represented in emerging market portfolios.
When the JSE is added to indices by which the performance of share
portfolios are judged, emerging market fund managers will have to redirect
some of the Dollars 8bn assets they manage to South Africa to ensure they
have even exposure to a market which represents at least 10 per cent of the
value of all emerging markets.
Ms Maria Ramos, an ANC economist, says any increase in indirect investment
is welcome, as its improves market liquidity and economic confidence. That
will be vital if a new government is to raise new funds on international
capital markets. But she points out it does not create jobs.
Direct foreign investment will be critical if the estimated 6m unemployed
South Africans are to find work. Job creation has risen swiftly this year to
the top of the agenda at the National Economic Forum, which links
government, business and trade unions.
However, as high-profile as the announcement of the return of Industrial
Business Machines (IBM), Kodak and Reebok have been, the sums involved with
the companies' reinvestment are small.
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Opic), the US government agency
which helps US businesses invest abroad, completed a 10-day visit on Tuesday
by announcing a Dollars 75m equity investment fund aimed at black business,
and small business partners.
Mr Richard Morningstar, an Opic vice-president, says the trip was an
'unqualified success' but admits the agency can only make the smallest,
albeit important, contributions to the economy.
Even if the political transition proves surprisingly free of violence, and
fears of future macro-economic indiscipline are unwarranted, foreign
companies contemplating direct investment are entering a competitive
domestic market.
Mr Jesse says it is easy to say a foreign brewer or pharmaceutical company
should be able to rush into South Africa, but large indigenous groups are
unlikely to give ground easily to competitors.
Foreign investment will be good for stockbrokers' pockets but promises no
free ride for the economic planners.
See World Stock Markets
