FT  23 MAR 94 / BCCI auditor defends acceptance of loans
Price Waterhouse, the accountancy firm, received loans or credit facilities
in two African countries from Bank of Credit and Commerce International, its
audit client, in possible contravention of professional ethical rules.
Mr Graham Stacey, a PW partner in London, said yesterday that he was not
embarrassed by the loans and that they reflected the fact that there were
relatively few banks audited by other firms in the regions in question.
The firm said yesterday that it had also received loans from BCCI in Panama
and Barbados, and that two of its partners in the Cayman Islands had
deposits with the bank.
It said that these transactions had been on normal commercial terms and had
in no way affected its audit judgments on BCCI.
In addition, PW confirmed that one of its partners auditing BCCI's
operations in the United Arab Emirates had been given a Dollars 600 (Pounds
410) carpet by the bank's managing director. It said the partner notified PW
and paid the firm this sum to keep the gift rather than risk offending the
client.
The UK chartered accountants rules that applied at the time state that
'objectivity may be threatened or appear to be threatened by a loan to or
from an audit client'.
They also state that 'objectivity may be threatened or appear to be
threatened by acceptance of goods, services or hospitality from an audit
client' unless the value of any benefit is 'modest'.
BCCI approved a (US) Dollars 215,000 credit facility in 1985 from its
Liberian operation to PW, the local auditors. In the same year it approved a
Pula 100,000 (about Dollars 53,000) loan from its Botswana operation to PW,
the local auditors, for the purchase of a residential property for one of
the firm's partners.
A document outlining the loan in January 1985 includes a handwritten note
that a copy was given to Mr Richard Fear, a PW partner in the Cayman
Islands, for his comments. Both he and Mr Richard Harris, then accountants
with PW in the Caymans and who worked on the BCCI audit, had deposits with
the bank there.
The two African transactions are in addition to loans previously reported of
nearly (Barbados) Dollars 600,000 in Barbados in 1987 and of up to
(US)Dollars 50,000 in Panama by 1985.
