FT  30 JUN 94 / Pension fund in talks to buy NCP
National Parking Corporation, the secretive private company that owns
National Car Parks, is in talks which could lead to its sale for more than
Pounds 700m. It is thought a UK pension fund is proposing to buy the group
from founders Sir Donald Gosling and Mr Ronald Hobson and float it within
three or four years.
National Parking yesterday issued a statement to the Stock Exchange which
said: 'The company has received an approach which may or may not lead to an
offer for all the shares in the company. This approach is being considered
by the board, and shareholders will be notified as soon as there is anything
to report.'
More than half the shares are owned by Sir Donald, 65, and Mr Hobson, who
started the company in 1949 by charging customers 1s 6d a day for parking on
a London bomb site. In 1986 they sold 28 per cent of the shares to City
institutions including Ensign Trust and Royal Insurance.
It is understood they have received approaches in the past two years and
there has been speculation that Mr Hobson in particular might want to take a
less active role.
Sir Donald, thought to be one of the 50 wealthiest people in the UK and a
generous donor to Conservative party funds, has a passion for large yachts.
He has just proposed that a consortium of British businessmen contribute
Pounds 5m each to fund a replacement for the royal yacht Britannia, and has
already pledged his Pounds 5m.
One of the UK's largest private companies, National Parking is not listed on
the stock exchange but its shares are traded under Rule 535 (2). S. J.
Jenkins, which makes a market in the stock, was quoting a price of 550p to
650p after the announcement. The last trade, recorded at 450p, valued the
company at Pounds 529m.
The largest private operator of car parks in the UK, the group also owns the
National Breakdown vehicle recovery service and has a property trading
portfolio which was valued at Pounds 50m last year. The group made a pre-tax
profit of Pounds 53.3m on turnover of Pounds 233.5m in the year to March
1993.
Last year Mr Gordon Layton, group chief executive, was acquitted of
conspiring to defraud rival Europarks. National Car Parks carried out a
three-year campaign of industrial espionage against Europarks to acquire
confidential information. But the defence argued the operation was legal and
was intended to find out whether Europarks was getting leaked information
from National Car Parks.
