FT  03 MAY 94 / Signs of tax-rise damage are muted
The May Day bank holiday came at a particularly sensitive time for the
economy. Large parts of the working population have just received their
April pay details, confirming the damage done to their disposable income by
the last two tax-raising Budgets.
For a deeply unpopular government pinning its hopes on economic recovery, it
is crucially important that these consumers should shrug off the bad news
and keep on spending. In coming weeks FT writers will keep close track of
emerging trends among retailers, leisure operators, the motor trade, finance
houses and the rest of the consumer economy.
Early indications are ambiguous. In some areas, there is worry that the
downturn may have happened already - that some consumers, alerted by media
publicity to the scale of the forthcoming tax rises, may have reined back
their spending in early spring.
Some will have been less provident, and their first shrunken pay slip will
come as a corresponding shock. But not everyone will have received the news
yet. Smaller companies tend to be slower at processing wages, especially in
April when details must also be compiled on the past tax year.
For the bulk of the population money is still tight. The less leeway there
is in the family budget, the more the sums have to be scrutinised.
When it comes to individual consumer industries, the trends reported must be
interpreted with care. The holiday operators, for instance, seem to be
experiencing a distinct upturn in bookings compared with last year. But the
effects of this can be perverse. The more people take their main holiday
abroad this year, the more spending is subtracted from the domestic economy.
Mr Charles Newbold, managing director of Thomson, the largest tour operator,
says that when his company's winter 1994-95 programme went on sale last
Thursday, 35,000 holidays were sold on the first day - double the number
sold on the equivalent day last year.
Retailers, while concerned about an impact on sales, say there has been
little evidence so far of a downturn.
Some retailers said spending fell in February and March as customers
anticipated the tax increases. Mr Barry Dale, chief executive of
Littlewoods, which operates more than 120 chain stores, as well as the Index
catalogue shop chain and the UK's second-largest mail-order business, said
sales had fallen significantly.
He believed this was partly due to customers transferring savings out of
building society accounts to pay fuel bills early and avoid value added tax.
Other retailers, such as clothing groups Sears and Next, which reported
results recently, said trading was still positive. Argos, the catalogue
retailer, said sales had not been damaged by tax increases, but it was
prepared for a downturn. 'If it doesn't (happen), that will be a bonus,' the
company said.
John Lewis Partnership, which operates 22 department stores and 107 Waitrose
supermarkets, said it had seen no evidence of a fall in sales.
