FT  09 JUL 94 / Cash tills with bicycle bells: Stewart Dalby asks if le Tour
de UK has been a commercial hit
When Merseyside Development Corporation sponsored the Tall Ships regatta and
an accompanying opera in 1992 to the tune of Pounds 700,000, it hoped to
turn the region's image from one of urban decay, unemployment and militant
politics into a middle-class modern version of the Victorian sea-faring soap
opera, the Onedin Line.
But all it got was a damning parliamentary report about the waste of
taxpayers' money that helped pay for rows of wooden trading schooners in the
Mersey docks that few people turned up to see.
This week south-east England caught the sponsorship bug, hoping the world's
biggest cycling event, the Tour de France, would bring tourists to an area
increasingly reliant on their spending for economic survival. The tour is
the world's most lucrative bicycle ride, with Pounds 1.2m in prize money.
On Thursday, the 189 competitors raced through Portsmouth during the
113-mile stint around the Hampshire countryside. About 250,000 people packed
into the town centre, matching a similar number in Brighton and slightly
less in Dover on an earlier leg of the race.
Together, the three towns, with the county councils of Kent, East Sussex and
Hampshire, have spent between Pounds 1m and Pounds 1.5m, of which Pounds
270,000 went to the race's organiser, the Societe du Tour de France. The
rest went on signposting, policing, publicity, car parking and road
closures.
But will the councils meet the same fate as Merseyside and be accused of
squandering public money, or will the costs be justified by the return?
The question is not immediately answerable because the overall effect of the
race cannot be measured simply by the revenue the councils raise, or even
the number of ice creams, hot dogs or T-shirts bought by visitors watching
the race. The real benefits will derive from the three-day cash injection
into hotels, restaurants and other tourist attractions. Mr Graham Tubb,
economic development officer of East Sussex County Council said: 'Not
everyone watching the race spends a lot of money. But, say 250,000 visiting
Brighton spend Pounds 10 each, that is Pounds 2.5m just on the day.'
For Brighton, the extra income will come on top of the Pounds 130m it
estimates tourism brings in every year. Across the UK, tourism is a
multi-billion pound industry; overseas visitors alone spent Pounds 9.1bn
last year.
Many local officials believe that the best way to build up tourism is by
sponsoring prestigious, eye-catching projects - which are often loss
leaders. In the 1970s Brighton built a Pounds 13m conference centre which is
thought never to have made a profit, even though the town regularly attracts
more than 200,000 delegates a year. But they spend about Pounds 60m a year
in the town, helping hotels and restaurants to flourish. Mr Peter Bramich,
general manager of the Metropole, the largest hotel in Brighton with 328
rooms at about Pounds 150 a night, said: 'About 80 per cent business is from
conferences.'
Similarly, the value of events such as the Tour de France, has to be
calculated in broad terms. Brighton, which was the finishing town for the
first UK stage of the race, probably did not do as well as it might on the
day because there was a rail strike. The barman in the Concord public house
opposite the pier and just 200yd from the finishing line, was disappointed:
'Where are all the visitors then? We are not doing any extra business at
all.'
His experience seems isolated. The early signs are that the impact of the
race on the local economy will prove beneficial. Mr Paul Delenaught, general
manager of the Dudley Hotel in nearby Hove said: 'I have 60 rooms and we are
absolutely full to the rafters. Normally we would be 75 per cent full at
this time of year.'
Outside Brighton there was a tremendous response to the race. In Ditchling,
Mr Rod Clarke, who runs a tea shop and bakery said: 'We have had four to
five times the usual number of customers and it's only 10am.' The village
saw a price war between the garden centre and a farmer who were trying to
undercut the official rate of Pounds 3 for a day's parking.
In Portsmouth it was a similar story. Ms Debbie Greenwood of the district
council said: 'We estimate that 1m watched the race in Hampshire. This is
more than double the number we expected.'
More important than the number of visitors is the amount of cash they poured
into the local economy. On a conservative estimate of about 1m watching the
race and, taking the rule-of-thumb of tourism officials and assuming each
visitor spent about Pounds 10, then total the benefit to the local economy
is Pounds 10m.
Ms Deborah Grubb, head of arts and leisure at Brighton district council,
said: 'We have spent Pounds 150,000 and I would guess we will get a multiple
of that back. Our town has been on Channel 4 news every night and we have
had a special programme devoted to us. If you include the newspaper coverage
we would have spent nearly Pounds 150,000 on promotion alone.'
Mr David Knight, the race's project manager for Portsmouth council, suggests
Pounds 10m for the whole region might be an under-estimate. 'I think that
Portsmouth will have made Pounds 10m out of the race.'
That might not be enough to fend off the critics - such as Mr and Mrs
Welbury, a retired couple from Ditchling. 'We are in favour of the race but
there is quite a lot of opposition here locally. When the London to Brighton
race came through, they left an awful lot of litter. Someone has to pay for
that,' said Mrs Welbury.
Mr Knight countered: 'The race director said he will definitely be bringing
the race back to Britain next year. He said there was a logic to the south
coast because of the Channel Tunnel. We in Portsmouth would be interested in
hosting the race again.'
