FT  09 MAR 94 / Abu Dhabi improves BCCI offer
The liquidators to the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International
yesterday provisionally approved a revised deal with the government of Abu
Dhabi which should pave the way for an increased payment to creditors.
Under the terms of the settlement, Abu Dhabi, the majority shareholder in
the bank, is expected to increase its direct cash contribution to about
Dollars 1.8bn (Pounds 1.23bn). It had previously agreed a payment of at
least Dollars 1.2bn.
The agreement requires the ratification of the BCCI creditors committee,
which failed to meet formally yesterday following a dispute over the
confidentiality by which its members are bound.
The money available under the agreement for distribution to the bank's
hundreds of thousands of creditors around the world will be raised further
as a result of the settlement because Abu Dhabi has agreed to restructure
and reduce a number of its claims against BCCI. It is expected to drop its
potential claim for Dollars 2.2bn of assets it alleges were stolen by the
bank, and in exchange may receive protection from future litigation which
could be brought against it by the liquidators.
Efforts to reach a new deal have been under way since October, when the
Luxembourg appeal court rejected on technical grounds a previous settlement
between the liquidators and Abu Dhabi.
The new agreement has been modified to address these problems and has been
considerably simplified in an effort to achieve an easier and speedier
settlement for creditors.
If the creditors committee ratifies the agreement, it will still require
approval by the English, Cayman Islands and Luxembourg courts, which may
delay a first payment for several months. The liquidators have never revised
their original estimated payments of 30p to 40p in the pound.
The liquidators from Touche Ross, the accountancy firm, yesterday promised a
briefing with 'an important announcement about compensation for creditors'
but then cancelled it following the unexpected way in which discussions with
the creditors' committee developed.
The Abu Dhabi settlement was concluded after final negotiations with the
liquidators in Zurich last week. The government of Abu Dhabi indicated last
month that it was keen to see creditors receive increased compensation for
their losses.
Other money available to creditors will come from liquidation of BCCI's
assets, up to Dollars 150m paid by Abu Dhabi to the US authorities as
settlement of legal actions, and from any proceeds of litigation against the
bank's auditors, the Bank of England and National Commercial Bank of Saudi
Arabia.
If an agreement had not been reached the liquidators would have had to
consider suing Abu Dhabi, which risked jeopardising any payouts for many
years.
