FT  10 MAR 94 / Survey of Software at Work, Spring 1994 - Financial Control
Systems (8): The right choice - Accounting at the National Exhibition Centre
/ When the NEC upgraded its core financial systems, keeping the familiar
modelling and planning software running was a priority, but it also wanted
better information to feed in
The amount of paper produced by any information system is often in inverse
proportion to its usefulness. Triggered by this rule of thumb, the National
Exhibition Centre, near Birmingham, is looking at rationalising its output,
and is even experimenting with PC-supported CDs (compact discs) as a source
of financial information, rather than printed reports, writes Claire
Gooding.
The NEC is one of the largest exhibition complexes in Europe, and is still
expanding. In the last two years, the National Indoor Arena and the
International Convention Centre, ten or so miles away in the centre of
Birmingham, have been part of the growth, which has been managed without
taking on extra management staff. In 1993 the NEC had profits of Pounds
11.5m; it employs 1,100 people.
The finance department faced an all-too-common problem in attempting to
update its financial systems in a drive to improve efficiency and save
costs. Each department had its own way of reporting, and software tools it
was happy with, such as Lotus spreadsheets for internal and departmental
reports. Figures from sales, purchase, and other departments were fed by the
finance department into a highly tailored implementation of the
well-established FCS/EPS modelling package.
But 18 months ago, hardware upgrade from an ICL ME29 to an ICL DRS6000
provided an opportunity to replace Cobol-written financial systems with Open
Systems software under Unix. The NEC board chose an integrated accounting
system under Unix called Chameleon, because its design allowed for bespoke
tailoring, without sacrificing the essential support that went with the
standard package.
Its suppliers, Tetra provided on-site consultancy and 'excellent support'
for the NEC in a contract worth Pounds 290,000. Since April 1993, the
existing systems have been linked in what Barney Flint, responsible for
in-house systems development describes as 'a sort of bio-feedback loop,'
with all the systems feeding FCS, which in turn re-feeds the figures back
into Chameleon. Some of the in-house NEC enhancements have since been
adopted by Tetra as features for general release.
Speed of response, reliability, and better information have been the result
 -'the ME29 was only available to a finite number of people,' says Mr Flint,
in charge of systems development. 'Now we have 50-60 users perpetually
online, some of them miles away. We have greater control, better management,
and a lot more information: so much so that we have to rationalise it.'
Barney Flint feels the right choice was as much to do with the vendor and
the level of support as with the software itself, and adds a general
warning: 'Don't believe sales literature, sales-people, or 'the pitch.' Get
it on your desk for three months - and then make a decision.'
Software: Chameleon 2000
This product is a 1992 version of the Chameleon accounting software suite
first launched in 1987, is multi-currency, multi-lingual, provides full
financial control with management reporting and offers pan-European
functionality and the facility for integration with corporate systems.
Users: 2,500
sites in UK, 1,000 more worldwide; for the 2000 version: 120 UK sites, 60
elsewhere).
Supplier: Tetra, founded in 1979, has 10 years' experience of implementing
Open Systems (Unix-based) accounting packages.
Turnover: Pounds 12.2m in 1993, with Pounds 2.3m profit.
Price: modular - average starting price for core system (ledgers only) of
32-48 users, around Pounds 25,000. User views include 'excellent support,
good performance; consistent user-interface; inter-operability with other
packages.'
Contact: Barbara Wilkie, Tetra, The Cynosure Centre, Vanwall Business Park,
Maidenhead, Berks SL6 4UB.
