FT  03 DEC 94 / Man in the News: The thorn in the flesh - Dzhokhar Dudayev
Of the many upstart local leaders who have poked the rump of the Russian
bear with a sharp stick, General Dzhokhar Dudayev is the boldest and the
most assertive.
Alone of the presidents of the Russian Federation's republics and regions,
he has declared the full independence of his state. Others such as Mr
Mintimer Shamieiyev of Tatarstan bargained for less.
Alone, he tried to acquire the symbols and currency of statehood - the
Utsyev brothers murdered in London last year were on an official Chechen
mission to acquire passports, money and stamps.
And now, alone, he faces Russia aroused. President Boris Yeltsin's troops
and armour have massed at the Chechen border during the last three days to
enforce a state of emergency in the republic - effectively an occupation.
The implementation of that state of emergency was delayed yesterday, but its
cancellation depends on a surrender that Gen Dudayev will not - cannot -
give.
Gen Dudayev was born 50 years ago when his people were being deported en
masse from Chechnya in the northern Caucasus to central Asia for alleged
collaboration with the Nazis. He spent his first 13 years in Kazakhstan, but
overcame the stigma carried by Chechens to become an air force officer,
rising to the rank of general.
His first public sign of deviance was allowing an Estonian flag to be raised
at a base he commanded in 1989. In 1990, back in Chechnya, he took part in
the republic's national congress and so impressed its members that he was
elected leader.
The failed August coup of 1991 gave Gen Dudayev his opportunity to break
away from Russia. He supported Mr Yeltsin in the battle against the
hardliners, declared independence and won an election with 85 per cent of
the vote.
Alarmed at the precedent, Mr Yeltsin sent troops to the Chechen capital of
Grozny to restore order. Within days, he was forced to withdraw them when
the Russian parliament refused to ratify his action.
In the three years since, half-hearted efforts to negotiate with Gen Dudayev
have yielded nothing. Earlier this year, Russia turned to covert support of
the motley armed opposition - one of whose leaders is, ironically, Mr Ruslan
Khasbulatov, Mr Yeltsin's former foe as speaker of the Russian parliament.
That opposition launched an abortive attack on Grozny, capital of Chechnya,
a week ago. Its rebuff by Chechen government forces was followed by a
Yeltsin ultimatum to Gen Dudayev to surrender or face imposition of the
state of emergency. An invasion force of paratroopers and other elite forces
gathered on the western border of Chechnya, more than adequate to brush
aside the lightly armed Chechen volunteers.
The insurrection in Chechnya has been much more serious for Mr Yeltsin than
the other small wars in the Caucasian cauldron that boiled up after the
collapse of the Soviet Union - not least because it is part of Russia.
Pressed by Russian nationalists, President Yeltsin cannot afford to give
away territory. Two weeks ago, at Pskov on the Estonian border - an area
claimed by Estonia - he swore 'not one centimetre' would be given up, no
matter who asked.
In Grozny yesterday, Mr Anatoly Shabad, a liberal Russian deputy from a
group of four who courageously volunteered to negotiate for the release of
more than 20 Russian prisoners, said: 'Our national patriots are urging the
president on, telling him to act decisively. This influences him a lot now.'
Over the border at the Russian Moszdok base where the troops are gathering,
Lt Col Vladimir Mozhaev says: 'Yeltsin should have done this two years ago.'
Chechnya remains a symbol of the uneasy imperial past of Russia, one not
exorcised by the collapse of the Soviet Union. Mr Iussif Shamsuddin, the
Chechen foreign minister - a dictionary of diplomacy on his desk, the Koran
on a table before him, and an AK-47 on the window sill beside him - says:
'We were almost destroyed as a nation by Stalin, we have been fighting for
freedom from Russia for 300 years.'
Prof Rosetta Yasenbayeva, a vice-secretary of state, says: 'We appeal to the
world society to recognise our country. Because the Soviet Union has gone,
slavery is hidden but slavery is still the same when hidden.'
The tiny nation threatens revenge against the attackers. 'If they come, look
out for what we will do in Russia, to the nuclear power stations,' says Mr
Shamsuddin.
Chechen blood feuds are a living tradition; the director of Grozny airport
(ruined by Russian bombs) Mr Ramzan Aliev promised that the pilots of the
Russian bombers would be found and killed. Terrorism is threatened and the
threat is real.
No other Russified people has been as resentful of Russian, then Soviet,
rule as the Chechens. But the Caucasian peoples, impoverished and mostly
Moslems, have some sympathy for Gen Dudayev.
Suppressing the insurrection in Chechnya forces Russia to prepare for war
within its borders. The Chechens are unpopular in Russia - being seen as
Mafiosi, a reputation some of them would seem to deserve. But this is much
more than rubbing out a Mafia clan. It requires the mobilisation of the
force of the Russian state.
Liberal deputies like Mr Shabad are worried; they say they will raise the
issue of Russian support for the opposition in the parliament. The National
Patriots and middle-ranking army officers like Col Mozhev now want their
say, and Chechnya is where they want it said.
This can only strengthen the nationalist mood in Russia, especially if the
Chechens carry out their threats of terrorism. Faced with an irreconcilable
foe, pushed by an impatient military and their supporters, unpopular,
lacking economic success, increasingly distant from one-time democratic
allies, Mr Yeltsin has a temptation before him  - to go in and sort it out.
Gen Dudayev is no longer a hero - the past three years have been too hard,
his power too corrupted for that. But the nation appears united against
Russia. Russia may take it, but is unlikely to hold it in peace.
