FT  19 NOV 94 / Weekend Money (Self-analysis for Investors): First, take the
temperature - The opportunity might look good, but don't dive in before
doing Anthony Bailey's quiz
He is young, single - and he likes to live in the fast lane. At 28, this
whizzo accountant drives a company car and earns Pounds 48,000 a year, more
than enough to service his Pounds 110,000 mortgage. A good whack is going
into his pension plan, too.
When he hears of a small, go-go biotechnology firm coming to the stock
market, he is convinced it is worth a punt of Pounds 5,000 although he has
never bought a share before. His immediate boss, caught up by the
enthusiasm, puts in Pounds 5,000 as well.
When, six months later, the shares are trading at 70 per cent below their
launch price, young whizzo puts it down to experience. Not so his
45-year-old boss.
He has just received a letter saying the fees at his two sons' school are to
rise by 10 per cent. His wife has filed for divorce - and the chief
executive has summoned him for an interview. It is rumoured that the
Director of Human Resources will be there . . .
One investment, two investors. One disastrous investment, but only one
disaster-struck investor. The boss is in hot water. But things might have
been a shade cooler if he had first taken his own temperature as an
investor.
A self-examination along the following lines might have helped . . .
1. Excluding your home and pension plans, are your savings and investments
worth:
(a) Under Pounds 25,000.
(b) Pounds 25,000 to Pounds 75,000.
(c) Over Pounds 75,000.
2. Are you likely to be moving to a more expensive home:
(a) Within five years.
(b) Within 10 years.
(c) Not for at least 10 years, if at all.
3. What is most important when choosing investments?
(a) Safety.
(b) Diversification.
(c) Maximum returns.
4. When will you need to draw an income from your investments?
(a) Now or soon.
(b) In five to 10 years.
(c) Not for 10 years or more.
5. Which fits your attitude most closely?
(a) It is crucial to maintain the value of at least 90 per cent of my
investments.
(b) Capital growth is as important as capital preservation.
(c) Growth is the key to successful investing.
6. Do you have anyone depending financially on you:
(a) Now.
(b) Not yet, but I might.
(c) No - I am responsible solely for myself and likely to remain so.
7. A friend is leaving the UK to work abroad and is willing to sell you his
house at a bargain price. You are keen, but the maximum mortgage you can get
means you will have to raise an extra Pounds 10,000 yourself. Would you:
(a) Find it impossible to raise the cash, or get the money by selling all
your shares and unit trusts.
(b) Cash in some of your shares and unit trusts.
(c) Dip into your building society account.
8. Do you expect to retire:
(a) Within 10 years.
(b) In ten to 20 years.
(c) Not for 20 years or more.
9. Which cap fits you best?
(a) I can just about manage my rent or mortgage but do not have much spare
cash.
(b) I have a mortgage, am well covered with life insurance and belong to a
pension scheme - but have not built up substantial savings so far.
(c) My finances are pretty well shipshape. Income exceeds spending and I
have a reasonable spread of equity-based investments.
10. What is your approach to money?
(a) I enjoy spending it and it is something of an achievement if I keep my
credit card below its limit.
(b) I have limited savings and keep meaning to put some away in a Pep or
Tessa but can never quite afford it.
(c) I hope I will not ever run short: I think I have planned for most
contingencies.
11. The headlines report another big slide in share prices. If you owned
shares, would you:
(a) Ring up your broker and sell some.
(b) Do nothing except ring your broker to seek guidance and re-assurance.
(c) Ring your broker and place some buy orders.
12. Do you expect to need money to start up or expand your own business?
(a) Never.
(b) Possibly within the next five to 10 years.
(c) Not for at least 10 years.
13. Which statement best summarises your approach to managing your capital?
(a) The building society is the best home for spare cash because you know it
will not disappear down a black hole.
(b) The main reason to invest on the stock market is to maintain and improve
the real value of your spare capital.
(c) The stock market is attractive because it offers one of the few chances
to make some serious money.
14. Where do you stand?
(a) There is no point in hoarding too much money - you can't take it beyond
the grave.
(b) It would be nice to leave something to my friends, family or a charity.
(c) I have not worked hard all my life just to fritter away my assets. I
hope to be able to contribute to the long-term security of my children when
I die, or help out some dear friend, or leave my mark with a charitable
donation.
To calculate your score, see box.
HOW DID YOU SCORE?
Add scores for all odd-numbered questions to calculate your Risk Rating. Add
scores for even-numbered questions to get a Time Frame - how long you can
invest before you may need a cash lump sum or income. No points for each
(a), one for each (b) and two for each (c).
Risk Rating 0, Time Frame 0
This is the lowest possible score: you are a very cautious investor.
Furthermore, you are likely to need to spend all your money now or draw an
income in the not too distant future. Keep your spare cash on deposit or in
low-risk investments such as gilts.
Risk Rating 7, Time Frame 7
A medium Risk Rating means you can afford to put some of your money into
higher risk investments such as shares, though you may prefer to stick
mostly to blue chip UK companies. Caution is needed because you also have a
medium Time Frame - perhaps you will need investment income soon or have
specific lump sum spending plans. Some investments in lower risk bonds and a
good cash reserve are important.
Risk Rating 14, Time Frame 14
This is the highest possible score. It means that you are able to invest for
long-term growth. A large part of your portfolio should be in equities with
a good chunk in higher-risk areas, such as smaller companies and emerging
markets.
Risk Rating much higher than Time Frame
Either you have sufficient spare capital to take some risk on the
stockmarket or the temperament to take a bigger risk. But you should see how
this fits in with your Time Frame. If you have insufficient funds on deposit
to meet emergencies or if you know that you will need funds in the near to
medium future, take care. You could come a cropper if you are forced to cash
in equity-based investments when prices are low. Keep some cash reserves and
consider bond investments such as gilts.
Risk Rating lower than Time Frame
Perhaps you have not built up sufficient reserves to consider
higher-risk/higher growth investments - but try not to leave it too long
before you get a balanced portfolio. Or you could be the classic
over-cautious investor. Perhaps you keep bundles of tenners under your
mattress? Get a proper investment strategy - and don't be too afraid of
shares and unit trusts.
This is not a scientifically designed questionnaire,
but it may help clarify your priorities and what investment risk means in
your case. Then the question arises as to whether you have a properly
balanced portfolio. Does the way you have allocated money across three broad
investment areas - cash deposits, bonds/gilts and equities - fit with your
needs and temperament?
