FT  07 SEP 94 / Gene therapy success claimed
The first UK trial of gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis is giving
'encouraging' results, the British Association meeting in Loughborough heard
yesterday.
Dr Duncan Geddes, who is in charge of the trial at the Royal Brompton
Hospital, London, said the first phase showed 'approximately 20 per cent
correction of the CF defect' in patients suffering from cystic fibrosis, a
debilitating lung disease.
CF is the most common serious inherited disease, and one of the first
disorders to be treated experimentally by gene therapy - inserting correct
copies of the defective gene into patients. Many scientists believe gene
therapy will eventually be used to cure many diseases that cannot be treated
effectively with conventional drugs, including some cancers.
Scientists in the US and UK started human tests of CF gene therapy last
year, only four years after identifying the defective gene responsible for
the disease.
The US researchers used a common virus known as adenovirus to carry correct
genes into the patients' lungs. But the virus turns out to have a serious
side-effect: it provokes an unpleasant immune reaction.
The UK trial, a collaboration between the Royal Brompton Hospital and St
Mary's Hospital Medical School, uses tiny fat-like particles called
liposomes instead of virus to carry the genes.
'We are now convinced that the system we are using is safe and we will go on
to the next stage of the programme,' said Dr Geddes.
He and Professor Bob Williamson, head of the St Mary's research team,
yesterday refused to discuss their results in detail because they had not
yet been published in a scientific journal.
But Prof Williamson said the viral and the liposomal approaches seemed to
have complementary advantages and drawbacks.
'The critical thing now is to combine the safety of the liposome with the
efficiency of viral transmission,' he said.
'We all remain convinced that gene therapy will work, but there are still a
number of years of research before it is available as routine treatment,' Dr
Geddes said.
In Prof Williamson's opinion, 'gene therapy will become part of the
treatment for cystic fibrosis within the next four to five years'.
