FT  11 JUL 94 / World Cup '94: Brazilian flair and Italian fortune win the
day
Nobody will ever remember the first half of Brazil vs Holland in the World
Cup quarter-finals on Saturday. Few will ever forget the second.
It went 1-0 and then 2-0 to Brazil, then 2-1 and 2-2 as the Dutch
miraculously rallied, only for Branco, the mid-fielder, to step into an 80th
minute free kick from 30 yards and bury it off de Goey's left-hand post so
that Brazil won 3-2.
It was not only the goals. The second half saw soccer at its very best, with
skill, passion and controversy of an order that deserves to be corked and
bottled by the million cases, to be opened whenever the sport goes dull as a
reminder of how it can be played.
Romario and Bebeto were the catalysts. The twin Brazilian strikers came out
after half-time determined to take the match by the scruff of the neck, and
did so. Twice in the first three minutes Romario went close, and after 51
minutes he put Brazil ahead.
It was Bebeto, inevitably, who set it up, released at top speed by Dunga's
through ball into the area. His left-foot cross bounced awkwardly for
Romario though not too awkwardly for a reflex half-volley from 10 yards that
no goalkeeper could have touched.
Brazil were rampant now and it was Romario, at a walk, who was the vital
ingredient in Bebeto's 61st-minute goal. Romario was strolling back,
unconcerned and indisputably offside, when Bebeto latched on to a headed
ball from the Brazilian half, broke one tackle, rounded de Goey and tapped
the ball home. The Dutch stood still, waiting for the flag against Romario.
But, after consultation, the referee and linesman stuck to the new letter of
the law - that the Brazilian had been 'passive' to the play in progress.
Brazil then relaxed, almost fatally. Two minutes later, a throw-in from the
left saw Bergkamp surviving one half-hearted challenge and beating Taffarel
in the Brazilian goal from close range with a hard right-foot shot.
Taffarel was under the gun now, first from Jonk, then from Winter. Yet he
seemed asleep in the 75th minute, rooted to his line as Winter rose to an
Overmars corner and headed home the equaliser from no more than six yards.
Now it was Brazil's turn to show mettle. Branco, in mid-field, unleashed a
35-yard range-finder that de Goey touched over. Satisfied, when the free
kick came moments later, following the only foul that could be described as
remotely dirty, he completed the scoring.
Saturday's other quarter-final, in which Italy beat Spain 2-1, indicated why
Italy may win next Sunday's final: not because they are the best team but
because they have a winning formula. It works like this. Play like drains;
be savagely criticised back home for performance; and allow one or other
Baggio to score the necessary minimum of goals.
Spain controlled most of the game and rarely used their fleetness while
Italy, competent defence apart, showed all the inspiration of soggy,
over-cooked penne.
But the Italian defence held, and the Baggios did their bit. In the 26th
minute, Dino, the game-winner against Norway, found himself with a bit of
room 25 yards out and bent an out-swinger past Zubizarreta in the Spanish
goal.
Spain drew level after 58 minutes on a deflected shot from Caminero and
proceeded to dominate. More than that, Salinas, a second-half substitute,
should have disposed of the increasingly tired Italians after 82 minutes
when set free alone in front of Pagliuca 10 yards out. He mis-kicked
embarrassingly.
That set the stage for Roberto Baggio. Previously, an early blocked shot
excepted, he had been a mostly marginal performer. After 87 minutes, an
instinctive flick from Signori, only introduced after the break, set him
loose on the right of the area. Baggio deftly rounded Zubizarreta and
right-footed it under the covering Abelarde from an acute angle.
Spain, a quietly impressive team throughout the tournament, with as many
goals (nine before Saturday) as anyone, must wonder why they lost a match
they played well enough to win.
For the Azzurri, these days, it matters less how they play than how it turns
out. And history is on their side. In 1982, in Spain, their early matches
were also undistinguished, but then Paolo Rossi got untracked. Two Baggios
may yet equal one Rossi.
