FT  25 MAY 94 / World Trade News: UK business wants our man in Havana
The improvement in relations between Britain and the government of Fidel
Castro indicates growing opportunities perceived by British business in
Cuba.
It follows the opening by the Cuban government to foreign investment as part
of its desperate search for hard currency since the collapse of the Soviet
Union, its main supplier of financial support.
The growing contacts between the two governments are reflected in the visit
of a Cuban parliamentary mission, including Mr Ricardo Alarcon, often
described as Mr Castro's number two, to London this week. Junior trade
minister Patrick McLoughlin is due to become the first British minister to
visit Cuba since at least the 1970s when he goes to Havana in September.
The decision to send a minister to Havana has not been taken lightly, since
it is bound to incur some US displeasure. It is the latest manifestation of
the differences between Washington and London over the Cuban question,
following the strong British representations against US legislation that
tightened the embargo on Castro by making it tougher for the subsidiaries of
US companies to do business in the US. UK companies were forbidden to comply
with this law.
It shows that the Foreign Office has reached the conclusion that Castro and
his government are likely to be around for some time despite the country's
severe economic difficulties. 'A year ago there was a real question over
whether there would be a violent upheaval,' said one British official. 'Now
that seems less likely.'
UK officials say the closer ties reflect a British interest in a peaceful
transition in Cuba, which will be encouraged by development of trade and
investment links. There is also, they say, a long-standing interest in the
stability of the Caribbean in view of the location of British territories
such as the Cayman Islands nearby.
The shift also follows the stepping down as foreign office minister last
year of Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, who was strongly opposed to moving closer to
the Castro regime. His successor, Mr David Heathcoat-Amory, is meeting Mr
Alarcon this week.
But the real driving force behind the move is the growing interest by UK
business in Cuba, a market of 11m people from which the US is excluded by
the economic embargo. While there is some scepticism in Whitehall that
Castro will ever allow hugely profitable joint ventures, there has been
enthusiastic support for closer ties from businesses attached to the
Caribbean Trade Advisory Group (Caritag), which has led unofficial trade
missions to Havana.
Mr David Jessop, Caritag director, said agreements currently being
negotiated by UK companies involved significant sums in the agriculture,
tourism, mining and other sectors. He declined to be more specific since the
decision to invest usually involved main board decisions because of the
difficulties of the US embargo.
However, most involved say negotiations are not easy - the rules of the game
are sometimes changed by the government and each joint venture must be
referred to the council of ministers for permission.
UK companies have been slower than their counterparts elsewhere in exploring
the market. The Dutch bank, ING, has established a joint venture with the
Cuban group, Acemex, to open a bank aimed at financing Cuban trade. The
Netherlands Caribbean Bank, to be based in Curacao, will soon open a
representative office in Havana - the first foreign bank representation in
the country. ING officials say they hope business will be sufficient to
justify a branch there.
