FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (3): Striking the right balance -
Education and training
The decline in traditional industries and the need to attract inward
investment has led to the introduction of a range of training provisions for
industry and management throughout East Kent, writes Richard Evans.
The need is particularly acute because dependence on industries and services
like coal mining, tourism and cross channel ferries has led to a dearth of
up to date skills in some areas.
But although these needs are recognised, a difficult balance is having to be
struck on how best to divide the limited budget between improving skills and
putting maximum resources towards improving the infrastructure in order to
attract more jobs.
Mr Ken Welsh, inward investment manager at the East Kent Initiative,
appreciates the dilemma more than most - 'we see the top priority as getting
more business parks completed so that companies can move in straight away,
while at the same time giving any help we can to improve local skills. But
it is no use going overboard on training without attracting the jobs.'
The decision last year to grant Dover, Shepway (Folkestone) and Swale
(Sheerness and Sittingbourne) intermediate area status and Thanet (Margate,
Broadstairs and Ramsgate) full development area status should make more
money available for skills training, both from UK and European Union
sources.
In addition, increasing use is being made of the facilities available at
Kent University, based at Canterbury, and other higher education colleges,
and a range of management training programmes being introduced by the
recently launched Kent Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
Unemployment across East Kent averages 10.7 per cent, but this includes
travel to work areas of relative prosperity like Ashford and Canterbury.
There are areas with chronic unemployment problems like Thanet (16.8 per
cent and among the worst blackspots in the country), and Sheerness and
Sittingbourne with 14.7 per cent, though the level is much higher in parts
of the Isle of Sheppey.
Folkestone's level is 13.4 per cent and Dover's 10.9 per cent, but both
these are expected to deteriorate as the channel tunnel comes into operation
and the ferry companies rationalise to compete.
Kent Training and Enterprise Council, a non-profit making partnership
between business and local and central government to stimulate growth and to
expand the pool of available skills, has launched two initiatives.
The training for work and the training credits programmes target for special
action school leavers and the long-term unemployed, offering skills training
and job placements.
Training for work provides people out of a job for more than six months with
vocational training and work placements, and individually tailored packages
are provided. Training credits allow 16 and 17 year olds leaving school to
claim up to 6,000 worth of vocational training.
In a partnership between Kent Tec and Dover district council, engineering
and technical training is available which give grants of up to 50 per cent
of costs for workers in local manufacturing companies employing fewer than
350 people. Small companies are given priority.
Kent Training Centre, also in Dover, was set up by Kent county council over
five years ago to provide construction industry training. The range of
courses covers bricklaying, plastering and carpentry, and there are many
short courses in a range of construction skills. The centre is adapting to
the changing needs of industry as qualifications move towards the training
of all-rounders rather than single craft specialists.
An imaginative scheme is being launched by Swale borough council at
Sheerness where the site of a former old sailors' rest home is being
converted into a 41-bed training hostel for young people at a cost of 1.3m.
They will be trained either on site or elsewhere locally and use the hostel
as a base. The scheme, based on a French idea for training hostels, should
be launched by the end of the year.
An area with equally intractable though very different problems is Romney
Marsh in Shepway, where the decline in agriculture, poor communications, a
low skill base, low wages and high unemployment are compounded by poor
access. The Kent outreach project, funded by the county council, Kent Tec
and the rural development commission, has sought to develop training and
education opportunities, particularly for young people. Courses have
included computing, languages and catering.
At a more advanced level, South Kent College with sites at Dover, Folkestone
and Ashford offers a wide range of vocational training opportunities
including business and management studies, engineering and construction,
information technology and languages.
Kent University has developed into an important research and teaching
centre; it is an acknowledged centre of excellence in biotechnology, fibre
optics, medical electronics and computer networks, providing research and
statistical services for industry and commerce, international organisations
and local and central government.
As the largest employer in Canterbury, the university adds some Pounds 100m
and 3,360 jobs to the economy of East Kent.
One of the most interesting developments at Canterbury has been the
establishment in 1992 of Chaucer College within the university campus. It is
an independent college owned by the Japanese Shumei educational foundation,
which provides Japanese nationals with an education in western culture,
history and politics.
The Kent Chamber of Commerce, launched last autumn in an attempt to
co-ordinate the efforts of a dozen small local organisations, has already
becoming the third largest chamber in the UK with 3,000 businesses in
membership, 17 staff and a growing range of training courses, many
specifically tailored for local needs.
