FT  04 JAN 94 / Operators braced for Channel price war
The first shots in the long-awaited battle for the lucrative cross-Channel
travel market will be fired next week when Eurotunnel announces its fares
structure for the Channel tunnel.
The tunnel opens in May and its operator is expected to offer return tickets
for about Pounds 160 a car in the off-season. This is expected to rise to
between Pounds 220 and Pounds 260 in the summer with premiums for busy
weekends.
Eurotunnel yesterday refused to comment on the prices for using the Pounds
10bn tunnel, describing the figures as 'pure speculation', but the company
was expected to price its service competitively in an attempt to lure
passengers away from the ferry companies. The Channel ferries carry about
18m passengers each year.
The fares structure will be announced by Sir Alistair Morton, Eurotunnel's
chief executive, on January 11. Tickets will go on sale the next day.
The ferry companies, which have already announced reduced prices for 1994,
are expected to offer further incentives to passengers once the cost of
using the tunnel becomes clear.
P&amp;O European Ferries said yesterday that the speculation about tunnel prices
was in line with what it had been predicting - fares comparable with ferry
charges plus a small premium for speed. The shuttle service will take about
30 minutes to travel between terminals at Folkestone, Kent, and Sangatte
near Calais.
A car and up to nine passengers travelling with P&amp;O, and returning within
five days on the Dover to Calais route, costs between Pounds 77 in the low
season and Pounds 160 at the height of summer. A standard return of six days
and over costs between Pounds 139 and Pounds 289.
Stena Sealink said it would review its prices after the Eurotunnel
announcement.
Sally Line, which operates between Ramsgate and Dunkirk, appeared
unconcerned by the threat from the tunnel. The company said yesterday it
concentrated on the 'family leisure-traveller, not the businessman, which is
what the Channel tunnel is all about'.
It said it had never engaged in price wars with other ferry companies and
was not attempting to compete on speed. Its niche in the market was a
two-and-a-half-hour leisurely crossing with on-board facilities such as a
creche.
In common with the other ferry companies Sally Line has just begun its
traditional post-Christmas discounts enabling foot passengers to travel for
Pounds 1 and offering a day-trip fare for a car and up to five passengers of
Pounds 16.
It has also launched a ski-drive package allowing a car and up to five
people to travel for Pounds 139. The ferry companies believe heavy discounts
and incentive schemes such as this will enable them to retain a large share
of the market.
