FT  19 NOV 94 / Property: New rules for old houses - Gerald Cadogan assesses
a fresh approach to England's historic environment
You may not have heard of PPG 15 but, if you own one of the 500,000 listed
buildings in England, or live in one of the country's 8,000 conservation
areas, you will ignore it at your peril.
In September, after many consultations and revisions to the draft version,
the Department of the Environment and Department of National Heritage issued
planning policy guidance note (PPG) number 15 on Planning and the Historic
Environment. This policy statement will guide local authorities on managing
listed buildings, conservation areas and historic landscapes. And that will
affect everybody who lives in them or nearby.
PPGs are not law, but they carry weight, telling district councils and
planning appeal inspectors what the important factors are in their
decisions.
The key element in PPG 15 is a presumption in favour of preservation,
welcome news for conservationists who had feared it would be lost in the
revision. Anyone who wishes to alter or demolish a listed building of
architectural or historical merit has to make a positive case to justify the
proposal and obtain listed building consent. The same holds for buildings in
conservation areas which may not be listed but are part of 'the familiar and
cherished local scene'. This surprising language marks a seachange in
official attitudes. Government is beginning to understand the intangible
value of the environment.
Local authority development plans should include conservation, and examine
how run-down historic areas can be revived by adapting old buildings; the
canalside regeneration of central Manchester is a good example.
PPG 15 recommends tourism and leisure as new uses and insists that
development must be sustainable.
'This is not spelt out enough,' remarks Neil Findon, of the Council for the
Protection of Rural England. The essence of the policy is not to sacrifice
things that people will value in the future for short-term and often
illusory gains. Councils are expected to cast a beadier eye over schemes
that affect the setting of listed buildings, which may be adjacent unlisted
buildings or high, bulky buildings some distance away that could 'alter
views of a historic skyline', says the policy statement.
It would be marvellous if this meant Oxford City Council would dismantle the
 -banal brown and gilt signs for pedestrians which diminish the city's
handsome buildings and destroy the scale of its streetscape.
Listed building controls will be tougher. The rationale that 'once lost,
listed buildings cannot be replaced' now includes damage by unsuitable
alteration as well as outright demolition. Indifferent minor works 'can
cumulatively be very destructive of a building's special interest'.
Councils should be flexible about how they apply disabled access and fire
regulations so as not to damage a building's historic character. Nor should
they be overly strict, if they give a grant for damp proofing.
The requirement for conservation areas is that councils now identify
important elements in each area - green verges, trees, buildings, street
flooring, pillar boxes, lamps and other street furniture. This will make the
case for designating new areas, and guide applicants and planners in keeping
up existing ones. For councils in the shires, which may have as many as 50
conservation areas, it will be an expensive task.
Gap sites in conservation areas need imaginative, high quality buildings. If
development proposals conflict with guidelines, there should be 'a strong
presumption against the grant of planning permission'. And trees may not be
cut down, lopped or topped, even if they do not have tree preservation
orders, without council permission. (This usually happens by default. Give
six weeks' notice of what you intend. If you hear nothing to stop you, then
proceed.)
PPG 15 details the procedures for listing and issuing building preservation,
urgent works and repairs notices. At the same time it reminds owners that
there is no specific obligation to keep the buildings in good condition,
'though normally it will be in their interests to do so.'
It does not mention relief from VAT which, thanks to the negative attitude
implicit in the law - contrasting with the positive approach of the PPG - is
possible for works that have listed building consent, because they alter the
character of the building, but not for the all-important regular clearing of
gutters or other maintenance. It explains also how to have a building
de-listed.
People developing buildings which might be listed can apply to the DoE for a
certificate of immunity from listing. Good for five years, it allows the
developer to work without disruption by spot-listing. If it is not granted,
the DoE normally lists the building forthwith, and listed building consent
rules apply.
Three groups of places do not have any special statutory protection, but
councils are urged to be extra vigilant about them: World Heritage sites,
there are 10 in England, such as Bath, the Tower of London, and Stonehenge
with Avebury; historic parks and gardens on the English Heritage register
and battlefields on EH's draft register.
Finally, PPG 15 introduces the public to the notion of seeing the country as
a man-made artefact - an historic landscape that reflects how people have
used it for centuries.
Conservation is as much about hedgerows that have been in place since Saxon
times as about 200-year-old listed buildings. Expect further announcements
on this theme from English Heritage and the Countryside Commission.
PPG 15, Planning and the Historic Environment, HMSO Pounds 8.40.
