FT  29 APR 94 / London Stock Exchange: Lasmo sellers
Evidence that some of the big institutions had been selling Lasmo stock in
the market, following the first shot in what is expected to be a protracted
takeover battle, saw Lasmo ordinaries and nil-paids lose ground.
Neither the market, nor Lasmo was impressed with the terms of the all-paper
bid from Enterprise Oil, which the latter valued at 150p a share. Lasmo
ordinaries dipped to close 5 1/2 lower at 157p after more big turnover of
22m, while the nil-paids settled 4 1/2 to 53p with 15m changing hands.
Enterprise fell 21 at 424p.
However, dealers and analysts said the market still expected a counter
bidder for Lasmo to emerge, citing British Gas and Total as favourites. Elf,
which retains a 10 per cent stake in Enterprise, was ruled out, while
Atlantic Richfield, the US group is thought to have been unhappy with the
results of its acquisition of UK oil group Tricentrol in the late 1980's.
Dealers said the level of activity in Lasmo since the rights issue last week
suggested at least one and possibly more stake builders had been operating
in Lasmo shares.
First quarter figures from ICI were, at Pounds 93m, on the bright side of
expectations but a share price rise of 50p in one week proved unsustainable.
The shares ignored the spate of subsequent upgrades and responded more to a
weak US market by sliding 22 to 831p with 3.8m traded.
Smith New Court, which has been a supporter of the stock, maintained its
bullish stance with analyst Mr Charles Lambert commenting: 'Recovery is
obviously getting under way. The company gave a very good upbeat meeting.'
Elsewhere, Hoare Govett, which has been negative on the company for several
years shifted its recommendation from hold to undervalued and raised its
end-of-year forecast by Pounds 45m to Dollars 450m, around the top of the
existing range of analysts' estimates. Kleinwort Benson continued to be
merely holding the stock and pointed out that the 31 per cent improvement in
profits was from a very low base. Analyst Mr Jeremy Chantry lifted his
forecast by Pounds 35m to Pounds 430m but said earnings per share would
remain broadly unchanged.
Glaxo rose in response to an aggressive legal move and worrying news for its
Swedish rival, Astra. But the shares were taken back from their high of 580p
by a sell-off in the US to close 5 up at 569p.
Initially, the shares responded to a Swedish newspaper article about Astra's
Losec, the principal competition for Glaxo's top product, Zantac. The
article said the German health authorities had received reports from other
European countries on possible side effects from Losec.
Then, in the afternoon, Glaxo announced it was initiating legal action
against Geneva Pharmaceuticals, the US arm of Switzerland's Ciba Geigy,
which has claimed it can bypass Glaxo's patent on Zantac. The move had been
flagged but one analyst said: 'It does illustrate that the company is not
rilling over and playing dead.' The legal action includes Uquifa, the
Spanish arm of Holliday Chemicals whose shares have only just recovered from
a profits warning in November. The shares rose a penny at 223p.
Leading property stocks remained in positive territory, with James Capel
reiterating its positive stance on the sector. Analyst Mr Andrew Causer said
that encouraging prospects for rental recovery would underpin sentiment and
favour those stocks with prime retail properties and rental potential, such
as Land Securities, up 2 at 670p, and British Land ahead 4 at 409p. The
latter yesterday paid Pounds 70.5m for a City of London property.
Abbey National shares were heavily traded but failed to hold on to an
initial small rise that followed news that the company's pre-tax profits in
the first quarter are more than 20 per cent higher than the same period last
year. The shares closed 6 off at 442p after turnover of 6m, with dealers
reporting switching into Royal Bank of Scotland, 3 at 393p.
Gerrard &amp; National, the financial services group, was one of the market's
best individual performers, the shares racing up 39 to 448p after the good
results and news that it was buying the rest of GNI, its derivatives
subsidiary.
Holiday operator Airtours remained friendless as it announced the details of
its purchase of SAS Leisure. The shares slumped a further 24 yesterday,
closing at 424p, in heavy turnover approaching 900,000. Airtours has slid
60p on the week and 162p since its year-high on February 9. Analysts blamed
the stock's fall on the lack of synergies in the latest purchase - to be
largely funded by a Pounds 82m one-for-five rights issue at 390p - and
concerns over growth prospects.
Reed International rose 12p to 837p with dealers saying NatWest had
reiterated its long-term outperformance stance.
The day's two newcomers both enjoyed healthy market debuts; SuperscapeVR,
issued at 198p, closed at 261p while Oxford Molecular settled at 84p, a
premium of 4 to the 80p issue price.
Other statistics, Page 30
