FT  16 APR 94 / Arts: Package holiday passions
John Godber's characters are moving steadily up in the world; so is his
reputation as a playwright. In terms of output he is becoming almost as
prolific as Alan Ayckbourn and other similarities have developed. Godber
commands his home ground at the Hull Truck Theatre much as Ayckbourn
commands the Stephen Joseph Theatre in Scarborough. It is a fair bet that a
Godber work in Hull will reach London.
There was a time when the environment of his plays was almost entirely
local. In September in the Rain, 1984, it seemed an adventure for the
characters to move from Yorkshire into Lancashire. Blackpool was the holiday
mecca, and a run-down hotel was where they stayed.
Now they cross to the continent. Passion Killers is the final play in
Godber's trilogy about Britons abroad. On the Piste, which takes place on
the Austrian alps, had a good run in the West End last year. April in Paris,
part of it set where its name suggests, is still running. Passion Killers
takes us to Benidorm or, as one of the characters puts it, the Spanish
Blackpool.
Hull, however, is where the piece begins and ends. Godber's characters now
have candlelight dinners at home. They also have jobs. One women is a
lecturer at Hull University. Of the two men who matter most, one is a
teacher turned journalist, the other is an executive in a bread company.
This is the move into Ayckbourn territory.
Yet Godber is a tenderer writer. Very little of his comedy is black. When
the business executive tells a lie in Benidorm - that he is unmarried -
there is a palpable sense of shock, though it turns out that the woman he is
chasing sees through him because he goes to bed with his socks on.
Tom, the former teacher, receives the most sympathetic treatment I have ever
seen given to a journalist on stage. He describes himself as 'emotionally
pathetic, reasonable, understanding, educated and soft'. When he thinks that
he is falling in love with a girl in Benidorm, he does not pursue her. 'I
wonder if it may be alright if I kissed you,' he says timidly. 'Better not,'
she replies. 'I've never been asked before."
I wondered slightly which paper Tom works for, but this is a remarkable part
beautifully played by Mark Addy. Godber himself was once a teacher; possibly
he believes that such a background must be virtuous, yet the role never
strays into sentimentality.
There are two other men in the cast, more of the football hooligan type.
They wander in and out and remind one of Godber's earlier plays, yet here
again there can be pathos: even the biggest lager louts have feelings.
The wives at home in Hull double with the women on holiday. In Spain they
are more prominent and look like young over-made up girls. In fact they are
31 and 37, having lied about their age to get into the holiday club. This
background of not telling the complete truth is one of the most intriguing
aspects of the play. Some scenes remind you of a modern, down market
Importance of Being Earnest.
Godber directs himself and the refurbished Truck Theatre looks splendid. If
you live remotely nearby this is the place to see his work.
