FT  17 SEP 94 / How To Spend It: Pick your cotton for nights of linen luxury
 -Lucia van der Post hails a growing emphasis on synthetic-free bedding
All those addicted to antique linen and who cannot pass those magic words
'antique market' without feeling compelled to start ruffling through the
shelves will fall with joy upon Francoise de Bonneville's The Book of Fine
Linen, which could easily become the addict's manual.
It is a homage to the subtle sense of luxury that crisp white sheets and
soft blankets can convey, to the sense of security that comes from having
piles of sweetly-scented, freshly-laundered linen neatly stacked in the
cupboard.
These pleasures are once again accessible to all but the most impoverished.
Habitat, for instance, sells only 100 per cent cotton bed linen. And now,
for sophisticates, there are crisply-styled absolutely plain white sheets
and duvets, there are cool checks for those who hanker for a plain-Jane New
England look and there are plain natural dye bed linen sets for those who
prefer their linen coloured. And all this comes at astonishingly reasonable
prices - double duvet covers about Pounds 65, standard pillowcases, Pounds
12.50, square pillowcases, Pounds 15.
Marks and Spencer is still, on the whole, addicted to its cotton and
polyester mixes (its customers no doubt hooked on ease of care) but in its
latest mail order brochure it does offer an absolutely plain white
embroidered set of 100 per cent cotton duvet (Pounds 43 single, Pounds 53
double) and Oxford-style pillowcases for Pounds 13 each. The very plain 100
per cent cotton Jacquard bedspread in pure white is exceedingly nice and
costs just Pounds 60.
Ikea, too, has gone for nothing but 100 per cent cotton in its bed linen
range and seems able to offer it at the best of all prices - crisp New
England blue and white checks with single duvet cover sets starting at
Pounds 14.
In the past few years, however, a number of specialist companies have sprung
up offering more exclusive ranges. Damask has been until now an entirely
mail order company (write to Units 7 &amp; 10, Sullivan Enterprise Centre,
Sullivan Road, London SW6 for a brochure, sending Pounds 2.50 which is
refundable when you spend over Pounds 25) but in mid-October it will be
opening a shop at 3-4 Broxholme House, New King's Road, London SW6.
It offers an unashamedly nostalgic look with white woven cotton bedspreads,
gentle patchworks, faded prints or crisp checks and an especially attractive
set of designs for the nursery, and nightdresses with plenty of
old-fashioned innocent charm. The full-cover brochure shows the range
beautifully and the collection can still be bought by mail. Prices are good
 -hand-quilted patchwork bedspreads cost Pounds 155 for a double size
(215cms by 240cms), woven cotton bedspreads starting at Pounds 46 for a
single size and finely embroidered duvet covers starting at Pounds 34.
Those who prefer a crisper, more contemporary look should look out for
Turquaz - in bold checks, plaids and stripes. The collection uses nothing
but 100 per cent hand-loomed cotton from India. There is, of course, the
ubiquitous selection of blue and white checks but there are yellows, browns,
greens, greys as well as colour combinations. Like most of the more
up-to-the-minute ranges, it offers square, buttoned pillow-cases as well as
the standard oblongs. Stocked by Peter Jones, Liberty and the John Lewis
stores, prices start at about Pounds 12 for a buttoned Oxford pillow case
and Pounds 50 for a single duvet cover.
Cologne &amp; Cotton which some readers may remember offers a limited but
charming and very affordable range of pure white and checked bed linen
started with a single shop in Leamington Spa but it, too, now has a London
flagship at 791 Fulham Road, London SW6.
For those looking for the ultimate in duvets I recommend a brand called
Brinkhaus. At the top of its range are finest white Hungarian goose down
filled duvets, covered in 100 per cent combed Egyptian cotton batiste, each
cover stitched in small squares to keep the filling evenly spread. These do
not come cheap - the largest size, 260cms by 220cms is Pounds 680 but it
does have a very high 12.5 tog rating (a tog is the industry measurement for
warmth).
Those who have found duvets impossibly hot this summer might like to know
that Brinkhaus does a lightweight summer silk and cotton covered version
(6.5 tog rating and the cover is again stitched into small squares) at
Pounds 210 for the largest size. The Brinkhaus range can be found at
Harrods, John Lewis, and House of Fraser stores.
The free brochure showing the full range is available from The French Linen
Company, Unit 7, The Vale Industrial Centre, Southern Road, Aylesbury,
Buckinghamshire HP19 3EW.
The Book of Fine Linen, published originally by Flammarion, is distributed
in the UK by Thames &amp; Hudson. 208 pages, Pounds 30.
