FT  19 NOV 94 / Consumers boost GDP rise in third quarter
Hopes that economic recovery was being powered by export and investment
growth were dashed by yesterday's gross domestic product figures.
The breakdown of GDP from the Central Statistical Office shows that the
British consumer is still going strong. Consumer spending rose 0.5 per cent
between the second and third quarters and was 2.3 per cent higher than in
the previous year.
While recent retail sales figures have shown signs of a slowdown in high
street spending, the consumer has nevertheless been remarkably resilient in
the face of this year's tax increases.
Consumers contributed about a third of the 0.9 per cent third-quarter GDP
rise. Just under a half was due to the improvement in the trade position.
The hoped-for investment boom faltered as gross domestic fixed capital
formation fell in the third quarter - although it was still 2.3 per cent
higher than a year ago.
While the upward revision to third-quarter GDP had been expected, after
strong industrial production figures for September, the change in the
estimate of second-quarter growth from 1.1 per cent to 1.3 per cent was more
surprising.
The CSO said part of the reason for the rise was a jump in the estimate for
agricultural production, but the bulk of the increase came from the services
sector.
After allowing for all the revisions, GDP is about 3.2 per cent above its
previous peak and 7.1 per cent above the trough reached in the recession.
The revisions confirm earlier views, expressed by some of the chancellor's
panel of independent forecasters, that official figures had been
underestimating GDP growth.
There are three ways of measuring gross domestic product: output, income and
expenditure. The CSO found that the income and expenditure measures were
growing faster than the output indicator. Revisions have been made to align
the output measure with the other two.
This alignment is achieved by adjusting the stocks figure. So while the
statistics show a Pounds 925m rise in stocks and work-in-progress in the
third quarter, the biggest rise for five years, this statistic will be
treated with caution.
