FT  19 DEC 94 / Survey of Sweden (9): Exploiting their leverage - The Greens
After failing to break through the required 4 per cent threshold to enter
the Riksdag (parliament) during the last three-year session, Sweden's
fledgling Environment Party (Miljopartiet) - popularly known as the Greens -
captured 5 per cent of the vote in the September elections and see the
party's future going from strength to strength.
The Greens find themselves back in parliament for the second time since they
were formed in 1981 as the country's first new political party in 70 years.
Their roots are in the so-called 'alternative movement' which emerged in the
1970s to champion the causes of not only the environment, but also peace and
womens' equality while opposing nuclear weapons and energy.
They first entered the Riksdag in 1988 for a three-year parliamentary term,
backed by a vote of 5.5 per cent. But, in 1985, the Greens scored at local
level, winning 237 seats on 148 local councils which they tripled three
years later to 698 seats on 260 out of 284 councils. They also forged ahead
at regional level in 1988, when they won 101 seats and representation on all
25 county councils.
There were teething problems in the early days as the Greens seemed more a
curiosity than anything else. But important political events such as the Rio
Conference on the environment in Brazil in 1991 has boosted the credibility
of Green parties worldwide with their main cause having been elevated to the
international agenda.
In Sweden, the Greens' platform has changed little over the past 10 years,
although it is now presented in a less idealistic and less fundamentalist
tone. Among other things, they favour energy taxes - so-called environmental
taxes or Green taxes - as a means to make pollution expensive, promote
recycling and reduce traffic. They support a 35-hour work week so that more
people can be put to work - Sweden's present 13.8 per cent unemployment rate
is unprecedented since the second world war. They continue to push for rapid
closure of Sweden's nuclear power plants and adamantly oppose plans for a
hazardous waste disposal facility.
'Our return to the Riksdag did not represent the protest vote which some
claim. . . it meant that when we were out of parliament the last time,
people genuinely missed the fact that environmental issues had disappeared
from the debate,' said Ms Marianne Samuelsson, 49, a mother of three, joint
leader of the Greens and an MP.
'When we were in (the Riksdag) before, the other parties saw benefits to
gain votes by elevating environmental issues to their agenda. This was
superficial. What happened on the environment front during 1991-94 when we
were out? Very little, if anything - and this did not go unnoticed by the
electorate, particularly by women and youth,' she said.
It was primarily women and the youth vote which propelled the Greens back
into the Riksdag this year. Ms Samuelsson concedes that the Greens lost out
in 1991 because of inefficiency and disarray: 'We simply did not have our
act together.' But Greens throughout Europe hit a five-year low after 1988
which coincided with a right-wing wave of politics and from which they
managed only this year to recover, according to political analysts.
Sweden's Greens ran on an anti-European Union ticket for the September
elections and this undoubtedly shored up their support ahead of Sweden's
November referendum on EU membership which was opposed by almost half the
electorate.
During the period when it was out of power, the party reorganised and did
some deep soul-searching to regain its confidence which was battered by the
1991 defeat.
'The leadership in Sweden of the Green party has become more seasoned, more
experienced and less fundamentalist than their earlier years. They have
shown that they are a party with whom political deals can be struck,' said
Professor Soran Holmberg, at Gothenberg University where he is department
head of political science and head of a special election studies team.
The Greens' joint male-female party leadership is meant to demonstrate that
party commitments also include gender equality. Ms Samuelsson became
co-leader of the party in 1992 together with Mr Birger Schlaug. The Greens
have the highest proportional female representation in the Riksdag of any
national party. The party holds 18 seats and is represented on 16
parliamentary committees.
The Greens are also members of the 20-country European Green Party
Federation, and have endorsed its programme which rejects the Maastricht
Treaty and the Western European Union. With Sweden's slim Yes vote on EU
membership, the Green party intends, through the federation, to make its
voice heard in Brussels, because the party has little faith that Ms Anita
Gradin, Sweden's EU Commissioner, will make environmental issues a priority.
'I'm disappointed that Sweden did not get a person in Brussels who is
engaged in environmental issues - Anita Gradin simply is not,' said Ms
Samuelsson.
'The situation in Europe is developing one way - the wrong way. There is
more traffic and more chemicals. . . the list goes on. . . and this cannot
continue if we have any conscience at all about leaving the earth in
reasonable shape for coming generations,' she said.
The Greens advocate a referendum throughout the Nordic countries in either
1996 or 1997 on the EU's next phase of economic and monetary union.
'Basically, we oppose the EU's common economic and monetary policy - not all
countries are equal - and as for the WEU, this is not a peace organisation.
After the US, the EU is the world's second-biggest producer of weapons. This
means weapons will remain high on the EU's agenda because Europe's economies
depend on their production for revenue.
'Sweden has WEU observer status which means it will have access to all WEU
information, undermining the government's claim of being 'alliance-free'.
This also raises questions over the government's stand on a future common EU
military force, although the prime minister has suggested a referendum may
be needed,' Ms Samuelsson said.
Professor Holmberg believes that the Greens' anti-EU stance will benefit the
party in the long run. 'They were helped by the 'EU dimension' and the
ongoing (EU) debate in Sweden will help their future as they try to slow
Sweden's integration into Europe. Their main political competition is the
Left party who they will always have to look over their shoulder to monitor.
. . both of these parties have the most volatile voters in Sweden,' he said.
The Greens believe their return to the Riksdag will strengthen the party's
ties to the ruling minority Social Democratic party.
'They depend on the Left (party) for support for all the budget cuts and
other proposals to reduce the deficit. They won't get support from the Left
on many of their plans. . . which means they will have to rely on us,' Ms
Samuelsson said - a reminder that Sweden's political situation gives the
Greens a degree of leverage in the Riksdag which they aim to exploit.
