FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget 94 (Government Statements): Maturity will bring new
lease of life - TESSAs
Changes to the rules for Tessas are planned so that investors who have held
an account for five years will be able to open a second account with the
full amount of capital deposited in their first Tessa, but not the
accumulated interest.
This will mean that they will be able to go on getting tax-free interest on
up to Pounds 9,000, provided they leave the capital untouched for a further
five years.
The chancellor's intention is to encourage people to hold on to savings
built up in their Tessas.
The first Tessas will mature in January 1996.
Interest earned on the account after maturity will become taxable. Under
current rules investors would then be able to open a new Tessa with a
max-imum first-year deposit of Pounds 3,000.
The chancellor proposes to increase the first-year deposit limit for a
second Tessa to allow individuals to invest up to the full amount of
capital, at most Pounds 9,000, which they had kept in their first Tessa
until maturity.
Investors who wish to take advantage of the increased limit will need to
open their second account within six months of the maturity of their first
Tessa.
People who invest less than Pounds 9,000 in the first year of their second
account will be able to go on saving over the next four years within the
usual limits of Pounds 1,800 for each year.
All Tessas will remain subject to an overall investment limit of Pounds
9,000 and to the rule that a Tessa has to last for five years if the tax
advan-tages are to be obtained.
The maximum first year deposit for people who have either not previously had
a Tessa or who invested less than Pounds 3,000 in their first Tessa will
remain at Pounds 3,000.
The Inland Revenue will be consulting the bodies representing institutions
offering Tessas on the changes needed to administer the new rules.
Under the Budget proposals the range of institutions able to offer Tessas
will be extended to include 'European Authorised Institutions'.
These are, broadly speaking, credit institutions incorporated in other
member states which are authorised to take deposits anywhere in the European
Union by virtue of the relevant authorisation in their home state.
