FT  27 AUG 94 / Markets: Stocks are pulled up by their shorts - Wall Street
This week, the Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed about 130 points to more
than 3,880 - its highest level since late March - on three separate waves of
buying.
It was not just a rally of blue-chip stocks, either. The composite index of
Nasdaq stocks climbed 3 per cent in four and a half trading days, in the
process scaling a peak untouched in six months, while the more broadly-based
Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index did even better, jumping 4.4 per cent to reach
its highest mark since early February.
After a difficult summer, traders, investors and analysts are wondering if
this is the beginning of the rally that everyone has been waiting for since
the Federal Reserve began ratcheting up interest rates in February. Rates
have been raised five times since then, but at the time of the last increase
10 days ago, hopes were high that it might be the last such move of the
current cycle of monetary policy tightenings.
Those hopes were reinforced this week by data which suggested that the
interest rate increases of earlier in the year may finally be feeding
through into the economy, slowing it down sufficiently to keep inflationary
pressures firmly in check.
First there was the July durable goods orders report, which showed that
orders had fallen by 4.2 per cent in the month, an unexpectedly large
decline that was the biggest in more than two and a half years. While that
figure was skewed by a big drop in orders in the transportation industry, it
was still encouraging, at least to those troubled by the strength of the US
economy.
Similarly, yesterday's revision in the second quarter gross domestic product
figure was also a pleasant surprise. Although the number was revised higher
 -from GDP growth of 3.7 per cent to 3.8 per cent - the market had been
bracing for a considerably larger upward revision.
The durable goods orders and GDP reports were exactly what the
inflation-sensitive bond market wanted: a sign that the economy may be
cooling off. The subsequent rally in Treasury prices lowered the yield on
the benchmark 30-year government bond - the most widely followed measure of
long-term interest rates - from 7.55 per cent at the start of the week to
7.47 per cent near the end. And, of course, where the bond market goes, the
stock market, which has been marching in lockstep with Treasury prices all
summer, follows.
The gains in share prices this week, however, were not entirely due to news
of a weakening economy and rising bond prices. A recovery in the value of
the dollar against the Japanese yen also helped lift stocks. More unusually,
though, activities in the derivatives market may have provided share prices
with a significant boost on Wednesday, the day when the Dow jumped more than
70 points.
Much of those gains were achieved late in the day, and market analysts
attributed them to 'short-covering' by investors and dealers. In recent
months, a record number of market participants, anticipating further
declines in share prices, have run up 'short' positions in stocks. This
means they have borrowed shares and immediately sold them on, in the hope
that when they have to return the borrowed shares, they will be able to buy
them in the market at a lower price - thus making a profit.
When prices start rising unexpectedly, short-sellers are faced with the
prospect of big losses, because they have to buy back their borrowed stocks
at a higher price. The only way to limit those losses, is to buy stocks
before they rise too far and wipe out the profit on the short positions.
This 'short-covering' is what happened late on Wednesday, and the rise in
prices that prompted it was reportedly caused by heavy buying of blue-chip
stocks by investors who had bought a particular derivatives product - a
short-term stock index option - from a Washington-based money manager. That
manager had sold the option because he was convinced share prices were going
to fall this week.
When prices rose above a certain level on Wednesday afternoon, however,
anyone who bought the index options from him started making money. Those
investors then kept on buying, because the higher prices went, the more
money they made on their options. It was this rush of late demand which
seems to have panicked the short-sellers into also buying stocks. The end
result was a 71-point gain on the Dow.
Short-covering may also have contributed to yesterday morning's big jump in
the Dow, but by then, share prices appeared to have an upward momentum all
of their own. For now, at least, the stock market is on a roll.
 ---------------------------------------
Monday             3751.22  -  03.89
Tuesday            3775.83  +  24.61
Wednesday          3846.73  +  70.90
Thursday           3829.89  -  16.84
Friday             3881.05  +  51.16
 ---------------------------------------
