FT  14 JUN 94 / Letters to the Editor: 'Excessively high' returns are sought
for long-term projects
Sir, The recent debate on dividend payments by UK companies and the
associated issue of whether pressures from the City of London discourage
longer-term investment has generated much heat but limited light. A key
issue in evaluating the efficiency with which resources are allocated in the
UK is assessing whether the returns required by investors for funding
longer-term projects undertaken by industrial and commercial companies are
too high. Assessing those required returns is itself tricky - though
manipulation of various financial market data can be informative. Much
harder is assessing what required returns should be given the time horizon
over which physical investment or R&amp;D expenditure might pay off and the
risks involved.
In an article published in the November 1993 volume of the Economic Journal
I described some research I carried out into whether returns required by the
stock market on longer-term investment by UK companies looked too high. Two
conclusions were reached in that paper. First, the returns required on
projects which did not pay back for five years or so appeared to be very
substantially higher than the returns required on projects which paid off
more quickly (within a year or so). Second, the difference in required
returns appeared to be larger than could easily be warranted on the basis of
risk. The econometric study used data on around 500 medium and large UK
public corporations and covered the 1975-1990 period.
In an area as complex as this, no econometric study could be expected to
settle the issue. But testing hypotheses about the operation of markets by
carefully analysing the historical record offers the only constructive way
forward. On the basis of the little econometric work that exists, there is
worrying evidence that companies in the UK face excessively high required
returns for longer-term projects.
David Miles,
senior UK economist,
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith,
25 Ropemaker Street,
London EC2Y 9LY
