FT  11 MAY 94 / A blot on the map: The genocide in distant Rwanda can no
longer be ignored
It would be wiser not to write about Rwanda. Very few FT readers want to
know about it, and if they did I should not be the best person to inform
them.
There may not even be anything one can usefully say, let alone do, about
what is, for most of us in London and New York and Tokyo, a very faraway
country indeed. Maybe we should be better off, and the Rwandans themselves
at least no worse off, if we literally knew nothing of their affairs.
But that state of innocence is denied us. We have eaten of the fruit of the
tree of knowledge, alias the global media network. We do know that 'up to
200,000' people have been massacred in Rwanda since the death of President
Juvenal Habyarimana on April 6. Even a mind like mine, long since numbed
with the arithmetic of horror, finds that rather a large pile of corpses to
pass by in silence.
So I am forcing myself to think about Rwanda, at least for a minute or two.
To what purpose, you may ask. 'If those people insist on killing each other,
is it any affair of ours? Can we be expected to fight their wars for them?
How many troops would it take to stop this slaughter, and how long would
they have to stay there? Wouldn't foreign troops soon become one side in the
war, or even unite all sides against them? Aren't you advocating a new
colonialism?'
If those questions are asked about Bosnia, which is in the heart of Europe,
and about which we have now had two years to educate ourselves, they are
bound to be asked about Rwanda, an obscure ex-Belgian colony in the heart of
Africa.
Let me answer the last one first, in order to avoid the others. At this
stage I am not advocating anything, except that we pay more attention to
these terrifying events and take them seriously.
I am willing to admit, and I hope it does not make me a racist, that as a
European I feel more directly concerned by Bosnia than by Rwanda. But I have
a strong and uncomfortable impression that many Europeans, including
educated and well-informed ones, do not feel concerned by Rwanda at all.
Part of the reason is probably that during the past month, while the Rwanda
tragedy has been happening, the attention of almost all our Africa
specialists has been riveted on South Africa. Indeed most of them have been
physically there, caught up in the tense and moving denouement of the epic
struggle to end apartheid. They have had little time, and probably even less
to spare of energy or emotional commitment, for events elsewhere in Africa,
as well as being less accessible to diplomats, exiles or relief agencies
involved in Rwanda than they would have been at home.
But that is not the whole story. The truth is that Africa specialists in
themselves are a dwindling and embattled breed. The South African election
might even be their last hurrah. They have been finding it increasingly
difficult to hold the attention of their colleagues and bosses for events in
other parts of the continent where neither white lives nor foreign
investments are at stake on a large scale.
We in the west, or north, have got into the habit of writing off, or
shrugging off, Black Africa as a hopeless case. We think of it as a grim and
tragic story, but one 'told by an idiot, signifying nothing' to the rest of
the world. 'Why can't Africans be more like Asians?' has become the essence
of our conventional wisdom on the subject.
That wisdom was challenged in a recent article in the Atlantic Monthly,
which caused a bit of a stir when copies of it were distributed among the
cream of the Anglo-American establishment at a recent foreign affairs
conference at Ditchley Park, near London.
The author, Robert Kaplan, suggested that many parts of Asia, and even some
parts of North America, are actually very like what we think of as typical
Black Africa, and are going to get more so; and that even if more Asians
than Africans are likely to join the privileged elite of global capitalism,
that elite will increasingly have to spend its time in a kind of
air-conditioned, heavily defended ghetto - since large areas of most big
American cities, not to mention the urban sprawl between Hong Kong and
Guangzhou, are already little safer or healthier than the anarchic,
Aids-ridden shanty towns in which so many Africans now live their short and
miserable lives.
The article, entitled The Coming Anarchy, raised a very uncomfortable
question: could it be that an 'African' future - in which the majority of
the world's population would have to live with endemic violence, rampant
disease, soil erosion, malnutrition, and the collapse of family structures
and values - is not the alternative to an 'Asian' future of headlong
economic growth, but actually the other side of the same coin?
Mr Kaplan raised that question. He did not answer it altogether
convincingly. And anyway he was not trying to explain the genocide in
Rwanda, which happened since he wrote the article. But he did succeed in
making Africa a little harder to shrug off.
Meanwhile, there is another habit which western commentators need to break,
namely that of lumping together victims and murderers, and of assuming that
violence is deeply ingrained in any society where large-scale violence
occurs, rather than looking for specific causes and indeed specific
culprits.
Genocide does not just happen. It has to be carefully planned, and evidence
is already coming out that this was the case in Rwanda, perhaps even more
clearly than it was in Bosnia.
