FT  13 MAY 94 / Greek socialists in new privatisation U-turn
Greece's socialist government, which has already abruptly reversed its stand
against privatisation by announcing the partial flotation of OTE, the state
telecoms company, now plans to re-appoint the same international investment
bankers it accused a few months ago of demanding excessive fees.
The decision to bring back Credit Suisse First Boston and J Henry Schroder
Wagg to handle the sale of 30 per cent of OTE through the Athens stock
exchange is due to be announced in the next few days.
The government's choice is all the more surprising as senior socialist
officials had earlier dismissed the possibility that CSFB would be recalled.
CSFB had been openly attacked over the high fees it commanded as a leading
adviser on privatisation to the previous conservative government,
One government adviser said that to members of the governing Panhellenic
Socialist Movement (Pasok) CSFB 'appears an arrogant outfit that represents
the unacceptable face of capitalism.'
But he added: 'On the other hand, bringing back the old team is the
pragmatic solution. They worked on the listing for several months last year,
so we can be more certain of getting the flotation done on time.'
The government hopes to realise about Dr300bn (Pounds 814m) from the sale of
30 per cent of OTE. The offering would include an international tranche
amounting to 12-15 per cent, to be sold to investors in Europe, the US and
Japan.
The economy ministry is anxious for the deal to be completed this autumn, so
that a portion of the funds raised can go towards covering a projected
Dr500bn shortfall in budget revenue. The remainder would be used to upgrade
OTE's fixed wire network.
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou cancelled Greece's privatisation programme
immediately after the socialists returned to power at last October's general
election. The conservatives' overall adviser on privatisation, N M
Rothschild, was sacked, while separate agreements with CSFB and Schroders
were frozen.
The widening revenue gap and the need to raise funds to modernise Greece's
public utilities forced the government to change its policy two months ago.
Since then, confusion has surrounded procedures for appointing an adviser
and lead underwriters for the sale. While bids were not formally invited,
the economy ministry solicited offers from several international investment
banks. Another half-dozen banks are understood to have submitted bids
without waiting to be asked.
The ministry's plans for a 'beauty contest' to assess bids from a shortlist
of contenders, including Paribas, Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns, Salomon
Brothers and S J Warburg, were dropped last month without any explanation.
The government was understood to be looking for a bank that could replace
CSFB in selling the international tranche, while retaining Schroders to
structure the issue.
Under the conservatives' plan to sell 49 per cent of the company, CSFB was
advising the government on the sale of a 35 per cent strategic stake to an
international telecoms operator. CSFB and Schroders were appointed joint
global co-ordinators and lead managers for the flotation of another 14 per
cent of the company.
