FT  05 MAY 94 / FT Exporter (15): Bruised but not yet broken - The break-up
of the Soviet Union was a painful experience for Finland's state-owned
chemicals group. But Christopher Brown-Humes finds that it is preparing to
rebuild its operations in the area / Company profile, Kemira
Most big Finnish exporters were caught out by the collapse of the Soviet
Union in 1991 and Kemira, the state-owned chemicals group, was no exception
to the rule.
Particularly painful for the Finnish company has been its experience with a
plant at Kokkola in western Finland, which was commissioned in 1987 with the
sole aim of supplying crop protection chemicals to the Soviet market.
The plant - a Dollars 100m investment - had to be shut down last year after
the agreement with the Soviet side broke down and demand for the chemicals
in their intended market dived.
The bruising experience has not deterred Kemira from seeking to rebuild
sales and operations in the former Soviet states and eastern Europe.
Although its sales to both regions fell sharply between 1989 and 1992, the
group has already begun building up business again.
Exports from Finland to the Commonwealth of Independent States rose by FM30m
to FM220m between 1992 and 1993, while exports to other East European
countries increased to FM75m from FM42m.
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet bloc accounted for 3 per cent of total
group net sales of FM11.8bn in 1993, up from 2 per cent a year earlier.
But Kemira today is facing a new business climate. Gone are the days of cosy
Finnish/Soviet government-to-government trade pacts when the Soviet market
accounted for as much as 25 per cent of Finnish exports.
Although the barter agreements that characterised that period do still
exist, they are looser arrangements, and there are few guarantees that they
will be honoured in full.
Kemira has been forced to adjust to a rapid change in business structures.
Having previously dealt with just one organisation on the eastern side -
say, the fertilisers ministry - it is now involved with a much broader range
of agencies, such as import/export companies, plant protection agencies and
chemical formulating plants.
One positive result is that the company can influence the development of its
eastern business more directly than in the past. 'We are now working very
closely with formulating plants to develop new formulations for the CIS
market.' says Mr Risto Keranen, vice-president of Kemira Agro's technical
products division.
But crop protection is just one aspect of the group's effort to build up
eastern business. It has also been developing water treatment and paint
operations, and is investing in facilities and joint ventures in a way that
was not possible in the Soviet era.
One Kemira water treatment plant is already operating in Poland, and the
group is currently investing some FM30m on building a similar facility in
Estonia. There are also well-advanced plans to construct water treatment
plants in both St Petersburg and the Czech republic.
In contrast to these direct investments, the preferred method for building
up paints operations has been through joint ventures. Initially, the group
took an 80 per cent stake in an Estonian company, but it has since taken 100
per cent control. In St Petersburg it has a 70 per cent stake in a joint
venture with Lenbythim, which should start producing paint at the end of the
year, while in Latvia it is involved in a paint producing joint venture with
the Swedish group Alcro Becker and Latvian interests.
As a complement to this, the company has been forced to devote much greater
resources to sales, marketing and distribution operations than it did in the
past.
Sales of Kemira products in the CIS are still only half of what they were in
1990, although in some markets, such as Estonia, they are higher. The group
attributes the decline to the fact that many of their potential customers in
the CIS are chronically short of money.
'The farmers don't have any money, and there isn't any working credit system
for them. If they do have money, it is more likely that their first priority
will be spare parts for their tractors or fuel,' says Mr Keranen.
But the group is confident that the situation will eventually change. Crop
protection, water treatment, industrial chemicals and paints will remain the
main areas of emphasis for Kemira in eastern Europe, while the geographical
net will be spread far beyond the neighbouring regions of St Petersburg and
the Baltic states.
While waiting for the upturn to materialise, the group has been giving
additional emphasis to its principal European markets. But there has been no
dramatic change in sales. Kemira notes that it is already strongly
established in the European Union, with 40 per cent of production based
there, and 46 per cent of sales in EU countries.
Its broader strategy is to give increased emphasis to chemicals for water
treatment and the pulp and paper industry and to titanium dioxide (a key
ingredient in paints). At the same time the relative share of fertiliser
sales in group business is expected to decline. To assist these ambitions,
the company is planning an initial public offering and stock exchange
introduction, although the timetable for them has yet to be specified.
