FT  10 SEP 94 / Travel: Chasing a tail shot - Practical Traveller
The first sight whale-watchers have of their quarry is likely to be the
mixture of carbon dioxide and water the whales huff into the air through
their blowholes. Boatmen should cry 'Thar she blows]' What the ones at
Kaikoura, in New Zealand, actually say is: 'Get your cameras ready for tail
shots, folks]'
Sure enough, once refreshed, the great sperm whales lift their tails slowly
into the air against a background of snow-capped coastal mountains, and
silently vanish underwater while 100 shutters click. When they resurface,
more tourist boats, alerted by underwater sonar gear, will be waiting.
Whale-watching has burgeoned in the last decade. You can visit feeding,
breeding and migrating grounds round the world on small local fishing boats,
or lengthy scientific research cruises led by qualified naturalists.
Though people join in for much the same reason they go on safari, whales
evoke a visceral awe which not even lions can produce: whales are big. But
the sea is so wide that you do not feel you are getting in the way.
Off the British coast, there are trips run by Sea Life Surveys from the Isle
of Mull (tel: 06-884 223), from April to October. You can have four hours
for Pounds 26, seven days for Pounds 470, or a variety of excursions in
between. The most likely sightings are small - 25ft minke whales, target of
Norwegian harpoonists, but orcas ('killer whales') and dolphins can also be
spotted.
Coastal New England was among the first regions to turn from catching to
watching. Off Cape Cod, for instance, you can see humpbacks, right whales
(so called because, swimming slowly, they were the right whales to hunt),
finbacks, minkes and sei whales.
They eat enough from April to October to fill them for the rest of the year,
which they sensibly spend in the Caribbean. Whale Watcher of Provincetown
(tel: 508-362 6088) is among the many organisations to run day trips: 3 1/2
hours for Dollars 22. In Boston, call New England Aquarium for details of
trips (617-973 5277).
Off the US West Coast, grey whales migrate south from Alaska to Baja
California from December to March, and back again until May. Monterey Sport
Fishing (tel: 408-372 2203) of Monterey Bay offers two-hour trips for
Dollars 15 until March, on which you may see as many as 60 sailing by.
From July to October, longer trips (Dollars 30) go further out to watch
humpback, blue and minke whales which summer there, though not as many as
the greys. Similar trips are available from San Diego; try Mariposa (tel:
619-542 0646).
Those who want to become more deeply involved could try Monterey Bay Whale
Watch (tel: 408-372 0671). For Dollars 43 from June to November you can go
on six-hour cruises helping to identify humpbacks' migratory patterns.
Oceanic Society Expeditions of San Francisco (tel: 415-474 3785) offers
everything from winter half-day trips to see the greys to 12-day cruises in
March.
Most far-flung of all is Kaikoura. A cold current meets a warm one,
attracting food (squid, mostly), so male sperm whales are here all the time
and trips run year-round unless bad weather stops them. Summer and autumn
mornings are best. Whale Watch Kaikoura (tel: 03-195 045) trips leave from
the Whaleway station and cost NZDollars 95. Expect to see up to five whales
in a 2 1/2 -hour trip five miles offshore; the guides know most of them by
name.
There are other places to look at whales: Dingle in the Irish Republic; the
Azores; Maui in Hawaii; Vancouver Island in Canada; Anchorage in Alaska;
Perth and south-east Australia; Peninsula Valdes in Argentina; Samana in the
Dominican Republic; and many more.
It is also possible to book from Britain. Twickers World (tel: 081-892
8164), for instance, offers 10-day packages to Mexico, including eight days
afloat, from Pounds 2,200.
With minimal regulation, whale-watching is ecologically sound: once whales
generate more money being watched than killed, they will live longer,
possibly for ever.
