FT  29 DEC 94 / Milosevic silences opposition at home: The Serb president is
tightening his grip
Once denounced as the chief instigator of war in former Yugoslavia,
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, now praised by the west for his key
role in efforts to end the violence, is quietly getting on with crushing the
last remnants of opposition at home.
He has turned his attention to the independent media, political opposition
and national minorities in Serbia, convinced that western approval entitles
him to a free hand. While western governments count on him to broker peace
in Bosnia, they appear to ignore the fact that since coming to power in
1987, his regime has fed on conflict.
The Serb authorities this week outlawed Borba, the only independent daily
newspaper in Serbia. A city court ruled that Borba, which was privatised
four years ago, was now state property. Journalists have a fortnight to
report to the new editor-in-chief, Mr Dragutin Brcin, minister of
information and a member of the ruling Socialist politburo.
Borba now comes out under Mr Brcin's supervision. His 'official' edition is
filled with unsigned pro-government articles and is sold in kiosks. But
Borba journalists have not given up. Joined by liberal intellectuals, they
brave the cold to hawk the 'real', now illegal, version on the grey streets
of Belgrade.
Why the seemingly omnipotent Serbian president would crack down on a
newspaper with a circulation of 35,000 puzzles them. 'Especially,' said Mrs
Gordana Logar, editor, 'when Mr Milosevic is now supporting peace, which we
have always advocated'. In the distorted landscape of Serbia, Borba somehow
maintained high standards. It published news censored by all other Serbian
dailies, opposing nationalist hysteria and offering Serbs an alternative to
the state-run media's tales of foreign conspiracies and providing a bridge
to the outside world.
At first, these steps appear at odds with the Serbian president's new role
as a 'man of peace', determined to re-join the international community. A
European Union statement issued this week by Germany, the outgoing EU
president, warned that the Belgrade regime's disregard for an independent
media would be taken into account when considering Yugoslavia's
re-integration.
In fact, Mr Milosevic's repressive measures have increased since five months
ago he abandoned his proteges, the Bosnian Serb leaders, pronouncing himself
in favour of peace in Bosnia. Almost unnoticed, the Serbian regime has
unleashed a wave of terror in its southern province of Kosovo, killing,
arresting or harassing hundreds of ethnic Albanians who comprise 92 per cent
of the province's 2m population. Belgrade has also intensified arrests and
Kafkaesque political trials in Sandzak, a Moslem-inhabited region which
straddles southern Serbia and tiny Montenegro, the two republics that now
comprise what remains of Yugoslavia. Non-Serbs make up a third of
Yugoslavia's population of 10.5m.
The restive Kosovo remains the most volatile potential flashpoint in Serbia.
This densely populated province, which was stripped of its autonomy five
years ago, remains in the grip of the Serbian police. If violence were to
erupt, Albanians from neighbouring Macedonia and Albania could take up arms
to help their Kosovo kin. Diplomats worry this could ignite the Balkans.
While opposition parties hold nearly half the 250-seat Serbian parliament,
they have virtually disappeared from public life. The Socialist MPs this
week took advantage of an opposition walk-out to adopt the state budget
unanimously - and without any debate. Opposition MPs yesterday said the
government was poised to introduce 'special measures' in key municipalities
where the Socialists were not in power. Mr Milosevic has used his iron grip
over the state media to blame the opposition for rising economic
deprivations and the massive increase in crime.
Indeed Mr Milosevic rules as if his quarrelsome opposition does not even
exist. His wife, Mrs Mirjana Markovic - after her husband regarded as the
most influential figure in Serbia and who makes known her views by
publishing her diaries in a popular magazine - recently made clear her
distaste for the parliamentary system. 'Parliamentary democracy, for
example, suits the English but really not does not look good on the Serbs,'
she wrote last week.
In former Yugoslavia, Serbia was the last of six republics to adopt a
multi-party system. Mrs Markovic routinely mourns the fall of communism in
eastern Europe, insisting that it was just a passing phase.
Meanwhile, the Serbian parliament has passed a law calling for the
re-appraisal of all privatised companies. In short, what little
privatisation has been achieved, less than 10 per cent of state-companies,
will be largely reversed.
It seems, as one Socialist official recently confided, 'everything must be
under control - we will have to take important decisions'. Perhaps fearing a
backlash by Serbs, tired of extensive power cuts or the deteriorating
economy, Mr Milosevic seems to believe that he will have to snuff out even
the last flicker of opposition.
