FT  10 JUN 94 / Government Bonds: US Treasuries mixed ahead of inflation
data
US Treasury bonds drifted to mixed levels yesterday as traders squared their
positions before today's inflation data.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government issue was  1/16 better
at 87 5/8 , with the yield dipping to 7.271 per cent. At the short end, the
two-year note was down  1/32 at 100 5/32 , to yield 5.772 per cent.
Activity was sluggish, as most traders preferred to stay on the sidelines
until after this morning's release of the May producer price index. Bond
prices held fairly steady, as there was general optimism in the market that
inflation was still no threat to the value of fixed-rate securities.
Though the PPI itself, which reflects a backward view, is inherently of less
interest than statistics suggesting future trends, today's report may
provide a catalyst for a strong advance. Analysts were expecting bonds to
rally if the index matches expectations of a 0.2 per cent rise in wholesale
prices last month, or 0.3 per cent when the volatile food and energy sectors
are excluded.
There was a snippet of economic news out yesterday. The Labor Department
said initial claims for state unemployment benefit had held steady last
week. The market had been expecting a slight uptick in joblessness, but the
announcement barely caused a ripple of activity.
The more sombre tone in Europe caused UK government bond prices to ease.
With no new UK economic data, there was no follow-through after Wednesday's
substantial rise as investors took profits.
'European markets are on hold. They are still tracking the US and waiting to
see when the Federal Reserve tightens again and waiting for more real
economic data in Europe to see if the easing process is going to continue,'
said Mr Bob Pierce, head of gilt sales at Salomon Brothers.
Traders reported a lack of interest among buyers, particularly for
longer-dated maturities. Analysts said that there was some switching from
gilts into German government bonds.
Analysts said that investors' attention has also begun to turn to the Bank
of England's next gilt auction, due to be announced next week , which will
be a test of market sentiment. The long gilt future was down 17/32 point at
101 7/32 in late trading.
German bond prices suffered a further bout of weakness, following
indications earlier in the week of stronger economic growth which traders
fear will delay further interest rate cuts. Prices slid about 1/8 point, in
the absence of any fresh direction.
The Bundesbank council's inaction over interest rates at its fortnightly
meeting was in line with market expectations, as most analysts believe it is
still too early for a further rate cut.
Moderate retail interest, triggered when 10-year bond yields reached 7 per
cent earlier in the week, has tailed off, leaving the market without any
firm support.
Traders are now waiting to see whether the release of US producer price data
for May will provide any fresh impetus for the bund market.
The September bund future on Liffe ended seven basis points lower at 92.86.
French government bonds tracked the German market downwards, despite data
showing a surprisingly small rise in industrial production in March.
The decision by the Bank of France to leave its intervention rate unchanged
at its money market tender was fully expected and also failed to have an
impact on sentiment.
More important will be today's data on US producer prices and French
consumer prices. The French data could reinforce the picture of a low
inflation French economy and could help improve sentiment in the bond
market. Expectations centre around a rise of 0.2 per cent in May.
French industrial production rose by 0.2 per cent in March, below
expectations of a 0.4 per cent increase.
Sweden's National Debt Office has frozen plans to auction more of a
newly-launched 20-year index-linked bond, meaning it would not go ahead with
auctions for SKr4bn worth during this month to complete a previously-advised
issue programme, Reuters reports.
'We have put (the bonds) on ice for the time being,' a Debt Office spokesman
said. The office had said it would auction a total of SKr10bn worth of the
new zero coupon paper in May and June. In two auctions so far in this period
it offered SKr6bn but accepted bids for only SKr1.157bn.
