FT  28 JAN 94 / Israeli parties greet Hussein-Rabin links
In a rare display of Israeli political consensus on the Middle East peace
process, leaders across the political spectrum yesterday welcomed the
announcement by King Hussein of Jordan that he is ready publicly to meet Mr
Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister.
The prospect of growing economic and political contacts with neighbouring
Jordan before a formal peace treaty will bolster the domestic political
standing of Mr Rabin in face of growing public opposition to territorial and
'security' concessions to the Palestinians and Syria.
Mr Rabin said he was ready to make the necessary preparations to meet the
king without pre-conditions; the king's offer represented 'significant
progress' in the peace process.
Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, said the time had come 'to
legitimise public peace with Jordan'.
Mr Binyamin Netanyahu, leader of the right-wing opposition Likud party, said
he fully supported peace with Jordan, as an important step to a permanent
solution with Palestinians in a confederal arrangement with Jordan. Even the
ultra-right wing Tsomet party, led by Mr Rafael Eitan, endorsed the move.
Israeli leaders have been delighted with the king's statements in the US
this week where he has outlined a vision of peace with Israel.
The Jordanian monarch continues to insist he he will not sign a formal peace
agreement ahead of Syria, but he intends to go ahead unilaterally with
political, diplomatic and economic contacts. King Hussein has said that
unless peace agreements are concluded this year, the region faces the
prospect of deep instability. He has called for a Middle East which holds
the prospect of an entirely different future.
'The talents that are available, the resources that are available, the
opportunities that are available I believe will transform the entire
region,' he declared. The removal of physical and economic barriers could
produce what he called 'a Middle East Nafta'.
Israeli officials believe a Hussein-Rabin summit will lead quickly to
economic co-operation, including the opening of borders to stimulate
regional tourism and trade; joint Israeli-Jordanian development of the
Jordan Valley between the Sea of Galilee and the Dead Sea; the development
of a tourist project between Jordan, Israel and Egypt around cities on the
Red Sea; joint energy in projects in electricity and solar power, and new
road networks.
Mr Peres, who met secretly with King Hussein and Crown Prince Hassan last
November, says a peace agreement has been prepared in detail under which
Israel will cede disputed Israeli-held areas of the Dead Sea and Arava
valley to Jordan and then lease them back at a nominal price. Mr Peres,
however, says he believes that Israel and Jordan will move as close as
possible towards full peace in 1994 without a formal signing ceremony.
A major business conference sponsored by President Bill Clinton is due to
take place in Amman in March, bringing together Arab, Jewish and
international business and political leaders on Arab soil.
For Mr Rabin, unfolding peace with another Arab neighbour will shore up
public support for the government's peace policy. Since last September's
peace accord with Palestinians, many Israelis have expressed concern about
security and have not seen any tangible benefits of peace.
