FT  15 JUL 94 / Letters to the Editor: Estonia has set good currency example
Sir, The article by Philippe Legrain, 'Baltic states' varied roads to
freedom' (June 21) included a misinformed criticism of Estonia's currency
board system, in which the exchange rate of the Estonian kroon is pegged to
the D-Mark, and the central bank abjures domestic credit expansion. Legrain
alleged that Estonia's currency arrangements were leading to high inflation
and currency overvaluation. This is an odd charge, since similar currency
systems, such as in Argentina and Hong Kong, have underpinned price
stability.
Legrain seems to have extrapolated from a single month's price increase, 8.9
per cent in March, to reach broad and unfounded conclusions. The March price
increase resulted mainly from the elimination of subsidies on various
service-sector prices, such as public transportation. Since March, Estonia's
inflation has been among the very lowest of the post-communist economies,
registering just 0.7 per cent in the month of June, and just 5 per cent for
the entire second quarter.
The fact is that the currency board has performed as expected, as we have
shown in a detailed comparison of the Baltic state's monetary arrangements.
The Estonian currency board has provided a firm anchor to Estonia's traded
goods prices, which cover a large proportion of Estonia's small open
economy. As expected, non-traded goods prices have risen faster than traded
goods prices, partly as the result of the end of price controls, and partly
as the consequence of rapid productivity improvements in the tradeable
sector, which have pushed up Estonia's wages in D-Mark or dollar terms.
The kroon is hardly becoming overvalued as a result of these wage increases,
however, especially since dollar wage levels were remarkably low at the
start of Estonia's reforms. Estonia's average industrial wage is currently
about Dollars 120 a month, making Estonia highly competitive in attracting
foreign capital, especially as an export platform to western Europe. This is
why European, and especially Scandinavian, investors are setting up
production operations in Estonia at a remarkable pace.
What Mr Legrain failed to recognise is that Estonia's currency stability and
strict monetary discipline have contributed to solid investor confidence,
low interest rates and renewed economic growth, the highest in the Baltics
and perhaps the highest of all the economies in transition in 1994. It is no
wonder that Lithuania changed over to Estonia's currency board arrangements
in April, and that Latvia has also recently abandoned its floating exchange
rate policy in favour of a pegged exchange rate, though without the firm
backing (and thus the main benefits) of the stricter currency board system.
Ardo Hansson,
Stockholm School of Economics,
adviser to prime minister of Estonia
Jeffrey D Sachs,
Harvard University,
Cambridge,
Massachusetts, US
