FT  27 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: British Gas in trans-Andean
project
British Gas has signed agreements with Argentine, Chilean and US partners to
begin a Dollars 14m feasibility study of a proposed Dollars 1.65bn project
to pipe natural gas across the Andes from Argentina's Nequen fields to
Chile.
Pending satisfactory results of the year-long study, British Gas would take
a 30 per cent equity stake in the Gas de Chile consortium. Chilectra, the
national utility, would have 35 per cent participation and lay the 8,000km
distribution network to supply power plants, industry and homes at an
estimated cost of Dollars 450m. The project's transmission and generation
elements would cost a further Dollars 1.2bn.
British Gas would be technical operator of distribution and take charge of
marketing gas, expected to come on stream in 1998. Construction could begin
next year.
Mr Mike Fulwood, regional manager of British Gas, said: 'We are very much
looking forward to working with Chilectra and other partners on the
feasibility study.
The project has enormous implications for the energy industries of Chile and
Argentina and we feel honoured to participate'.
A second consortium, Gasoducto Transandino, would lay the 750-mile
transmission pipeline at a cost of Dollars 600m. Tenneco Gas of the US,
which would be a 25 per cent equity partner, would build and operate the
pipeline.
Chilectra would take a further 35 per cent stake in Gasoducto Transandino,
with 10 per cent each going to Chile's state oil concern, Enap, and YPF, the
privatised Argentine oil group.
The consortia will also study the feasibility of building thermal power
stations, with a total capacity of 700Mw, for which additional investment of
Dollars 600m will be needed. The plants, which would consume 45 per cent of
projected gas flows, are vital to the entire project.
The signing of agreements, after months of negotiations, was somewhat
upstaged by the announcement last Friday of a rival scheme to supply
Argentine gas to Santiago through a much shorter pipeline. The rival
project, put at a relatively modest Dollars 500m, is being proposed by
Canada's Novacorp and Chilean groups Chilgener, Gasco and Copec.
