FT  27 OCT 94 / World Trade News: Italian leads the field for WTO job
Mr Renato Ruggiero, the European Union candidate to head the future World
Trade Organisation, is leading the three-man field 'by a length', according
to diplomats.
Of the 90-odd countries so far consulted, about a third back him. A quarter
favour Mr Carlos Salinas de Gortari, outgoing Mexican president, with Mr Kim
Chul-su of South Korea not far behind.
Support follows broadly regional lines. Mr Salinas has central and south
America solidly behind him, with Washington giving support behind the
scenes. Mr Kim, South Korea's trade minister, has most of Asia, including
Japan and Australia. Mr Ruggiero, a former Italian trade minister, has
western and eastern Europe, with a sprinkling of Mediterranean, African and
Asian nations.
The decision has to be made by consensus of the 123 members of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. If the three regional blocs hold firm to
their candidates, therefore, a decision could be delayed beyond early
December when Gatt members are due to meet formally to endorse the final
choice.
The WTO is due to come into effect on January 1.
Following last week's consultations, conducted by Mr Andras Szepesi,
Hungary's Gatt ambassador, the political battle has shifted away from
Geneva.
The diplomatic artillery is being trained, first, on the remaining 30 or so
Gatt members, mostly small developing nations with no diplomatic
representation in Geneva. Many have strong trade and aid ties with Brussels
through the European Union's Lome Convention and are likely to back Mr
Ruggiero.
Another line of attack involves securing the second preference votes of
trailing candidates. Both the EU and the Salinas camp have hopes of picking
up Asian backing, on the assumption that Mr Kim will drop out of the race
first.
EU officials believe the Asians would rather support Mr Ruggiero than Mr
Salinas, who is vulnerable to criticism that he is too close to the US and
too 'presidential' to run a technical organisation.
However, trade officials expect Mexico and the US to launch a big diplomatic
offensive at the November 14 summit meeting of the Asia Pacific Economic
Co-operation forum to win Apec endorsement for Mr Salinas.
Nancy Dunne adds from Washington: Washington welcomed the candidacy of Mr
Salinas but realised early that too much enthusiasm could hurt him if he was
seen as 'the US candidate'. Mr Salinas has gone out of his way to
demonstrate his independence from the US, visiting Cuba and promoting trade
ties there and recently warning of trouble if California's anti-immigration
initiative becomes law.
US trade officials are preoccupied by the battle to get approval of the Gatt
implementing legislation. Suspicion of the proposed WTO is intense and Mr
Mickey Kantor the US trade representative, has had to defend it from charges
that the US will be giving up its sovereignty to a foreign body.
