FT  09 AUG 94 / Dutch snuff out church candle cartel: EU rules have ended a
price arrangement dating back to first world war
The stiff wind of competition is blowing through the candle-lit churches of
the Netherlands, where members of the Church Candles Convention have been
forced by European Union rules to change their ways and abandon the practice
of price fixing.
This week, as part of its drive to eliminate cartels, the government
outlawed a price-fixing arrangement that has been operated by the
convention's 12 members since the first world war.
The companies, which supply candles to mainly Catholic churches, have not
decided whether to appeal. 'To be successful, we'd have to prove that the
price arrangements are in the interest of the Netherlands as a whole,' said
Mr Gody van den Hurk, secretary of the industry association. They are not
alone in feeling the heat of the government's campaign against cartels.
Until recently, the Netherlands was alone in the EU to permit cartels,
provided they were not expressly forbidden and were entered in a secret
government register.
The Netherlands forbade price-fixing agreements in 1993, and this year it
outlawed market-sharing and tender-fixing agreements. So far, it has not
granted a single exemption to the rules, not even to the 12 church
candle-makers.
'We've never heard objections from fellow manufacturers or the churches
themselves,' said a spokesman for Van Manen, a family-owned candle-maker.
'The market for church candles is not expanding, and there's no growth in
the number of churches. If anything, the trend is downwards.'
Mr Jacques Klok, chairman of the finance directors of the Catholic Church's
seven Dutch bishoprics, said: 'To us, what is important is that there are
enough candle-makers in the Netherlands.'
Each of the church's 1,800 Dutch parishes buys its own candles from its own
long-standing suppliers. According to Mr van den Hurk, because of these
traditional links between priests and the companies which have supplied
local churches for generations, there is little likelihood of cut-throat
competition emerging.
Attentive service and quick deliveries are probably more important to
churches than price alone, he believed.
The mainstay of the industry is the devotional candles which churchgoers can
light for a donation, starting at around Fl 1 (36p) for the smallest candle.
Churches pay less, and use the difference to pay for general upkeep and
religious purposes.
The industry's most specialised product is the large altar candle which is
made to detailed liturgical specifications and which stays lit for days at a
time on special occasions, such as Christmas or Lent. Prices for these are
calculated by the kilo, but can easily exceed Fl 250 (Pounds 90) for the
bigger varieties.
The average Catholic church spends several thousand guilders a year on
candles. This is especially true for those in large cities where streams of
tourists and other visitors encourage church elders to light candles during
the week. In the countryside, candle-lighting tends to be restricted to once
or twice a week.
Together, Dutch churches spend up to Fl 8m a year on candles, a fraction of
the country's total Fl 200m annual consumption of candles.
Besides church candle-makers, other business sectors that have failed to win
exemptions from the new cartel rules include the country's aviation schools,
which wanted to continue their policy of charging a basic minimum for
parachute courses.
Dutch estate agents also dropped their minimum commission under government
pressure and, instead, adopted a system of negotiable, recommended charges.
This week, however, a Dutch house-owners' lobby group claimed that some
agents were still agreeing commission levels and presenting a united front
to prospective house-buyers.
