FT  21 MAR 94 / War-weakened Somalia hit by cholera epidemic
A cholera epidemic is inflicting further suffering on Somalia, struggling to
recover from famine and civil war. More than 1,700 cases, and 100 deaths,
have been reported since the first outbreak of the disease in the northern
port of Bossasso last month.
The Qaraan hospital in the capital, Mogadishu, has run out of beds and floor
space, but is admitting more than 70 new cholera patients a day. Scores of
sufferers are being treated outdoors, lying on rough blankets and attached
to saline drips hanging from branches of acacia trees.
Dr Osman Dufle, who says the number of cases is rising exponentially, has
begged the departing US military for tents and camp beds, as the rainy
season is due to begin later this month. 'The epidemic,' he warns, 'will
continue to rage out of control unless UN agencies help us to chlorinate
wells and improve the sanitation of this city.'
Relief workers say cholera was a disaster waiting to happen. Big towns such
as Mogadishu and Kismayo have no piped water or sewerage systems; both were
destroyed during the civil war. Thousands of displaced people still live in
overcrowded camps. Rubbish is left to rot on the streets and drinking water
comes from a multiplicity of shallow wells, most contaminated by sewage.
The cholera epidemic also points to the failure of the UN Operation in
Somalia (Unosom) to deliver humanitarian assistance. Most of the UN's
resources have been consumed in the failed military attempt to overpower
Mogadishu's warring militias.
The UN has also spent more than Dollars 80m (Pounds 54.7m) building a
fortified compound for 1,000 UN civilian and military staff. The sewerage
system alone cost Dollars 9m.
Outside the compound walls, however, human and animal waste - the breeding
ground for cholera - lie in stagnant pools. With no government and no social
services, Somalia is ill-equipped to cope with a national health emergency
of this kind.
The few Somali doctors, like Dr Dufle, who did not flee during the war have
worked without salaries for the past four years.
They depend on non-government organisations such as Medecins Sans Frontieres
for food and medical supplies. 'Although we hoped Unosom or the World Health
Organisation would pay our salaries, no help has been forthcoming,' says Dr
Dufle.
The epidemic has struck as the west is disengaging its troops from Somalia,
following the deaths of UN peacekeepers and frustration over the
unwillingness of rival Somali factions to reach a political settlement.
The last US troops will leave Mogadishu this week. The Italian, French,
Belgian and German contingents are also leaving or have left.
The remaining UN peacekeepers, mostly Indians and Pakistanis, are unsure of
their role and fear a renewed outbreak of fighting.
Uncertainty also surrounds the future of the UN operation, the mandate of
which expires in May.
Two journalists working for Italian TV were gunned down in a drive-by
shooting in Mogadishu, the Somali capital, yesterday, Reuter reports.
The two were shot dead near the old Italian embassy. Their corpses were
airlifted by helicopter, apparently to a ship covering the withdrawal of
Italian troops from Somalia.
