FT  25 AUG 94 / International Company News: Lac accepts CDollars 2.4bn bid
from American Barrick
American Barrick has beaten rival Royal Oak Mines to win Lac Minerals,
another large Canadian gold producer, with a revised bid valued at about
CDollars 2.4bn (USDollars 1.73bn).
The move will make Barrick one of the world's biggest gold producers. It is
already one of North America's top three gold producers.
Barrick's new offer, accepted by the Lac board yesterday, is CDollars 5 cash
and 0.325 shares of Barrick for each Lac common share. Alternatively,
Barrick is offering 0.487 shares of Barrick.
Mr Peter Steen, Lac president, said the Lac board had examined several
options and 'found the revised Barrick offer fair and the best available at
this time'. It recommended the offer and agreed to help Barrick gather in
all the Lac shares. He estimated the value at CDollars 15 a share, based on
Tuesday's market price of Barrick shares.
This was at least CDollars 1 a share higher than a rival cash and share
offer from Royal Oak Mines, a medium-sized gold producer based in Vancouver.
Earlier, Royal Oak had extended its bid to September 6, saying it had
received a 'strong response' by the previous expiry date of midnight,
Tuesday.
'This is a friendly transaction with Lac,' said Mr Peter Munk, chairman of
American Barrick and controlling stockholder. 'The combination is an
excellent strategic fit of both companies.'
Mr Munk said Lac would benefit from Barrick's financial strengths and
management experience. 'Shareholder values will be significantly enhanced
for the holders of both companies. We are creating one of the largest and
most profitable gold producers in the world with exceptional growth
potential.'
The Barrick bid expires September 6 and the formal offer will be mailed to
Lac shareholders this Friday.
About half Lac's 148m shares are held in the US, and many US institutions
had been awaiting the higher bid from Barrick.
Though Lac said it had talked to several suitors, analysts do not expect any
last minute counter-bid. Minorco and Echo Bay Mines had been rumoured
contenders for Lac.
Mr Munk said Barrick did not need outside financing to complete the Lac
deal.
