FT  01 JUN 94 / Scott urged to broaden arms probe
Labour yesterday called on Lord Justice Scott to broaden the scope of his
arms-for-Iraq inquiry to include leading businesspeople and bankers.
In a letter to the judge, Mr Michael Meacher, the party's public-service
spokesman, says the inquiry has been too narrow in focusing principally on
arms sales to Iraq between 1989 and 1990, and on the use of public interest
immunity certificates during the Matrix Churchill trial.
The letter refers to 'huge quantities' of arms being exported by the UK both
to Iraq and to Iran between 1980 and 1988, in 'defiance of UN international
embargoes' and with 'the full connivance of the British government'.
Mr Meacher says that the revelations that sparked the inquiry are only a
minor instance of a wider practice involving larger companies.
He writes: 'I submit that unless you question the leaders of the firms
controlling Britain's arms-export business . . . you will not . . . be able
to discover the full extent of the government's knowledge and active
involvement in the supply of arms to Iraq.'
Lord Justice Scott concluded the bulk of his hearings in March. He took
evidence mainly from civil servants, intelligence officials, and former and
serving ministers.
Mr Paul Regan, a spokesman for the inquiry, said that the judge had no
immediate comment on Mr Meacher's letter. However, he said that the judge
was 'still following leads he feels he has to follow up'.
In the past the judge has made clear he considers his terms of reference do
not cover a full inquiry into the main participants in the British arms
trade with Iraq and Iran. His inquiry covers the extent to which the
government may have broken its own rules.
Mr Meacher said last night he realised that extending the inquiry would mean
further delays to the publication of the judge's report.
However, he felt that such a delay would be justified in the public interest
as otherwise the judge's conclusions would be based on incomplete evidence.
He added: 'If the judge doesn't do what we are asking for, he is going to
let the government off the hook in a very big way.'
