FT  30 MAR 94 / Management: Prevention is key in tackling RSI / A look at a
TUC report on strategies for employers
A survey last year by Britain's Health and Safety Executive (HSE) revealed
that there are almost 1m cases of musculoskeletal disorder in the UK, more
than 60 per cent of which were thought to have been caused by work.
Treatment is difficult once the condition becomes established, so prevention
is vital. The Trades Union Congress, the trade union movement's central
body, acknowledged this by commissioning the University of Surrey to prepare
a publication* on the subject, which will be launched in London today.
The publication says strategies should be aimed at those employees who are
experiencing minor aches and pains or muscle discomfort and at those who are
still trouble free.
To prevent the spread of Work Related Upper Limb Disorders, or Repetitive
Strain Injury (RSI) as it is popularly known, employers should be following
recent European directives and implementing UK regulations. Broadly speaking
there is a requirement to carry out sufficient workplace assessments; act on
the findings to reduce risks; involve employees throughout the process;
follow up any changes made.
The TUC publication identifies the three main areas in which employers can
act: through a consideration of the design of each job, assessment of the
needs of the worker and reviewing of policies for dealing with disorders.
The first implies a need to provide suitable equipment that fits the
multifarious shapes and size of a typical workforce. Without such an
objective some workers will find themselves working for long periods in
awkward postures. Not only might this increase the risk of a problem
developing, it is almost invariably less efficient with regard to work
output and quality. One suggestion is to consult the end users of equipment
before selecting new tools, furniture or technology, and purchase them after
trials with workers. Good workplace design allows the worker's joints to be
free from strain.
It is crucial that work is organised so that individuals are not at risk
from factors such as too many tight deadlines or work that is too physically
repetitive. To reduce this stress a culture of open communication between
managers, supervisors and staff is important.
Any individuals working on tasks judged to pose some risk should be rotated
to reduce the exposure time. Tasks that involve forceful or awkward
postures, high concentration and/or which are highly repetitive should have
inbuilt rest breaks to allow the worker to recover - regular breaks often
increase productivity and quality of work.
Stress may contribute to the problem and can be caused by factors including
workload, deadlines, control over work, and need to adapt to new technology.
When workers suffer from stress, this can show in physical symptoms, such as
tense postures. Low job satisfaction may also be the result of a job that
has not been designed to suit a worker's abilities. Consultation with
experts may be required to improve the content of such jobs.
If workers are required to work to a set rate, then this should be based on
realistic consideration of the job demands and individual worker
capabilities and not solely on the capacity of the machines. Bonus incentive
schemes, machine pacing or monitoring devices should not be used to
encourage workers to push themselves beyond their capacities. Good design
takes account of the fact that each individual has a different capacity.
The physical work environment can be a source of stress to workers.
Standards and guidelines are set out in recent HSE regulations, particularly
for display screen equipment users. Employees bear some responsibility for
their own health and safety but it is up to the employer to ensure that they
are not at risk from their work tasks or workplace environment.
* The TUC Guide To Assessing WRULDs Risks, price Pounds 5, is available from
today from TUC Publications, Congress House, Great Russell Street, London
WC1B 3LS.
Dr Peter Buckle is head of the Ergonomics Research Unit at the University of
Surrey.
