FT  05 OCT 94 / Markets Report: D-Mark bounces back
The D-Mark was generally firmer on foreign exchanges yesterday in spite of
continued anxiety ahead of German national elections later this month,
writes Philip Gawith.
A measure of support for the German currency was also provided by Mr Hans
Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank president, who told the IMF annual meeting in
Madrid that it would be a mistake to follow a policy of 'forced monetary
easing'.
Activity in the markets was generally very subdued, with the key concern
being what news Friday's US employment report will offer on inflation and
the outlook for US interest rates. The market had little in the way of
figures, policy developments or statements to focus on.
There was little follow-through buying of the dollar following the weekend
trade agreement between the US and Japan. Analysts are sceptical about what
effect the agreement will have on the trade surplus. The US currency moved
narrowly, closing in London at DM1.5519 from DM1.5573 and Y99.69 from
Y99.82. It finished in New York at DM1.5457 and Y99.63.
Sterling lost some ground, the trade weighted index ending at 80 from 80.2.
Given the pound's recent strength, some analysts said this was a temporary
correction that should be seen as a buying opportunity.
The dollar's inability to profit from the trade agreement has been taken by
the market as confirmation that its fortunes remain shackled to those of the
US bond market. Following the strong purchasing managers index released on
Monday, there is renewed concern about inflation in the US economy, with
bonds and the dollar unlikely to prosper against this backdrop.
Traders are worried about whether the employment report, and inflation
figures due next week, will prompt the Federal Reserve to raise interest
rates for a sixth time this year. But the minutes released last week of the
August Fed meeting, which was a prelude to a 50 basis-point increase in
interest rates, suggest that this fear may be groundless.
Mr Steve Hannah, head of research at IBJ International in London, said the
minutes gave the impression that the Fed felt it had done enough for no
further tightening to be required for a number of months. 'Unless the FOMC
changed its mind at its last meeting, the next tightening may be some way
off,' added Mr Hannah.
Yesterday evening the dollar received support from influential investor Mr
George Soros. He told Reuter in an interview that he saw scope for the yen
correcting to around Y115 to Y120 per dollar. He said both Japan and the US
had an interest in this taking place.
Mr Soros's comments followed recent reports that he, and fellow hedge fund
manager Mr Paul Tudor Jones, had built up large dollar positions at around
Y98.5, in anticipation of a trade agreement supporting the dollar.
Mr Avinash Persaud, currency strategist at JP Morgan in London, commented:
'The dollar's failure to make a sustained breach through DM1.56 and Y99.75
in spite of the falling risk environment (with the trade agreement, and
risks surrounding the German election) was an important signal that the
dollar did not have the support to move higher.'
Opinion remains split about the extent to which sterling has decoupled from
the dollar. Mr Persaud said there was 'ample evidence that the market is
viewing UK assets more favourably after the rate rise'.
But although the pound responded positively to the monetary tightening, Mr
Hannah said it would probably be caught in the cross-fire should the dollar
weaken further on inflation fears.
He said, however, that if sterling broke through DM2.45, it had the
potential to make significant headway. 'But nobody seems willing to back
that bet with significant flows,' added Mr Hannah.
The Swedish crown performed well after local exporters bought the currency.
It closed at SKr4.765/DM in London from SKr4.836. Analysts said that while
the market had greeted the new government warmly, there was a longer term
risk of conflict between the reconstituted board of the Riksbank, and the
governor.
In the UK money markets the Bank of England provided Pounds 619m assistance,
compared to a Pounds 600m shortage. Overnight money traded between 2 and 6
1/8 per cent.
Activity in the futures markets was subdued, although short sterling
contracts picked up a few ticks across the board. The December contract
closed at 93.20 from 93.19.
Mr Richard Phillips, analyst at broker GNI, said the markets were trendless
and difficult, leaving investors nervous. He said recent economic news, such
as reports of falling house prices and car manufacturer Ford moving to
shorter working hours, hardly justified the pessimism at the short end of
the yield curve. The December contract is discounting short-term rates 100
basis points higher than where they are at present.
But in spite of the value offered, 'the problem is that people just do not
have the confidence to buy the market'.
