FT  19 FEB 94 / International Company News: Pinault bids for La Redoute
minority
Pinault-Printemps, the French retail group, yesterday announced an all-share
offer to take full control of La Redoute, its mail order subsidiary,
triggering protests from minority investors over the terms of the deal.
Pinault, which has been transformed from a small Breton timber business into
one of France's largest distribution companies under the control of Mr
Francois Pinault, owns 54.4 per cent of La Redoute and is offering to buy
the remaining 45 per cent in a one-for-one share swap.
La Redoute, one of Europe's largest mail order companies which became part
of the Pinault group following its 1991 acquisition of Au Printemps
department stores, is capitalised at over FFr12bn (Dollars 2bn) on its
suspended share price of FFr960.
The Pinault group's shares were suspended at the slightly higher price of
FFr995. Pinault said it had decided to do the deal as a one-for-one share
swap due to the similarity of the two companies' share prices.
However, fund managers argued that the offer was too low given the 13 per
cent fall in La Redoute's shares over the past four weeks. 'Francois Pinault
is trying to buy La Redoute on the cheap,' said one fund manager. 'We'll
fight him: but being realistic he already owns enough of the shares to swing
the deal.'
Mr Pinault has fallen foul of minority shareholders in previous deals. The
outcry following the Au Printemps acquisition, when he won control through a
partial bid, triggered an official review of French takeover law.
The Pinault group, which is offering one free share to its own investors for
every 10 shares they own to compensate for the dilutive effect of the deal,
said it had launched the offer for commercial and strategic reasons.
Mr Pierre Blayau, chairman, said the deal offered an opportunity for the
group to maximise the scope for economies of scale in buying, technology and
some aspects of central management.
He said it would help strengthen Pinault's financial position. Pinault has
for some time been trying to reduce the debts left by its acquisitions. It
raised FFr5.8bn from disposals in 1983, thereby helping to cut net debt to
FFr12.5bn from FFr18bn.
The addition of La Redoute should help improve its financial performance. La
Redoute made net profits of FFr488m in 1992 (its last fully audited year)
against net profits of FFr586m in the same year for Pinault-Printemps.
