FT  06 JUL 94 / Texaco to sell half its US fields
Texaco, the US oil group, is to sell half its US oilfields and cut 2,500
jobs from its worldwide workforce of 32,000 over the next year as part of a
plan to increase profitability.
The restructuring will result in a second quarter charge to earnings of
about Dollars 165m (Pounds 109m), to cover redundancy costs, the write-down
to market value of assets being sold, and a previously-announced charge of
Dollars 49.5m relating to the sale of its chemical operations.
However, Texaco said the moves would reduce overheads by some Dollars 300m a
year, about a third of which would be realised this year and the rest by the
end of 1995. Its shares rose Dollars  3/4 to Dollars 60 7/8 in early
trading.
Texaco's actions mirror those of other big US oil companies which have been
responding to low oil prices by rationalising US production and cutting away
at management and administration functions.
Texaco has more than 600 producing fields in the US. The 300 or so to be
sold or traded will mostly be small fields that have been rendered marginal
or unprofitable by recent declines in oil prices.
The company said US activities would be focused on the remaining oil and gas
assets accounting for more than 90 per cent of US profits, cashflow,
production and reserves. Proceeds from the oilfields being sold would be
redirected to growth opportunities in the US and overseas.
Texaco is also cutting production costs by consolidating offices and
reducing layers of supervision. There will also be rationalisation in
international production.
Further cuts will be made in the company's downstream operations.
Earlier consolidations and restructurings have cut Texaco's workforce by 13
per cent in the past two years and produced annual pre-tax savings of
Dollars 54m. Last year the company made after-tax profits of Dollars 1.1bn.
Reuter adds from Quito: Ecuador's energy minister Mr Francisco Acosta said
his government planned to sue Texaco after a study found the oil firm had
caused damage to the environment in the Amazon rain forest.
World stock markets, Page 41
Lex, Page 24
