FT  15 SEP 94 / Technology: Magnetic attraction - Swiss plans for an
underground rail system will take engineers into unexplored territory
The Swiss are not known for wild leaps into the frontiers of technology, so
it came as a surprise last year when the federal government and 80 Swiss
companies put up SFr14m (Pounds 6.8m) to finance a feasibility study for an
underground high-speed magnetic levitation (maglev) train system.
Called Swissmetro, the project, initially proposed in the 1970s by a
Lausanne engineer, proposes the construction of 315km of dual tunnels from
Geneva to St Gallen and from Basle to Bellinzona.
The atmospheric pressure in the 5m-diameter tunnels would be substantially
lowered so that air resistance to the trains' movement would be reduced. The
trains' 200m-long vehicles would then have to be pressurised - they are like
'aeroplanes without wings and tails' according to one engineer - to support
human life.
Theoretically, the maglev trains, driven by linear motors, could reach
speeds of 500kmh, although the planners foresee a constant speed of about
380kmh. At that speed, the trip from Geneva to Zurich could be reduced to 57
minutes, compared with the current three-hour train journey.
This sounds appealing, not least because the entire infrastructure would be
'several tens of metres' underground, minimising environmental impacts.
Swissmetro backers knew there would be no chance of winning approval for
additional surface infrastructure on Switzerland's densely populated
northern plateau.
By having the trains run within tunnels in a partial vacuum, Swissmetro
would substantially avoid the problems of air resistance that bedevil all
very high-speed transport. In Switzerland, these problems would be magnified
because of the need to have frequent tunnels due to the mountainous terrain.
The project plan calls for reducing air pressure in the tunnels to between 1
per cent and 10 per cent of normal atmospheric pressure, the equivalent of
the atmosphere at between 20,000m and 40,000m above the earth. The
consequent reduction in resistance is also expected to bring significant
energy savings.
The plan proposes twin tunnels, not only to eliminate the risk of head-on
collisions, but also to avoid the air pressure effects - pressure change and
vibration - when trains pass each other in a tunnel. Maglev trains hover
only 20mm above the track, so even minor jolting could cause problems.
Maglev technology is fairly well established, with Germany and Japan the
most active developers. In March, the German government approved
construction of the world's first commercial maglev train to run from Berlin
to Hamburg in less than one hour. The project will cost an estimated DM8.9bn
(Pounds 3.67bn).
In Japan, a Japan Railways experimental maglev train achieved a speed of
423kmh on a test track in February, although plans for a prototype line near
Tokyo have been delayed by difficulties in obtaining land.
All projects and experiments so far have been aimed at developing
above-ground, open-air systems. The Swiss project, by going completely
underground, moves into unexplored territory and raises questions in at
least three important areas:
Aerodynamic behaviour at high speed in a tunnel. How much free space must
there be between the train and the walls of the tunnel? How much vibration
will there be?
Air-tightness of a very large tunnel structure. What materials need to be
used to ensure that a partial vacuum can be maintained? Swiss scientists say
it could be achieved with a steel tube, but at a very high price. They are
working on solutions using concrete with various chemical coatings.
What are the thermal effects caused by the activity within the tunnel?
Yves Trottet, co-ordinator of the project at the Federal Institute of
Technology in Lausanne, says there are no answers to these questions at the
moment. No one has ever attempted a project of this scale with these
characteristics.
All these elements also have implications for operational safety, including,
for example, how to deal with a loss of pressurisation in the train and how
to evacuate a train in an emergency. The present thinking is that a train
must be able to advance to the next station under its own power if
necessary.
As part of the feasibility process, the scientists in Lausanne and a sister
institute in Zurich, together with the relevant Swiss industrial companies,
will be studying these issues as well as those related to maglev over the
next three years.
Trottet says computer simulations can provide some answers, but physical
testing will also be necessary. Later this year, the Lausanne institute
intends to build a scale model tunnel for tests. It will probably be 300m in
length with a 25cm diameter.
The economics of the Swissmetro project are contentious. The preliminary
study published last year estimated that the Geneva-St Gallen line would
cost SFr13.1bn and take eight years to build. Feasibility claims were based
in part on assumptions of large numbers of people abandoning conventional
trains and their cars in favour of Swissmetro.
