FT  26 OCT 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Tractor import plan draws fire
of Pakistani manufacturers - Cheap eastern European machines are seen
locally as unfair competition
A large front page advertisement in a local newspaper says it all. 'Please
stop the import of tractors and save Pakistani tractor industry,' it reads.
Pakistan's tractor industry is fighting a populist plan by the government of
Ms Benazir Bhutto, the prime minister, that would give tractors imported
from Poland and Belarus to farmers at low prices.
The plan, for importing up to 60,000 tractors by next year at a cost of
Rs9bn (USDollars 88.8m), is set to create at least a mini-boom for tractor
producers in the two former communist countries. But in Pakistan, the local
industry strongly resisting the plan, arguing that it would lead to
large-scale losses for the two larger local producers - Fiat and Massey
Ferguson, which together account for up to 90 per cent of the annual sale of
about 16,000 tractors.
These companies, together with smaller factories that manufacture some of
the spares, are also opposing an official decision to set aside all
government loans for the purchase of imported tractors only. They argue that
there would be no government-backed credits left to allow farmers to
purchase their tractors. Up to 90 per cent of the tractors sold in the local
market in recent years have been bought on such loans, which are repayable
over an eight-year period.
'If the government does not allow us to participate in the plan, the entire
tractor industry will receive a severe jolt,' says Mr Sikandar Khan,
chairman of Millat Tractors, the manufacturer of Massey Ferguson machines in
Pakistan. Mr Khan is urging the government to reverse its decision to stop
official credit for the purchase of locally assembled tractors, even if the
price is higher than the imported tractors.
'Farmers must be given a choice,' he insists. 'If they like our tractors,
they will buy them.'
So far, the government has refused to accede to the local industry's demand
unless they can sell their 50 horsepower tractors for under Rs150,000. But
neither Fiat nor Massey Ferguson is willing to sell these machines at under
Rs230,000, arguing that any further cuts would result in huge losses.
'The local industry should also take its profits down,' says Mr Makhdoom
Altaf Hussain, finance minister of the province of Punjab, which absorbs
more than half of the new tractors sold in Pakistan every year. 'They don't
necessarily have to make large profits.'
Privately, senior government officials contest the industry's claim and
argue that there is room for further price cuts. They also say that a
drastic rise in the price of tractors during the past decade has made it
increasingly difficult for farmers to buy new machines and implements.
However, tractor factory executives such as Mr Khan and representatives of
tractor dealers' associations are confident that even if their prices are
higher than Poland's or Belarus's, farmers will prefer to buy their tractors
rather than imported ones, provided there is no discrimination in the
availability of official credit.
This confidence is partly justified by the well established repair and
maintenance network that has sprung up across this country over the past two
decades, which can serve the needs of Fiat and Massey Ferguson tractors.
Some tractor dealers concede that the new tractors may not have a long-term
future in Pakistan, in the absence of similar repair networks. In a country
where literacy is low and few tractor mechanics are properly trained, there
is little prospect that repair shops will be set up as the new tractors
start arriving.
The controversy has also once again exposed the opportunities for the abuse
of tractor credit given by the government. Senior bankers say privately that
up to 60 per cent of the tractor loans have never been fully repaid within
their time limit.
Evidence of that abuse is also visible at dealers' show- rooms across the
country. Private tractor dealers at offices not too far from Millat Tractors
outside Lahore, the capital of Punjab, offer both Fiat and Massey Ferguson
tractors for up to 15 per cent less than the price offered by the local
manufacturers. In all such cases, the only catch is that the tractors
offered were originally bought under a government agricultural loan and not
meant to be resold for up to eight years.
Local businessmen opposed to the government's plan say that the new tractor
scheme will only further encourage the abuse of such credits. In one year
alone, the import of 60,000 tractors, or four times the number sold here
each year, will allow more people to seek government credits. 'The abuse
will only be more because there will be more opportunities to do just that,'
says one.
