FT  27 JAN 94 / Commons procedure row threatens to block bills
The government was trying to break a procedural logjam in the Commons last
night after a row over committee rules threatened to block debate on four
important bills.
The row blew up after Labour refused to bow to demands for a Conservative
majority of two on a committee to debate a bill reforming local government
in Scotland.
However, it also prevented talks on the composition of committees on three
other bills - the finance bill, the bill to privatise the coal industry, and
the social security bill, which tightens the rules for invalidity benefit.
Labour said it would block further progress on the all bills unless the
government accepted a majority of one. 'It is their bill - if they want to
get it through they will have to back down,' said a senior Labour MP.
But Conservative business managers were refusing to give way, raising the
prospect that a full-scale Commons debate might be needed to sort out the
muddle.
'They are refusing to stand by the rules. If they insist on pushing it, we
will just vote them down,' said a Tory involved in the row.
The dispute has its roots in Labour's decision to withdraw parliamentary
co-operation from the government before Christmas after ministers cut short
debate on two bills.
Under Commons rules, the government's majority of 17 entitles it to a
majority of 1.8 on the standing committees, which debate bills line by line
after they have been approved in principle in the second reading debate.
Normally, the two sides' business managers agree that some bills will have a
government majority of two and others one, giving an average majority of
about 1.8 over a parliamentary session.
But the campaign of non-cooperation has meant that no discussions have taken
place, leaving Labour free to trigger a crisis when the selection committee
met to choose MPs for standing committees.
For the first time in memory, the selection committee was forced to adjourn
without deciding on the make-up of a standing committee.
The dispute is regarded as a parliamentary triumph by Labour, which appears
determined to continue its campaign of confrontation until the government
backs down.
Labour's refusal to allow leave of absence for its MPs has also forced the
abandonment of several cross-party overseas delegations. Casualties have
included a defence committee visit to Belize and a parliamentary delegation
to the Council of Europe/Western European Union plenary session in Paris.
