FT  29 APR 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (11): Euro-bears
unimpressed by signs of recovery - Equities / Regional reports
Investors in continental European equities lost money, on average, in the
first three months of 1994. But they didn't lose much.
The problem they face now is an extension of the uncertainty that was
present three months ago: will European economic recovery develop quickly
enough to offset the threatened withdrawal of US investment funds from the
continent?
Measured by the FT-A World indices, Europe excluding the UK fell by 2.85 per
cent in the first three months of 1994, after gaining 40 per cent in 1993.
However, investors would have done a lot worse elsewhere. Equities fell by
4.4 per cent in the US and 8.5 per cent in the UK; while the Pacific Basin,
excluding Japan, an area which had a halcyon year in 1993, experienced a
first quarter's drop of 18.4 per cent.
The European setback reflected another stage in the conflict between those
analysts who had been saying for some time that shares were fundamentally
overvalued, and the pragmatists who believed in the weight-of-money argument
 -that share prices were driven up by funds coming into Europe from the US.
The geographical diversification of US investment funds is seen as a
long-term trend, and may have a further beneficial impact on the world's
financial markets by the end of 1994; but in the short term it has been
braked by increases in US short-term interest rates.
Bearishness on Europe is widespread. Mr Bert Jansen, of Paribas Capital
Markets, says that the bull market in European bonds has come to an end,
removing the last three years' main prop under equities. 'Historic
evidence,' he maintains, 'shows that the odds for equities are not good in a
rising-yield environment, regardless of the economic background.'
On valuation, Mr Jansen is uncompromising. 'All European equities are
over-valued,' he says, 'both in absolute and relative terms.'
Writing earlier this month, Mr Anthony Thomas, of Kleinwort Benson, faced
the need to make an uneasy compromise. 'We remain very wary of the European
markets is the near term,' he said. 'Global markets generally are under
pressure, bond markets are weak and there is a lingering fear of large-scale
US repatriation.'
However, he added that the signs of economic recovery were increasing, in
such a way that investment funds did need to begin lowering their exposure
to defensive areas, and to move into cyclical stocks as opportunities arose.
KB raised its weightings in capital goods and basic industries, and lowered
them in financials, utilities, pharmaceuticals and retailers.
A similar trend was implicit in the performance of individual stocks in the
first three months of 1994. The list of top-performing European stocks was
peppered with front-line cyclicals, including three leading carmakers in
Fiat, BMW and Volvo.
In contrast, the bottom echelon featured insurance companies, banks, a
pharmaceutical company (Sweden's Astra) and a German utility (RWE).
In country terms, there have been surprises. The conversion of investors to
the Italian cause was on the cards; but Italy has surprised everyone with
the scale of its rise - 19.4 per cent in the world index series, building on
the country's macro-economic revival, excitement over privatisation and
hopes for corporate earnings recovery this year and next.
Unfortunately, a recent perennial hope, France, has disappointed with a fall
of 6.5 per cent on the quarter, in spite of a 4.2 per cent gain in January.
Mr Thomas, of Kleinwort, is recommending a switch out of France, where he
sees a flood of rights issues capping the market at a time of only limited
interest-rate cuts, and into Germany.
In Germany, investors took the bit between their teeth when they saw exports
rising, although the D-Mark was strong. Cyclicals are fashionable, Germany
has them - and in Germany they seem capable of recovery rather sooner than
expected.
