FT  02 DEC 94 / UK Company News: BT signs deal to shift Asia-Pacific office
to Sydney
British Telecommunications, the UK's dominant telephone operator, is moving
its Asia-Pacific headquarters to Sydney, Australia, from Singapore and will
purchase equipment worth ADollars 440m (Pounds 199m) from Australian
manufacturers during the next seven years.
The moves, part of BT's strategy to develop its international business, are
detailed in a partnership agreement signed this week between the company and
the Australian federal government.
As a result, BT is expected to be in a good position to secure a public
telecommunications operator's licence when, as expected, the Australian
telecoms market is opened fully to competition in the middle of 1997. It has
not made an application for a licence to date.
Senator Peter Cook, Australia's industry minister, said the agreement
provided for the establishment in Sydney of BT's Asia-Pacific engineering
centre, and a university research programme to fund collaboration between
Australian universities and the company's R&amp;D laboratories in the UK.
Australia has a good reputation for research in a number of important
telecoms technologies.
BT has operated in Australia since 1987 and provides private services
primarily to international organisations and government departments. Sydney
is already a hub for 'Concert', a joint venture between BT and MCI which
offers multinational companies cut-price international networks.
Agreements already exist between the UK and Australian governments for
'international simple resale' between the two countries, which allows
telecoms operators to offer large customers low-cost international telephone
lines.
Two years ago, BT won the contract to design, install and manage the
internal telephone network for the New South Wales government. A BT
spokesman said yesterday that that contract meant large numbers of BT
engineers were working in Australia and the company was already buying
equipment from local manufacturers.
Australia is committed to the de-regulation of telecoms. Public telephone
services are provided by a duopoly comprising the state-owned Telstra
Corporation, the largest integrated carrier in the Asia-Pacific region, and
Optus, a new company in which Cable &amp; Wireless of the UK and Bell South of
the US have stakes.
