FT  22 DEC 94 / World Trade News: EU fines shipping group over price-fixing
The European Commission yesterday acted to prohibit price-fixing
arrangements by a group of shipping companies in what could be the first of
many cases against potentially illegal shipping agreements.
Mr Karel Van Miert, commissioner responsible for competition policy, said
members of the Far Eastern Freight Conference - a group of 14 shipping
companies - were banned from fixing prices for the land transport of
container cargo.
He ruled that shipping companies were allowed to set common rates for sea
transport but not for the land-based leg of journeys.
The decision means that from now the FEFC will not be allowed to fix prices
with road-haulers and other land-based carriers for the transport of
containers to and from ports within the EU.
The FEFC, one of the world's largest liner shipping conferences, reacted
angrily to the decision and said it would appeal to the European court of
Justice. Its members include P&amp;O Containers, Compagnie Generale Maritime and
Orient Overseas Container Line.
Each of the 14 companies was given a 'symbolic' fine of Ecu10,000 (Dollars
12,100). The commission said this was to mark the existence of the offence
and the need for compliance with EU competition rules.
Mr Patrick Giles, FEFC director-general, said: 'The commission has failed to
recognise the international nature of the trade and has ignored th many
representations of both EU and non-EU governments and shipowners. . . the
stability afforded by the present conference inland tariff is essential.
Thought-through evolution and investment is preferable to abrupt
revolution.'
An existing EU regulation permits shipping companies to fix prices for sea
transport services. But in 1989 the commission received a complaint from the
German Shippers' Council that members of the FEFC were agreeing prices not
only for sea transport but also for inland transport services.
The FEFC is one of many global shipping 'conferences' - the traditional way
in which the world's shipping trade is organised. Others can now expect
similar treatment from the commission. This could lead to a shake-up in the
provision of 'door-to-door' services by shipping companies dealing with
container cargo.
The FEFC argued that all its price-fixing activities were covered by EU
rules that exempted price-fixing for sea transport. Further, it said that
the absence of collective inland rate-fixing would endanger the stabilising
role of liner conferences by undermining the rates set collectively for
maritime services.
The commission rejected these arguments on the grounds that an exemption for
one activity could not justify an exemption for all other revenue-producing
activities. It added that other providers of inland transport services,
which were not allowed to fix prices, were put at a competitive
disadvantage.
