FT  25 MAR 94 / Stock and bond markets badly hit
International stock and bond prices fell sharply yesterday, shaken by the
assassination of Mr Luis Donaldo Colosio, Mexico's leading presidential
candidate and by renewed worries over the rise in US interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average finished 48.37 points down at 3,821.09 in
heavy volume of 303m shares. The falling market earlier triggered the New
York Stock Exchange's 'uptick rule,' which restricts computerised trading in
periods of volatility.
Moves by some of the US's largest banks to raise their prime rates on
Wednesday, in response to the Federal Reserve's latest credit tightening the
day before, contributed to the bearish mood.
The assassination prompted a sharp fall in Mexican bonds in New York and
London, pulling down other Latin American debt markets in their wake.
Mexico's 30-year benchmark 'Brady bond', issued as part of the country's
1990 debt restruct uring, dropped to 69 1/2 from 73, but bounced off its 66
1/2 low, said Mr Denis Loubignac, a trader at Paribas Capital Markets in
London. The Mexican benchmark Eurobond, a 10-year dollar- denominated bond
for Banco mext, fell from 90 to 86 1/4 , but rose from its intraday low of
84.
The fall in Latin American debt had a domino effect on US treasuries and
European govern ment bonds.
Mr George Magnus, chief international economist at SG War burg in London,
said there were fears that international investors would have to lighten
their holdings of US and European government bonds in order to offset losses
on their investments in Latin American debt.
Long-dated gilts fell by more than 2 points yesterday and the pace of the
fall prompted the Bank of England to attempt to stabilise the market by
offering to buy back cash gilts from marketmakers.
Mexico yesterday joined the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development. Membership was agreed by the 'rich nations club' in June last
year.
German M3, Page 2
Effect on UK economy, Page 13
Government bonds, Page 31
World stock markets, Page 39
