FT  21 MAY 94 / Markets Report: Dollar struggles
The dollar slipped yesterday to levels that raised the prospect of renewed
central bank intervention to support the currency, writes Philip Gawith.
Traders said the market was probing the downside in search of the central
banks. The dollar closed in London at DM1.6463 from DM1.6551 on Thursday.
Against the yen it finished at Y103.910 from Y104.065.
Elsewhere the Greek drachma remained in the spotlight with interest rates
rising as high as 500 per cent, and widespread rumours of a possible weekend
devaluation.
There was also furious activity in the euromark futures market. Comments
from Bundesbank president Mr Hans Tietmeyer, suggesting that the pace of
German rate cuts might slow, prompted heavy selling, which spilled over into
the French PIBOR futures too.
Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief economist at Citibank in London, said the dollar's
weakness reflected market efforts to flush out the central banks. He said
there was evidence of heavy selling by US funds.
Also contributing to the dollar's woes were Mr Tietmeyer's comments made in
a magazine interview. Not only did he cast doubt over the likely pace of
monetary easing, but other observations he made were interpreted by the
market as indicating a Bundesbank preference for a stronger D-Mark.
Mr Tietmeyer's comments had most resonance in the futures market where
enormous volumes were traded. The December euromark contract traded over
110,000 lots. The price settled at 94.89, 23 basis points down on the day.
The French market also suffered, with analysts noting that it was a case of
'Germany sneezes, France catches cold.' The December PIBOR contract closed
at 94.57, 24 basis points below Thursday's close.
Sterling futures performed relatively well by comparison. The December
contract traded nearly 28,000 lots, and actually finished two basis points
firmer at 94.07.
The drachma struggled to the end of a torrid week, amid widespread
speculation that the government might be forced to announce a devaluation
over the weekend.
Overnight rates rose to 150-500 per cent, and the drachma was fixed at
Dr150.700 from Thursday's Dr148.980. Dealers, however, said that most price
action took place in the Dr151-153 range.
Economists speculate that the central bank has now spent as much as Dollars
1.5bn out of total foreign exchange reserves of Dollars 10bn in its defence
of the currency.
Mr MacKinnon, of Citibank, said the drachma was overvalued by as much as 30
per cent against other European currencies. He predicted a devaluation of up
to 15 per cent.
Although the government has ruled out this prospect, few in the market
believe it can be avoided. High interest rates exact too high a cost to be
maintained for long. Also, recent European history shows that high interest
rates do not provide long term protection to a weak currency.
Sterling slipped lower against the D-Mark, in sympathy with the weaker
dollar. It finished one pfennig lower at DM2.4856 from DM2.4954.
In the money markets the Bank of England cleared a Pounds 850m shortage with
comparative ease.
