FT  07 JUN 94 / International Bonds: Sweden kicks off string of Canadian
dollar issues
A strong Canadian government bond market and continued demand from
continental retail investors for short-dated Canadian dollar paper prompted
a rush of Canadian dollar issues in the eurobond market yesterday.
The Kingdom of Sweden kicked off with a CDollars 200m offering of 2 1/2
 year eurobonds which were priced to yield 20 basis points over the 7 3/4
per cent Canadian treasury due September 1996.
Lead manager Scotia McLeod said the December maturity on the eurobonds
increased the efficiency of the currency swap which was linked to the deal.
Sweden is believed to have swapped the proceeds of the offering into
floating-rate dollars. When the bonds were freed to trade, the spread was
largely unchanged which confounded some criticism in the market that they
were aggressively priced.
Societe Generale is also believed to have swapped the proceeds of its
CDollars 100m issue of 3 1/2 -year eurobonds into floating-rate dollars.
Joint lead manager BZW said the bonds, which were priced to yield 22 basis
points over the interpolated yield curve, were selling well which reflected
the issuer's strong following among retail investors.
BZW said although there had been quite a supply of Canadian dollar issues
recently, retail investors were still attracted by the yield pick-up of 200
basis points which Canadian treasuries offer over US Treasuries.
This could prompt more issuers to tap this sector. There were rumours
yesterday afternoon that Daimler-Benz was looking to raise Canadian dollars.
The Province of Ontario disappointed syndicate managers by opting to raise
CDollars 600m through an issue of 10-year bonds in the domestic market where
demand for long-dated maturities is said to be stronger than in the eurobond
market.
The issue was priced to yield 58 basis points above 10-year Canadian
treasuries which syndicate managers said was in line with the pricing which
Ontario would have achieved in the eurobond market.
Mr John Madden, Ontario's assistant deputy minister of treasury, said he was
pleased with yesterday's issue but he added that he was continuing to
monitor other currencies on a daily basis with a view to launching a
eurobond or global issue. Last week, the province was rumoured to be looking
at a euro-yen deal.
Moody's, the international credit rating agency, has downgraded to Ba3 from
Ba1 the long-term foreign-currency debt rating of Turkey. The downgrading
affects about Dollars 8.5bn of debt securities.
The downgrade reflects Moody's view that the Turkish economy will have to go
through a significant adjustment in order to correct the country's fiscal
and financial crises.
