FT  30 NOV 94 / Budget 94 (Government Statements): Sharesave scheme to be
extended - Save-As-You-Earn
The right to offer Sharesave contracts will be extended to certain European
institutions who are authorised to accept deposits in the UK.
The 'ordinary' save-as-you-earn (SAYE) scheme will be abolished and tax
relief will no longer be available on new SAYE contracts which are not
linked to share options.
Existing contracts will be allowed to run their course with full tax relief.
Tax relief is to continue for SAYE Sharesave schemes, which are contracts
linked to approved employee share option schemes, but with the substitution
of a Treasury model for the present Department for National Savings (DNS)
model.
SAYE Sharesave schemes provide employees with an opportunity to buy shares
in their own company by saving for five or seven years.
Until now, the DNS has set up and run its own savings schemes, which also
act as a model for savings schemes offered by the private sector (banks and
building societies). The government sets the terms and conditions for each
of these schemes.
The DNS is now withdrawing from operating schemes in order to concentrate on
its core activities.
As a result, the DNS scheme will no longer provide a model for banks and
building societies and a Treasury model scheme will be introduced in its
place.
The measure will not take effect before the finance bill receives Royal
assent. It is envisaged that the change will be made when the current
prospectus is replaced.
Only an institution authorised under the Banking Act 1987, building
societies or the DNS may currently offer SAYE contracts.
The proposals extend this list to include 'European authorised
institutions', which are credit institutions authorised to accept deposits
throughout the European Union by the central bank in their home state.
Ordinary SAYE provides a tax relief for regular contractual saving in a bank
or building society account. The scheme was introduced in 1969 and has been
unchanged since 1974.
The maximum monthly contribution is Pounds 20. A fixed bonus is paid at the
end of a five-year contract, with a higher bonus if the savings are left
untouched for a further two years.
Both the maximum contribution and the implicit interest rates are now
largely obsolete.
