FT  29 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Greenspan in China
Mr Jiang Zemin, the Chinese president, had plenty to learn this week from
the visiting chairman of the Federal Reserve, Mr Alan Greenspan. But one
lesson of the market applies as much to recent experience in the US as it
does to China. Capitalism can allow a large economy to grow faster, but it
will rarely allow deep structural weaknesses to go unexposed.
One thing Mr Greenspan shares with his hosts is a penchant for gradualism
or, as they say in Beijing, 'crossing the river by feeling the stones'. For
China, this has meant 15 years of incremental reforms. For Mr Greenspan, it
has meant a career as Federal Reserve chairman in which the interest rate on
federal funds has never changed by more than half a percentage point at a
time.
Since February, he has applied this strategy to slowing growth in the US,
just as he did to reviving it during the recession. A series of five rate
rises has left the interest rate at 4.75 per cent, 1 3/4 percentage points
higher than it was at the start of the year.
One does not have to have a communist's scepticism of markets to favour
incrementalism. Monetary policy is a more established art in the US than it
is in China, but the precise effect of a given change, not to mention the
lag with which it will operate, are uncertain nonetheless. Mr Greenspan
would like a soft landing for the economy and considers a gentle tightening
of monetary policy to be more consistent with this goal than a more dramatic
correction.
The trouble with gradualism, as the Chinese have discovered, is that
economies do not always play by the rules. Data released yesterday showed US
real GDP growing at a rate of 3.4 per cent in the third quarter of 1994.
This is down on the previous quarter's 4.1 per cent rise, but is still
significantly higher than the 2.5 per cent that Mr Greenspan thinks
consistent with stable prices.
High yield
Over the past few decades, the real rate on federal funds has averaged 2 per
cent, a little more than its current level. Investors fear that this is
altogether too relaxed for an economy half-way through its fourth year of
recovery. That anxiety continues to translate into rising long-term interest
rates. The yield on long-term US treasury bonds is now over 8 per cent, its
highest level since May 1992.
Are these concerns justified? It is in the nature of monetary policy that no
one will know whether Mr Greenspan is making a mistake until it is too late
to correct it. The evidence suggests several developments that could fuel
inflation, but only anecdotal evidence that they are yet doing so.
In the past, commodity prices, high rates of industrial capacity
utilisation, tight labour markets and a falling dollar have individually
proved capable of triggering inflation. In 1994, US producers have had all
four to deal with. The fear is that that sooner, rather than later, they
will raise prices to compensate.
Subdued picture
It has not happened yet. The latest price data showed a subdued picture.
Consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 2.9 per cent in September, and the
equivalent figure for producer prices was only 1.9 per cent. The labour
market evidence is similarly ambiguous. Hiring, especially in the service
sector, continues apace. But so far there is little sign that wages are
starting to rise in step. Indeed, on Wednesday the labour department
revealed that worker compensation rose 3.2 per cent in the year to
September, the lowest year-on-year increase since the series began in 1981.
Mr Greenspan may wish to ponder the data further before announcing another
rate rise. The political climate in the run-up to the November election is
unusually mean this year. The Fed chairman would rather not be the butt of
the administration's frustration at widely expected Democratic losses.
The trouble is that international investors see things more starkly than Mr
Greenspan and, unlike him, they are not in a mood to be accommodating.
Without an un-Greenspan-like rise in interest rates - perhaps even with such
an increase - the markets' doubts are likely to keep the dollar heading
down, and bond yields heading up.
Investors may find fault with Mr Greenspan's self-restraint over interest
rate rises. But they are also exacting a penalty for the things about the US
which even a more aggressive central banker could do little to alter. The US
had a Dollars 203bn federal deficit in fiscal year 1994, and low savings to
compensate for that built-in profligacy. The result is a current account
deficit which can only be funded by persuading domestic and foreign
investors to buy American assets. Neither category sees many reasons for
doing so.
The US economy, unlike most other industrial countries, is reaching the peak
of the current cycle. From now on the economic news is likely to bring
disappointment to the US people and to Mr Clinton. The argument between Mr
Greenspan and the markets is only over how much disappointment and how fast
it will come.
