FT  16 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Enough to give a one-legged stork an ulcer
 -Paul Abrahams on the problems for Glaxo as it faces an end to 15 years of
growth
Glaxo is at the crossroads. During the 1980s the company was headed in one
direction - forwards.
Its pre-tax profits galloped from Pounds 66m in 1980 to Pounds 1.67bn in
1993, as a pharmaceutical also-ran was transformed into Europe's biggest
drugs group.
Growth was based on the philosophy of discovering novel medicines, proving
they were safe and effective, and then convincing as many doctors as
possible to prescribe them.
It was a philosophy no different from that adopted by other drugs groups -
Glaxo was just very good at implementing it.
The problem for Glaxo now is that its formula may no longer guarantee
success.
The relevance of the group's strategy has been thrown into doubt by the
rapid deceleration in the world drugs market, where, according to IMS
International, growth has slowed from 11 per cent in 1990 to 7 per cent last
year.
Glaxo must now show it can adapt to this new lower-growth business.
But, so far, Sir Richard Sykes, chief executive, appears to have been left
stuck on the starting block.
Since July last year, four of Sir Richard's rivals, Merck and Eli Lilly of
the US, SmithKline Beecham, the Anglo-American group, and Roche of
Switzerland, have spent more than Dollars 18bn (Pounds 11.8bn) on
acquisitions in an effort to position themselves in the new environment.
All the deals were designed to strengthen the groups' respective strategic
positions. But the methods used to achieve this aim were very different.
Roche's Dollars 5.3bn purchase of Syntex was a classic horizontal
acquisition, giving the Swiss company greater weight in the US and expanding
its product range in its traditional areas.
Merck's acquisition of the US distribution group Medco last July was, by
contrast, truly revolutionary. It introduced the concept of vertical
integration to the pharmaceuticals industry.
Medco is one of a number of the increasingly important pharmaceutical
benefit management companies. PBMs control drugs spending through a variety
of means, but, most importantly, through negotiating discounts and creating
formularies which limit the medicines doctors can prescribe.
Dr Roy Vagelos, Merck's chairman, claimed the deal would remodel not only
Merck, but also the entire industry.
In part, this was because it would allow Merck to supply more of its
products to Medco's patients. More importantly, it would permit Merck to
collect data about the cost-effectiveness of its treatments - a vital factor
in an increasingly cost-conscious health environment.
Dr Vagelos' counterparts at SmithKline Beecham and Eli Lilly were
sufficiently impressed by this strategy to acquire the remaining two
significant PBMs, so effectively preventing Glaxo from following a similar
route.
At Glaxo, Sir Richard's apparent paralysis is all the more perplexing
because the company's immediate problems seem so acute.
Salomon Brothers are predicting that the group's profits will fall in 1996
and 1997, ending 15 years of unbroken growth.
The main reason for this possible profits fall is the gloomy prospects for
Zantac, the world's top-selling drug, with sales last financial year of
Pounds 2.17bn.
Zantac's very success has made the whole group vulnerable. Glaxo is
dependent on Zantac for 44 per cent of group sales and probably more than 50
per cent of profits.
Glaxo has effectively become a one-legged stork, in the same way that Roche
became dependent on Valium during the 1970s.
In the old environment, Glaxo's dependency on Zantac would not have
mattered. Zantac and its revenues would probably have been secure until its
US patents expired in 2002. Now, threats to the drug in the US are legion,
and the net effect is that some analysts believe its sales could peak this
year.
Faced with this threat, Sir Richard and his team now appear ready to
consider possible strategic changes.
This conclusion has taken time. Mr Ernest Mario, Sir Richard's predecessor,
is understood to have wanted to acquire another pharmaceuticals company, an
ambition that in part led to boardroom disagreement and Mr Mario's departure
in March last year. The man perceived to be most opposed to a strategy
change, Sir Paul Giorlami, the chairman, is leaving the company in
September.
However, while the need to change has been recognised, the range of options
available is wide. They include:
Acquiring a PBM. This strategy has effectively been scuppered by the
purchase of the three most important PBMs by Merck, SmithKline Beecham, and
Eli Lilly. In any case, most analysts argue that such a move would not be a
sensible one for Glaxo. The company's chances of significantly increasing
its share in the therapeutic areas where it is already market leader remain
poor, and would certainly not be worth the required investment.
Buying another drugs company. Sir Richard could use his cash mountain of
more than Pounds 2.2bn to help fund the purchase of a smaller company,
active in areas where Glaxo does not have a presence. Glaxo could absorb the
other company's sales and reduce the combined group's dependence on Zantac
while cutting R&amp;D and marketing overheads.
Setting up strategic alliances with health management organisations in
specific disease areas. These organisations pay for all healthcare costs for
members for a set fee. They could provide Glaxo with data on the
effectiveness of various treatments.
Cost cutting. Some analysts are concerned that Glaxo's private medium-term
market growth forecasts remain too high. Glaxo, with its outstanding product
pipeline, expects to outperform the market.
The company could rationalise its US sales force. But if management has
overestimated its future sales growth, the group could be forced to make
hefty restructuring provisions.
Whatever direction Sir Richard and his team pick, there remain questions
over the management's ability to implement change.
Glaxo's managers have been successfully focused on research, development and
marketing. It remains unclear whether the company, accustomed only to
growth, can cut deals and costs.
One option Sir Richard cannot afford is to stay stationary. The environment,
particularly in the US, is changing too fast for continued inactivity.
The sign-posts are easy to read; choosing which one to follow is more
difficult.
