FT  17 NOV 94 / European Commission leader plays Hamlet: 'To run or not to
run' for the French presidency? That is the question for Delors
Jacques 'Hamlet' Delors has six weeks to decide whether to run or not to run
in the French presidential election next spring.
This week, the European Commission president said that, if his decision was
negative, he would tell the Socialist party 'before Christmas' to give it
time to cast around for another candidate. He may not have intended so
precise an answer but, having given it, he knows that silence beyond
December 25 will be taken as affirming his interest in the Elysee, thereby
increasing the pressure on him to run.
Punters would be ill-advised to bet on the result of what Mr Delors calls
his 'very difficult' decision. Insiders are divided. One close and longtime
collaborator predicted that, despite Mr Delors' steady rise in the polls and
stream of Socialist endorsements, he will not run because 'he has no taste
for the monarchy' that is the Fifth Republic's presidency.
Yet Mr Pierre Mauroy, former prime minister, said this week the groundswell
for a Delors candidacy was beginning to push the decision out of the man's
control; Mr Mauroy is running for re-election as mayor of Lille with Mr
Delors' daughter, Martine, as his deputy.
Most personal factors point the 69-year-old Mr Delors towards taking a break
after a decade of running the EU executive. These include a back problem and
a desire to follow up his latest book One Man's Unity with further tomes.
But set against this is mounting Socialist pressure. Mr Michel Rocard, who
would have been the presidential candidate had he not led the party so badly
in the European parliament elections last June, said this week that the
candidacy of someone 'for 10 years out of French public life, and therefore
less battered by it' was 'an historic chance'.
Talk of 'history' appeals to Mr Delors, who has made a bit of it himself in
Brussels, and he in turn is proving appealing to the public. In an Ifop poll
to be published by L'Express magazine, he again leads Mr Edouard Balladur,
the prime minister, and a field of eight other possible candidates in a
hypothetical first round.
But is Mr Delors popular enough? Virtually every poll, today's Ifop survey
included, shows that in a two-man run-off he would beat Mr Jacques Chirac,
the mayor of Paris, but would be beaten by Mr Balladur. The latter, however,
might give further ground, particularly if he continues to lose any more
ministers to the sort of political funding scandals with which Mr Delors -
by virtue of being abroad - can hardly be associated.
More of a conundrum for Mr Delors is, if he were elected, how and with whom
would he govern? As he told French radio this week in English in his best
Maurice Chevalier accent, 'Zat is ze qvestion'.
Faced with relatively small conservative majorities in parliament, President
Francois Mitterrand was able to use the momentum of his 1981 election and
1988 re-election to dissolve parliament and win left-wing majorities there.
But a President Delors would be confronted with the enormous majority the
RPR-UDF centre-right coalition won in 1993 when it gained 80 per cent of the
parliament's 577 seats.
'Delors would have to dissolve parliament, because the result of new
elections could not possibly be worse than the present one for him,' says Mr
Olivier Duhamel. This Sorbonne political scientist believes the most likely
outcome would be the Socialists and their MRG radical allies forming a
working majority with support from CDS centrists. The latter are at present
within the UDF federation and the Balladur government.
Mr Delors denies his new book amounts to a presidential programme. But
virtually everything in it - belief in European integration, a strong
currency, a wish for workers to restrain pay demands in the interest of
competitiveness and of society as a whole - could not be better tailored to
appeal to France's centrists and christian democrats.
A Delors victory could even produce, in Mr Duhamel's opinion, a 'grand
coalition' of left and right, with other pro-European elements of the shaky
UDF federation following the centrists into coalition with the Socialists.
It is hard to imagine a large number of RPR Gaullists going that way. But Mr
Jacques Chaban-Delmas, veteran Gaullist in whose prime ministerial cabinet
Mr Delors once served, has said he hopes Mr Delors will run.
So far, however, there is nothing remotely resembling a 'military
organisation' ready to roll into electoral action for Mr Delors, says Mr
Francois Hollande, a former Socialist deputy who runs the 'Temoins'
discussion club established by the Commission president two years ago. This
club of 2,000 members, plus two smaller political clubs he set up earlier,
together with some 15 local Delors-for-president committees around the
country, form a tiny network, outside the party.
But unless the polls are completely wrong, many more French people are ready
to roll up their sleeves for Mr Delors - if he gives them the word.
