FT  24 DEC 94 / Books: The struggle for autonomy - Chinese brutality has
given Tibet a greater sense of unity
CIRCLE OF PROTEST: POLITICAL RITUAL IN THE TIBETAN UPRISING
by Ronald D. Schwartz
Hurst &amp; Co
Pounds 12.95, 263 pages
RESISTANCE AND REFORM IN TIBET
ed. by Robert Barnett &amp; Shirin Akiner
Hurst &amp; Co
Pounds 12.95, 314 pages
China's stranglehold on Tibet, the restless Himalayan region which it
occupied in the 1950s, has tightened these last few weeks. Fierce propaganda
campaigns against the Dalai Lama took off in Lhasa last month and fresh
Chinese investment began to pour in. This is all part of China's classic
strategy of pacifying sensitive border areas with hordes of Chinese
immigrants. Beijing has updated it by adding money in the hope of swamping
disaffection with greater prosperity.
This bad news for Tibetans makes the appearance of these two excellent books
doubly welcome. Both deal with modern Tibet - modern in this context meaning
after 1970, the initial year of China's post-Cultural Revolution reform.
Both seek to explain the 1900s political protests against China by analysing
Tibetan religion and society.
Until the Chinese occupation, Tibet had been isolated and remote, ruled by
the Dalai Lama and with a unique and ancient Buddhist culture. While not
rich in the modern sense, it was easily self-supporting. In preceding
centuries it shifted in and out of Chinese influence, never (contrary to
Chinese claims) moving fully under Beijing rule. After the fall of the Qing
empire in 1911 it gained total independence.
The l950s occupation set off a series of desperate revolts. In 1959 the
Dalai Lama fled to India, and Tibet then endured almost 20 years of
oppression and hunger. In the Cultural Revolution nearly all its 13,000-plus
monasteries were destroyed and its traditional agriculture ruined. With the
reform in the late 1970s came a yearning to practice Buddhism without
constraints and a new generation of young Tibetans to protest at Chinese
rule.
Both books are indirectly the upshot of the demonstrations in Lhasa in
September-October 1987 in which the police killed and beat up a number of
participants. Schwartz, a Tibetan-speaking Canadian sociologist, arrived in
Lhasa as a tourist on October 12 that year. He found a group of foreign
travellers already collecting information to pass on to journalists and
human rights workers who were barred from Tibet. Barnett is the director of
the London-based Tibet Information Network which sprang from the same group
and now publishes documents on contemporary events in Tibet.
There are few modern book-length studies on the area and, as Tsering Shakya
points out in his introduction to Resistance and Reform in Tibet, this
absence of scholarly interest has allowed the field to be dominated by
polemics from Beijing and the exiled government.
The vacuum generated a conference at London's School of Oriental and African
Studies in 1992 (the revised papers form the backbone of the Barnett book)
and these two volumes between them go a long way towards remedying the
deficiency.
Schwartz's account is an analytical narrative of events since the 1987
protests, fleshed out with his considerable knowledge of Tibet. These
protests culminated in three days of riots in March 1989, after which
martial law was imposed on Lhasa for 13 months. Arrests and prison brutality
followed, many monks and nuns were expelled from their religious houses and
troops posted in the monasteries. Since then Lhasa has been ringed with
troops and the plain-clothes police presence on the streets has become
overwhelming.
The Barnett book deals in aspects of Tibet rather than narrative. History,
ethnicity, nationalism, religion, all figure as part of the bigger picture
it provides of Tibet's struggle for its own identity. Perhaps uniquely for a
western book on Tibet, it contains contributions from Chinese scholars.
One is Wang Xiaochang, an economist, who though he clearly respects aspects
of this Himalayan culture (unusual for a Chinese since most despise Tibetans
as savages), simply cannot understand why Tibetans do not want riches,
preferring to spend their money on renovating temples. His comment
encapsulates the yawning gulf between Chinese and Tibetan culture.
Both books reveal key facets of modern Tibet, especially the importance of
Buddhism. While urban Tibetans sometimes succumb to the blandishments of a
consumer society, in the countryside villagers rebuild monasteries with
their own funds and staff them with their sons and daughters. These young
recruits to the religious life (and not the 'Dalai clique', as the Chinese
unremittingly allege) have been the mainspring of the chiefly non-violent
protest movement.
Interesting and previously unpublished details of political intrigue in
Tibet are hinted at in these pages. These are not just a matter of Tibetan
versus Chinese, or even of who's who in the Chinese hierarchy appointed by
Beijing which is how China scholars traditionally approach Tibet. There are
key rivalries among the local Chinese military from different armies and
between Tibetans from different backgrounds. These can significantly affect
how policy is implemented.
Though still deeply Buddhist, Tibet is no longer isolated in a medieval
mindset. Voice of America now has a Tibet language broadcast and important
news like the Dalai Lama's 1989 Nobel Peace Prize travels fast. For all its
harshness, the Chinese occupation has updated attitudes. In fact its very
brutality has given Tibetans a greater sense of unity and nationalism.
Both books refrain from predicting the future. China's hard line makes it
difficult to be upbeat about autonomy for Tibet, let alone independence. The
Buddhist ethic counsels against violence and Tibet's moral weapons mean
little to Beijing. While foreign tourists - mainly young backpackers - have
immeasurably strengthened the pro-Tibet lobbies back home, there is no sign
that China plans to respond to pressure either internal or external for
greater freedoms.
