FT  14 OCT 94 / Lawyer brands Magnet a 'shambles'
Magnet, the fitted-kitchen retailer whose 1989 management buy-out proved a
spectacular disaster in which backers lost almost Pounds 600m, was a
'shambolic' business, not the well-run company investors believed, the High
Court was told yesterday.
The claim was made by lawyers opening the case for GE Capital, which lost
about Pounds 70m from investing in the buy-out.
GE Capital is claiming the damages from Bankers Trust, the lead bank in the
transaction. Bankers Trust, which opened its case last week, is in turn
suing Arthur Andersen, adviser to the Magnet management, for Pounds 600m.
The actions between investors, bankers and professional advisers - expected
to last up to a year - raise questions about the nature of diligence and the
extent of the duty of care advisers should have during acquisitions.
The buy-out cost Pounds 629m, with Bankers Trust leading the banking
syndicate which financed it. Lower-than-expected profits, the recession and
rising interest rates hit the highly borrowed company. When sold earlier
this year, it fetched just Pounds 56m.
Mr Anthony Boswood QC, for GE Capital, said yesterday that all involved in
the Magnet buy-out could now see that 'serious misjudgments' were made about
the commercial merits of the transaction. However, GE Capital had been given
no clue of this - true figures about the company's financial standing were
either hidden by those who knew or were not discovered by those responsible
for finding out, he said.
The management had saddled itself with unmanageable levels of debt and
produced profit figures that did not add up. Bankers Trust had 'completely
failed' to discharge its responsibilities - ignoring warnings about Magnet's
financial health. Arthur Andersen was negligent and unprofessional in
failing to produce an objective report on Magnet to Bankers Trust, he said.
Bankers Trust has also argued that Arthur Andersen was negligent for failing
to provide it with such an objective and independent report on Magnet.
The claims are denied by the accounting firm, which has previously insisted
that its duty was entirely to the Magnet management and that to have acted
for Bankers Trust would have amounted to a conflict of interest.
