FT  30 MAR 94 / Recruitment: Moveable feast for hungry dealers - Renewed
activity in the poaching of staff is leading to new ideas for linking
loyalty to reward and ownership
Strong autumn bull runs in stocks and bonds have revived a recruiting
instinct hitherto languishing in hibernation for much of the recession.
Poaching has returned to the dealing rooms and the most successful lure, as
always, is money.
The poaching of individuals remained sporadic in the recession and the
defection of teams was beginning to look quite historical, one of those
quirks that characterised the Lawson boom. Not so. Poaching in its rawest,
most brutal form, is back.
Just how potentially destructive the practice can be was demonstrated in the
case of the so-called 'Lopez warriors' who followed Jose Ignacio Lopez de
Arriortua, the head of global purchasing at General Motors, to Volkswagen.
Unusually in such cases, GM and Opel, its German subsidiary, decided to
fight the move, introducing allegations of industrial espionage against
Lopez for good measure.
While criminal investigations in Germany and the US relating to suspected
industrial espionage, theft, perjury and wire fraud are still in progress, a
Frankfurt civil court last month rejected claims that VW broke competition
rules.
Nowhere, however, has poaching been more pronounced recently than in the
securities houses and Smith New Court yesterday decided to tackle the
problem squarely by creating financial shackles for many employees and
transforming an element of the bonus into shares. The shares will be payable
only if the employees are still with the company in three years time.
Smith New Court has yet to announce its profits for last year but this kind
of reward cannot be paid out of fresh air. It is an expensive proposition
because the company is going out to the market to buy shares. It is seeking
approval from shareholders to hold up to 15 per cent of its equity in trust
for bonuses. The shares will be treated as cash for tax purposes. This means
that if, say, 100 shares were awarded, the employee would get 60, since tax
at 40 per cent would be paid by the company on behalf of the individual.
The move demonstrates how sensitive investment banks are becoming to their
employees walking out of the door.
What has tended to happen when a company loses a complete team of
professionals is that the poached turns poacher, often paying higher
salaries to re-recruit.
In the hot-house atmosphere of the dealing room there is often little scope
for loyalty, hence the payment of high salaries and the treatment of people
like commodities to be traded at the market price. The only difference is
that companies do the buying and the people sell themselves.
Few have been more active than NatWest Markets, which has been recruiting
heavily from competitors as it extends the operation it established 18
months ago on the bones of County NatWest.
Goldman Sachs has also been among the recent predators, luring the oils team
from SG Warburg and taking two property analysts from NatWest Securities.
The latter made its own move on Smith New Court's German analyst team and
NatWest Markets recruited the sterling distribution team of six from Hoare
Govett.
Trends influencing the activity are both seasonal and cyclical. Those in
financial market jobs tend to move at the beginning of the year after
bonuses have been paid. People become too costly at other times when
prospective employers have to compensate them for their lost bonus.
This seasonal trend has been more pronounced this year, partly because the
strong markets towards and at the beginning of the year led to renewed
confidence among both employees and employers. The other reason is that,
even though the markets have undergone a sizeable correction, the big
dealing rooms are positioning themselves for increased activity to come.
Another influence is the emerging markets of South East Asia and the Pacific
Rim. Expanding dealing rooms are drawing specialist operators from the more
established European and US teams.
Changes in financial market jobs are also being influenced by the extent to
which technology is advancing. Deryck Maughan, Salomon Brothers' chairman,
revealed recently that out of Dollars 2bn dollars the company marked up in
costs last year, some Dollars 450m was spent on technology.
Technological innovation has led to a market in backroom dealership staff as
equally hectic although much less visible than that in the front offices. It
has also led to the appearance of people termed mid-office staff, often
technicians whose skill is to ensure the system works as efficiently and
speedily as possible.
An official at one of the biggest firms said: 'If volumes are exploding you
can have any number of sales staff holding the phones, but if you can't
process the deals in time eventually one of them has to say no to a client.'
Joe Clark at Day Associates, a consulting company that provides salary
information for the city and investment banking said that new systems for
confirmation checking in banks and constant changes in information
technology were creating recruitment opportunities at a time that many
traditional banking administration jobs were disappearing.
The question that recruiters must address, particularly when poaching is an
issue, is whether it is time to bring back the restrictive covenants
preventing former managers recruiting their old teams or from taking
customers.
Mark Watson, a partner at Fox Williams, solicitors, which specialises in
employment law, says: 'You can see poaching going on in nearly every part of
the economy.'
Courts, he says, are approaching such constraints as restrictive covenants,
which companies have used to protect their interests in the past, with
little enthusiasm.
If restrictions are imposed, he says, they must be applied selectively and
sparingly. If courts are going to accept the argument that you are
protecting a legitimate business interest, it is necessary to show that only
a limited number of employees had access to what you may argue is
confidential information.
The most effective covenants, he argues, are those on the non-solicitation
of customers. The effectiveness of covenants on employees is more
questionable. 'The time is coming when employers may have to enforce
covenants more rigidly,' says Watson. Legal shackles, however, as Smith New
Court has shown, are not necessarily the favoured answer.
The Smith New Court scheme is something of a departure from the deferred
compensation deals that have become a growing feature of remuneration
packages at such firms.
Salomon Brothers tries to keep its best people by paying a percentage of
bonus in shares, not options, so that they have a direct incentive to
maintain the performance of the company. The shares are held in trust for
five years when they cannot be traded, but they belong to the employee and
are redeemable at the end of that period whether the employee has left the
company or not.
The idea behind the scheme is to encourage the feeling of partnership and
ownership that existed before Salomon became a public company. Share
allocation ranges from 2.5 per cent of bonus at the lower end to more than
50 per cent for higher earners. The scheme's strength can be gauged by the
fact that 19 per cent of the company's equity is now held by employees.
At Goldman Sachs, where the partnership structure is maintained, the 161
partners must plough back their share of profits into the company where the
capital is retained. When they retire or leave the company they receive a
proportion of their capital and the balance over a five year minimum period.
Partners were reputed to have received individual profit share-outs of
Dollars 5m each at the end of last year.
The generous bonuses paid to other staff were not sufficient to maintain the
loyalty of all. But one leaver, Michael Sherwood, the syndicate manager,
returned to the fold soon after leaving to work for a private Swiss bank.
Whether such retrospective loyalty will be rewarded with a partnership
remains to be seen.
