FT  21 NOV 94 / This Week: FT guide to the Channel Tunnel
Twenty thousand people have booked return tickets on Eurostar trains through
the Channel Tunnel in the past three weeks, with services over the Christmas
period proving particularly popular. Despite growing interest in the idea of
cross-Channel train travel, many people remain confused about differences
between the Eurostar trains and the car shuttle service due to begin within
the next three weeks. What are the various services on offer?
The Eurostars are high-speed trains, modified versions of the French trains
a grande vitesse, which run between London and Paris and London and
Brussels. They carry passengers, but not cars, from city centre to city
centre. Each train seats up to 794 people, nearly twice as many as a Jumbo
jet or an Intercity express train. The shuttle trains, by contrast, will
carry cars, their drivers and passengers on the short under-sea hop between
Folkestone and Calais. The Eurostars compete with the airlines, while the
shuttles will compete with the ferries. The Eurostars are operated by
European Passengers Services, initially part of British Rail but now
government-owned, and the French and Belgian railways. The shuttles are run
by Eurotunnel, the company which owns and operates the Channel Tunnel.
Can I drive my car through the tunnel?
No. But you can put it on one of the shuttles. Other things which you cannot
do are: put your car on a Eurostar in London, Paris or Brussels, or travel
on the shuttle without a car - unless you are part of a coach party or you
can persuade a car-driving friend to take you across.
What will it cost?
Eurostar tickets from London to Paris or Brussels cost Pounds 155 for a
standard adult return. If you travel first class you pay Pounds 195,
including a free meal. If you book two weeks in advance the standard return
fare is Pounds 95. Unlike most airline advance bookings, you do not have to
spend a Saturday night at your destination to qualify for an Apex ticket.
Shuttle ticket prices will be announced shortly before services start.
Earlier this year, when Eurotunnel hoped to start running shuttles in May,
it unveiled return fares - for any size of car carrying up to its legal
maximum of passengers - of between Pounds 220 and Pounds 310, depending on
time of year. Its revised tariffs are likely to be similar. Eurotunnel and
the railway companies which run Eurostar are keen to avoid a price war.
Their prices are very similar to their airline and ferry competitors, but
they are promoting their trains as providing a premium service offering
quality and convenience.
How long does the journey take?
Eurostar from London to Paris takes three hours, and London to Brussels 3
1/4 hours. Neither Britain nor Belgium has yet built high-speed lines to
match the French. But when construction work is completed in Belgium, in
1996, the journey time to Brussels will fall to 2 hrs 40 mins. And when
Britain completes its high-speed link through Kent, in about 2002, times
will fall to two hours to Paris and two hours 10 mins to Brussels. The
shuttles take about 35 minutes from terminal to terminal.
Eurostar keeps boasting about the quality of service, but all I seem to read
about in the newspapers is breakdowns?
Good point. There was a series of high-profile train failures during the
pre-launch period which stranded journalists, the bosses of Eurotunnel and
British Rail, and a party of MPs. These failures were partly due to the
complexity of the trains - Eurostars have been designed to run on three
different electrical power systems and four different signalling systems -
and partly the normal technical hitches when you test a new railway system.
If these problems occur when the trains are carrying paying customers, the
Eurostars will have a serious image problem. But the three railways believe
they have sorted the hitches out.
So it's a smooth ride?
The Eurostars are air-conditioned and very comfortable, though there have
been complaints about cramped conditions in the standard-class carriages.
Upgrading work on track in the UK and the new track through the tunnel and
in France makes for a very smooth journey. The car shuttles, too, provide a
smooth - if spartan - trip. The safety regulations require travellers to
stay with their cars so the journey is a bit like spending half an hour
standing in your garage. Eurotunnel is looking to introduce travelling
refreshment trolleys, but the internal safety doors impede movement up and
down the trains. There are no duty-free facilities on the shuttles or the
Eurostars, but there are duty-free shops at the Folkestone and Calais
shuttle terminals.
Should I stop flying to Paris and Brussels, or switch from the ferries to
the shuttle?
The main benefit of the Eurostars is that they provide an uninterrupted
journey from city centre to city centre, in contrast to air travel, which is
broken up into taxi or tube journeys, waiting in departure lounges, and
sitting on the aircraft. The shuttles, meanwhile, are independent of the
weather, which can delay or cause the cancellation of ferry sailings. And
they are slightly faster.
