FT  20 JUL 94 / Rules on child seatbelts attacked
The government yesterday unveiled plans to make seatbelts compulsory in all
minibuses and coaches carrying children and young people but was criticised
by the coach industry for failing to go far enough.
The Department of Transport said its proposals met the industry's demands
for a clear set of rules, but the Confederation of Passenger Transport UK
said: 'This doesn't give us the clear guidelines we need.'
Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, said the government wanted early
action on child seatbelts while pressing the European Commission for
legislation requiring seatbelts in all new minibuses and coaches.
In the longer term the government may set tougher requirements on the
competence and health of minibus drivers and may require volunteer drivers
to pass a special test.
A series of fatal crashes has put pressure on the government to tighten up
the law covering seatbelts in minibuses and coaches.
Unilateral action by the UK to require minibuses to have seatbelts fitted to
all their seats could be regarded as inhibiting free trade in the single
European market.
By restricting the tougher regulations to minibuses used by children, the
department of transport hopes to win EU approval for new rules in 1995, and
hopes that the EU will be able to bring in a directive in 1996.
Existing EU legislation on seatbelts merely requires that they be fitted to
the front seats and other exposed seats in a coach or minibus.
This means other European manufacturers could still supply minibuses without
seatbelts.
Mr MacGregor said most new vehicles manufactured in the UK were already
provided with seatbelts, and minibus operators would be encouraged to fit
them to their existing fleets where practicable.
The confederation said it was dissatisfied with the proposed legislation
which merely extended the rules on front-seat belts to all other seats in
coaches and minibuses. It had been seeking different rules covering the
other seats in vehicles.
