FT  09 JUL 94 / Markets: Dollar takes Neapolitan limelight - London
See Naples and dive may be the fate of the dollar after this weekend's Group
of Seven summit.
Little if any concrete support for the US currency is expected from the
heads of state at their Neapolitan meeting. Consequently the dollar could
weaken further, unsettling bond and equity markets around the world.
But any adverse reaction might be short-lived, judging by the dollar's
behaviour this week. It coped with US and German authorities leaving their
monetary policies unchanged despite some market players hoping for interest
rate help for the currency.
The relative stability of the dollar gave some firmness to European stock
and bond markets. In London, the FT-SE 100 index mustered a net gain of 26
points on the week with two strong up days more than compensating for three
mildly weak ones. Yet again share trading volume was light as investors
waited for clear evidence that the markets had bottomed.
The index stubbornly refuses to climb back above 3,000 while the dollar
takes the limelight. But the determination of the markets to be driven by
the dollar rather than domestic factors may be waning after a trying
fortnight. Investors are coming to accept that the dollar's weakness, deeply
rooted in US economic trends, will defy quick fixes by governments or heavy
intervention by central banks.
If authorities tried to ambush foreign exchange markets next week with a
post-summit surprise, battle would be joined. But once the skirmish was
over, investors would try to get back to domestic considerations.
'Markets have slowly come to realise that the world doesn't end if the
dollar goes below Y100,' says Tim Brown, UBS's chief UK market strategist.
'The dollar may go a little lower but it will have no marked effect on
markets.'
There was little of domestic consequence for the markets to chew on this
week. Economic growth is on track with industrial output rising 4.6 per cent
in the three months to May from a year earlier. Inflation remains subdued.
M0 might have risen by 6.8 per cent in June from a year earlier, but this
rapid expansion of cash in the economy was explained away by factors ranging
from changing bank technology to a thriving black economy.
With the flow of corporate news slowing for the summer, the equity market is
already looking for inspiration to September's interim results season. A
year ago, the interim results were worse than expected because the economy
was failing to gather momentum. This time, there is greater confidence that
the interim results will build on the strong earnings and dividend trends
shown in this spring's full-year figures.
Investors have tended to overlook one question in their general enthusiasm
for generous dividend increases this year - which companies offer the best
prospects for dividend growth?
BZW notes that interest rate changes have had a marked effect on the way the
market prices dividend growth. When interest rates were high, as they were
before the UK left the ERM, a large number of stocks offered high yields and
the yield range was wide. As interest rates fell, the range of yields
compressed and high yielding stocks performed strongly.
But with interest rising again since February, high yielding stocks have
performed badly. Once again, the market is beginning to differentiate
between the stocks depending on the prospects for the dividend growth.
Within the largest 200 stocks, there is still nearly 10 per cent of them
which are likely to show zero or declining dividend growth over the next two
years. 'Strong dividend growth is a must for income stocks to combat this
general de-rating,' BZW says.
As the accompanying BZW chart shows, there is a wide range of companies
offering yields of 4 per cent to 6 per cent coupled with an acceptably brisk
rate of dividend growth. It recommends a number of such companies including
Royal Insurance, Wellcome, Abbey National, Glaxo and Lloyds Bank.
Conversely, it identifies a number of high yield stocks offering little hope
for higher payouts. These include Blue Circle Industries, MEPC, BICC, GKN
and Redland.
Modest dividend growth was certainly one element in this week's results from
GEC which disappointed the market. The full-year payout rose 5 per cent to
10.82p. Pre-tax profits were ahead only Pounds 3m to Pounds 866m while
operating profits in its three main divisions - power systems, electronics
and telecommunications - actually fell. Once again, it was GEC's famous cash
mountain that flattered the bottom line with an increased contribution from
interest receivable.
The disappointing results from the divisions were attributable to a wide
range of influences and had been flagged at the interim stage. Nonetheless,
the profit and dividend figures, coupled with a cautious trading statement,
knocked the shares. They now stand at their lowest level since December,
1992.
GEC also signalled the next small step in finding successors to Lord
Weinstock, its managing director who turns 70 shortly. He said he hopes to
continue in office for another couple of years. Meanwhile, the managing
directors of the three main divisions are joining the group board to bring a
more collegiate style.
The other big result of the week was year-end figures from Dixons the
electrical goods retailer. Pre-tax profits before exceptional items were
down slightly at Pounds 73.3m. After previously disclosed costs of closing
down some Comet shops in the UK and selling its US operations, it ran up a
loss of Pounds 238.5m. However, this masks the progress Dixons has made on
its Comet and Dixons chains. The dividend for last year was raised to 6.6p.
