FT  30 MAR 94 / S Africa moves against Natal political violence: Election
body agrees emergency powers in principle
Emergency measures to combat political violence in South Africa's troubled
Natal province were agreed in principle yesterday by the multi-party body
overseeing the transfer of power through all-race elections next month.
The move by the Transitional Executive Council followed a countrywide outcry
over Monday's gun battles in central Johannesburg which pitted the mainly
Zulu Inkatha Freedom party against the African National Congress.
'Natal is sliding into a bottomless pit of death and destruction. Something
must be done immediately,' Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, ANC secretary-general, told
the council, the de facto interim government.
The council said it would draft legislation to impose a state of emergency
in Natal, or to declare 'unrest areas' where police would have special
powers. The council agreed in principle to impose such powers, but did not
do so immediately.
Any such actions would amount to a decision to impose central government
authority against Inkatha, headed by Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi who is
seeking to have the elections delayed. The council's aim would be to ensure
that campaigning could take place in Natal.
Such a move could, however, provoke bitter resistance from a diehard group
of armed Buthelezi supporters, and call into question the loyalty of some
members of the security forces, elements of which have in the past shown
sympathies with Inkatha.
Much may depend on the outcome of a planned peace summit between South
Africa's four most powerful leaders, which was to have started today but has
been postponed until next week.
ANC officials were angry at the postponement, which was caused by Zulu King
Goodwill Zwelithini's refusal to attend a summit over the Easter weekend. He
said his people needed time to bury their dead before the summit.
Police said the death toll from Monday's violence had risen to 53, and there
were sporadic incidents of shooting in central Johannesburg again yesterday.
Hopes of progress at next week's meeting seemed slim after the ANC and
Inkatha traded blame for the deaths. Chief Buthelezi accused the ANC of
planning to massacre Zulu marchers. 'No reasonable person could possibly
doubt what took place near the Shell House headquarters of the ANC . . . was
a wilful slaughter of people who had every democratic right in the world to
be where they were and doing what they were doing,' he said.
But public reaction to Monday's events has been overwhelmingly to condemn
Inkatha for having provoked the attack.
Editorial Comment, Page 21
