FT  12 SEP 94 / This Week: Reading
Dirk Bogarde was a good, under-recognised film actor who has become a good,
under-recognised writer. That under-recognition may be changing. His
autobiographical volumes, from A Postillion Struck By Lightning through to
the latest, A Short Walk From Harrods, have acquired, deservedly, a
respectful following, and his novels, most recently Jericho, have confirmed
that he has the gift.
A Period Of Adjustment, following on from Jericho, will be well received.
The narrator inherits a house in the south of France from a brother who has
died of Aids. He visits, likes it, settles, decides to stay, and in the
process wins his 10-year-old son Giles from his estranged, career-woman
wife. He falls in love with his sister-in-law, mother of a Down's Syndrome
child; there is a tragedy on the last page.
That's all. It takes a very confident writer to carry off a story which
relies on so skimpy a 'plot', and Bogarde demonstrates on every page - most
of all in the dialogue (where his actor's skills may have helped),
especially tricky here where most of the characters are speaking French most
of the time - that he has taught himself a second profession.
There are three focal points. The first is the house: 'Jericho lay still and
silent, like a sleeping dog in the sun. I stopped the car beside the mossy
pillar which marked the boundary of the land, and Giles got out. We stood
looking up the path through the potager, past the big cherry and the fig, to
the long, low, rough-stone house, the two sentinel cypress trees (one for
Peace, one for Prosperity), the green curtain of heavy vine falling from the
iron trellis shading the terrace . . .'
The second is the narrator's sense of a new life (''Perhaps Jericho will be
a terrific healer? You know? A complete change-around. A new life. One
doesn't often get a second try at life, does one?'') The third is the
relationship between father and son, which is well done, convincing,
satisfying.
Let's not get carried away, this isn't Tolstoy. But it's that old-fashioned,
comfortable product, a middle-brow novel which gives pleasure. There can
never be enough of them.
A Period of Adjustment by Dirk Bogarde. (Viking Pounds 15, 280 pages)
