FT  14 APR 94 / UK Company News: Transamerica sells its stake in Sedgwick
Transamerica Holdings, the US-based financial services holding company,
yesterday disposed of its 21 per cent stake in Sedgwick Group in a deal
valued at about Pounds 220m.
The shares were offered for sale at 193p to European investors yesterday
morning in an underwritten offering by Morgan Stanley and SG Warburg. On
Tuesday, the shares had closed at 213p.
The 30.7m shares offered for sale were A Ordinary Shares in Sedgwick, which
carry no voting rights. In order for the transaction to be completed,
Sedgwick's board must vote to convert the shares into 114.5m ordinary shares
which carry the same dividend and other rights, but have voting rights as
well.
Sedgwick's board is set to meet to approve the conversion within the next
few days, and it is expected that settlement of the share purchase will
occur on the Stock Exchange's May 3 settlement date.
Two Transamerica directors serve as non-executive directors on the Sedgwick
board. Mr Jeremy Pinchin, Sedgwick company secretary, said it is not
intended that the two will resign from the board in the near future.
An official at Morgan Stanley said the shares were placed with a variety of
institutional investors, more than half of them in the UK. US securities
laws classified the shares as a restricted offering, barring them from being
offered publicly in the US.
Transamerica said it was disposing of the shares in line with its plans to
withdraw completely from the property and casualty insurance businesses. It
acquired them in 1985, when Sedgwick purchased Fred S James, its US-based
insurance brokerage subsidiary.
In that paper-based transaction, which would have given Transamerica voting
rights over 40 per cent of Sedgwick's equity and triggered a requirement to
make a bid for the full company, Sedgwick elected to create a special class
of non-voting share.
In 1991, Transamerica reduced that stake to about 25 per cent, and it has
since been slightly diluted by a Sedgwick rights offer last autumn.
Sedgwick's shares have risen significantly since that offering, which valued
them at about 165p.
Last night they closed 15p lower at 198p.
