FT  05 MAR 94 / Markets Report: Dollar firmer
The US Federal Reserve yesterday kept interest rates unchanged after the
release of a mixed set of employment data, writes Philip Gawith.
Foreign exchanges had eyes for little else beyond the figures which last
month prompted the Fed to increase its Federal Funds rate by 25 basis
points, subsequently throwing financial markets into turmoil.
Ever since markets have been obsessional in their focus on US inflation
prospects and the prospect of a further tightening of policy. Although the
217,000 increase in February jobs was well above expectations, it was offset
by other inflation indicators such as average hourly earnings.
Continuing speculation about another credit tightening helped the dollar
close higher in London at DM1.7198 from DM1.7088 on Thursday.
The D-Mark was mixed in Europe yesterday, finishing lower against the
Belgian franc, the Italian lira and the French franc, and stronger compared
to the Irish punt and the Spanish peseta. It closed just over a pfennig
weaker against the dollar at DM1.7198.
Attention was focused on the industrial dispute in the engineering sector.
Employers and unionists met last night in a late attempt to stave off
industrial action next week.
Going into the talks Mr Klaus Zwickel, head of the IG Metall union, told
Reuters: 'The probability of a strike is very large. This is the last chance
to avert it.'
The Portuguese escudo finished unchanged in London at Es102.3 to the D-Mark
after the central bank cut its emergency lending rate, for up to Es100bn of
one-day funds to resident banks, by  1/2 point to 11.00 per cent from 11.5
per cent. The little used rate was previously cut by a similar margin on
January 19.
The dollar started the day strongly after President Clinton's resurrection
on Thursday evening of Super 301 - the provision in US trade law allowing it
to impose sanctions on countries with trade barriers.
Part of the reason for dollar strength was support from the Bank of Japan,
assisted apparently by buying from US funds and Japanese life insurers.
Analysts said Japanese insurers sold yen to shift some of their
yen-denominated assets to other higher yielding overseas assets.
Traders said interbank short-covering also helped the US currency, while the
market appeared to be modifying its view that any intensification of the
trade dispute was bad for the dollar.
In terms of yesterday's figures, the headline increase in the non-farm
payroll was partially offset by the downward revision of the January figure
from a 62,000 rise to a 2,000 decline. Hourly earnings rose by only 0.2
cents and the working week fell to 34.3 hours from 34.8 hours.
The Bank of England provided the UK money market with around Pounds 400m of
late, unspecified assistance, bringing total help for the day to Pounds
1.369bn. This compared with its latest forecast of a Pounds 1.5bn liquidity
shortage, revised down from Pounds 1.7bn earlier.
With the D-Mark under pressure, sterling gained against the German currency
to finish in London at DM2.5629 from DM2.5546. It finished slightly lower
against the dollar, closing at Dollars 1.4903 from Dollars 1.495.
