FT  27 JUL 94 / Why the birthday bond is a party-pooper
As the Bank of England celebrates its first 300 years (yes, today is at last
the Old Lady's real birthday), it is relishing the unusual prestige of
central banking and the tantalising talk of 'independence'.
But in Threadneedle Street there is one tiresome party-pooping problem - the
high level of real interest rates which the Bank regards as some kind of
market anomaly related to the inability of the obstinate markets to accept
that inflation has permanently fallen to a very low level.
Also today the Bank happens to be holding one of its gilt-edged auctions,
the first for a long while to offer a reasonably long-dated bond (with a
16-year maturity, in fact). If inflation is to stay around 2 per cent the
real interest rate on this birthday bond will be more than 6 per cent, a
rate at which the Bank is very reluctant to fund for lengthy terms.
To underline its hesitation the Bank has chosen an issue with a 6 1/4 per
cent coupon, even though this means the sale will be at a big discount (of
about 17 1/2 per cent) so the yield to redemption will be at the market rate
of about 8 1/4 per cent.
The Bank is kidding nobody here - and even when the long gilt yield did fall
fleetingly below 6 1/2 per cent at the end of last year it failed to exploit
the tactical opportunity to launch a long bond issue.
However, the Bank of England can count itself lucky to be facing only a 6
per cent real yield. In Canada the 10-year bond yield is 9.2 per cent and in
Australia 9.6 per cent, while inflation in those two nations is zero and 1.4
per cent respectively.
For governments that have become used to defrauding investors through
inflation these high real rates appear formidable. The average annual real
return on UK gilts between 1946 and 1993 was minus 0.1 per cent, very
satisfactory for the public purse.
However, in the process much of the natural domestic investor base for
government bonds was wiped out, and it will only be rebuilt slowly and
painfully.
In any case, periods of very high real returns on government bonds are
regular historical phenomena. During the 1920s and 1930s, for instance, real
gilt-edged returns averaged 7 or 8 per cent. This came about, however,
because retail prices were falling, and nominal yields were not as high as
now.
If inflation is to remain positive, as seems likely in most countries other
than Japan, high real rates in the 1990s can only be achieved through
nominal interest rates of a level that central banks will find alarming.
Such historical periods of high rates have reflected necessary financial
adjustments after unsustainable credit expansions. Although this time
governments in the US, Japan, Sweden and elsewhere have prevented collapses
of their banking systems they have often done so only by borrowing vastly on
their own accounts. In Sweden the price has now correspondingly gone up to
11 per cent.
As for inflation, it may be quiescent but a study in the Bank of England's
last Quarterly Bulletin showed that nearly all the inflation in the Bank's
300-year history has happened since 1945 (and the rest was mostly caused by
the Napoleonic wars or the First World War). Such peacetime inflation has
been a triumph, you might say, for the Bretton Woods agreement, which this
month celebrates a mere 50th birthday.
According to the BZW Equity-Gilt Study a 6 to 8 per cent real return is the
kind of return expected from equities. The danger for the central bankers
funding profligate governments is that they now depend on speculative bond
investors who trade actively up and down the yield curve and from country to
country and look for capital gains rather than yield. Instead of sleepy
trustees and doddery grannies they must nowadays look hedge fund managers in
the whites of the eyes.
There is hope. British pension funds are reported to have raised their UK
fixed interest exposure from 3.3 to 4.2 per cent in the second quarter.
The bad news is that UK retail prices have risen 67-fold since the Bank of
England was established in 1694. The good, if doubtfully relevant, news is
that is only 1.4 per cent a year.
