FT  31 JAN 94 / Rampant expansion rouses critics
J. Sainsbury is going ahead with its programme of 20 new superstores a year
for the next four years in spite of its property write-down and the risk of
increasingly fierce local opposition.
Alarm at the pace of superstore development and its effect on town centres
has been marked in the West Country. Sainsbury is embroiled in a cause
celebre on the edge of Yeovil, Somerset, where it plans a superstore with a
gross area of 50,000 sq ft, parking for 460 cars and a link road.
A local protest group has been formed and petitions organised. Supporters of
Earth First, an environmental group, are occupying a closed Tesco store and
warehouse in the town centre. A High Court order to remove them has been
granted but not yet enforced. Earlier this month, 20 campaigners disrupted
Saturday shopping at a Sainsbury store in Bath.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, leader of the Liberal Democrats and MP for Yeovil, became
involved in the controversy by arguing that if Sainsbury's plans were
blocked, then the retailer would apply for an out-of-town site and probably
get it. But he has praised the non-violent protests as evidence of a
'community coming alive'.
Sainsbury admits the site is a 'sensitive location' but says it will be
landscaped with 550 trees. It claims, with the support of the local chamber
of trade, that the superstore will encourage regeneration of the area.
Although the town council voted against the scheme, South Somerset District
Council, the planning authority, is not opposing it.
The application was referred to Mr John Gummer, the environment secretary,
who decided not to call it in for a public inquiry in spite of his
department's tougher stance on superstore development.
Sainsbury has also run into stiff opposition with its plans to build a
superstore on a cricket ground at Westbury-on-Trym in Bristol. A residents'
action group has been supported by the city council at a public inquiry. The
inspector's recommendation has not yet been made.
The Westbury site is not far from a Tesco superstore built on an open space
at Golden Hill, Bristol, which the city council also opposed but was allowed
by the environment secretary. When the store opened last year there were
demonstrations and arrests. Unlike Sainsbury, Tesco is scaling back its
superstore expansion plans.
