FT  17 OCT 94 / Media Futures: Whistleblowers blast the pirates - A
promising start for Software Crimeline
Evan Cox, European counsel for the Business Software Alliance, declared
himself satisfied. The first two days of operation of 'Software Crimeline'
had produced more than two dozen telephone calls, and the work of sorting
the genuine from the mistaken or malicious was already in progress - all
this three weeks before the organisation starts to reward whistle-blowers in
earnest.
BSA is an aggressive industry lobby comprising the world's principal
personal computer software suppliers. Software Crimeline, announced last
week, is the latest initiative in the escalation of its war against software
pirates - companies or individuals who copy software rather than pay for the
genuine article. The alliance reckons to have brought more than 500 legal
actions against such organisations since 1989.
Piracy is thought to cost the industry more than Pounds 8.5bn a year in lost
revenues, almost half of which is incurred in Europe. The figure for the UK
is Pounds 328m. The UK Federation against Software Theft seized Pounds 25m
worth of illegal software in the first half of 1994.
Nevertheless, Britain is one of only six countries where legal software
sales exceed 50 per cent of the market. In Pakistan, Thailand and the United
Arab Emirates, for example, pirated software represents 99 per cent of the
market.
Software piracy is easily perpetrated and hard to detect. Copying software
on to blank computer discs is simple. Soaring sales figures for glossy
manuals covering the operation of popular pieces of software are one
indication of how easily it can be accomplished.
Through Software Crimeline, individuals are being encouraged to ring a
hotline number - 0800 510510 - to report the use of pirated software. The
carrot, in this case, is the promise of a reward of up to Pounds 2,500 in
the case of a successful prosecution. The scheme has already been tried
successfully elsewhere. In Australia there were 150 calls in the first week
alone. In the US, a hotline has proved successful although no reward is
offered.
What sort of motive do people have for shopping their employers or
colleagues? Cox accepts that a number of calls are malicious - made,
perhaps, by disgruntled ex-employees out to settle scores.
But most calls, he believes, come from people who feel their honesty is
being compromised by being asked to work with illegally-copied software.
This can happen when a company under-estimates its software budget and
copies existing software.
Cox leaves no doubt that the BSA is losing patience with companies where
senior executives plead ignorance of the law, and is ready to press for
harsher action. Under Britain's software protection laws, penalties include
up to two years' prison for executives of offending companies.
He says: 'We have a feeling that the process of education has been going on
long enough. We were prepared to give people the benefit of the doubt at
first, but now we are tired of the old excuses - 'We didn't know', 'We
didn't understand' - and so on'.
Cox makes the point that there have been changes in software industry
practice which make piracy increasingly indefensible. High software prices
used to be blamed, but costs have fallen, sharply in many cases. Equally,
there were complaints about restrictive licensing practices from large
companies with a requirement for many copies of a particular program
(software is often licensed rather than bought outright). Easier licensing
arrangements had been agreed, he said.
A survey of computer abuse carried out by the UK Audit Commission makes
clear the kind of trouble software piracy can cause companies. It notes that
one organisation had to pay Pounds 30,000 for new licences while another
incurred costs of Pounds 100,000 after a programmer was caught with 60 discs
filled with illegal programs.
While nobody quarrels with BSA's aims, there are some qualms about its
latest methods. Among the dangers is the possibility that a malicious or
greedy employee could install illegal software on his employer's system -
then tip off the BSA.
Typically, once the BSA believes it has enough evidence against a company,
it obtains an 'Anton Pillar' order from the courts, which enable it to
search premises and seize suspect computers and discs.
The telephone hotline is just one of the ways the organisation has for
gathering information about illegal software use. But Cox has no intention
of surrendering the element of surprise: 'There are some things,' he says,
'that I am not prepared to talk about.'
