FT  25 MAY 94 / Management: Prunes can be good for you - David Blackwell
reports on a Yorkshire recipe for long-distance takeovers
Running a prune production operation in California from a converted silk
mill in Bradford, England, might seem a recipe for disaster.
But it was thanks largely to the acquisition of the Californian dried fruit
business of Del Monte last July that Yorkshire Food Group, the UK food
processing company, almost doubled its pre-tax profits to Pounds 5.1m in its
first year as a public company.
'We were not fazed by 5,000 miles,' insists Mike Firth, 47, Yorkshire Food's
chairman and chief executive, who has built the group from a sugar packing
operation started in 1974 with a Pounds 3,000 bank loan.
Given the distances involved, Yorkshire was determined to do its homework
from the outset. The company spent Pounds 2m on professional fees - and sent
an acquistion team to Fresno - to investigate the prospective Dried Fruit
purchase in early 1993. 'When we arrived with our management team which was
formed during the negotiations, we knew more than anyone in Del Monte -
people were asking us the questions,' says Firth.
Once inside, Yorkshire started imposing a proper business structure on a
company which hitherto had been supplying dried fruits into the American Del
Monte sales and distribution system (and as such formed only 5 per cent of
the fruit giant's operations).
Yorkshire put in a team of five, including David Morgan, chief financial
officer, who was to remain for two years. It concentrated on the financial,
systems and logistics sides of the business.
The priority was to install a financial reporting system. Yorkshire quickly
discovered, though, that often the best way to learn is through experience.
Faced with one of the worst prune crops for years, the new owners were
forced to meet demand by buying in supplies from Bulgaria, Chile and
Argentina.
'The nice thing about having a few problems is you get to know your business
a bit better and you also get the chance to see how people react to those
problems,' says Firth. The group has now spread the source of its prunes
across all three of the growing areas in the San Joachim Valley, minimising
the risk of crop failure.
Yorkshire, however, avoided the temptation to try to change everything.
Allan Giddings, divisional director of the US operation, points out that the
group has not tried to impose UK sales practices. 'We have kept the US sales
team - we are not saying this is how to sell, this is who you should sell
to.' Furthermore, Yorkshire surprised the US farmers by showing them its
accounts.
'We displaced gossip and rumour with hard financial fact. Then Allan rolls
up and takes them their cheque in person,' says Paul Haley, Yorkshire's
finance director, adding that a US chief executive, based in New York, would
be unlikely to turn up at a farm.
Yorkshire, which was floated on the stock market in March last year, was no
newcomer to the takeover business and had learned lessons from its previous
experience.
It had moved seriously into the fruit and nut sector with the Pounds 12m
purchase of Scotia Haven, Berisford International's loss-making dried fruit
packaging business in Warrington in 1991. Here it had sent in an acquisition
team of five for six months: by the time it left, Pounds 7m had been taken
out out of working capital through reduced stocks and improved efficiency.
Yorkshire was also already in California, having bought Treehouse Farms,
Berisford's Californian almond processor, in 1992. The acquisition of
Treehouse marked a move into downstream processing, with manufacturing plant
to clean and cut the almonds. A roaster has since been added.
Despite being described by Firth as 'a relatively simple business',
Yorkshire believes in keeping a close eye on the operation. Giddings, who
spent six months in California when Treehouse was first bought, now spends
10 days in every month there.
Yorkshire has tried to motivate Treehouse's existing management by making
its members feel part of the Yorkshire team. The latter's ethos is strongly
quality driven.
Both Giddings and Firth have operational backgrounds from Mars, which they
believe gave them a global perspective and a strong insight into customer
needs.
'It's not just price and production - we have to talk technology,' says
Giddings. The added value of the company's products lies in ensuring the
ingredients supplied are of top quality, he says. Technical teams from
Cadbury, Safeway and other customers have visited the Del Monte operation to
ensure that there will be no stones or stems in the product.
The group is also using computer technology to reduce the distance between
its operations. It is close to having a full network information system
which will enable staff at head office to look into any of its companies'
financial positions in real time. Firth says Bradford will then be as
immediate as the local management, able to send a fax to reach California
before staff there arrive for work.
