FT  21 MAY 94 / Food &amp; Drink: To Alsace for a dish of potato
As soon as he mentioned the dish, the wine producer knew I was hooked. 'It
is an old Alsace dish which I think you can find in only two or three
restaurants. Would you like to try it?'
I agreed enthusiastically and spent the rest of the day wondering what a
potato dish that incorporated a verb usually associated with hairdressing,
could look like let alone taste of. I was sure my ears had not deceived me -
pommes de terre coiffes - was what we were to eat that evening.
We set off at 7pm on a typical Alsace spring evening. The rain was falling
softly in the vineyards and in the villages, where memorials to the dead of
the first world war are splintered with bullets holes from the second.
We headed towards the Vosges mountains where in the summer, my host assured
me, French farmers' wives open their kitchens and serve a bountiful FFr60
(Pounds 7) menu.
We stopped at medieval Riquewihr, on the edge of the mountains. The town
still maintains an ancient feel - two sets of city walls, cobbled streets
and old, exposed beams.
In the Grand Rue, stands Wistub Cric, a pale green building that would not
look out of place in a Hansel and Gretel storybook.
Inside there is not a level surface anywhere and an air of comfort and
friendliness emanates from its owner.
I cannot vouch for all the dishes on the menu. Another table's tarte a
l'oignon and quiche lorraine looked good, and the rhubarb tart, made with
the first of the season's crop, was excellent. But we were there to eat
potatoes.
We ordered the pommes de terre coiffes au Munster (FFr59) which, according
to the menu, came with slices of mountain ham and salad.
My host, a potato connoisseur, did not require either.
Ten minutes later, four large earthenware bowls arrived and silence
descended.
The dish was simplicity itself - slices of potato that had been sauteed,
seasoned, mixed with slices of Munster cheese, cooked and then given a
crisp, golden topping under the grill. It was fashioned to a peak in the
centre, hence the word coiffes.
No one left a mouthful.
Wistub Cric, 50 Grand Rue, Riquewihr. Tel: 89 47 92 24.
