FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (12): Shift in direction from east to west
 -Foreign trade / Estonia's foreign trade more than doubled last year, but
Russia remains an important partner, as Anthony Robinson reports here
When Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet president, sought vainly to keep
Estonia and the other Baltic states within the Soviet Union he warned that
divorce would cut the umbilical cord which kept Estonia supplied with energy
and raw materials and lead to economic disaster.
Nothing could have been further from the truth, although Mr Gorbachev almost
certainly believed in what he was saying.
Within two years Estonia has shifted from more than 90 per cent dependence
on the Soviet market to around 30 per cent, including trade with its Baltic
neighbours, Latvia and Lithuania which it is trying to boost through the
Baltic free trade agreement.
Russia remains an important trading partner with strong potential for rapid
growth once this can be placed on an ordinary commercial basis. St
Petersburg, with more than 9m inhabitants in the city and its surroundings,
is a rich potential market for agricultural and industrial goods.
Tallinn and other Estonian ports are well-placed to serve the expected
growth of Russian foreign trade into the 21st century.
Estonia's experience over the last three years demonstrates that a
combination of political independence, a strong currency and a rational,
market-determined price structure can lead to dramatic shifts in both the
direction, volume and usefulness of foreign trade.
In the specific Estonian case it has led both to a change in the pattern of
trade, as energy and raw material consuming industries have been closed or
cut back, and a geographical shift in trade from east to west.
Both aspects have been helped greatly by the physical proximity of Finland,
only 80kms across the Gulf of Finland, and the cultural and linguistic
affinity between these two Finno-Ungaric peoples.
Even so, the turnaround has been exceptional. In 1991, more than 56 per cent
of Estonian exports - mainly foodstuffs, textiles, chemicals and machinery -
went to Russia alone and over 90 per cent to the Soviet Union as a whole.
Total dependence on Soviet oil and gas ensured a similar pattern of imports
with Russia alone accounting for 46 per cent of imports.
In 1993, Estonia's foreign trade more than doubled to around EEK20,000m
(over Dollars 1,450m). Detailed figures for the first nine months show that
exports, at EEK7,143m grew by 218 per cent compared to the same period in
1992 while imports grew 240 per cent to EEK7,515m, leaving a small negative
balance of EEK372m.
Further strong trade growth is expected as Estonia, with its excellent
deepwater ports, resumes its old Hansa league trading habits and the economy
expands.
Given the small overall size of the economy, the biggest potential for
growth lies in shipping services and the development of an already
substantial entrepot trade. With a touch of irony, and some immodesty, the
port of Tallinn likes to bill itself as the 'Hong Kong of the Baltic.'
The move of Estonian exporters into new markets meanwhile will be
facilitated by a series of new trade agreements.
These started in July 1992 with the bi-lateral free trade agreements with
Finland, Norway and Sweden.
This was followed by the tri-lateral free trade agreement between Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania in September 1993.
This year, Estonia and the European Commission are due to discuss a free
trade agreement with the EU, talks which will largely try to eliminate the
possibly harmful consequences of Finland's own application for EU
membership.
For Estonia, close trade and investment links with Finland are vital. In
1993, Finland became both the main export market, taking 22 per cent of
Estonian goods compared to Russia's 20 per cent, and the main source of
supply, 25 per cent of total imports compared to the 19 per cent supplied by
Russia. Sweden and Germany are the next most important trade partners.
 ---------------------------------------
        Value of foreign trade
 ---------------------------------------
Period              Exports    Imports
                      EEKm.      EEKm.
 ---------------------------------------
1991                    510        445
1992                  5,548       5127
1993, half year       4,295      4,452
 ---------------------------------------
