FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (6): The pace is beginning to quicken -
Privatisation / This year, 155 out of the remaining 500 industrial
enterprises have been prepared for sale by tender
When the Estonian government decided last year that rapid privatisation of
the virtually all-encompassing state sector was a priority issue, it was not
interested in re-inventing the bicycle.
Instead it decided to hire an expert from Treuhand, which has been
responsible for selling off former East Germany's once-vaunted 'crown
jewels.' The aim was to apply German methodology, modified where appropriate
to the specific local circumstances.
The man and the ideas came mixed together in Mr Herbert Schmidt whose
penchant for blunt speaking appears to be matched by a similarly steely
resolve to get privatisation up and running demonstrated by his principal
Estonian colleagues, Mr Vaino Sarnet, director of the Privatisation Agency
and Mr Jaan Manitski.
The trio appear to circle around each other with a mixture of mutual respect
and wariness.
The privatisation process started, as elsewhere in the post-communist world,
where it was easiest. This meant the sale by auction or the restitution to
former owners of small property - shops, restaurants and the like. The
process is virtually complete, with the exception of rural land and property
where restitution and other legal problems are still acute.
Large scale privatisation only started to take off in August last year with
the creation of the Privatisation Agency, (PA). The agency is modelled
closely on Treuhand, and designed as a one-stop operation for potential
investors - 'the international investor wants to know with whom he can
deal,' explains Mr Vainet. 'This is the one-stop agency which carries out
the privatisation programme through tenders.'
The decision to proceed with privatisation as fast as possible was an
all-party decision, overwhelmingly approved in parliament.
This is reflected in the composition of the agency's 11-strong board. It is
chaired by Mrs Liia Hanni, the minister for reform and ownership
transformation, and includes representatives from the finance and economy
ministries, the central bank and six political parties.
As Mr Schmidt makes clear, the Estonian way eschews various forms of mass
privatisation through vouchers, popular in the Czech Republic, Russia and
elsewhere, as well as simple auctions to highest bidders.
'Privatisation is an economic exercise. It is not about selling assets so
much as purchasing capital, know-how and access to foreign markets,' he says
to nods of assent from his Estonian colleagues. 'For this,' he adds, 'the
appropriate method is the tender, with no distinction between foreign or
local bids.'
A few restrictions on foreign participation in the Estonian economy do,
however, remain. Since April 1993, foreigners have been allowed to buy land,
but only in connection with a particular land-use connected to their
investment, not land as such. This is not overtly discriminatory but makes
it harder for ethnic Russians and others, including the 10,000 retired
Soviet servicemen, from buying in potentially strategic areas.
The authorities have also drawn up a list of over 20 sectors which are
currently restricted for foreigners. They include electricity, harbours,
gas, liquor and tobacco, but definitely not telecommunications where a joint
venture between the state telecom system and Finnish and Swedish telecom
companies is busy upgrading mobile and fixed land telecommunication systems
in a 10-year priority programme.
The pace of privatisation started to hot up towards the second half of 1993.
Last year the PA signed 50 contracts involving the sale of assets worth EEK
400m.
When taken together with assumed debts, future investment, job creation and
other commitments this translates into deals worth around EEK 1.5bn to the
economy, securing 10,000 jobs, Mr Schmidt calculates. 'This helps to make us
popular with the unions,' he adds.
The agency is now fully operational with 50 trained Estonian staff and 15-20
experienced consultants, thanks partly to financial and other assistance
from US-AID, the EU's Phare Fund, the EBRD and Treuhand.
This year some 155 out of the remaining 500 industrial enterprises have been
prepared for sale by tender, out of a total of what Mr Schmidt delicately
describes as 2,000 state-owned 'objects.'
In practice, a high proportion of these assets can best be described as
'dogs,' like the former Soviet managed rocket and military engineering
factories which ran to a different music when the economy was not about use
and utility as now, but about power and authority - Soviet authority at
that.
Some of the old plants may be salvageable in a new form, but the fate of
many will be oblivion. But this process will be much lass painful than
seemed likely only two years ago. Then privatisation of state assets looked
like virtually the only show in town.
Now the main dynamism in the economy stems from greenfield investments and
start-ups by new homegrown and foreign entrepreneurs.
