FT  25 JAN 94 / Channel rail route finalised: Planning blight removed for
hundreds - Project opened to private sector
The final route of the long-delayed fast rail link between London and the
Channel tunnel was announced yesterday.
The decision will remove planning blight from hundreds of homes and clear
the way for the government to bring in private sector partners.
The Pounds 2.6bn project has been dogged by delays and route changes for
nearly a decade and is not expected to be completed before 2002 - eight
years after the opening of the tunnel itself and nine years after the
completion of fast rail links on the French side of the Channel.
Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, confirmed that the government would
provide more funds for the project than had been expected, but said the
exact amount would depend on negotiations with the private sector.
Completion of the fast link into London will cut more than 30 minutes off
journey times and relieve pressure on the crowded commuter rail networks in
the south-east of England.
Two small sections of the route have still to be finalised, but the
government can now start preparing legislation.
The main decisions announced by Mr MacGregor were:
The choice of St Pancras rather than King's Cross as the north London
terminal.
A two-mile extension to a planned tunnel running into Islington in central
London to spare hundreds of homes from demolition or high levels of noise.
Two extra short tunnel sections in Kent to spare villages from disruption.
However, no final decision has yet been taken on the line of the route at
Ashford and at Gravesend in Kent, while the site of an intermediate station
has also been left to the private developers who will part-finance the line.
Three possible sites have been identified at Ebbsfleet in Kent, Rainham in
Essex and Stratford in east London.
At most, 40 homes would need to be demolished or acquired to make way for
the route, Mr MacGregor said, although more may be affected by increased
levels of noise.
The government plans to have legislation authorising the line ready by
autumn, but is resigned to a two-year battle to get it past parliamentary
oppos-ition.
Ministers drew comfort nevertheless from the muted response of Kent's
Conservative MPs, in sharp contrast to the savage criticism that followed
the announcement of the proposed line in 1986.
Mr Andrew Rowe, Conservative MP for Mid Kent, said: 'My constituents have
already lived in blight for five years; they are very likely to live in
blight for another 10 years.'
Kent County Council, which is in favour of the project, said it was
nevertheless disappointed that two sections were still not finalised and
said it would continue to fight for environmental improvements.
Ove Arup, an engineering consultancy involved in work on the route, said it
hoped to join the consortium that builds the link, either in a lead role or
as a junior member.
Tunnel route fails to end doubts
Heated response on Pepper Hill, Page 8
