FT  27 AUG 94 / Fashion: Bloomsbury in artist's bloomers - Me and My
Wardrobe / Jane Mulvagh meets Celia Lyttelton
Celia Lyttelton, artist, art critic and traveller, is a throw-back to a
Bloomsbury world. Her flapper's bob, preference for short skirts, silk
stockings, and brocade rather than sensible shoes and the arts of Albion,
created by her coterie of friends, is reminiscent of those rarefied tastes
which preoccupied the Bells, Woolfs and Frys half a century ago.
Indeed many of their descendants are her friends and fellow artists and,
like them, her decorative surroundings, dress, and reading material are all
crafted by them. Cressida Bell painted the silk that covers her cushions,
Andre Dubreuil designed the chair in which she sits, Belinda Eades the
sconces lighting the room, Craigie Aitcheson, Paul Benney and Matthew
Spender painted the portraits of 'Celia' that adorn the faux-Pompeian villa
walls of her drawing room.
Alastair Thane photographed her in the ball dress given by her friend and
former lodger, Lady Henrietta Rous. The wardrobe holds clothes by Georgina
Godley, Abe Hamilton, Paul Frith, Cressida Bell, Koji Tatsuno and Bella
Freud; all of whom have dined at her Jasper Morrison table.
With unabashed aesthetic confidence and an absolute disregard for the winds
of commercial taste, Lyttelton surveys the contemporary art scene; hangs it,
wears it and reports on it in the pages of Tatler or the Japanese cult
magazine, Le Millenium.
Her love of the avant-garde is disciplined by an exacting sense of manners.
Practicality and comfort are marginalised by her love of ceremony,
decoration and humour. She loathes sports clothes and all the sloppiness
they engender, denim for its prosaicness, Valentino for his vulgarity and
Azzedine Alaia for his ludicrous and cruel demands on the female form.
There is nothing egalitarian, commonplace or sensible about Lyttelton's
taste.
She never goes to shops. 'I hate them. They never have anything you want and
they are expensive. I only go into them when I am abroad.
'Last month I spent three hours in Issey Miyake's Tokyo store, just admiring
the colour combinations.' Instead she buys from her friends. 'It's so much
more fun trying on clothes in Abe's (Hamilton) studio with the sound of
sewing machines still putting the seams together or buying a whole load of
outfits in Bella's (Freud) sitting room, while she's on the 'phone and
friends pop round. Anyway, it's cheaper that way.'
Lyttelton's attitude to buying clothes is the same as it is to buying
furniture or paintings: she enjoys patronising young talent and 'in a modest
way, I like helping a designer on his way and helping to set a trend. That's
why I like young designers who have not been discovered, so that I can be
the only one wearing it. I cannot bear anyone else having something I have.'
Apart from clothes from designer friends, Lyttelton, dresses in cast-offs -
a Mary Quant mini given to her by George Melly's wife, Diana; a Molyneux
inherited from her grandmother; bloomers from the Spanish painter Anna
Corbero; an old 'Granny Takes a Trip' jacket from Nell Campbell (of the New
York nightclub); and an Ossie Clark skirt - or junk-shop finds from Echoes
in Hebden Bridge or antique shops wherever she happens to be staying.
Lyttelton is 'never knowingly underdressed'. Her two extravagances are silk
stockings of every shade and her custom-made Rigby &amp; Peller black or pink
satin bras, deemed a necessity because: 'My bosoms are huge and my back is
tiny. Every time I went into a department store the assistants just laughed,
so Issey (Blow) dragged me to Rigby's'
Lyttelton cannot remember a time when she did not love clothes. 'As a child
I would fantasise about them and was much more fastidious than I am now. I
used to have specially tailored first night gear to accompany by grandfather
(the theatre critic Sir Harold Hobson) and when I was a teenager I had 10
pairs of platforms from Petticoat Lane and pirate gear from Westwood.'
Her sartorial icons now are Marella Agnelli for 'that neck' and her good,
simple taste and Issey Blow, features associate of Vogue 'because all day
she wears evening clothes'. Her pet hate is anything touched by the grunge
school of dress and most Italian fashion.
Her incomprehension of Italian style is reciprocated, for few Continentals
can cope with her disregard for convention. It is not unusual for Lyttelton
to turn up to a party in one beautiful shoe, 'the other being lost on the
hard shoulder of the M4' for she would rather wear one stunner than two ugly
ones.
She used to suffer a weakness for Manolo Blahnik's shoes. 'I would go to all
his sales but now they are really off, rather Dolcis. I was so angry with a
pair I bought recently that I ripped the tassels off.' Instead she is shod
by Johnnie Moke, Miranda Morrison, Freud and, when working in her etching
studio, by a 1930s pair of white leather ladies golfing shoes worn with a
white overall and white opaque tights.
For someone who adores clothes, Lyttelton is blessed with a sense of
contentment. 'I do not need any more. Anyway people keep giving me their old
stuff and once a year I do buy one thing, otherwise there is an embargo. In
the end one has too many. I often forget I've got outfits because they've
fallen off hangers and lie at the back of my wardrobe and I've lost so many
Philip Treacy hats in New York nightclubs.'
If she were to have a windfall she would spend it on coloured kid leather
gloves from Yves Saint Laurent in Paris, more real silk stockings and a soft
leather bag.
This unorthodox aesthete would also like to make two pleas: 'More gold, like
gold sandals. People don't wear enough gold. And the daring mix of colours
and patterns, not in a gypsy style, but a more sophisticated one. Oh, and
one more thought. No more monochrome black.'
