FT  15 APR 94 / World Trade News: US farm lobby threatens to withdraw its
support
Lobbyists for US agriculture interests have warned President Bill Clinton
that the administration must drop proposals to lower farm spending or they
will withdraw their support for congressional passage of the Uruguay Round
implementing legislation.
Twenty-one groups, which expressed their displeasure in a letter to the
president, have been among the strongest supporters of the Round. They
include the American Farm Bureau, the American Meat Institute, the National
Association of Wheat Growers, and the National Pork Producers Council.
Their threatened opposition is the latest in a series of difficulties
confronting the administration in its struggle to have the legislation
approved this year. The biggest obstacle lies in finding an estimated
Dollars 13bn over the next five years to compensate for the loss of tariff
revenue in the US budget.
It is proposals to raise the billions through cuts in agriculture programmes
which have the farm groups up in arms. They had been assured that the final
Gatt deal would not require further reductions beyond those have already
made in domestic income and price-support programmes.
They are urging the president to shift current funding from programmes
either reduced or not allowed by the Gatt to those which are allowed, such
as market promotion, export credit and food aid schemes. 'Unless these
concerns are addressed, it is hard to envision how US agriculture stands to
gain as a result of the new Gatt agreement,' they said.
Large exporters, such as IBM and Caterpillar, are also worried about the
implementing legislation. They say proposals by the labour/industry
coalition Licit will undermine the spirit of the improvements to dumping
laws negotiated in Geneva.
US companies are already being hit with the largest number of dumping cases
worldwide, according to Mr Thomas Gann of Sun Microsystems. He and other
exporters say they do not want the dumping laws eviscerated.
'But what is going to happen if other countries further copy our dumping
rules?' he said. 'This scares computer companies, because we have to go
internationally to compete.'
Licit is just as worried that the pact will dilute US trade laws. 'In
virtually every area, current US law provides domestic industry with greater
remedies against injurious unfair trade than will exist under the new
Uruguay Round regime,' said a recent Licit report.
'Several provisions are likely to reduce anti-dumping duties, but they are
unlikely to deny relief altogether.'
Labour groups see the failure of the Gatt members to agree to a standing
committee on labour rules as confirmation that the global trading
organisation agrees rules purely for the benefit of the giant
multinationals.
