FT  06 DEC 94 / The FT Interview: Undaunted by hurdles ahead - Ingvar
Carlsson
For a man who has just taken charge of a country with one of the biggest
holes in Europe in its public finances, Mr Ingvar Carlsson, Sweden's
recently restored Social Democratic prime minister, shows a remarkable
degree of confidence about the task facing him.
Sweden will have a budget deficit in the current fiscal year of SKr200bn
(Pounds 17bn) - about 13 per cent of gross national product. The state debt,
the fastest-growing among industrialised countries, will top 90 per cent of
gross national product next year.
The financial markets remain nervous about the new government's ability to
reconcile its commitment to the country's big welfare system with the need
for drastic action to cut public spending. Mr Carlsson, however, insists
that the job will be done.
'It went very rapidly in the wrong direction and I am very optimistic about
the possibilities to change this again,' he declares.
He ticks off a list of measures. A package of tax increases (the largest for
years in Sweden) and spending cuts announced last month will shave SKr57bn
from the deficit. These come on top of SKr18bn in cuts inherited from the
previous centre-right government of by Mr Carl Bildt, the radical leader of
the conservative Moderate party. Further measures worth another SKr20bn -
mainly cuts - are promised in the January budget.
'Honestly, I don't think the market is aware yet of what we are doing,' he
says. 'But they will see the facts. (The measures) will stabilise the total
Swedish debt before 1998, which was the target we set in the election
campaign. I think it is possible in 1997.'
Nor is Mr Carlsson worried that his government's forecast of more than 3 per
cent growth next year - on which the deficit reduction plan depends - is
ahead of most market expectations.
'I met a large group of industrialists only last Monday and they say all
forecasts now are underestimating the activities already taking place in our
companies. I don't think we are over-optimistic. Now there is a real swing
in investment and demand is also coming in the domestic market, so I think
we will have a very good year in 1995.'
So far, the markets have reserved judgment on the government's economic
policies: long-term interest rates in Sweden are 3.5 percentage points
higher than in Germany. Mr Carlsson knows that, if the January budget fails
to convince the markets, continuing high interest rates will dog his efforts
to cut unemployment.
But in the meantime, the prime minister is clearly enjoying his return to
power, savouring his clear election victory in September and the Yes vote in
last month's referendum over membership of the European Union.
The silver-haired Mr Carlsson, party leader since 1986, exudes relief that
the political status quo has been restored, after Mr Bildt's coalition set
out to transform Sweden into a full-blown liberal market economy.
Instead, Mr Carlsson is reassured that Swedes flocked back to the Social
Democrats (in power for more than 50 of the last 60 years) in order to
preserve their welfare state - as far as present straitened circumstances
allow.
Even though he campaigned in favour of EU membership, Mr Carlsson will take
a markedly more cautious and traditional approach to the Union than his
predecessor. Mr Bildt saw joining the EU as part of a strategic swing - both
politically and economically - away from Sweden's tradition of aloof
isolation from the rest of Europe. He spoke, for example, of Swedish
neutrality as having lost its meaning.
Mr Carlsson - whose party held out against EU membership for years,
primarily to safeguard the country's neutral stance - rejects the idea that
neutrality is dead. He knows that almost half of all Social Democrat
supporters voted against membership in last month's referendum and is keen
not to widen the gulf further.
He is careful to emphasise that Swedish military non-alignment and
neutrality are still endorsed by parliament. Sweden will become an observer
in the Western European Union, the EU's defence organisation, but not a full
member - nor will it join Nato.
'I think it is not in the interests of Nato or of Sweden to change the basic
security policy in northern Europe,' he says. 'We have had a very stable
situation in northern Europe for many years with the kind of security policy
we have had so far, and I think it could be dangerous to give Russia the
feeling that we are encircling them.
'Of course, with the Berlin Wall torn down in 1989 we have a completely new
security situation in Sweden. The old, very difficult policy for us between
east and west - that's gone. But when you come to the core - are we prepared
to give up military non-alignment? - the answer is no.'
On social policy, however, Mr Carlsson and his government will aim to take a
leading role in the EU's fight against unemployment. With unemployment in
Sweden having reached unprecedented levels, at about 13 per cent of the
workforce, the Social Democrats support concerted employment policies for
the EU. Mr Carlsson supports moves to add conditions on employment levels to
the fiscal and monetary criteria set at the Maastricht summit for European
monetary union.
'I think that more and more politicians are aware that, if Europe doesn't
better solve the unemployment problem, it is not only a problem for
individuals, it is a problem for European democracy,' he says. 'If we in
these good years have 8-10 per cent unemployment and we meet the next
recession from that very high level, I think we will enter a very dangerous
situation.'
The prime minister will enter the debate on unemployment at the EU summit in
Essen at the end of this week, pushing for action to implement
recommendations made in the policy 'white paper' produced by the EU
Commission in December 1993. He cites infrastructure investment, active
measures to get jobless workers into work schemes and wide-ranging moves to
upgrade education.
'I think there will be a struggle about it,' says Mr Carlsson. 'But I am
glad to be a part of the struggle and not having to watch it from the
outside as a non-member. Now we can be on the inside and I look forward to
that.'
