FT  04 MAR 94 / Major joins attack on executive pay increases
Mr John Major, the prime minister, joined Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor,
in the Commons yesterday in condemning excessive pay awards to company
chairmen and senior executives.
There were fierce protests from the opposition benches when both insisted
that there was no case for government intervention - with the chancellor
ruling out an increase in the top rate of income tax.
Mr Major recalled that it was in 1991 when he first stated that 'excessive
pay awards' were not justified. He had not altered his view that pay was a
matter between employer and employee, and company and management, rather
than for the government.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, said that there was anger throughout the
country over top people securing massive pay increases while others had to
bear massive tax increases.
Undeterred by Labour jeers, the prime minister said Britain was 'a free
capitalist country' in which wage rates were determined by companies. He
argued that Mr Smith's demand for government intervention undermined
Labour's claim to have modernised its ideas and to be more understanding
about the needs of free enterprise.
Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, accused the government of having one
tax law for company boardrooms and another for everybody else. He maintained
that if executive share options were fully taxed it would make Pounds 200m
available for public services. He pressed the chancellor to act over the
'unacceptable face of capitalism'.
Mr Brown condemned the tax-free handout secured by Mr John Cahill when he
stepped down from the chairmanship of British Aerospace, and the Pounds
370,000 rise awarded in one year to Lord Young, chairman of Cable and
Wireless.
Mr Clarke said he frequently urged restraint on those who led British
industry at a time when it was necessary to maintain competitiveness and low
inflation.
'Individuals get cited who are wholly untypical of British management, most
of whom have exercised such constraint,' said Mr Clarke.
