FT  21 SEP 94 / Survey of Logistics (2): It's still early days - A look at
the attractions of the Channel tunnel
The Channel tunnel offers the prospect of much improved distribution links
between Britain and the Continent.
But delays to the build-up of full tunnel services and this summer's lengthy
strike of UK railway signalmen have done nothing to increase confidence in
the Pounds 11bn venture.
These two events have created doubts about the tunnel and reinforced more
general suspicions about the reliability of rail freight. They have set back
hopes of a speedy shift from road to rail.
In theory the opening of the 32-mile-long tunnel provides an unprecedented
opportunity for Britain's railway network. The 10,000 miles of UK track will
be directly joined to the mainland European network of 150,000 miles.
This transforms the economics of making rail shipments. With few freight
journeys financially viable over distances of less than 300 miles British
Rail has in the past been unable to compete with road transport.
Railfreight Distribution, the British Railways freight subsidiary
responsible for container shipments to the Continent, calculates that the
opening of the tunnel will increase freight volumes from 2m tonnes a year to
6.5m tonnes within two years. It expects freight shipments to reach 9m
tonnes by about 2000.
Railborne freight currently accounts for just 7 per cent of cross-Channel
shipments by container, closed rail waggon or lorry. At present cargoes go
by train ferry from Dover to Dunkirk or by lift-on lift-off container ship
between Harwich and Zeebrugge.
The Channel tunnel creates opportunities for the development of intermodal
services with consignments travelling much of the journey by rail, and road
used solely for delivery and collection from a rail terminal. The
environmental attractions of a shift to rail are attractive to politicians
and the general public. In addition to the long-distance freight services
which will use the tunnel, road hauliers will also be able to put their
trucks on Eurotunnel's freight shuttles running between Folkestone and
Calais. The freight shuttles should provide a marginal saving on the
ferries, though at times of bad weather or during the summer holiday peak
when passenger cars displace lorries on the ferries considerable savings may
be achieved.
But opinions within the distribution industry about the railways are mixed.
Rail has not endeared itself to hauliers and freight forwarders over the
years. Sudden price increases, unreliable deliveries and a cavalier attitude
to customers have made potential users wary of rail.
There are even doubts about the railways' ability to match the delivery
times provided by road transport. One survey showed that European intermodal
shipments travelled at an average of just 23 miles an hour while road
shipments moved at 43 miles an hour.
'Significant weaknesses exist in the organisation and marketing of rail
freight services through the tunnel,' said Mr Jim White, director general of
the British International Freight Association.
Mr White believes that the number of organisations involved in providing
services and marketing the tunnel has led to confusion among potential
users.
The tunnel is being promoted by Eurotunnel, which owns and provides services
through the tunnel; by Railfreight Distribution and by 'retailers' of cargo
space like ACI and CTL.
The tight security regime imposed on freight users of the tunnel is also a
concern to some. Groupage traffic, the combination of shipments from
different customers into one consignment, is of particular concern to
security officials. Registering shippers and agents on the model recently
adopted for air freight should be possible, Mr White said.
The faltering start to freight and passenger services through the tunnel has
damaged the credibility of its operations. The well-publicised breakdown of
a small number of the early freight trains in the tunnel - despite being
inevitable on a new service of this kind  - has increased concerns.
And while the tunnel's operations have not been directly affected by the
signalmen's strike, the dispute has emphasised the vulnerability of the
railway to industrial action.
Despite these fears, considerable sums of money are being invested in rail
freight terminals and in rolling stock to provide through links.
Railfreight Distribution will operate a network of seven freight terminals
including London, Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow while private investors
are creating terminals in Daventry, Doncaster and elsewhere.
These terminals will act as collection points for containers and swapbodies
 -truck trailers without the wheels. Plans are also afoot to create a
'piggyback' service which would transport complete lorry trailers, including
wheels, on special flat-bed rail waggons.
The Piggyback Consortium, grouping rail companies, local authorities and
transport organisations, has calculated that raising bridges and tunnels to
take the higher waggon loads on a route to the north west of England and to
Scotland would cost just Pounds 70m, much less than previous estimates.
In August the consortium invited rolling stock manufacturers to quote for
the supply of a fleet of flat-bed waggons.
It is on the long distance routes, from the north of England and Scotland to
northern Italy and Germany that big time savings can be made, according to
the supporters of intermodal transport.
London to Milan should take 31 hours and Glasgow to Basle 34 hours.
Birmingham to Vienna should be a 37 hour journey and Manchester to Mannheim
24 hours. Delivery and collection times, by road, will need to be added to
these terminal-to-terminal times, however.
If the tunnel can provide a regular, reliable service, guaranteed delivery
times could prove invaluable to companies supplying customers or field
engineers with components from a central European warehouse.
Companies could push back the cut-off point for orders for next-day delivery
of spare parts from, say, 4pm to 5pm and still get the order there on time.
Food retailers shipping chilled foods through the tunnel by a combination of
road and rail could gain an extra 12 to 48 hours longer on the supermarket
shelf, said Mr Pat Lee, development director of Wincanton, a food
distribution specialist.
'The speed of movement will allow an honest claim that the fruit, say, was
only picked the day before,' he added. Intermodal transport through the
tunnel should avoid traffic jams, ferry cancellations in rough weather and
continental bans on long distance lorry journeys at weekends and on public
holidays.
The tunnel will be judged on whether it can save the distribution industry
and its customers time and money. But four months after its official opening
the tunnel still has a long way to go to demonstrate that it can do either.
