FT  06 JUL 94 / Management: Attraction of the opposite - Adrian Furnham
finds that turning conventional theories on their head can have intriguing
results
One way of being creative is to think through the opposite of an idea or
technique. Academics have performed this trick so often they have the jargon
terms of thesis, antithesis and synthesis.
Turning an idea on its head (as Marx did to Hegel) can be useful,
mischievous or just plain fun. It can help to define positions, clarify
differences and set out clear alternatives. It can also point out the sheer
ordinariness or commonsense nature of ideas or concepts, because the
opposites are so ridiculous. In a sense antonyms simply do not exist. Thus
the opposite of looking for zero defects is to look for zero perfects or 100
per cent defects.
Some opposites are not that obvious. The opposite of managing by walking
about (MBWA) could be management by staying in the office (MBSITO) or
management by hiding away (MBHA) - surely more fun. But 'creative opposites'
is an entertaining and useful exercise.
Thus we have:
Shoddy squares. Sitting around in circles becoming obsessed with quality
might be desirable for the obsessive but it is incredibly boring. Checking
for, and throwing out, the odd shoddy product or service system is probably
a good idea, but not worth getting excited about.
Disempowerment. Because responsibility and accountability come with power,
so does stress. Empowerment means no one else to blame; being on-call;
making executive decisions and facing the consequences of one's own actions.
Disempowerment means the easy life and the old excuse that 'I was merely
following orders . . .'.
Relayering the company. All this down- or right-sizing has been too similar
to a vicious cull of the herd. Just as the mature elephants are the
embodiment of the wisdom of the herd, so we need to bring back the
middle-brow middle-manager and have a deep gateau of management layers to
pad out the management structure.
Thriving on order. Organisations, like the world in general, are too
chaotic, capricious and unpredictable to be either enjoyable or beneficial.
Management's job is to give order to the organisation, to bring stability to
the chances and changes of this world and to abolish chaos.
De-engineering the organisation. People are not machines and to talk in this
language only encourages mechanistic thinking. Re-engineering is not the
best metaphor in these people-oriented times. It is too redolent of the
'dark satanic mills' of the last century. Perhaps a metaphor from cooking
should be used: 'Reheating the organisation' or 'Defrosting the
organisation', for instance.
Job impoverishment. All that consultant clap-trap of job enrichment ignores
the obvious fact that it is not the tedious or routine nature of jobs that
make them distasteful, but having to do them at all. Job impoverishment
removes horrid jobs. Get everyone to write down on a piece of paper the job
they hate the most. Put these in a hat and draw one each to be performed
next month. The same work gets done and everyone gets to do a new task.
Management without objectives: The trouble with management by objectives is
that it expends massive and wasteful effort defining and then measuring
objectives. Ignore mission statements, section goals and job descriptions.
Work relations are optimised under MWO because people love doing their own
thing. This is especially true of more senior positions where the
undesirable side-effects of lower productivity are of little consequence.
Time-serving related pay: Performance-related pay means that loyalty to the
organisation (40 years at the mast) is not sufficiently rewarded. Young,
workaholic, thrusting newcomers are promoted over the steady-as-you-go
types. Hence, companies need to stop rewarding effort and ability and indeed
support Lifo (last in, first out) and Figs (first in gets support). We could
have one-hour (not one-minute) managers; corporate philistinism, not
corporate culture.
Lady Thatcher understood the power of opposites. In strident tones she would
turn with contempt on the cowed Labour parliamentarian and shout 'Tina'.
This stood for 'There Is No Alternative.'
She knew, or hoped, that the available alternatives had either been tried
before (and found wanting) or were clearly impractical.
Perhaps executives could try shouting 'Creative Realistic Alternative Plans'
at board meetings and training sessions and see the immediate beneficial
effects on the organisation.
The author is professor of psychology at University College London.
