FT  27 APR 94 / Stock Exchange awarded two grudging cheers: A look at the
long-awaited initiative for small companies
Erratic trading in the shares of smaller companies has been a thorn in the
side of the London Stock Exchange since the onset of the last recession in
1990.
Small companies took it on the chin as the recession went from bad to worse
and the flow of capital through the market to the sector slowed to a
trickle. The exchange was often accused of being a fair-weather friend to
the smallest companies whose shares it lists.
The exchange's long-awaited initiative to encourage capital into small
companies, announced yesterday, goes some way towards meeting that
criticism.
But some venture capitalists argue privately that much of the exchange's
plan simply amounts to repackaging some of what it was already doing, and
the most significant new initiative - a marketing plan - is no more than
what some of its fiercest critics have been urging for some time.
Mr Ronald Cohen, chairman of Apax Partners, the venture-capital group, said:
'If you boil it all down, the stock exchange is proposing a low-regulation
market as a stepping stone to the official list, and that the official list
should cater for all larger companies.'
Mr Cohen is a member of Cisco, the City Group for Smaller Companies, which
has argued for a new, pan-European small company exchange under separate
management from the exchange. It is not at all clear that the latest plan is
sufficient to deter the competitive threat.
At the heart of scepticism about the new effort is a question mark over
whether the exchange is really prepared to undergo a cultural transformation
and become an organisation which aggressively markets itself and its
services. 'We have never been very active in marketing what we have,' Mr
Lawrence said.
To this end, Mr Giles Vardy, director of market development, was given the
additional title of director of marketing earlier this month.
A key element of the exchange's small companies' plan involves meeting
regional stockbrokers to encourage them to promote shares of locally based
companies. The exchange's network of regional exchanges which performed this
function were phased out in a cost-cutting and restructuring exercise in the
late 1980s.
Scottish Enterprise, the government-backed economic development body, will
aid the exchange in its efforts.
Besides enhanced marketing, there are three other critical elements to the
plan - improving the trading technology for small company shares, codifying
the regulations for small companies and creating a new index against which
institutional investors can benchmark performance.
Shares in 236 companies now trade under section 535.2 of the exchange's
rules - a section of the rulebook with no formal listing requirements of its
own. While some of these companies' shares are traded no more than once a
year, others trade several times a day.
Mr Lawrence was vague on the degree of regulation the 535.2 companies would
have, but venture capitalists and stockbrokers say the sector needs to be
more stringent in its requirements than the exchange's official list.
'The 535 market needs beefing up,' said the head of corporate finance at a
City stockbrokers. 'It needs to be regulated. It's not a market many people
understand but it's becoming more active.'
Unless investors feel confident that the market is well regulated, they will
not devote additional capital to it.
Some market participants said the exchange had fended off some possible
competition in the small-companies sector by deciding to build an
order-matching capacity into its new Sequence share-trading system. This
will allow those wishing to dispose of illiquid (infrequently traded) shares
to offer them at a set price to any willing participant.
'That's a good move,' said the investment director at one leading UK
institutional investment group. 'We were considering taking Tradepoint (a
competing trading system to the stock exchange) so we could get that
facility for small company shares.'
