FT  31 JAN 94 / Survey of the World's Young People (8): Patchwork solutions
 -Leslie Crawford profiles Undugu's work in Kenya
'Mama, I'm hungry, buy me something to eat.'
The boy's voice is soft, but his eyes are desperate. The rags he wears flap
about his thin legs. I give him a sweet bun and a coupon which will entitle
him to a hot meal and a bath in one of the shelters run by Undugu Society, a
non-government organisation devoted to the care of destitute children.
There are more than 130,000 street children like him in Nairobi, an
inescapable reminder of Kenya's decline into poverty and social strife. The
children - or 'parking boys' as they are known in Kenya - survive by
begging, prostitution, or theft. They cheat their hunger by sniffing glue.
They are regarded as pests by the police and as an eye-sore by the local
tourist authorities.
Every few months, police make half-hearted efforts to sweep them off the
streets. As the government cannot afford to keep them in juvenile detention
centres for long, the children soon return to their old haunts.
Over the past 21 years, Undugu (the name means 'brotherhood' in Swahili)
Society's work has evolved from rescuing children from the streets to
addressing the problems that drove them there in the first place.
The core of Undugu's work revolves round providing under-privileged children
with basic education and survival skills. It has also become increasingly
involved in trying to relieve poverty in Nairobi's sprawling slums.
Through small loans for small business ventures, skills training and
community-based health and nutrition projects, Undugu hopes it might be able
to alleviate the economic hardship that causes family break-ups and
abandoned children. Providing low-cost shelter for the urban poor has been
another priority.
Despite Undugu's efforts, the plight of Nairobi's street children gets worse
every year. Rapid population growth, rising unemployment and structural
adjustment policies have hit urban dwellers particularly hard.
Nairobi's overcrowded slums lack basic sanitation and are often plagued by
water shortages. The removal of food subsidies has priced most staples,
including maize, beyond the reach of most urban households. Children are
withdrawn from schools because parents cannot afford school fees.
Malnutrition is on the rise.
'At best, we can only provide patchwork solutions,' says Friar Arnold Grol,
the Dutch missionary who founded Undugu Society in 1973. 'We cannot solve
national problems, and we should not be a substitute for the lack of
government policies to fight poverty and injustice.'
Friar Grol does not believe in handouts or food aid, but he is now feeding
the 1,000 children who attend Undugu's schools. 'Children were dropping out
because they had nothing to eat,' he explains. For the first three years,
children are taught basic literacy and numeracy skills. The fourth and fifth
years are dedicated to learning a trade. 'We teach them to become
self-reliant,' says Grol.
Undugu is also sponsoring 400 children in state schools and seven at
university. The white-haired friar is a familiar figure round the wood and
metal workshops and the garage, which train future carpenters and mechanics
as well as providing Undugu with an income to finance other projects.
There is a tangible pride in what they do, as well as some grumbling about
low wages. 'When I look at the kids who are still on the streets, with no
future, I know I am lucky to be here,' says Francis, an 18-year-old
carpenter.
Undugu's latest project - centres which provide street children with meals,
counselling and a bath - was developed in partnership with the private
sector. Nairobi residents are being encouraged to buy coupons at Barclays
Bank which they can then give to street children, instead of giving them
alms. The coupon entitles children to food and a thorough scrub.
'It was our way of mobilising all of Nairobi in the care of our vulnerable
kids,' says Aloys Opiyo, one of Undugu's supervisors. 'All of society should
be involved in looking after them, not just the non-government
organisations.'
