FT  19 OCT 94 / Management: Who gets what from the maternity provisions -
New rights for women on leave bring the UK into line with European law / A
look at the changes
British women employees whose babies were due on or after 16 October are
entitled to new legal rights and benefits during their maternity leave from
work.
All women now have a statutory right to at least 14 weeks' leave regardless
of length of service or hours of work.
The new maternity rights also guarantee protection against dismissal and the
right to alternative work or suspension with full pay if continuing in the
job is harmful to health.
The changes are intended to bring UK law into line with the European Union
directive on the health and safety of pregnant women agreed two years ago.
How much leave is a woman entitled to?
Maternity leave entitlements for full-time women staff, who have at least
two years' continuous service with their employer, and part-time women with
five years' service, who work fewer than 16 hours a week but more than
eight, have not changed. Everybody else gets 14 weeks.
How much maternity pay is a woman entitled to ?
Women who have worked for the same employer for at least 26 weeks prior to
the 12 weeks before the baby's expected delivery date and earn at least
Pounds 57 a week or more on average qualify for up to a maximum of 18 weeks'
pay.
The pay entitlement for the first six weeks is 90 per cent of the woman's
average earnings and Pounds 52.50 for up to a further 12 weeks. Women who
qualify for only 14 weeks' maternity leave (full-time employees who have not
worked in continuous employment for two years and part-time employees who
have not completed five years' continuous service) and therefore return to
work at or before the end of the 14th week do not receive the last four
weeks of SMP.
Are there some companies who already provide longer leave?
One in four employers already provide more than the statutory minimum. Some
allow periods of up to 52 weeks' leave. These include Abbey National,
British Gas, the civil service and the national health service.
Do some employers pay more than the statutory figure?
A growing number of companies also pay more than the statutory maternity
pay. Marks and Spencer, Rover car group, Amersham International and HP
Bulmer pay 100 per cent of previous earnings for the first six weeks of
maternity leave.
How much will this cost employers?
The cost to employers of the new materity rights has been set at Pounds 65m
a year, 0.03 per cent of the total national wage bill, or Pounds 230 per
expectant mother receiving maternity benefits. Employers are being
reimbursed by the state for up to 92 per cent of the cost of maternity leave
pay from September 4. Small companies - those who pay Pounds 20,000 or less
a year in gross national insurance contributions - are fully reimbursed.
What happens to the other provisions in a woman's contract?
All women on maternity leave continue to benefit from all the terms and
conditions of their contract (including holiday entitlement, pension rights
and company car) except for their normal pay.
Are women protected from unfair dismissal?
The new legislation's guarantee of protection against dismissal means that
all women on maternity leave who are subsequently dismissed must be given
written reasons. There are no set limits on the damages an industrial
tribunal can award if a pregnant woman is unfairly dismissed.
How will the new health and safety regulations affect employers and
employees?
Health and safety rights have been introduced to protect pregnant women,
women who have recently given birth or are breast feeding. An employer is
now required to carry out a risk assessment of working conditions and take
whatever preventable action is reasonable. The law also states that where a
risk to a woman's health is suspected and no alternative work is available,
an employer must suspend the employee on full pay. The regulations are being
revised at present by the Health and Safety Executive.
If suitable alternative work is available but not offered or a woman is
suspended without full pay, she can gain access to an industrial tribunal.
How can women claim their new rights?
To aid employers' planning of employment needs pregnant women have to follow
a procedure to claim any of the new maternity rights. If the procedure is
not adhered to they will lose entitlements.
A woman must give at least 21 days' notice to the employer of the date when
she intends to start her period of leave (the notice need only be in writing
if the employer insists). Maternity leave can begin 11 weeks before the
expected week of childbirth. To receive SMP, 21 days' notice before
beginning leave is required. A copy of the maternity certificate (MAT B1)
must also be sent to the employer.
What steps does a woman employee take to return to work?
The employer may ask for confirmation of intention to return to work eleven
weeks after the start of the maternity leave. A reply in writing must be
given within 14 days. At least 21 days before intention to return to work
the employer should be informed of the exact date of return. An extension
beyond the 29 weeks leave is allowed if a woman is ill. She must inform the
employer of illness and supply a medical certificate. Employers can also
delay return by four weeks, but must give reasons.
What are the main problems with the new rights?
All women are entitled to 14 weeks' maternity leave and only some women are
entitled to 18 weeks' statutory maternity pay. The Department of Employment
calculated that bringing the two into line would add Pounds 50m to annual
business costs.
If a woman is absent sick before her planned maternity leave begins, but
this is a pregnancy-related illness and occurs on or after the sixth week
before the expected week of confinement, maternity leave is automatically
triggered. Some believe this is confusing, too arbitrary and punitive.
Can a woman have her old job when coming back to work?
A woman is entitled to return to the same job she had before she went on
maternity leave on no less favourable terms and conditions of employment.
However, she may request to work on a part-time rather than full-time basis.
Who is not covered by the new regulations?
An estimated 2.25m women, or 20 per cent of the female labour force, who
earn less than Pounds 57 a week fail to qualify for statutory maternity pay.
Any woman who has not been in continuous service with the same employer for
26 weeks will not qualify.
How does UK maternity leave provision compare with the rest of western
Europe?
British women receive the lowest level of maternity pay in the EU with only
up to 14 per cent having statutory entitlement topped up by employers. In
Denmark they receive 22 weeks on full pay during maternity leave, in Germany
they get full pay for 14 weeks and in Italy for 17 weeks.
