FT  23 NOV 94 / Survey of Mexico (8): Business needs new transport systems -
Investment sought for infrastructure and services
Few challenges can match the need to modernise Mexico's infrastructure in
roads, ports, railways, sanitation and telecommunications. The success of
Mexican exports and the survival of local manufacturers facing increased
foreign competition will depend in large measure on the improvement of these
services, which businessmen regard as costly, inadequate and inefficient.
Over the next 15 years, Mr Andres Conesa of Grupo ICA, Mexico's largest
construction firm, estimates the country will need to:
Build 60,000km of highways.
Lay 6,600km of railway track and reinforce 5,000 bridges.
Modernise 183 ports and put into operation three industrial ports on the
Pacific coast and three others on the Gulf of Mexico.
Establish an alternative airport system for Mexico City.
Duplicate the number of telephone lines.
Extend irrigation from 6m to 8m hectares.
Revamp 250 important dams and 2,100km of river-bed dikes.
Increase water supply and sewerage networks for 13m people.
'We estimate that Dollars 100bn will need to be invested - just in the next
six years,' Mr Conesa says.
Following the severe spending cuts of the 1980s, the Salinas administration
sought to revive investment in infrastructure in partnership with the
private sector. In addition to the privatisation of Telefonos de Mexico
(Telmex) in 1990, the government has extended private sector participation
to road building, inter-modal transport terminals, railway maintenance,
water treatment plants, ports and power generation projects.
Mr Ernesto Zedillo, the president-elect, promises to increase investment in
public infrastructure by 25 per cent during his first year of office, and to
set up an investment fund for infrastructure, financed in part from the
income of privatisations. The fund is expected to function as a guarantor
for projects, enabling the private sector to gain access to cheaper,
long-term project finance.
The dearth of affordable credit to match the long recovery costs typical of
infrastructure projects has proved a big disincentive to greater private
sector participation. At present, most Mexican banks draw the line at
10-year loans, while access to the international financial markets has been
restricted due to the lack of an investment grade for Mexican debt.
The financial constraints has been felt most acutely by the private sector
in the construction of toll roads, of which more than 5,800km have been
built since 1989 at a cost of Dollars 10bn. Expensive credit, cost
over-runs, and lower than expected traffic, caused in part by high tolls,
has depressed internal rate of return, with many toll road trusts having to
reschedule debt payments.
Nevertheless, Grupo ICA, which has built 12 toll roads, remains optimistic
about the future. The government has extended the life of concessions to
make up for lower-than-expected traffic, while some loans have been
restructured.
'We are also learning to cost projects more accurately and we are becoming
more sophisticated in tapping the capital markets,' Mr Guerrero concedes.
Mexican businessmen expect the Zedillo administration will extend the system
of private sector concessions to rail transport, even if the state retains
ownership of track. US and Canadian companies are reported to be interested
in joint-venture cargo operations if and when the liberalisation comes
about.
At present, less than two per cent of the government's investment budget is
devoted to this neglected mode of transport, and as a result, and the
state-owned network carries less than 13 per cent of overland cargo.
The World Bank says productivity at FNM remains less than two-thirds of
comparable US railway companies, despite the retrenchment of 30,000 of its
80,000 employees since 1992. Current terminal organisation, scheduling and
dispatch operations are so inadequate that less than 20 per cent of shipment
time is spent on route.
The privatisation of municipal services, such as the provision of drinking
water and the disposal of solid waste, are also opening new business
opportunities. Aguascalientes, Cancun, Ciudad Juarez, among other cities,
have given the private sector concessions to manage their water supplies.
GDM and Grupo ICA are also building Mexico's first private-sector
hydroelectric power plant on the River Fuerte, on the border between the
states of Sinaloa and Sonora. The joint-venture raised Dollars 250m in
12-year Eurobonds to finance the project, backed by leasehold guarantees
issued by the Mexican Electricity Board.
ICA, and its partners, are among those seeking to build a private
electricity plant in the city of Merida. After several false-starts, the
government is expected to give the go-ahead for construction early next
year.
