FT  03 SEP 94 / Costly dam to be opened
President Carlos Menem will today inaugurate what he once called Argentina's
'monument to corruption', the 3,200 MW Yacyreta hydroelectric dam on the
Parana River.
The dam, among the largest in the world, has cost at least six times over
budget and is still not finished, 11 years after construction began.
Mr Menem will only be unveiling the first of Yacyreta's 20 turbines, which
will eventually generate one-third of Argentina's electricity. The final
bill for Yacyreta is not in yet. Estimates vary between Dollars 9bn and
Dollars 12bn.
The Yacyreta project began in 1958 when Argentina and Paraguay, which share
the Parana river, signed a co-operation treaty to build the dam. However,
squabbling between the two countries, Argentina's repeated financial crises
and 17 changes of government over the last 36 years constantly delayed the
project.
Yacyreta's fame as a 'monument to corruption' - a phrase Mr Menem coined in
1990 - was born soon after the first feasibility studies began, with
contracts reputedly being awarded to groups with the strongest lobbying
capability in Buenos Aires and the Paraguayan capital Asuncion. The two
governments own equal shares in the project.
Bidding for the construction contract itself began in 1980 and competition
was fierce. Dumez of France and Italy's Impregilo were the front runners in
the bidding. The then military government of Gen Reynaldo Bignone eventually
told the two to create a joint venture, which it awarded the contract just
10 days before the civilian administration of Mr Raul Alfonsin took over in
1983.
Since then, the two companies have struggled through hyperinflation, a
second change of government with Mr Menem's election in 1989, and his
surprise conversion to free market economics. They have also coped with
three different currencies and three radical shifts in economic policy over
the last 11 years.
Mr Menem now believes he has found a market solution to Yacyreta: he wants
to privatise the dam, turning over its operation to a private company once
the 20th turbine is installed and spinning.
