FT  17 JUN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: EU warned on cost of eastern
European farm price support
The cost of farm support to help central and eastern European countries join
the European Union could amount to nearly Ecu1bn (Pounds 780m) a year,
according to two independent farm experts, reports Reuters from Brussels.
Provision of low farm support prices and creation of 'land banks' to provide
credit to help private farmers would cost between Ecu500m and Ecu900m a
year, Mr Henri Nallet, former French farm minister told a news conference.
'We hope the eastern Europeans will finance it themselves,' added Mr Adriaan
van Stolk, co-author of a report for the European Commission on EU farm
trade relations with eastern Europe.
The financing of farm support measures is expected to be one of the most
difficult issues in negotiations with Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic,
Slovakia, Romania and Bulgaria on their eventual entry into the EU.
Mr Rene Steichen, EU agriculture commissioner, said on Wednesday that the
report reflected only the personal views of the authors.
The European Commission is expected to publish in July a discussion document
on measures to narrow the farm policy gap and assist the eventual membership
of the eastern European countries.
Eastern European farm support would be based on a wheat price of Dollars 85
a tonne, said Mr van Stolk, a Dutch farm business expert. 'The clue is to
lock in a low support price,' he suggested, adding that Dollars 85 would
cover 'hard core' input and labour costs and allow farmers to compete on the
world market.
Mr Nallet said lessons must be learned from the EU's major error 30 years
ago in setting cereals intervention prices 25 per cent above the internal
market price.
Price support would be complemented by a simplified system of fixed levies
and refunds on EU farm imports and exports from eastern Europe.
The creation of 'land banks' would help tackle the huge problem of inflation
and illiquidity in eastern Europe, Mr van Stolk said. 'It would help provide
liquidity in a very illiquid system' while helping private farmers to
establish economically viable farms.
