FT  01 AUG 94 / UN backs use of force to remove Haiti junta: Exiled
President Aristide calls for swift action
The United Nations Security Council yesterday gave US President Bill Clinton
permission to invade Haiti and remove its military leaders by force as and
when he wishes. Sources within the Clinton administration said this did not
necessarily mean an invasion was imminent.
The UN resolution, passed by 14 votes to none with China and Brazil
abstaining, employs the formula first used for the Gulf war in 1990-91,
which authorises member states to 'use all necessary means' to bring about
an objective, in this case the departure of Haiti's military leadership
under General Raoul Cedras.
The decision was legitimised by a letter sent to the council on Friday by Mr
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the elected president whom Gen Cedras ousted in a
coup in 1991 and who is now in exile in the US.
Mr Aristide had refrained from calling publicly for a US invasion, on the
grounds that he is forbidden to do this by the Haitian constitution. Now, he
has called for 'swift and decisive action' to remove the military leaders -
which, like 'all necessary means', is a transparent euphemism for the use of
force.
The UN resolution calls for a 'multinational force under unified command and
control' but this is understood to mean a US force with token participation
from a few Latin American or Caribbean states.
Once the military leaders are removed and a 'secure and stable environment
established', this would be replaced by a more traditional UN peacekeeping
force of 6,000 men, intended to help Mr Aristide impose law and order and
reorganise the Haitian armed forces to ensure their future loyalty to the
elected government. In the view of most US experts on Haiti, this longer
term task presents much greater difficulties than the initial invasion.
There is little support among the US public for an invasion, except in the
influential black caucus in Congress and in parts of Florida where it is
seen as the best hope of ending the flow of Haitian refugees. In the past
month, the US has been housing Haitian refugees at its naval base at
Guantanamo in Cuba rather than allowing them into Florida, and the outflow
has dropped.
This is one reason why observers in Washington no longer expect an immediate
invasion, but believe Mr Clinton will use the threat of invasion, plus
tougher sanctions imposed by the Security Council in May, to try to persuade
the military leaders to step down peacefully.
