FT  01 MAR 94 / 'Circus' turns deadly serious
A United Nations official in Zagreb said yesterday that the no-fly zone over
Bosnia-Hercegovina had been a 'circus' since Nato aircraft began enforcing
it some 10 months ago.
The UN declared the no-fly zone on October 9, 1992. Nato aircraft started
enforcing it on April 12, 1993.
Under UN resolution 816, backed by Russia, no fixed-wing aircraft or
helicopters are allowed to fly over Bosnia without prior permission and
clearance from the UN.
The aim of the resolution, directed at Bosnian-Serb forces, Croatian
aircraft and Bosnian government helicopters, was to prevent munitions and
supplies reaching all three armies.
Bosnian Serbs began with a numerical advantage, since their air force was
inherited from the former Yugoslav army. The Bosnian-Serb air force includes
30 fixed-wing jets - 12 Galeb and Jastreb light attack aircraft, 12
ex-Yugoslav Orao fighter bombers, six Russian-made MiG-21 fighters - and 15
Gazelle helicopters.
The Bosnian army is equipped with helicopters and light aircraft, while
Croatia has four MiGs, although unconfirmed reports claim that the Croatian
air force has acquired an additional 16 MiGs.
Since the enforcement of the no-fly zone, numerous violations have taken
place.
According to UN officials in Belgrade and Zagreb, 1,397 violations were
recorded between October 1992 and January 1, 1994. They add that between
January 24 and February 17 alone, there were 152 violations, with the
Bosnian Moslems responsible for 77, the Croats for 55, and the Serbs 19.
Most of these violations were by helicopters transporting munitions and
personnel into military zones.
UN officials say that between last December 20 and January 24, the vast
majority of the 65 violations were carried out by Moslem and Croat forces,
mostly over central Bosnia.
More than 170 Nato aircraft have carried out 7,250 sorties, or fighter
missions over Bosnia. Most of the aircraft fly out from the Italian air base
of Aviano, Nato's largest base in southern Europe. The US, the Netherlands,
France, Britain,Spain and Turkey are involved in the sorties, known as
'Operation Deny Flight'.
The sorties are backed up by Awacs surveillance aircraft and fuel tankers.
Altogether, Nato has carried out 13,650 sorties over Bosnia.
