FT  25 MAY 94 / Competitiveness - The White Paper: DTI rejects main
proposals in MPs' report - Committee's role
The main recommendations of the Commons trade and industry committee are
rejected in the white paper, although Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary, said he agreed with most of its analysis.
Mr Richard Caborn, the Labour chairman of the committee, said: 'The white
paper may accept the analysis of our report but it is a million miles apart
in terms of the prognosis for significantly improving Britain's long-term
competitiveness.'
But Mr Heseltine made it clear the government was unable to accept some of
the committee's proposals because they would have proved too costly to
implement.
The contrast between the white paper and the select committee's report
includes the following:
The committee called for direct government action to eradicate City
short-termism by controlling hostile takeovers, restraining excessive
dividend payouts and taking steps to control over-generous pay to
direc-tors.
The white paper, while acknowledging concern over the high proportion of
profits that British companies distribute as dividends, says it does not
mean there is a 'malfunction in the market'.
The issue is whether capital is best left in the hands of companies or
returned to shareholders. But the white paper takes no view as to which is
preferable.
The committee urged ministers to stamp out deficiencies in training and
education.
It suggested a move towards the imposition of a levy on employers, offering
tax incentives, and transferring control of training from the Department of
Employment to the Department of Trade and industry.
The white paper ignores the call for a training levy and the committee's
recommendation that the DTI should be responsible for training.
The committee called for a significant increase in research and development
spending, particularly in specific leading industries such as aerospace.
Although the white paper underlines the importance of R&amp;D it makes no
specific pledges to increase spending on industries such as aerospace.
The committee recommended improving the funding of small business through
tax changes, and called for better understanding of the importance of
manufacturing by setting out national targets for growth in productivity.
The white paper dismisses the need for economic targets.
