FT  31 DEC 94 / International Capital Markets: HK exchange chief looks
forward to 1997 - Simon Holberton meets Dr Cheng who has been chosen to
oversee the transfer of the colony's stock market to Chinese sovereignty
Dr Edgar Cheng, 51, has been chairman of the Hong Kong stock exchange for
nearly two months and already he barely has time to scratch himself.
'I have recently taken up calligraphy,' he said in an interview. 'A master
visits once a week and that's the only time - my one hour of peace - when I
don't think about the stock exchange.'
This is not a complaint, but is said simply to underline that Dr Cheng has
given up his other business activities for the exchange. He has been elected
for a year, but he accepted the post on the understanding that he will see
the exchange through Hong Kong's transfer to Chinese sovereignty in 1997.
The Hong Kong stock exchange has been adept at picking chairmen in the
recent past. The outgoing incumbent, Mr Charles Lee, was highly experienced
in the law of securities regulation, just at the time when the exchange -
recovering from the trial of its former chairman Mr Ronald Li, and the shock
of a new regulatory framework - needed such a figure. He was also
instrumental in devising a means by which mainland Chinese companies could
list their shares in Hong Kong.
In opting for Dr Cheng the members of the exchange appear to have made a
similarly prescient decision. They have gone for a man with impeccable
credentials in China even if he is a little unknown in his native Hong Kong.
Dr Cheng is the son-in-law of the late Sir YK Pao, the Hong Kong shipping
magnate, whose closeness to the Beijing regime was underlined by the fact
that he played bridge regularly with Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount
leader. Dr Cheng always accompanied Sir YK on his trips to China.
When, in the early 1990s, Beijing sought Sir YK's advice on whom to select
as the first group of Hong Kong advisers, it was Dr Cheng whose name went
forward. In 1992, when the first tranche of 44 advisers was announced, Dr
Cheng was one of the youngest. 'The stock exchange is an extension of that
relationship,' he says. 'If there is anything they (Beijing) need to know
I'm in the best position to let them know.'
He says he is confident about China's ability to get right its relationship
with Hong Kong. On a recent visit to Beijing he left with the strong sense
that the Chinese leadership sees Hong Kong facilitating economic development
on the mainland; moreover, Beijing will let Hong Kong run unhindered its own
financial affairs. 'China knows that Hong Kong's financial system is good
for them to tap,' he says. 'They look at us as a partner and that was very
comforting to me.'
Unlike his brothers in law - Mr Peter Woo, who runs the Wharf-Wheelock
group, or Dr Hulmut Sohmen, who runs World-Wide Shipping - Dr Cheng does not
have much of a public profile in Hong Kong. For most of his professional
life Dr Cheng was a specialist in gastro-intestinal cancer. In the US he was
teacher, researcher and clinician.
The pull of family was strong, however, and since his return to the colony
in 1987 he has kept to himself and applied himself to his business.
Initially this was working alongside Sir YK in managing a vast portfolio of
private investments, which he was later to inherit, in the World-Wide
Investment Company.
Looking back on those early days, he observed: 'My job was to look after the
family money. Helmut (Sohmen) got the shipping and Peter (Woo) the public
companies. But the chunk of family money was looked after by my late
father-in-law; he didn't believe in fund managers. So working with him I got
to learn a lot about the world economy, currencies, bonds, and equities -
mainly US and European.'
He also had to respond to the demands of his own family. As the eldest son
his decision to embark on a medical career in the US had been controversial;
ordinarily he would have been expected to stay and assist his father in the
family firm. Upon his return to Hong Kong his father insisted that he fulfil
Cheng-family obligations as well as those to his father-in-law. He did this
by assuming the chairmanship of Wing Tai, a textiles and property company
listed on the Singapore stock exchange.
At the beginning of December he relinquished this job to his younger brother
Edward, who until then had been finance director at Wharf. He has also put
in Edward's care a USDollars 100m investment project in Ningbo, the coastal
city of Zhejiang province. In 1992, Dr Cheng decided to make his first big
independent foray into business on the mainland. World-Wide and Wing Tai
have put up 60 per cent of the capital, and various agencies of the
Singapore government the remaining 40 per cent.
Ningbo was the home town of Sir YK It is one of China's leading coastal
cities with the country's deepest port. 'My late father-in-law had donated a
university there, and relations were very good with the city,' Dr Cheng
said. 'I thought that with our connections in Singapore and Hong Kong
entrepreneurialism we could do something.'
Singapore lent its city planner, who set about to do a new plan for Ningbo
city. Dr Cheng knew Prof Lester Thurow of Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and got the institute to do a study of Ningbo and its economic
relationship to the Yangtze river delta. The results of the studies were
presented to the Ningbo authorities in November 1993.
The pay-off for Dr Cheng and his associates is a slice of the development of
a 50 sq km economic development zone in the city. In addition the consortium
is developing a multi-storey office development in centre of Ningbo. The
consortium also acquired a former state-run canned foods company which has
proved difficult to turn around. 'It is teaching me the lesson that
attitudes are hard to change,' he says.
It is this first-hand experience of doing business in China which Dr Cheng
believes will help him in his new job at the stock exchange. Under his
predecessor the exchange defined how to accommodate the capital-raising
needs of Chinese state companies. Dr Cheng is a believer in the exchange's
slogan that Hong Kong can be the centre for capital formation in China.
'Where else do you have a developing country with a market place like Hong
Kong for their capital formation?'
The agenda for the coming year is one which he inherited. This foresees an
increase in the number of mainland companies quoted on the exchange, the
introduction of stock options during the summer of 1995, and the creation of
an 'off-floor' exchange. Out of reasons of habit, Hong Kong maintains a
central trading floor even though all trading is screen based and could
theoretically be conducted from members' offices. Many of the larger brokers
have wanted terminals in their offices and from 1995 this will be allowed
under the so-called 'second terminal' rules.
In Hong Kong share trading is dominated by the large brokers. It is
estimated that a third of the trading is spread among 14 houses (mostly
foreign), another third among 50 large local brokers and the remaining third
among 400 or more small family brokers. The pressure for rationalisation in
growing, especially as fixed commissions come under pressure from fund
managers no longer allowed to accept cash commissions from the brokers.
Dr Cheng may well find that his 'patient care' skills are needed as much in
his new job as they were when he was dealing with cancer patients. He is
aware of the need for change, but understandably cautious when pressed about
the need for giving the process a nudge along. 'The exchange cannot tell
small brokers what to do but it can provide an environment and advise them
on mergers,' he says. But then he adds: 'If you do not grow you will be left
behind.'
