FT  31 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Uruguay Round target date set for January
1995
Top trade negotiators yesterday agreed to make January 1 1995 the target
date for implementation of the Uruguay Round trade liberalising accords,
committing the leading trading nations to ratifying the accords this year.
The date will be formally endorsed by ministers next month when they meet in
Marrakesh to sign the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade agreements.
Continued wrangling over a US demand for labour rights to go on the agenda
for future trade talks prevented approval of a draft ministerial
declaration. The row is also blocking agreement on setting up a preparatory
committee to manage the transition between the Uruguay signing and
establishment of a new World Trade Organisation next year.
Mr Peter Sutherland, director-general of Gatt said yesterday he stood ready
to call a meeting of senior trade officials next week to try to resolve the
worker rights issue ahead of the Marrakesh meeting on April 12-15.
The matter did not pose a threat to the signing of the Uruguay Round
agreements, but Mr Sutherland said it would be 'very unfortunate' not to
have consensus on the ministerial declaration. In a reference to a potential
North-South split in the WTO, he warned that failure to resolve the problem
could create 'a divided attitude in regard to future developments'.
Earlier Mr B K Zutshi, India's Gatt ambassador, told the 121-strong trade
negotiations committee that the worker rights issue had 'menace and
destructive potential' for undoing what had been built in the Uruguay Round
and threatened the foundations of the multilateral system.
Despite the united opposition of developing countries, and lack of support
from other industrialised nations, US officials say Washington remains
committed to a reference to worker rights in the ministerial declaration.
Mr Sutherland, worried by the US move which surfaced unexpectedly last week,
said there had been broad assent to his proposal in January that discussion
of new issues be postponed until after the Marrakesh meeting.
