FT  05 MAR 94 / Finance and the Family: Ready for any battle - RE Gee: sixth
in a series by Joanna Slaughter on fee-based advisers
Any independent financial adviser who has served on Fimbra, the industry's
regulator, is likely to be battle-hardened. The experience could stand Ron
Gee in good stead.
Gee, who was deputy chairman of Fimbra from 1987-1990, is the founder of RE
Gee, a Shrewsbury-based firm of advisers established in 1972. Five staff -
including daughter Philippa, who joined four years ago - look after 1,800
personal clients.
Gee has just made a radical change in commercial strategy: he decided, after
more than 20 years as a conventional, commission-paid financial adviser, to
charge fees only. Reaction from clients has, so far, been very favourable
but he does expect to lose a few. 'There will be some for whom fees are not
appropriate,' he concedes.
The firm is not a total stranger to fees: it has been arranging one-off,
fee-based deals since the mid-1970s and has also operated some pilot
exercises with fees in recent years. These were charged on a time basis,
though, and Gee has decided against doing this again. Instead, he has opted
for a scale of fixed monthly retainer fees for clients whose affairs are
being monitored constantly.
Clearly, such fees depend on the complexity of a client's affairs but
minimum charges range from Pounds 25-Pounds 85, depending on what percentage
of initial commissions the client wishes the firm to retain. Gee decided to
offer this particular arrangement to existing clients because, as he puts
it: 'Fee-based advice is still relatively new in this area at least, and we
are trying to make the tablet a little easier to swallow.'
The firm also provides financial advice on a one-off basis - for example, a
client might want a pension transfer analysis or advice on residential or
commercial mortgages - and minimum fees here range from Pounds 125-Pounds
500. No execution-only work is undertaken.
Clients are drawn mostly from the West Midlands area, and 90 per cent
contact the firm because of recommendations from existing customers or other
professional advisers; indeed, prospective clients often are asked if they
want to bring their accountant or solicitor to the initial meeting.
'Many new clients have existing investment plans, and our first step is to
review them,' Gee says. 'You would be surprised what this turns up.'
Among recent horrors were 'life policies worth more than Pounds 1m
supposedly written under trust but with no trust registered. And a client
who had been sold a personal pension life policy with a major company, even
though he was a member of his company scheme.'
Gee adds: 'We like to look at all a client's affairs. We ask if they have
made a will, what National Savings they have, what sort of a person they
are. We are not just investment managers. We are financial planners across
the board.'
There is no hard and fast rule about acceptable minimum investment and
income levels, but Gee reckons: 'You are probably talking about Pounds
40,000 at least for pure investment. On income, Pounds 20,000-Pounds 25,000
a year would be the bottom end of the scale.'
No one at the firm handles client money. 'We stress peace of mind and there
is no discretionary management,' says Gee, 'but we have about Pounds 30m
under our stewardship.'
This stewardship includes liaising with stockbrokers (for those with equity
investments), asset allocation, and safeguarding clients from what the firm
considers to be inappropriate investments. Gee says: 'We do not, for
example, use single premium bonds apart from certain very specialised
circumstances, and we haven't done so for several years. Very often, these
bonds are just sold because of commissions.'
The firm belongs to the Society of Pension Consultants and does a lot of
work on planning and re-structuring pension schemes. 'Not too many people in
the provinces do that kind of thing,' says Gee, 'but, again, it is a matter
of structural rather than investment management.'
Gee probably is placed as well as anyone to discuss the development of the
IFA market, thanks to his stint on Fimbra. He concedes that this position
often was uncomfortable but believes Fimbra's accomplishments have been
considerable.
'What it did was take a totally unregulated sector of 15,000 firms and whip
it into something that had a fair degree of organisation,' he says. 'I would
say the quality of independent advice is far better than it used to be.
Certainly, it is totally different from what it was in 1972.'
Gee argues that a further reduction in the number of IFAs is inevitable,
however. 'I don't think the one and two-man business will survive. One of
the basic problems is that many IFAs are not businessmen, and I think lFAs
will have to go down the fee route to move forward. I think clients are
going to demand it.'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
The Independents
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Name of financial adviser:           R E Gee &amp; Co
Address of head office:              Forester's Hall, 1a Wyle Cop,
                                     Shrewsbury,
                                     Shropshire SY1 1UT
Date firm was established:           1972
Regulator:                           Fimbra
Funds under management:              Pounds 30m (monitored)
Number of clients:                   1,800
Number of offices:                   1
Minimum investment accepted:         None
Services offered:                    Corporate and personal financial
                                     planning and investment
                                     management
Fees:                                Minimum monthly retainer pounds 25
                                     to pounds 85
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
