FT  20 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: EU farm price deadlock broken
European Union farm ministers broke a six-month deadlock over farm prices
and milk quotas yesterday, marking an early success for Germany's
presidency, reports Reuter from Brussels.
The breakthrough was made after the European Commission conceded some aid
for northern French producers of durum (pasta) wheat and Germany moderated
its own demands after taking over the rotating EU presidency on July 1.
'Durum was a particularly difficult question,' Mr Jochen Borchert, the
German farm minister told a news conference after a final 10-hour
negotiating session.
The annual EU farm price talks, which began in February, have a history of
stretching over months, with some all-night sessions as ministers try to
squeeze more money for farmers. Talks this year were unusually lengthy
because of delays caused by European Parliament elections in June and a
budget squeeze.
EU agriculture commissioner Mr Rene Steichen finally bowed to French
pressure and agreed that northern French producers of durum wheat would be
eligible for EU payments on up to 50,000 hectares, a quarter of what they
requested.
Spanish, Portuguese and Italian durum wheat farmers will be entitled to aid
for an extra 30,000 hectares.
Mr Steichen dismissed the aid as a small concession with little extra cost.
'It's a minor adjustment,' he said. 'The essence of CAP (common agricultural
policy) reform has been preserved.' He was referring to sweeping reforms
agreed in 1992 to get rid of costly grain, beef and butter mountains.
Mr Jean Puech, the French farm minister, said France's insistence had paid
off even though it led to the failure of a week-long negotiating session in
Luxembourg last month.
French officials said that the aid would ensure that French mills in
northern Europe would continue to receive durum wheat supplies at
competitive prices.
The German compromise, which also included improved terms for sugar, beef
and dried fodder producers, will cost around Ecu375m (Dollars 465m) extra,
officials said. But the additional aid represents only about 5 per cent of
the massive EU farm budget.
The final package was a little cheaper than the Greek compromise rejected
last month.
'Spending will still be within budget limits, though 1995 will be
difficult,' Mr Steichen said.
