FT  17 OCT 94 / Survey of International Telecommunications (11): The target
is 10m new lines - India, confusion and delays have hindered the race to
catch up / India has one of the least developed telephone networks in the
world - only 140,000 of its 576,000 villages have phones
Three years after the start of the economic liberalisation programme by
India's prime minister, Mr PV Narasimha Rao, the nation's telephone networks
are being opened to private investment.
Albeit with many important issues left unsettled, government officials are
ending the state's monopoly of basic telephone services and inviting bids
from private companies, including foreign groups, to help transform one of
the world's least developed networks.
The conditions under which private investment will be permitted were
published only last month, so few would-be bidders have had time to study
the fine print. Moreover, the precise relationship between the private
operator and the state network has yet to be decided, including crucial
matters such as pricing and revenue-sharing.
Nevertheless, the prospect of winning even a small share of the undeveloped
Indian market, with its population of 890m people, has drawn expressions of
interest from all over the world. The telecommunications ministry says that
100 groups have filed outline proposals.
With only eight lines per thousand people, India has one of the least
developed telephone networks in the world. China has 17; and Malaysia, 130.
Only 140,000 of India's 576,000 villages have telephones. The country needs
telephones not only to fulfil its aim of increasing international trade and
investment but also to provide a basic communications network for its
people.
Until this year, the government's aim was to increase from the number of
lines from 5.8m in early 1992 by 7.5m to 13.3m by the end of the current
five-year plan in March 1997. But this would have left some 2.5m people
still on the waiting list. So, the target was raised in May to 10m new
lines.
With its own funds squeezed by the need to control public spending, the
government is relying on private companies to raise much of the extra
Rs230bn it needs on top of Rs330bn it had previously ear-marked from public
funds for 1992-97.
Big though it is, the total may not be unreachable. Even before the
government announced its new telecommunications policy, permitting private
investment, in May, private groups, including foreign companies, had
submitted to the government 21 plans together worth Dollars 4bn (Pounds
2.5bn) for telephone networks. Among the foreign companies are industry
leaders such as US West, AT&amp;T, and Motorola of the US, Siemens of Germany,
and Japan's Fujitsu.
But it will be difficult to meet the government's demanding time-table,
given the department's past record in accommodating the private sector. With
46 trade unions, representing 470,000 workers, the department has long been
suspicious of changes which curb its influence. Since 1992, when value-added
services such as cellular telephones and voice mail were liberalised, the
department has been entrusted with handling potential competitors from the
private sector. The result has been confusion and delay. Cellular telephones
contract awards made in October 1992 were challenged in court by
unsuccessful bidders in a case which went to the Supreme Court, which then
ordered the ministry to reconsider the bids. A new award was expected in
early October.
The acrimonious debate inside the department which has accompanied the
launch of the new policy for basic services does not bode well for its
smooth implementation. Mr Nagarajan Vittal, the former telecoms secretary,
who was transferred out of the ministry a month ago, lost his job because he
became involved in a public row with his minister, Mr Sukh Ram.
Mr Vittal, brought into the ministry last year to spearhead pro-market
reforms, fought hard to make the new policy as liberal as possible. Mr Sukh
Ram, supported by the department's trade unions, adopted a more cautious
approach. Mr Narasimha Rao felt he had no choice but to move Mr Vittal for
abusing his position as a civil servant in speaking too publicly.
Mr Vittal's departure was followed by the announcement of details off the
new policy, which include a 49 per cent cap on foreign investment in any
private carrier. Private companies will also be limited to providing local
networks - they will be barred from operating the much more lucrative
long-distance and international services.
Companies will be free to bid for licences in 18 regions, which roughly
correspond with India's states. Only one private carrier will be permitted
to operate in each region - but will face competition from the existing
state-owned service.
Licence-holders will be required to offer lines in rural districts as well
as the far more lucrative towns and cities. The licences will run for 15
years and there will be no restriction on the number of licences awarded to
any one company. Mr Sukh Ram has said he hopes the first private carrier
would start operating in 1995.
There will also be a new regulatory body - the Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India, which will oversee the private operators. It will not have a
separate statutory existence from the telecommunications department.
The guidelines have provoked a mixed response from industry. There is relief
that Mr Vittal's departure has not further delayed the progress of the new
policy. But there is also concern that the arrangements for pricing and
revenue-sharing have not been announced. The published policy leaves the
telecommunications department with ill-defined powers to control the
negotiations with bidders, creating great scope for delays and for
corruption.
However, some executives argue that the lack of clarity is the price
companies will have to pay for investing in the market at the beginning of
its development. They believe that the ultimate prizes will justify the cost
and risk of entering the industry early.
