FT  30 APR 94 / Adams sees little hope of ceasefire
Mr Gerry Adams has dealt a further blow to hopes of an early end to violence
in Northern Ireland by warning that the IRA is unlikely to call a unilateral
halt to its 25-year armed campaign.
In an interview that coincides with a renewed upsurge of sectarian shootings
in the province, the president of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, urged
all sides to lay down their arms, saying that 'demilitarisation' was what
was needed.
Meanwhile, security forces yesterday confirmed they had found the body of a
man near the border town of Newry. Earlier, the IRA claimed it had shot dead
an alleged informer.
The murder takes to 10 the number of killings in the province in nine days -
the worst outbreak of violence since the Downing Street declaration was
signed in December.
Mr Adams's remarks, published in an Austrian newspaper, came as he was urged
to 'walk away' from the IRA's gunmen by Mr Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of
the mainly Roman Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party.
Mr Mallon's appeal followed the killing of a Protestant father-of-three by
terrorist gunmen in Armagh on Thursday night.
The Newry and Armagh MP said that if leadership meant anything, it meant
walking away from the perpetrators of 'this type of gross sectarian
slaughter'. 'If Mr Adams is serious, he should walk away,' Mr Mallon said.
Mr James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionist party, said the security
situation would get worse unless London recognised that the declaration had
run its course. 'There is no point in bargaining with the IRA,' he said.
Downing Street last night reiterated that it wanted a permanent end to IRA
violence.
Mr Adams, interviewed by Der Standard, said: 'We need a demilitarisation, I
have committed myself to that.
'I have called on all those involved to put down their weapons - the IRA,
the British, the loyalists. And I stand by that.
'I believe we are in a crisis at the moment. If the British stonewall and
refuse to move, everything will freeze - the loyalists will step up their
murder campaign and the British will intensify the military occupation.'
Mr Adams said he was not interested in a 'temporary or partial peace', and
said it was 'most unlikely' that republican forces would unilaterally pledge
a permanent ceasefire.
'It is going too slowly for me,' he said, expressing frustration that 'we
are hostage to the right wing of the British Conservative party'.
