FT  15 MAR 94 / International Company News: Japanese banks try to get the
books in order - The hangover from the high-spending 1980s is greater than
was first estimated, and despite best efforts the government is worried it
could hurt recovery
With the March financial year-end fast approaching, Japanese companies are
scrambling to spruce up their books in the face of the fourth consecutive
year of declining earn-ings.
The banks, many of which are busily trying to rid their balance sheets of
bad loans resulting from the reckless lending of the late 1980s, are no
exception.
Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, Japan's biggest bank in terms of assets, expects to
write off a total of Y700bn (Dollars 6.6bn) in problem loans this year and
next. Other banks are also accelerating write-offs, reflecting a policy
shift by the ministry of finance.
Initially the ministry had backed the traditional Japanese approach, urging
the banks to sit tight on high-risk loans until the economy recovered,
rather than making provisions. But it is clear that earlier estimates of the
extent of bad banking loans had been too low. Bad loans among the top 21
banks are now believed to total about Y30,000bn.
The ministry fears that economic recovery could be endangered if bad loan
exposure and consequent balance sheet strain forces the banks to curb new
lending.
The main vehicle helping banks confront their bad loans is the Co-operative
Credit Purchasing Company (CCPC). This was established by the banks last
March, after strong public opposition towards the government's suggestion of
using state funds to bail out the sector.
The banks sell their property-backed bad debt to the CCPC at a discount,
writing the difference off as an income loss. The CCPC, which buys a loan
with funds injected by the bank selling the loan, then tries to recover it,
in some cases selling the property collateral on the real estate market.
There are doubts about the extent to which the CCPC can ride to the banks'
rescue. At the end of February, it had bought Y2,857.1bn of bad debt from
the banks, but collected only 0.6 per cent of total loans purchased.
At the same time, the ministry is allowing the banks to set provisions at
their own discretion. According to IBCA, the UK bank credit rating agency,
resolving the problem could cost the leading 21 banks more than Y10,000bn,
assuming that a third of total problem loans need to be written off. Some
Y4,000bn is likely to be written off this financial year, leaving Y6,000bn
plus further increases in bad loans, which the agency expects will take at
least three to five years for the stronger banks to resolve.
Meanwhile, the ministry of finance is to allow banks to set up special
purpose companies, enabling them to shift 'restructured loans' - loans on
which banks have waived all or most of the interest to help restructuring -
to non-bank financial institutions.
During the past week, the ministry has put forward plans to allow banks to
set up subsidiaries which will buy land collateral at a court auction price.
In short, the banks will sell the land to themselves, while booking the loss
on the sale as a tax deduction.
But such plans, where banks fund separate entities to buy and warehouse the
bad or restructured loans and land collateral, leaves the financial
institutions vulnerable to a rise in interest rates. And while such schemes
will speed the write-off of bad loans, it will pose problems for investors;
the complex structure and the lack of transparency will make it virtually
impossible to assess the real risks banks face.
For example, when selling a bad loan to the CCPC, a bank will need to supply
the funds for the purchasing company to buy it. In effect, the bank is
changing a non-performing loan into a performing loan extended to the CCPC.
Mr David Marshall, of IBCA, says that such accounting practices deviate from
western standards and are far from prudent. Although bad loans may have been
shifted to the CCPC and losses written off, he points out that unless the
purchasing company can recover the loan, the ultimate risk will remain in
the hands of the banks.
