FT  05 JAN 94 / Business and the Environment: Islanders count the cost of
climatic change - Two cyclones in 18 months have left Samoans with a sense
of unease and a Dollars 500m bill
Two years ago, Western Samoa was recovering well from Cyclone Ofa, the worst
storm to strike the Pacific island state in 20 years. The last thing it
needed was another large cyclone - but barely 18 months later came Cyclone
Val.
Cyclone Ofa caused Dollars 200m (Pounds 134.2m) worth of damage and Cyclone
Val brought the total cost to Dollars 500m.
Despite a big clear-up, the devastation is still evident in many parts of
the country. A sea wall has recently gone up in the capital, Apia, and whole
villages remain deserted on the badly-hit western side of the islands.
Several hotels closed and have not reopened.
'We were still recovering from Ofa when Val came,' says Wes Ward,
information officer for the locally-based South Pacific Regional Environment
Programme.
Much of the damage caused by Ofa was coastal - it even destroyed houses on a
30m clifftop. Waves washed away the road to the airport in several places,
and while the runway was not affected, damage to the airport buildings meant
that no planes could land for three days.
It was so long since the islands had suffered such a severe storm that many
trees had grown up, only to be blown over and uprooted, bringing down power
lines and dislodging pipes. Samoans were left without power for five weeks
and without water for seven. Food crops were devastated, and 80 per cent of
the population relied on emergency food aid for three months.
While Ofa was considered the worst storm in 20 years, Val was the storm of
the century. It raged for four days, looping back on itself once it had
passed the island of Savai'i, with wind speeds averaging 100mph and gusting
up to 150mph. 'Strong winds from the south are very unusual,' says Noumea
Simi, head of the government's aid division. 'Now we don't know what to
prepare for - it could come from anywhere.'
As a wind-based cyclone, Val caused greater devastation than Ofa, especially
to buildings, including schools and hospitals, with repair bills running to
Western Samoan Tala 336m (Pounds 114m). Roofs were ripped off and leaks
damaged electrical wiring and interiors of houses.
Substantial damage was inflicted on 90 per cent of the buildings on Savai'i
and 80 per cent on 'Upolu, the country's two main islands.
Overseas aid proved to be crucial - and the expatriate Samoan community in
New Zealand was particularly generous.
The Samoan government responded by suspending import duties on building
materials - even though vast numbers of trees had fallen, the islanders were
still short of materials. Rehabilitation is not yet complete, but more than
half of all families have been able to rebuild their homes to their original
standard.
'I couldn't find where my house used to be,' says Pene Lefale, a Samoan
worker for Greenpeace. Many families took refuge in the sturdy concrete
water tanks found in every village, or even in Savai'i's caves. A few were
unlucky and had only a fence for shelter. 'You definitely thought your life
was in danger,' adds Lefale. 'There was no contact with the outside world.
The weather here has been more extreme on all fronts - the rains have been
heavier, and it has been hotter and more humid. We've realised we've entered
into something we've never experienced in our lives before.'
Apia's main street, Beach Road, and its major intersections were badly
damaged by the cyclone, and one bridge had to be totally reconstructed. The
harbour was destroyed, though not the new container park, and the ferry
building, transit sheds, stores and warehouses all had damage to their roofs
and or walls put at WST10.9m.
However, roads in the less populated island of Savai'i got the worst of the
cyclone: substantial stretches were washed away and pavements were badly
affected. The east coast road on 'Upolu suffered extensive destruction, and
an EC-funded reconstruction contract needed to be extended by two months,
bringing the total road repair bill to WST24.7m.
Food crops were the worst affected, with damage to bananas, breadfruit,
vegetables, taro, and other root crops put at 100 per cent - a WST44.2m cost
to the country.
Supplies lasted only a few weeks, and food supplies were critical for
months. It is likely to take several years before tree crops (estimated at
90-100 per cent damage and put at WST29m) can grow to fruit-bearing size.
Half the country's livestock was lost at a cost of WST12.5m.
The forestry industry was also badly affected, with the loss of native
forest timber put at WST100m. Total primary industry (agriculture) losses
amounted to WST200m.
Although the cyclone caused catastrophic damage, local people were quick to
repair their homes, hauling on roofs and tidying up. As Noumea Simi says, 'a
lot of people took the initiative, no one hung around and waited for the
government to help them.' 'People were very resilient,' Lefale says, 'they
went from village to village to help - it really brought the country
together.'
With two once-in-a-lifetime cyclones in 18 months, many Samoans are heeding
warnings on climate change and wondering when they will be struck again.
They have particular cause to worry, as Cyclone Val put an end to cyclone
insurance for many people. National Pacific Insurance now insists on a
certificate from a structural engineer and asks for extra premiums for
cyclone insurance - too much for most people or businesses to pay.
