FT  23 DEC 94 / Better than 'bingle jells': This year's corporate Christmas
cards
They are piled on your desk, taped to your wall and strung up over your
head. Some have been put aside, for their senders to be added to next year's
list, others are already on their way to recycling.
Chances are you received more Christmas cards than usual at the office. From
organisations you have never heard of, signed by strangers - first names
only - in an illegible scrawl. Some, even, with rubber-stamped signatures.
Companies just cannot kick the habit. Apart from a no doubt genuine desire
to communicate their good will, the occasion is so good an opportunity to
try to make a sale.
And little is sacred. Overt Christian themes are a dying tradition, in
honest acknowledgment of the religious, cultural and national diversity of
most companies' mailing lists.
The blasphemous mixing of religion, humour and commerce also appears to be
declining (or malefactors are being more selective about who receives such
cards).
Interregnum Venture Marketing does have a biblical looking star over what
might be a stable, with the seasonal beatitude 'transforming technology into
wealth', but that seems to qualify as obscure rather than offensive.
Even more gnomic is the card from Dyson, the UK vacuum cleaner maker. One of
two appliances has a star above it. The official explanation is that this
represents a Christmas tree, but whispers from Dyson's Wiltshire
headquarters suggest it heralds the launch of a new model in February, the
second in a 'trinity'. Please say no more.
Product placement is much more straightforward. Guinness serves up a richly
toned photographic still life, an Old Master with a word from our sponsor.
The usual accoutrements - fig, walnuts, pomegranates and pine cones - share
the picture with bottles of Bell's, Johnnie Walker, Gordon's gin and a pint
of stout.
And what good is an ad campaign if it can't be milked? Insurer Direct Line
dresses its red telephone in seasonal garb. 'Does Santa use Switch? Do
children like Christmas?' fits in neatly with the debit card's outdoor
poster campaign.
Perrier harks back to a previous ad campaign by sending a large green
balloon and instructing: 'Bleau'. Fizzy nostalgia or discreet testing of the
waters for a revival?
Fiat and Vauxhall also implicitly admit things aren't what they used to be
by featuring vintage cars rather than current models. Citroen finds a more
artistic way for the display of logo that seems mandatory in the motor
industry.
Christmas is also a time to lobby. Robert Maxwell appears as a snowman, to
underline the Maxwell/AGB Pension Fund Contributors Association's point that
its members are 'still out in the cold'. The Brewers and Licensed Retailers
Association sends a cartoon of Father Christmas, reindeer and sleigh coming
in over the channel with the observation: 'It seems like everyone is doing a
beer run to France.'
'Let us show you our building' remains a favourite theme of the
imagination-impaired. Universities and business schools are frequent
offenders, and one hopes for the sake of Sun Alliance Life &amp; Pensions that
the night-lit offering of its Horsham HQ does an injustice to the edifice.
Daewoo Heavy Industries features a snap of one of its tankers.
'Let us show you ourselves' is even worse. Mockery here would only gratify
the offenders, so we will not mention most of them. But the
self-aggrandising extravaganza from derivatives traders Intercapital cannot
pass unacknowledged. Their cavortings as 'merrie men' (and women) are
recorded in 12 A4 pages, bound in a green-and-gilt folder.
Leeds Development Corporation sends another execrable card, showing its
chairman dressed as Santa on a cabin cruiser. But North West Water depicts a
winter's day on Ullswater, and the Scottish Tourist Board makes effective
display of the landscape.
Fewer companies send kiddie drawings this year, although Legal and General's
childishly abstract three kings come in the colours of the insurer's
umbrella logo. The chairman of Mendip district council turned to his wife
for the painting on its card. A nice one, too.
There are more cards with railway scenes, an inevitable result of corporate
fragmentation in the sector. Most offerings, like Railtrack's (above), are
suitable for slipping into a train-spotter's anorak, but France's SNCF is
more stylish.
Sakura Global Capital wins points for topicality in the year of the
derivative. Its card shows Santa packing a parcel with curves, ceilings,
floors, caps, collars and other instruments of the financial engineering
trade, while wondering 'whatever happened to Action Man and Lego'. If you
like 'funny', this is as good as it gets. It is certainly better than a
tipsy Santa repeating 'bingle jells' 14 times.
Among abstract cards, two of the best were commissioned by the senders:
paintings by Sarah Henson for solicitors Nabarro Nathanson and Linda Melia
for video processing equipment maker Snell &amp; Wilcox. A Charity Christmas
Card Council illustration by Robert Guy, sent by several firms, is also
outstanding.
In the 'views of London' category, Guinness Flight sent a dramatic
photograph of Tower Bridge and frozen River Thames in February 1895. Faintly
in the background is the outline of Butler's Wharf, where the fund manager's
offices now are.
Martin Ryckaert's Flight into Egypt, sent by Schroders, is the best
religious card we have seen this year. In the secular branch of high art,
Hardy Oil &amp; Gas sent a juicy 19th century Still Life of Oranges by Carl
Vilhelm Balsgaad.
Perhaps the best overall was one of the simplest, from London PR agency
Fishburn Hedges. A blue cover bears a simple green tree in red pot. When the
card is removed, holes in the cover create yellow ornaments on the tree.
But if only all cards could be as personal as that received by the FT's
banking editor from Lloyds Bank. Looking at the Tavistock streetscape, he
pointed to a first-floor window and exclaimed: 'I lived in that flat when I
was a cub reporter]'
