FT  04 JUN 94 / Jakarta relaxes rules on foreign investment limits
The Indonesian government has slashed limits on foreign investment in an
effort to compete with neighbouring Asian economies offering more attractive
investment packages.
The deregulation package has been welcomed as a breakthrough by Indonesia's
international business community. 'It is very, very big news for us and it
will make a difference to the amount of companies investing here,' said a
Jakarta-based Japanese investor.
Foreigners will be allowed to own 100 per cent equity in a company. At
present a maximum of 85 per cent is allowed for investors setting up in Java
or Bali, the two preferred destinations, and full ownership was permitted
only for ventures worth Dollars 50m (Pounds 33m) or more on outlying
islands.
The new laws also open up sectors as diverse as nuclear power, mass media,
ports, telecommunications, railways and civil aviation to partial foreign
ownership - the government did not specify what percentages it would permit
 -and lift restrictions on the region and minimum capital requirement.
The package also ends compulsory equity divestment for foreign companies, an
issue which has frightened off many investors. Before, foreign companies
were required to reduce their stake in joint ventures to 49 per cent, 20
years after their start-up date. Under the new laws, foreign investors may
determine independently what size of stake to hand over to their Indonesian
partner after 15 years of operating in the country, allowing foreigners to
retain majority ownership.
In addition, foreign companies will be granted 30-year licences to operate
in Indonesia compared with 20 years at present.
'The teeth of the divestiture laws have been removed and divestiture was
always a real problem for investors here,' said a Jakarta-based economist.
The loosening of restrictions comes after foreign investors complained that
the government's previous deregulation package of last October was not
thorough enough. It was also sparked off by an unexpected drop in foreign
investment last year.
