FT  21 APR 94 / The Queen's Awards 1994: 'Britain's finest ragworms' - The
choice of winners among environmental companies is diverse
'Healthy and lively worms' are the attraction offered by Seabait, the
Northumberland-based fishing bait company which has won one of this year's
Queen's Awards for environmental achievement.
This is the second year in which the awards have been made, and like the
first, the choice of winners is striking for its diversity. The eight
winning products include technology to reduce pollution from power
generation, recycling of polythene and newsprint, and valves to handle
hazardous chemicals.
Despite this range, there is very little overlap with last year's list. The
main criterion laid down for the award is that products and processes should
make 'a significant advance' and yield 'major benefits in environmental
terms compared to existing products, technology or processes'.
Two of the award-winning companies have arisen directly from the science and
technology departments of universities. Universities have been defending the
funding for these departments partly by pointing to their capacity for
generating technological innovations.
Of the other award-winners, several say that they relied on the support of a
single large customer in developing the product, and are only now beginning
to test the waters of the international markets.
Seabait, which describes itself as 'the world's first ragworm farm' grows
'millions of Britain's finest ragworms' for use as fishing bait.
Traditionally, fishermen dig up beaches and mudflats in pursuit of the
worms, which are becoming increasingly scarce. Councils and
environmentalists have become concerned about the disruption to seashore
ecology.
Nine years after it was set up on the back of research at the University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Seabait has seen output rise by nearly 10 times,
although it says it is 'only scratching the surface of the UK market'.
Alida Recycling, a Derbyshire-based subsidiary of British Polythene
Industries, has won an award for recycling polythene films into pellets
which are then reused in packaging. The process, which uses waste polythene
collected from stores around the country, is able to handle material which
has adhesive labels or other plastics attached to it, or is printed with
ink.
The problem of removing contaminants is one reason why recycling polythene
and other plastics is expensive and not widespread. Alida's two plants
remove these contaminants automatically. However the company notes that 'the
development of more outlets for recycled materials' remains a 'challenge' in
developing markets for their products, and that the solution is partly in
retailers' hands.
The government's current proposals - now the subject of consultation with
the packaging industry - to increase the amount of packaging that is
recycled may help the development of these markets. A new European directive
to be debated by the European Parliament could have an even greater effect.
Recycling - which is now the subject of government consultation - is also
the reason for the award to the Bridgewater Paper Company. Bridgewater,
based in the South Wirral, produces newsprint and other paper for use in
directories and other products which contain on average 80 per cent recycled
fibre.
The company, a subsidiary of Stone-Consolidated Corporation of Montreal,
Canada, exports a fifth of its product.
A second theme of the government's recent environmental policy - energy
efficiency - features in the award to Combined Power Systems. The company,
which grew out of the University of Manchester Institute of Science and
Technology, makes generators for use in hospitals, hotels and leisure
centres.
The 'combined heat and power' systems generate electricity and heat from a
single fuel in the building where the electricity is used. This enables the
waste heat from electricity generation to be used for heating the building,
making the process more efficient than conventional large-scale power
stations.
The Energy Saving Trust, set up by the government to encourage energy
efficiency and help curb the emission of gases linked to global warming, has
chosen to promote combined power systems as one of its first projects.
Similarly, Vickers Electronics, the Cheshire-based producer of
electronically-controlled heating systems, claims that its products bring
considerable energy savings. The company has won the award for its
Synchronous Burner Control, an electronic heat sensing system which allows
businesses to heat their offices more efficiently. According to the company,
the savings, which 'are achievable in most non-domestic premises', average
around 50 per cent on conventional heating systems.
Dorman Diesels, a Staffordshire-based engine manufacturer, won an award for
low emission gas engines for industry. The company, which is also known for
making diesel engines for industry, power generation and shipping, has
teamed up with German and Japanese manufacturers to market its products.
Shaw Valves of Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, have won their environmental
award for producing valves to handle hazardous chemicals safely. The valve,
which arose from discussions in 1985 with ICI, the chemical group, controls
the use of liquid chlorine.
Chlorine, which is used in treating drinking water, in the production of
food and medicines and in bleaching paper, is nonetheless highly toxic and
harmful to the environment.
The company says that in developing the product it was battling against the
attitude of 'better the devil you know', which it feels is 'common in
industries with high risk processes'. The product has already secured a
contract with ICI which the company believes will be worth some Pounds
100,000 a year.
Multicore Solders, the Hertfordshire-based producer of soldering materials,
has won its award for development of new materials which eliminate the need
for cleaning with solvents after soldering.
Multicore's products, called 'no clean' solders, are used particularly by
the electronics industry in manufacturing components and assembling circuit
boards.
Many solvents used for cleaning have employed CFCs - chlorofluorocarbons -
which damage the ozone layer of the atmosphere. Since the 1992 renegotiation
of the Montreal Protocol, which governs use of ozone-damaging substances,
many countries have agreed to phase out their manufacture.
Companies which have depended on these substances have been searching for
alternatives or for new processes which eliminate the need for CFCs.
Environmental pressure groups have cautiously welcomed the introduction of a
green category to the Queen's awards. But they point out that the award
simply commends a technological development and is not the same as an
environmental audit of the companies' activities.
Mr Andrew Lees, campaigns director of Friends of the Earth, the pressure
group, welcomed Seabait's award, saying 'bait digging causes serious damage
to wildlife in mudflats'. He called for digging licences in sensitive areas
to be revoked.
Pressure groups welcome in general the development of environmental
technology markets and the encouragement that awards schemes give to
companies competing in these arenas. However they argue strongly that the
growth of the markets is driven by regulation. 'Without intervention by
governments, these markets are not going to develop,' says Mr Lees.
