FT  22 OCT 94 / Motoring: A public test of their metal - A look at the
British International Motor Show in Birmingham
Insiders are inclined to dismiss the British International Motor Show,
opening to the public today at the National Exhibition Centre near
Birmingham as a re-run of the Paris Mondiale de l'Automobile (this column,
October 8).
Inevitably, the Paris show up-staged the British event. All the 1995 models
were there; even the UK's new Jaguar XJs and Range Rover made their world
debut in Paris, not Birmingham, though Toyota thought differently and chose
the UK show for the European unveiling of its Lexus LS400 and Celica
Cabriolet. Which is only a reflection of how international the motor
industry has become.
In fact, most of the people who will crowd into the NEC for the next eight
days will almost certainly be Midlanders and northerners. Southerners prefer
the London Motor Show, held at Earl's Court Arena on alternate years to
Birmingham.
When the traditional annual motor show left London for Birmingham in 1978
and became biennial, the Earl's Court Motorfair was started to fill the gap.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, which has always run the
'official' show, disapproved of Motorfair at first but soon adopted it.
This year, the British International Motor Show has followed a lead given by
the former upstart Motorfair. For the first time in 91 years, visitors can
actually buy things on the exhibition floor. No, not yet cars. But a wide
range of accessories and components awaits buyers in a 55,000 sq ft retail
pavilion.
The show's main value is that it gives Britons their first chance to see in
the metal the cars they have so far only seen pictured. One is the
light-alloy Audi A8 luxury saloon, offered as a 2.8-litre V6 with
front-wheel drive, or as a 4.2-litre V8 with quattro transmission. Alfa
Romeo's highly individual 145 hatchback is also there, although, sadly, not
the toothsome new Spider.
Main interest on the BMW stand centres on the 3-Series Compact, due to sell
from Pounds 13,350 and set to take BMW into Ford Escort, VW Golf, Vauxhall
Astra and Honda Civic territory. At the other extreme is the marque's
flagship - the 5 - litre, V12-engined, long-wheelbase version of the new
7-Series.
Citroen's Xantia-based Xanae concept car and the Ludo, Renault's idea of a
town car for the young and active, should not be missed. The Ludo has
sliding doors and runs on liquid petroleum gas (LPG). Renault says it
approaches the environmental cleanliness of an electric vehicle but can be
refuelled in a couple of minutes and has a range of 250 miles (400kms). The
Ludo's automatic clutch will, incidentally, soon be available on the Clio.
The multi-purpose vehicle (MPV) developed by PSA (Peugeot Citroen Group) and
Fiat can be seen on all three companies' stands.
Ford's Galaxy MPV - another joint effort, this time with Volkswagen - also
threatens to end the Renault Espace's long domination of the European MPV
market.
For buyers who stick firmly to the tarmac, part of the attraction of
on/off-road 4x4 vehicles - like Land Rover's Discovery - is their elevated
(Land Rover calls it 'command') driving position. Thus, their makers and
importers will be watching keenly the market performance of the new breed of
European MPVs - which also have high-up driving positions, plus lots of
interior space and generally car-like ride and handling.
For the time being, though, sales of the 4x4s are standing up well, even if
prices for the poshest ones approach stratospheric levels.
Interestingly, Mitsubishi's stand at Birmingham features a 2.9-litre,
turbo-diesel version of the five-door Shogun, due in the UK early next year
at about Pounds 22,500. It is equipped less elaborately than the original
but looks more elegant.
Two other 4x4s are well worth looking at. They are a prototype of a much
better-looking, more powerful and easier to load Lada Niva Cossack, due to
go on sale next year; and the quaintly-named but most attractive Ssangyong
Musso. This rugged, four-wheel drive, five-door estate from Korea has a
Mercedes-Benz five-cylinder diesel and will be on sale in Subaru and Isuzu
dealerships in the spring. Prices are likely to be from Pounds 16,000 to
Pounds 21,000.
If you fancy an affordable sports car, do not miss the Vauxhall Tigra and
the eye-catching new Fiat Coupe. UK sales of the Tigra - with which I shall
be dealing more fully next week - are less than a month away. The Fiat's
British launch is not until next year but, if the Coupe is as well built and
competitively priced as the Punto, it could be worth waiting for.
Much further off is the market launch of Mercedes-Benz's small SLK sports
car, being shown at Birmingham as a concept. It has a steel top that
power-folds into the body.
The show is open to the public from today until Sunday, October 30, from
9.30am until 7pm (5.30pm on the final day). Admission is Pounds 8 (children
and senior citizens Pounds 4); the NEC charges Pounds 5 for parking. The
organisers recommend travelling by train to Birmingham International, which
is in the middle of the exhibition complex. Combined rail and motor show
tickets are available from most stations.
