FT  01 DEC 94 / Island trader runs out of puff
A small cargo ship said to be worth Pounds 200,000 is being offered free to
anyone prepared to continue using it to provide a service to the islands off
north-west Scotland.
The 66ft, 230-tonne Eilean Eisdeal is the last working Clyde puffer - a
class of boat which once traded along the north-west seaboard and among the
islands. It can carry 132 tonnes of cargo and has a top speed of eight knots
unladen.
Mr Chris Nicholson is being forced to end the service after losses of more
than Pounds 660,000 since he restored the 'Easy' in 1983.
Most of the hundreds of puffers went to the scrapyards on the arrival of
roll-on, roll-off services operated by state-owned Caledonian MacBrayne in
the late 1960s.
Mr Nicholson's company, Easdale Island Shipping Line, spotted what it
thought was a gap in the market in the 1980s. The government awarded the
company tariff rebate eligibility in 1986 which it thought would make it
competitive against the CalMac's largely lorry-based cargo delivery
services.
The tariff rebate subsidy scheme enabled Easdale Island Shipping Line to
claim top-up grants of 40 per cent of most of the delivery cost of freight
to the islands and 30 per cent on freight being taken away from the islands.
But the business lost money from its inception and has been forced into
voluntary liquidation.
Mr Nicholson said he suffered unfair discrimination through having to
compete against CalMac, which will receive a subsidy of Pounds 5.7m this
year.
He said the puffer still had a role. Its size and shallow draught allowed it
to deliver to the smaller piers the CalMac ferries were unable to get into,
and it could even be beached to unload goods.
Mr Nicholson said at his Midlands base - which boasts a skull and crossbones
nailed to the door: 'It's outrageous that CalMac should be in receipt of an
annual Pounds 6m while I am denied a mere Pounds 100,000 a year to provide
an irreplaceable service to a vast number of communities.
'This puffer's no anachronism, she offers a low-cost flexible service and is
the only craft small enough to deliver bulk goods to the tiny piers on
islands such as Eigg, Rum and Muck.
'Without the puffer these vulnerable communities will be unable to bring
anything ashore from the big steamers unless it is strongly pre-packaged and
manhandled on to small launches that have to come out to meet the big boats
in the worst of weathers.'
Rather than see the puffer rot, Mr Nicholson said he was prepared to give
the Eilean Eisdeal to anyone who would give an undertaking to continue the
service to the islands.
He was not interested in selling her for conversion for recreational use.
The Scottish Office has expressed regret about the loss of the puffer
service. It is soon to change the way freight services to the islands are
subsidised.
The puffer's last run was between the island of Eriskay, in the Outer
Hebrides, and Tobermory on Mull, where it was laid up, the crew was laid
off, and a wake held in the public bar of the Mishnish Hotel.
