FT  27 JAN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: British oil brigade leads
charge into Crimea - Jill Barshay reports on a joint-venture project for
deep-water drilling in the Black Sea
The British-Ukrainian Crimean Petroleum Company will drill the first deep
off-shore oil well in the Black Sea this spring, following the completion
last month of a preliminary geological study last month that confirmed the
location of a likely oil deposit in the sea's north-western shelf.
If the well, 3,300m below the sea floor and 90km off the Crimean coastline,
strikes oil the joint venturers expect an annual oil yield of 2m tonnes and
additional investment of Dollars 1.5bn into the sea-shelf project.
'This will be the first deep oil well in the history of the Black Sea. No
one has ever tried this before,' says Mr Nikolai Ilnitsky, deputy general
director of Chornomorneftgaz (which translates as Black-Sea-Oil-Gas), the
state enterprise representing the Ukrainian side.
'We have a very, very exciting prospect,' says Mr Richard Humphreys of JP
Kenny Exploration, the British partner of Crimean Oil Company. 'The Black
Sea is one of the few areas in the world that is unexplored. . . 'We have a
licence for one of the most promising areas. We are looking forward to
drilling the first well'.
Despite the high risks, the virtually unexploited Black Sea shelf has
attracted British energy companies, such as JP Kenny and British Gas, with
their advanced North Sea oil drilling technology.
British Gas signed a co-operation agreement last month with Chornomorneftgaz
to conduct geological research in the Black Sea's eastern Kerch shelf.
Ukraine is eager for British know-how because Soviet technology not equal to
drilling farther down than 70m, keeping off-shore exploration near the
coastline. But the Black Sea's oil potential is much farther off-shore where
the water depth is 80m and oil deposits are thousands of metres below the
sea floor.
American, Dutch and Norwegian companies also have experience with deep sea
drilling, but the British have come first to the Crimea, where they fought
against the Russians 140 years ago.
Mr Humphreys said: 'British companies are very well placed. Ukraine needs
western sea technology which can go down thousands of metres. We've done
this in the North Sea'.
Ukraine, in turn, is eager for western investment to develop domestic oil
sources in order to reduce their 90 per cent oil and gas dependence on
neighbouring Russia and alleviate their current energy crisis.
In Crimea, where the joint venture is based, energy shortages have shut down
35 per cent of all enterprises and forced another 55 per cent to operate at
half capacity. Aircraft at the capital's airport are grounded for lack of
fuel and most scheduled flights have been cancelled.
Anxious to keep oil at home, the Ukrainian government has reserved the first
option to buy JP Kenny's 49 per cent share of Crimea Petroleum Company's
production at world market prices. If Ukraine is unable to pay, JP Kenny may
export the oil abroad, according to the joint-venture agreement, signed in
April of last year.
Despite the Ukrainian and British sides' optimistic assessments, deep off
shore drilling in Crimea is as fraught with risk as it is in other areas.
Huge drilling expenditures (Dollars 7m-Dollars 8m for each drilling attempt)
are often for naught, as even the most thorough seismic analysis cannot
reduce the two-to-one odds against striking oil in the seas.
In addition, the unsettled Ukrainian-Russian territorial dispute over Crimea
could threaten current contracts, which have been negotiated with Ukrainian
authorities.
Crimea was transferred from Russian to Ukrainian jurisdiction only 40 years
ago. Many Crimean Russians, who make up 70 per cent of the population, would
like to reunite with their ethnic kin.
