FT  19 MAR 94 / Gardening: Gaia the earth goddess makes a comeback - Bridget
Bloom picks her way through the latest crop of gardening books
Have you heard of Gaia? You have, of course, if you had a classical
education. But today, classical education or not, if you believe in
gardening organically - that is without chemicals and in a manner in tune
with nature - you may be a Gaian devotee.
Gaia is the ancient Greek goddess of the earth who is, it seems, making an
important comeback according to The Natural Garden Book by Peter Harper and
others, (Gaia Books, Pounds 18.99, 287 pages). The 'nub of the Gaia
hypothesis . . .is that the biosphere is a complex system so closely
analogous to a living organism that we might as well regard it as one.'
Gaia, we learn, is three billion billion years old, probably immortal,
self-regulating like any living thing and capable of self repair even from
severe damage. It - or is it she - is also capable of recycling its own
waste while being 'powered by the sun and profoundly influenced by the
moon'.
In other words Gaia seems to be Nature itself and it is the contention of
the authors of The Natural Gardening Book that, since each of our gardens is
'a little piece of Gaia' and each of those pieces is a microcosm of the
whole, it behoves us to garden in sympathy with Gaian rules.
Mumbo jumbo? Or no more than flavour of the moment, given the high political
profile of sustainable development? You scoff at your peril, says Geoff
Hamilton, one of Britain's foremost organic gardeners, whose chemical-free
veg and flower beds are regularly seen by 5m television viewers. He writes
in his introduction: 'There are plenty of books about natural gardening, but
none, I'm sure, that so clearly and comprehensively explains not only the
techniques that will ensure chemical-free success but also the logic and the
philosophy behind the ethic of natural gardening.'
I must say I found the book fascinating. This is partly because of the
different methods of gardening it recommends - although some of these, such
as using your own urine to speed up compost making, are challenging - but
mainly because of the more respectful attitude it encourages one to take
towards the garden and its huge array of plant, animal and insect life.
A more pedestrian, although admirably clear and well-illustrated guide to
organic gardening is to be found in Gardening Naturally by Ann Reilly
(Prion, Pounds 14.95, 192 pages). An American writer, Reilly takes a
hands-on approach, beginning with ways to condition the soil and proceeding
through insect and pest control to chapters on which flowers, herbs and
vegetables to grow and how.
If you are at all serious about growing vegetables, however, you should also
know about The Vegetable Finder, a handbook analogous to the admirable The
Plant Finder in that it aims to tell you where in the UK to buy a vast
variety of vegetable seeds.
It is produced and published by the Henry Doubleday Research Association,
one of Europe's premier organic establishments (Pounds 5.99, 296 pages,
distributed by Moorland Publishing at Ashbourne, Derbyshire DA6 IHD.)
The Vegetable Finder is doing its bit for bio-diversity by listing nearly
3,000 varieties of vegetables.
Two more books with an organic flavour are David Bellamy's Blooming Bellamy
(Pounds 15.99, BBC Books) an enthusiastic, nicely-illustrated work on herbs
and herbal healing. There is also a rather curious item bearing Geoff
Hamilton's name and entitled Gardener's Challenge (Kingfisher Books, Pounds
9.99, 144 pages). The publisher's blurb describes it as a test of general
gardening knowledge with more than 1,000 gardening questions (and answers).
Designed, perhaps, to help the quiz-minded gardener while away the
non-gardening months of the year.
With similar activity in mind, I confess to having bought and given away at
Christmas several copies of another slim volume published last year.
Gardener's Latin, a lexicon by Bill Neal (Robert Hale, Pounds 6.99, 136
pages) is a book for the gardener who has most things (except perhaps a
classical education) and who likes to browse, discovering as he goes that
while cyaneus means dark blue, cyananthus means with dark blue flowers and
cyanocarpus means bearing blue fruits.
But now to something grander. Challenged to name two dozen of the major
gardens created this century, most experts would probably include Hidcote,
in Gloucestershire, designed by Lawrence Johnstone from 1907 and now managed
by The National Trust.
They might well also list Lutyens' Viceregal Garden in New Delhi and perhaps
Dumbarton Oaks in Washington and the Governor's Palace in colonial
Williamsburg, designed respectively by Beatrix Jones Farrand and Arthur A
Shurcliff.
But what about the Woodland Cemetery just outside Stockholm, designed by
Gunnar Asplund to take advantage of 'the pale Swedish light punctuated by
tall, dark pine trees' or the 125-acre site once the home of the central
abattoir for Paris, now becoming the Parc de la Villette with Bernard
Tschumi's 'glistening red surfaces of individual steel cubes' as its
centrepiece?
William Howard Adams' impressive tome, Grounds for Change: Major Gardens of
the Twentieth Century (Little, Brown and Company, 216 pages, Dollars 60) is
itself conceived on the grand scale.
'Of all the arts - painting, sculpture, music, architecture, dance, theater,
even that arriviste, photography - only landscape design has been denied an
account of its history and achievements produced in the 20th century.' Adams
plots just those achievements, from the early struggle between the Formal
and the Natural philosophies of garden and landscape design (the two are
often seen as synonymous) to the more recent post-Modern efforts to
integrate technology and its shapes into landscape design. He describes his
24 chosen gardens in often fascinating detail with some striking photographs
by Everett H Scott.
Next come two very grand books indeed. Heather Angel's Kew: A World of
Plants (Collins and Brown, Pounds 20, 160 pages) which was published last
year and Trees of Ireland - Native and Naturalised, by E Charles Nelson and
Wendy F Walsh (Lilliput Press, Dublin, 240 pages).
The first is an upmarket guide to the Royal Botanic Gardens, at Kew, Surrey,
which has one of the largest collections of living plants anywhere, from
habitats as diverse as tropical forests, deserts, coral reefs and the
temperate zones. The pictures, as one might expect from one of the UK's top
nature photographers, are very fine.
Trees of Ireland, with line drawings and watercolours, not photographs, is
an elegant reference book which could well, as its publishers say, appeal to
the gardener, ecologist, artist and dendrophile alike.
And so to gardens not included in Adams' book, which form the subject of two
other recently published books: Christopher Lloyd's In My Garden
(Bloomsbury, Pounds 16.99, 277 pages) and Mirabel Osler's The Secret Gardens
of France (Pavilion, Pounds 16.99, 158 pages).
Lloyd's famous garden, designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens for his father
Nathaniel Lloyd, is at Great Dixter in Sussex. Lloyd himself is a respected
garden writer and this latest work is an anthology celebrating 30 years of
his gardening column in Country Life. The pieces are grouped month by month;
they are chatty, informative and definitely for dipping into, although
Lloyd's highly personal style may not be for everyone.
Osler's book, too, is for dipping, perhaps when travelling in or planning to
visit France. She has strong opinions, but is knowledgeable and enthusiastic
about her subject.
Finally, since spring is upon us, are three no-nonsense, hands-on guides to
gardening from the Royal Horticultural Society at Wisley. Each is priced at
Pounds 13.99 (Cassell, 256 pages) and each brings together three or four of
the RHS's earlier handbooks. The new books are entitled Making a Small
Garden, Courtyard and Terrace Gardens and Planting Your Garden - the latter
including the earlier handbook by Christopher Lloyd on The Mixed Border.
