FT  02 JUL 94 / Expiry of London's Pounds 110m ticket to nowhere: Was
CrossRail a popular scheme scuppered by the planning process, or an idea
whose time was past
Five years of detailed preparations, Pounds 110m of public money and
hundreds of hours of costly campaigning by the business community have come
to nothing.
CrossRail, the Pounds 2bn underground railway line intended to link east and
west London, was struck a mortal blow in May when four MPs on a
quasi-judicial private bill committee voted 3-1 to block a private bill
authorising construction.
This week's confirmation that at least two of the MPs will not change their
minds means that the bill is dead, in spite of a Commons motion signed by
279 MPs urging the committee to reconsider.
Supporters will see the bill's demise as yet another example of the failure
of the planning process to deliver the goods. Its critics will welcome the
failure of a plan which they saw as over-ambitious, over-engineered and
overtaken by the swings of the economic cycle.
CrossRail emerged from a far-reaching review of London's public-transport
requirements carried out in 1989 - the peak of the boom. The project
involved the construction of a six-mile tunnel large enough to take British
Rail trains underneath the capital.
This would have provided a through service between Aylesbury and Reading to
the west of London and Shenfield to the east. The five stations on the new
underground section would have provided links with other underground lines.
Like the RER network linking the centre of Paris with the suburbs, CrossRail
would have provided rapid journey times with fewer stops than the Tube. It
would have avoided the need to change from suburban trains to the Tube and
might have persuaded car-driving commuters to switch to rail.
But the detailed forecasts of passenger demand were overtaken by the
recession. By the time CrossRail came up for scrutiny in parliament the
committee concluded that the extra capacity, thought to be necessary by
2001, would not be needed until 2010.
The prospects of raising enough private-sector finance had also faded with
the decline in the number of passengers. CrossRail's financial advisers
calculated that private money could meet half the costs, but one transport
consultancy estimates it would be no more than 25 per cent.
But why have four MPs been allowed to scupper the project? After all,
supporters say, it has the backing of both Mr John MacGregor, transport
secretary, and Mr Frank Dobson, his Labour shadow, and it is seen as crucial
by its sponsors, British Rail, London Underground and Railtrack, the
infrastructure company.
The private-bill procedure was used to allow property owners on or near the
route to challenge the need for the line, and to question its economic
viability. The MPs on the committee were legally required to consider the
bill on its merits, and to ignore party-political pressures.
The committee has been criticised for refusing to go along with the wishes
of the government and opposition. But members say that the scheme does not
make economic sense.
Mr John Marek, a Labour member, said that the benefits were estimated at
between 0.7 and 1.5 times the cost. He added: 'If the money was spent almost
anywhere else on the London Underground system - which is in a terrible
state - the ratios would have been 5, 12 or even 20.'
There were two other main objections:
The government refused to say how much it would contribute to the project,
and the committee feared that approval would lead to a long period of blight
along the route. The line was not properly integrated into the capital's
transport network. There was strong evidence that it would largely duplicate
the Central line, which is being upgraded at a cost of Pounds 800m.
Even more seriously, CrossRail had been planned before a final decision was
taken to site the London terminus of the Channel tunnel rail link at St
Pancras, north London, and before the building of the Heathrow Express rail
link from Paddington, west London.
The committee was advised that the only way to force the government to
consider adding interchanges with these two projects, which would add more
than Pounds 100m to the cost, was to block the bill.
Ministers are relaxed about the bill, mainly because they believe that BR
privatisation and the extension of London Underground's Jubilee Line will
squeeze the available private capital for transport projects until at least
1998-99.
But they have to decide quickly whether to let the project drop, or promote
it through one of the two alternatives to the private bill procedure.
One is the 1992 Transport and Works Act, under which Mr MacGregor could lay
an order for the project in parliament. But public inquiries could delay
construction for 10 years.
The other is the hybrid-bill procedure, used for projects which affect
private individuals but are also in the national interest. Transport
ministers have started to lobby for parliamentary time for such a bill, but
the department is already committed to one hybrid bill next year for the
Channel tunnel link.
It is unlikely to win parliamentary time for a second, particularly as the
government's business managers know that there would be overwhelming
pressure for government cash to provide links with the Heathrow and Channel
tunnel lines.
