FT  03 NOV 94 / Grachev'sjob at risk after sacking
The future of General Pavel Grachev, Russia's defence minister, was in
question yesterday following the sacking on Tuesday of his deputy, Gen
Matvei Burlakov. His deputy was removed after allegations of corruption in
the Western group of armed forces which he had commanded until September.
Mr Sergei Yushenkov, head of the state duma (lower house) defence committee,
said 'the next logical step should be the resignation of Grachev. This would
accord with the officer's code of dignity and would help the moral cleansing
of the army'.
President Boris Yeltsin's decision to fire Gen Burlakov 'shows civilian
control over the army exists and that the president is listening to press
and public opinion'.
Mr Yushenkov's remarks were underscored by Gen Alexander Lebed, commander of
the Russian 14th army in the Moldovan province of Trans Dnestr and the most
popular figure in the forces - according to polls taken of officers.
He told the Itar-Tass news agency that he welcomed Gen Burlakov's dismissal
and said that the sooner the army was cleansed of corruption 'the stronger
the army and the stronger the Russian state will be'.
The army's top command is clearly in turmoil. Gen Grachev, appointed after
playing a key role in foiling the attempted putsch in 1991, has been close
to Mr Yeltsin and may still have enough influence to survive. Ms Elena
Agapova, an aide, said last night that the decree removing Gen Burlakov
'came as no surprise. . . . Gen Burlakov has repeatedly requested the
defence minister to relieve him of his duties'.
Mr Yuri Yerin, former military prosecutor for the Western group, said
yesterday that Gen Grachev had been cleared of any corruption by 'numerous'
commissions and inquiries. The purchase with extra-budgetary funds of two
Mercedes cars for his use was 'not improper'.
However, Gen Grachev is not, and never has been, the defence establishment's
favoured candidate for minister - and his alleged acquiescence in corruption
is a serious weakness.
Communist and nationalist politicians have long demanded his resignation
because he ordered his tank units to fire on the Russian parliament last
October in obedience to Mr Yeltsin's requests. Now the reformist parties
have deserted him following the murder of a young journalist three weeks ago
who was investigating corruption in the Western group.
Though popular, Gen Lebed is regarded by the top brass as too young and
inexperienced to take the top job.
Mr Yushenkov named as possible candidates the army chief of staff, General
Mikhail Kolesnikov, the former Soviet defence minister, Marshal Yevgeny
Shaposhnikov, and Gen Andrei Nikolayev, chief of the border guards - which
are not under Gen Grachev's control.
