FT  31 MAY 94 / Survey of the Computer Industry - Battle for the Desktop
(13): Storage problem intensifies / New, inventive software eats away at PC
hard disk space
There is an assumption that when you buy a PC you will get enough storage to
last you five years.
'That's not true and not possible,' according to Peter Sondergaard, an
analyst at the Gartner Group. 'We are on the verge of a significant increase
in storage requirements.'
Key drivers include the onset of multimedia (combining voice and video with
the PC) and the development of storage-hungry software - 'from 1995, when we
buy a PC we'll get 'free' audio and video (multimedia) support,' says Mr
Sondergaard. 'And when users have it, they'll exploit it. But video and
voice make heavy demands on storage.'
Compression software, which helps users reduce the space taken up by voice,
video and data, is improving all the time. But the Gartner Group does not
believe that it will enable people to stick with what facilities they have.
Storage-hungry software is also eating away at hard disk space. Anyone who
bought a 386-based PC with a 20 megabyte hard disk a few years ago will find
that it is almost impossible to get anything but a slimmed down version of
one of the latest word processing packages on to it.
Microsoft's Word for Windows 6.0 and WordPerfect for Windows both take up
over 20 megabytes of storage. And you cannot run either of them without
MS-Dos and Microsoft's Windows graphical user interface (itself much larger
than earlier PC operating systems). Using compression software and deleting
superfluous files can help but both require spare time and technical
knowledge.
In the future, as object-oriented operating systems and software catch on,
the problem is likely to become worse. Object-oriented software, which
combines data with the instructions used to process it - for example,
statistical data and the graph needed to plot it - will allow software
developers to come up with ever more inventive and more storage-hungry
software.
However, the good news from the Gartner Group is that the price per megabyte
of storage will continue to fall over the next five years. At the same time
the range of different storage options will increase. Today, the main
choices for PC storage are:
Magnetic hard disks. These are built in to most PCs. Removable hard disks
are available, too. Alessandra Bianchini, notebook manager at Olivetti in
Italy, asks: 'Why carry a portable into the office, when all you want is
access to the data it contains?'
With this in mind, Olivetti's latest Philos portable includes a removable
hard disk (under the keyboard) measuring about 3 ins. by 5 ins. This can be
carried into the office and plugged into a slot in a desktop PC.
PCMCIA hard disks (PCMCIA stands for Personal Computer Memory Card
Association) are another form of portable storage. These are the size of
thick credit cards and can be slotted into small expansion slots conforming
to PCMCIA standards. These slots are becoming the norm on most portable
computers (for hard disks, fax modems and so on) but are only available on a
small proportion of new desktop PCs - 'there is almost universal support for
PCMCIA in the mobile computing market,' says Gavin Lennox, brand manager for
communications products at Lotus.
CD-Rom disks (compact disk, read-only memory). These are optical disks which
look like music CDs but store data, voice, video - or all three. They are
usually non-rewritable; which means you can retrieve information from them
but not add to it. To use CD-Rom disks you need a CD-Rom drive plugged into
your PC or built into it.
Magneto-optical CDs. These are also based on CD technology but are similar
to magnetic floppy and hard disks in that they are rewritable. They are
often used for storing digitised images of paper documents in industries
like insurance. The entry costs for using this technology are relatively
high in terms of the equipment needed and access is slow, but the cost per
megabyte is low.
'Raid' technology (raid: redundant arrays of inexpensive disks) are mainly
used in conjunction with PC servers, computers which store files and manage
PCs in a network, and with mid-range systems.
Raid technology cleverly combines low-cost PC hard disks with techniques and
peripherals common to mid-range and mainframe computing environments. Hard
disks are essentially stacked together so that several can be accessed
simultaneously for extra speed.
Tape drives: where fast access is not needed - for example, in data
archiving - data can be stored on tape (such as digital audio tape) and this
provides a cheaper alternative than Raid.
Floppy disks: once the main form of PC storage, these are now used mainly to
transfer information to another computer - for example, through the post -
or from an office PC to a portable/home computer.
The Gartner Group believes that hard disks will remain the dominant form of
PC storage until at least 1997 for a number of reasons: first, they are
inexpensive which is very important in the competitive PC market.
Second, there is a large installed base of users and a wide choice of
suppliers. In the computer industry this situation tends to slow the take up
of newer technologies.
Third, they do not suffer from some of the drawbacks of potential rivals.
They are rewritable and offer fast access to data. They are also available
in high-capacity versions, such as 200 megabytes.
CD-Rom disks can store far more data than hard disks. But most are not
rewritable. This makes them most suitable for delivering information which
cannot be changed. They are ideal for dictionaries and software programs.
Rewritable CDs are starting to appear - 'but over the next few years, growth
of CD-ROMS will be slightly inhibited because they offer slower access to
data than hard disks,' says Sondergaard,
PCMCIA hard disks take up less space and consume less energy than hard
disks. For this reason, IBM has one in its small footprint 'green' PC.
Peter Sondergaard says the dominance of hard disks could change after 1997;
after that,'we'll see the emergence of CDR (CD rewritable) and we may see
CDs with faster data access,' he says. 'But even then, hard disks will still
be faster and cheaper.'
The writer is associate editor of the FT newsletter, Business Computing
Brief.
