FT  30 MAR 94 / Survey of Japanese Financial Markets (8): Key changes are in
place - Bond Market
The Japanese domestic bond market, long hindered by archaic practices, has
at last started to modernise.
Until now, the high level of fees charged, limits on the amount of issuance
allowed by individual companies and the lack of secondary market trading
have effectively capped the domestic market's development - although some
borrowers have continued to use the market, partly as a means of gaining
access to Japanese retail investors.
In the past year, the limit on the maximum amount of new issues has been
lifted.
'Shelf registration has been very much simplified by the Ministry of
Finance,' said Mr Keiichi Yoshida, manager of the treasury division at NEC
Corporation. 'Before, you had to get permission to issue a single bond. Now,
you can register a maximum amount for two years.'
The finance ministry has also lowered the minimum credit rating for issuing
foreign and domestic yen bonds by Japanese companies to triple-B from
single-A, opening the market to a broader range of borrowers. Restrictions
on the issuance of floating-rate notes have also been lifted.
In addition, high fee levels, which used to make the market very
uncompetitive relative to the Euroyen bond sector, have been substantially
reduced - by as much as 50 per cent, according to market practitioners.
The granting of securities licenses to a handful of Japanese banks has
helped generate more competition in the sector.
In addition, efforts have been made to modernise market practices,
eradicating the traditional structure of fee-earning securities houses and
chief commissioned banks.
In December 1991, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone launched the first domestic
bond using a fixed price reoffer mechanism, which is designed to set the
price of an issue according to market sentiment and create a more
transparent price for investors.
In addition, rather than dividing, say, a Y30bn issue into three tranches of
Y10bn, dividing business between different securities houses in order to
keep them sweet, companies have started to issue bonds in large amounts,
which helps improve their liquidity.
'So far as issue volume is concerned, we are trying to issue bonds as big as
possible,' said Mr Hiroshi Tsuchiya, deputy general manager, finance and
treasury division, at NTT.
However, the market is not without its problems. Most fundamentally, it
suffers from the lack of an efficient clearing system.
The market could also be held back by a general lack of issuance, since many
companies do not need to borrow fresh money in the recession.
'We need the economy to improve so that there is borrowing for capital
expenditure, said Mr Hiroshi Hayakawa, general manager, capital markets at
Nomura Securities. 'Companies are still slimming down their balance sheets
rather than borrowing.'
The domestic market has also been affected by changes to the rules governing
issues in the Euroyen bond market.
Last year, the selling restrictions for Euroyen bonds issued by sovereign
and supranational borrowers were lifted. Previously, there was a 90-day
lock-up period before such paper could be sold in Japan.
This easing is expected to be extended in time to Euroyen bonds issued by
companies. In the longer-term, the result is likely to be a convergence, in
pricing, between the domestic and Euroyen bond markets.
However, one casualty of the changes has been the Samurai bond market - the
domestic bond market for foreign borrowers, once widely used by sovereign
and supranational borrowers. The ability to place Euroyen paper directly
into Japan has removed the incentive for top borrowers to tap the Samurai
market. Instead, the market is now frequented by lower-rated sovereign
borrowers, such as Turkey and Hungary, who are taking advantage of the fact
that the domestic market is less credit-sensitive.
Although a number of key changes to the domestic market are now in place,
the development of an actively traded corporate bond market is likely to
take some time - some market participants put it at five or 10 years.
However, the concentration of issuance by Japanese companies in the Euroyen
market is likely to shift.
'As a long-term trend we think that borrowers will return to the domestic
bond market,' said Mr Hayakawa of Nomura.
