FT  16 FEB 94 / Employers condemn recruits' illiteracy
A report that suggested 92 per cent of employers thought recruits did not
have a 'sufficient' command of English was yesterday described by the Labour
party as 'a damning indictment of 15 years of Tory education policies'.
The Queen's English Society found that 38 per cent of the 248 companies it
surveyed had had to spend money to bring their recruits' literacy up to
required standard. Others said they wished to do so, but did not have enough
funds.
Most recruits were 'poor' at writing reports, memoranda and minutes, and
giving presentations, according to the responses.
There were particular problems with application forms, with some applicants
unable to spell the titles of their GCSEs. Many recruits were unable to
spell words such as 'business' and 'separate'.
Mrs Ann Taylor, shadow education secretary, said that if the survey's
findings were true, even in part, 'the 16 to 18-year-olds referred to in
this survey have spent their entire school life under a Conservative
government'.
Mr Bernard Lamb, a lecturer in the biology department at Imperial College,
London, who compiled the report, called for more conservative teaching
methods, such as correcting errors in spoken English.
However, the working group of academics which is redrafting the English
national curriculum for England and Wales, has ruled this out.
Mr Nigel de Gruchy, general secretary of the NASUWT teachers' union, said:
'Employers have always complained about standards of school leavers since
state education was introduced. In 1861 the Newcastle Commission complained
of low standards and payment by results was introduced. Apparently, that did
not succeed.'
The Confederation of British Industry said that other countries were in a
similar position, and that employers' needs had changed with 70 per cent of
recruits requiring 'cerebral' skills compared with only 30 per cent in 1950.
A shortage of good science and technology teachers is predicted today by the
independent National Commission on Education. It has found in a survey that
only 10 per cent of students expecting to earn a first-class degree had
applied for jobs in teaching, against 27 per cent in line for a third.
