FT  14 DEC 94 / Dash to dam the Mekong raises ecology fears: William Barnes
on the environmental cost of plans to control flooding and generate power
Creeping up on the millions of people who draw sustenance from the Mekong
river is the threat of a dash to dam and exploit one of the world's longest
rivers.
Last month Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos agreed to resurrect their
long-dormant Mekong oversight committee. The agreement  - brokered by the
United Nations Development Programme  - breathes new life into decades-old
plans to develop the Mekong Basin that were frozen by more than two decades
of warfare and ideological turmoil in Indochina.
There is only a handful of tributary dams in the upper and middle reaches of
the river. Now Laos alone is proposing to build 58 dams by the year 2020,
mostly to feed voracious demand for energy in neighbouring Thailand and
eventually Vietnam.
Mr Kithong Vongsay, chairman of the Lao National Mekong Committee, says the
whole of the lower Mekong area could generate 37,000MW of electricity, of
which Laos could account for 18,000MW. The country's two main dams produce
210MW and are already its biggest foreign exchange earner. Thailand, which
also wants to irrigate its arid north-east, has virtually run out of dam
sites because of local opposition to environmental destruction.
'This is a modern agreement, a pragmatic agreement,' says Mr Prathet
Sutabutr, director of Thailand's department of energy development and
co-operation. 'Each country will have the right to do what they think is
justified in their own territory.' One US banker in the region says the work
will be a 'bonanza' for construction companies, bankers and water engineers.
But environmental groups say Mekong projects often ignore the fragile
ecology of a region fed by a river which descends from the snowy Tibetan
plateau to the warm waters of the Vietnam Delta.
In the 1940s US engineers, fresh from numerous 'big dam' projects in north
America, first laid plans for a cascade of 'multi-purpose' dams along the
river for electricity, flood control, irrigation and improved river
transport.
Then, as now, would-be dam builders who cite their ability to 'control' the
Mekong's annual flooding frequently omit to mention that the flooding is
part of a complex cycle of natural activity.
The Mekong's watersheds receive hardly any rain in the early months of the
year allowing salt water from the South China Sea to penetrate 500km inland,
as far as the middle of Cambodia. But monsoon rains transform the Mekong in
May. The water flow into the Vietnam delta increases 30-fold and certain
stretches of the river can rise by as much as a six-storey building.
The annual reversal of the flow of water back into Cambodia's economic
heart, the Tonle Sap lake, is unique and important fueling one of the
world's most productive fresh-water fish industries.
Ecologists say that 90 per cent of the fish in the Mekong basin spawn not in
the river but in submerged forests and fields. Among the many complex
arguments against rapid development is that dams which hold back silt might
decrease downstream fertility, risk increasing incursions of salt water and
worsen flooding.
'Still waters run dead,' says Mr Tyson Roberts, a specialist in freshwater
fish from the University of California. 'The people who live above or below
dams almost never benefit. But the worst dangers from dams can be
downstream: it is quite possible to imagine the Mekong Delta itself
(Vietnam's rice bowl) being eroded away.'
Mr Roy Morey, the United Nations Development Programme's resident
representative in Hanoi, says the new co-operation agreement  - which will
be signed early next year  - is an improvement on the old one. 'For the
first time the members have an avenue of appeal. Any arguments not resolved
in the joint working committee can be sent to a policy-making council  -
there was never anything resembling a council before.'
Yet, says Mr Vitoon Permpongsacharoen, general secretary of the Project for
Ecological Recovery in Bangkok, the new agreement weakens the old rule that
member countries could veto projects that diverted or dammed the river and
its main tributaries.
The new agreement requires majority approval, at council level, only for
projects that divert water out of the Mekong basin during the dry season.
'The purpose of this exercise is to legitimise dam building  - there's
hardly any talk about people participation or about studying the ecological
impact,' says Mr Vitoon.
The reason wary downstream countries such as Vietnam have agreed this change
can be partly explained by looking north to where China has quietly built
the 1500MW Manwan dam. This is only one of more than a dozen dams the
Chinese  - who are not on the committee  - are planning to build on the
Mekong to spur the development of a region that has lagged behind the
economic boom along China's coastal region.
Faced with the possibility of a free-for-all involving powerful neighbours,
some downstream countries have decided that some means of consultation and
appeal is better than nothing. 'It was a good political decision,' says Mr
Mok Mareth, Cambodia's secretary for state for the environment.
Two decades ago an early critic of exploitation of the Mekong, Mr John
Milton, observed: 'No real effort has been made to consult the people
affected. . . no one asked those 20m or 30m people about their needs and
problems or asked them what they wanted. . . . The assumption had long been
made that those dams were going to be built; the only questions were how
many, where and how.'
