FT  23 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Private finance
It is almost two years since Mr Norman Lamont launched the private finance
initiative. The then UK chancellor's aim was to mobilise the private sector
to meet needs that had traditionally been met by the public services. A
vision of new privately-built roads, railways, schools and hospitals was
conjured up.
As the initiative approaches its second birthday, that vision has yet to be
achieved. Some modest projects have taken off in the health service, and
several road and rail projects have been put out to tender. The Treasury has
lifted its objections to financing new roads through shadow tolling -
payments to the operators according to the number of vehicles using them.
But there remains an absence of holes in the ground, as Mr Howard Davies,
director general of the Confederation of British Industry, put it last year.
There is continuing scepticism about the initiative in Whitehall, and among
the investment community which might provide the capital. Civil servants
seem to have unrealistic views about the degree of risk that the private
sector is prepared to assume in infrastructure projects. It is not clear
that they or ministers are yet prepared to countenance the rates of return
required to attract private capital. On the other side, the absence of
progress on the initiative is leading many potential partners in the private
sector to conclude that involvement is unlikely to produce early returns.
If the initiative is to achieve its promise, renewed efforts are needed to
remove obstacles. One would be to provide some incentive for civil servants
who succeed in bringing private finance into government services. At
present, they can see only the downside of failure. If a project fails, or
the private sector partner makes a large profit, there is likely to be
criticism from the National Audit Office and excoriation by the Commons
Public Accounts Committee.
A positive incentive might encourage clearer analysis about the appropriate
share of risk between the public and private sector. Sir Alastair Morton,
chairman of the panel advising the chancellor on the initiative, last night
urged the government to 'loosen up' its approach to risk-sharing. In a
speech at the London Business School, he said that it makes sense for the
public sector to bear the political risks of large infrastructure projects
such as the Channel tunnel rail link. By putting the link out to tender
before the planning process is complete, private operators have been asked
to bear risks they cannot control.
Lessons should also be learnt from public services where private finance is
already playing a part. Housing associations were transferred to the private
sector in 1988 and have since raised more than Pounds 5.5bn of private
capital to supplement government grants for building low-cost homes. A
similar transfer for NHS trusts and grant-maintained schools would allow
them to raise capital against the value of their assets without adding to
public borrowing.
Finally, some projects need to be started soon if private finance is to be
attracted into public services. Without the prospect of lots of holes in the
ground, the cost of bidding for the occasional large project will do little
to encourage private sector enthusiasm.
