FT  08 AUG 94 / Bounty along the border line: The likely economic benefits
of improved relations between Israel and Jordan
Coils of razor wire and land mines will finally be removed today to make way
for a new Middle East border crossing between the Red Sea cities of Aqaba
and Eilat. The opening of the crossing by Crown Prince Hassan of Jordan and
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin will inaugurate a new era of economic
relations between the neighbouring states, following the formal opening of
direct telephone links between them by King Hussein and Israeli president
Ezer Weizman yesterday.
The two ground-breaking measures are the latest steps in what promises to be
a turning point in the Middle East after nearly half a century of
Arab-Israeli conflict. While the Middle East common market foreseen by Mr
Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, remains a distant dream, Israel and
Jordan will co-operate on several economic fronts.
Less than two weeks after the two sides formally ended their 46-year state
of war, they have revealed an extensive agenda. The speed with which they
unveiled their detailed proposals testifies to the economic imperatives
which are central to the peace process.
The benefits to Jordan - which has a gross national product of USDollars
5bn, a fraction of Israel's Dollars 70bn economy - are likely to be more
significant than those to Israel in the short and medium-term. Already the
US has forgiven Dollars 220m in loans to Jordan and has promised to write
off a further Dollars 500m; the UK has converted a loan worth Pounds 59.5m
(Dollars 91m) into a grant; and Japan has granted the kingdom energy loans
worth Dollars 130m, partly in appreciation of its peace efforts. Jordan has
a Dollars 6.9bn external debt.
Early economic co-operation is expected in three main areas: services,
regional integration projects and trade.
In services, the most favourable area is tourism. Today's opening of the
Eilat-Aqaba border will pave the way for travel agents to promote
multi-destination regional packages.
Israel and Jordan will also develop a near-eastern tourist association,
together with Egypt, Turkey and one day, perhaps, Syria and Lebanon, for
marketing and promotion abroad. Both Israel and Jordan expect tourism to
expand rapidly from last year's 2m visitors to Israel and about 350,000 to
Jordan. Tourism was Jordan's second-largest foreign exchange earner last
year, at Dollars 500m, and contributed about Dollars 2.1bn to the Israeli
economy.
Tourism will also be the starting ground for joint integration projects.
Plans are under way for cross-border schemes including a 'Red Sea Riviera'
between Aqaba, Eilat and Taba in Egypt, and a 'lowest point on earth'
tourism park in the Arava desert.
Transport projects will be undertaken early on, and should provide
considerable returns to both economies. Six roads - worth Dollars 1.4bn and
covering a total of 700km - are planned. The two most urgent are a road
linking Egypt to Jordan via Israel, and a road between Amman and Israel's
Mediterranean ports. Finance will be raised mainly from the private sector,
which could earn its return from tolls on the routes. Jordan will be able to
cut the costs of shipping and reduce its import bill, while Israel would
earn port fees.
Israel would also like an exit terminal at Jordan's Aqaba airport, allowing
Israel to close its small Eilat airport and pay airport fees to Jordan.
Israel also wants a joint Israeli-Jordanian port inland from the Gulf of
Aqaba, which it sees as critical to eventual exports to the Gulf states.
In the energy sector, linking the electricity grids would produce
considerable savings for both Jordan and Israel and pave the way for the
long-term development of a regional grid. The costs of linkage would be
minimal. Jordan's use of Israel's sophisticated communications
infrastructure and the resort by Jordanian companies to Israeli capital
markets to raise finance, might also save money. Potential benefits from
trade between Jordan and Israel are unclear. Both economies are highly
protected.
Any significant Israel-Jordan free trade treaty would also involve
negotiations with the Palestinians, as the Israeli-Palestinian economic
agreement is based on common import taxes and duties. Thus any pact giving
preferential treatment to Jordanian imports would have to be agreed first
with the Palestinians.
In the meantime, a trade agreement based on most favoured nation principles,
with little adjustment of present tariff structures, will promote annual
trade worth about Dollars 100m to Israel and tens of millions of dollars to
Jordan. Another option being considered is for Israel to allow Jordanian
imports to enter Israel on more favourable tariff terms and earlier than
Israeli goods enter Jordan.
Initial trade will be small, given the relative size and development of the
two economies - Israel imported Dollars 16bn of goods last year compared
with Jordan's Dollars 3.4bn. At present there are few goods Israel would
want to buy from Jordan, whose trade deficit last year was Dollars 2.4bn.
However, economists believe that once the Israeli market is open, Jordanian
industry will adapt to the new opportunities thus created.
'Trade creation will be more important than trade diversion,' said Nadav
Halevi, professor of trade at the Hebrew University. 'Trade will be much
more significant to the Jordanian economy than to the Israeli economy, and
Israel can open its markets without much fear, so the decision about trade
arrangements will be largely political.'
Politics, however, might conspire against a more broad-based process of
'beating swords into ploughshares'. While the economic links between Israel
and Jordan may develop quite quickly and smoothly, broadening economic
co-operation across the region may prove more difficult. Arab states are
suspicious about possible Israeli economic domination and reluctant to
integrate their economies with Israel.
Another obstacle to economic integration is finance. The prospect of funding
from foreign governments and international financial institutions appears
limited. Israel, however, says finance could be raised by the creation of a
Middle East development fund and the provision of government guarantees to
private sector companies. Israel is pursuing this idea with the US and other
potential donors. In October, King Hassan of Morocco will host a Middle East
economic conference in Casablanca.
Ultimately, moves towards Arab-Israeli economic co-operation based on peace
agreements between Israel and Egypt, Jordan and the Palestinians will depend
in part on international economic incentives, in the form of aid, debt
relief, increased trade and foreign investment. As Mr Peres has pointed out,
in an increasingly global economy, the Middle East has little option but to
move towards closer integration. Fifteen years after a 'cold peace' with
Egypt, there are few signs of Egyptian-Israeli economic integration. But
Israeli officials believe the Jordanian agreement is a fresh start.
Further, Israel remains haunted by the threat of Islamic fundamentalism and
is determined to cement fragile Middle East peace through the economic
development of its neighbours. The Jewish state says it is ready to make
economic concessions to them. Such gestures, if genuine and expanded, could
help persuade Arab countries to see Israel as an economic partner rather
than as a power set on dominating them, and turn the initial benefits of
peace into a transformation of the region.
