FT  20 MAY 94 / Arts: Beards, bop and blues - The London Jazz Festival
For a time during the all day avant-garde segment of the London Jazz
Festival, I could feel tears of joy falling silently to mingle with drops of
beer in the beard I had grown especially for the occasion. Guitarist Billy
Jenkins' was wheezing his way through an excruciating version of 'What a
Wonderful World'. Earlier in the set Jenkins, who usually performs as the
Voice of God Collective, had been inexplicably yelling 'Jurassic Park]' at
his perplexed (German) horn section before throwing himself painfully to the
stage floor. A large man bellowed at him to desist, shouting 'Have you
forgotten what jazz is?' Jenkins responded by thanking the Goethe Institut
for their support and proceeded to demolish the Louis Armstrong weepie with
power chords and an asthmatic vocal style inspired by Norman Wisdom.
A full day's worth of sturm und drang in the confines of the Sadler's Wells
theatre is enough to make a grown critic cry: good job it culminated in the
confident and sophisticated musings of pianist Carla Bley, master bassist
Steve Swallow and saxophonist Andy Sheppard. Performing a repertoire of
gentle writing arrived at between the three of them in the Bley/Swallow
kitchen, a cool blue intimacy descended on the concert hall. Bley and
Swallow are clearly enjoying the bucolic idyll of their north western
mountain greenery. Their first three pieces are known collectively as
'Wildlife' and included 'Sex With Birds'; the skittish 'Chicken' was written
for them by their chickens and 'Wrongkey Donkey' was a stubborn melody which
eventually came along as a kind of arabesque.
Sadler's Wells also hosted the 'Jazz Australia' evening whose highlight was
multi-instrumentalist James Morrison's sextet. Fewer gags and horn
acrobatics than is usual from the funny man meant that closer scrutiny of
his mainstream trumpet playing was possible - but what still impresses are
the man's chops of steel and his ability to sustain impossible notes.
In support, pianist Paul Grabowsky takes the prize for being the most
authentically dissolute jazz musician of the festival. He has the appearance
of a man who commutes daily between Sydney and London, subsisting on the
airline's courtesy refreshments. Unfortunately, his sub-Mingus, horn-led
work was handled in such a cavalier way that abruptly called time changes
could not restore its impact. Perhaps the material sounds better on the new,
much awaited Viva, Viva (East West Records).
Over at Ronnie Scott's club, every night of the week, Joshua Redman was
demonstrating the straight-on, in your face style of post-bop playing which
has made him the hot young tenor to watch. His youthful band, which on these
nights included pianist Eric Reed as well as Christian McBride (bass) and
Brian Blade (drums), whipped through blink-and-miss-the-changes numbers from
Wish, Redman's recent release on WEA. Reed, who also has a new disc on the
racks, It's Alright To Swing (MoJazz) punches out precise and brittle notes,
bringing the rhythm section on behind him. Redman cites Sonny Rollins as a
major influence and he shares the great man's love of a waltz and a calypso
 -and like Rollins is compulsively and imaginatively 'on' for most of the
time.
On the South Bank, a large crowd of faithful Chick Corea acolytes assembled
to meet the pianist's new Elektric Band. Taking his material from the new
GRP album, Paint The World, Corea's latest sound is semi-electric, more
spontaneous than previously, but remains a crowd (mostly men) pleasing
fusion of rock and jazz. Shrill altoist Eric Marienthal continues from the
old band and he is joined by Gary Novak's machine gun drumming, Jimmy Earl's
monster bass lines and Mike Miller's heroic licks. Predominantly nerdy,
Corea's chip-driven technique is nevertheless reliably exciting. You could
say that he presses all the right buttons.
The FT will be printed to the sound of Glenn Miller's music on Thursday, May
26. The Ambassadors, the jazz orchestra of the United States Air Forces in
Europe, is playing a one-off concert at the St Clements Press, East India
Dock House, from 7.30pm to 10.15pm. Tickets are Pounds 6 each, available
from Tracey Coyle on 071-537-8012. All proceeds in aid of St Anne's Church,
Limehouse, the Getty Challenge Grant Appeal and Bromley Hall School Fund.
The London Jazz Festival is funded by the London Arts Board, The London
Boroughs of Camden, Hackney and Islington
