FT  10 SEP 94 / London Stock Exchange: ICI stand out
Chemicals leader ICI was one of the few London stocks to avoid the impact of
yesterday's discouraging US statistics after receiving a push from a leading
US securities house.
Goldman Sachs had published a substantial research document regarding the
global pick-up in bulk chemicals prices. The house cited - among others -
ethylene which rose from 18.3 cents per pound in June to a prospective 22.5
cents for September.
The US investment bank's chemicals analyst highlighted ICI as the main UK
beneficiary of a price rise. The company generates around half of its
profits from bulk chemicals and has also underperformed against the broader
market recently.
Helped also by some takeover talk, ICI shares rose 20 at one point but fell
back with the market to close 7 1/2 stronger at 828p. Turnover hit 3.8m
shares, a high figure in comparison with recent trading sessions.
BTR continued to head up the market's list of active stocks with turnover
topping 24m shares as the stock price responded to a big two way pull after
Thursday's dismal interim figures.
A burst of buying early in the session drove the shares up to the day's high
of 342p around midday, with fund managers at some of the big income funds
taking a hard look at what could well be substantial returns in the stock on
a fifteen-month view. It was pointed out that over that period the company,
which nows yields around 5 per cent, would produce three dividends in two
sets of results. 'At the end of the day, BTR remains a quality company,'
said one analyst.
The subsequent steep fall in the market left the shares 9 lower at 329p at
the close. The warrants also attracted renewed selling, the 93/4s closing 8
1/2 off at 36 1/2 p.
Cookson, whose excellent figures were overlooked in the aftermath of the BTR
debacle on Thursday, jumped 5 more to 264p.
Pharmaceuticals group Fisons shed 3 to 151p ahead of interim figures on
Tuesday which are expected to produce profits of around Pounds 35m down from
Pounds 42.3m a year ago. Reorganisation costs and a low pollen season in
Japan - which cut demand for hay fever drugs - are expected to hit
pharmaceuticals profits while continuing losses are expected in scientific
instruments.
Continued bid speculation helped pharmaceuticals groups Wellcome and Zeneca
resist the market pressure. The former held its ground at 696p while the
latter slipped only 3 to 835p.
Tobacco to insurance conglomerate BAT Industries held firm as UBS reiterated
a buy recommendation and Smith New Court confirmed its bullish stance with
some rivals suggesting it had upgraded to a buy from a hold. The shares were
up 14 at best and ended the day one better at 434p.
Ulster Television added 15 at 685p after producing encouraging figures. The
television group announced a 24.5 per cent hike in interim profits to Pounds
2.4m.
A sharp increase in profits from market research group Taylor Nelson saw the
shares improve 2 1/2 to 38 1/2 p.
A follow-through from disappointing car registration figures in the UK saw
Inchcape fall 9 to 436p.
Costain shares dipped 3 to 24 1/2 p after the dismal figures and the
projected sale of its US coal mining interests which analysts said could
fetch between Pounds 150m and Pounds 180m.
Bank shares were badly affected by worries that UK interest rates may soon
be on the way up. Lloyds were given the roughest ride in the market, the
shares sliding 18 to 552p.
Royal Bank of Scotland lost 15 to 421p on big turnover of 5.3m with
sentiment affected by news that Mr Peter Woods, the head of Royal's hugely
successful Direct Line insurance subsidiary, had sold more than 600,000
shares.
Willis Corroon came in for strong institutional support after a recent bout
of selling pressure, the stock price moving up 2 to 155 1/2 p on turnover of
10m.
Jeweller Asprey plunged to 178p after warning that group results for the
half year to September 30 would be significantly below current market
expectations and those for the corresponding period last year. The shares
recovered slightlyto close 110p lower at 200p.
A cautious annual statement from Dixons prompted concern over forthcoming
figures from Woolworths parent Kingfisher. The market had anticipated a
pre-tax figure between Pounds 90m and Pounds 95m but the Dixons statement
coupled with the Asprey profits warning had prompted some analysts to err on
the downside. The shares fell 16 to 488p.
Auctioneer Christie's International fell 4 to 175p after disappointing
results that included a static interim dividend.
