FT  12 JAN 94 / The Finance Bill: Government set to buck European norm
Yesterday's finance bill contained few surprises for insurers but did little
to clarify how the controversial new premium tax will be implemented in
practice.
Insurers and brokers have until the end of the month to make their
representations. Analysts do not expect full details to emerge until
regulations are published later this year.
The indications are, though, that the government will press ahead with its
plan to charge the new tax on premiums net of insurance brokerage, rather
than on the gross premiums.
This has caused some consternation in the insurance industry, partially
because it could put insurers selling directly to the public - rather than
through an intermediary such as an agent or broker - at a competitive
disadvantage.
Insurers selling direct - through a combination of mass media advertising
and telephone sales - have made strong inroads into the motor and
increasingly the home-insurance market in recent years, and now account for
more than 15 per cent of the personal market.
'We are keen to see that the competitive balance between different
distribution channels is not altered,' said Mr Tony Baker, head of public
relations at the Association of British Insurers. Mr Baker also pointed to
possible administrative difficulties. He said, however, that the bill's
wording was sufficiently flexible 'to enable many of the areas of contention
to be dealt with. The industry's main concerns are the practicality and cost
of dealing with the tax.'
Insurance brokers have still to define their position in relation to the new
tax, said Mr David Hough of the British Insurance and Investment Brokers'
Association. In spite of apparent concern in some quarters that charging the
tax on a net basis could make insurance brokerage commissions more
transparent, Mr Hough said that charging the tax on a gross basis would
increase costs for consumers.
He said, however, 'There are difficulties and greater costs in applying it
on a net basis and most European countries levy the tax on a gross basis.'
