FT  28 JUL 94 / Government Bonds: Gilts sharply lower after auction fails to
meet expectations
European government bonds ended a volatile session lower, with the UK and
Italian markets posting the sharpest losses. Weak US Treasuries following
stronger-than-expected durable-goods orders data put a further dampener on
European markets.
UK government bonds ended the day sharply lower following a disappointing
gilts auction and late selling in the futures pits.
The initial reaction to the auction results was muted, with dealers
disappointed that the Pounds 2bn of 6.25 per cent gilts due 2010 had a
bid-to-cover ratio of just 1.29 times.
'The gilt auction result was worse than expected,' said Mr Edmond Warner,
head of strategy at Kleinwort Benson. 'We needed a cover of around 2 times -
so many expectations had been built into this,' he added.
Yesterday's auction - the first for a conventional, long-dated gilt since
January - had been regarded as a key test of market sentiment, and the low
investor demand indicated that it remains fragile, traders said.
Some dealers reported investors switching into the new stock out of other
gilts but said there was little outright investor buying of the new bonds.
Seeing other European and US bonds falling, traders decided to hedge their
long positions by selling futures against them, causing a sharp fall in the
gilt futures price in late trading, he explains. The September long gilt
contract on Liffe fell by 1 27/32 to 101 3/32 on the day.
Prices were further pressured by rumours that Bank of England governor Eddie
George and Chancellor Kenneth Clarke may raise UK interest rates when they
meet today.
Italian markets took another tumble as rising political tensions weighed on
bonds and the currency.
Reports that an arrest warrant for Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's
brother had been issued in connection with the probe of his media company
Fininvest, and late rumours - denied by a government spokesman  - that Mr
Berlusconi would himself resign, sent bond yields soaring towards their
year's highs.
The Italian 10-year yield spread over bunds rose to 411 basis points, from
390 on Tuesday. The September BTP future on the Italian futures exchange
fell by 1.52 point to 101.31.
German bonds also weakened on the day, hit by weakness in the US market but
remaining largely range-bound.
The Treuhandanstalt's five-year note was absorbed without difficulty but saw
little retail demand, dealers said. This was reflected in the modest size of
the issue: the Bundesbank sold DM2.49bn of the 6.25 per cent paper to the
market and retained DM1.51bn for market-tending purposes.
US Treasury bonds retreat-ed yesterday amid fresh evidence of an
accelerating economy.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was  1/2 lower at
84 5/16 , with the yield climbing to 7.589 per cent. At the short end, the
two-year note was down  3/32 at 99 13/16 , to yield 6.21 per cent.
The catalyst for the downturn was the Commerce Department's announcement of
a 1.3 per cent rise in orders for durable goods last month. The data was
much stronger than the consensus forecast of a 0.6 per cent gain.
Economists said the big jump demonstrated the continued strength of the
manufacturing sector despite this year's cycle of interest rate increases.
The news reinforced the expectation that the Federal Reserve was poised to
lift rates in the coming weeks. The robust data also raised the likelihood
of a move to put up the pivotal Federal Funds rate by 50 basis points to
4.75 per cent, rather than a more modest 25-point increase.
Looking ahead, the development escalated fears over Friday's preliminary
estimate of second-quarter economic growth. A strong reading could send
bonds into a tailspin.
The bearish fundamentals also had an impact on the market's technical
position, with the uncertainty over rates depressing demand for an afternoon
auction of Dollars 11bn in new five-year notes.
Before the sale, dealers had sought to push prices lower in an effort to
extract concessions when the Treasury awarded the issue. The yield came in
at 6.98 per cent, just a little under market expectations, even though bids
were thin.
Afterwards, the market showed little reaction, with the long end drifting
higher and shorter-dated securities holding steady with moderate losses on
the day.
