FT  21 JAN 94 / World Trade News: Showdown over silk brings latest victory
for Kantor - The US trade chief's Chinese textiles deal
Mrs Carla Hills, former US trade representative, defined failed trade talks
as those which result in sanctions. By this standard - and others - her
successor, Mr Mickey Kantor is a high achiever.
Mr Kantor has only once imposed sanctions - on the EU in a dispute over
government telecommunications procurement - and those were mostly symbolic.
(He and Sir Leon Brittan, his EU counterpart, may be nearing a solution on
telecommunications with the expected conclusion of a study this week forming
the basis of a deal.)
The trade representative has succeeded in numerous high-stakes showdowns
with the EU, Japan and China, employing neat timing and a potent combination
of seemingly reckless threats, followed by flexibility and ingenuity.
On Monday Mr Kantor announced still another triumph, a new three-year pact
with Beijing which sharply cuts the growth of Chinese textile and apparel
imports. By threatening a 25-35 per cent cut in China's current quotas and
refusing to cave in when China threatened retaliation and insisted on
last-minute changes in the pact, US negotiators got the customs co-operation
agreement they insist they need to curb 'massive' fraud and transshipment.
Customs will now be permitted to employ US-Chinese 'jump' teams, comprising
officials of both countries, to swoop on Chinese factories in search of
misleading labels and documentation, used to circumvent quotas.
US negotiators also got China to agree for the first time to ceilings on
silk apparel, which they say is sold so cheaply that it can undercut cotton.
Imports jumped from Dollars 900m in 1991 to Dollars 2.6bn in 1993; increases
will now be limited to 1 per cent a year for the next three years.
The US-Sino relationship has come some way since 1984, when a dispute over
textiles resulted in US sanctions and Chinese retaliation against American
grain.
That infuriated the US agricultural lobby, at a time of massive surpluses,
and so traumatised trade officials that they avoided confrontations with the
Chinese for years, even renewing the country's Most Favoured Nation status
after the crushing of the 1989 student uprising in Tiananmen Square.
Even now, China could easily shake up US industry by retaliating against the
vulnerable US aircraft makers, agriculture and capital goods producers. But
it now must reckon with pressure from its own business sector and its
interest in the lucrative US market, where its surplus last year soared
above Dollars 22m.
The textile deal both pleased and annoyed Mr Kantor's constituents. Although
overall quota growth is frozen this year and limited to 1 per cent in each
of the next two, importers were relieved to know their contracts would be
fulfilled. However, Ms Laura Jones, executive director of the Association of
Importers of Textiles and Apparel, was 'horrified' at the silk apparel
quotas, viewing them as a contradiction of the liberalisation promised in
the Uruguay Round.
US textile producers are pleased with a trade representative who brags that
US textiles are the 'best' in the world and US workers the most productive.
But they would have preferred the threatened 25-35 per cent quota cut to go
ahead, on the grounds that the Chinese deserve to be punished for
transshipment sins.
Mr Kantor said the 'resolute' US stand ought to send a message to Beijing
that the US would stand tough on other disputes, most importantly on renewal
of Most Favoured Nation status.
This is a message which has been conveyed by every US visiting official for
months, including Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary, who appeared
there this week, and a delegation of US congressmen led by Mr Richard
Gephardt, the House majority leader, last weekend.
Beijing has also had encouraging hints that if it co-operates on human
rights, intellectual property rights and nuclear proliferation, it will be
invited to take a respected place among the community of trading nations.
'The Clinton administration does not want to make an annual MFN assessment
the central focal point for economic ties between the two countries year
after year,' said Mr Jeffrey Garten, the Commerce Department trade
undersecretary, on Wednesday in Frankfurt. 'We sincerely hope there can be
enough progress in the human rights area to get these MFN issues behind us.'
In the past, no amount of pressure has moved Beijing on human rights. If Mr
Kantor and the other players in this effort pull off this deal, it will be a
dazzling achievement indeed.
