FT  30 AUG 94 / Arts: An Indian dream from Australia - Edinburgh Festival
Somebody must have told the Australian Opera about Edinburgh's new Festival
Theatre. Originally called the Empire, it was re-built after a fire in 1928
and its handsome art deco interior survived decades of use as a bingo-hall
to be lovingly restored and re-opened this year.
How kind of the Australian visitors to bring a show that was in period. A
portrait of George V smiled down from above the proscenium arch. Vignettes
of the King and Queen Mary adorned the boxes. The stage picture was of the
British Empire in its heyday - a military bandstand in the India of the Raj
with stiff-upper-lip officers and elegant ladies taking the air in the dusty
heat of the late evening.
No - it is not surprising if the opera is hard to guess. Neither Britten nor
Shakespeare had imperial India in mind when writing A Midsummer Night's
Dream. The Australian Opera production is by Baz Luhrmann, the director of
the film Strictly Ballroom, now signed up to 20th Century Fox. He is hot
property and this production has predictably proved to be a hot ticket
down-under - a vibrant and colourful crowd-puller.
The choice of India for the setting was a moment of inspiration. I used to
think of A Midsummer Night's Dream as the innocent among Britten's operas,
whereas these days it seems as much about sexual repression as any. To see
it as a clash of cultures is an interesting gloss on the story: instead of
Athenians lost in an enchanted wood, we have the starched and inhibited
English having their passions liberated in sensuous, headily-perfumed India.
Putting this exotic world of enchantment on stage must have been a
designer's dream. Catherine Martin and Bill Marron have come up with a riot
of ruby reds and midnight sapphire blues, luxuriantly bejewelled costumes
and shafts of moonlight (lit by Nigel Levings). Never mind that it looked
more like the India of the Maharishi's psychedelic sixties. This was a
welcome change from the current fashion for opera productions in
all-pervading grey.
Having set the scene so skilfully, Luhrmann was ready to probe the emotional
issues at the heart of the opera, but did he do so? In the tender scene
where Tytania and Bottom the ass settle down on the bower for a mutual
scratching session (to music from Britten of surprisingly sensual
lassitude), no suggestive glint of hidden desire broke the surface. Luhrmann
just played the scene for laughs.
And that - unfortunately  - is what happened through most of the opera.
Elisa Wilson's Helena was a nymphomaniac in jodhpurs, mercilessly pursuing
an army officer Demetrius, who was strongly sung by Paul Whelan. Ian
Bostridge played Lysander as a chinless civil servant in love with the
limpid upper-class Hermia of Kirsti Harms - caricatures all. When Puck says,
'What fools these mortals be]', one had no option but to agree.
The rustics formed the amateur dramatics group from the local army base, a
sit-com assortment of marching men in khaki shorts, with Michael Martin's
gormless Flute as camp goof. Every old knockabout pantomime routine was in
their army rule-book, but at least they had brought a good band along to
play. The Scottish Chamber Orchestra, in red army uniforms on the bandstand,
was expertly conducted by its moustachioed sergeant major, Roderick Brydon.
Subtle this show was not, except perhaps for the fairies. I could have
strangled Tyler Coppin's camp-is-not-the-word Puck long before the end, but
Kathryn McCusker looked beautiful in Tytania's sari and Michael Chance's
Oberon, with waist-length hair and pointed fingernails, was the epitome of
Indian culture as hippie heaven. As his haunting counter-tenor led the final
ensemble, Britten's music worked its magic afresh.
Sponsored by Bank of Scotland
