FT  09 DEC 94 / UK Property Review (13): 'Steady as she goes' is catchphrase
 -The Channel Tunnel Region / The flood of speculative property developments
some expected has not materialised
However embarrassing the accident-prone start to the high-speed Eurostar
passenger service, the Channel Tunnel's share of the cross-Channel freight
market has been building satisfactorily since the first lorries caught the
train at the end of July.
By mid-October volumes had already outstripped those handled by the Port of
Dunkirk. Importantly, the tunnel appears to have captured a disproportionate
share of express hauliers and couriers, the time-sensitive sector of the
market essential for the tunnel's premium pricing policy.
Yet if the tunnel is finally operating, that event has not been marked by
the flood of speculative property developments some expected. With the
notable exception of a development consortium keen to create 'Euro City'
around an International Passenger Station (IPS) at Ebbsfleet just east of
Dartford, the catchphrase is 'steady as she goes.'
Chris Bond of John Laing Property Ventures which has ambitious plans for 125
acres around the new IPS under construction at Ashford, believes he knows
why. 'During the Chunnel's early planning stages everyone rushed into Kent.
Now they are waiting for the infrastructure to catch up.'
Andrew Jackson of agents Weatherall Green &amp; Smith agrees that those
developments presently going ahead have been fuelled by the general
attractions of the south-east rather than in direct response to the tunnel.
He even detects some disillusionment with the amount of distribution
business which has already chosen to settle outside Kent or Essex.
Recession has also delayed the take-up of much of the speculative
developments of the late 1980s, making new speculation less urgent. Figures
produced for the Kent Impact Study by the Channel Tunnel Joint Consultative
Committee would not cause a developer to salivate.
Warehousing demand in Kent up to 1996 is estimated at 111,000 sq m. This is
fully matched by buildings either completed and vacant or under
construction. In addition, the planning pipeline contains a further 388,000
sq m to meet an estimated demand of 194,000 sq m between 1996 and 2001.
It comes as no surprise therefore that Laing is not rushing into development
at Ashford despite planning permission for a retail element of 300,000 sq
ft.
'We have been reviewing the whole site for the past three months. Site
inspections will continue until the year-end and a decision will be taken in
early summer whether to protect our existing planning applications or alter
them according to our projections for the rest of the site,' says Mr Bond.
Eurotunnel, which has extensive development land in both Ashford and
Folkestone, is also proceeding with caution.
Its 14-acre Cheriton Parc business park overlooking the tunnel terminal just
two miles east of Folkestone, has just started to pick up speed. Eurotunnel
itself has taken the first building as a 28,000 sq ft customer services
centre.
But Cheriton Parc is just a fraction of the 615 acres on seven sites owned
by Eurotunnel Developments (EDL) along the M20-A20 Channel Tunnel Corridor.
Ashford is the prime location. Orbital Park, a 100-acre light industrial
site, has BP Travel Services as its first tenant in 115,000 sq ft. Nearby
Waterbrook Park, close to Junction 10 of the M20, already boasts 10ha for
lorry parking, servicing and customs clearance.
EDL is now drawing breath while it considers a mix of retail and industrial
warehousing, a new Ashford cattle market and hotel-leisure possibilities on
the rest of the site.
Ebbsfleet is the one big development location which seems to be in a hurry.
Tony Kemp, managing director of Blue Circle Properties, is keen to maintain
the momentum of having beaten Dartford as the site of the intermediate IPS
on the Chunnel route and the main rail link to the Medway towns.
Blue Circle has good reason to be the motive force in the public-private
sector consortium with dreams of a 'Euro City' between Dartmouth and
Gravesend. It owns a former quarry on the edge of the Ebbsfleet station site
and has plans for a 1.7m sq ft shopping centre at Bluewater, another quarry
just one mile away.
Consequently, around Ebbsfleet station itself, the emphasis will be on light
industrial use, possibly in a multi-storey business park. Retail use will be
deliberately limited.
Another element in Euro City with which Blue Circle is closely involved is
the Crossways Business Park at Junction 1A of the M25 close to the Dartford
Tunnel. In the six years that development has been under way, 1m sq ft of
the proposed 3m sq ft at Crossways has already been built. Mr Kemp predicts
parity with West London rents within two years.
A new campus for Greenwich University, a regional hospital and big new
residential and leisure facilities are to be the key public sector
contributions to what used to be called the East Thames Corridor but now
describes itself as Thames Gateway.
