FT  28 FEB 94 / UK Company News: Epsom contenders enter final furlong
The three remaining con-tenders in the race to own Epsom, home of the Derby,
this morning were entering the final furlong.
They are Racecourse Holdings Trust, owned by the Jockey Club, a consortium
headed by Mr Stan Clarke, owner of Uttoxeter racecourse, and Sunset + Vine,
the sports television company.
The three have to submit their bids for Epsom, together with Sandown Park
and Kempton Park, to Lazard Brothers by 10am this morning. Lazard is acting
for the Horserace Betting Levy Board, the statutory body that has owned the
courses for more than 20 years. Estimates of the value of the three courses
run up to Pounds 30m.
Mr David Hillyard, managing director of Racecourse Holdings Trust, believes
that the trust will be best able to fulfil the obligation on the buyer to
keep horse racing at all three courses.
They lie within London's M25 ring road, and were acquired by the Horserace
Betting Levy Board in order to protect them from possible property
development.
'We have a track record going back 30 years, and, with the Jockey Club as
our parent, we are in the business for the long-term benefit of racing,' he
said.
The trust already owns nine courses, including Cheltenham and Newmarket.
There are 59 horse racing courses in the UK. On Friday, the Office of Fair
Trading gave its clearance to the proposed purchase.
Mr Stan Clarke, who turned round Uttoxeter racecourse from losses five years
ago, is putting in a private bid, along with Mr Anthony Solomons, chairman
of Singer &amp; Friedlander, the merchant banking and property group, and Mr
Andrew Cohen, managing director of Betterware, the home shopping company.
The three men are all racehorse owners.
Mr Clarke was in optimistic mood following the victory of Honest Word, his
wife's horse, in the 3.25pm at Kempton Park on Friday.
Sunset + Vine is expected to make an announcement about its bid this
morning. Mr Colin Frewin, chairman, said yesterday: 'We will be putting in a
visionary document which protects racing and takes it through to the year
2000'.
