FT  12 OCT 94 / Markets Report: Troubled rouble sinks to new low in Moscow
A dramatic decline in the Russian rouble was the highlight of a quiet day on
the foreign exchange markets, writes Philip Coggan.
The rouble followed Monday's 6 per cent fall with a startling 21.5 per cent
plunge, which took the unit from Rs3,081 to Rs3,926 to the dollar.
The Russian central bank responded with its first intervention since
September 22, selling Dollars 80m for roubles. Central bank chairman Viktor
Gerashchenko said the three month refinancing rate was being increased from
130 per cent to 170 per cent with effect from today.
The rouble's fall was a talking point in London, rather than a dealing
issue, since the Russian currency is not traded on international foreign
exchanges.
The US dollar moved in a fairly narrow range, helped by a strong performance
from bonds and equities but weakened by indications of Iraqi troop
withdrawals. The dollar closed in London at Y100.325, down slightly from
Y100.63 on Monday.
Against the D-Mark, the dollar also eased to DM1.5466, from Monday's
DM1.5500. The D-Mark gained some strength from expectations that Chancellor
Helmut Kohl would triumph in Sunday's election. Mr Nick Parsons, treasury
economist at CIBC in London, said the dollar had now traded in the
DM1.54-DM1.55 band for 25 consecutive days.
The sudden decline in the rouble took many people by surprise, with
interbank dealers in Moscow stopping trading. One Russian bank was quoting
the rouble at 5,000 to the dollar to discourage sellers.
'Exactly what triggered the fall is unclear' said Mr Jonathan Hoffman,
international economist at CS First Boston. But Mr Hoffman said the rouble
appreciated sharply in real terms during 1993. 'Our judgment on policy is
that the Russian authorities wanted to reverse some - but not all - of this
in order to help exporting industries.'
Since September 22, in Mr Hoffman's view, the authorities have followed a
policy of benign neglect of the exchange rate. Previous announcements that
they would not raise rates to support the rouble may have weakened the
currency but yesterday's U-turn would help the currency, he thought.
Mr Hoffman does not think the rouble will go into a further tailspin and
believes it can stabilise at around Rs5,000/Dollars by the end of the year.
However, Mr Paul Chertkow, head of global currency research at UBS, said 'In
this sort of circumstance, the market is trading on fear and emotion. In the
absence of an improvement in confidence over economic management and
political leadership, there's no level beyond which the rouble can't
depreciate.'
In the crisis atmosphere, a spokeswoman for the central bank was reported as
saying that the peak of speculation against the rouble was past and
speculators risked heavy losses if they made further attacks. 'The situation
is under control and we have enough reserves to control it' she said.
Sterling was generally weaker ahead of today's batch of important economic
data. The pound fell against the dollar to close in London at Dollars 1.5815
from Monday's close of Dollars 1.5852, while against the D-Mark, it weakened
to DM2.4459 from DM2.4569.
Today will see inflation and average earnings numbers, which will be
scrutinised closely for signs that the government will need to increase
interest rates again. Consensus forecasts suggest the figures will show that
inflationary pressures will remain subdued.
However, Mr Parsons of CIBC, warns that history suggests the pound's short
term outlook is not good. 'For the last eight years, sterling has fallen in
the week of the Conservative party conference on all but one occasion' he
says.
Mr Tony Norfield, UK Treasury economist at ABN-AMRO Bank, argues that the
longer term outlook for sterling is encouraging. He believes the big falls
in UK financial markets this year have built in a risk premium to sterling
assets, which should provide some underlying support for the pound.
In the money markets, the Bank of England gave assistance in two batches of
Pounds 126m and Pounds 485m, in response to a Pounds 650m shortage, revised
from an earlier forecast of Pounds 700m. Overnight rates moved within the
range of 6 1/2 to 4 3/4 per cent.
