FT  18 NOV 94 / Pugnacious Newt takes a fresh tack: Bomb-thrower of far
right seeks to become a leader
If as Erich Segal once wrote, 'love means never having to say you're sorry',
then Mr Newt Gingrich has never known true romance. The evidence is that
once or twice over the past week he has been caught apologising for being a
bit too rude to the President and First Lady.
The speaker-presumptive of the US House of Representatives has even
apologised for himself, of whom he was always reckoned to be extraordinarily
fond. He told a prime time television audience: 'The truth is occasionally
I'm not very smart. . . I probably need to be 30 per cent less pugnacious
and 50 per cent less negative.'
Indeed, his first week since the Republican electoral landslide may be seen
as a remarkable voyage of discovery for the nation's capital. The great game
is to ascertain if the bomb-thrower of the far right has been transformed
into a new kind of leader capable of doing business not only with the
Democrat in the White House but with those in his own party less persuaded
by his own ideological convictions.
The new emollient Gingrich has struck a few chords - one even from across
the Pacific. In Jakarta, President Bill Clinton shocked his dwindling
liberal constituency by suggesting that the next speaker might have a point
in wanting the reintroduction of voluntary prayer in state schools,
proscribed by the US Supreme Court in 1962 as a violation of the
constitutional separation of church and state.
Back home, the White House scurried about to clarify that Mr Clinton was not
supporting Mr Gingrich's modus operandi - a constitutional amendment - but
rather saw nothing wrong in time set aside for 'quiet reflection' in
schools. But the president also agreed to sit down to a policy summit with
the new Republican leadership early next month, if not before.
In assigning committee chairmanships in the next Congress, Mr Gingrich also
showed a willingness to forgive and possibly forget. Most conspicuous was
his support of Congressman Gerald Solomon of New York to run the rules
committee. Mr Solomon is certainly conservative enough but once had the
temerity to challenge Mr Gingrich for the position of minority whip, an
offence considered tantamount to lese majeste in the old Gingrich handbook.
He also had no problems with the selection of Congressman Benjamin Gilman,
another New Yorker, to head the foreign affairs committee. He is a leading
party moderate who promises to offer a counterweight to Senator Jesse
Helms's right-wing stewardship of the counterpart Senate panel.
Unlike Mr Helms, who threatened in a letter to Mr Clinton to create all
sorts of trouble on foreign policy if a vote on the Gatt treaty were not
postponed until next year, Mr Gingrich also renewed his promise to work for
approval later this month.
Finally, the next speaker said he would make his House a more humane and
'family friendly' place in which to work. Democratic staffers on Capitol
Hill, facing job losses running into many hundreds, construed this as
meaning they would be spending more time with their families, though his
proposed abolition of three standing committees - on the merchant marine,
the post office and civil service and the District of Columbia - will
certainly cut down on the workload.
On the other hand, in speeches and interviews beyond number, the Gingrich
message was as much one of no compromise as it was of co-operation.
Regardless of what the Republican Senate does next year, the 'Contract with
America' manifesto promising less government, lower taxes and more prisons
will be on the House agenda from the very beginning. It will even be read
out loud at the start of each daily session.
Mr Gingrich described his mandate with these blunt and familiar words:
'There's been an enormous effort in the Washington elite to avoid the
reality that this election was actually about some fairly big ideas. . .
those who argued for counterculture values, bigger government,
redistributionist economics and bureaucracies were on the losing end in
virtually every part of the country.'
An important part of this 'elite' is, of course, what Mr Gingrich has long
seen as a pernicious 'liberal' media, and it has to be reported that the
course of true love between the next speaker and the press is already
running no more smoothly than it has done with the current president.
Of many assaults from the left, Anna Quindlen's in the New York Times was
merely the most pointed in writing of his 'not-like-us ethos (that) makes so
much bigotry possible'. Even the non-doctrinal David Broder of the
Washington Post contrasted his 'arresting, powerful ideas' with 'the demons
he seemingly cannot control'.
Mr Gingrich is thin-skinned enough to have banned from his office reporters
from the Atlanta Journal Constitution, his home-town newspaper, after it ran
a cartoon recalling the circumstances of the break-up of his first marriage.
As Mr Clinton knows only too well, even ancient and personal history is no
longer off-limits for those in power.
Even those long forgotten can still bite back. No sooner had Mr Gingrich
assailed the Clintons as 'counterculture McGoverniks' than ex-Senator George
McGovern himself, the failed presidential candidate of 1972 and more
recently New England hotel-keeper, was back in print professing 'nothing but
disdain towards this unscrupulous demagogue'. This is one love affair never
to be consummated.
