FT  09 JUL 94 / Bundesrat logjam broken for holidays
With almost indecent haste, the German Bundesrat - the upper house of
federal parl-iament - broke through a legislative logjam in record time
yesterday, devouring no fewer than 139 items in four-and-a-half hours, to
ensure that everyone could depart for summer holidays on time, writes
Quentin Peel in Bonn.
The worthy representatives of the 16 federal states who sit in the upper
chamber rushed through their approval of a stack of outstanding bills, with
sweeping consequences for many areas of the German economy, and daily life.
They gave the go-ahead to postal reform, enabling privatisation of Deutsche
Telekom, as well as the postal service; they approved laws on bankruptcy and
on making insider trading illegal; they legalised private employment
agencies; and they approved a sweeping law on waste disposal.
They gave the green light to a bill allowing private enterprise to build
public roads and finance them with toll charges. And they approved
legislation to wind up the Treuhand privatisation agency in east Germany.
On the way they blocked a second attempt to reform the conflicting abortion
laws of east and west, postponed plans for the Transrapid
magnetic-levitation train, and held up a property compensation law for east
Germany - all of which must now go back for further negotiation.
And somewhere in the middle they voted by a large majority to stoke up the
simmering row between Britain and Germany over BSE - mad cow disease - by
approving plans for a ban on imports of beef from Britain.
The extraordinary exercise, with the largest-ever agenda presented to the
Bundesrat in a single day, was caused by the coincidence of the end of the
parliamentary cycle - with a general election in October - the imminent
summer holidays, and the fact that the chamber has blocked a record number
of bills recently.
In the event, the members started sitting one hour early, at 8.30 am, and
finished the entire agenda in time for a one o'clock lunch.
The predictable approval of Deutsche Telekom privatisation clears its last
parliamentary hurdle, with a first tranche of shares to be on sale in 1996.
The unpredictable rejection of the Transrapid plan - to build a 400 km per
hour line from Berlin to Hamburg - means it will go back for negotiation
between the government majority in the Bundestag, the lower house, and the
Social Democrat (SPD) majority in the Bundesrat.
It is that SPD majority in the Bundesrat - where states with SPD-led
governments have 37 votes, against just 31 for Mr Helmut Kohl's Christian
Democrats and their allies - which has allowed the upper house to block so
much legislation, and force compromises from the ruling coalition.
The government has been complaining bitterly that the SPD has blocked its
entire legislative programme, while the SPD insists that negotiation is the
name of the game: both are playing politics with an eye on the October
election.
They still have a chance to get the rest of the laws agreed, however, for
the Bundesrat has two more sittings scheduled in September, one to approve a
handful of constitutional amendments, and the other to take in any other
business.
Only then, they will not be so bothered about having to get away for their
holidays on time.
