FT  25 OCT 94 / UK Company News: East Midlands warms shareholders - Why the
rec announced a special dividend and share consolidation
Only six months ago East Midlands Electricity was in a state of shock. Its
chairman had left, it had written off Pounds 130m of losses, and it was
forced to adopt less ambitious strategies. But yesterday, the
Nottingham-based company was able to regale its 250,000 shareholders with an
early Pounds 186m Christmas present.
There could be no clearer sign of the basic strength of the UK electricity
distribution business now that the uncertainties of the recent price review
are out of the way. But rather than follow other regional electricity
companies and pass surplus cash back to shareholders through a share
buy-back, East Midlands yesterday broke new ground by paying a special
interim dividend.
'This opens up a new front,' said Mr Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at
Hoare Govett.
According to Mr Nigel Rudd, chairman, the dividend is fairer than a buy-back
because it enables small shareholders to benefit through a general
distribution of cash.
In a buy-back, only a limited number of shares are acquired, and these
usually belong to the big institutions who can muscle their way to the front
of the queue.
In East Midlands' case, many of its 250,000 shareholders have small numbers
of shares bought at the time of privatisation. The average holding is 200
shares, which means that the typical investor will receive a cheque for
Pounds 170. Many small shareholders are also employees, who may become more
motivated if they can share directly in the company's fortunes.
The pay-out, however, is only half the equation. East Midlands also
announced yesterday that it was consolidating its shares on a 22-for-25
basis, which will reduce the numbers of shares outstanding by about an
eighth. This is to offset the impact of the 85p dividend on the share price.
Technically, the shares should remain unchanged as a result of the exercise.
However, East Midlands will become more highly geared through the pay-out
because it will treat the Pounds 186m as if it were borrowed money. The
gearing of the balance sheet will rise from about zero to about 20 per cent,
and in the long run, this should enhance the company's earnings by a few
pence per share because the assets are made to work harder.
The consolidation will also benefit East Midlands employees who are saving
up to buy shares in a Sharesave scheme. Although they are not yet owners of
these shares, they have options to buy them at a pre-set price, and the
consolidation will ensure that they share in the upside of yesterday's
proposed transactions.
East Midlands' move also has to be seen in a wider context. If there was a
surprise about yesterday's announcement it was that it came while there is
still uncertainty about the regional electricity companies' plans to sell
off the jointly owned National Grid company, which could be worth up to
Pounds 5bn.
Mr Norman Askew, East Midlands' chief executive, declined to comment on
sell-off plans yesterday, but he said the special dividend indicated that
his company, which owns 8.4 per cent of the Grid, was keen to pass benefits
on to shareholders rather than sit on them or use them for acquisition
purposes.
The regional companies may also be worried that the controversy over soaring
electricity profits and bonuses will trigger some kind of windfall profits
tax in next month's Budget. By acting now, they can cushion any blow. Also,
the less cash they have on their balance sheets, the less attractive they
are as takeover candidates.
