FT  19 JUL 94 / Survey of Japan (6): Thirty percent and rising - Nuclear
power
As the heat and humidity soar in the sweltering Japanese summer, electricity
companies have to shift gear to keep up with demand. Air-conditioners,
refrigerators and juice extractors make life more comfortable for those who
can afford them, but put a huge extra burden on generating capacity.
With energy use climbing steadily and no natural fuel resources of its own,
Japan has long put its faith in nuclear power, a policy reinforced by the
oil crises of the 1970s. More recently, the government and the nuclear
industry have gone to great lengths to win the population over to the idea
of yet more energy from uranium and plutonium.
Already accounting for 30 per cent of electricity generation - the country
has 46 nuclear power plants with seven more on the way - the scale of the
nuclear commitment is set to rise further.
Yet several factors have combined to slow down the nuclear energy drive.
Concern over nuclear proliferation, especially after North Korea's
reluctance to allow international inspection, has focused foreign attention
on Japan's technological prowess in the nuclear field, despite protestations
from Tokyo that it has no intention of using plutonium to make weapons.
Japan's growing environmental consciousness is also playing a role. So is
the fact that uranium, used in the present light water reactors, looks
likely to be in plentiful supply for many years. Thus the government has
just decided to hold back on further development of the fast breeder reactor
(FBR) programme, based on plutonium, and on building a second nuclear fuel
reprocessing plant.
This plant, on which a decision will not now be taken until 2010, would
follow one being built some 700km north-east of Tokyo in an area of lush
fields and low hills near the town of Masawa at a cost of Y1,250bn (Dollars
12.5bn). Chattering school children and attentive adults tour the visitors'
centre at the Rokkasho reprocessing and waste disposal plant near the
Pacific coast.
In the smartly designed centre, the workings of the facility are
demonstrated - from the treatment of spent fuel and the enrichment of
uranium to the storage of radioactive waste. A smiling hostess points to a
display of yellow drums in which low-level waste from power stations will be
buried in concrete; some 3m drums will eventually be stored.
Although the Japanese people broadly accept the case for nuclear energy,
they have reservations. The government says 70 per cent believe in its
necessity but only 40 per cent think it is safe. Also, said a recent report
by a nuclear advisory sub-committee of the Ministry of International Trade
and Industry (Miti), 'the public has a low degree of confidence in
information on nuclear power generation provided by the government and
electric utilities'.
The 7.5m sq m Rokkasho site, partly completed and partly a hive of
round-the-clock construction activity with tall cranes piercing the skyline,
is central to the government's aim of providing security of energy supply
for resource-poor Japan. The enrichment facility, in which the concentration
of heat-generating U-235 is increased, is building up its operations, while
the first huge pit for storing the drums is now in use.
Reprocessing will not start until around 2002, also a slight delay. But
Rokkasho is already a symbol of both the nuclear industry's ambitions and
the concern in and outside Japan over how far it intends to go down the
nuclear road. Despite constant reassurances from Tokyo, suspicions about the
possibility that the country may one day build nuclear weapons persist.
It certainly has the skills to do so. Even the previous prime minister, Mr
Tsutomu Hata, whose minority government collapsed last month, admitted as
much. Yet anyone who has visited the Peace Museum at Hiroshima with its
horrific exhibits from August 1945 when Japan became the only country to
suffer atomic bombing, will understand its reluctance to enter the nuclear
arms race. 'We have to show foreign countries how we are keeping to peaceful
uses of nuclear power,' says Mr Teruaki Masumoto, head of communications at
Tokyo Electric.
The overseas concern, especially in the US, has arisen mainly over Japan's
nuclear fuel cycle policy - with uranium reused after spent fuel is
reprocessed - which would result in the production of plutonium, which could
be used to make nuclear weapons. 'The idea that surplus plutonium could be
used to make a bomb is very controversial,' admits Mr Harushige Takeuchi, a
general manager at Rokkasho. 'Japan has no intention of doing that; the
point is to use the nuclear fuel resources in the most practical and
economic way.' Officials at Miti echo this. But while stressing the absence
of military ambitions, they argue that Japan's nuclear policy is vital to
secure long-term electricity supply in a country which is a voracious
consumer of energy.
Japan used to be heavily dependent on imported oil, which accounted for
around 70 per cent of its needs. Today, this is down to some 30 per cent. At
Tokyo Electric, the share of electricity produced from nuclear power units,
of which it has 15, is set to rise to 43 per cent in 2003 from 37 per cent
last year.
The company appears unworried about the FBR delay. The Y600bn Monju
prototype facility has now begun operations after technical problems. But
commercial use of fast breeders has been postponed by 10 years to 2030, with
the planned demonstration plant (to be built by industry) put off from the
late 1990s to early in the next century.
The slowdown in policy will lessen the supply of plutonium and should thus
abate concern over non-peaceful uses. But Tokyo Electric's Mr Masumoto
thinks the FBR will eventually go ahead. 'No-one knows if a third oil shock
will come. We have to prepare something as insurance.' So while the FBR
programme is on hold, R&amp;D work will carry on at full stretch.
