FT  16 MAR 94 / Government Bonds: German rate hopes spur big gains across
Europe
European government bonds put on another strong performance yesterday,
boosted by hopes of a more rapid easing in German interest rates.
Firmer US Treasuries lent added support, although they underperformed their
European counterparts, Mr Ifty Islam, an economist at Merrill Lynch said.
The yield gap between the higher-yielding US 10-year benchmark and its
German counterpart widened to 39 basis points, from 30 basis points on
Monday and 24 on Friday.
Retail activity remained subdued, with investors awaiting today's allocation
of the Bundesbank's securities repurchase agreements, UK retail sales and
employment numbers, and US consumer price data.
However, some traders reported substantial buying of German, French and
Dutch bonds by US hedge funds.
Hopes for accelerated Bundesbank easing gave German bunds a strong boost,
with 10-year maturities gaining more than a point.
Looking to the Bundesbank's repo allocation, most dealers are calling for a
slightly larger drop in the minimum repo rate than the three-basis-point
declines of the last two weeks.
Most traders are betting on a reduction of between five and seven basis
points, with some calling for a 10-basis point ease.
The market was also abuzz with speculation over Thursday's Bundesbank
council meeting. As it is the last meeting before the central bank's Easter
break, there was some talk that it might announce fixed-rate repos at lower
rates for the following weeks. The next council meeting is scheduled for
April 14.
UK gilts also gained more than a point, boosted by strong bond markets
elsewhere and the latest Confederation of British Industry survey
in-dicating that UK retail sales slowed in February from January. Full sales
data will be released today, along with key employment numbers.
Meanwhile, traders expect the Bank of England to announce its next gilt
auction on Friday. Most are looking for an issue of medium-dated paper,
possibly the 6 per cent gilts due 1999. The June long gilt future rose 1 3/8
point to 113.
Italian bonds put on the strongest performance of the day, helped by the
successful five-year bond auction and short-covering in the futures market.
The June BTP future jumped 1.62 point to 112.17.
However, according to Mr Andre de Souza, market strategist at PaineWebber,
the rally 'was not investor-driven - it was more of a catch-up,' retracing
the losses of the recent global sell-off, when Europe's high-yielders
suffered most.
Japanese bonds weakened in Tokyo, pressured by a lacklustre two-year auction
and worries of further supply. However, they steadied in London trading. The
June JBG future dropped 0.68 point to 110.22 in Tokyo, but slipped only 0.02
point in London.
US Treasuries took some comfort from a keenly-awaited report on producer
prices. However, the positive sentiment was tempered by concern over
stronger-than-expected industrial production in February.
Late in the session, the benchmark 30-year government bond was ahead at 91
29/32 , with the yield slipping to 6.89 per cent. At the short end, the
two-year note was  1/32 better at 99 3/8 , to yield 4.946 per cent.
Despite the gloomy mood of recent weeks, traders were able to look past a
disconcerting headline figure in the Labor Department's producer price
report. The overall index showed a 0.5 per cent increase, a little worse
than analysts had forecast, but most of that gain was attributed to a
weather-related 2.8 per cent jump in energy prices. The core PPI, excluding
energy and food, showed a tame 0.1 per cent rise, against expectations of
0.3 per cent.
Prices across the yield curve improved on the news, but slipped a little
after the government reported that industrial production had climbed 0.4 per
cent last month, twice what the experts predicted.
Nevertheless the market, considered by many analysts to have over-reacted to
the bearish economic fundamentals recently, quickly regained its stride.
Bond prices were close to their session highs late in the day, with added
support from an afternoon purchase of securities by the Federal Reserve. The
move, known as a coupon pass, carried no policy implications.
