FT  17 JAN 94 / Assad vows to seek peace with Israel
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria pledged himself yesterday for the first
time in public to a full normalisation of relations with Israel as part of a
comprehensive Middle East peace settlement.
In a rare appearance in the west after long talks in Geneva with President
Bill Clinton, Mr Assad called for a 'peace of the brave' and said he wished
to see stability and security in the region and normal relations between all
states. Syria had made the 'strategic choice' to seek peace with Israel
after years of confrontation.
Mr Assad's call for normal relations could give a significant boost to
negotiations between Syria and Israel, the most important component of an
eventual comprehensive Middle East peace agreement still to fall into place.
Senior US officials said they were greatly encouraged by the words used by
Mr Assad, particularly on relations with Israel. 'These are words that
Israel has long waited to hear,' said one.
Mr Clinton stressed that the outline accord between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organisation represented an important first step towards peace.
But he and Mr Assad also emphasised that for any deal to be durable it had
to include the other Arab partners to the process.
'Syria is the key to a comprehensive and enduring peace that will finally
put an end to conflict between Israel and her Arab neighbours,' said Mr
Clinton.
He confirmed that the heads of the Syrian, Lebanese and Jordanian
negotiating teams would be in Washington next week to resume contacts with
Israel and discuss a full resumption of the talks broken off last summer.
Syria has insisted that it would be pointless to resume negotiations without
a prior Israeli commitment to withdraw fully from the Golan Heights,
occupied in 1967. Israel has demanded that Syria should state its
willingness to exchange ambassadors and open its borders to trade and
travellers, before it would say from how much of the Golan it would
withdraw.
Mr Clinton said he was encouraged by the Syrian leader's statement and he
hoped for a positive response from Israel. Speaking aboard Air Force One, as
he returned to Washington last night, he said Mr Assad 'has reached the
conclusion that it is in the interests of his people, his administration and
his legacy to make a meaningful and lasting peace. I believe that.' Mr
Clinton added that his trip to Europe had 'met all of our objectives'.
In Jerusalem, Israeli officials were cautiously positive. Mr Yossi Beilin,
deputy foreign minister, said significant words were spoken at the press
conference, mainly by Mr Clinton. Israel was waiting to hear from a US
delegation last night about what was said behind closed doors.
The two presidents agreed to set up a committee under Mr Warren Christopher,
US secretary of state, and Mr Farouk al-Sharaa, the Syrian foreign minister,
to explore bilateral differences between the two countries.
