FT  07 APR 94 / Book Review: Yen for a monster with its own mind
NIHON KAIZO RON
(Blueprint for Building a New Japan)
By Ichiro Ozawa
Kodansha Publishing House Y2,900
(or Dollars 19.95 outside Japan) in
English from April 17; or Y1,500 in
Japanese. 93 pages.
What country is like a giant dinosaur with a tiny brain? That simile was
once used by historian George Kennan to taunt the US, for its inability to
exert its power internationally before the second world war.
Today, it applies to Japan, according to Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the Tokyo
government's backroom strategist. Mr Ozawa's latest book shows Japan as a
passive economic monster of little imagination whose failure to adapt will
turn it into a fossil unless it wakes up fast.
It is no surprise that Mr Ozawa, as prime mover behind Japan's recent the
most radical political changes, argues further reform of the political
system is the first condition for awakening the tiny brain.
Washington's trade hawks, who have been reading this book closely, will no
doubt draw a different conclusion. For those who believe Japan's political
reforms are incomplete and unconvincing, this book could be taken as
evidence that foreign pressure is still needed - in the absence of any more
effective force - to help Japan change its inward-looking ways.
Yet the foreign pressure argument, says Mr Ozawa, is dangerous for both
sides. For change to To be durable, it change must come from within.
But before Japan can find a new form of life, it must first find its own
identity. This, which Mr Ozawa believes, is buried under a concrete sprawl,
in which every big city, playground and park looks the same. Moreover, it is
stifled by a conformist education system, and is denied expression by a
centralised web of regulations.
Japan's identity problem is, results, ironically, a consequence of from the
fact that it is a descendant of the US dinosaur. It owes most of its
economic power to having its post-war security guaranteed by Washington,
rather than, as popularly believed, to its own workers' diligence, argues Mr
Ozawa.
But the end of the cold war undermined 'the very foundation' of Japan's
economic prosperity by removing its value to the US as a bastion against
communism in Asia. To compensate, for this, Japan must now become an
'international nation', taking a full part in world diplomacy, including
United Nations' peacekeeping.
That bit of Mr Ozawa's argument is standard fare from the increasingly
powerful internationalist camp in of Japanese politics, to be found on the
the rightwing of the coalition government. Not surprisingly, He does not air
the alternative view - for a low-profile Japan that seeks a return to
traditional values. That can be found in another newly published book, A
Small but Radiant Nation (in Japanese only) by Mr Masayoshi Takemura, chief
cabinet secretary. Both These two conflicting alternatives books visions are
important because they explain the visions of Japan which lie at the heart
of the present power struggle in the seven-party coalition.
Mr Ozawa's book makes it clear he believes that the stakes in this power
battle struggle are higher than many foreigners might imagine. Japan's
economic future and chances of becoming a 'normal' nation hang directly on
its ability to play a more active part in the world, he writes.
Japan should learn from successful merchant nations of history, such as like
the city state of Carthage and the Venetian Republic. They achieved
long-term prosperity - 1,000 years long in Venice's case - by becoming much
more than merchants, he recalls.
In different ways, Carthage and Venice ploughed resources into ensuring
peace and free trade in their main markets. Japan has only just begun to do
so. Mr Ozawa does not suggest that Japan should adopt develop a the modern
equivalent of a Venetian navy or a Carthaginian mercenary army. But it
should pay the cash, diplomatic and human costs of assuring peace and free
trade - and just as important, of international respect for itself.
To play a more active role in world affairs, Japan must first get to work on
internal institutional reform, starting with the political system. Mr Ozawa
makes practical suggestions to boost the authority of the prime minister and
cabinet, in order to clarifying where decisions are made and to improveing
the quality of policy debate in cabinet and parliament.
He believes a UK-style system, in which the cabinet is at the heart of
government, could solve the Japanese Japan's problem of a government with no
clear centre of authority. This would bolster prime ministerial power, which
on the evidence of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa's recent series of U-turns is even
more fragile in Japan than Britain. Mr Ozawa also has high praise for the
British tradition of having a large number of non-cabinet ministerial jobs.
posts. This trains politicians to take part in making policy-making rather
than, as in Japan, just carrying out bureaucratic instructions.
A more imaginative central government would will enable improve Japan's
ability better to achieve the other tasks needed to become a 'normal
country' - including deregulation, tax reform, decentralisation and improved
town planning, all part of the Hosokawa administration's programme.
Yet Mr Ozawa also sees a sociological explanation of for side to Japan's
dinosaur-like qualities, though he does not discuss it much. As he admits,
the book is supposed to be a workmanlike look at the shortcomings in Japan's
system of government.
Democracy has never really taken root in Japan, partly because of an
inherited collective spirit and an education system designed to stamp out
independent thought. Mr Ozawa believes this system is faulty at both ends -
too rigid at school level and too dull at the university stage.
The book's theme is that Japan's cure must start with the head, which means
creating a more modern government, both on the international and domestic
level. From this will gradually evolve a Japan to be envied, rather than
derided, by foreigners.
Yet tantalisingly, Mr Ozawa says little about what his 'Japanese dream'
would look like.
Perhaps this lacuna is evidence of his own theory that Japan suffers from an
under-exercised imagination.
