FT  28 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Cocoa losing its appeal for
Malaysian growers - Producers are grubbing up trees as hopes of higher
prices fade
Not so long ago cocoa was referred to as 'green gold' by planters in Sabah,
East Malaysia. In 1990 production of cocoa beans in Sabah rose to 145,000
tonnes out of a total Malaysian production of just under 250,000 tonnes.
But now increasing numbers of planters, despairing of a sustained rally in
world cocoa prices, are grubbing up their cocoa trees. Cocoa production in
Sabah fell 9 per cent to 122,000 tonnes last year while total Malaysian
production fell 10 per cent to 200,000 tonnes.
'There was an upswing in prices at the end of last year' says Mr Hashim
Abdul Wahab, head of the Malaysian Cocoa Board. 'But it wasn't enough to
make people stay in cocoa. Once again we are seeing a reduction in areas
planted with cocoa. In 1990 420,000 hectares of land countrywide was given
over to cocoa. Last year it had come down to 375,000 hectares.'
In recent years the structure of Malaysia's economy has been transformed. In
1987 commodities and mining made up 55 per cent of export values. By 1993
manufactured goods accounted for more than 70 per cent of the total value of
exports.
Increasing numbers of people have left the land for the factories in the
towns. Malaysia's GDP has grown by more than 8 per cent in each of the last
six years. Wages have been rising: there are serious labour shortages in
many country areas. But international prices of most Malaysian commodities
have continued to fall.
Most of Malaysia's tin miners have given up the struggle for survival.
Rubber producers are turning increasingly to the more profitable palm oil.
Cocoa growers are following suit.
'It's very tough - especially for those in primary cocoa production,' says
Mr Hashim. 'What we are trying to do now is go into more downstream
activities and absorb more of the cocoa crop ourselves. We also need to
search out new markets like China.'
The Ivory Coast and Brazil have for some time been the world's biggest cocoa
producers, but the big change in production patterns in the last three years
has been a surge in Indonesian cocoa output. Most estimates put Indonesian
production at more than 260,000 tonnes last year.
Indonesia has plentiful supplies of cheap labour. The Jakarta government has
also been offering considerable subsidies to cocoa growers in order to open
up new plantations and encourage resettlement in sparsely populated areas.
Malaysian cocoa growers cannot compete with Indonesian production costs. It
now costs about MDollars 3,000 (Pounds 1,115) a tonne for cocoa produced on
Malaysia's estates - MDollars 2,400 on smallholdings. Costs in Indonesia are
about 25 per cent lower. Though cocoa prices on the Malaysian market have
climbed to MDollars 2,800 per tonne in recent months, many feel cocoa has
had its day in Malaysia.
The Malaysian Cocoa Board is fighting to stop a wholesale abandonment of the
crop. It points out that though Malaysia is a high cost producer, it is none
the less an efficient one. Some estates in Sabah are producing 2,000kg of
cocoa a hectare. In Africa the average is about 500kg per hectare.
Hopes that world cocoa prices will continue to rise, have been partially
revived by the agreement reached recently by producing and consuming
countries on a new five-year world cocoa agreement aimed at bringing supply
and demand into balance.
While cocoa statistics are notoriously unreliable, most analysts agree that
world production has lagged behind consumption in each of the last three
years. But world stocks are still around the 1m-tonne mark and the
international cocoa organisation has meanwhile pledged to liquidate its
buffer stock of 180,000 tonnes by 1998.
'The key is proper monitoring of world production and perhaps most
important, more commitment to encourage wider cocoa consumption,' says Mr
Hashim.
'Malaysia has been open about its production figures. We have also made
great efforts through various campaigns to increase public consumption of
cocoa. We hope other countries take similar measures. If not, we will never
achieve our aim of achieving fair prices.'
