FT  13 JUN 94 / Fall in world CFC output a 'green' victory
Global production of chlorofluorocarbon gases, which scientists say are
responsible for holes in the earth's ozone layer, has plummeted since 1988,
according to a US report.
The fall is the most striking success to date of the worldwide campaign by
environmentalists against the use of CFCs.
The report, Vital Signs 1994, by the Washington-based Worldwatch Institute,
a private think-tank, says CFC production fell 20 per cent last year, and is
60 per cent down from its peak in 1988.
Mr Lester Brown, head of the institute, said: 'We are now headed in the
right direction. If we continue on this phase-out path, eventually the ozone
layer will heal. But that is several decades down the road.'
Concern about the ozone layer dates back to 1974 when two atmospheric
scientists at the University of California warned that CFCs could deplete
the ozone layer which protects the earth from ultraviolet radiation.
Governments began to take the threat seriously when a team led by Mr Joseph
Farman of the British Antarctic Survey reported a recurring hole in the
ozone layer over Antarctica.
Subsequent investigations found a thinning of the ozone in other regions of
the world. In 1987, governments signed the Montreal Protocol, promising to
halve CFC production over the next decade. Later agreements in London in
1990 and Copenhagen in 1992 pledged many industrial countries to phase out
production of CFCs and other ozone-depleting substances. CFC production is
due to stop in industrialised countries by the end of this year.
Vital Signs, an annual exercise in 'taking the planet's pulse', found the
environmental movement making important gains. Use of wind power rose 13 per
cent last year, with most of the growth in northern Europe. Nuclear
generating capacity grew by nearly 3 per cent, but the number of plants
under construction fell and closures increased. Capacity is expected to peak
before the year 2000.
Natural-gas production expanded to record levels and now provides 21 per
cent of the world's primary energy as coal use declined. Sales of compact
fluorescent lamps - efficient substitutes for incandescent bulbs - have
quadrupled over the last five years.
Carbon emissions - believed to produce global warming - fell slightly, but
that was attributed to recession in the industrialised countries and the
economic contraction in the former Soviet Union. Emissions are soaring in
Asia.
As is usual, there is bad news aplenty. The 1993 grain harvest dropped by
nearly 5 per cent, the report says, one of the largest declines on record.
Some 70 per cent of the world's 6,600 bird species are declining; 1,000 are
in danger of extinction.
Vital Signs 1994, Worldwatch Institute, 1776 Massachusetts Avenue NW,
Washington DC 20036, US. Tel (202) 452 1999, fax 296 7365. Dollars 89.
