FT  30 MAY 94 / Through gas and high water: The regulators of the UK's
privatised utilities are feeling besieged. John Willman explains why
Last week was one that Ms Clare Spottiswoode, the UK gas regulator with a
disarming giggle, will be anxious to put behind her. From a position of
relative obscurity, she found herself splashed across Britain's tabloid
newspapers as 'the laughing gas regulator'.
This unwelcome exposure was sparked off by spurious allegations - denied
with great seriousness - of an improper relationship with a civil servant
involved in her appointment. But the addition of Ms Spottiswoode to the cast
of regulars in the tabloid soap opera reflects more than the traditional
British obsession with hanky-panky, real or imagined, in public life.
The UK's utility regulators are finding themselves increasingly in the
limelight as they revolutionise the industries they regulate. They are also
attracting growing attention from the politicians as it becomes clear that
their decisions have far-reaching consequences for society.
Yet the UK's utility regulators were created to take complex pricing and
competition judgments away from the meddling of MPs. 'Politicians made such
a hash of running the nationalised industries,' says Sir Christopher Foster,
adviser to the government on privatisation and author of a book on
regulation. 'Detaching them from the day-to-day interference of politicians
has been an incontrovertible good.'
Until recently, the consensus was that the regulators had made a good fist
of their jobs, especially in the two utilities - telecommunications and gas
 -that were privatised first.
In telecoms, prices have fallen by more than 30 per cent in real terms since
1984. BT, the privatised company that formerly enjoyed a monopoly in
telephony, now faces more than 40 competitors in different sectors of its
market.
If there is disquiet, it is among companies in the industry rather than
consumers. BT has complained of over-regulation: Mr Don Cruickshank, the
regulator, is now tackling the smaller obstacles faced by new entrants to
the market, such as access to directory inquiries. Mercury, the second
largest operator, has taken Mr Cruickshank to court over his approach to
regulating the charges BT makes for carrying other operators' calls.
Gas prices have also fallen in real terms, by more than 20 per cent since
the privatisation of British Gas in 1986. The next stage of regulation,
opening up the industry to competition, is proving more controversial,
however. One consequence of liberalisation could be differential pricing, if
charges rose for customers furthest from the North Sea gas fields.
Before last week's events, Ms Spottiswoode had incurred the wrath of
opposition MPs for appearing with Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, at the
launch of the consultative paper on gas competition. 'She has adopted a
Thatcherite interpretation of competition that will lead to higher prices
for consumers furthest from the points where gas comes ashore,' says Mr
Peter Hain, the left-wing Labour MP, who advocates far-reaching changes to
the regulatory system.
In the water industry, prices have risen above the rate of inflation to
finance modernisation and clean up water and beaches. There is also less
scope to introduce competition to keep prices down.
In the south-west of England, Conservative candidates are already blaming
water price increases 50 per cent above the national average for their
expected poor showing in next month's European elections.
Experiments in water metering, encouraged by the regulator to curb demand in
areas of the country where supplies are under strain, have also proved
controversial. The burden of metered charges falls more heavily on families,
pensioners and low-income households.
'It's illusory to believe that politics can be removed from the utilities,'
says Mr Dieter Helm of Oxford Economic Research Associates. 'They are
central to the performance of the economy as a whole, there is a strong
monopoly element and they have a large impact on living standards.'
The impact of utility regulation on the economy can be seen in the
electricity industry. Prof Stephen Littlechild, the regulator, refused to
halt the expansion of gas-fired power stations, a development largely
responsible for the sharp fall in demand for coal that has led to widespread
pit closures. The decision is described by Mr Hain as 'an effective veto on
coal'.
'The idea that regulation is a value-free, technical exercise is nonsense,'
he adds. 'Regulators may hide behind the mantle of competition, but they are
right in the thick of political controversy.'
The view that regulation is too important to be left to the regulators is
increasingly heard in the City. Investors are concerned that the water and
electricity regulators, who are conducting reviews, will crack down on price
rises.
In April, Mr John Baker, chief executive of National Power, the privatised
electricity generator, called for curbs on regulators' power. Barclays de
Zoete Wedd Investment Management and Prudential, the UK's largest
institutional investor, have urged water companies to appeal to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission rather than accept much tougher price
limits.
One cause of concern is regulators' different approaches.
'The regulation of the water and electricity industries reflects the
personalities of their regulators,' says Mr Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst
at Hoare Govett.
'Mr Ian Byatt (Ofwat regulator) is in favour of intensive regulation. He
demands lots of information from the water companies and has assembled a
massive database. Prof Littlechild takes a free-market approach (to the
electricity industry) and believes in profit. He wants regulation to be
light-handed and therefore asks for relatively little information from the
companies.'
There is also concern that regulators feel they must act tough. 'Mr Byatt's
review of the price caps for water companies will inevitably be judged by
ill-informed commentators on the number of companies that squeal,' says Mr
Robert Miller-Bakewell, water analyst at County NatWest. 'If none of them
appeal to the MMC, he'll be seen as a wimp.'
These differences in approach are an inevitable consequence of the way the
UK's regulatory system hands power to one individual, according to Mr Helm.
'If you give individuals great power, it will become intensely personalised.
Just look at how different the approach of Clare Spottiswoode is compared
with her predecessor, Sir James McKinnon. Yet both were appointed under the
same legislation.
'A future Labour government could appoint someone completely different who
could overturn the system without further legislation.'
Such concerns have led to similar prescriptions from different quarters.
National Power's Mr Baker, for example, has called for a common organisation
of regulators, to raise the quality of support staff and transfer experience
between industries. Labour's Mr Hain makes a similar proposal.
Both also support the idea of defining more precisely the role of the
regulator and the establishment of strategic plans for their industries.
Both want the regulatory process to be more open to scrutiny.
The only comfort for the regulators is that no one appears to want to return
to the bad old days of Whitehall administration of the utilities. It is
perhaps a compliment to their success that even the more radical voices in
the Labour party would preserve the system of independent regulation, albeit
with greater accountability to Parliament.
