FT  27 JUL 94 / Survey of Tunisia (9): Chance for local talent -
Construction
Modern Tunisia is not a land of grand architectural statements. North
Africa's smallest country lacks a grandiose mosque, such as the one just
completed in Casablanca, or a massive monument, like that to the martyrs of
the revolution which dominates Algiers. Indeed, the capital has no striking
modern buildings, a state of affairs certain Tunisians regret as they know
their country boasts some fine architects such as the Ben Miled brothers.
Yet any visitor to Tunis and the major cities cannot help but be struck by
the number of construction sites and the quality of buildings as diverse as
hotels, hospitals, schools and private housing. Nor are these modern
buildings confined to big cities and the heavily populated coastline. Small
provincial towns are developing fast; for example Gafsa, whose buildings are
very much in keeping with its traditional and distinct style of
architecture.
Three in four Tunisian households live in homes they already own or are in
the process of buying. The choice of housing to suit every purse is
considerable and over the years the state has pursued an active policy of
helping poorer families get a roof over their heads, with running water and
decent sanitation.
Achieving this aim would not have been possible had not the construction and
civil engineering sectors been so efficient. One of the reasons for this is
the relatively low cost of building which, in turn, results from the fact
that most of the work is carried out by Tunisian firms whose workers and
engineers are indigenous.
An estimated 1,500 com- panies employ about 250,000 people, thus putting the
construction and civil engine- ering sector ahead of all others, except
farming, in the number of people it employs. Many companies are very small
but others, such as the Eltaief group, employ up to 4,000 people. The
diversity and competition which characterise this sector have in recent
years allowed Tunisian civil engineering companies to win contracts in many
African countries, often in partnership with French and British
counterparts.
This success story can be traced to the days before independence. First of
all, more Tunisians gained access to the French 'grandes ecoles' such as
Polytechnique Centrale and Ponts et Chaussees than any other foreign group,
a state of affairs which continues to this very day.
Secondly, and in sharp contrast to neighbouring Algeria, a number of small
Tunisian-owned and run building companies were operating as early as after
the second world war. Some building companies, such as the Eltaief and
M'Henni companies, which were started by small builders in the Sahel region
of the country, today rank among the biggest in Tunisia.
The new state encouraged very early on competition among these emerging
companies. Public tenders became the norm and even those enterprises which
were state- owned or joint ventures between the state and private
entrepreneurs were run as private companies.
The liberation of the economy after the socialist experiment of the 1960s
gave a big boost to building as did the policies aimed at developing the
tourist sector, public health and education. Hospitals are to be found in
every region of Tunisia and the rate of literacy is one of the highest in
the Arab and African world.
Gambling on growing local talent has paid off handsomely. Today Tunisian
entrepreneurs and civil engineers account for 90 per cent of all building
and public works undertaken in the country.
Housing is entirely carried out by Tunisian companies, as are new roads and
the new motorway from Tunis to Hammamet which has recently been extended to
M'Saken and will soon reach the country's industrial powerhouse, the city of
Sfax. The same goes for ports, once a preserve of French companies such as
Dumez and Grands Travaux de l'Est. Foreign companies do get involved
sometimes as Dragados y Constructiones did with the new port in Zarzis
because the project was entirely financed by a Spanish state-subsidised
credit.
Another area where Tunisian companies are making great strides is in the
building of dams and airports. All small dams are built by local companies
but bigger projects such as the dam on Ouled R'Mel are being constructed by
Bredero, a joint venture between the Dutch Bredero and a Tunisian bank,
Societe Tunisienne de Banque. Many of these major public works projects have
been partly financed by loans from the World Bank, other regional
development banks or Arab funds. The proceeds of these loans have thus
benefited indigenous companies far more than has been the case in
neighbouring countries where the tight control maintained by the state over
the economy has not allowed the development of an indigenous class of
sophisticated civil engineers and construction companies.
Another notable development in recent years has been the growing number of
building contractors such as Studi and SET which have gained valuable work
in Africa. This has reinforced the emerging service sector, one where
Tunisia's position on the map, growing quality of communications with the
outside world and more educated population are proving to be key factors.
Tunisia will soon get its own Polytechnique school modelled on its Paris
counterpart, thanks to a FFr200m gift from France. There will no shortage of
skilled teachers but ironically a French company will be associated in the
building of the school, even though Tunisian companies could do it all
themselves. But French participation is a condition laid down by Paris.
It is an exception which confirms the rule that, by and large today, most of
the building requirements for the country's growing economy can be met by
local talent and companies.
