FT  03 DEC 94 / Outdoors: The bear necessities - FT Ski Expedition
Arnie Wilson and Lucy Dicker are trying to ski every day of 1994 on a
round-the-world trip. They are now in Aspen, Colorado on the last leg of
their odyssey.
Could a careless streak have crept into the FT's ski expedition as we reach
the home straight? For the first time in 327 consecutive skiing days, I
forgot my battered ski boots. Then I lost my lift ticket.
But no matter - we were in Beaver Creek, Colorado's answer to Deer Valley,
Utah, where skiers are cosseted like royalty.
New boots were swiftly upon my feet and a replacement lift ticket was
ordered by radio from our chair, shared with Mike Beckley, the Mountain
Manager, a thoroughly decent chap with a British mother.
Beckley is about 6ft 4ins and approaching 50, but skis more like an antelope
than an ox. Being with the Mountain Manager was useful - he plunged under a
rope and led us down Rip Saw, a wonderfully steep run with a foot or so of
fresh powder. We helped ourselves to fresh tracks three times before he
finally let hoi polloi share the run with us.
Beaver Creek, Vail's sister resort, is soon to be part of 'Operation
Interconnect', an attempt to create European-style linked resorts. The idea
is to link it with Arrowhead and Bachelor Gulch, where new villages are
planned.
Unfortunately, this may mean moving one of Colorado's most exclusive and
up-market hostelries, Trappers' Cabin.
Trappers' is an epicureans' hideaway in the boondocks, where staff prepare a
sumptuous meal and then leave you to spend the night on the mountain without
the intrusion of telephone or television.
One of the joys of waking up at Trappers' is to put on snow-shoes before
breakfast (which is served by the staff, now happily returned) and tramp
around in the wilderness. Attempting to do so with a high-speed 'Interbahn'
quad chair roaring up towards you from Bachelor Gulch would simply not be
the same. 'Nimbys' (not in my back yarders) who purchased property at
Arrowhead when it was still known as Vail's private address, may still have
the last word, but we are making plans to spend a night at Trappers' just in
case it is moved to who knows where.
The only alternative is lunch at the yurt (a tent-style construction) at
Arrowhead. But this might have to be shared with the local wildlife. They
are still repairing the damage caused by a bear which last summer ripped its
way through the side of the club-house and tore open the fridge to help
itself to the contents.
