FT  08 DEC 94 / Survey of Vietnam (4): Big money yet to be seen - Lack of
infrastructure is constraining tourism
In the early 1970s Bui Xuan Nhat was a key figure in the Paris negotiations
aimed at ending the war in Vietnam and putting a stop to US involvement in
the country. Twenty years on, Mr Nhat, a former diplomat, now deputy
chairman of Vietnam's tourist authority, is trying to woo Americans back to
explore the beauties of his country and revisit old battlefields.
'We think the US is a very big market for our tourism industry,' says Mr
Nhat. 'Hundreds of thousands of American troops were here. Many of them want
to come back and see where they fought.'
Already there are special tours for American war veterans, with visits
organised to battle sites such as Khe Sanh and along the Ho Chi Minh trail.
Vets can see some of the mountain of US weaponry left behind when Vietnamese
forces finally took control of Ho Chi Minh City in 1975. They can even buy
back some of their old kit from souvenir shops at the city's war crimes
museum.
But the US tourist assault on Vietnam has yet to take place. The French, in
the country long before the Americans, are back in large numbers. Vietnam
has become the latest vogue tourist spot for many other Europeans. Numbers
are rising fast: according to official statistics Vietnam had 250,000
tourists in 1990. This rose to more than 650,000 in 1993 and forecasts for
this year predict at least 900,000 visitors.
'We aim to have more than three million tourists by the end of the century,'
says Mr Nhat. 'Tourism will make a big contribution to our foreign exchange
earnings. There are some problems in the industry but we are confident they
can be overcome.'
Some might feel Mr Nhat is being overly optimistic. For the moment, Vietnam
is an excellent destination for the more adventurous type of traveller. But
the real tourist revenues come from big tour packages, not from small groups
of intrepid explorers.
Vietnam's chronic lack of infrastructure - from paved roads to power and
drinkable water - is a serious constraint on any large scale development of
the tourism sector. Tourist facilities outside the main cities are virtually
non-existent.
There is already a serious shortage of hotel accommodation in both Ho Chi
Minh City and Hanoi. People are hungry for jobs. But the country lacks a
pool of trained hotel staff. Hotel operators have to build up their
businesses from scratch.
A standard room in Hanoi's leading hotel costs nearly Dollars 200 per night.
Top class hotels in other parts of Asia offer both better rates and service.
Officials say that Vietnam now has a total of 32,000 hotel rooms, with only
half of them considered fit for foreign tourists. New hotels are being
built. A US group has plans for a Dollars 240m tourist complex on the coast
near Danang in central Vietnam. Foreign investors, led by Singaporeans and
Malaysians, are queueing up to build hotels in Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi.
Progress on these projects is slow. More than 100 foreign-funded tourist
projects involving investments of more than Dollars 1bn have been registered
with the authorities but few have progressed from the paperwork stage.
As in many sectors of Vietnam's economic planning, developers have found
that official central government policy is often at variance with the views
of politically powerful local Peoples Committees. Establishing land titles,
moving people from development areas plus settling compensation claims have
proved serious obstacles for tourism-related projects.
Mr Nhat is aware of the bureaucratic hold-ups in the system. But there is
also the danger that by allowing a haphazard, unregulated approach to
tourism, Vietnam might risk destroying the very things visitors want to see.
One of the attractions of Hanoi is its old style French colonial
architecture and its tree lined boulevards. Many of the old villas are
crumbling and in dire need of repair. But unregulated property development,
including a mushrooming of small, often ugly, hotels with modern facades, is
already threatening to spoil the look of parts of Vietnam's capital.
Mr Nhat says that he does not want to see Vietnam developing the same sort
of tourist industry as that of Thailand. Yet signs are already emerging that
Ho Chi Minh City is reverting to its old ways with a recent proliferation of
massage parlours and risque bars.
Vietnam might not be able to keep the bulk of its tourist earnings within
the country. Every sector of the economy lacks capital. Foreign tour
operators, having invested funds in order to set up various facilities in
Vietnam, could insist that they retain a sizeable slice of the revenues.
'We have no choice,' says Mr Nhat. 'We have to seek partnerships with
foreign companies, not only to use their capital resources but also to learn
the industry from them. We are just starting. I hope we can learn from the
experience and mistakes of others.'
 -----------------------------------------------------
        HOTEL DEVELOPMENT: PROPOSED NEW ROOMS
 -----------------------------------------------------
Destination                       By 2000
 -----------------------------------------------------
Ho Chi Minh City                   10,000
Hanoi                               6,771
Vung Tau                              728
Haiphong                               90
Danang                              2,478
Dalat                                 182
Phan Rang                             117
Hue                                   250
Nha Trang                           1,328
Total                              21,944
 -----------------------------------------------------
Source: BDO Hospitality Consulting
 -----------------------------------------------------
