FT  12 JAN 94 / Leading Article: Chunnel pricing
Investors have not done too well so far out of Eurotunnel. Now it looks like
passengers are not going to get a particularly good deal either. That, at
any rate, is the impression given by the prices Eurotunnel proposes to
charge for its car passenger service.
The pricing schedule, announced yesterday, ranges from Pounds 220 for a
return journey in winter to Pounds 310 in the peak summer months. Not only
are the prices higher than expected. They are also slightly higher than
those charged by Stena Sealink and P&amp;O European Ferries, the two ferry
groups which dominate the cross-Channel market.
Moreover, there is every sign that neither Eurotunnel nor the ferry
companies want to engage in a price war. At every opportunity, they stress
the point. P&amp;O yesterday even took the step of commending Eurotunnel's fares
as 'positive and realistic'. What we are witnessing are the latest moves in
a complex oligopoly game. Eurotunnel is anxious to avoid a price war because
its gigantic debts mean it has to find Pounds 600m in annual interest
payments alone. Equally, the ferry companies are concerned that an erosion
of margins would force them out of the market.
But passengers should not lose heart. Just because the main players say they
do not want a price war does not mean that they can necessarily stop one.
Oligopoly games are hard to control.
In the short run, Eurotunnel has every incentive to use the ferry companies'
prices as a benchmark for its own services. This is because for several
months the group will not be able to run at full capacity due to a shortage
of rolling stock. So there is little point in cutting fares to a point where
it is unable to satisfy demand.
In the longer run, it could be in Eurotunnel's interests to reduce prices.
Only by running the tunnel at near to full capacity will it be able to make
a sufficient return to satisfy investors. But that will probably require an
expansion of the market, not merely taking market share from the ferry
companies, and in turn will mean that fares will probably have to fall.
Moreover, passengers can take comfort from the fact that some benefits have
already come through in anticipation of Eurotunnel's opening. Ferry
companies have upgraded their services and marketed a wide range of special
offers involving deep discounts off their standard tariffs. Customers will
also gain from the fact that Eurotunnel's service is faster and more
reliable than the ferry companies'.
This does not mean that competition concerns can be dismissed. Eurotunnel
and the ferry groups may be able to avoid a price war, especially if P&amp;O and
Sealink were allowed by the competition authorities to combine some of their
operations - a move which would be at best premature. But this is a case
which calls for continued vigilance rather than immediate action.
