FT  26 SEP 94 / Media Futures: France launches faster version of minitel
The minitel, France's teletext system, is getting faster as it gets older.
Tomorrow, France Telecom will unveil its minitel Vitesse Rapide, a system
which is eight times quicker than the 6.5m terminals already installed in
the country's households and businesses.
For the French state-owned telecoms operator it is an important step. 'We
regard it as one of the first moves towards multimedia and an information
superhighway,' says one official at the group.
The new terminals, which will cost less than FFr100 (Dollars 19) per month
to rent, will allow a significant increase in the capabilities of the
minitel network. For the first time, for example, service providers will be
able to send photographs to potential customers.
'If you are looking to buy a car or a house then you can have a photograph
sent immediately,' says a spokesman for France Telecom. Existing services
available on minitel will also be cheaper. By raising the system's speed
from 1,200 bytes per second to 9,600, the time needed for connection will be
sharply reduced.
Initially, the new service is expected to be aimed at business customers. In
time, it should find its place in French households as consumers demand a
broader range of multimedia services.
'There has been a long wait for a faster system,' says one analyst in Paris.
'There should be quite strong interest from corporate clients. But the rate
of penetration will depend on the quality of the system, particularly the
images and the number of new services it attracts.'
The high-speed minitel is not the only element in France Telecom's push
towards multimedia services. Earlier this year the company established a new
multimedia subsidiary, which has subsequently launched a range of services,
including a pay-per-view movie channel. An electronics games channel and an
home shopping channel have also been developed by the new subsidiary.
For minitel, the upgrade represents a new source of growth after 15 years of
service. There are now more than 23,000 services available on the minitel
system, from the basic telephone directory service to reservation facilities
for trains and airlines. But it faces increased competition with
communications and information networks, such as Internet, which operate on
personal computers.
