FT  14 JUL 94 / MEPs show little support for Santer: The FT polled Euro-MPs
on their preference for Commission president
The Maastricht treaty sought to strengthen the European parliament's
standing by giving the Strasbourg assembly the right to be consulted on the
choice of Commission president.
Judging by an FT opinion survey carried out by telephone with 150 of the 567
MEPs elected on June 9 and June 12, the innovation could misfire.
Mr Jacques Delors, the present European Commission president, and Mr
Giuliano Amato, the former Italian prime minister, top the list of favoured
candidates.
Mr Jacques Santer, the Luxembourg prime minister who is favourite to be
chosen by the special summit in Brussels tomorrow, comes well down the poll.
When the newly elected deputies meet next week to ponder the new president,
there is likely to be no more than an unenthusiastic endorsement of Mr
Santer.
Mrs Pauline Green, the British Labour Euro-MP who leads the dominant
Socialist group at Strasbourg, said yesterday: 'We want somebody of the
right stature and ability to deal with world leaders.'
She warned that, under the Maastricht treaty 'we have a constitutional right
to veto and we're prepared to use it'. She also suggested that 'if the
(European) Council can't decide' on a successor to Mr Delors 'then maybe we
should nominate someone.'
The FT's opinion poll, carried out between July 8 and 13, gives only an
incomplete guide to MEPs' sentiment. Nonetheless, the sample of 26 per cent
of MEPs, spread throughout the European Union and including a representative
selection of all the Strasbourg political groupings, has produced the first
insight into the assembly's views.
MEPs from the following countries gave firm responses to FT researchers
conducting the poll: Germany (22), UK (33), France (15), Italy (20), Spain
(5), Belgium (9), Ireland (8), Netherlands (18), Portugal (12), Denmark (4),
Greece (4). None of the six MEPs from Luxembourg could be contacted.
A total of 177 MEPs were contacted by telephone and asked to take part in
the poll, with 27 declining. The MEPs were asked to list in order of
preference their three favoured candidates. Mr Delors was given 35 first
places, seven second places and eight third places. Mr Amato gained 23 first
places, 15 second places and six third places.
Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the Belgian prime minister, who was the leading
candidate until opposed at the Corfu summit, gained 15 first places, 14
second and 14 third.
By contrast, Mr Santer was given first place by only six MEPs, with one
putting him in second place and five in third.
Mr Helmut Kohl, the German Chancellor and current president of the European
Council, is likely to be told of MEPs' hesitancy about Mr Santer on Friday.
At Mrs Green's insistence, he will then meet the leaders of the main
political groups in the parliament to sound them out before joining heads of
government at the Brussels summit.
Whoever emerges as the European Council's nominee from tomorrow's summit
will be expected to appear before the Socialist group in Strasbourg next
Tuesday, and then the parliament's full plenary session on Wednesday.
On Thursday, MEPs intend to vote on the candidate. Although Maastricht
entitles them only to approve or reject the Commission as a whole, if the
vote were negative or even close it could badly damage the credibility of
the choice.
The parliament insists all members of the Commission be named by the end of
October, and intends to hold individual, US Senate-style confirmation
hearings of the member states' nominees before voting on the whole
Commission in December. There is no provision in Maastricht for these but
the assembly says it will not put ratification of the Brussels team on the
agenda unless they are held.
Readers requiring more information on the FT poll should contact Neil
McDonald, FT Research Unit, 071-873-3385.
