FT  16 DEC 94 / Technology: Hot synthetics - Clothes manufacturers are
warming to man-made fibres
The last decade has seen a revolution in cold-weather apparel, and winter
sports enthusiasts face an enticing but confusing array of synthetic
fabrics.
Choosing a wardrobe for cold-weather sports used to be straightforward.
Skiers, skaters, ice fishermen and ice climbers would pack silk or cotton
long-johns, wool sweaters and down jackets. The main concern was choice of
colour.
These days stores stock clothes made of materials with enigmatic names such
as Thermax, Polartec, Thinsulate and Akwatek. Most of the high-technology
fabrics are derived from polyester, a material formerly associated mainly
with cheap suits. Many consumers have a hard time believing in the new
high-performance polyesters.
'If you had told me five years ago that polyester would be the
state-of-the-art fabric for cold-weather clothes, I would have laughed,'
says James Riley, vice-president of design for Reebok, the sportswear
company, which has recently branched out into cold-weather apparel. 'But the
yarn has become so fine and the level of knitting so advanced that it has
become an incredibly flexible material.'
Polyester is manipulated in various ways to improve insulation. 'A main
focus in the industry has been keeping moisture away from the skin,' says
Catherine Salfino, market editor for DNR, a leading publication of the US
textile sector.
Long underwear is probably the weakest element in the traditional
cold-weather ensemble. Silk and cotton both absorb moisture easily and
although silk retains some of its insulating power when wet, damp cotton
loses nearly all its warming capability.
Early experiments with synthetic long-johns in the 1970s, however, were not
successful. Cold-weather retailers such as Patagonia used the plastic
polymer polypropylene in early high-technology models. The new material's
hydrophobic property kept users dry, but customers complained that their
plastic-derived long-johns melted in the clothes dryer. The fabric also had
an uncanny ability to retain odours.
Synthetic long-johns have come a long way since then. Patagonia now offers a
chemically-altered polyester called Capilene, which has gone through
anti-microbial treatment to help the fabric reject odour.
DuPont has also come up with some important new materials. ThermaStat and
Thermax are light-weight polyester materials that aim to trap air next to
the body while funnelling moisture to the outer layer, where it evaporates.
'These fabrics have a hollow chamber which helps them trap the warm air
close to the body,' says Arun Aneja, research associate with DuPont, 'and
air is a good insulator.'
Aneja says scientists got the idea for the material by studying polar bear
fur. 'Each strand of polar bear fur is hollow, and that gives the bear
incredible insulation.'
Reebok challenges the idea that moisture should be drawn away from the skin
in cold weather. The company is negotiating to make use of a new fabric,
Akwatek, developed by Comfort Technology. Akwatek is a polyester that has
undergone a chemical bath, and Reebok claims the material is equally
effective in cold weather or warm.
'In warm weather, Akwatek draws moisture away from the skin to the outer
layer, where it evaporates,' says Riley. 'But in cold weather, the warm
moisture stays next to the skin.'
Long-john technology may be impressive, but the textile industry hit the
jackpot with polar fleece. Malden Mills was one of the early innovators of
this material, which is now as ubiquitous on US streets as wool sweaters.
Polar fleece is popular because it is lightweight, rejects moisture and
dries quickly. Fleece, which entwines thousands of strands of microfiber
polyester, also feels soft and furry.
In outerwear, scientists still face a formidable competitor in down. 'It is
hard to beat down in terms of warmth-to-weight ratios,' admits Elizabeth
Volkers, brand-manager for the insulation material Thinsulate at 3M. But
once down is wet it offers almost no protection. It is also expensive and
bulky. 'Down jackets give people that Michelin man look,' Volkers says.
Insulating material for outerwear uses the hollow chamber concept.
High-technology fillers are honeycombs of fabric that trap warm air near the
body - one of the main challenges for scientists is to fit the highest
number of chambers in the smallest space. Thinsulate by 3M has emerged as
one of the most popular insulating materials, particularly for cold-weather
gloves and ski pants. Sports enthusiasts are still drawn to down jackets for
their lightweight comfort.
In terms of pure insulation power, fur is also difficult to beat. However,
the material's disadvantages are numerous: it is expensive, heavy and
controversial.
Over the next few years, several new technologies are expected in the
cold-weather apparel market. One of the latest is recycled fibres, which
manufacturers hope will prove popular with environment-conscious consumers.
3M plans to introduce recycled Thinsulate next year and recycled fleece is
already available.
Scientists have set their sights on developing bizarre-sounding miracle
fabrics. 'Technology today is based on passive fabrics, which work by
trapping heat generated by the body,' says Aneja. 'We are working on fabrics
that would harness energy from outside the body, such as visible light and
wind. We are trying to modify the polymer from which the yarn is made so
that it absorbs this energy.'
Aneja is also researching materials that adjust to temperature needs. 'We
would like to have a material that warms you when you are cold, cools you
when you are hot.' The most promising polymers in this area are elastic,
engineered proteins, which adjust to temperatures by creating a
temperature-sensitive biosystem.
Cold-weather clothing has already undergone a significant overhaul in recent
years and more technological change is on the way. The day may soon arrive
when ski holiday suitcases contain wind energy-harnessing jackets and
protein long-johns.
