FT  10 MAY 94 / Survey of Kenya (18): A fresh start after the storm -
Conservation is about people as well as wildlife
To many observers, Richard Leakey's stormy departure from the Kenya Wildlife
Service revealed the sinister side of Kenyan politics.
His success in saving Kenya's wildlife from the clutches of ivory poachers,
and his fund-raising efforts abroad, put Leakey on a collision course with
those in government who envied his independence and coveted the aid dollars
flowing into KWS conservation projects.
Before Mr Leakey's appointment in 1989, Kenya's wildlife was being decimated
by gangs of armed brigands who roamed the country with impunity.
Three-quarters of the elephant population and almost the entire rhino herd
had been slaughtered. Attacks on tourists were on the rise.
Mr Leakey began the new regime at KWS by sacking 1,640 staff suspected of
corruption. He re-introduced a shoot-to-kill policy against game poachers,
and campaigned for an international ban on the ivory trade. He believed
Kenya's wildlife, which underpins a Dollars 350m-a-year tourist industry,
could be managed in a profitable and sustainable manner. Donors, including
the World Bank and Britain's Overseas Development Agency, backed his plans
by pledging Dollars 300m for KWS projects over 10 years.
To foreign donors, Mr Leakey represented the new face of public service. He
was a man who had taken over a corrupt and dispirited government department
and transformed it into a dynamic parastatal, with the freedom to cut
through red tape and resist political meddling.
Suddenly, in January, he came under attack for arrogance, racism and
corruption. He was told he faced a secret government probe into the workings
of KWS. Neither President Moi nor the KWS board of trustees rallied to his
defence as senior government figures, led by William ole Ntimama, the
minister for local government, called for his resignation.
Mr Leakey believes the smear campaign was orchestrated by 'land-grabbing'
politicians, whom the KWS had frustrated in their attempts to appropriate
vast chunks of Kenya's wildlife sanctuaries to develop hotel resorts or
mining concessions.
He left the director's post in January, was recalled by the president in
March, and resigned again barely two weeks later, saying the government had
placed impossible restrictions on his job.
Mr Leakey's acrymonious departure dismayed conservationists in Kenya and
abroad. It also raised alarm bells in the donor community, who began to fear
their conservation grants might fall prey to political predators.
The government appears to have acknowledged their concern, for instead of
naming a politician to head KWS, it appointed another white Kenyan with
solid credentials in the field of conservation.
David Western has a tough act to follow.
He must persuade the donor community that their conservation funds are in
safe hands. He must avoid charges of empire-building while being in control
of an area the size of Northern Ireland. And he must maintain the trust of
government to be allowed to command an irregular army of game wardens,
reconnaissance vehicles and surveillance aircraft.
He is also aware of the political machinations which hounded his predecessor
from office, and says land-grabbing politicians will have no better luck
with him.
Significantly, Mr Western obtained the reversal of two presidential
directives which caused Mr Leakey to resign: the armed Wildlife Protection
Unit will no longer be placed under the authority of the commissioner of
police; and KWS will regain its financial autonomy from the Tourism and
Wildlife Ministry.
Mr Western, however, believes that, under Mr Leakey's stewardship, KWS had
laid itself open to charges that it was more concerned about animals than
people.
An acute shortage of arable and grazing land, coupled with Kenya's rapid
population growth, have brought communities to the borders of wildlife
sanctuaries. Elephants trample crops. People are maimed, sometimes killed,
by predators. A ban on culling means that wild animals and farming
communities live in increasingly uneasy coexistence.
'There was a lack of sensitivity to how critical the issue had become,' Mr
Western says. He intends to redress the issue by focusing on the 'people
side' of conservation.
He wants to promote landowners' associations, and encourage them to present
their proposals for community-based conservation projects. He believes
certain policies, such as the introduction of culling or hunting licenses,
might be less controversial if they came from local communities.
But the bottom line is money. Local communities, and local politicians in
particular, feel they are not getting their fair share of wildlife revenues.
For Mr Western, juggling the competing financial demands of wildlife and
people will be the toughest act of all.
