FT  20 APR 94 / MPs criticise mental health care policy
Serious criticisms of the government's policy of caring for mentally ill
people in the community were made yesterday in a report by the Commons
health committee.
Services for severely mentally ill people were inadequate, unco-ordinated
and underfunded, the report said. Many people were being failed by care in
the community.
The report comes after a series of violent attacks by mentally ill patients
discharged from institutions.
The MPs found that emergency and crisis services were poor, there was little
day care and more services were needed for mentally disordered offenders.
The number of homeless mentally ill people was on the increase, they said.
The report said the current funding formula for community care 'very
substantially' under-estimated the extra need for mental health services in
deprived inner-city areas.
Ms Marion Roe, the Conservative MP who chairs the committee, criticised the
lack of information on community care for mentally ill people. Much data was
incomplete and inaccurate and there was no record of the numbers cared for.
The committee said lack of co-ordination and arguments between government
departments were partly to blame. It urged the government to set up a
permanent inter-departmental advisory group on mental health to review
policy and ensure that adequate resources were made available.
A second inter-departmental taskforce was needed to improve housing
provision for mentally ill homeless people, the report said.
Mr John Bowis, health minister with responsibility for mental health, said
the report would be studied carefully.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, said the report reflected the
failure of Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, to accept
responsibility for care in the community. 'She should legislate to ensure
that resources are in the right place and that the network of comprehensive
care advocated by the select committee is implemented throughout Britain,'
he said.
Better Off in the Community? HMSO. Pounds 10.
