FT  30 MAY 94 / Germany rejects offer of MiGs to help discharge Russian debt
Germany has rejected a Russian offer to discharge more than a billion
dollars' worth of debt in the form of 100 of its most advanced MiG fighter
aircraft, according to German government officials.
The proposal was made by General Pavel Grachev, the Russian defence
minister, to Mr Jorg Schobohm, state secretary for defence, during the
recent visit to Germany of President Boris Yeltsin.
The offer, whose acceptance would have implied a huge change in Germany's
strategic orientation, was rejected on both political and technical grounds,
the officials said.
They said the German Air Force remained committed to procuring the
four-nation Eurofighter 2000, although its price was higher and it has
aroused political controversy.
The opposition Social Democrats have threatened to withdraw from the
project, which also involves Britain, Spain and Italy, if they win the
German elections this autumn.
United Germany has inherited 30 MiG fighters from the east German forces,
and a report by the National Audit Office last autumn, leaked in part to the
press, suggested that further purchases of the Russian aircraft would be a
better option than procuring Eurofighter.
However, a decision to make MiGs the linchpin of the air force could leave
Germany dependent on Russian spare parts and after-sales service - both of
which are alleged by Western experts to be unreliable - and call in question
Germany's commitment to its western allies.
Other drawbacks with the MiGs included: the need for a massive internal
reorganisation of the air force; the Russian aircraft's incompatibility with
western air traffic control procedures; and the frequency with which they
require servicing.
MiG engines are designed to fly for about 600 hours between overhauls,
compared with up to 4,000 for a similar western aircraft.
This reflects the fact that the cost of engineers' pay was never an
important factor for Soviet military planners.
The German officials insisted that discussions between Mr Schobohm and Gen
Grachev did not get as far as negotiations over price.
Reports in the specialist press have speculated that Russia would be
prepared to sell its MiGs for as little as DM20m (Pounds 8m) apiece,
compared with a basic price for the Eurofighter of three to five times
higher.
This would imply that the proposed MiG deal would have been worth DM2bn,
only a fraction of the DM80bn which Germany is owed by Russia.
A government official said: 'The deal looked cheap, but it would still have
required the air force to transfer funds to the economics ministry or any
other government agencies which are owned money by Russia. The air force
does not have the necessary resources at the moment.'
The air force says the need to renew its air-to-air defence capacity will
not arise until the year 2002, when its fleet of US-built F-4s will become
obsolete.
