FT  26 JUL 94 / Bretton Woods (50 Years): If you go down to the woods today
 -Martin Wolf offers the Group of Seven leaders a recipe for reforming the
world's economic institutions
'The separate economic blocs and all the friction and loss of friendship
they must bring with them are expedients to which one may be driven in a
hostile world, where trade has ceased over wide areas to be co-operative and
peaceful and where are forgotten the healthy rules of mutual advantage and
equal treatment. But it is surely crazy to prefer that.'
With these words, uttered shortly before his death, Lord Keynes commended
the Bretton Woods agreement to the House of Lords. It was a noble legacy of
the Anglo-American co-operation during the second world war.
A month after the landings in Normandy, a new world economic regime had been
designed at the celebrated conference in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire. That
the victory was not wasted was largely due to the rebirth, at least in the
industrial countries, of the ideas Keynes extolled. It has not been the
details of the Bretton Woods agreement that matter. Many have had to be
abandoned. What has mattered most is the commitment to a co-operatively
managed and increasingly liberal, global economy. That is the legacy to
cherish.
Anniversaries are valuable if used for taking stock of what is left from the
past and for devoting thought to the needs of tomorrow. Largely by chance,
now is an appropriate time in which to ask what the needs of tomorrow might
be.
The collapse of the only serious rival to the liberal model is five years
old, long enough not only to become used to that event, but to appreciate
the scale of the debris communism leaves behind. Yet the greatest economic
challenge for the western world is the need to adjust to the rise of east
Asia. A world economy in which only about a sixth of the population enjoy
prosperity will be transformed by the arrival of perhaps another 3bn. Nor
will the challenge be merely economic. This will be more than a mere shift
in power among similar countries: five centuries of dominance by Europe and
its American progeny are coming to an end.
Fortunately, at President Clinton's prompting, western leaders have shown a
belated awareness of the issue in calling, at the recent summit of the Group
of Seven industrial countries in Naples, for a review of institutional
requirements in the global economy. So what might a comprehensive report to
the G7 leaders cover?
The starting point is the success of the postwar economic system, a success
measured by almost five decades of trade-led growth (see chart). Even though
increased real incomes have been enjoyed in most parts of the world, they
have not been enjoyed everywhere. One fifth of the world population produces
 -and enjoys - 85 per cent of the world's income. The degree of global
inequality has also been increasing. Worst of all, even though most
indicators - such as infant mortality, life expectancy and school enrolment
 -show improvements since the 1950s almost everywhere, more than a billion
people, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia, subsist on less than a
dollar a day.
Economies have done well and their residents prospered to the extent that
they have been able, or willing, to exploit the opportunities offered by an
increasingly global market economy. North America, Europe and Japan have
been able to do this. So too have many developing countries. The paper,
Learning from the Past, Embracing the Future, released by the World Bank
last week, shows that income per head in east Asia had risen by some 350 per
cent since 1960, while that of Latin America is significantly lower than it
was in 1975. Worst of all, sub-Saharan Africa's income per head is back
where it was in 1960.
Such failures are, above all, those of nation states. One part of the
problem has been the determination of many developing countries to turn away
from the global market, by seeking the bankrupt path of 'self-reliance'.
This mistake can be rectified. But the difficulty is deeper than that. Many
states are unable or unwilling to provide such basic economic services such
as reasonably impartial property rights enforcement, efficient or honest
administration, basic education and health, or minimal infrastructure. Not
infrequently, governments have been murderous and exploitative. Worst of
all, states have occasionally dissolved altogether.
This is an extreme illustration of a fundamental issue: the relation between
the market, which is increasingly global, and states, which are local, often
blinkered and sometimes demonic. Four points need to be remembered
throughout any G7 discussions.
First, the most important purpose of international economic regimes is to
render national policies globally compatible. Sometimes this is done through
day-to-day co-operation. It is done more effectively, however, by embodying
international agreements within domestic laws and policies. That is what the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has achieved, if partially.
Second, at least half of the spending of modern states is concerned with
income redistribution, with internal income transfers as much as 50 times
larger than international ones. In consequence, citizens of states that are
both impoverished and incompetent (or worse) are excluded from the benefits
and opportunities afforded by the global economy, except through migration.
Third, because the politics of wealthy countries focus on internal income
distribution, developments that undermine customary patterns are immediately
subject to attack by protectionist antibodies. One of the great challenges
for the industrial countries in future will be to sustain economic openness
under such pressures.
Finally, the customary complaint that the internationalisation of the world
economy jeopardises sovereignty is correct, but only in the sense that it
curbs redistributive politics by limiting a government's ability to tax
mobile factors of production. It is wrong in the mistaken proposition that
countries cannot affect their economic fates. Whether or not a government
encourages its people to exploit global opportunities has, in fact, proved
decisive. Compare east with west Germany; south with north Korea; Chile with
Peru; or Taiwan with mainland China. Policy matters. That is why governments
matter too.
The principal purpose of international economic institutions is to reconcile
the politics of nation states with their international interests and
obligations. With this in mind, the international economic regime of the
future should ideally cover five areas:
monetary and financial stability;
economic development;
trade and investment;
the environment; and
migration.
In each case, the aim should be to try to minimise government and maximise
the play of the market. This is not just a question of ideology. It is a
practical matter. The capacity to co-operate is limited. It should be
hoarded, just like any other globally scarce resource.
Monetary and financial stability. The Bretton Woods monetary regime was a
brilliant failure: brilliant, because of the exceptional economic progress
that occurred during its heyday, and failure, because it collapsed in the
early 1970s. The lesson, underlined by the breakdown of the hard ERM during
the summer of 1993, is that adjustable-peg exchange rate regimes are
inherently unstable without extensive exchange controls.
Yet floating exchange rates have been far from an unalloyed success. Real
exchange rate variability has been far greater than many had hoped. For this
reason, the attractions of fixed exchange rates and target-zone regimes are
substantial. But this is a point at which the objectives of states clash
with international economic aspirations. Maybe a decade or two of sustained
low inflation and fiscal discipline in important economies (neither of which
is to be taken for granted) will allow the formation of a common monetary
policy in the leading economies. At present, this is a fantasy. So too is
the hope for an agreement on equilibrium real exchange rates and a
willingness to back them up with policy changes.
Floating exchange rates may not be ideal, but they have proved workable.
They will also remain in operation for the foreseeable future. If correct,
this leaves the IMF with no more than a marginal role in international
monetary affairs.
As financial markets become more global, domestic supervision becomes
increasingly difficult. A global supervisor is one possibility. A more
plausible alternative, however, is greater supervision by the market. The
right policy would be a determined assault on the sources of moral hazard,
such as deposit insurance, combined with provision of more timely
information to the marketplace.
Economic development. There is no great mystery about what makes for
successful economic development. The recipe consists of well-motivated
people, operating within the global market, under the aegis of a supportive
and fiscally self-disciplined government. Unfortunately, such states are
rare. In their presence, international assistance is helpful, but marginal.
Developing countries that meet such criteria now have little difficulty
obtaining resources from the private markets. In their absence, assistance
is almost doomed to failure.
It is this grim reality that critics of the World Bank and IMF fail to
confront. The legitimate criticism of those institutions is not that they
have been too tough, but that they have far too weak in supporting member
governments that have neither the capacity nor the intention to do as they
have promised. States become bankrupt financially because they are already
bankrupt ideologically and politically. One of the greatest challenges
facing the world community consists in dealing with such situations.
Professor Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard University has argued persuasively for an
international bankruptcy procedure. On the economic side, that could be
placed under the management of a reformed IMF. But there will often need to
be a security arrangement as well. One possibility would be to reinstate the
idea of a UN protectorate.
Meanwhile, an uncomfortable overlap between the functions of the World Bank
and the IMF remains, with both increasingly concentrated upon a number of
relatively unsuccessful states. They must at least be forced to co-operate
still more closely.
International Trade and Investment. The World Trade Organisation, whose
power rests upon agreements embodied in the domestic law of its members,
should take pride of place in trade. It would also make sense to nest
international agreements on investment within the WTO. Otherwise, the agenda
is clear enough: to liberalise further on the course already set, which may
well require another trade round later this decade.
Environment. A case can be made for an international environmental regime,
housed within a global environmental organisation. One aim would be to bring
together all the existing environmental treaties. Another would be to
protect world trade from the intrusion of environmental considerations. The
most important aim, however, would be to ensure that international
environmental overspills are handled by a consistent set of global rules
that carry over into domestic policy.
The starting point should be the 'polluter pays' principle. Its main value
would be to reveal that industrial countries are the main polluters. The US,
for example, generates a quarter of global output of carbon dioxide from
fossil fuels and cement manufacture. Correspondingly, industrial counties
must pay most for their disproportionate exploitation of the global commons.
Migration. At present, there is no policy on the treatment of international
flows of people, though there is such a policy for flows of both goods and
services. This is an obvious anomaly. A host of questions - such as taxation
of the brain drain or treatment of guest workers - should be covered.
This then is the agenda for the G7. But it cannot exclude the G7 itself. Is
there to be any overarching body charged with global economic co-ordination
and co-operation and, if so, should it be the informal G7 or something
broader or more formal?
There is, in fact, a strong case for keeping the G7, while using any
relevant international organisation to support it. One consequence of a
world of unequal sovereign states is that it is also an undemocratic one.
What is needed is responsible leadership. Leadership can only be provided by
those with the resources and the influence to exercise it. At present, that
is principally the G7, though in time its membership will have to change, as
the world economy does. The challenge, however, is also to act responsibly.
It was difficult enough in the past. Now that the cold war is over and huge
upheavals lie ahead, it may prove still more difficult in future. G7
leaders, be warned.
Previous articles in the series appeared on June 21 and 28 and July 8, 15
and 20
