FT  22 OCT 94 / The armchair shopper: A look at the commercial appeal of
'virtual shopping malls'
A giant shopping centre will soon be built right on your doorstep. There
will be hundreds of stores, banks, a supermarket, car dealerships,
billboards - all within sight of your living-room armchair.
But don't rush to organise a protest. There will be no concrete poured in
the construction of this mega-mall. It is a 'virtual' shopping centre, just
a few seconds down the information superhighway.
Electronic shopping centres are proliferating as retailers spot the chance
to create a direct, low-cost marketing channel to a fast-growing and
predominantly affluent group of consumers - home-computer users.
More than a third of all US households now have a personal computer and 12
per cent - approximately 11m people - are equipped with a modem that allows
them access via the telephone to the electronic data networks. Among US
households with an annual income exceeding Dollars 50,000, the percentage of
'net travellers' - users of such networks - rises to 27 per cent.
This level of access has prompted a charge into electronic shopping, led by
commercial networks such as Compuserve, America Online and Prodigy. They now
have more than 5m subscribers who use their on-line discussion groups, live
chat 'rooms' and news services, as well as electronic shopping.
Each has an 'electronic mall', with more than 100 stores selling products
from a Brooks Brothers suit to honey-baked ham.
The Internet - a global web of computer networks with an estimated 25m-30m
users - is also going commercial. Last month, Home Shopping Network, which
operates the Home Shopping cable TV channel, acquired Internet Shopping
Network (ISN), a fledgling Silicon Valley company that began selling
computer products on the Internet five months ago.
'It is a bold step towards opening up a huge new market,' says Mr Randy
Adams, founder of ISN. Home Shopping is planning 'a major push into the
digital environment, a first step towards interactive television', he says.
With distribution and billing facilities already in place, Home Shopping
Network is poised to create the first large-scale electronic shopping
service on the Internet. Already there are dozens of smaller retailers on
the Internet. Merchants from Palo Alto, in California's Silicon Valley, for
example, have posted listings of their wares while the city's restaurants
provide menus on-line.
For consumers, the main appeal of on-line shopping is convenience.
Electronic stores are open 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The services
draw 'too busy, two-income families', say the electronic merchants.
Most of the computer shopping services available today take the form of
product lists with detailed descriptions of the merchandise and discount
prices. For people who know what they want - a particular brand of clothing
or a specific model of a household appliance - on-line shopping is a quick
way to find a bargain. Without even a picture of the product, however, it is
hard to imagine buying an outfit for a special occasion or a piece of
furniture from an on-line service.
But multimedia computers are beginning to make electronic shopping much more
interesting. Industry analysts predict that on-line sales of goods and
services will mushroom into a multi-billion dollar industry over the next
three years as the technology becomes more widely available.
A high-performance multimedia PC (now selling in the US for about Dollars
2,500) with a fast modem can handle graphics, audio and video clips, giving
shoppers a much richer view of the products available. Multimedia also
expands the range of goods and services that can be marketed effectively
on-line.
For instance, the Global Network Navigator, a free Internet service provided
by O'Reilly &amp; Associates, a California publishing group, has established a
'travel resource centre'. Users can watch a video clip promoting the
delights of a holiday resort, read travel articles, join a discussion group
where people share travel experiences or check weather forecasts.
Even with a fast modem, however, on-line access to multimedia services
through the telephone network can be tediously slow. A compromise approach
that is gaining popularity involves publishing a multimedia catalogue on a
CD-Rom disc which carries the images and sound. Updates on prices and
availability, as well as ordering, are available on-line.
'The problem with the on-line world today is that the technology is long in
the tooth,' says Mr Stephen Tomlin, vice-president in charge of interactive
technology development at QVC, Home Shopping Network's rival in the cable TV
shopping market.
'To be a good merchant you have to have a rich interaction with the customer
 -show the merchandise, demonstrate its features and have a real dialogue.
We are limited by current modem speeds,' says Mr Tomlin.
Yet electronic shopping may be on the brink of a technology breakthrough
that could give 'virtual' shopping malls a competitive edge on the real
thing. The latest computer network technology for electronic commerce
provides 'intelligent assistants' - computer programs that travel the data
networks in search of information, or products, at the behest of their
owners.
AT&amp;T, the telecoms group, recently launched PersonaLink network service, the
first commercial application of this technology. Using software developed by
eShop, a California software venture, Per-sonaLink will create a 'market
square' with electronic shopping assistants to help subscribers browse,
select and make purchases.
These 'cyberpersonas' will get to know your interests and tastes, what
sports you enjoy, your shoe size, your spending habits and more. Retailers
will provide these 'electronic assistants' to help you to make your
purchases.
You might also want to create your own electronic assistant, who will look
through several electronic stores to find what you need at the best
available price.
These assistants will emulate the role of the high-street tailor who knew
your measurements, the corner grocer who used to deliver a regular weekly
order to your home, or the saleswoman who helped you to select Christmas
gifts.
Many retailers see these developments as an opportunity to experiment in the
brave new world of 'virtual' shopping before it becomes a 21st century mass
consumer service on 'interactive television'.
'It makes sense to get into the game, to understand what is going on,' says
Mr Tomlin.
So when are they going to start building that virtual shopping centre?
'It's not around the corner, but there is no doubt that it is going to
happen,' says Mr Adams. 'We are young enough to wait.'
