FT  29 JUN 94 / World Trade News: China urged to clarify trade rules
Members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade yesterday called on
Beijing to clarify its new foreign trade law, emphasising that little time
was left to complete negotiations on an agreement which would enable China
to rejoin the body at the start of next year.
Officials in Geneva said the provisions of the law, which was published last
month and sets out basic rules on trade and investment, were expected to
feature prominently in this week's four-day talks on China's application for
Gatt membership.
Alhough several delegations welcomed the law, most said they wanted detailed
clarification of how it would operate to ensure that it was fully consistent
with the obligations of Gatt membership.
The US and some other governments have criticised parts of the law as
obscure and have expressed concern that it could unduly restrict trade in
services and discriminate unfairly against foreign companies doing business
in China.
The European Union said yesterday that, if there were to be a calendar for
China to rejoin Gatt early next year, a formal timetable would have to be
discussed. But, it added, China would first have to improve trade offers
made in bilateral negotiations, notably on agriculture and services.
The EU delegation said it could not negotiate in August because most
officials in Brussels would be on holiday then. But the US quickly pointed
out that its government continued to function throughout the summer.
Mr Gu Yongjiang, China's vice-minister of foreign trade, called for an
acceleration of negotiations and said he hoped enough progress could be made
in talks this week for a formal accession protocol to be drawn up soon. 'The
patience of the general public of China for Gatt re-entry is ..facing a
serious test,' he said.
He said his government had submitted to the Gatt secretariat a list of its
non-tariff barriers to trade. It was ready to negotiate a reduction in some
of these and to modify its offers on agriculture and services in response to
Gatt members' demands.
However, he indicated that China, as a developing country, would seek a
transition period to comply with some Gatt obligations after it became a
member and would need time to implement some of its commitments.
He promised that China would spell out before entry those commitments it
could not fulfil immediately. He also said China's foreign trade law would
not affect its Gatt obligations.
