FT  24 OCT 94 / Survey of Zambia (4): Fulcrum of the economy / A look at
Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines
Three years after President Frederick Chiluba came to power with a mandate
to privatise Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines, the source of 90 per cent of
the country's export earnings, the government is no closer to deciding how
and when divestiture is to take place.
Privatisation seems to be the only option open to a mining giant that has
been systematically starved of investment and is burdened with high
production costs, a Dollars 640m foreign debt and mines nearing exhaustion.
Since nationalisation, copper production has nose-dived from a peak of
700,000 tonnes a year in the mid-1970s to less than 400,000 tonnes. Output
is forecast to halve again by the turn of the century unless ZCCM's
best-explored ore body - the Konkola Deep deposit with mineral resources of
381m tonnes containing 3.5 per cent copper - can be brought into operation
within the next six years.
By some estimates, Zambia's ailing copper industry requires Dollars 2bn of
fresh capital to develop new ore bodies and modernise smelters and
refineries.
While the government acknowledges that it lacks the resources to keep the
copper industry alive, it does not appear to have accepted the tough
consequences of opening ZCCM to foreign investors. This will almost
certainly entail the loss of state control over a company which is not only
the fulcrum of the economy, but a symbol of national independence.
Mr Edward Shamutete, ZCCM's chief executive, warns: 'If the privatisation is
handled badly, it could bring down the government.'
The reluctance to let go of ZCCM is illustrated by the company's year-long
search for a Dollars 600m loan to develop Konkola Deep. Nikko Securities of
Japan has been trying to raise the required funds, so far without apparent
success.
Mr Shamutete still hopes a syndicated credit facility will be forthcoming.
Meanwhile, the government has turned down an offer by Anglo American
Corporation of South Africa to lead a consortium that would develop Konkola
Deep as an independent joint venture - relegating ZCCM to a minority role.
Anglo American is disappointed. As ZCCM's main minority shareholder, having
retained a 27.3 per cent stake in the company following nationalisation, the
South African mining house is as anxious as the government to get Konkola
Deep off to an early start.
The first report on ZCCM's privatisation options, funded by the World Bank,
was a dead letter almost before it landed on ministerial desks in October.
Its central recommendation was to split ZCCM into five operating companies
and to privatise them separately.
Kienbaum Development Services of Germany, the authors of the study, believe
the carve-up would maximise the number of new investors in ZCCM's diverse
operations, while avoiding the politically unpalatable option of handing the
nation's copper wealth to a single overseas mining house or consortium. The
Dollars 300,000 report was rejected by the cabinet, which has ordered
another one.
'We do not believe the break-up of ZCCM is the best option,' President
Chiluba said in an interview. Mr Shamutete was more forthright: 'It was a
rushed job, poisoned by interested parties, with shallow conclusions.'
Anglo American is also opposed to the dismemberment of the company. Mr
Anderson Mazoka, Anglo's managing director in Lusaka, believes the company
would be better managed as a single entity. 'The break-up of ZCCM would lead
to the rapid closure of the less profitable divisions,' he says. He believes
the negotiations to sell off separate units would be long and costly and
would open opportunities for corruption. Few doubt that if ZCCM were to be
privatised intact, Anglo American would become the controlling shareholder.
Mr Shamutete says he is not an opponent of privatisation, but he wants to be
given a chance to box ZCCM into shape before it is offered for sale.
'ZCCM was bled to death under the previous administration,' he argues. Its
profits were milked by the government to diversify the economy, as a result
of which ZCCM became the owner of a host of subsidiaries with no direct
bearing to its core business.
All this is changing. The subsidiaries have been cut off and are slated for
privatisation. A copper trading company in Britain has been closed down.
Some 800 senior staff jobs have gone, and ZCCM has just reached agreement
with the Mineworkers' Union of Zambia to shed 10,000 jobs - one fifth of the
workforce - over the next two years.
Mining analysts, however, believe Mr Shamutete's recovery plan may have come
too late in the day to save ZCCM. Output has continued to decline and
efforts to reduce production costs have only met with partial success.
At 82 US cents for each pound of copper, ZCCM's production costs almost
double the outlays of Chilean mines, the world leaders in copper production.
State-owned Codelco Chile, for example, produces more than twice ZCCM's
copper output with half the number of ZCCM's employees. The comparison
becomes even more unfavourable when one adds ZCCM's overheads and heavy
debt-servicing burden, which add another 20 per cent to the cost of Zambian
copper at the mine gate.
Low copper prices drove ZCCM's operations into the red last year. The
company posted a net loss of K72.6bn (Dollars 99m) for the year ended March
1994, but Mr Shamutete hopes the recent rebound in world prices and his
cost-cutting measures will restore ZCCM's profitability over the coming
months.
