FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (16): Show-offs, moaners,
time-wasters, bullies, blamers, whiners . . . - How do you cope with
impossible colleagues at work? To begin with, keep calm, says a woman who
told her boss his desk was too big / Interpersonal skills
Problem People at Work
by Marilyn Wheeler
Century, Pounds 8.99
155 pages
Working it out at Work
by Julie Hay
Sherwood, Pounds 9.95
200 pages
Marilyn Wheeler had just been promoted. As she parked her car in the
management car park for the first time, she felt on top of the world.
The feeling did not survive her first meeting with the boss, who spoke
disdainfully to her from the other side of his big desk, making her feel she
was bound to fail.
Being a plucky girl, Marilyn did not let it get her down for long. She took
an assertiveness course, and, fresh from its lessons, marched into her
boss's office and told him that his oriental carpet and over-sized desk were
blatant power signals.
This exchange took place some years ago. Now the wicked male executive has
got rid of the offending carpet, and replaced the desk with a round table.
And as for Marilyn, she is living in California making a living writing
books telling people about how they, too, can deal with the problem people
in their lives.
In the old days, if someone was being difficult at work you fired them if
they happened to be your subordinate, and put up with them if they happened
to be your boss. These days you go on courses and read books to equip
yourself with winning strategies. The result is that the 'difficult people'
segment of the management publishing industry is booming.
'You've already taken the first step by buying this book]' says Wheeler in
the first chapter of Problem People at Work.
In the next, she reveals that the trick of dealing with impossible
colleagues is to remain in the 'Freedom State', as opposed to the 'Immature
State' or the 'Controlling State'. This is a fancy way of saying that it is
better to keep calm then to let yourself be crushed or to fly off the handle
 -advice which seems so obvious as to be scarcely worth saying.
The rest of the book takes each different variety of nightmarish behaviour
type by type. It catalogues real-life examples of insulters, time-wasters,
moaners, show-offs, bullies, blamers and so on, and for each supplies the
appropriate response.
Faced with someone who explodes, you should apparently avoid fighting words,
keep eye contact, use a strong voice. If your difficult person whines all
the time, you should ask them what they are going to do about their
problems, make them feel responsible (and therefore less likely to
complain). When dealing with the sort of person who always takes the credit,
you should be assertive, professional, blow your own trumpet, and above all
stay in the freedom state.
After treating you to 100 pages of other people's colleagues from hell,
Wheeler invites you to confront your own worst workmates. 'Take Action]' she
urges. Simply reading her book is not enough, she says: you must complete a
probing questionnaire about your difficult person, and about your responses
to them. She warns that you will never change your colleagues' characters,
but by thinking about the problem carefully, and by planning a strategy, you
will thwart them in their impossible ways.
Wheeler's old boss, with his big desk, has a lot to answer for.
Relationships in the office are just not as simple as she makes out.
Although one can recognise her stereotypes, they are of little practical use
to apply to real people. Coping with people in real offices calls for common
sense, sensitivity, and for a trial-and-error approach. Some of the advice
is reasonably sensible - but amid the exhortations and exclamation-marks
there is no room for subtlety, which is surely the key to getting yourself
out of hot water at work. Those who are inept in their dealings with others
should read this book at their peril. Its simplistic solutions may backfire]
As least Wheeler keeps much of the psycho-babble at bay, which is more than
can be said for Julie Hay. Hay, who was once upon a time an ordinary
employee, a trade unionist and subsequently a manager, has suffered a
wholesale conversion into the serious psychoanalytical world of
Transactional Analysis.
Working it out at Work is riddled with jargon and diagrams. 'The position of
mutual respect is summarised by IOKYOK,' she says at the outset. That is
short for I'm OK, you're OK, and it is TA's way of saying that two people
are getting along. Apparently, if either side is not OK, any number of
conclusions and diagrams can be deduced.
Then there are the different personal styles: we are all either adults,
parents or children - the classification depending not on our age or
offspring, but on our behaviour and emotions. This is only the beginning:
'controlling parent' must be distinguished from 'nurturing parent', and
'internal child' from 'adapted child'.
And will any of this make you better equipped to tell the boss you don't
like the size of his desk? Possibly, but by the time you had worked your way
through Hay's 'dream triangle', and fussed about the 'negative payoffs' and
the 'ulterior transactions', he might, with any luck, have retired.
