FT  04 JAN 94 / Jordanian king hits at Arafat over peace talks
King Hussein of Jordan has attacked PLO chairman Yassir Arafat's handling of
the Middle East peace talks. In an outspoken statement the king said Mr
Arafat had one 'last chance' to sign an agreement on Jordan's economic role
during transitional Palestinian autonomy in the occupied territories.
Otherwise, he said, Jordan would move ahead with its own separate talks with
Israel.
Displaying frustration at being left out of discussions between the
Palestinians and Israelis on limited self-rule, the king complained about Mr
Arafat's constant procrastinations during talks with Jordan. 'We cannot go
on saying there is co-ordination if there isn't or that there is agreement
when there is none,' he said.
The king's ultimatum came amid increasing Israeli dissatisfaction over the
stalled Cairo autonomy talks and within the PLO itself over Mr Arafat's
leadership style.
Senior PLO officials met yesterday in Tunis to try to persuade their
chairman to widen the decision-making process and come up with a coherent
strategy for talks with Israel and Jordan.
An economic agreement between Jordan and the PLO which would give Jordan's
central bank wide-ranging monetary responsibilities in the occupied
territories has been ready for months. But Mr Arafat has held back from
endorsing it for fear of relinquishing Palestinian fiscal responsibilities
to the Jordanians.
Jordan has already signed a memorandum with Israel to allow banks in Jordan
to reopen branches in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. And Jordan's central
bank governor recently said the reopening of branches would now not depend
on the economic pact with the PLO.
The king also buried prospects of a Jordanian/Palestinian confederation,
arguing that the idea was premature. 'I have requested that my brother
(Arafat) drop the expression of confederation from his dictionary and not to
discuss it in any form or manner,' he said. The PLO has been at pains to
emphasis that the autonomy agreement with Israel will eventually lead to a
confederation between Jordan and a Palestinian entity and joint committees
had been established to discuss the issue.
Relations between the PLO and Jordan have been strained since the August
announcement of talks between the PLO and Israel in which Jordan played no
part.
