FT  20 OCT 94 / The long wait and high cost of a small transfer
Few services offered by European banks have been of as low quality as their
transfers of small sums of cash across borders. As the European Commission
recognised in proposing legislation yesterday, it not only costs a lot to
send cash, but takes a long time.
Money transfers are traditionally done by banks sending money to
'correspondent' banks in the destination country. The correspondent bank
transfers it to the appropriate account - usually at another bank  - via the
automated clearing house which is used for domestic payment transfers.
In some countries, this can take an extremely long time. In Italy in the
1980s, foreign banks were told that it would take a standard 28 days to
clear a payment. Although standards have improved markedly, some banks are
happy to delay the clearing of cash to gain interest.
Banks had little incentive to compete for such business - and raise
standards - until recently. There are relatively few transfers of small sums
 -defined as up to Ecu10,000 (Pounds 7,870) - within the EU. They account
for only 0.8 per cent of total domestic payments in the UK, and 4 per cent
in Belgium.
The view among most banks was, as Mr Tim Sweeney, director general of the
British Bankers Association, put it this week, 'that old British response:
'there's no call for it, guv''. This meant that banks displayed little
urgency either in making payments or raising standards.
Some of the results could be seen in the study carried out for the European
Commission earlier this year which found that banks charged an average
Ecu25.4 to make an urgent transfer of Ecu100, and the money took an average
of 4.15 working days to reach the destination bank and be cleared.
The study found widespread double charging - the receiver of the cash is
charged as well as the sender. This occurred in 36 per cent of urgent
transfers. Customers were also given inadequate information, with only 21
per cent of branches giving an accurate guide to transfer times.
This led to the commission losing patience after a three-year effort to
raise standards. The decision to proceed with legislative action is a
setback for Mrs Christiane Scrivener, commissioner for consumer affairs, who
argued that a voluntary code of conduct would be more suitable.
But Mr Raniero Vanni D'Archirafi, commissioner responsible for the single
market, argued successfully that legislation was a necessary step to help
consumers and small businesses to take full advantage of the 1992 programme
for the free movement of goods, services, capital and people.
The proposed EU directive must be approved by a qualified majority of EU
ministers, by the end of 1996 at the latest. Customers will have to have
accounts credited with the sum transferred in six days; there must be full
disclosure of costs; and double-charging will be banned.
European banks mounted a strong lobbying campaign against legislation. Ms
Diane Iannucci, the official responsible for payment systems at the European
Banking Federation, yesterday argued that small banks might withdraw
services and that efforts by large banks to raise standards could be
disrupted.
Despite the results of the commission's study - which the federation says
are flawed - there is evidence that banks are at least starting to improve
standards. Several partnerships have been formed among European banks in the
past two years to provide more efficient transfers.
These include a partnership between National Westminster Bank of the UK,
Commerzbank of Germany and: Societe Generale of France; and another among
Lloyds Bank of the UK, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya of Spain and Credit Agricole of
France. Girobanks and Co-operative banks have also formed payment links.
The commercial bank effort which has gone furthest is the Inter Bank On-line
System (Ibos) developed jointly by Royal Bank of Scotland and Banco
Santander, which offers virtually instantaneous and relatively low-cost
transfers between accounts at banks which are members of the system.
Such services have started to develop because banks have seen efficient
cross-border payments as a means of drawing in small businesses who operate
increasingly across borders. But yesterday's decision shows that the impact
of such initiatives has been too slow to hold the commission back.
 ---------------------------------------------------------
                     EU BANK TRANSFERS
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Number of
working days                              % of
for payments                            payments
to arrive                               arrived
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Same day                                   0.8
1                                          2.0
2                                          9.7
3                                         27.1
4                                         19.2
5                                         16.1
6                                          9.7
6+                                        15.4
 ---------------------------------------------------------
Source: Retail Banking Research for European Commission
 ---------------------------------------------------------
