FT  07 JUL 94 / IMF and World Bank 'must adapt to new global financial
landscape': Review calls for clearer roles after 50 years
Sweeping reform of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank is needed
if these institutions are to remain relevant after radical changes in the
global financial landscape since their creation 50 years ago at Bretton
Woods, New Hampshire, an independent commission says.
The IMF should concentrate on managing the global monetary system and play
less of a role as a development agency. The Bank should focus on promoting
growth of the private sector in third world countries and improve its
overall efficiency by rationalising activities and sharply cutting staff.
The recommendations for far-reaching changes in the goals and organisation
of the IMF and Bank were released yesterday in a report by the Bretton Woods
Commission, an independent group led by Mr Paul Volcker, the former chairman
of the US Federal Reserve, and containing former senior ministers, central
bankers, academics and private-sector financial experts.
The commission also proposes radical reforms of the international monetary
system to reduce exchange rate volatility and improve the prospects for
sustained economic growth. The long-term goal should be the creation of
'flexible exchange rate bands' - or target ranges - for the dollar, D-Mark
and yen.
However, the commission says, a managed system of currency zones would not
be feasible immediately. The leading economies must first strengthen their
macroeconomic policies, for example by cutting budget deficits, and achieve
greater economic convergence on key variables such as inflation.
The report says the IMF should be given the central role in co-ordinating
macroeconomic policies and in developing and implementing the proposed new
system of flexible exchange rate bands. The commission believes such a task
can be undertaken only by an institution such as the IMF; it cannot be
achieved through ad hoc consultation among Group of Seven finance ministers
 -an unrepresentative group that lacks even a permanent secretariat.
The quid quo pro for a larger role in global monetary management - the task
for which the IMF was designed - is that the Fund should withdraw from much
of its work in developing countries and the formerly centrally planned
economies. It should 'avoid duplicating functions' of the Bank, which ought
to have the principal responsibility for promoting long-term economic
development.
In a staff review attached to the main report, the commission argues that a
clear division of labour between the IMF and Bank will be achieved only if
the IMF stops pursuing independent programmes in the poorest developing
countries and instead confines itself to providing macroeconomic input to
programmes run by the Bank. This would entail a big change in present policy
as the IMF has recently expanded its concessional lending programmes for the
poorest countries.
Where an overlap in functions is unavoidable, the commission urges more
effective co-operation between the two institutions, including sharing of
'data, training and research'. At present both have large research
departments.
The commission says criticism of the IMF for imposing 'harsh or
inappropriate' conditions on loans is generally invalid. However, the IMF
should 'explain itself better and be less secretive about its operations'.
It needs to seek broader public support for economic reforms by conducting
negotiations more openly and by publishing more of its analysis.
The commission also notes a disturbing decline in the quality of executive
directors to the IMF and Bank in recent years and argues that both
institutions need to create formal mechanisms whereby they can receive
advice from outsiders. One option would be to set up external advisory
committees of senior individuals from the private sector.
The commission considered arguments for the abolition of the Bank but
concluded it has an important role to play in promoting development, despite
the greatly increased availability of private-sector equity and bond
finance. However, it argues that sweeping changes are needed in both the
Bank's goals and internal organisation.
The report says the Bank still focuses too heavily on promoting
public-sector development projects. It should, but does not, operate on the
maxim that 'development assistance should be directed only at what the
private sector cannot or will not do'.
The Bank does too little to speed the transformation from state to market
and still supports 'too many state-owned enterprises'. It has failed to
adapt to 'a world that has turned from public sector dominance towards
private enterprise and free markets'.
The commission indicates that the Bank's Articles, which do not allow it to
lend to the private sector except with a government guarantee, are no longer
appropriate. But rather than change the Articles, it says, the Bank should
expand affiliates such as the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (Miga) that are not so constrained.
It should also 'revitalise its co-financing programmes' with private
lenders.
The report stresses that the IFC's ability to promote private sector
development is seriously hampered by its limited capital. The Bank should
assign the IFC 'additional resources of people and finance'. The IFC could
then help stimulate larger volumes of private financing, for example for
infrastructure projects, allowing a shrinkage of the Bank proper.
The commission says the Bank should work harder to 'concentrate its
assistance in those countries where the need is greatest'. In the staff
review attached to the main report it says the Bank should apply a 'market
access', as well as an income, test when considering offering support.
Countries that are able to borrow at reasonable rates from international
capital markets should cease to qualify for Bank loans, even if they are
poor.
However, the Bank's main shareholders should continue to fund the
International Development Agency (IDA), the Bank affiliate that makes soft
loans to the poorest countries. But the Bank should lower the threshold
income level at which soft loans are available and impose stiffer
'graduation requirements' - in other words stop giving IDA loans to
countries that do not need concessional assistance.
The report says the Bank could play a valuable role in co-ordinating and
directing the development assistance presently offered on an ad hoc basis by
numerous other agencies and governments. It should also co-operate more
closely with the regional development banks and try not to duplicate their
work.
The commission is critical of the Bank's internal organisation and says
steps to improve its efficiency and effectiveness should be an urgent
priority.
'There is scope for the Bank to shed staff significantly as it becomes more
efficient and for both the Bank and the regional banks to consolidate as
they rationalise their responsibilities.'
In the staff review, the commission notes that 'as little as 7 per cent of
the time of a task manager - a front- line officer responsible for relations
with clients - is spent in actual contact with the country on which he or
she works.' This suggests there is 'extraordinary scope' for the Bank 'to
reduce the time staff spend talking and writing to one another'.
Bretton Woods: Looking to the Future. 1900 M St NW Sutie 450 Washington DC
20036
