FT  26 NOV 94 / Books: Charismatic wordsmith - Jackie Wullschlager probes
beyond the poet's pyrotechnics
EE CUMMINGS: COMPLETE POEMS edited by George J. Firmage Norton Pounds 35,
1102 pages
He is the famous poet who never used capital letters. In England, we know a
few sexy verses by 'e e cummings' ('May I feel, said he/ I'll squeal, said
she,') because they stand out as eccentric in anthologies of love poems. In
America, by contrast, Cummings is a literary giant. When he died in 1962, he
was the most widely-read poet after Robert Frost; today he is seen with
Eliot and Pound as the father of modernism.
Was Cummings a genius, the inventor of a new form of expression which spoke
for our disordered, fragmented times? Or was he merely a gimmick-maker who
tinkered with typography? This beautifully produced volume, published to
mark the centenary of his birth last month, collects together all his poems
for the first time, and offers a new insight into the man and his work.
Few poets are at once so modest - Cummings always hid behind that lower case
anonymous i - and so exuberant and charismatic in their egoism: 'Cheri' he
says in a 1918 love poem which was not discovered until the 1980s 'the, very
picturesque, last Day/(when all the clocks have lost their jobs and god/sits
up quickly to judge the Big Sinners)/ he will have something large and
fluffy to say/to me)'.
Throughout his life, Cummings pitted himself against god and the devil, US
presidents - he called Roosvelt that great pink super mediocrity - big
business and the upper class East Coast society into which he was born. His
father was a Harvard professor and a close friend of William James; Cummings
wrote about the Boston Brahmin Circle as 'the Cambridge ladies who live in
furnished souls.' But he adored his parents and an idyllically happy
upbringing gave him both his passionate belief in the individual and the
confidence to ignore traditional American expectation of patriotism and
conformity. A large body of poems about his childhood when 'The world is
puddled wonderful,' is one of the revelations here.
As a pacifist, Cummings went to France as an ambulance driver in 1917 and
was promptly jailed for ignoring censorship rules in his letters home. After
the war he stayed on in Paris, discovered Picasso and Stravinsky, and
returned to America a modernist, convinced that the 'day of the spoken lyric
is past.' He began to apply the Cubist methods of break-up and restructuring
to poetry.
The pleasure of this fat complete edition is that in making us quickly
familiar which such surface pyrotechnics, it gives us the chance to notice
the deeper, less showy side of the poet. Despite his protests, Cummings was
a bred-in-the-bone lyricist and, in displaying the full range of his love
poetry, this volume establishes him as the most erotic English poet since
John Donne.
During his Paris days, he became the friend - though not the client - of
some prostitutes. He enjoyed using the high sonnet form to describe bawdy
low life, 'the dirty colours of her kiss.' Then in the 1920s and 30s,
Cummings, according to his biographer Richard Kennedy, married in quick
succession 'three of the most beautiful women in America,' including actress
and model Marian Moorhouse.
Like Donne, Cummings makes sensuality work on the page by a mix of dazzling
explicitness and absolute rigour of form. He sees that sex is half in the
head, and he is metaphysical ('one not half too. It's two are halves of
one') and agonisingly restrained ('O Distinct/lady of my unkempt
adoration'). He is also, like Donne, witty and obscene. In the poem 'she
being Brand/New; and you/know consequently A/little stiff' he describes sex
as a run in a new car: 'Just as we turn the corner of Divinity/Avenue i
touch the accelerator and give/her the juice, good.'
Offbeat and experimental, Cummings had the outsider's uncanny feel for the
mood of the nation and an appealingly American idiom - upbeat and zany -
with which to convey it. The girl/car piece laughed at the American male's
obsession with the automobile as early as the 1920s. The lines 'what if a
much of a which of a wind,' with the warning 'what if a dawn of a doom of a
dream/bites this universe in two,' were written in 1944 the first poem of
the Cold War.
Almost every Cummings poem is enormous fun. With his jokes and word games he
reflects everyday fears, hopes and madnesses back at us through a
distracting cheerful mirror. His gimmicks are part of his genius: this
magnificent volume is a tribute to both.
