FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (17): A nation of talented innovators -
Bruce Clark highlights Estonia's inventive tradition and creative flair
Estonians make good inventors. The small Estonian community in Sweden has
produced several talented innovators and Estonia's Johannes Hint - whose
efforts were rewarded with a criminal case and a grisly death in prison -
had one of the most original scientific minds in the former Soviet Union.
Mr Toom Pungas is another standard-bearer of Estonia's inventing tradition.
A florid, genial figure whose looks reflect the Estonian farming stock from
which he springs, Mr Pungas rose to considerable prominence in the Soviet
scientific world.
In the 1980s, Moscow put him in charge of a sensitive government project
seeking to reduce - from a staggering seven years - the average time lag
between scientific discoveries and their application in Soviet industry. He
was successful enough to make some bitter enemies, notably bureaucrats in
Moscow industrial ministries with a vested interest in maintaining the time
lag.
He has now returned to his native Estonia where he heads the local
Inventors' Union and campaigns vigorously for the adoption of tough patent
laws.
While his work in Moscow involved pioneering technology in fields such as
lasers and compact discs, Mr Pungas is engaged in the more homely task of
restoring the 60-hectare family farm where he grew up.
He believes he has found a way to bring his ancestral acres - ruined by
noxious waste from the shale-oil industry - back to life, and solve a number
of ecological problems.
In a discovery for which he recently filed a US patent application, Mr
Pungas has made an environmentally friendly fertiliser out of oil-shale
waste, mixed with pigs slurry - another pollutant that is turning the Baltic
into a dead sea - plus an activator produced by Medina, an American
biotechnology company.
The oil-shale tips, Mr Pungas points out, are a hazard which will need to be
neutralised, anyway. His proposal is to create soil-enriching virtue out of
a pollution-fighting necessity. The alkalinity of the oil-shale waste -
micro-organisms cannot survive in it - is counterbalanced by the acidic pig
slurry so the redolent mixture becomes an agency for restoring micro-organic
life, as well as minerals, to the soil.
The inventor reckons his fertiliser soil could be used by Middle Eastern
states battling desertification and for reforestation in Scandinavia on soil
damaged by chemical fertiliser and acid rain. After 'extremely positive'
indications from tests on potatoes and tomatoes, he plans to go into
production on a small scale - about 30,000 cubic metres - this year and
hopes to capture a large chunk of Estonia's 3m ton per year market in
fertiliser soil.
But Mr Pungas is not counting any chickens, or fertiliser pellets, yet.
Already, he says, he sees signs of 'negative reaction' to his project:
samples disappearing, faxes going astray, production licences failing to
materialise.
He says he cannot tell whether this reflects the activity of commercial
rivals, or of governments who fear the economic strength that pioneering a
successful fertiliser project would give Estonia.
But if Estonia's inventors are permitted, mixing shale waste and slurry will
be the first of many ideas and the country's ability to convert these ideas
into profitable production will be a test of its viability as a small but
efficient outpost of capitalism.
