FT  10 AUG 94 / Recruitment: Window of opportunity for government policy -
Information Technology is transforming the search for vacancies
The middle-aged unemployed manual worker anxiously scanned the visual
display unit as the Guildford Jobcentre employee keyed in 'warehouse work'
and 'Pounds 175 a week' as the man's optimum salary and preferred
occupation.
The job search, which scanned all such jobs available in the Guildford area,
came up with no vacancies. A second attempt was made, this time with Pounds
150 as the desired salary. Again no luck. 'Try driving', he said. This time
there were no vacancies that the man found acceptable.
'Keep looking at the vacancies on the boards in the office and we will
access vacancies on the computer next time you sign on,' advised the
Jobcentre employee.
Jobcentres, run by the Employment Service, a government agency, handle about
30 per cent of vacancies in the UK, as well as administering unemployment
benefits.
The Guildford Jobcentre employee keying into the visual display unit was
operating an experimental Information Technology project called called VOP
(Vacancies, Opportunities and Providers.)
In addition to providing screen access to vacancies, it will also provide
single screen access to training programmes and claimants' records, many on
paper at present.
The system has only been running for a couple of months and so has not yet
been formally evaluated. But staff hope that Mr Michael Portillo, the new
employment secretary, is persuaded of the cost efficiencies of the new
system and that he, in turn, can persuade his Treasury colleagues of those
benefits. The cost of rolling out the programme to the 1,200 Jobcentres in
England and Wales has not been worked out.
Better IT processes may be vital, say Jobcentre staff, if they are to manage
their operations more efficiently. This need will be even more pressing next
year when the ES, along with the benefits agency, part of the department for
social security, will be administering the new Jobseekers allowance.
This new allowance, which replaces income supplement and unemployment
benefit, will place even greater obligations upon the unemployed to seek
work and for Jobcentres to monitor that process more closely.
But most Jobcentres while physically integrating the administration of
benefits and job search, operate systems that are designed for stand-alone
operations. This is at a time when the government's reforms will demand even
closer integration of benefits and job seeking plans.
Not only are the IT systems that exist not integrated, but other processes
are outdated and time consuming. Mr Richard Foster, regional director of the
Employment Service for the south-east, grimaced as he demonstrated how staff
have to drill a hole with a pen into a claimant's 'back to work plan' in
order to attach it to the man's claims form for unemployment benefit.
'Staff up and down the country have to do this thousands of times a week and
and nobody thought of punching a hole in the form when it was printed,' said
Mr Foster, who recently spent a week running a Jobcentre with his senior
colleagues so as to better understand the needs of frontline workers. A
Jobcentre colleague said: 'I estimate that I spend 10 per cent of my time
keeping clients in touch with their pieces of paper.'
Nevertheless, Jobcentres have been working more efficiently over the past
few years, according to government criteria. Mr Foster said: 'We have
achieved big performance gains through better management and setting clear
targets. But, there is a limit. So, we started focusing on the processes.'
This involved a joint project between the office staff in the region, Price
Waterhouse Management Consultants and the ES itself, led by an ES board
director, in which they examined ways the centres could improve their
business processes.
'We are the ones who know what our business needs,' said Mrs Shirley
Whittle, the Guildford Jobcentre manager. 'We want to get people back to
work, but we have to have the tools to do that. In the past systems were
handed down to us. This time we have been involved in the process.'
The design process started last November, with a series of workshops. Users,
from a range of frontline and advisory jobs, first mapped out current
processes and then suggested ways to make them work more efficiently.
The aim was to design an IT system that would best support both claimants
and those employers offering jobs; improve advice to clients; encourage
active job seeking; and boost the marketing areas of the centres' work.
A first finding of the project was that the system for taking vacancies was
poor. Traditionally the least experienced member of staff was put to that
job and he or she was often unable to obtain the best job descriptions.
Using a Windows-based computer package, the vacancy-taker can now access a
number of prompts which make staff instant experts in different trades.
'Carpenters are not just carpenters,' said Mrs Whittle. 'There are first fix
and second fix, for example and those vacancies demand different skills.'
Such vacancies are instantly placed on the computer system, which sends the
details to all four Jobcentres participating in the project. Press another
button and there is an instant print-out for the notice boards. Before this,
jobs were written out for the boards.
Mrs Whittle said that in the past staff were often tempted to keep the best
vacancies for their Jobcentre, only passing on less desirable ones to other
offices in local travel to work areas. The new system, she said, giving
automatic distribution of vacancies would be to the benefit of both clients
and employers.
Despite a few teething problems Guildford Jobcentre staff described VOP as
'brilliant.' Staff pointed to what they called a glaring example of systems
not keeping up with new demands on the service. This involved what is called
'active signing', a new procedure in which claimants attending the Jobcentre
to 'sign on' every few weeks are now actively asked what they are doing to
find a job. Such information is recorded.
But, the Jobcentre staff signing them on in most offices have no sheafs of
vacancies on their desks. Normally they physically have to get up and walk
to the boards displaying vacancies if they want to guide claimants to jobs
on offer. Most do not have the time to do so.
VOP offers such a service at the press of a button, as well as automatically
recording what jobs people may have declined or tried to get - information
which will be even more vital with the Jobseekers allowance. Such
information is manually recorded at present, a process that is not only time
consuming but also not foolproof.
'VOP will help staff test availability by giving them instant access to a
much larger number of vacancies of the kind that the job seeker says he is
looking for,' said Mr Foster.
'The system is great' said one young employee at Guildford. 'I had one man
who wanted retail work. He could not believe it when 200 vacancies flashed
up on the screen. I get more job satisfaction because clients can actually
become involved in the process as well as seeing that you are trying to help
them.'
While the middle aged manual worker seeking warehouse or driving work did
not like the information that was being flashed in front of him, there was a
sense that he felt a participant in the process.
The system may in turn place new demands on employers. Mrs Whittle said:
'Sometimes employers ring Jobcentres with vacancies that we know nobody will
accept. These vacancies are not always actively promoted. Now all jobs taken
are instantly put on record. But, because one of our assessment criteria is
the number of vacancies that we fill, we will have to communicate more
effectively with employers about what jobs are acceptable.'
