FT  20 JUN 94 / Equity Markets: Heading for record year - International
The bearish sentiment which has dogged most financial markets for the first
half of 1994 has failed to suppress activity in the international equities
market.
While the lacklustre performance of most stock markets has forced companies
to price new share offerings more cheaply to attract investors, the broad
trend towards distributing equity offerings internationally - or adding
international tranches to domestic offerings - shows no sign of abating.
So far this year, Dollars 45.7bn of new international equity offerings has
been absorbed, according to IFR Securities Data, which puts the market on
target for another record year, after last year's Dollars 73.7bn.
The trend for international offerings was kick-started in the mid-1980s,
when a number of governments keen to sell large amounts of equity through
privatisations found that they could get better pricing by targeting foreign
investors. Keen to facilitate their own deals, regulations restricting such
offerings were rapidly adjusted.
Deals such as the UK's British Gas and Spain's Telefonica in the late 1980s
proved that paper placed overseas did not always drift back to the domestic
market.
Re-examining their policies on asset allocation, fund managers began to
increase the weighting of international equities in their portfolios. In
particular, the massive US market became more outward-looking.
'Historically, US investors had been running with 3 to 5 per cent of their
assets in non-US stocks. That has now risen to 7 to 8 per cent, and we think
it could easily double again in the next three years,' said Mr Tom Davis,
head of equity capital markets at Merrill Lynch in New York.
The market for global offerings was also boosted by the introduction of
book-building techniques developed in the US domestic market, which helped
improve transparency.
However, the market has not been reliant on US issuers. In fact, many
participants are sceptical about international tranches, usually comprising
10 to 15 per cent of the total transaction, tacked on to US offerings, often
for league table, rather than distribution purposes.
This year, the normally active new issues market in the US has suffered from
the relative weakness of stock prices, causing many public offerings to be
cancelled.
However, 'a lot of the slack in the US calendar has been picked up by the
explosion of activity in Europe,' according to Mr Davis of Merrill.
The flow of prime European names on the privatisation calendar has been
little affected by more difficult market conditions.
Many governments, concerned about deficit financing problems, are willing to
scale down their pricing expectations, while companies may prefer to wait
for more favourable conditions.
A more competitive environment for deals is also the result of the
proliferation of privatisation programmes among European countries - as well
as what one banker describes as 'a ton of smaller corporate deals'.
Nevertheless, the second half of the year is likely to be dominated by a
spate of large privatisations for the likes of Ina, the Italian insurance
company, Repsol in Spain and Lufthansa in Germany.
Emerging market transactions, which suffered from the sell-off in those
markets earlier this year, could also stage a come-back, although at more
realistic pricing levels, while some analysts expect the stronger
performance of the Japanese market to pave the way for a resurgence of
Japanese convertible offerings.
'There is a global market for stocks now,' says Mr Ian Hannam, director of
Robert Fleming, with London as the main centre for the origination and
distribution of these international offerings.
An international equities column will run in this space every Monday. Our
weekly derivatives column will now run on Thursdays.
