FT  19 NOV 94 / Perspectives: Over or under to France? - Stuart Marshall
takes his car on Le Shuttle
Next time, will you take your car over or under to France? It all depends
whether you regard the actual crossing as a pleasure to be enjoyed or an
ordeal to be avoided.
Having at last made a trip with a car through the Channel Tunnel on Le
Shuttle, I can vouch for its speed. The 34 minutes it took from drawing out
of the English terminal near Folkestone to pulling up at the French one at
Sangatte, near Calais, beats even the noisy and uncomfortable Hovercraft.
The fact that the brightly lit, double-deck car-carrying wagon is rushing
along under 100 metres or so of water can be forgotten. Reality is
suspended. The train is so quiet and smooth riding at up to 100 mph (160
kph) one is hardly aware that it is moving.
Will the forecast of just one hour between leaving the M20 motorway and
joining the A26 autoroute be achieved by the average car driver? I reserve
judgment.
Four trains per hour are promised at peak travel periods. A one-hour
crossing will clearly be possible for motorists who drive into the terminal
just in time to catch the next train. But not if they just miss it. And most
certainly not if they arrive to find queues of cars waiting to cross.
Conceivably, they might have to wait up to an hour to drive on board.
Upper and lower decks are loaded simultaneously. The first cars have to
drive the full length of the train - well over 300 metres - but will, of
course, be first off. The day I went, disembarking was a much slicker
operation than loading. I would not like to find myself at the back of the
train, parked behind a car that would not restart after the crossing.
During the journey you sit in your car, with windows and sun roof open, to
catch frequent announcements in French and English. You can also hear them
on your car radio. Apart from walking up and down the carriage, the only
diversion is a visit to the lavatory - if you can find one. They appear not
to be signposted.
After walking through so many power-operated airlock doors between the
carriages that I lost count, and down the forward loading ramp, I found one
up a spiral staircase. A notice in French said it was under repair.
Eurotunnel is a fantastic engineering achievement. The terminals -
especially the colossal one on the French side - are like modern airports.
Will Le Shuttle - the vehicle-carrying train - be a commercial success?
Provided it is priced to be competitive with the ferries, I can see it being
a hit with motorists who live within 100 miles or so of Folkestone, are
short of time, hate sea travel and bring their own sandwiches and coffee.
Unless you suffer from acute claustrophobia, it must be a highly attractive
alternative to the Hovercraft.
Travellers from further afield may find little point in using Le Shuttle.
For them, the 75-90 minute Dover-Calais voyage by P &amp; O or Stena Sealink
superferry is the equivalent of a stop at a motorway service area. They can
have a proper meal, buy their duty frees, have a nap or stretch their legs
while they cross. Yes, of course, the actual crossing takes far longer than
it does by Le Shuttle. But the time passengers save by not having to stop
for a meal, buy their duty frees and so on will erode - even wipe out - the
train's main advantage.
The Dover-Calais ferries have so improved check-in procedures that they
offer what are almost 'turn up and sail' crossings outside summer peak
times. When the Monopolies and Mergers Commission allows P &amp; O and Stena
Sealink to pool their services - as it surely must next time they apply -
the situation will improve further.
Motorists heading for Brittany, the Atlantic coast of France and northern
Spain can spoil themselves by using my favourite, Brittany Ferries. A
nine-hour day crossing from St Malo to Portsmouth a few weeks ago was more
like a short cruise than a ferry trip. This immaculate and stylish ship has
a shopping arcade, a hairdressing salon, a children's playground and a
good-quality restaurant.
Cross-channel shopping - Page IX
