FT  09 DEC 94 / UK trade deficit at lowest level for almost 10 years
The UK trade deficit fell to its lowest level for almost 10 years in the
third quarter of this year, which could result in a significant turnround in
the country's balance of payments.
Official figures yesterday suggested that the UK may have recorded a
quarterly current account surplus in the third quarter of this year, for the
first time in almost eight years.
The recent improvement in the UK's current account has surprised many City
economists who were predicting last year that the British recovery would
suck in imports and lead to a deterioration in the balance of payments
position.
The Central Statistical Office yesterday said that rising exports and flat
imports caused the UK visible trade deficit to fall to a seasonally adjusted
Pounds 1.5bn in the third quarter of this year, down from Pounds 2.4bn in
the second quarter.
The CSO is not due to publish official figures on the trade in invisible
items, which recorded a Pounds 1.7bn surplus in the second quarter of this
year, until later this month.
But unless the surplus in invisible items fell back significantly in the
last quarter, yesterday's figures showed that the recent improvement in the
visible trade balance would have pushed the UK into a trade surplus, after
recording a deficit of Pounds 664m in the second quarter. Although the UK
recorded a surplus in the first half of 1980s, it has since recorded a
deficit, apart from a temporary surplus in the first quarter of 1987.
The trade in invisibles is a difficult item to measure, since the balance in
investment income, which is key part of the figures, can be very erratic.
The data on investment income include items such as the profits on UK
companies' overseas assets.
However, Ms Alison Wright, director-general of the trade body British
Invisibles, yesterday said she believed it was 'very unlikely' that the
surplus on investment income had deteriorated in the third quarter.
The City welcomed the data, not least because of a further, surprise fall in
import volumes. The volume of UK exports, excluding oil and erratics, rose
by 1.3 per cent in September, compared with October, while the volume of
imports fell by 0.6 per cent.
