FT  21 OCT 94 / Basque poll may allow Eta to follow IRA
The Northern Ireland peace process could have a knock-on effect on Spain's
Basque Country where regional elections on Sunday are widely viewed as
setting the stage for similar negotiations to end violence by Eta, the
separatist organisation.
The vote among the 2.1m Basques, who since 1979 have enjoyed increasing home
rule, is also seen as a watershed poll that could undermine the nationalist
rhetoric and extremist calls for secession from Spain that has dominated
much of local politics.
Opinion polls indicate that the Partido Nacionalista Vasco, PNV, the
mainstream nationalist party, will remain the dominant force but that there
will be big gains by Madrid-based parties - the conservative People's party
(PP) and the communist coalition, Izquierda Unida (IU) - which had formerly
been on the sidelines of Basque politics.
'I believe that once the elections are over,' says Jon Idigoras, a veteran
leader of Herri Batasuna (HB), the radical Basque group that acts as Eta's
political front organisation, 'there will be contacts with Eta and any one
of us in HB can play the role of Gerry Adams (the leader of Ireland's Sinn
Fein who was at the centre of the IRA's ceasefire).' Founded in the late
1960s, Eta has been responsible for more than 600 deaths in its campaign to
create an independent Basque state and some 500 of its members are in
Spanish and French prisons.
'We have still got to digest the Irish developments,' says Mr Idigoras, 'but
it is clear that they will force every-one, the Spanish government, the
Basque political parties and Eta to move their pawns.'
The sentiment is echoed by the PNV's Mr Jose Antonio Ardanza, who is certain
to be returned as Basque prime minister on Sunday.
Mr Ardanza has said during the electoral meetings that he favours 'discreet
and, if possible, secret' talks with Eta.
Mr Xabier Arzalluz, the powerful chairman of the PNV and its leading
ideologue for the past 20 years, says he expects a 'deep rethink' by HB
after Sunday's vote, particularly if the opinion polls are borne out and the
radicals, which are at present the third-largest political group in the
Basque Country after the PNV and the Socialists, lose votes.
Although there are important differences between the politics of Northern
Ireland and those of the Basque Country, Mr Arzalluz says HB's supporters
have been 'stunned by the IRA's decision to give up violence, apparently in
return for nothing'.
The momentum towards a Basque peace process will, however, depend on the
willingness of the Socialist government in Madrid to sanction the talks that
the PNV has in mind.
While the Madrid government officially opposes contacts with Eta, Mr Mario
Onaindia, a former Eta member and now a leading Socialist party official in
the Basque Country, says circumstances after the election will favour 'a
dialogue'.
Sunday's vote is, however, expected to see a decline in support for the
Socialist party which has been the junior partner in the Basque Country's
government for the past eight years. The shrinking Socialist vote is partly
prompted by the diminished popularity of Mr Felipe Gonzalez's government in
Madrid, but it could also reflect dissatisfaction among rank-and-file
socialists, mostly blue-collar migrant workers from elsewhere in Spain, over
the local party's decision to co-opt a minority left-wing group led by Mr
Onaindia and to compete for the 'ethnic' Basque vote.
Polls suggest that the IU coalition could be backed on Sunday by former
socialist supporters and, underlining a further shift from nationalist-based
politics, that the conservative PP will do well among young professionals.
'People are at last waking up,' says Mr Jaime Mayor Oreja, the leader of the
PP in the Basque Country.
'The permanent vindication of the Basque nation over the past years has only
created uncertainties and impoverished the Basque Country,' he says.
