FT  16 FEB 94 / UK Company News: CRSG rights issue to fund acquisitions
Conrad Ritblat Sinclair Goldsmith, the property surveying and estate agency,
yesterday announced the acquisition of two London office buildings for
Pounds 21.1m to be funded by a 1-for-1 rights issue.
At the same time the company reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 600,000 for
the half year to November 30 compared with losses of Pounds 260,000.
The rights issue price is 42p, against yesterday's close of 58p. It will
raise a total of Pounds 24.2m.
The acquisition is designed to reduce sharply CRSG's fixed overheads, since
the buildings will be primarily utilised by the company. It will also lock
into asset values which offer potential for appreciation.
Following the acquisition, the company will have net assets of about Pounds
30m, a net cash position, and a market capitalisation of about Pounds 54m.
CRSG was formed last May by the merger of Sinclair Goldsmith, the listed
property agency, with Conrad Ritblat. The two companies operated in
different segments of the market, and the merger aimed to provide synergies
and a stronger position in the chartered surveying market.
Mr John Ritblat, chairman of British Land, is chairman and leading
shareholder, with a 9.7 per cent holding in the enlarged company.
One property, at 9, Marylebone Lane, is being purchased for Pounds 10.1m
from Pleiad, a consortium of four Swedish insurance and pension companies
and Volvo. Pleiad acquired the property on a sale and lease-back basis from
Rosehaugh for Pounds 23.5m in 1990.
CRSG will relocate most of its staff from its West End operations in
Manchester Square, with 40 per cent of the new building being leased out on
short leases to allow for further expansion.
St Michael's House is an office development due to be completed in spring
1995. CRSG is paying Barclays Pounds 11m, under an agreement whereby
Barclays will be responsible for completing the property.
It is also planned that the lease on CRSG's offices in Finsbury Circus will
be ended in March 1996.
Turnover for the six months was Pounds 5.6m (Pounds 1.18m). Earnings per
share amounted to 7p (losses 2.03p). There is no interim dividend but the
directors expect to recommend a final of not less than 0.33p.
