FT  25 APR 94 / Business Travel: A partiality for perks - Michael Skapinker
asks whether frequent-flyer points should belong to the staff or the
employer
Ministers and civil servants in the UK last month were banned from taking
free private holidays using the air miles accumulated while travelling on
official business.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, said they could, however, use their air
miles to fly free on official business. Mr Major's reasoning seems fair. If
flights are paid for out of public funds, it is the taxpayer who should
benefit from any resulting perks.
Why should shareholders in private-sector companies be treated any
differently? Why should employees who travel on company money keep
frequent-flyer points for themselves?
Mr Paul Allan, chairman of the Guild of Business Travel Agents, says few
companies adopt this approach. Most allow employees to use their
frequent-flyer points for their own trips. Many take the view that business
travellers suffer the inconvenience of being away from home, and are
therefore entitled to use their frequent-flyer bonus to pay the cost of a
family holiday.
You might expect the airlines to take the side of Mr Major. The aim of
frequent-flyer programmes is to encourage customer loyalty. As it is the
company which pays the air fare, it would apparently be in the airlines'
interest to ensure that companies benefit from frequent-flyer points.
Not necessarily, says one airline representative. If a company does not tell
staff which airline to use, employees may pick one carrier rather than
another on the basis of its frequent-flyer scheme. 'If a company doesn't
have a travel policy, frequent-flyer points really come into their own,' he
says.
Even when a company does have a definite policy, this often specifies that
staff must travel on one of two airlines. An attractive frequent-flyer
programme can help ensure that travellers stick to one at the expense of the
other.
Mr Allan gives another reason why airlines believe the points should belong
to the individual rather than the company. If the company puts all the
accumulated points into a common pool, it is likely to use them when sending
staff on trips. Individuals are less likely to use their points. They might
not accumulate enough points or not get around to taking their holidays.
Mr Allan admits that business travel agents do not like frequent-flyer
points, because they earn no commission on them. In principle, his personal
view is that whoever pays for the ticket should receive the benefit.
If, as a traveller, this has you choking on your airline cashew nuts, what
of the following case?
A colleague was recently waiting to board a flight from New York to London
when the airline announced the aircraft was overbooked. If there were seven
passengers willing to fly on another airline 1 1/2 hours later, they could
have Dollars 200 in cash.
My colleague was almost crushed in the stampede and in no condition to ask
the lucky seven whether they intended to pocket the cash or hand it over to
their companies.
So, three questions on travellers and their perks:
1. Who should benefit from frequent flyer programmes - business travellers
or their companies?
2. Who should receive cash compensation?
3. If your answers to 1 and 2 are different, why?
Answers to me at the FT, fax 071-873 3196.
