FT  20 OCT 94 / Fannie Mae plans to raise Dollars 20bn on world bond markets
The US Federal National Mortgage Association yesterday announced its
intention to borrow Dollars 20bn on the international capital markets,
launching what it claimed was the 'largest global funded programme in the
world'.
The association, better known as Fannie Mae, is the largest supplier of
funds for American home mortgages and one of the world's biggest issuers of
long-term debt. It has borrowed Dollars 100bn since the end of 1992, and is
seeking to fund expansion of its Dollars 214bn portfolio of mortgages.
The company made its debut in global bond markets four months ago when it
issued Dollars 1.5bn of ten-year global debentures, 60 per cent of which
were bought up by international investors. Lehman Brothers, the US
investment bank, is arranging the new facility, with ten other international
banks involved in the the issue.
Fannie Mae is a shareholder-owned company chartered by the US Congress.
Funding programmes approaching this scale are normally the province of
sovereign or supra-national borrowers, such as the World Bank.
Mr James Johnson, Fannie Mae chairman, said the programme would tap
'important new markets abroad'. Fannie Mae did not detail the amounts or
currencies of the maturities it plans to issue. But it clearly expects to
reduce its borrowing costs.
Funds obtained under the global bond issued in the summer were obtained for
five basis points less than would have been the case in the US market, said
Ms Linda Knight, Fannie Mae senior vice-president and treasurer. A basis
point is one hundredth of a percentage point.
The programme will give Fannie Mae access to international clearing systems
to allow it to trade and settle securities in its own time zone.
Fannie Mae has a triple A rating from credit rating agencies. Since 1988 it
has built up a domestic market in so-called 'callable' bonds - which can be
redeemed before maturity.
Another US mortgage provider, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
known as Freddie Mac, launched its own Dollars 1.5bn global issue in July.
