FT  11 AUG 94 / Book Review: A hack out of the old block
POLITICAL JOURNALISM'S CRIME AND PUNISHMENT (Seiji janarizumu no tsumi to
batsu) By Hiroaki Tase
Shinchosha, Y1,250 in Japanese, 207 pages
The unexpected return to power of Japan's Liberal Democratic party in a
three-party co-alition led by the Social Democrats has sent executives and
commentators at some of the nation's leading television networks and
newspapers scrambling for cover.
The LDP is angry at media organisations which branded its former leadership
corrupt and dishonest once the party had fallen from grace last year, while
heaping praise on successive new administrations for their programmes of
reforms. Many media chiefs are now trying to restore former links with
leading LDP members who, still seething, are threatening to cut some news
organisations off from news emanating from the party.
Such fawning behaviour by the media is hardly a surprise: since its
establishment early this century, the Japanese press has been part of the
status quo and has sidled up to those in power. It has never been given -
nor has it taken on - the role of political critic. Moreover, the static
quality of modern Japanese politics has meant the media have seldom been
called upon to choose sides in any deep ideological or other conflicts.
Hiroaki Tase, a senior reporter at Nihon Keizai Shimbun, the leading
business daily, says one of the main reasons for the confused state of
Japanese politics is the unhealthy proximity between the media and
politicians. The country's immature press has failed to check the excesses
of politicians, who are widely seen as being preoccupied with securing
favours for their constituencies while party power brokers have dispensed
patronage among favourites.
Tase says his book, un-Japanese in its critical tone, is partly a confession
of his own past 'sins' as a political reporter. He says he realised that
something was wrong with Japanese journalism when he was Washington
correspondent for the Nikkei between 1985 and 1989. He found western
journalism much more open, analytical and critical.
One of the main problems in Japan, he says, is the kisha club, or the
reporters' cartel, which is attached to and usually funded by each ministry,
political party or faction, and business organisation. A journalist arriving
in Japan for the first time faces a bewildering array of more than 600 kisha
clubs accommodating more than 160 media organisations. Instead of commuting
to the office, reporters from Japan's mainstream newspapers, wire services
and television networks virtually live in these clubs, which resemble
permanent newsrooms, waiting for announcements or briefings.
It is a cosy arrangement for both sides, allowing government and business
officials to establish close links with the media while controlling
information. Diversity and competition are sacrificed, as reporters, who
know exactly what the competition will write, simply rewrite press releases.
Another factor contributing to the low standards of Japanese journalism,
says Tase, is the lack of bylines for reporters. This, he says, has dampened
competition between journalists and hence quality (although he fails to
consider the case of a publication such as The Economist, which does not
give its writers bylines). He also blames a lack of analytical skills among
reporters on the way news organisations tend to promote journalists for
their respect for hierarchy or for working long hours, rather than for their
intellect. 'After working from early in the morning to late at night,
political reporters come home tired as a rag. They don't even have time to
read books,' he says.
He points out that the closeness between the press and politicians extends
abroad. He describes a press conference hosted by the foreign ministry at
the Group of Seven summit in Munich in 1992 for Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the then
prime minister. The government official chairing the press conference
ignored questions by non-Japanese reporters, allowing only approved
questions by Japanese kisha club members travelling with the prime minister.
But the Japanese mainstream media are not scared to kick someone when he is
down, says Mr Tase. Mr Shin Kanemaru, a power broker in the LDP and a
political legend created by the media, is a case in point. After he had been
arrested and indicted in 1992 for receiving bribes from a trucking company
in exchange for political favours, the media engaged in near-hysterical
condemnation of him. The case against him is pending.
Tase warns that, if the media do not go back to the basics of journalism,
scrutinising the political establishment and writing the truth, they will
lose what remains of their credibility among the Japanese public.
Even though Tase's book has been received with resentment among some, his
views are gaining support among journalists, particularly the younger
generation. His solutions to the problems of Japanese journalism seem
straightforward. He calls for the abolition of kisha clubs, the greater use
of journalists' bylines, and the development of a media culture which
nurtures the development of more analytical journalists.
Yet, if Tase's prescriptions are correct, it may be a while before Japanese
journalism improves substantially and plays a leading role in forming public
opinion, rather than merely regurgitating the government or corporate line.
Although Tase has been following his own prescriptions, writing analytical
and critical features under his own name, he remains in a minority within
the press and even within his own newspaper. He argues convincingly that, in
a culture where open debate is new, analytical and lively journalism may
still take some time to establish itself.
