FT  27 JUL 94 / Survey of Tunisia (11): Europeans are targeted - James
Harding looks at the country's tourism strategy
'Tourism in Tunisia is a sun, sea and sand product,' according to Mr
Mohammed Jegham, minister for tourism. 'There is sometimes another 's', but
we do not encourage that, we leave it to our tourists.'
So saucy a comment may seem out of place from a minister of a state where
Islam is the dominant religion, but from the representative of a tourism
industry making a pitch for the Mediterranean market it is quite
appropriate. Rather than aiming for tourists to Morocco or Egypt, Mr Jegham
has his sights on people who might go to the Balearics, Canaries or Greece.
Along the coast and on the islands just offshore, purpose-built resorts at
Tabarka and Jerba, along with established destinations such as Hammamet,
Sousse and Monastir, offer holiday-makers guaranteed sun, a decent stretch
of sand, soft rock by the poolside, a cuisine blessed by both French and
Arab influences, and local wine, all for less than they would get it on the
northern side of the Med.
Tourists appear to be appreciating this. Mr Jegham predicts a record year
for hard-currency receipts from tourism of Dollars 1.3bn, rising by a
further 15 per cent to Dollars 1.5bn in 1995. The official figures support
his optimism, showing that for the first four months of 1994 tourists spent
4.54m nights in Tunisia, up 24 per cent on the previous year. Results are
particularly encouraging for the new luxury resorts offering golf, sailing,
hunting and diving in addition to the standard indulgences of a beach
holiday, with tourism nights up by 48 per cent at Tabarka and 38 per cent at
Jerba.
What is significant in a sector which represents only 5-6 per cent of GDP
but 20-25 per cent of hard currency receipts, is that Tunisia is attracting
more European tourists. In 1993, west European visitors rose by 17 per cent
to 2.16m, including 712,000 Germans, 448,000 Frenchmen, 246,000 Britons and
242,000 Italians.
The east European market is also being developed successfully, with numbers
doubling to 70,000 last year, estimated to increase to 100,000 this year,
and predicted to grow to 150,000 in 1995.
It is numbers that drive Tunisia's tourism strategy. The pace of
construction suggests that the country will have 200,000 hotel beds by the
end of the century.
Investment in quantity, which offers regular, bankable receipts, rather than
quality, which is notoriously vulnerable to trends in elite tourism, may
seem over-cautious. But Tunisian hoteliers point out that even if five-star
tourists spend a lot, they can also be infuriatingly unpredictable.
Considering the numbers of workers who rely on tourism - Tunisian hotels
employ 60,000 people and other linked sectors a further 200,000 according to
the tourism ministry, not to mention its impact on such sectors as
construction, agriculture and services - prudent investment in the more
dependable beach holiday market promises steady results.
Nevertheless, sun, sea and sand is not all that is on offer - for travellers
who interpret Mr Jegham's fourth 's' to mean sites, there are several points
of interest. In addition to the Islamic sites at Kairouan, the mosaics at
the Bardo museum, and the desert in the south, there are several outstanding
Roman sites.
At El Jem stands the largest amphitheatre in Africa visible from five miles
away across the open scrub of the Sahel plain. The 30,000-seater was built
in the second century AD and despite recurrent attacks and bombardment
against rebels who holed up in there over the first 1,000 years of its
existence, it is well-preserved. The delicate touches in the form of
mosaics, inscriptions and sculpture which are noticeably missing from the
theatre itself can be found in the accompanying museum.
In the north-west corner of Tunisia, not far from the Algerian border, two
further Roman sites are available for what is, in effect, a private viewing.
Dougga, a large provincial Roman town built in AD 168 sprawls across a
hillside commanding a view across a broad valley of olive groves,
wheatfields and fallow ground. For an 1,800-year-old site, it feels
strangely lived-in - the interconnecting dwellings, shops, latrines and
temples recreate a sense of the intimacy of the original Dougga community.
The wealthy inhabitants of Bulla Regia, which lies above the Mejerda Valley
and 60km north of Dougga, chose to build underground rather than on a
hillside exposed to the heat. They made little allowance in architectural or
aesthetic terms for the inconvenience of building beneath the ground - the
villas exhibit classical courtyards, the remains of central fountains and a
few pristine mosaics in situ, all in a cool, comfortable environment.
These exceptional sites are largely untroubled by tourists. Development of
the beach holiday package has been at the expense of investment in the
infrastructure for sightseeing. As a result, the benefits of privacy in
'discovering' Tunisia are paid for in the costs of transport  - car hire is
extortionate.
With receipts growing at 10 per cent on the back of Mediterranean business,
there is little reason for the enthusiastic and successful Mr Jegham to
redirect Tunisia's tourism strategy to invest in roads and buses to the
sites and super-luxury hotels for an elite clientele. Until that kind of
investment is made, however, you will have to wake the gatekeeper at Dougga.
