FT  06 DEC 94 / South Africa to launch Dollars 500m bond
South Africa is to return to the international capital markets this week
with the launch of its first international bond offering since the end of
apartheid.
The Dollars 500m global offering of five-year bonds is likely to pave the
way for a flood of new issues from other South African borrowers in both the
public and private sectors. It is being closely watched by major South
African companies and institutions as a measure of the acceptability of
South African bonds on the global market and of confidence in the economic
policies of the new government.
The state-owned electricity utility Eskom and telecommunications company
Telkom as well as several private companies are expected to approach the
international capital markets over the next few months.
Although South Africa has borrowed on the international markets before, this
is the first time it has been able to approach the US market directly.
The bond offering is expected to be launched either today or tomorrow.
Goldman Sachs and Swiss Bank Corporation, the banks lead-managing the deal,
were last night unable to comment on the pricing of the bonds, but the
market expects a price about 170 to 200 basis points (1.7 to 2 percentage
points) over US Treasury bonds of the same maturity. This compares with a
margin of about 175 basis points available on Greek bonds of a similar
maturity. Mexican debt is trading at about 200 basis points over US
Treasuries. Both countries have a similar credit rating to South Africa.
Earlier this year, South Africa was awarded an investment grade rating by
Moody's, the US credit rating agency. Japan's Nippon Investor Services also
gave the country an investment grade rating. However, Standard &amp; Poor's, the
other major US rating agency, awarded a sub-investment grade rating, albeit
with a positive outlook.
The launch follows the completion yesterday of a series of investment
presentations in Asia, Europe and the US by a South African delegation,
including Mr Chris Liebenberg, the finance minister; Mr Alec Erwin, his
deputy; Mr Chris Stals, governor of the Reserve Bank; and Mr Tito Mboweni,
labour minister.
Government bonds, Page 30
