FT  11 NOV 94 / Leading Article: Learning the right lessons
At last, after six years of attempts, the UK government has passed one of
the most difficult tests of domestic policy: devising a workable national
curriculum for schools. The final text published yesterday hardly deserves
an 'A' grade. But although the teaching unions have given only a grudging
response, the proposals look like delivering peace in Britain's schools
after years of turbulence.
A year ago that looked unlikely. The curriculum proposals, which stemmed
originally from unease about falling standards of literacy and numeracy, had
become so detailed and extensive that they threatened to engulf every minute
of the teaching day. Meanwhile, the desire to raise national standards in
core subjects had become an obsession with testing almost everything.
The problem has been that the government envisaged the curriculum and the
associated system of tests as performing three entirely separate functions:
setting a standard of education to which schools should aim; providing a
Nationwide picture of how students are doing; and giving parents and
teachers benchmarks for the progress of individual pupils. In trying to
satisfy those ambitions, the original curriculum risked performing no task
well.
Slimmed down
The final version of the curriculum, the product of an 18-month review by
Sir Ron Dearing, chairman of the Schools Curriculum and Assessment
Authority, untangles much of that muddle. It holds to the main principles
laid out in a preliminary revision in May: many areas have been slimmed
down, and the core subjects English, mathematics and science have been
strengthened, as have information technology courses.
There are still unwelcome signs of party ideology: UK history must be taught
even to pupils under seven years old, and, in line with the pledge the prime
minister made to his party conference, schools must encourage competitive
team sports. There are also signs of confusion about the aims of science
teaching; the emphasis on natural sciences has increased, but there is much
fiddling with the detailed content of lessons. Such points aside, schools'
anxieties about the rigidity and workload of the original proposals have
been broadly answered.
National standards
So too have many concerns about testing, in a series of radical revisions to
the original proposals. In recommending testing by external examiners at
ages 11 and 14, rather than by schools themselves, the curriculum has become
more clearly a tool for assessing national standards and comparing schools.
At the same time, it has rightly relinquished the impossible goal of
providing standards by which to monitor every child.
The changes appear to have pacified most of the teaching unions, who should
now withdraw gracefully from boycotting tests. They should recognise that,
having gained so many concessions, they could lose much sympathy by
persisting. The unions can, however, credit themselves with engineering,
almost inadvertently, an important improvement in education policy which
would otherwise not have taken place.
The pity of the saga is that a workable curriculum has been devised almost
by chance, out of a dispute that began on the narrow territory of teachers'
workload. Mishandling of that squabble by both sides widened the debate; it
is a happy accident that such a bitter row has produced a workable policy.
The government has now come up with more or less the right answer. But it
earns few marks for the painful and prolonged route it took to get there.
