FT  01 NOV 94 / World Stock Markets (America): Dow retreats after Friday's
strong gain
Wall Street
US share prices were mostly lower yesterday as equity investors regrouped
after Friday's big gains, writes Frank McGurty in New York.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average finished 22.54 down at 3,908.12 after a
wave of program-guided selling brought a sharp fall in the index during the
final hour. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 was off 1.42 at 472.35. Declining
issues were ahead of advances by a slim margin. Activity eased from Friday's
heated pace, although a fairly heavy 303m shares were traded on the NYSE by
the close. In the other leading markets, the American SE composite was 0.41
better at 458.57, while the Nasdaq composite added 1.35 at 777.50.
Early in the day, profit-takers came to the fore on the heels of Friday's
55-point surge by the Dow industrials. Bonds were a little lower, following
a big advance of their own. The day's economic news came in fairly close to
expectations and had little impact on sentiment.
The Commerce Department reported a small increase in personal spending and
income during September, while the Purchasing Management Association of
Chicago said its October index of business activity and the prices-paid
component of its monthly survey had both risen.
Investors took little notice of either development, with attention centred
on today's national survey of purchasing managers and Friday's crucial data
on conditions in the labour market.
Among the Dow components, Philip Morris was marked down Dollars 2 3/4 to
Dollars 61 1/4 . A Florida court ruled in favour of allowing any smoker who
had fallen ill because of nicotine addiction to be included in a
class-action suit against cigarette makers.
Shares in RJR Nabisco, another big tobacco company, eased Dollars  1/8 to
Dollars 6 7/8 . Sellers were influenced by the additional news that RJR
planned to divest 19 per cent of its food operations in a stock offering and
would drop its plan to acquire a minority stake in Borden, Dollars  1/4 off
at Dollars 13 1/2 .
