FT  22 AUG 94 / Media Futures: A Newbie's guide to Internet lingo
The most mild mannered person can become reckless and aggressive behind the
steering wheel of a car. Computer keyboards, it seems, often have a similar
effect. People who would not dream of using epithets in casual conversation,
swear outrageously when exchanging electronic messages.
For novice drivers on the information highway, this can come as quite a
shock. A naive question, calling for advice, is likely to receive a sharp
response such as 'RTFM' (read the **** manual) or , if you are lucky, 'Read
the FAQs' (frequently asked questions) from a more experienced traveller who
is not happy to be stuck behind a 'Net Newbie' (a learner driver). The Net
might be the new open space of global communications but its actually
structured by a highly developed etiquette and snobbery.
To avoid confrontations, keep a smile on your face. This can be achieved
quite simply by typing :-) at the end of your messages. Turned on its side,
this looks like a pair of eyes, nose and a smiling mouth.
Over the years, 'smileys' as they are called on the Internet, have becoming
increasingly elaborate. There is ;-) for winking and :-) a smiley with
mustache. :-x means 'my lips are sealed' and =:-) is a punk rocker.
If you are feeling :-( and lonely, the Internet is a great place to meet
MOTOS (members of the opposite sex) or MOTAS (members of the appropriate
sex). Get too personal, however, and you may be told LJBF (lets just be
friends), or CU (see you).
Since the Internet is a place where everybody has an opinion, there are
shortcuts to expressing them. IMHO is perhaps the commonest net acronym,
meaning 'in my humble opinion'. It is generally used in a far from humble
manner.
BTW (by the way) you should never send a message on the Usenet (user
network) that you don't want thousands of people to read IMHO. It is in the
PD (public domain) and YOYW (you own your words).
If you want to make an impression on the Net, don't spend Dollars (money) on
designer jeans, just make up your own acronym and use it as if everyone else
ought to know what it means. As an example TOD (the other day) will do quite
adequately. If you do not know what you are talking about, do not be
dissuaded from corresponding with thousands of other Net users. There are
three marvellous words that can be substituted for any word: foo, bar and
foobar are used as generics, as in 'The foobar Times, what's it called
again?'
An important rule is always to have some comment to make. It is called the
Ob- , such as the Objoke, the obligatory joke. This is not to be confused
with the OS, the computer operating system, which is far from funny and can
easily become the subject of a lengthy and highly technical 'Net exchange.
Getting 'flamed' is a rite of passage on the 'info highway' ' a term that is
BYW (by the way) de rigueur among REAL Netters. It is not too difficult to
incite such personal attacks.
A sure way to set the Net afire is to send messages suggesting that it is
populated by people who can't spell and whose grammar is poor. This , of
course, is true - but it is not a nice thing to point out IMHO.
