FT  28 DEC 94 / French suspend passenger links with Algeria: Security
shake-up in wake of hijacking to counter threat from Islamic militants
France yesterday suspended air and sea passenger links with Algeria, pending
new security measures to reduce the threat of attacks by Algerian Islamic
militants.
But it quickly set new security guidelines to allow French cargo ships to
continue to call at Algerian ports.
Four Islamic terrorists were killed on Monday when special forces stormed a
hijacked Air France airliner at Marseilles.
The terrorists, members of the Armed Islamic Group (GIA), an organisation
opposed to the Algerian military-backed government, were protesting against
French support for the regime.
The hijack was the most dramatic action taken against foreigners by Algerian
Islamic militants. It raised fears that the violent conflict between the
militants and the Algerian government could spill into France and other
western countries.
Fears of further attacks were heightened by the news that three French
Catholic priests and one Belgian priest were killed in Algeria yesterday.
The deaths in Algeria took to 76 the number of foreigners killed in the
country since the GIA ordered all foreigners more than a year ago to leave
or face death. It also took to 25 the number of French people killed in
Algeria since the eruption of the civil war three years ago.
The conflict has escalated since the cancellation of elections in 1992 which
the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) was poised to win.
Yesterday's deaths marred a triumph for Mr Edouard Balladur, the French
prime minister, who received praise from government and opposition
politicians and foreign governments for his handling of the hijacking.
His decision to order the successful rescue operation is seen as
strengthening his hand in presidential elections which are due in the
spring.
The tough action was supported by Mr Charles Pasqua, the hardline interior
minister and a potential prime ministerial candidate.
According to Mr Pasqua, there was evidence to suggest that the hijackers
were preparing a suicide mission over Paris.
He declined to give details, but passengers on the aircraft said the
hijackers had indicated they would crash into the French capital or explode
the aircraft overhead. Mr Bernard Kessedjian, France's ambassador to
Algiers, had been due to travel on the hijacked flight but brought his trip
forward.
Mr Alain Juppe, the French foreign minister, urged a democratic solution to
the crisis in Algeria and denied that Paris was backing the Algerian
government against its Islamic opponents. 'We are not backing a regime or a
government . . . the only side we are backing is that of democracy,' he
said.
Mr Juppe drew a pessimistic picture of the prospects for a resolution of the
conflict in the near future. 'I am convinced, unhappily, that the solution
to the Algerian drama is not close,' he told French radio.
Government officials said that a series of security measures were under
consideration to reduce the threat of attacks against French nationals and
businesses. Transport minister Bernard Bosson met heads of French transport
firms yesterday after Mr Balladur and other ministers held talks on how to
strengthen security.
Balladur poll boost, Page 2
Attention is focused on Algeria's hidden war, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 13
