FT  02 DEC 94 / How the cement cartel came unstuck: A look at the European
Commission investigation of price-fixing
The fat file sitting on European commissioner Karel Van Miert's desk is, he
says, as good a read in places as a roman policier.
Unfortunately for the curious, Mr Van Miert is not publishing his file but
he could probably be forgiven the hyperbole given that it took three of the
Commission's staff against 'an army of lawyers' five years to come up with
its contents.
The file's contents relate to the alleged illegal manoeuvrings of 33
European cement producers, plus one international cement association and
eight national ones that over a period of 10 years colluded to rig Europe's
cement market.
On Wednesday, a triumphant Mr Van Miert, competition commissioner, announced
the imposition of record fines totalling Ecu248m (Pounds 193m) on the
producers but warned that industry was getting better and better at hiding
evidence of collusive behaviour.
'There are still cartels in some sectors and they will do anything they can
to avoid us finding any evidence,' he said.
The chairman of one leading cement producer is alleged to have said at the
end of a collusive get-together that no minutes of the meeting would be
'necessary'. The participants were, however, not careful enough. A series of
raids on the headquarters of all the leading EU cement companies towards the
beginning of the investigation produced enough evidence to satisfy the
Commission that a powerful cartel was operating.
It alleges that the European Cement Association - Cembureau - established
what was known as the 'Cembureau agreement or principle of not transhipping
to internal European markets'.
Through the exchange of information on prices the principle allowed
producers to reduce price differences between countries so as to remove any
temptation to export and to get those producers who did export to align
their prices with those of local producers.
In effect, the system allowed the producers to maintain artificial frontiers
on the basis of domestic markets. As Mr Van Miert said yesterday: 'If a
German business wanted to buy cement from a French producer, just 20km
inside the frontier, it was not allowed to do so.'
Conclusions to one Cembureau meeting on intra-community trade said:
'Pressure from inter-member trade had slackened considerably through
improved bilateral contacts. Exports had tended to shrink, but there was
still a threat from outsiders'.
According to the Commission, exchanges of notes between French and Italian
producers, for instance, reveal their decision to share the Cote d'Azur
market. And at several meetings, the Portuguese and Spanish producers,
represented by their associations, monitored cement exports between the two
countries so as to ensure that markets were shared.
One note from a meeting between the Spanish and Portuguese stated that: 'The
parties present, who may be regarded as the repres-entatives of Spanish and
Portuguese cement producers, expressed their clear support for the principle
that there should be no cement movements from Spain to Portugal or from
Portugal to Spain.'
In 1986, after the loss of key Middle East markets, Greek producers started
to threaten other markets with cheap exports. Cembureau reacted swiftly. It
set up a joint trading company, called Interciment, to absorb Greek cement
and prevent it from being exported to other markets.
Using heavy-arm tactics the Italian cement producers also took action,
ensuring that a big contract between an Italian buyer and Greek suppliers
was broken. Meanwhile, other European cement producers ended contracts with
Greek producers to curb exports.
These practices continued right up until last year, according to the
Commission. The companies - most of which are appealing - have three months
to pay fines that in some cases amount to 4 per cent of their annual
turnover in cement.
The Commission hopes its action will introduce competition into Europe's
cement market. It has pointed out that cement can be supplied profitably
even over long distances.
'Cement supplies are possible from Germany and Spain to the UK and Ireland,
while Italian producers are able to cross the Alps and supply cement in
Switzerland,' it said yesterday.
The relevant market is therefore Europe, it concluded. 'If the markets were
sealed off by distance, there would be no reason for the behaviour of the
firms as described in the infringement.'
