FT  05 JUL 94 / World Trade News: EU quotas will backfire, Beijing warns
China condemned recent quotas imposed by the European Union on its exports
of products including toys and silk and warned yesterday that the curbs
would ultimately backfire.
Mr Wu Jianmin, spokesman for the Chinese foreign ministry, speaking in
Germany, said the EU restrictions did not send the right signals to China,
which expects to import goods worth Dollars 1,000bn between now and 2000.
'If you want China to import more from Europe, then you should make it
possible for China to export more to Europe,' Mr Wu said. 'But if you
introduce import quotas you will suffer ultimately.'
Trade between Germany and China totalled Dollars 10bn in 1993 and rose 41
per cent in volume in the first quarter of this year, Mr Wu said.
He was speaking after Mr Li Peng, the Chinese prime minister, had begun a
week-long trip to Germany to foster diplomatic relations. His delegation is
planning to sign contracts worth Dollars 1bn and letters of intent worth
another Dollars 2.5bn.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl said Germany would use its presidency of the European
Union to improve trade between the EU and China. He vowed to press for
China's readmission to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and earned
Mr Li's 'special thanks' for German efforts to 'further lower or totally
remove' restrictions on high-technology exports to China.
The EU quotas, covering five categories of Chinese exports, have been
criticised by many European importers since they were hastily imposed this
year. The British government is challenging restrictions on toys in the
European Court of Justice after failing to block them in the Council of
Ministers.
The curbs were imposed as part of a package deal designed to persuade EU
members to agree to abandon national quotas on about 6,500 other products
that were preventing free movement of goods in the single market.
Chief executives from 30 leading state-owned enterprises are accompanying
the Chinese premier on his visit to Germany, where the delegation will
conduct negotiations on a variety of steel, chemical and transport projects.
In the first of many ceremonies this week, the electronics company Siemens
closed a deal for a coal-fired power station to be built by a joint venture
in which Siemens has a 40 per cent stake worth around DM500m (Pounds
201.6m).
Siemens, which will bring its tally to 16 joint ventures in China after
signing agreements this week, said there were letters of intent for more
power stations, steel rolling mills and digital telephone exchanges.
Asea Brown Boveri, the Swiss-Swedish engineering group, is expected today to
announce several power station deals.
Mr Horst Teltschik, a senior executive at BMW and former top adviser to
Chancellor Kohl, also said a Sino-German group was working on several
transport projects to be built between 1996 and 2010 including a 600km
railway line in northeast China and an airport in Shanghai.
Mr Li also said tenders would be issued to build the world's biggest
hydro-electric dam on the Yangtze river. Preliminary work has begun on the
project, which is forecast to cost about Dollars 10bn, and is hotly
contested because of the amount of flooding involved. However the Chinese
premier gave no further details.
