FT  19 NOV 94 / The last warriors, betrayed defeated, dispossessed: George
Monbiot investigates the destruction of the Maasai, their society and the
land they roamed
Samson was tottering. As a senior elder, he was one of the men responsible
for blessing the community, and the more honey beer he drank, the stronger
his blessing was deemed to be. He had observed his duty with diligence.
Gaunt as a scarecrow, with mad red eyes, he staggered into my hut, demanded
for the third time that day to know who I was, announced that he was a
polygamist and a blaspheming heathen and collapsed on to my bed. A few
minutes later he sat up.
'This is the end for us and the end for everyone. The Maasai are finished.'
He fell back and immediately began to snore.
Samson was right on all counts. He is both a polygamist and a blaspheming
heathen and, as such, is the last in his line. The ceremony over which he
had just presided had, in effect, brought his own community to an end.
Throughout Maasailand, traditional life is ending so swiftly that, some
researchers claim, Africa's most famous surviving nomads will be reduced to
little more than tourist dancers within the next two years. The Maasai, who
once made their living by driving their cattle great distances across the
savannahs, are suffering a land privatisation so flawed and so fraudulent
that it has brought most of their 400,000 people to the brink of
destitution.
Their catastrophe began, as most African catastrophes begin, with good
intentions. Running down lions and killing them with spears, fighting other
tribes and other sections of their own tribe, stealing cattle and wives,
refusing to till the ground, the Maasai, who had overrun half of what is now
Kenya, were regarded by the first British officials as the antithesis of all
they sought to implant.
The administrators believed that east Africa would not become a God-fearing
and productive land until the Maasai were settled. At the beginning of this
century they confined them to just 10 per cent of the savannahs they once
occupied, then set to work to change the way they lived. To the Maasai, the
land was not theirs but God's. Elders would claim rights to use certain
places, but there was no outright ownership. The British saw this as a
prescription for disaster. They argued that if no-one owned the land,
everyone would exploit it as heavily as he could. Only by making every
herder responsible for his own patch could they prevent it from being
destroyed.
The British left Kenya before they managed to settle the Maasai. But, though
the tribe was no longer a threat to other peoples, the independent Kenyan
government upheld the policy, reasoning that nomadism was primitive and
unproductive. Recognising that the Maasai would not accept the outright
privatisation of their lands it started, in 1968, with an intermediate
stage, putting every community in charge of what it called a group ranch. A
small committee of elders was selected to manage each one.
Wherever external appointments have been imposed on self-governing people,
the newly powerful exploit their own communities, and the group ranch
committees were not slow to discover that they could do just as they wished.
They started to grab the best land for themselves, excluding the rest of the
Maasai.
Soon the ordinary people realised that if they too did not seize some land,
the greedy committee members would take the lot. The chaotic and inequitable
division of the savannahs that began in this way is now approaching
completion.
It is destroying everything that distinguished the Maasai as a people.
Over the last two years I have watched Samson's community falling apart. In
Enkaroni, close to the Kenyan border with Tanzania, I followed the passing
out ceremonies of the last warriors ever to be initiated. After six months
of festivities, they were dancing in a huddle of red ochre and beads when
Samson sent a man running towards them, carrying the horn of a kudu
antelope. He brought it to his mouth and blew four loud blasts.
Screaming, the warriors scattered. Four or five lost consciousness and lay
drumming their heels on the ground like the last spasms of the dead. They
had, one of them later told me, been overcome with grief and anger. The
sound, which traditionally brought their youth to an end, had also dissolved
the community, for warriors are the axis of Maasai life.
But the fury that all the young men felt was unfocused: they told me they
were not angry with anyone in particular, simply with the situation. This
was scarcely surprising, as the men who had sold them down the river were
some of the elders they had always been required to respect.
When the committee members had awarded themselves the best land, the other
people of Enkaroni had complained to the government. They were told that the
only option was to divide their ranch formally into inalienable private
farms.
But when, in 1987, the subdivision began, the villagers found that the
government recognised only the decisions of the committee members. Instead
of splitting the land equally, these people took even more for themselves.
One member bribed the others to let him have 4,000 acres; some ordinary
Maasai received as little as 10, and hundreds were left out altogether.
Travelling around Enkaroni, it is not hard to discover where the committee
members live. Red tiled ranch houses have sprung from the savannahs, with
new Land Cruisers or Mercedes parked beside them.
Traditionally the richest Maasai would distribute some of their wealth to
the poor, knowing that if, in this volatile environment, the tables were
turned, they could depend on the same generosity themselves. But these
Mercedes men, the wabenzias they are known in Kenya, no longer need the old
support networks, and feel they owe nothing to anyone. The rich people of
Enkaroni are becoming permanently rich and the poor permanently poor.
The division of the land has forced the Maasai to split into hitherto
unknown nuclear families. In a wind-stricken patch of thorn scrub Tepeney,
the mother of one of the warriors, complained that no-one came to visit her.
Before sub-division, people had arrived throughout the day, to exchange
news, take a cup of tea or ask for a loan. Now, she told me, it was every
family for itself, and she felt so lonely she sometimes believed she was the
last person left on earth. Yet she is among the more fortunate smallholders
for, seven years after the land was privatised, she still owns a dozen cows.
Nomadism evolved in east Africa because, during the dry seasons, the
customary pastures shrivel up, and the animals can only survive by migrating
to wetter places. Trapped on one plot, the cattle on many of the private
farms of Enkaroni died soon after the rains moved on. Their owners had to
sell up and look for work.
They were woefully unprepared. Most were illiterate and spoke only Maasai.
The wabenzi needed little labour, so the dispossessed moved to the towns.
In Kajiado, a small town 15 miles from Enkaroni, I found a handful of Maasai
who had used the money from the sale of their land to buy small businesses,
and hundreds who had no idea what to do with it. Every bar was filled with
men in red cloaks, with hoarse voices and shining eyes. Young men, deprived
of their role as guardians of the livestock, wandered the streets at night,
mugging people and breaking into shops. Government ministers sent lorries,
ferrying them to political rallies to beat up their opponents.
When their money runs out, many of the Maasai of Kajiado move north, seeking
work in Nairobi. They sink into slums like Kibera, where as many people live
in two square miles as in all of Maasailand, and one in 40 has a formal job.
Looking back over the history of the Maasai, it appears that the British
administrators misunderstood how they used their land. The lack of outright
ownership did not mean that the savannahs were uncontrolled. Every group of
elders regulated the areas they grazed: they decided who should be allowed
in and for how long. If people abused the land they were punished, for the
elders knew that anyone overexploiting it was exploiting them. Widespread
destruction began only when the Maasai were settled.
That there will never be sufficient employment even for those already living
in the cities is now axiomatic in Kenya. As the approaching completion of
privatisation coincides with a population boom, the effects of destitution
will be catastrophic. In 1994, for the first time in 30 years, Maasai
herders starved to death in southern Kenya. Yet, as the Maasai wobble, the
government continues to shove. In a quiet grove of fever trees beneath the
Ngong Hills, I began to find out why.
I met 'Amos' crouching between two trees. He told me he did not know whom he
had offended, but every time he showed his face he was arrested on public
order charges. He was one of 2,700 people in the community of Loodariak who
had been left off the registry when the land was divided. Their places had
been taken by 200 outsiders, registered as members of the community even
though many of them had never set foot there.
The people of Loodariak had petitioned officials at every level of
government, even waiting outside state house to waylay the president, but no
one would listen. They pooled all their money and hired a lawyer, but the
high court refused to hear their case. Now, Amos told me, they were left
with just one option.
'Let these people come. Let them come and say 'this is our land.' We are
ready for them. We are going to kill people here.'
Failure of the authorities even to acknowledge what was happening began to
make sense when, with the help of certain inducements, I was able to extract
the lands registry from a dusty office in Kajiado.
Among the new owners of Loodariak's territory I found the associates of some
of Kenya's most powerful people, including the maiden name of the wife of
the Minister of Land, Darius Mbela.
Mysterious manifestations of his wife's name had already caused problems for
Mbela. In 1991 he had almost been forced to resign when it was found on the
neighbouring community's registry. Mbela had claimed that his wife bought
the land, but lawyers uncovered memoranda he had signed naming people he
wanted included on the list. I visited Mbela, now minister of water, in a
weather-stained block in Nairobi.
He answered my general questions about privatisation with affability, but
when I turned to the case of Loodariak he became strangely terse. He told me
that his ministry was not responsible for the allocations, that he knew
nothing about his wife's registration, and the situation of Loodariak was
sub-judice and he did not wish to discuss it.
In Loodariak the new owners appear to be waiting for the price of their land
to rise before selling it on, but in the Rift Valley in western Maasailand
they have set to work to make it pay. Here the rainfall is just sufficient,
in good years, to allow them to plant wheat. Beside the road from Nairobi to
Narok I watched a tractor towing a plough through the grass sward. The
savannah flowers, the many hundreds of grass species, rolled over to expose
clean slabs of earth. For 20 miles I saw neither a house nor a human being,
simply a sea of churned soil. Some of the wabenzi here had seized as much as
30,000 acres. The ordinary Maasai were each left with insufficient land to
graze one cow. They could do nothing with these plots but lease them for a
pittance to the people who had taken the rest.
The soils here are shallow and fragile. After three or four years the
farmers abandon them. Recovery, if it happens at all, will take 40 or 50
years. Scanning the bleak horizon, I wondered where all the people had gone.
The answer came sooner and louder than I could have guessed.
Driving into Narok I saw a crowd leaning over the bridge, staring across the
basin of the river. The houses below them appeared to have exploded. Cars
were tangled in the branches of the bankside trees. A tree trunk transfixed
two walls of a shop.
The storm the evening before had been no worse than many that fell on Narok,
but soon after it broke the people heard a rumble in the surrounding hills,
and a wall of filthy water roared into town. Everything in its path was
swept away. Thirty-two bodies were found hanging from the branches of the
trees or rammed into the riverbank.
The Maasai pushed out of their pastures by the wheat farms had nowhere to
turn to but land too steep for the tractors to plough. With their livestock
and the displaced wildlife they crowded into the hilltop forests, consuming
the vegetation and compacting the soil. The rain had flashed off the
indurated ground. It brought to the people of Narok a final roar of despair,
as the nomads reached the end of their migrations.
George Monbiot is the author of No Man's Land: an investigative journey
through Kenya and Tanzania.
