FT  04 JUN 94 / Risk managers incredulous
The decision to fly a group of top security chiefs in one helicopter has
astonished leading risk managers and advisers working in the private sector.
The Ministry of Defence said yesterday that there were no formal procedures
governing the travel plans of senior members of the armed forces. Air travel
was far safer than the alternatives and it had no immediate plans to
introduce procedures in the light of the crash.
Mr Laurence Law, national services director with Alexander &amp; Alexander, the
insurance broker which advises leading multinationals, said: 'I find it
unbelievable. The basic thing you do is spread the risk.' His company
insisted that no more than two executive directors travelled on the same
aircraft.
Mr Geoff Saunders, risk manager with RTZ, the mining company, said: 'It is
the number one rule in corporate travel policy. You never double up on key
personnel. You just wouldn't put the whole board on one 'plane. It is a well
established principle at our company and most corporations share the same
philosophy.'
Another company official said: 'It's just common sense. You don't suddenly
want a huge hole in your hierarchy.'
Mr Peter Lerwill, risk manager with British Airways and chairman of the Risk
Managers Association, said: 'This is just terrible from a risk-management
point of view.'
Professor Brian Toft, risk analyst at Sedgwick (UK), an insurance broker
which advises a number of leading UK companies, agreed. He said: 'I find it
absolutely incredible that they could put all these people in the same
aircraft. I can think of no large company who would put all their key
players on the same flight.'
At least one UK company has negotiated an arrangement with its insurers
under which personal-accident cover available to senior employees is
restricted if more than two executives travel on the same flight.
Price Waterhouse, the accountancy firm, said it had a limit of 10 partners
travelling on the same aircraft, or three senior executive partners.
Standard Chartered, the UK-based international bank, said it had a policy
that no more than two directors travelled together by air.
