FT  07 OCT 94 / Bretton twins at an awkward age: The fundamental task of the
World Bank and IMF is to do themselves out of a job, argues Martin Wolf. But
they have much to do
It has not been a particularly happy 50th birthday for the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank. But 50th birthdays are often unhappy. By
that age, people have built up, along with a record of achievements, a list
of disappointments and mistakes. The attitudes and knowledge acquired in
their youth have often become outmoded. Usually, they have made enemies as
well.
So it is for the twins born at the Bretton Woods conference in July 1944.
For all the show at their annual meetings in Madrid this week, these are
troubled giants. They have a host of enemies and many friends do not like
them much either. This is not just a natural time to take stock. It is
essential for these institutions to do so.
The brilliantly achieved aim of the Bretton Woods conference was to
re-establish a global market economy. But it was to be a guided capitalism.
The assumption - particularly on the part of the British delegation, headed
by the economist Lord Keynes - was that there would be no return to a world
of free capital flows and 'hot money'. Finance was to be kept in chains.
Thus, the articles of the IMF required that currencies be convertible only
on current account (to pay for goods and services). Governments could retain
controls on capital movements, to enable them to maintain fixed exchange
rates while pursuing policies for full employment. The IMF was to underpin
this combination. Similarly, the World Bank was created to finance post-war
reconstruction and economic development, because the private capital flows
that had financed growth in the late-19th century, would or, it was
believed, should not return.
In the light of the Great Depression and contemporary advances in economic
thought, these were reasonable assumptions. But they have been undermined by
history. The IMF lost its envisaged function with the collapse of the fixed
exchange rate system in the early 1970s, largely caused by the impossibility
of combining pursuit of full employment with fixed exchange rates, once
capital flows were set free.
Since then the Fund has increasingly become the macro-economic policeman of
the more fallible developing countries, encouraging them to change economic
policy when in balance of payments difficulties. Under three entrepreneurial
managing directors, it also found a wider role in co-ordinating
international responses to the oil crises of the 1970s, the debt crisis of
the 1980s, and Soviet communism's collapse.
Similarly, the World Bank has been elbowed aside by surging private capital
flows, after the long hiatus of the debt crisis. Regional development banks
have also taken over some of its work, notably in Asia and Latin America.
In 1993, the net external financing of developing countries was Dollars
170bn (see table). But the net disbursements of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, commercial arm of the World Bank, were a
mere Dollars 2.3bn in the financial year ending June 1993 and negative, at
minus Dollars 0.7bn, the following year. Even soft-lending from the
International Development Association was only Dollars 4.6bn (net) in
financial year 1993 and Dollars 5.1bn the next year. The bank has become a
marginal provider of development finance.
These profound changes in the global environment have hardly gone unnoticed.
Senior managers of the World Bank are engaged in a vigorous debate over
whether theirs is a 'sunrise' or a 'sunset' institution. The IMF, too, is
debating its future, if rather more circumspectly. Yet the explosion of
global financial activity, albeit the most important, is far from the only
development with which the two institutions have to grapple. There are at
least six more.
The first is the end of the cold war. The institutions now have some 20 new
clients engaged in making the transformation from planned economies to the
free market. However, they can also no longer count for support on people
concerned about geo-strategic competition with the former Soviet Union.
The second is changes in what the main shareholders demand. The IMF has
recently come under formidable pressure to relax conditionality - the
imposition of economic policies in return for finance - for some borrowers,
notably Russia. The pressure on the World Bank is rather to adopt quotas for
increased lending to social sectors. Both institutions, but particularly the
World Bank, are also being told to become more cost-effective.
The third is the development record. A friendly critic would conclude from
the chart that development has worked, above all in east Asia. An informed
critic would know that these countries have best conformed to the
'Washington consensus' of fiscal conservatism, outward-orientation and
reliance on market forces.
Those on the anti-market left argue, instead, that the twin institutions
bear most blame for what has gone wrong in Latin America, the Middle East
and Africa. Meanwhile, critics on the market-liberal right conclude, more
plausibly, that, since they have been associated with failures as much as
with success, the Bretton Woods twins cannot make a decisive difference.
The fourth issue is the record of the institutions. Their prestige depends
on the perception that they know what they are doing, but they have made big
blunders. They encouraged much of the lending that led to the third-world
debt crisis; they failed to foresee the energy-price collapse of the
mid-1980s; they have supported incompetent and corrupt regimes; the World
Bank ignored the environment for too long, while some of its project lending
proved misguided; and many countries helped by the IMF have returned to its
trough again and again.
The fifth is ideological changes. Leftist hostility to the market economy
has become venomously focused on the Bretton Woods institutions. The left's
commitment to more participation also creates a profound suspicion of
governmental structures, shared by the market-oriented right, with its
demand for reliance on markets. So now the left is pursuing its '50 years is
enough campaign', while Lady Thatcher's former economic adviser, Sir Alan
Walters, argues that 'the ideal solution would be to abolish the Fund and
the Bank'1.
The last is the questioning of the institutions' professional competence.
Professor Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard University, for example, argues the IMF's
approach to stabilisation in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union has
been inappropriate, because it fails to understand the economic consequences
of the state's political bankruptcy.
How can these institutions best respond to the many challenges they
confront? The central necessity is to define and defend their core tasks in
ways that respond to justified demands and resist unjustified ones; the
subsidiary need is to execute those tasks as efficiently as possible. The
institutions' basic operational role can best be defined as helping those
economies unable, at present, to prosper in the global market system. They
must complement the global market economy, not substitute for it.
Countries that need these institutions' help are:
the least successful developing countries, notably those in sub-Saharan
Africa;
relatively dynamic countries such as Indonesia that remain poor and need to
achieve large institutional changes;
countries engaged in the switch from state planning to the market economy,
mainly the former Soviet empire and, in its own way, China;
and countries that fall into the hands of incompetent populist governments
or suffer large adverse shocks.
As a country prospers, however, and improves links to the global economy,
and as more of its investment is carried out by entities with access to
global capital markets, the operational role of these institutions should
disappear, as in western Europe. Balance of payments problems can then be
managed through the international capital markets.
The IMF's focus is on shorter-term macro-economic problems, while the World
Bank's is on longer-term structural difficulties. Given the different time
horizons and relationships involved, the two institutions should not be
merged, as some suggest. In addition, the IMF has a useful role vis a vis
industrial countries and, as important, is accustomed to imposing relatively
tough conditionality. The customary criticism is that it is too tough. But
critics fail to realise that its clients would have to make still more
savage cuts in spending without it. Beggars have few choices.
Being mainly restricted to the worst-managed developing countries is a
painfully circumscribed role for the IMF. Many argue, instead, that it
should play a central role in the formal management of exchange rates. The
independent Bretton Woods Commission - under the leadership of Paul Volcker,
former chairman of the Federal Reserve - has recommended that 'the
governments of the major industrial countries should give a high priority to
international monetary reforms aimed at reducing large exchange rate
fluctuations and serious misalignments'2.
If the IMF were to calculate target zones for exchange rates, it would gain
a more central role in the world monetary system than ever before. But the
IMF's major shareholders are unlikely to agree to this, as Mr Lloyd Bentsen,
US secretary of the Treasury, indicated in Monday's FT.
Today, the IMF's managing director attends discussions of the Group of Seven
leading industrial countries, but has no voice in decisions on exchange
rates. That is how things are likely to remain. For the foreseeable future,
the IMF's relations with major industrial countries will depend on its
surveillance discussions with countries, whose effectiveness is questioned
even among the staff. While the Fund might yet be needed to help with public
debt crises in industrial countries, that would indicate serious policy
failures.
For the World Bank as well, longer-term prospects are not all that bright.
The fear within it is that lending will move from stagnation to outright
decline, as its clientele is gradually restricted to south Asia and Africa.
Just as the IMF hopes for a role in exchange-rate co-ordination, some in the
bank dream of a consultative role in countries that do not need its funds.
But that would be a remarkable departure for an organisation that has
depended on mixing subsidised finance with its recommendations.
How well are the IMF and bank set up to do their core jobs? In the IMF's
case, questions about the quality of its advice are legitimate. Arguments
for greater transparency and wider use of outside economists are strong.
More important is a sharper focus on the underlying disease, which lies
almost always in the functioning of the state.
For its part, the World Bank has published a list of the six principles it
has derived from its experience - selectivity, partnership, client
orientation, results orientation, cost effectiveness and financial
integrity3. It also defines its objectives as the pursuit of economic
reforms that promote broad-based growth and reduce poverty, investment in
people, protection of the environment, stimulation of the private sector and
reorientation of governments on the tasks only they can do. Finally, it is
undertaking a re-engineering of its internal management processes, to make
itself more efficient, more responsive and more flexible. Yet the goals
hardly look selective and the six principles are little short of banal. As
for the managerial changes, they will be difficult to achieve, however
desirable.
The core functions of the Fund and World Bank are not, of course, their only
ones. Both provide valuable analyses of global economic trends and undertake
useful research and analysis. Both must also retain a flexible capacity to
respond to unforeseen events. Nonetheless, the fundamental job of the
Bretton Woods twins is to do themselves out of one. How will they reach this
goal? By insisting firmly on performance from those who depend upon them.
'Tough love' is what they must provide. If they do so successfully, their
operations ought to have largely faded into history by the time their
centenary is celebrated in 2044.
1 Sir Alan Walters, Do We Need the IMF and the World Bank? (London: the
Institute of Economic Affairs, 1994); 2 Bretton Woods Commission, Bretton
Woods: Looking to the Future, Commission Report (Washington DC: 1994); 3 The
World Bank Group, Learning from the Past, Embracing the Future (Washington
DC: 1994)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
             PERFORMANCE AND FINANCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
External financing
(Dollars bn)              1986    87    88    89    90    91    92    93
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          73.6  65.7  62.0  65.5  85.1  96.8 129.8 170.2
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-debt creating flows
  Official transfers      13.2  15.1  16.2  16.8  13.0  -8.3  19.8  21.2
  Direct investment        9.8  13.6  16.2  15.9  18.3  30.2  40.2  59.7
Reserve-related liabilities
of which:                 -1.7  -2.9  -3.5  -0.8  -3.3   0.4  -1.3   2.5
  Net credit from IMF     -2.2  -4.7  -4.1  -1.5  -1.9   1.1  -0.2 1 1.0
Net external borrowing    52.3  39.8  33.1  33.7  57.1  74.5  71.1  87.0
  IBRD*                    5.7   3.4   1.9   5.7   2.1   1.8   2.3  -0.7
  IDA                      2.9   3.2   3.4   3.7   4.3   4.4   4.6   5.1
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
*July to June
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: World Economic Outlook, World Bank
 ----------------------------------------------------------
