FT  07 SEP 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Rio Algom to boost copper at
Cerro Colorado by 50%
Rio Algom, the Canadian diversified metals group, already has decided to
boost by 50 per cent production from its USDollars 290m Cerro Colorado
copper mine in Chile - which began commercial production only in June.
This year Cerro, located 2,600 metres above sea level in the Atacama desert
120kms east of the port of Iquique, will produce 40m lbs of copper. Next
year output rises to 90m lbs.
Mr Colin Macaulay, president, said in London yesterday that Cerro was built
with expansion in mind and by 1996, by spending only another USDollars 50m,
Rio would lift annual output by half from the present design capacity to
more than 130m lbs.
He said: 'We could not have brought Cerro into production at a better time'
because all the indications were that copper prices would remain reasonably
high for the next two years.
However, Rio was primarily focused on keeping production costs down well
below the industry average and Cerro, by using the low-cost
solvent-extraction, electro-winning (SX-EW) technology, would produce
cathode copper for about 53 cents a lb until the expansion was completed
when costs would fall to about 50 cents.
Rio is one of the mining industry's most consistent profit makers but its
main source of income until recently came from the Elliot Lake, Ontario,
uranium mines. Before Cerro started production, all of Rio's copper - 116m
lbs last year - came from a one-third stake in Highland Valley Copper of
British Columbia. Highland's cash costs for cathode copper are about 62
cents a lb.
Rio first took an option on Cerro from a Japanese exploration group in the
early 1980s and intended to develop a mine in partnership with Outokumpu of
Finland. But the copper price plummeted and Outokumpu's unions objected to
it operating in a country which then was a right-wing dictatorship.
'That was fortunate because then the new SX-EW technology came along which
doubled the size of the reserves, is much cheaper and cleaner,' Mr Macaulay
said.
RTZ, the world's biggest mining company which once controlled Rio, also had
designs on Cerro. But when RTZ sold to the public its 51 per cent stake two
years ago because of growing conflicts of interest, 'it could not find a
legal way to take it away from us,' said Mr Macaulay.
The impact of Cerro on Rio can be judged by the company's sensitivity to the
copper price - it does no forward selling or hedging but all production is
pre-sold to Japanese and German customers on terms based on the market rate.
At present a 10 US cents a lb change in the price affects Rio's earnings by
19 cents a share. This will increase to 31 cents a share in 1995 and to 38
cents in 1996 after the expansion.
Mr Macaulay said Rio was exploring for more copper in Chile and, like most
other copper producers, was talking to Codelco, the state-owned group there,
about possible joint ventures or taking over some properties. But this was a
slow process because it was politically difficult for the Codelco management
and the Chilean government which faced strong union opposition to such
moves.
