FT  15 APR 94 / Survey of Turkey (5): Education - must try harder /
Industry's needs are not being met
Academics and educationists award Turkey's state education system good marks
for effort, but lower grades for an inconsistent approach, lack of qualified
teaching staff and patchy provision of facilities.
Mirroring the political swings and roundabouts, there have been 63 ministers
of education in 70 years, each making a mark by overhauling, reversing,
amending or merely tweaking the system.
Nevertheless, there have been strides in improving the literacy rate from
only 10 per cent 50 years ago to 80.7 per cent in 1990. There are, however,
marked differences between the literacy rates of men and women, the young
and the elderly as well as in urban and rural areas.
The development of educational facilities has been constrained by population
growth, migration and urbanisation. Widespread birth control slowed the
birth rate from 2.49 per cent in the late 1980s to 2.0 per cent in 1990,
which is still high in European terms. Thirty-five per cent of the
population is under 15 years of age. The age distribution pattern has led to
high unemployment rates among young people with nearly 65 per cent of the
jobless aged between 22 and 29 years old.
Family size is declining in higher income families, but rural families are
still large. The south-east has the highest population growth in the
country, which is politically significant as most people in these areas are
Kurdish.
School building programmes have sometimes lagged behind the rapid
urbanisation, leading to double shifts at some urban schools while those in
the villages have been emptied of pupils. In the cities population is
growing by 4.5 to 6 per cent a year, amounting in 1990 to 61.3 per cent of
the country's total.
Spending on education devoured 19.2 per cent of the budget in 1990, second
only to general public services at 25.2 per cent, and more than defence at
11.7 per cent. The cost of compulsory education between the ages of six and
14 is borne by the state, but parents are expected to contribute towards the
cost of books or additional facilities - so that the poorer areas, which are
in the most need, fall further behind.
Turkey's educational system of primary, middle, general and vocational high
schools and universities, has a declining enrolment rate from one stage to
the next. Efforts are being made to provide easy transfer between
vocational, technical and general secondary programmes and to tailor
education to developments in industry. 'We have a big hole in the middle,'
says Professor Mehmet Saglam, president of Yok, the Higher Education
Council. 'There are more than enough good engineers, but far too few able
technicians.'
The ministry of national education concedes that 'it has not been possible
to reach the planned targets to train the needed manpower'. Repeated calls
for more technical and vocational schools at the secondary level have been
heeded by Mr Nevzat Ayaz, the minister of education, who has been promoting
the recognition of 'skills' through apprenticeships, industrial placements
and adult education.
The chasm between education and the needs of commerce and industry has
become acute in many sectors. Last year, the Turkish Maritime Educational
Foundation (TDEV) campaigned to raise Dollars 8m to improve officer
training. Citing a disparity between growth in the merchant fleet and
education, the foundation said the training bottleneck hampered efforts to
increase tonnage and Turkey's share in the shipping market.
The TDEV succeeded in securing private and government funds for classrooms
and facilities while the Merchant Marine Academy, run by the Istanbul
Technical University, replaced its four-year course with a 2 1/2 -year
sandwich course, leading to an expected 200 deck and engine-room officers
graduating from the college every year, double the present number.
In higher education, there is stiff competition for university places. Out
of 1m applicants, only a third secured a place last year, despite annual
intake increases and the creation of new universities. From only 19
universities in 1982, there has been a threefold increase to 57, of which
four are private, while student capacity has risen from 49,000 to 173,000.
As a result, there is a lack of qualified lecturers and academic staff and
the student to lecturer ratio has grown rapidly.
In stark contrast to the austere, Dickensian state universities, the
recently established private universities are bright and dynamic. Bilkent
University, modelled on private research universities in the US, is
epitomised by its energetic rector, Mr Ali Dogramaci. Its rapidly expanding
campus, where all the teaching is in English, is funded through a foundation
comprising an array of companies from printing plants to furniture
producers, which also act as suppliers to the campus.
Yok was established in 1982 as a co-ordinating and policy making body to
develop Turkey's higher education system. Under its umbrella, the
Inter-University Committee is responsible for improving standards and
supervising research, higher degrees and other academic matters. Members of
the council and the committee are predominantly drawn from academia, with
one third of the 21 seats appointed by the government.
There remains a deep-seated suspicion over the role of Yok among those who
believe it is a hangover from the military coup of 1980 when right and
leftwing activism was rampant at the universities. But this is countered by
Prof Saglam who stresses the education council's academic credentials and
its metamorphosis since its formation.
The universities are conscientiously apolitical; neither faculty members nor
students are permitted to be active members of political parties. As Seyfi,
a student at the technical university in Istanbul says: 'We are here to be
technical, not political.'
The universities, however, cannot isolate themselves from the current debate
over Kemalist doctrines, democracy and the secular nature of the republic.
Although out of the headlines, the issue of whether women should wear
headscarves on campus remains. Turkey's secular constitution tolerates the
expression of religious beliefs but draws the line at open identification
with the principles of an Islamic state. The universities are at odds over
when a woman's insistence on covering her head becomes a political
statement.
