FT  22 APR 94 / Survey of Egypt (12): 'About to enter a gas era' - Heady
news in the hydrocarbons sector
It would have sounded unlikely even a year ago, but in the past few months
oil ministry officials have begun talking cautiously about Egypt becoming a
gas exporting nation by the end of the decade.
There has been much excited talk - most loudly from Israel - about gas
pipelines feeding Egyptian gas to its neighbour, which is already the
biggest single consumer of Egypt's crude oil exports.
It remains early days for all this yet. But Egyptian officials believe they
have reasons to be cheerful.
The cause is a sudden flush of good gas finds which led Mr Hamdi al-Banbi,
Egypt's petroleum minister, to raise earlier this year, almost at a stroke,
the official figure for Egypt's gas reserves from 12.8 trillion (million
million) standard cubic feet to 21 trillion.
Moreover, after further recent finds, particularly offshore in the
Mediterranean, and the recent allocation of new and potentially gas-prone
concessions, ministry officials are confident that this official reserve
figure could double again.
'You can say that Egypt is about to enter a gas era,' says Mr Wafik Meshref,
the state petroleum company's vice chairman for agreements.
All this is heady news for a hydrocarbons sector which previously had
offered little to cheer about. Egypt's oil industry, for instance, continues
to pump at about its capacity of 900,000 barrels a day (b/d).
Oil executives say they are doing better than they expected at prolonging
the life of mature fields, but tend to rule out the prospect of big new oil
finds. According to many in the industry, given present trends, significant
crude production looks commercially sustainable in Egypt for little more
than a decade.
The oil ministry is doing what it can to squeeze life into the oil sector.
Under Mr al-Banbi, the government has increased the flexibility and terms of
production sharing agreements with foreign oil companies, offered bigger
concessions and kept up a rolling series of bid rounds.
The present round, launched in January and scheduled to close at the end of
September, offers tracts in North Sinai, West Ismailia, Beni Suef basin, Abu
Aradik and Sidi Barrani, near the Libyan border. All but the last of these
are considered more likely to be oil than gas prone.
Some oil executives in Cairo say there are 'initially encouraging' results
from the application of 3-D seismic tests beneath the hitherto opaque salt
layers under the Gulf of Suez, the source of most of Egypt's crude. But such
promising avenues are few.
Most people in the industry argue that with greater prizes available in
Central Asia, Latin America and elsewhere, the continued attraction of Egypt
for oil exploration alone will depend critically on yet further improvements
in the terms of production sharing agreements.
Gas, therefore, appears to be Egypt's best bet.
According to Mr Meshref, most of the concessions awarded in the preceding
bid round, which formally closed last December, are either known to have gas
or seem to be gas prone.
Of the five areas awarded, British Gas and Shell won the shallow
Mediterranean Rosetta bloc; BG and Edison the deepwater West Delta,
International Egyptian Oil Company (IEOC), the Agip arm; and Amoco the
Rasal-Bar bloc in the eastern Mediterranean. (IEOC looks as if it may win
the operating agreement for the deepwater East Delta tract.)
Any real talk of prospective exports will hang crucially on the results of
drilling in these concessions.
But according to one of the foreign companies involved: 'There is already
enough encouragement, from what we see out there, to be talking about
possible exports eventually'.
At present, Egypt is in no position to sell gas. For the past several years
the country has been engaged in a long term policy of replacing fuel oil
with gas in the country's power stations, essentially to release further
crude for export. The country presently has about 170,000 b/d available for
export, and crude sales last year earned Dollars 2.13bn, according to Mr
al-Banbi, making it one of Egypt's main hard currency earners.
By the end of this year some 75 per cent of the country's power stations
will have been converted to gas, according to ministry officials, consuming
roughly 64 per cent of the country's gas output. This stands presently at
around 1.2m s cu ft daily.
The remainder of Egypt's gas supplies the local fertiliser industry (15 per
cent of the total), other industries and household consumers (a mere 1 per
cent).
But with domestic gas consumption rising by about 14-15 per cent a year, and
at least three new gas fuelled power stations planned, proveable gas
reserves will have to rise well above present levels before export plans can
go much beyond their present early discussions.
Nevertheless these have taken place - particularly with Israel. Egyptian
officials, however, are reluctant to say anything in public (or much even in
private) about these talks, beyond confirming that Mr al-Banbi has discussed
possible long-term export prospects. Several foreign companies are also
known to be examining the possibility of an export pipeline, notably ENI,
the Italian group, which has held discussions on a link from Port Said into
Gaza with a capacity of about 200m cu ft a day and a possible construction
cost of Dollars 800m.
Bankers in Cairo say that other proposals are being discussed but, given the
continued political sensitivity of deals with the Jewish state, remain for
now 'a bit hush hush,' as one banker put it.
Israel and perhaps also Jordan would be a natural market, given the
geography of Egypt's present and likely gas finds. Of present reserves, 38.5
per cent lie in the Mediterranean, 14 per cent in the Nile Delta and 16.8
per cent in the Gulf of Suez, with the remainder in the Western Desert.
Further big finds in the Mediterranean and Delta would give real impetus to
an Israeli pipeline deal.
Nevertheless, Egyptian officials say cautiously that they require more
detailed data on the size of a prospective Israeli market for their gas
before talks with the Israelis can go much further. Moreover, the ministry
is also studying Turkey as a prospective market and, possibly, Italy. For
the latter, however, exports would almost certainly be feasible only through
an LNG scheme, for which Egyptian officials say they would need a minimum of
5t s cu ft of gas available for export.
