FT  07 FEB 94 / Management: An aspirin a day keeps doc away - A simple drug
with benefits for the heart / Health Check
Aspirin goes back to the brew of willow leaves Hippocrates concocted to
relieve labour pains in around 400 BC. In the 19th century the active
ingredient, salicylic acid, was used for fevers and rheumatism; this was
soon followed by the introduction of acetylsalicylic acid, or aspirin.
Pain and fever are relieved by aspirin as it reduces the formation of
prostaglandins, substances which mediate inflammation. Taken half an hour
before eating, it may also be a useful treatment for some food
sensitivities. Importantly, aspirin blocks thrombosis by stopping platelets
clumping together. That anti-clotting action makes aspirin one of the most
effective remedies for 20th-century diseases.
Treatment with aspirin to prevent a second heart attack is now fairly
widespread; many people in middle-age and beyond take half an aspirin daily
after their first heart attack.
Aspirin can even help at the time of a suspected heart attack; it could save
many lives. New and expensive thrombolytic agents ('clotbusters') are not
suitable for everyone, but aspirin can make all the difference, especially
in the time before the patient reaches hospital when nearly a third of such
patients die.
As well as seeking medical help, anyone with crushing chest pains would be
well advised to take an aspirin right away. The recommended dose is 162.5 mg
or more; in the UK a standard aspirin containing 300 mg will do.
In angina, aspirin can help prevent clots forming in the narrowed parts of
arteries. It is especially useful in unstable angina, where attacks are
frequent and poorly controlled, and there is a one-in-six chance of a heart
attack occurring in the next 12 months.
In much the same way, the drug can help prevent strokes that are caused by
thrombosis. It may, however, worsen strokes due to bleeding, so it is
important to have a precise diagnosis.
In the British Medical Journal last month an overview of 150 trials
involving more than 100,000 patients was published. The analysis strongly
suggested that aspirin could help almost anyone with established blood
vessel narrowing in many parts of the body.
In patients at high risk, aspirin - like other anti-platelet treatments -
reduces the risk of death by about one sixth. The risk of non-fatal heart
attack and stroke is cut by about one third.
The message must be to give aspirin to anyone at risk of heart attack,
stroke or arterial narrowing in the legs unless there is a particular reason
to expect serious side effects.
Contrary to previous opinion, aspirin also helps prevent clots in veins.
Used around the time of major operations, it could halve the risk of
potentially fatal deep vein thrombosis.
In the laboratory, aspirin has been shown to inhibit the growth of induced
tumours in mice and rats. Now several studies in humans hint at a link
between aspirin intake and low risk of bowel cancer. This may be
cause-and-effect or some other kind of association - perhaps people who take
aspirin have healthier lifestyles, for instance.
Should everyone take aspirin routinely? The answer so far is no. There is no
suggestion that regular aspirin will do much for those already at low risk
of heart attack or stroke.
Aspirin does have a number of potential side-effects. It can, for instance,
cause gastric bleeding and ulcers, and in some people produce severe
allergic reactions. It can damage the kidney and perhaps the liver, which is
why paracetamol is the preferred pain-reliever for the under-12s. For those
at low risk of heart attack or stroke, the risk/benefit ratio increases as
side-effects become more important.
The author is a London general practitioner.
