FT  29 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Rescuing land from the creeping
desert - Deborah Hargreaves on UN efforts to rehabilitate barren, eroded
land in Africa
In the Yatenga region of Burkina Faso in Africa, farmers are rehabilitating
barren, uncultivated land by digging small pits and filling them with
manure. The dung attracts termites which digest it and start digging holes.
In this way the insects increase soil fertility and the land's capacity to
filter water.
Rehabilitated land in this region is now giving high yields of millet and
sorghum of over 1,000kg a hectare compared with much of Africa's
agricultural land, which is suffering from overgrazing, overcropping and bad
irrigation. The United Nations estimates that a quarter of the Earth's
agricultural land is at risk of becoming a desert.
This erosion of agricultural land in the world's dry zones is 'one of the
gravest problems our planet and its people face', according to the UN, which
is trying to broker a deal between countries over action on desertification
with a final treaty expected to be signed at a conference in Paris on June
6-18.
At the same time, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, a
Rome-based UN agency, is trying to demonstrate how land erosion can be
tackled with small-scale local projects aimed at turning barren areas back
into viable agricultural land.
In 1989 Ifad took producers from Niger to Burkina Faso to see the land
reclamation project. Those farmers decided to adapt the methods used in
Yatenga to their local conditions. By 1991 hundreds of Niger farmers had
joined the project.
Mr Bahman Mansuri, director of Ifad's Africa division, says the example
illustrates the importance of drawing on local skills and know-how to
reclaim degraded land. 'Indigenous technologies are very important because
they are low-cost, manageable by farmers and closely linked to local
conditions,' he explains.
Ifad has spent Dollars 700m on similar projects in sub-Saharan Africa since
1985 involving over 2m farmers. The organisation is holding a workshop in
Washington on Monday to try to increase public awareness of the problems
caused by desertification worldwide.
The UN Environmental Programme estimates that it will cost between Dollars
10bn and Dollars 22bn a year for 20 years to combat the problem of land
degradation. This compares with just Dollars 1bn currently being spent and
rich nations are reluctant to promise more.
'This is a real test of whether governments are serious about protecting the
fertility of this planet or not,' says Mr Nick Dunlop, London co-ordinator
of EarthAction, a network of 850 environmental groups in 111 countries.
'It's a question of how development resources are spent: some funds could be
re-directed from large infrastructure projects to help the poor conserve
their own land.'
Mr Mansuri stresses the importance of working with local farmers: 'One of
the greatest weaknesses of most large-scale soil and water development
projects financed with international support is that they come grinding to a
halt as soon as external project funding is withdrawn,' he says.
In Africa, Ifad is helping local farmers to conserve water and soil in a
number of ways, largely using low-tech ideas coming from the farmers
themselves.
Earth mounds are used in some areas where weeds are heaped into piles and
covered with soil between plants. These mounds help to slow run-off and also
become mini-compost heaps. In addition, stone bunds or rock walls about 1
foot high built along contour lines can help to reduce the amount of soil
washed away by the rain.
Half moons are shallow, semi-circular pits dug into barren areas near
deserts and filled with manure. These ditches catch water when it falls and
enable grasses to grow for feeding cattle. Ifad helped to install this
system in northern Niger, close to the Sahara desert and thick grass soon
covered what had been barren fields.
Another ingenious way of rejuvenating the land is to construct a network of
stone squares on naked rock which are filled with silt and soil from a
nearby river bed. Manure is added and vegetables can be grown.
These techniques can halt land degradation almost immediately, with crop
yields increasing by 30 per cent and because the results are so quick,
farmers are encouraged to continue.
Mr Mansuri is keen to spread these practices over a wide enough area in
Africa to prevent future famines, but for that he has to raise more money.
'At the Earth Summit countries were all worried about the ozone layer and
what happens if the ceiling falls on our heads,' he says, 'but I'm saying
the ground is crumbling beneath our feet.'
