FT  26 APR 94 / Management (The Growing Business): The right stuff for
'supergrowth' - Successful medium-sized companies share the same give-away
features
If you want to be a successful medium-sized company, educate your managers,
be generous with the share options and rush new products into the market.
You should also focus export efforts on high-growth markets and use more of
the modern management and production techniques larger competitors will
already have adopted.
If your company does all this, it shares many of the characteristics of the
'supergrowth companies' identified by Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accountants, in
one of the most comprehensive surveys carried out on the badly
under-researched UK smaller company sector.
As well as identifying characteristics of success, the survey questions
whether it is appropriate to restrict government support to companies with
fewer than 500 employees, a limit set by the European Union's definition of
a medium-sized enterprise.
The survey* covered more than 500 independent, family-owned and
owner-managed companies in the UK with sales of between Pounds 8m and Pounds
500m and between 20 and 3,000 employees.
Sir Brian Jenkins, senior partner at Coopers, says there are 19,000
companies in this middle market, which accounts for about 30 per cent of
total UK employment and about the same proportion of UK GDP.
The 70 highly successful 'supergrowth' companies, identified in the poll,
had grown sales by 60 per cent over the past three years. Almost all were
still relatively small with sales below Pounds 50m.
A number of factors distinguished 'supergrowth' companies:
A significantly higher number of senior executives had degrees than in the
sample overall. Throughout the middle market, however, companies were
providing more training to junior staff than to executives.
More supergrowth companies had increased the frequency of product or service
launches and shortened delivery lead times over the past three years than
businesses in the rest of the middle market.
More supergrowth companies used techniques now widely adopted in big
companies and by their larger customers. These include: use of
problem-solving teams with members from different disciplines within a
company such as sales, production and finance; simultaneous product
development by design, production and sales departments; value engineering -
redesigning to take costs out of existing products; reverse engineering -
stripping down a competitors' product to examine how much it would take your
company to make and market; and quality function deployment - ensuring
quality objectives cascade through the organisation.
Aside from these characteristics of success, there were other defining
features of the middle market as a whole. Nine-tenths of the companies had
only one product or service. In spite of having flat management structures -
or perhaps because of them - they had unstable management teams. More than
two-thirds of the companies had lost at least one top executive in the past
three years. Women were still rare at the top levels. Rapid growth was
unusual.
Two-thirds of middle-market companies thought the government's most
important role was to keep inflation and interest rates low. Nearly
three-quarters said increasing regulatory requirements were a crippling
financial burden.
And - an old chestnut - the Department of Trade and Industry needed to
improve the marketing of its services. Some 86 per cent of senior executives
of private companies had little knowledge of the DTI's activities despite
being a target for its assistance.
*Made in the UK - Middle Market Survey. Coopers &amp; Lybrand, 071 583 5000.
