FT  23 NOV 94 / Japanese bank lottery becomes a fight for business freedom:
The struggle is on to loosen iron controls
It started as a simple but ingenious marketing wheeze designed to lure
customers in Japan's newly-liberalised market for bank deposits. But Johnan
Shinkin's 'Super Dream' account has become a national cause celebre, a
struggle by an independent-minded business to break free from the iron grip
of regulatory controls.
The account was launched two weeks ago by the nation's largest credit bank,
with the novel attraction of a lottery for savers. The standard interest
rate on a one-year deposit would be 2.1 per cent, in line with similar
one-year rates, but Johnan announced that every six months its customers
would be entered in a lottery, with dozens of prizes to a maximum of Y50,000
(Pounds 324). Savers would have a one in 30 chance of winning a prize.
The new account was a spectacular success with savers who queued outside
Johnan Shinkin's branches and poured a total of Y10bn (Pounds 64m) into
'Super Dream' deposits on the first day alone.
But if it was a predictable hit with the public, it got an equally
unsurprising thumbs-down from Johnan's banking competitors. They immediately
cried foul, claiming the account broke a self-imposed rule by banks that
they would not offer cash bonuses of more than a few hundred yen as
incentives to depositors to open accounts.
The cuddly toy has long been a staple of Japanese banks' marketing
techniques, but offering customers money is considered strictly out of
bounds. The National Association of Shinkin Banks (small savings
co-operatives) to which Johnan belongs, responded to its members' complaints
by condemning the bank's scheme, upholding their objection that it broke the
voluntary rule, and warning other members not to follow suit.
In the public outcry that followed, the country's Fair Trade Commission
announced that it would investigate the NASB itself to determine whether its
actions represented a violation of Japan's anti-trust legislation.
The row has raised questions about the real extent of the freedom banks are
supposed to enjoy as a result of financial liberalisation, and has aroused
suspicions that the much-vaunted deregulation is not really much of a reform
at all.
Last month, the final restrictions on bank deposit interest rates were
lifted by the finance ministry. Since then banks have been free to offer
depositors any rate they choose. But, as Johnan's president, Mr Minoru
Makabe, points out, the advantages have somehow not been felt by the
depositor.
'We have had many customers saying they appreciate the cash prizes because
even though the financial sector has supposedly been deregulated, banks
still offer similar interest rates.'
Mr Makabe argues that his rivals' objections are actually based on a
conspiracy to deprive the public of the fruits of deregulation.
His lottery account represents, in effect, an extra 0.2 per cent on the
average deposit rate, a fact he claims is the real cause of the other banks'
discomfiture.
But in an ominous move, the finance ministry, which regulates the banking
sector, last week announced the formation of a panel to investigate the
account and to recommend what kinds of financial products might be
considered 'appropriate'.
Mr Jiro Saito, the top official at the ministry, acknowledged the probable
legality of Johnan's action but said: 'The law is not everything'.
Critics see the ministry's move as an attempt to consolidate its tight
control even after the apparent liberalisation.
'This committee should recommend how the ministry should play a proper
administrative role in the era of market liberalisation,' said Mr Makabe.
'It should conduct a drastic review of self-imposed rules that restrict
competition.'
It may prove difficult for the ministry to put the genie back in the bottle.
The account has won widespread support, and has come to be regarded as a
symbol of the entrepreneur's fight on behalf of the consumer against big
government and big business.
Any attempt to rein it in would be regarded with hostility by the Japanese
public.
The latest agency implicitly to declare its hand has been the National Tax
Administration Agency, which said on Monday it would treat winnings in the
lottery as non-taxable.
But the most significant threat to the regulators' plans could be the very
phenomenon they were supposed to be encouraging: competition. At the weekend
four banks announced they were breaking ranks with their association and
launching similar lotteries.
Mr Toshio Taga, senior executive manager at Shonan Shinkin bank, one of the
institutions planning to follow suit, said: 'There is no other product which
can collect tens of billions of yen in several days. This means users want
it. It is a depositors' rebellion.'
