FT  12 AUG 94 / Technology: Trials raise hope of breakthrough drug -
International Aids conference / A crucial therapeutic distinction
During the last decade, average life expectancy of patients diagnosed with
Aids in the developed world has increased from six months to more than three
years.
Most of the progress has been not in the treatment of HIV, the virus that
leads to Aids, but of the opportunistic infections associated with Aids that
eventually cause death. The most common include PCP, a form of pneumonia,
MAC (Mycobacterium Avium Complex), cytomeglovirus (CMV), a form of herpes,
and tuberculosis.
Among the opportunistic infections, CMV retinitis is particularly feared by
Aids patients because it can cause permanent blindness. Once patients have
been diagnosed with Aids, between 20 per cent and 30 per cent develop CMV
retinitis each year.
However, Syntex, the Californian-based company being acquired by Roche of
Switzerland, appears to have made a breakthrough in the treatment of the
disease.
It has been testing an oral version of one of its top-selling drugs,
Cytovene, to see if the medicine can prevent the development of CMV
retinitis.
Aids activists had expected interim results of the trial, which was started
in December and originally due to finish next summer, to be presented at the
10th International Conference on Aids in Yokohama.
But Syntex said it was not yet prepared to provide details. The US Federal
Trade Commission is still investigating Roche's Dollars 5.3bn (Pounds 3.4bn)
takeover of Syntex and has until later this month to make its decision. The
medicine, which last year generated sales of Dollars 85.5m, is already used
to treat patients once CMV retinitis has developed.
An independent advisory group monitoring the trial has told Syntex it should
prematurely stop giving dummy drugs to people on the trial. The US Food and
Drug Administration has also given its consent to stop that wing of the
study.
The decision was made on ethical grounds after it was discovered only 17 per
cent of those on Cytovene developed the disease, compared with 30 per cent
on the dummy drug. About 725 people were involved in the trial.
Scientists nevertheless warned that although the drug appeared highly
effective, concerns remain about Cytovene's safety when used with other
medicines.
A new oral version of Cytovene was used in the trial. The drug has until now
been administered through a permanent catheter in the chest to patients who
have already developed CMV retinitis. The oral version is also being tested
for patients who have already developed CMV retinitis. Three trials just
completed showed that when taken orally not as much of the drug becomes
available as when given intravenously, meaning the oral version is slightly
less
effective.
The oral version delays another onset of the disease between 51 days and 57
days. That compares with 62 and 67 days for the intravenous version.
However, the oral version has fewer side-effects and has significant quality
of life benefits.
Another increasingly common, devastating and lethal disease in late-stage
Aids patients is mycobacterium avium complex, a bacteriological disease that
during two years affects about 31 per cent of HIV-positive patients at an
advanced stage of the disease.
The main therapy available to prevent the disease is Rifabutin, a treatment
marketed in Europe by Pharmacia of Sweden. In two large trials involving
1,146 patients, only 48 people on Rifabutin developed MAC, compared with 102
on placebo. But 16 per cent of patients stopped taking the drugs because of
toxicity and other reasons.
Preliminary results of a study presented at the conference suggested
Abbott's Biaxin may have fewer side-effects and be more effective.
Mark Pierce of Vanderbilt University presented details of a trial of 682
patients with advanced Aids. Although the breakdown between placebo and
active drug has not yet been completed, only 5.7 per cent of patients
dropped out because of adverse effects.
In all, only 57 of the patients on both placebo and the drug developed MAC,
compared with a predicted 87 if all were on placebo. That meant a possible
80 per cent reduction for those on the drug compared with the expected
levels on placebo, claimed Pierce. The full results could be ready as early
as October, he added.
Wasting disease is a further serious problem for Aids patients, with body
cell mass falling below a level capable of sustaining life. The answer is
not eating more, which does not consistently restore weight, and often, at
best, increases fat rather than vital lean tissue.
However, a trial was presented in Yokohama which suggested Saizen,
Ares-Serono's recombinant human growth hormone, used on undersized children,
could be an effective treatment for the condition.
Preliminary findings were given from a 12-week study of patients with
HIV-associated wasting. Before the trial, the 78 patients who finished the
study had lost on average 11kg of their previous weight.
Those on Saizen increased their weight by 1.5kg of lean tissue, while those
on placebo gained weight which then continued to fall.
The trial indicated there was no difference between the two groups in the
development of Aids diseases or death. Those who have been on the drug for
two years on average gained more than 10kg.
