FT  08 APR 94 / Effective Aids drugs 'a long way off ': Doctors divided over
HIV treatment as study casts doubts on leading therapy
The year between the preliminary publication of the Concorde trial results
and their final confirmation today has been a period of almost unrelieved
gloom for the estimated 12m people worldwide who are infected with HIV, the
virus that causes Aids.
AZT, the only established Aids drug, turns out to deliver no lasting
clinical benefit to people who are HIV-positive but not yet showing
symptoms. And worldwide expenditure of more than Pounds 1bn a year on Aids
research has produced a plethora of potential drugs in early stages of
development, but nothing likely to treat the infection effectively in the
immediate future.
The official conclusion of the three-year study by French and UK medical
agencies published in The Lancet today is a cautious statement that 'the
results do not encourage the early use of AZT in symptom-free HIV-infected
adults'. That leaves doctors free to prescribe the drug if they want to.
But Professor Ian Weller of London's Middlesex Hospital, the study's
principal UK investigator, said his advice would be not to take AZT until
symptoms appear. Other clinical trials have shown that the drug does then
delay progression of Aids.
'Our results show that any benefits of AZT are transient and they have
disappeared completely after three years,' said Prof Weller. 'A policy of
careful watching and waiting is just as good as writing that prescription.'
On the other hand, Dr Trevor Jones, research director of Wellcome, AZT's
manufacturer, insisted that 'the drug remains the best weapon we have to
slow the progress of the disease'. He added: 'The question is where in the
course of the disease you begin.'
Wellcome said patients should discuss early and late treatment with their
doctors, 'allowing the patient to make an informed choice'. But Dr Jones
believes early treatment is valuable because some benefit, even a transient
one, is better than taking no action against the virus.
Aids charities and patient groups yesterday accepted the conclusions. 'For
everyone living with HIV, these are very disappointing results,' said Mr
Nick Partridge, of the Terrence Higgins Trust. 'While other clinical trials
have shown some benefit from AZT for people diagnosed with Aids, this trial
has failed to find any added advantage in the early, long-term use of the
drug by those who are HIV-positive but have no symptoms of Aids.'
Yet, Mr Partridge said, many HIV-positive people would find it hard to
resist medication until symptoms appeared. Those who preferred to fight the
infection more aggressively should, instead of simply taking AZT, consider
joining one of the many clinical trials of experimental treatments.
The largest trials now in progress are assessing the effects of combining
anti-HIV drugs. Many researchers believe that the best long-term prospect
will be to prescribe a cocktail of two or more medicines. The combined
ingredients may make it harder for the virus to develop resistance to
several drugs at the same time.
An independent international trial, for example, has recruited 3,000
patients to test combinations of AZT with the two other drugs approved for
HIV therapy: Roche's Hivid and Bristol-Myers Squibb's Videx.
All three drugs are synthetic chemicals called nucleoside analogues which
work by mimicking natural building blocks of genetic material. When HIV
takes up a drug molecule, it stops reproducing.
The international pharmaceutical industry is also developing other ways of
fighting HIV.
A comprehensive survey by the US Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association
listed a total of 103 Aids medicines in clinical trials at the end of last
year, 30 of which were aimed directly at HIV.
Other approaches include gene therapy - putting anti-viral genes into
patients' blood cells - and drugs to inactivate HIV by switching off its
genes. But such products are unlikely to be approved for general treatment
for several years.
'One of the lessons of Concorde is that pinning too many hopes on drugs
still in clinical trials increases the disappointment and disillusionment
felt when trial results highlight the limitations of therapy,' Mr Partridge
said. 'Above anything else, the Concorde trial has shown us how far away we
still are from effective long-term treatments for Aids.'
