FT  14 APR 94 / Hurd urges more confident Britain: Foreign secretary's
speech hits at Euro-sceptics
Mr Douglas Hurd last night warned Britain not to turn in on itself and urged
the country to make more vigorous use of its distinctive skills and
experience.
The foreign secretary used his traditional speech at the Lord Mayor's Easter
banquet at the Mansion House in London to map out a three-pronged agenda,
focusing on Europe, for British foreign policy in the 1990s.
In a wide ranging address, he also underlined the government's determination
to restore full trading relations between Britain and Malaysia.
The government was 'working hard in our contacts with the Malaysian
government, and through the business community, to get things back on an
even keel', he said.
Speaking with the European elections less than two months away, the foreign
secretary delivered a thinly veiled rebuke to diehard Euro-sceptics, saying
that 'while we dispute among ourselves' on issues like Maastricht and
European Union voting rights, 'we risk failing to notice how the world is
changing'.
Maastricht - though necessary and important - would not go down as 'one of
the great turning points in European history'. The 'endless, fevered'
discussion of the treaty often led people to lose sight of the real issue.
In a strongly worded passage, Mr Hurd said Britain ran the risk of
'intellectual shrinkage . . . as if we simply wanted to devise ways of
protecting ourselves against a Europe and a world which was bound to run
against us'.
He continued: 'This is negative and damaging nonsense . . . Let us use what
I hope may be a period of relative calm to regain the self-confidence we
need.'
He said Britain had to use assets like the City of London, its experience of
successful privatisation, and the reputation of the BBC and the armed
forces, 'more vigorously than hitherto'.
Mr Hurd enumerated three main strands of British foreign policy in the
1990s:
Shaping a Europe with which Britain and its partners could feel at ease.
This would be 'more than a single market' and would require policies and
institutions which were 'sensitive to the citizen'. Opening Europe to the
east. This would come partly through the search for security. Britain had
made it clear that Nato enlargement was 'not a question of 'if' but 'when''.
Putting new substance into old friendships around the world. Mr Hurd made
positive and conciliatory remarks about Britain's relations with both
Argentina and China. The country was injecting 'new vitality' into
commercial links with Argentina; relations with China were 'returning to
calm'.
The foreign secretary's remarks came as another staunchly pro-European
minister attacked hardline Euro-sceptics and federalists for attempting to
define the terms of debate on Europe 'in a way which excludes the viewpoint
of the great majority'.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, financial secretary to the Treasury, used a speech in
London to argue that the priorities of Britain's European policy should be
economic.
'The binding force of the Union is our shared interest in improving European
living standards,' he said.
