FT  18 JUL 94 / Equity Markets: Other markets
FRANKFURT
A quiet week is in prospect on the corporate front and few analysts expect
any change on interest rates when the Bundesbank Council meets on Thursday
for its mid-year monetary target review.
Colonia's annual meeting on Friday is expected, says UBS, to confirm the
positive underlying trends that have been developing in the German insurance
market so far this year.
Berliner Bank, which earlier this year merged with two others to form
Germany's sixth biggest bank, holds its annual shareholders meeting on
Friday.
MILAN
Preliminary details of the government's budget plans put some life back into
the market late last week but investors will have to wait until after a
cabinet meeting on Thursday for more information.
The market took the government's economic plans in its stride but it will
start the August account today looking decidedly fragile after events on
Friday, when Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the prime minister, clashed with
magistrates over plans to limit their powers of arrest in corruption cases.
Cartiere Burgo, the paper and packaging group, launches its rights issue
today to raise L230bn. Shares in the group fell by 4 per cent on July 5 in
immediate response to the announcement and by Friday they had fallen by
another 3.9 per cent.
BCI will talking to shareholders this week about plans to raise a total of
nearly L2,400bn in a two-stage share and warrant issue in the autumn.
James Capel said the way the issue was being priced, at L3,000 a share - a
discount of more than 40 per cent to the price at the time of the
announcement in May - meant that even after the price fall over the past six
weeks, it would still be at a discount of more than 30 per cent.
ZURICH
The market was still reacting on Friday to last week's disappointing
half-year sales figures from Roche and the somewhat better news from Sandoz.
This week, the focus switches from the pharmaceuticals to the
widely-recommended Nestle, which provides first indications on Friday of its
performance in the first half of the year.
Analysts are expecting slightly negative or flat sales, with the strength of
the dollar depressing the result by 4 to 7 per cent and outweighing
improvements in volumes and prices.
JOHANNESBURG
Having largely settled down following the turmoil resulting from the
unexpected change in South Africa's finance minister two weeks ago, the
Johannesburg SE will focus in earnest this week on the latest quarterly
results from the gold mining companies, writes Mark Suzman.
Gold Fields of South Africa, which reported last Monday, was slightly down
on the previous quarter, due largely to the effect of the South African
elections and sporadic 'stayaways'.
Analysts expect that Gengold and Anglo American, which release their results
on Wednesday and Thursday respectively, will also have been affected.
A lot of attention will be focused on the degree to which both companies
have managed to unwind their outstanding forward contracts to take advantage
of the higher spot price.
Their assessment of the current round of wage negotiations, which is
reported to be running into some difficulties, will also be carefully
studied.
Also under scrutiny will be Gencor, Gengold's parent company, which is
expected to announce on Tuesday the completion of its long-standing
negotiations to take control of Billiton, the mineral arm of Royal Dutch
Shell.
There has been some concern that Gencor's probable purchase price of around
Dollars 1bn will be seen by the market as excessive for the assets received.
However, the current turnround in the commodity cycle is seen to have
improved the group's longer-term prospects.
TOKYO
The strength of the yen will continue to be the focal point among investors,
as fears of US inflationary pressures still prevail among currency traders,
writes Emiko Terazono.
The strong yen has prompted profit-taking among overseas investors, who have
been the underlying force behind the recent strength of the Nikkei.
The Tokyo Stock Exchange last week said that foreign investors were net
sellers of Japanese shares during July 4 to July 8, for the third
consecutive week.
Meanwhile, brokers may actively buy up shares ahead of an expected
allocation of public funds to the stock market this week.
Also, reports that the Japanese post office plans to release Y1,000bn from
its life assurance assets to fund managers during the week, has heightened
expectations of a rise in the liquidity of the stock market.
Compiled by Michael Morgan
