FT  04 MAR 94 / Arts: Sympathetic 'Paddywack' - Theatre
Daniel Magee's Paddywack at the Cockpit is a play - and in parts a very good
one - about prejudice. It scores one definitive hit, yet also includes an
abysmal miss. The rest is in between. This mix, along with its topicality,
makes it a piece to be seen.
Paddywack is the most sympathetic work about Irish republicanism that I have
come across on stage. Damien, a young Northern Irishman looking for a job in
London, is suspected by his fellow lodgers of working for the IRA. Damien
does not deny the suspicion, nor does he overtly confirm it.
Instead he puts a thought of his own. 'Why is it,' he says after a spate of
London bombings, 'that the only question the British ever ask is how he (the
bomber) managed it, and not why he bothered to do it in the first place?'
Touche. No-one in the Kilburn lodging house even attempts an answer. Clearly
the IRA has still some residual sympathy in Northern Ireland which the
British fail to understand. This sympathy may fall short of approving the
violence, but it does not run to denouncing it: certainly not in front of
the British.
Yet Magee has a prejudice of his own. This is his manifest belief that, as a
result of the IRA bombings, the British have become more anti-Irish than
ever. I know of no evidence for this view. On the contrary, respect for the
Irish Republic has grown: British impatience is with the more intransigent
leaders of the Ulster Unionists; the IRA is a phenomenon to be contained
and, if necessary, lived with. The British tolerance of the disruptions
caused by the IRA is remarkable.
Magee plainly disagrees with that analysis. He thinks that the average Brit
regards 'Paddys' with contempt. 'Paddybashing' was a term coined by British
troops in Northern Ireland in the 1970s. It was meant to be a joke. Some of
the Irish took it literally, and that is perhaps the republicans' problem.
They take themselves over-seriously: more people, especially Irish people,
ought to poke fun at them.
Paddywack goes some of the way. Irish republicans, Magee suggests, can be
more racist than the British. Since there are very few blacks in Ireland,
the Irish do not have to live with the problems of a multi-ethnic society.
Magee also has a go at an English middle class woman who romanticises
violence and a middle class male intellectual whose liberal principles
collapse when he is sexually betrayed.
Since much of the drama depends on suspense - whether or not Damien is an
IRA activist - I shall not give away the plot. On the first night, the
direction by Michael Latimer looked a shade under-rehearsed. But it should
pick up speed and the subject is electric. James Nesbitt is a quizzical
Damien who maintains the suspense till the end. Holly Aird's Annette, the
girl who falls for him, is the essence of some female English liberals. And
the Soho Theatre Company is making the Cockpit one of the most exciting
small theatres in London.
Cockpit Theatre until March 26. (071) 402 5081
