FT  08 FEB 94 / Technology: Delays cut at the stroke of a pen - How
computing with a stylus could shorten trial periods for pharmaceutical
companies
Time is money for the international pharmaceutical companies. Delays in
getting a blockbuster compound to market give rivals time to launch
price-cutting imitations. Each day's hold-up can cost a drug company Dollars
1m (Pounds 600,000) in lost revenues.
As a result, the race is on to bring in the latest computer technology to
cut approval times. Clinical trials in particular have been targeted by the
big pharmaceutical companies.
While many big drug companies are investing in personal computers or
facsimile machines, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer in the US has gone one step further.
It is conducting trials with pen computers - electronic tablets reminiscent
of a Victorian school slate, with a stylus or 'pen' used for writing on the
screen. The software is usually displayed as forms, with boxes that can be
ticked or filled in.
Eventually, pen-based machines could obviate the mountains of paperwork
associated with drug trials. These case record forms, completed in
triplicate, can be up to 2cm thick for just one patient. A typical trial
would involve three phases, with an average of 200 patients per trial.
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, part of Rhone-Poulenc of France, is using pen computers
in a trial of antibiotics, which began last December. Of the 30 to 40 sites
involved, eight will be using the pen computers to duplicate the paper
system. The aim, says Greg Fromell, associate director of clinical research
in the US, is to assess how much quicker the electronic system could be.
Fromell sees two big areas of time saving. First, data entry - transferring
the paper-based test results on to the computer - is always a 'bottleneck.'
Data often have to be typed two or three times, introducing errors and
delays. With the pen computer, information is entered on the screen and can
be transferred directly to the main database.
Second, researchers lose months correcting basic errors in paper data. The
software selected by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, from the German company Padcom,
helps eliminate these.
If a number is required in response to a specific question, the software
will not allow the doctor to enter a letter or a tick. The software can
check the birth date of the patient to ensure that he or she is of the
appropriate age to take part in the study, or query information which
appears to be outside the likely boundaries - unlike a paper questionnaire.
Although Fromell believes that the breakthrough has been in the creation of
computers that take handwritten information, from companies such as Grid,
NCR, Tandy and IBM of the US and NEC and Toshiba in Japan, he argues that it
is not the hardware that will provide the competitive edge in drug trials,
but the software.
At Casella, the Hoechst subsidiary in Frankfurt, clinical project manager
Dieter R. Dannhorn believes it is critical to have software which can guide
doctors, many of whom will be inexperienced in the use of computers, through
the 'form': 'I need doctors who are happy with the system, otherwise I am
not going to get any patients for the trials.'
Casella has already conducted a short clinical trial with pen computers on
16 patients and is now planning clinical trials of an anti-fungal product
involving 240 patients in 10 centres with each patient questioned three
times.
Each doctor involved will receive a diskette to be completed on each patient
visit. For the Rhone-Poulenc Rorer trial, diskettes will also be used to
record patient information. They will be posted to the central office where
the data will be entered on the database. In future the data could be sent
automatically over a phone line.
While drugs companies believe it is too early to predict potential savings,
Padcom's director of marketing, Peter Munzel, calculates that for a typical
Phase II trial, where the drug is tested for efficacy for the first time,
the savings could be more than 40 per cent. If 10 centres and 200 patients
were involved over a 12-month period, with each patient visiting the doctor
six times, Munzel calculates a saving of more than Dollars 205,000 out of a
total study cost of Dollars 511,440, in reducing the number of queries and
the need for retyping.
He argues that if pen computers were used throughout the drugs approval
procedure, they could cut a month off each study. With an average of 30
studies per drug, that could cut months - or even years - off the eight to
12 years it usually takes to get a drug approved, giving companies an extra
two or three years of sales of a compound before competitors flooded the
market.
Not everyone is so optimistic. 'The challenge is to make major improvements
in a whole host of areas,' says Mark Delfino, a manager specialising in
information technology with the Boston Consulting Group, in Chicago. 'A
pen-based system per se is only a more friendly interface and an easier way
of getting data. Once the data comes in, you still need a set of processes
to handle it quickly.'
Although pen computers save time in data entry, Dannhorn calculates that
unfamiliarity with writing case study books for pen PCs means that it takes
him up to five times as long to write one for a pen computer as it does for
a paper-based trial.
Drugs companies could be drawn into writing much of their own software, with
the need to set up expensive centres of technical expertise, adds Delfino.
In addition, the cost of the hardware is 'not inconsequential'. He reckons
it costs between Dollars 5,000 and Dollars 20,000 per site to equip trial
sites with machines.
Today's pen computers are often relatively heavy and have a short battery
life. So far there is no de facto operating system - some companies favour
that developed by the Silicon Valley start-up Go; others prefer Microsoft's
Windows for Pen Computing.
While some pharmaceutical companies have been quick to adopt pen computing,
others have strong reservations. One concern is that handwriting recognition
technology is still relatively primitive. 'One of the biggest problems is
legibility: doctors have notoriously bad handwriting,' says Stephen Hill, UK
medical director for Roche, the Swiss pharmaceuticals company. He fears that
data could be inaccurately recorded - particularly in international trials
conducted in English where English is not the first language of the doctors
involved.
'One of the biggest problems is to make sure that the information we collect
matches the information on the patient's records,' continues Hill. If the
data are entered directly by PC from the doctor's surgery to the company's
main database - without intermediary checking - mistakes could slip through.
Regulatory issues are also hampering the widespread take-up of such systems.
At Pfizer's UK operation in Sandwich, Kent, for example, researchers are
still waiting for a pronouncement from the US Food and Drug Administration
about the use of electronic signatures. With paper trials, the investigating
doctor has to sign all the trial results to validate them, but there are no
guidelines about electronic signatures.
In Germany, the system is even more restrictive. Although the information
from the Casella trial will be recorded on screen, German law requires that
the results of the trials be printed out and signed by the doctor if the
trial is to be valid.
At Glaxo in the UK, researchers are experimenting with pen-based computers
but believe it will be another two to three years before they can rely on
them utterly. By then, says a spokesman for Glaxo, voice recognition
technology - where doctors simply talk to their machines - could have made
similar advances and might become the dominant technology.
