FT  08 OCT 94 / Markets: Elsevier digs for electronic gold - Bottom Line
Last Saturday, the co-chairman and chief financial officer of Reed Elsevier
took a break from meetings with US investors and spent the day playing the
tourist at deserted gold mines in Colorado, unaware they were about to
clinch a Dollars 1.5bn-deal.
Ian Irvine and Nigel Stapleton discussed the Anglo-Dutch publisher's
imminent launch on the New York Stock Exchange. But they barely mentioned
the group's long-term ambition to become a leading provider of electronic
information.
Within 48 hours, however, they had doubled the size of Reed Elsevier's
electronic publishing operations by agreeing to buy Mead Data Central - the
US distributor of on-line legal and business information.
The rapid turn of events was dictated by Mead Corporation, the paper and
forestry group, which decided quite suddenly to offer its MDC subsidiary to
Reed Elsevier after months of tentative negotiations.
A contract was drawn up in New York, Stapleton signed it and flew back to
London on Concorde. On the flight, he polished a presentation designed to
convince City analysts and institutions that the group had pulled off an
unexpected coup - winning control of the Ohio-based business in spite of
rival offers from Times Mirror, the US media group, and Thomson Corporation
of Canada.
After hearing Reed Elsevier's financial and strategic arguments, most
analysts have welcomed the deal, which is to be financed from cash reserves
and Dollars 1bn of borrowings.
'They have won access to a fast-growing electronic distribution network  -
that's the way forward for the group's professional and scientific
publishing businesses,' says Chris Munro of Hoare Govett.
Her view is echoed by Louise Barton, media analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
She says concerns at MDC's price have been soothed by forecasts showing
interest cover will remain above six times despite the near doubling of net
debt to Pounds 1.2bn.
'This is a sound strategic fit and the funding is well within the
constraints imposed by the balance sheet,' she adds.
Nevertheless, shares in Reed International and Elsevier, which merged last
year, fell after Moody's put its long-term debt ratings on review for
possible downgrade.
While admitting that gearing of 90 per cent looks steep, Nigel Stapleton
points out that the group's strong cash flow - Pounds 217m at the half year
stage - should enable it to pay down a large part of the debt within three
years.
The shares have since stabilised and should bounce back if MDC delivers the
growth expected by its new owners.
The electronic publisher is likely to contribute about Dollars 75m of
profits and Dollars 612m of sales next year - pushing North American
turnover close to 50 per cent of the group total.
By amortising a Dollars 1.27bn slug of goodwill, Reed Elsevier will enjoy
tax relief on those profits and ensure the deal is earnings enhancing.
'There are clear financial advantages,' says Frans van Schaik, of Barclays
de Zoete Wedd Nederland. 'It should add about 3 per cent to earnings per
share next year.'
On his forecasts, full year eps would rise from 41.9p to about 43.2p. Other
analysts predict an even larger jump to 49.5p by the end of 1995.
Strategically, the prospects are also alluring. MDC's two main businesses -
Lexis and Nexis - look set to grow rapidly. Demand for Lexis, the on-line
legal service used by 20 per cent of US lawyers, is expected to increase
almost 10 per cent next year. Nexis, the business information arm, has
access to more than 4,500 databases and is sold worldwide.
More importantly, they offer an electronic highway for Reed Elsevier's
high-margin scientific and professional publications, which could be
transferred from hard copy by the end of the decade.
That strategic shift looked some way off last weekend. But the MDC deal has
enabled the Anglo-Dutch group to fulfil its ambitions earlier than expected.
'Reed Elsevier will be able to better realise MDC's tremendous growth
potential,' says Steven Mason, Mead's chairman. 'The acquisition puts it in
a unique position in a rapidly developing industry.'
