FT  22 JUL 94 / British &amp; Commonwealth Collapse: The DTI Report - Other key
executives censured by government inspectors
John Gunn built British &amp; Commonwealth Holdings into a company worth Pounds
2.5bn in a few furiously busy years in the 1980s. But his purchase of
Atlantic Computers, a deeply flawed company, proved his undoing. B&amp;C crashed
in 1990 with Pounds 1bn in liabilities. Suits and counter-suits against
advisers are seeking some Pounds 3.5bn in compensation
Apart from Mr John Gunn, B&amp;C's chairman, the other B&amp;C directors facing
disqualification are Mr Peter Goldie and Mr Rusty Ashman.
Mr Gunn and Mr Goldie, who were close colleagues for some years, made a
slightly odd couple, the short often rumpled Mr Gunn contrasting with the
tall, suave Mr Goldie.
A chartered accountant Mr Goldie founded Abaco, a group of professional and
financial services companies, which B&amp;C bought for Pounds 189m in 1987.
He has not returned to business since B&amp;C's collapse and after taking a
philosophy degree at London University is now doing a doctorate at Balliol
College, Oxford.
Mr Ashman, another chartered accountant, joined B&amp;C as finance director in
October 1987. He was previously finance director at Abaco.
The inspectors are also seeking the disqualification of three directors of
Atlantic Computers: Mr David McCormick, its chief executive from its
acquisition by B&amp;C until his suspension in 1990; and Mr Nicholas Kennedy
Scott and Mrs Sien Yin Cheng Kai On who held senior financial positions.
Mr McCormick, an autocratic entrepreneur, founded ICA, a Dutch-based leasing
business, in 1977. It sold a similar product to Atlantic's Flexlease though
with much greater controls and more conservative accounting. Atlantic
acquired ICA in December, 1986.
Unlike the other Atlantic directors facing disqualification Mr McCormick was
a salesman not an accountant.
But the inspectors state that:'Even allowing for Mr McCormick's lack of
accounting expertise and for the fact that he was out of his depth as chief
executive of such a large group as Atlantic, we consider that he is open to
criticism for misjudging the situation and for not discussing Atlantic's
exposure problems in specific terms with B&amp;C before April 1989.'
The inspectors say he was in breach of his duties as a director for failing
to ensure that disclosure was made to Atlantic's auditors and for approving
its 1988 accounts.
Mr Kennedy Scott joined Atlantic in February, 1987, when it acquired Comcap,
another quoted computer leasing company where he was joint managing
director.
A chartered accountant with 10 years' experience of the computer leasing
industry he had joined Comcap in 1980 as finance director.
Comcap had a reputation as a much more cautious company than Atlantic with
much more conservative accounting policies.
The inspectors say he adopted a 'supine' attitude as group finance director
of Atlantic which did not change when he became executive chairman on a
salary of Pounds 175,000.
They found his claim that he only became aware of the scale of Atlantic's
contingent liabilities in 1989 'astonishing'.
For not drawing B&amp;C's attention to Atlantic's exposure he is 'open to
serious criticism for not properly discharging his responsibilities as a
director both of Atlantic and B&amp;C'.
Mrs Cheng is the least known of the individuals facing disqualification as
directors.
She qualified as an accountant in 1976 and was the audit senior with Rowland
Nevill - now Moores Rowland - on the 1977 Atlantic audit.
The firm was Atlantic's auditors from formation until the completion of the
1982 accounts. Mrs Cheng was taken on by Atlantic as chief accountant in
1978, reporting to its co-founders Mr Vernon Davies and Mr John Foulston.
Mrs Cheng became finance director of Atlantic after the takeover.
The inspectors concluded that she must have known that the statement in
Atlantic's flotation prospectus regarding the proportion of Atlantic leases
which contained walk clauses was incorrect.
They said:'Mrs Cheng is not assertive and we accept that in her early days
with Atlantic she would have round it difficult to stand up to Mr Foulston
and Mr Davies and that she therefore acquiesced in Atlantic's aggressive
accounting policies.'
However they concluded that she acted in breach of her duties as a director
in failing to disclose to the auditors the magnitude of the contingent
liabilities.
