FT  14 JUL 94 / International Company News: Renault in pole sell-off
position - John Ridding finds a mix of caution and commitment from Paris
Mr Edmond Alphandery, the French economy minister, chose his words carefully
yesterday. He was not announcing the privatisation of Renault, merely
preparing to select adviser banks for the 'evolution of the capital' of the
French state-owned automotive group.
But despite Mr Alphandery's reticence, the French government has clearly
started the wheels rolling again in its plans to transfer the car maker, one
of the flagships of the French public sector, into the private sector.
It raises the question of how and when Renault might be sold, and who might
be the buyers of stakes in the company, which is valued at about FFr40bn
(Dollars 8bn).
Behind yesterday's announcement lies a mixture of caution and commitment.
The government is keen to signal its commitment to the sale of Renault,
which has proved one of the trickiest proposals on its list of 21 public
sector companies slated for sale.
'The French state should not be in the business of making cars,' says Mr
Gerard Longuet, the industry minister.
Mr Longuet has pushed hard for Renault's privatisation. So has Mr Louis
Schweitzer, the chairman of the automobile group.
Industry observers add that the company is in good shape for sale. It is one
of the few European motor groups to endure the recession of the past few
years without falling into loss.
It reported net profits of FFr1.07bn in 1993, and has developed a successful
range of new models, including the Twingo, the quirky small car, and the
Laguna saloon.
A number of obstacles, however, have prompted a delay in the privatisation.
Most obvious was the collapse last year of plans to merge with Volvo of
Sweden, a merger that was intended to be the final step before
privatisation.
The sale of Renault has also run into political sensitivities. In
particular, the centre-right government of Mr Edouard Balladur has been
anxious to avoid trade union opposition to its plans for Renault, a
stronghold of union groups in the 1960s and 1970s and which remains a symbol
of a corporatist system of industrial management.
As Mr Alphandery demonstrated yesterday, the government remains cautious.
According to the economy minister, the launch of bids for adviser banks
'prejudges nothing' concerning the future ownership of Renault. He added
that there was no deadline for decisions to be taken.
French officials argue that there is no need to hurry. The government has
already named Assurances Generales de France, the insurance company, and
Groupe Bull, the computer manufacturer, as the next companies to be
privatised.
Proceeds from the privatisation earlier this year of Elf Aquitaine, the oil
group, and Union des Assurances de Paris, have already taken the government
beyond its targeted receipts of FFr55bn for this year.
Thus a possible scenario for Renault is a partial privatisation which could
take place before next spring's presidential elections. A sale of the
balance of the state's 80 per cent stake could follow.
Auberger, a senior member of the National assembly's finance committee, said
last month that the government was considering a partial privatisation, but
that no decision had yet been taken.
Industry observers in Paris suggest that a partial privatisation could
involve the sale of between 15 and 25 per cent of the company's shares and
the formation of a so-called 'noyau dur' of long-term shareholders.
Such shareholders would probably be drawn mainly from the ranks of France's
largest financial and industrial groups.
They might include Lagardere Group, the communications and defence company
which is involved with Renault in the development of its Espace vehicles,
and which has expressed an interest in its partner's privatisation. Elf
Aquitaine, which co-operates with Renault in several areas, including in
Formula One motor racing, is another potential investor.
Renault has also been seeking industrial partners following the collapse of
its merger plans with Volvo. Negotiations with Fiat of Italy, however,
concerning the sharing of foundry facilities, have ended unsuccessfully.
Privatisation, however partial, could help untangle the remnants of
Renault's complex cross-shareholding with Volvo. The Swedish company has 20
per cent of Renault.
