FT  14 MAY 94 / International Company News: Rescue plan lifts
Metallgesellschaft
Metallgesellschaft shares jumped nearly 15 per cent yesterday after the
German metals, mining and industrial conglomerate which came to the verge of
bankruptcy last January, published details of its planned restructuring
programme in its employees' newspaper.
The detailed account of the cost-cutting measures planned by Mr Kajo
Neukirchen, chief executive, coincided with a strong buy-note from a
London-based securities house recommending that investors purchase
Metallgesellschaft shares.
The shares rose DM36 to DM280 yesterday, following a DM17 rise on Wednesday,
with the result that the shares have risen by 25 per cent this week.
Metallgesellschaft said in its internal newspaper it was aiming to increase
liquidity and implement cost-savings totalling DM4bn (Dollars 2.3bn).
The planned reduction of the workforce by 7,500 people from 43,000 at the
end of last year would reduce personnel costs by DM550m, Metallgesellschaft
said.
A reduction of inventory levels would save a further DM500m.
Metallgesellschaft said it planned to save additional, large amounts of cash
by reducing investment levels and cutting borrowings.
Analysts said these figures were in line with their estimates and suggested
the main impetus for the share price movement came from the buy-note
released by UBS earlier this week. In this, Mr Peter Dupont argued that
Metallgesellschaft's shares - hitherto avoided by international investors in
the light of the scale of the group's problems - were oversold.
Drawing parallels with the share price performance of other near-bankrupt
German companies when entering a recovery phase, the UBS analyst argued that
in the case of Metallgesellschaft 'a major recovery story is about to unfold
based on aggressive cost-cutting, a strengthening industrial economy and
firmer metal and oil prices'.
Metallgesellschaft came to the brink of collapse after a US subsidiary ran
up DM2.3bn losses trading in oil derivatives. It survived after banks
provided a DM3.4bn rescue package. At current share prices, the group has a
market capitalisation of about DM4bn.
Analysts at other institutions cautioned yesterday that Metallgesellschaft's
shares remained a highly speculative investment, in spite of the surge in
price this week. The group lost DM1.88bn last year and is likely to lose a
further DM1.24bn in the current financial year to the end of September.
