FT  08 JUL 94 / Daimler considers Anglo-US policy on dividends
Daimler-Benz is considering changing its dividend policy to come into line
with what the group's finance director described as 'Anglo-American'
practice.
Speaking as Daimler an-nounced the successful completion of its DM3bn
(Pounds 1.2bn) rights issue, Mr Gerhard Liener said that in the long-term
Daimler was considering making sure that its dividend was more closely
related to the group's earnings.
German companies are reluctant to vary dividends in line with earnings,
although Daimler did cut its dividend last year, from DM13 to DM8,
reflecting the group's fall into a loss of DM1.8bn under US accounting
standards.
Mr Liener described the rights issue, the first from a German company to
incorporate a 'global offering' to international investors, as a great
success, although he conceded that Daimler had not managed to increase the
percentage of shares owned by US investors to 10 per cent as planned.
Demand from US shareholders was very high, Mr Liener said and 53 per cent of
all new shares not taken up by existing shareholders were placed in North
America, raising approximately DM200m.
This took the US shareholding to more than 8 per cent, from about 6.5 to 7
per cent before the issue.
The rights issue followed Daimler's move last year to become the first
German company to obtain a full listing for its shares on the New York Stock
Exchange.
The move had proved fully justified, Mr Liener said. Daimler remains the
only German company to have a full listing in the US and therefore direct
access to the world's largest capital market.
The rights issue was launched in late June just ahead of a severe downturn
in the German stock market.
The shares were offered at DM640, a 20 per cent discount to the then share
price. Had the issue been priced more tightly, it might have been forced to
follow Mediobanca, the Italian merchant bank, and cancel, Mr Liener said.
He said that Daimler's turnover was likely to exceed DM100bn this year,
representing a slowdown in turnover growth from the 19 per cent advance in
the first quarter of 1994. The surge in sales reflected the popularity of
the new Mercedes.
