FT  17 DEC 94 / Ex-directors are charged with fraud
Two former executives of MTM, the specialist chemicals company which almost
collapsed two years ago, were yesterday charged with fraud following a
lengthy investigation into one of the most rapid corporate declines in the
UK chemicals sector.
Mr Richard Lines, former chairman, and Mr Thomas Baxter, former finance
director, have both been charged with false accounting, conspiracy to commit
false accounting or furnish false information, and making false or
misleading statements under the Financial Services Act.
The charges mark the end of a 2 1/2 -year inquiry by the Serious Fraud
Office, which was called in after MTM shocked the City by reporting pre-tax
losses of Pounds 20.6m for 1991, against expectations of a Pounds 23m
profit. The share price fell from 290p to 25p after the losses.
Mr Lines and Mr Baxter both resigned in March 1992, shortly before the
company announced its full-year results.
Although officers conducting the inquiry declined to comment on the
allegations behind the charges they are understood to relate to problems
highlighted in the group's 1992 report and accounts.
According to those accounts: 'It became apparent that in previous years a
number of transactions appeared to have been incorrectly recorded, several
accounting policies were applied inappropriately and the group's
profitability had been incorrected stated.
'Furthermore, following a detailed review, the values at which certain
assets were carried in the group's balance sheet were found to be materially
over-stated.'
Yesterday, however, lawyers acting for Mr Lines denied he had been involved
in any wrongdoing. Mr Simon Catterall of Jacksons, solicitors, in
Stockton-on-Tees, said: 'He is utterly shocked and appalled by these
allegations. They are just not true and will be vigorously contested. Mr
Lines has dedicated himself to developing major British international
chemical companies which in the Teesside area alone have been responsible
for creating employment for over 1,000 people.'
Solicitors for Mr Baxter were unavailable for comment yesterday. Both men
have been bailed to appear at Northallerton magistrates on February 8.
Since their resignation, MTM has contracted rapidly, with its market
capitalisation falling from Pounds 256m to Pounds 30.4m.
Its decline has been marked by an aggressive divestment programme to reduce
its debts - dominated by the sale last year of most of its assets to BTP,
the leading speciality chemicals group, for Pounds 106.7m.
MTM noted in a statement to the stock exchange that the charges against Mr
Lines and Mr Baxter 'do not relate to the company itself nor any current
director or employee'.
The company said that a number of employees had been interviewed by the SFO
and had co-operated fully with its investigation.
