FT  02 JUN 94 / Survey of Belgium (1): Faster recovery than expected -
Political and business leaders are trying to regain their confidence after
riding out Belgium's worst recession for 60 years
Belgium is looking at a brighter future. After one of the most painful
recessions since the 1930s, the Kingdom is advancing again much more rapidly
than expected.
Economic recovery will bring relief for Belgium's beleaguered political and
business classes whose goal over the past 12 months can be summed up in one
word: survival.
Like all members of the European Union, Belgium has been buffeted by rising
unemployment, intermittent labour unrest and popular disillusionment with
politicians, few of whom can aspire to the stature of the immediate
post-World War II generation led by Paul-Henri Spaak.
The economic crisis peaked last summer when a wave of speculation threatened
to force the fragile coalition government led by Prime Minister Jean-Luc
Dehaene to abandon its policy of shadowing the D-Mark, a move which would
have put Belgium's long-standing anti-inflation strategy at risk.
Although siren calls were heard in favour of a UK-style dash for growth
through lower interest rates and a devaluation of the currency, the Dehaene
government and the Belgian National Bank stood firm. Together they refused
to break ranks on interest rates with their partners in France, Germany, the
Netherlands and Luxembourg - the informal hard currency club which continues
to enjoy the best prospects of forming a European monetary union later in
the decade.
Mr Dehaene plunged ahead instead with a 'global pact' between government and
employers, the most ambitious attempt to curb social spending since the
second world war. True, he failed in the end to win the support of the
trades unions; but the lengthy political bargaining which accompanied the
plan bought time for the government in the winter, as well as offering the
prospect of significant budgetary savings in the medium-term.
Mr Dehaene, who looks like a slimmed-down version of Chancellor Helmut Kohl
of Germany, has seen his reputation enhanced as a result of the global pact
and his chairmanship of the widely acclaimed Belgian presidency of the
European Union which ended last December.
Somewhat to the surprise of the Belgian public, he has been encouraged by
France and Germany to put himself forward as a candidate to succeed Mr
Jacques Delors as president of the European Commission at the end of the
year.
Sitting in his prime ministerial suite in Brussels, Mr Dehaene declines
politely to talk about his ambitions to move up the road to the Commission.
His biggest indiscretion is a loud roar of laughter in response to suggested
Cabinet permutations which would allow him to leave his post. Yet he clearly
relishes his reputation as the 'fixer' or the 'plumber' in Belgium, and
would not be averse to trying out his skills on a bigger stage.
'Many people thought that, because we were a government with socialists, it
(the pact) was not possible. We proved that it was possible,' he says.
'After a period of uncertainty between August and November (1993), we
re-established international confidence in the Belgian economy, in the
Belgian currency, and in the Belgian flag.'
The government's resilient response to the summer currency crisis underlines
a consensus at the heart of Belgium's complex domestic politics, in which
linguistic and cultural tensions between the French, Flemish and the tiny
German minority are contained in a loose federal framework. This consensus
rests on an assumption that Belgium's needs are best served by deeper
co-operation and integration in Europe.
Though Mr Dehaene says pointedly that the ordinary Belgian's enthusiasm for
Europe is not what it was, he still portrays his country as a test-case for
tackling the problems of the European Union itself: slow growth, high
non-wage costs, high public debt and popular disenchantment with political
elites (reinforced in Belgium by a corruption scandal in Wallonia which has
already claimed the scalps of three leading members of the local socialist
party).
Belgium's global pact drew inspiration from Mr Delors' White Paper on
employment, growth and competitiveness which was endorsed by the 12 heads of
EU government at the Brussels summit last December. The government's
measures to encourage companies to recruit young people under 25 without
paying full employment costs anticipated the White Book's own
recommendations; so too, the global pact's goal of holding down the real
wage growth to less than the rate of inflation for the next three years.
The ultimate prize for Belgium is European monetary union. The government
and the central bank are at one in striving towards this goal, believing
that in the long term a single European market without a single currency is
not workable. Yet it is also clear that the government's huge public debt -
built up during the spend-thrift 1970s  - makes it difficult for the country
to meet the Maastricht treaty's criteria for EMU membership.
Mr Dehaene is convinced that Europe's political leaders will exploit the
treaty language in the most flexible way possible to allow EMU to proceed.
Yet doubts remain about where to draw the line. If Belgium were welcomed
into the monetary union, protests from Spain and Italy seeking reciprocal
treatment would surely follow.
Peer pressure inside the EU has helped to steady Belgium's economic
performance, but Union membership has also served as an anchor for the
Belgians themselves. Without the Union, Belgians would be much more
vulnerable to tensions between Wallonia in the South and Flanders in the
North, where the Flemish population is becoming increasingly assertive in
pressing for greater political and economic autonomy.
Belgium's drive toward greater devolution of power to the regions started
almost 25 years ago, and it has been gathering pace ever since. The most
important shift took place as a result of the Saint Michael agreements last
summer which transferred powers over foreign trade, agriculture, and trade
export promotion to the regions.
The St Michael accords leave the national government with foreign and
defence policy, internal security, the budget and social security. Critics
argue that the national government has become nothing more than a glorified
co-ordinating committee; and there seems little doubt that Mr Luc van den
Brande, the garrulous Flemish minister president, sees the agreements as the
prelude to full autonomy.
Already, there are concerns in official circles about the ability of the
national government to rein back regional spending. Mr van den Brande has
also questioned why rich Flanders should contribute such a high proportion
of the national social security budget to compensate for poorer Wallonia.
Whether these tactics stir up or steal the thunder of the right-wing Flemish
national movement remains unclear; clues may emerge from this month's
European parliamentary elections.
Mr Dehaene regrets the controversy over social security, a matter which he
considers should be non-partisan. He plays down the threat of an eventual
split in the country between north and south.
In his view, the Belgian approach to regional and ethnic tensions compares
favourably with the failure to hold former Czechoslovakia together, let
alone contain the separatist violence in Spain and Northern Ireland. 'This
has never been, in the view of the population, a revolution.' Yet devolution
and regionalisation still represent something of a conjuring act. There is
something of a 'Now you see it, now you don't' quality about modern Belgium,
particularly when the visitor travels outside Brussels into the Flemish
heartland. It is only when something dramatic happens - such as the death
last year of King Baudouin, a monarch truly loved by his people - that the
national spirit comes alive.
To a lesser degree, Mr Dehaene, though far from popular, has also emerged as
a figure around which the diffuse ethnic and political coalitions in Belgium
can rally. He has done so for more than 15 years, first behind the scenes as
a power broker and chef de cabinet for prime minister Wilfried Martens and
latterly as prime minister himself from 1991 when no one else could win
sufficient support for the job.
If Mr Dehaene were to move to the European Commission, it could remove a
critical hub in Belgian politics. Leaving aside the rival claim of Mr
Lubbers, Dutch prime minister, this is his biggest obstacle to succeeding Mr
Delors.
