FT  25 JUL 94 / Car dealers fight battle of the bulge: John Griffiths on
moves to do away with letter prefixes on licence plates
The 'M' licence plate for new cars registered from August 1 may mark the
beginning of the end of the annual prefix letter system.
The annual registration letter change, for years proclaimed by the motor
industry as a useful boost to sales, is now regarded by much of the industry
as having grown into a market-distorting monster.
As a result, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders is investigating
a number of alternative systems which it hopes to present to the government
before the end of this year.
That would be too late to prevent the 'N' plate going ahead on August 1 next
year. But if the society has its way, the 'P' plate due in 1996 will never
appear.
It might seem strange that much of the motor industry, still recovering from
its worst recession since the second world war, now wants to abandon a
system which the society itself expects will lead to about 500,000 new cars
being registered next month.
But even the big UK manufacturers consider that the benefits of the larger
market presumed to be created by the system are outweighed by the disruption
it causes to both trade and industry for several months either side of
August.
Uneven cashflow, increased marketing and stocking costs and coping with the
flood of unwanted trade-ins left on dealers' forecourts in September are
just some of the problems which the August 'bulge' has created.
This year new-car registrations in August could exceed one-quarter of the
entire year's total for the first time, said Professor Garel Rhys, SMMT
professor of motor industry economics at Cardiff Business School. In
contrast, July has become a virtual sales desert for dealers, accounting for
about 2 per cent of registrations.
Many dealers say that the effect of motorists deciding to 'wait for the
plate' are felt as early as May.
Left unchecked, said Prof Rhys, the bulge could continue to expand until it
reached 42 per cent to 43 per cent of the market. But carmakers, having
adopted 'lean' manufacturing systems, are also introducing lean distribution
 -requiring as little as two weeks between placing of order and delivery.
Sewells International, the marketing monitoring group, said that replacing
the existing system with one spreading sales more evenly through the year
could save the industry almost Pounds 1.5bn in stocking and related costs.
The industry is not approaching the government in a wholly united manner,
however. The Retail Motor Industry Federation, the main trade association
for dealers, maintains that the extra sales it still believes are generated
by the prefix system are worth having, although the month of the new
letter's introduction might beneficially be moved, perhaps to October.
Yet this is a stance from which some of the UK's biggest dealers distance
themselves. Cowie Group, which has an Pounds 800m turnover and sells one in
every 40 new cars in the UK, described the August prefix as a 'massive
financial and logistical headache for the industry'. It results in UK
motorists paying more than necessary for new cars, said Mr Iain Jane,
managing director of Cowie's motor division.
He added: 'In the run-up to August, dealers sustain substantial overheads
out of all proportion to the rest of the year. They have to stock and
safeguard around three times their normal numbers of new cars, absorb the
associated costs, deal with staffing problems during the UK's peak holiday
period and at the same time they have to ensure that every customer gets
sufficient care and attention.'
Industry analysts believe that even if August registrations do match the
1989 record, they will be achieved, at best, at only marginal profit.
The 1989 record was set during a booming economy with consumer confidence at
an all-time high. In contrast a boom in registrations next month would be
against a background of continuing economic uncertainty, a faltering housing
market and other signs of consumer misgivings. Prof Rhys said it could only
mean a heavily forced market, with marketing incentives offered at a huge
cost to the industry and many cars pre-registered by dealers for which there
may be no actual buyers.
Alternatives so far suggested include number plates based on regions; a
prefix introduced at short notice at variable times during the year; and
random use of the remaining prefix letters.
An attempt to revise the system in the late 1980s failed largely because the
industry could not reach consensus on an alternative.
However, the police also opposed abandoning the annual prefix because, the
Home Office said, it helped people remember number plates and thus catch
wrongdoers.
