FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - Finance and Investment
(7): Curing deficit hangovers - Fiscal problems / Stephanie Flanders on debt
crisis fears
It has been a long time since the risk of a rich nation defaulting on its
debt seemed worth considering. Yet in some countries, the financial markets
seem to be taking it very seriously indeed. By and large, investors are not
simply punishing governments for the high level of their debt, but showing
doubts about their political will to reduce it.
Most of the world's industrialised nations emerged from the recession with
hefty bills to pay. On average, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development calculates that member governments' budget balances
deteriorated by 3 per cent of GDP over the period. For some countries, as
much as half of the budget deficit was 'structural', which meant that it
could only be cured by taking additional measures to raise revenues and/or
cut spending.
By the start of this year, many had put such measures in place. As the graph
shows, the effect of both fiscal tightening and continued economic growth
should start to stabilise the level of gross government debt in the OECD
area by 2001 at around 70-75 per cent of combined GDP. But that compares
with an average of around 40 per cent at the end of the 1970s. A larger
proportion of public spending, currently around 7 per cent, on average, must
now be used to pay debt interest, compared to 3 1/2 per cent in 1979.
When debt levels are high, there is little scope for governments to make
mistakes about future economic growth, or the path of government spending.
For a country with a debt ratio of 100 per cent, for example, every 1 per
cent increase in the gap between the nominal interest rate on the debt and
the rate of nominal GDP growth adds a further 1 per cent of GDP to the
interest burden.
Indeed, if the interest rate on the debt also exceeds GDP growth in real
terms, a country must run a primary budget surplus - a surplus of revenues
over spending, excluding interest payments - just to keep the debt/GDP ratio
constant. That puts tremendous pressure on elected governments. Raising
taxes to pay off debt is even less popular than raising money for higher
public spending.
Though several face this task, the financial markets seem to have decided
that Sweden, Italy and Canada are the most likely to fail. In at least two
of these, this is because there is an especially large gap between what
politicians need to do and what they seem able to do.
Sweden clearly faces the toughest battle. Having suffered the deepest
recession since the 1930s, the country had a budget deficit of close to 14
per cent of GDP in 1993, compared to a surplus of 5.4 per cent of GDP in
1989. The debt/GDP ratio, only 44 per cent of GDP at the start of the
decade, is now 93 per cent, and rising.
Since Swedish tax revenues already consume some 57 per cent of GDP, the bulk
of debt reduction must be achieved through lower spending. The last
government took some steps towards this, but their defeat in the recent
election showed that the public was in no mood for further austerity. With
unemployment at around 15 per cent of the labour force, the new
administration is unlikely to find it much easier to make the sweeping
reforms required.
There are similar worries about Italy, although the situation there is less
dramatic. The country has a long history of running up debt. But measures
passed last year have already gone some way towards stabilising the gross
debt/GDP ratio, currently over 125 per cent. Indeed, Italy was the only
country in the OECD (except Japan) to boast a primary budget surplus last
year.
Yet the heavy burden of interest payments - which consume over a fifth of
public spending - and recent over-spending mean that the country's debt
ratio will continue to rise, unless the Berlusconi government makes deeper
cuts. The fragility of his coalition has so far put this in doubt.
Political uncertainty also clouds the picture for Canada, possibly the least
worrisome of the three. The country's budget deficit will be around 5 1/2
per cent of GDP in 1994, while the the debt/GDP ratio is now 95 per cent.
However, much of the Canadian deficit was caused by the recession. As long
as the country continues to recover, William Dudley, economist at Goldman
Sachs investment bank, thinks that Canadian debt should stabilise without
further fiscal tightening. In the wake of the recent Quebec elections, the
worry about Canada does not seem to be that the debt itself will reach
unsustainable levels, but, rather, that the possible separation of the
country will cast doubt over who is responsible for it.
As the chart shows, investors' doubts have pushed up long-term interest
rates in all three countries. Their currencies have also suffered,
depreciating about 5 per cent against the D-Mark in the case of the Italian
lira and Swedish krona, and by a similar amount against the US unit in the
Canadian dollar's case.
As far as these countries' governments are concerned, the bitter irony about
the markets' concern for their financial well-being is that it makes their
situation dramatically worse. Rising long-term rates make for even higher
debt interest payments. Countries could, in theory, keep short-term interest
rates low, and reschedule the debt towards short-term bonds. But pressure on
the currency tends to mean official interest rates have to rise, not fall,
to defend its value, possibly further weakening the economy in the process.
Of course, signs of a debt-interest spiral of this kind only make investors
worry more, since the government must take even stricter measures to avert a
crisis. But the mere threat of one is supposed to be enough to force
governments to act sooner rather than later.
In most cases, the chances are that they will. In a world of highly
integrated capital markets, a good international credit rating is simply too
important for a country to throw away with a default on its debt.
In that regard, today's problem countries might well look wistfully to the
past. Many emerged from the second world war with even greater debt burdens:
US national debt was 125 per cent of GDP, in the UK the debt ratio was
closer to 200 per cent. Due, however, to the disintegration of the
international capital market between the wars, the bulk of that debt was
held by a country's own citizens. And tight capital controls prevented them
from taking their money out.
Neither condition holds today. As Sweden and others are painfully learning,
this ensures that their 'local difficulties', even relatively small ones, do
not remain that way for long.
