FT  27 APR 94 / South Africa Votes: Soweto's elderly finally come of age
Mrs Lena Tshabalala, 85, voted for the first time yesterday.
Nearly 350 years after European settlers landed in the Cape, 72 years after
the founding of the African National Congress, 46 years after the National
party took power, and nearly five years after Mr Nelson Mandela walked to
freedom, black South Africans by the hundreds of thousands went to the polls
to choose the party that would govern them.
Mrs Tshabalala, seated on the grassy green verge at the entrance to the
Soweto Home for the Aged, had no doubt as to where the credit for this
historic day lay.
'First, Jesus,' she said. 'Second, Nelson Mandela.'
Did outgoing President F W de Klerk deserve any credit? In a tone of steely
Christian charity, Mrs Tshabalala delivered her judgment. 'We shall pray for
Mr de Klerk.' Fellow voter Mrs Monica Hancock concurred: 'It wasn't him. It
was that poor old man who suffered in jail for so many years.'
Behind them stretched a queue whose dignity transcended their afflictions.
Arthritic and crippled, elderly and infirm, many wrapped in blankets and
wearing bedroom slippers, hundreds waited to cast their 'special votes' in
South Africa's first all-race elections. They stood hunched over canes,
obviously suffering from the long delays which had already kept them
standing in the sun for several hours. The Independent Electoral Commission,
charged with running the elections, appeared to have made few concessions to
the fact that all the voters for yesterday's polling were either elderly,
infirm, handicapped or heavily pregnant.
Only a handful of chairs, no water or first aid facilities were provided.
One old woman, close to tears with the strain of standing, pleaded with a
white woman journalist to vote on her behalf.
'I'm so tired. Take my dompas,' she said, holding out the hated 'passbook'
which today serves as an identity card for voting, but was used to keep
blacks out of cities in the bad old days of apartheid. 'Do it for me.'
Several hundred yards further back in the queue, the complaints were
vociferous. 'Nothing has been done. They're not doing their job,' said one
woman forcefully, as the queue seemed never to advance toward the polls.
Polling was due to finish at the Soweto home at 2pm, but by 11am only a
fraction of the queue had voted.
Elsewhere in Soweto were countless similar queues, outside primary schools,
hospitals and old age homes, waiting under blue skies on a crisp autumn day.
At Baragwanath Hospital, the massive public hospital which serves Soweto's
3m people, queues of patients in hospital gowns and nurses in uniform also
waited their turn to vote.
But electoral officials said they would probably have to abandon plans to
carry ballot boxes from bed to bed, to allow critically ill patients to
vote.
They simply hadn't got the staff.
Back at the Soweto Home for the Aged, Monica Hancock spoke for many.
'We never thought this day would come. It's a miracle,' she said.
