FT  29 MAR 94 / Scott report delay offers boost to Major
The politically explosive Scott report into arms sales to Iraq is likely to
be delayed until November or December, it emerged yesterday.
The inquiry was due to be completed by the middle of the year but the delay,
for administrative reasons, is a rare piece of good news for Mr John Major.
It means that the report will not be available until after the Conservative
party's annual conference in October, when Mr Major is likely to be fighting
for his political life.
Publication before the conference would have been a nightmare for party
managers, who already expect to have to explain away poor results in the
forthcoming local and European parliament elections.
The delay increases the prospect of a government reshuffle during the summer
Commons recess, when ministers expected to be criticised by Lord Justice
Scott could be moved or dropped.
Conservative MPs expect Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, to be the
prime casualty. Others expected to be criticised include Mr William
Waldegrave, minister responsible for open government, and Mr Alan Clark, the
former trade minister, who has left the Commons.
A summer reshuffle would allow Mr Major to lessen the impact of the report
by arguing that the three ministers expected to be most severely criticised
had already left the government.
From the government's point of view, the main drawback of the delay is that
the report is likely to appear while parliament is sitting, allowing MPs to
comment under parliamentary privilege.
Publication in November, instead of September as anticipated, could also
complicate matters for Mr Major if the Conservative party is in the throes
of a leadership election. However, possible challengers such as Mr Kenneth
Clarke, the chancellor, may also sustain political damage.
The inquiry's timetable has slipped because of the volume of evidence, the
judge's difficulties in obtaining some government papers, and problems in
scheduling witnesses for oral hearings.
The judge is understood to believe that the revised target is 'realistic'.
The inquiry will today take evidence from its final ministerial witness, the
former trade minister Lord Trefgarne, before going into recess for over a
month.
There will be a further week of oral hearings in May, when Lord Justice
Scott will take evidence from senior Customs officials.
By the end of this week, the judge will have taken written evidence from 166
witnesses, sat in public session for over 400 hours and gathered around
200,000 pages of documents.
