FT  25 JAN 94 / International Company News: Norwegian banks in merger talks
Christiania Bank and Fokus Bank, two of Norway's biggest banks, have opened
talks on a proposed merger, leading to one of the biggest rationalisations
of Norway's troubled banking sector since it plunged into a loan loss crisis
at the turn of the decade.
The banks said Fokus, the smaller of the two, had initiated the talks
following a decision to assess the alternatives to remaining free-standing.
Fokus, which was taken over by the state in 1991, was among the hardest hit
banks and remains burdened by credit losses despite a sharply improved
performance during 1993 which resulted in a NKr246.8m (Dollars 32.83m)
profit in the first nine months.
A merger with Christiania, itself still 69 per cent owned by the state, is
understood to be one of the options for streamlining the banking system in a
confidential report commissioned by the authorities from Davis International
Banking Consultants of the UK.
However, a report in a Norwegian business newspaper yesterday said an Oslo
brokerage house was working on an alternative proposal whereby Fokus would
be kept independent through a NKr500m recapitalisation package raised from a
group of domestic and foreign investors.
Orkla Finans, said to be the broker involved, refused to comment yesterday.
Christiania Bank, the country's second largest by asset value, said it and
Fokus saw the potential for a broadly-based bank with strong regional
connections. Fokus is concentrated along Norway's west coast, with its head
office in Trondheim.
A merger would be the biggest since Den norske Creditbank and Bergen Bank
were merged to form Den norske Bank in 1990. But Christiania, which last
month launched a share issue as part of its re-privatisation process,
stressed the talks with Fokus were at an early stage and were being
conducted on a commercial basis, without interference from the state
authorities.
Christiania said it was too early to say how long the talks would take, or
what the conclusion would be. Analysts said a merger would effectively
amount to a takeover of Fokus by Christiania. They estimated the price of
Fokus at around NKr1bn.
