FT  23 SEP 94 / World Bank plans Dollars 165m operating budget cut
The World Bank plans to cut its operating budget by about Dollars 165m
(Pounds 104m) over the next two years in response to calls for a leaner
organisation.
Mr Lewis Preston, the bank's president, has asked his vice-presidents to
propose administration cuts averaging 6 per cent in the fiscal year starting
July 1, and as much again in the following year.
Like other - all smaller - multilateral development banks, such as the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank has been
under attack for its high salaries and rich lifestyle. This year it
abandoned first-class air travel in response to criticism.
But senior officials of the Bank - which is based in Washington and lends
more than Dollars 9bn a year to finance development projects in the third
world and eastern Europe - say Mr Preston has suggested the cut not to curb
conspicuous consumption but as a means of getting staff to become more
selective in their activities.
The proposal is already fuelling friction between some industrialised
countries - especially the UK, Canada, Australia and the US - which have
long argued that there is plenty of fat to trim, and borrower countries,
which fear that cuts might jeopardise the quality of services.
The World Bank's administrative budget has climbed by 32 per cent over the
past three years to about Dollars 1.4bn for the fiscal year that began in
July. The proposed cuts would reduce spending to just above the fiscal 1993
level.
World Bank officials said the proposal was Mr Preston's and had not been
sought by the board of executive directors who represent shareholding
countries.
Each vice-president receives a cash budget, and could choose to cut staff
numbers, curb travel costs or delay equipment purchases.
Operational divisions have been asked to propose a cut of 5 per cent in each
year, and support divisions a 6.5 per cent cut each year. The cuts are not
final, and may be adjusted as the budget is developed over the next few
months.
'The majority of the board feels we really have to be very careful about
this because the bank does a lot,' said Mrs Eveline Herfkens, a World Bank
executive director from the Netherlands, who represents a constituency of
borrowing countries from eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
'If we want to continue to do what our shareholders want us to do, there is
very little room to cut,' she said. More junior bank project managers also
expressed concern that the budget cuts might could make it harder for them
to fulfil Mr Preston's requirement that they should spend more time putting
projects into practice.
Other present and former officials say the bank is still only minimally
conscious of costs. Mr Frank Potter, a former Canadian executive director,
says continued increases in the bank's benefits package have 'led to a
structure in which no single benefit is outrageous but in which the
aggregate amounts to a cost burden which no private institution I know of
could afford'.
Other bank officials say the steady increases in its operating budgets,
although fuelled in part by rising demand for its services in new member
countries in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, were causing 'donor
fatigue' at a time when virtually every government is forced to trim its own
aid budget.
