FT  22 APR 94 / Israel and PLO move closer to agreement
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation drew close to completing a
long-delayed agreement on Palestinian self-rule yesterday, but disputes over
Palestinian jurisdiction and economic relations continued to dog the peace
talks.
'We are at the beginning of the end, and we are trying to find a way how to
complete this great historic voyage of the Palestinian people and the
Israeli people,' Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, said after
holding talks in the Romanian capital Bucharest with Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO
chairman.
Mr Arafat, while saying he 'hoped' the peace process was irreversible,
added: 'We are seeing the talks being protracted . . . Mr Peres has the
upper hand. He is the occupier. He has to decide if he is going to withdraw
or not. We hope he is going to implement what he agreed upon.'
When asked how soon agreement could be reached Mr Arafat said: 'We hope that
we can reach agreement in the next two to three weeks . . . we hope to
achieve concrete results when the talks in Cairo resume next week.'
Mr Peres said the main oustanding issue was agreeing the terms of the
'parallel' withdrawal of Israeli troops and the installation of the
Palestininian authorities. He said talks would continue in Washington as
well as Cairo. He again stressed Israel's commitment to achieving peace.
'Our government has decided to conclude negotiations and to respect the
Palestinian position.'
In Jerusalem, meanwhile, there was hope for progress on another front after
the Israeli prime minister, Mr Yitzhak Rabin, said he would be willing to
dismantle Jewish settlements in the Golan Heights for the sake of peace with
Syria.
Mr Rabin's remarks came a week before a trip to the region by the US
secretary of state, Mr Warren Christopher, who was expected to visit
Damascus and Jerusalem in an attempt to move talks forward on the Golan
issue. Syria has insisted on a withdrawal from the Golan Heights, which
Israel captured in the 1967 Middle East war, before any peace treaty is
signed.
In Cairo, both PLO and Israeli negotiators said they were on the brink of a
solution to the issue of the extent of jurisdiction Palestinian courts would
have over Israelis and foreigners in the self-rule areas.
Mr Nabil Shaath, chief PLO negotiator, and General Amnon Shahak, his Israeli
counterpart, said the two sides could finish their work by the end of next
week's round of talks after months of slow-moving negotiations and delays.
'The big possibility is that we will finish next week and this will allow
for the agreement to be signed in the following week directly,' Mr Shaath
said.
In Paris, however, Mr Avraham Shochat, Israeli finance minister, said talks
on economic relations between Israel and the future Palestinian economy had
run into 'serious problems'.
Mr Shochat said the PLO had raised new demands unacceptable to Israel on
imports and a Palestinian currency which had torpedoed hopes for the signing
of an economic agreement this week. The minister said the PLO had asked to
double the list of products which could enter the Palestinian economy at
customs duties lower than those levied by Israel.
A PLO negotiator accused Israel of preaching the economic philosophy of open
borders but insisting on rigid restrictions on the movement of labour and
agricultural products.
Before the final signing Mr Rabin and Mr Arafat are expected to negotiate
for two to three days to agree some sensitive political issues which touch
on Palestinian demands for attributes of statehood. These include passports,
postage stamps and possibly PLO demands for a separate currency.
In Bucharest, Mr Peres said he had spent much time calming Mr Arafat's fears
about many aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian peace deal. He added that he
and Mr Arafat might join negotiators in Cairo next week to help push along
the last stage of negotiations.
