FT  30 SEP 94 / Arts: The maestro of Oslo - Andrew Clark discusses the
burgeoning talent of Mariss Jansons
You would never have known that most of those taking part in last weekend's
performances of Gurrelieder at the Oslo Concert Hall were playing it for the
first time. But that is entirely characteristic of the Oslo Philharmonic
Orchestra and its chief conductor, Mariss Jansons. They are always setting
new challenges, and meeting them in bracing style.
Schoenberg's spectacular cantata, with its sumptuous sonorities and
Scandinavian legends, was an appropriate work with which to celebrate the
orchestra's 75th anniversary. Despite an underpowered men's chorus and a
tricky acoustic, the performance combined momentum, depth and splendour. The
soloists - including Jane Eaglen, Ben Heppner, Anne Sofie von Otter and, as
the Narrator, Klaus Maria Brandauer - could hardly have been bettered. At an
anniversary dinner the next day, the players' spokeswoman, Elisabeth
Sonstevold, gave a hard-hitting speech to the effect that, despite coming
from little Norway, with its scant recognition of musical achievement, the
Oslo Philharmonic had won worldwide acclaim.
This was reason enough to celebrate. But anniversaries are also a time for
stock-taking. Hovering over the festivities were two questions which have
increasingly preoccupied the musicians and their admirers in recent months.
How long can Mariss Jansons afford to stay in Oslo? And how much longer can
the Oslo Philharmonic hold on to him?
Jansons' qualities are such that he has an open invitation to guest-conduct
the world's leading orchestras, some of which - notably the London
Philharmonic and the Philharmonia - are looking for a new chief conductor.
Many in the music business feel it is time Jansons loosened his links with
Oslo and moved on. They say that however good the Oslo Philharmonic becomes,
it will never rank in status with heavyweight orchestras in London, Berlin
and the US. 'Oslo will always seem provincial by comparison,' said one
record company executive attending the anniversary celebrations. But
Jansons' modesty and dedication, together with his loyalty to Oslo, prevent
him taking the quick route to the top.
Jansons' love affair with the Oslo Philharmonic is the stuff of fairy tales.
When the two joined forces in 1979, both were relatively unknown.
Latvian-born but Russian by nationality, Jansons was still in the shadow of
his mentor, the great St Petersburg conductor Yevgeny Mravinsky. He needed
to broaden his repertoire and find an orchestra of his own. The Oslo
Philharmonic offered the ideal opportunity - one to which Jansons' Soviet
masters could hardly object. It was a mediocre orchestra, in a country on
the musical fringe of Europe.
Today, Jansons and the Oslo Philharmonic are part of the world's musical
elite. Their tours and recordings are eagerly anticipated, as much by the
wider concert-going public as by cognoscenti. Thanks largely to Jansons'
tutelage, the orchestra has become renowned for its clean sound, its lyrical
intensity and youthful exuberance. Although 15 years is a long relationship
by current musical standards, neither side shows any sign of tiring of each
other. But both have begun to ponder their future.
Jansons finds himself in much the same position as Simon Rattle in
Birmingham: the pressures to move elsewhere are great. He knows that sooner
or later, the time will come when he and the Oslo Philharmonic have
exhausted the possibilities for mutual development. The lure of taking
charge of a crack orchestra in one of the world's musical capitals is bound
to assert itself. Such a move would serve the strategic interests of the two
music-industry giants who coordinate his work, EMI Classics and the IMG
artist agency. Jansons' dilemma is that he may never be able to repeat the
conditions and chemistry he enjoys in Oslo.
For their part, the Oslo musicians are afraid they will lose their cachet on
the world stage if Jansons leaves. He is feted no matter which orchestra he
conducts, but the Oslo Philharmonic has yet to develop an independent
reputation. Its lucrative EMI contract, which runs till 1997, is linked
exclusively to Jansons. The orchestra knows that although Jansons will
always retain some form of link with Oslo, it cannot hold on to such a
talent for ever. It has begun to adjust its sights accordingly. A UK tour
with Paavo Berglund next autumn will test its independent appeal. It has
also begun to take a longer look at its guest conductors.
For the time being, Oslo can rest assured that there is no other chief
conductor's post available which would appeal to Jansons. The Royal
Concertgebouw, for example, has just signed a new contract with Riccardo
Chailly. Philadelphia, with its strong EMI connection, is the most likely
American orchestra, but Wolfgang Sawallisch is still only settling in there
 -and extended periods in the US would probably be too much of a culture
shock for a low-key personality like Jansons.
A full-time return to the St Petersburg Philharmonic is equally unlikely -
even if Yuri Temirkanov resigned - because the orchestra is beset by
financial problems, and the last thing Jansons wants is to be typecast as
Russian. It is no secret that the LSO is the London orchestra he most
admires, not just for its consistently high playing quality, but because it
has a sharper identity, a stronger management and sounder financial base
than its competitors. But the LSO has signed up Colin Davis. Jansons' work
in London for the foreseeable future will be with the LPO.
A grandfather at 51 but still remarkably boyish-looking, Jansons contradicts
the image of the modern maestro: his prime concern is neither money nor
power, but simply to continue developing as a musician. 'Once Mariss decides
on something, he's totally committed,' says Trond Okkelmo, the Oslo
Philharmonic's manager. 'He can travel the world, but he always wants to
come back to Oslo. He feels safe here, he knows he's loved. It gives him
room to experiment and be adventurous.'
There are other reasons why Jansons has stayed - chief among them the Oslo
Philharmonic's capacity for hard work and devotion to self-improvement. It
also has the immeasurable advantages of a committed management, a full
subscription audience and a strong touring programme. In November and
December it accompanies Jansons to the US. Next summer they revisit the
Salzburg Festival and the London Proms, followed by Japan in the autumn. In
1997 they will undertake a residency at the Vienna Musikverein, a rare
accolade for a foreign orchestra.
Thanks to its continually expanding horizons, the Oslo Philharmonic has
developed a reputation beyond the Russian and Scandinavian repertoire with
which it initially made its name. Today, tour audiences are just as likely
to hear Beethoven, Brahms, Bruckner and Mahler. Jansons also wants to
develop its skills in the classical repertoire: there is talk of splitting
the orchestra into two for short periods to focus on Haydn and Mozart. All
this still leaves him plenty of scope to pursue outside interests. Having
neglected opera since his youth, he will conduct Carmen next year at the
Kirov in St Petersburg (with Olga Borodina), and La boheme for Welsh
National Opera in 1996.
What lies beyond 1997 is anyone's guess. Jansons himself insists he will not
calculate his next step. 'I will wait for what life brings. If I am to move
to a 'great orchestra', I must be sure it gives me the same joy as I have in
Oslo. If your sole motive is to make your name bigger, you're choosing it
only for the sake of career. What is the price? Should you give up artistic
satisfaction and joy just to be in a big city? That is a question I would
raise, without giving an answer. Each must choose. I have my own orchestra,
and great joy. I am lucky to conduct other good orchestras. I have what I
need.'
