FT  02 MAR 94 / Czechs and Slovaks win praise for their progress
Sixty years ago Czechoslovakia was among Europe's leading industrial
nations. Today the Czech Republic, as the more developed of the two parts of
the former Czechoslovak federation, ranks about equal with the European
Union's two poorest members in terms of gross domestic product per capita,
according to a report on the Czech and Slovak republics by the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development.
There is perhaps no more telling statistic for four and half decades of
communist management, and debilitating waves of migration that began before
the Second World War and ended only with the 'velvet revolution' of 1989.
The split of the federation on January 1, 1993, further reduced the economic
and political stature of its constituent republics.
The whole was greater than the sum of its parts, and both have had to adjust
to living separately.
The OECD report shows both countries suffered from the split, though
adjustment costs have been far heavier for Slovakia than for the Czechs.
The Czech Republic, with its more diversified industrial base and economy,
and close proximity to western markets, adapted more easily, though it has
yet to pull out of recession. Slovakia, with its dependence on heavy
industry and armaments aimed at eastern markets, was doubly hit by the
collapse of its trading partners in the former Comecon trade bloc, and the
loss of financial transfers from the federation. It has also had to build an
administration almost from scratch.
Nevertheless, both have made considerable progress in their transition to
market economies, the OECD says.
The report praises the Czech Republic for its reforms. Macroeconomic
stability has been maintained with underlying inflation at around 10 per
cent and 'lower than in any other post-communist economy in transition'; the
state budget is practically balanced and the current account is in surplus.
Output has continued to stagnate, but the economy appears 'set to start on a
path of slow expansion in 1994, that may accelerate in 1995'. Growth is
forecast at 2 per cent this year and 5 per cent in 1995, with exports rising
10 per cent. But, it warns, 'the transition is far from complete, and much
potentially disruptive restructuring remains to be done'. The reintroduction
of wage controls in July was a step backwards. Unemployment may double to 8
per cent this year.
The OECD is more cautious about Slovakia, though it argues that the economy
is already showing a number of positive features. The private sector
accounts for 35-40 per cent of economic activity, and government debt is low
compared with that in other eastern European and some OECD countries.
But immediate prospects are poor. A decline in aggregate output of 5 per
cent last year is likely to be followed by stagnation this year, with growth
of 2 per cent only resuming in 1995. Unemployment is set to rise to 18 per
cent of the workforce this year, and inflation will fall only slowly from 25
per cent in 1993 to 20 per cent this year.
The budget deficit is likely to remain at around 5 per cent of GDP, and
limited domestic financial resources make reducing the deficit more urgent.
Expenditure on arms production and defence should be reduced.
Political uncertainty has deterred foreign investment, says the report,
which urges the government to develop a coherent set of policies for
stabilisation and structural reform. Some of the report's statistics
compiled before the end of 1993 are already out of date but the main trends
remain in place, and as the first comprehensive study of the two countries
since they went their separate ways the OECD has usefully begun the job of
clearing the air about the real state of the two economies.
