FT  04 FEB 94 / Volatile Japanese politics plunged into turmoil again:
Hosokawa's unexpected move
Japanese politics was again plunged into turmoil yesterday as the
controversial tax plans of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, prime minister, aroused
outrage on all sides.
Mr Hosokawa's early morning announcement of an income tax cut, to be funded
by a rise in sales tax from the current 3 per cent to 7 per cent in three
years' time, astonished many in his seven-group coalition and the opposition
Liberal Democratic party. Japanese politics has moved into a newly
unpredictable phase, and nobody had expected any kind of a decision, let
alone such a blunt one, at that moment.
Less than a week after averting a political crisis by compromising with the
LDP on political reform, Mr Hosokawa has provoked fresh trouble by
apparently underestimating the political impact of his tax plan. This has
forced him to delay announcement of his economic pump-priming package and
attracted, for the first time, Japanese press criticism of his leadership
style.
The Asahi Shimbun newspaper yesterday accused Mr Hosokawa of dishonesty and
conceit, while the Mainichi Shimbun doubted whether Mr Hosokawa's 74 per
cent popularity rating would be enough to resolve this crisis. 'The prime
minister must have been drunk on his high poll ratings,' said an angry Mr
Kozo Igarashi, the construction minister, who belongs to the Social
Democratic party.
Yet most analysts think the basic plan, worked out by the three centre-right
parties which set the tone for coalition policy, will survive. 'It's a
purely emotional outburst. This is just Kabuki (theatre). There will be an
agreement because nobody wants an election,' said Mr Jesper Koll, chief
economist at SG Warburg Securities in Tokyo.
Mr Hosokawa yesterday offered to consider changing the plan to satisfy the
left-wing SDP, the largest member of the coalition, after it threatened to
leave the government unless he modified the scope and timing. 'I am not
concerned about saving face,' he said yesterday, after angry SDP officials
invaded his private office.
A wholesale walk-out by the 76 SDP lower house members would deprive the
coalition of its 10-seat majority there. 'The socialists don't want to leave
unless they have to . . . they don't want to take the government away from
Mr Hosokawa just yet,' argued Mr Jeff Young, political analyst at Salomon
Brothers Asia.
Mr Hosokawa was probably expecting the SDP to resist the plan, given the
party's election pledge last year to oppose any rise in sales tax. But the
criticism from other coalition members and from parts of the LDP - which,
ironically, introduced consumption tax - was a surprise.
Even Mr Masayoshi Takemura, chief cabinet secretary, and an open advocate of
an increase in indirect taxation, threatened to resign if Mr Hosokawa did
not mollify the socialists. 'It is better to correct major errors. We may
have rushed the decision on the tax,' he said.
The plan had been announced too suddenly and was 'not even worth
discussing', said Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, chairman of the LDP's policy
research council. Only a day earlier the LDP looked as if it was firmly
behind Mr Hosokawa on tax, on the strength of an agreement between him and
Mr Yohei Kono, the LDP president.
Mr Hashimoto's remark appears odd from a former minister at the Finance
Ministry, which orchestrated the consumption tax rise. Another former LDP
finance minister, Mr Michio Watanabe, welcomed the scheme as 'the sole
direction' the government can take. All this suggests the LDP is just as
split over tax as is the coalition.
The campaign by the powerful Finance Ministry for a rise in sales tax
clearly won over Mr Hosokawa. The ministry argues that it needs to increase
revenues from indirect taxation to make up for the decline in income tax
revenues that will take place as the number of Japanese aged over 65
increases from 12 per cent now to nearly 25 per cent by 2025.
Political parties' natural reluctance to take responsibility for raising
taxes is intensified by the LDP's painful memory of the consequence of its
introduction of sales tax in early 1989. That was a big factor in the LDP's
defeat in the upper house elections later that year, the first step in a
decline which culminated in its lower house election defeat last year.
The proposed increase will again have an electoral cost, judging by the
outcry from business and consumer groups yesterday. This is at a time when
political parties are unwilling to take risks because they do not know for
sure when the next general election will be.
Mr Hosokawa clearly believes his hand is strong enough to impose a fresh
balance on the tax system, even at the cost of shocking some of his allies.
