FT  23 JUL 94 / Clinton launches massive aid effort for Rwanda
President Bill Clinton yesterday announced that the US was mounting 'an
immediate and massive effort' in Rwanda to help end what he described as
'the greatest humanitarian crisis in a generation'.
The US was finalising plans to establish a military base of operations in
Entebbe, Uganda, to serve as the central co-ordinating and staging area for
a round-the-clock airlift of medical supplies and humanitarian aid, Mr
Clinton said. US military forces would work to modify two existing airstrips
in Zaire, at Goma and Bukavu, to accommodate flights of relief supplies.
Mr Clinton said the US relief operation had two goals: to alleviate the
Rwandan refugees' suffering as soon as possible, and to secure conditions to
enable them to return to Rwanda.
Between 1m and 2m refugees, mostly members of the Hutu tribe, have fled to
Zaire in the past week to escape the advancing Rwanda Patriotic Front,
dominated by Tutsis. The RPF has just taken power in Rwanda after months of
civil war in which the Hutu government slaughtered thousands of Tutsis.
The US army will move immediately to secure a safe water supply for more
than 1m refugees living in the camp at Goma. Polluted drinking water there
is believed to be responsible for the outbreak of cholera which, Mr Clinton
said, was now claiming 'one life every minute'. The Pentagon would also
provide 20m rehydration therapy packages for the refugees.
In announcing the US airlift, Mr Clinton sought to rebut criticism that the
US response to the Rwandan crisis has thus far been slow and weak.
'The US not only supports the efforts of the international community, but
has and will continue to take a leadership role,' he said.
The US State Department was urging the United Nations to deploy a full
peace-keeping mission to Rwanda immediately, Mr Clinton said, adding that
the US would make the formation of an 'ethnically and politically balanced'
government in Rwanda a condition of US diplomatic recognition.
The US president said the operation would cost 'in excess of Dollars 100m'
(Pounds 64.5m) and involve the deployment of a 'moderate' number of US armed
forces. A White House official said about 1,000 US troops drawn from Nato
would take part in the relief operation.
Launching a Dollars 434m appeal for humanitarian aid for Rwanda yesterday,
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, said that nearly half the 7m
population had fled their homes. He said in New York that the Security
Council would be called into session within the next few days to establish a
tribunal to try to punish those responsible for massacres in Rwanda.
France yesterday ruled out keeping its troops in Rwanda beyond its
self-imposed deadline of August 21, despite pressure from the US and the UN
for Paris to extend its humanitarian mission there.
Food, water - and troops: how the world should aid Rwanda, Page 6
