FT  09 APR 94 / Hawks and Handsaws: The sun also rises over Russia
I have been catching up on new Russian writing. There are plenty of new
Russian writers to choose from, including Zufar Gareyev, Yevgeny Kharitonov,
Olga Sedakova, Alla Latynina and Victor Pelevin. Especially Victor Pelevin,
who was born in 1962 and whose inimitable humorousness, it has been said,
'enables him to bid farewell to Russia's communistic past with a final
laugh.'
Pelevin can be funny. But he can also move you to tears - not in the way
that John Major moves people to tears (tears of outrage and disbelief) but
tears of fellow-feeling for Pelevin's countrymen as they are dragged from
the lightless depths into the blinding solar day.
Until I read a short piece by Pelevin called The View from the Window, my
attitude to Russia's plight was lackadaisical - not frivolous, especially,
but casual and negligent and zestlessly satirical.
Not any more. I found The View from the Window electrifying. It made me sit
up straight and try to understand the terror and despair in so many people's
lives as they contemplate what Pelevin calls the 'psychic storm of
immeasurable violence . . . raging in the skies over Russia.'
Pelevin's narrator says that Russians were in such a hurry to sink their
floating concentration camp that when it finally began to keel over, they
suddenly realised that they were its passengers, and that the guard dogs who
had snarled at them for so many years from behind barbed wire had long since
left and gone to read lectures on perestroika in small American
universities.
He says that the most expensive and opulent horror film of the last 50 years
is now being shot in Russia. And he likens his countrymen to the half-blind
fish that live under the sea, resisting immense pressure. If one of these
fish is pulled from the depths to the surface, it explodes like a bomb.
'We are the same kind of fish. For 70 years we have lived under the pressure
of tons of terror, which has permeated everything around us so thoroughly
that we have ceased to notice it. It has become an integral part of
ourselves, and now that they have tried to drag us up to the surface in a
few short years, up to freedom and the sun, we feel terror advancing on us
out of the future. But there is no terror in the future  - what we are
feeling now comes from inside us. We are being torn apart by the terror that
used to be balanced by the inhuman pressure applied to our souls. They keep
on pulling us up higher and higher, and we've already swollen perceptibly,
but if only we don't burst in the next few metres, at long last we shall
finally glimpse the sun.'
If only . . . the power of this passage rests on those two words. If only
Pelevin's countrymen can withstand the pressure, they, too, will enjoy life
at the surface. And what a life it is. Reading Pelevin has made me grateful
for aspects of life in London.
For our queen, and for her salty-tongued escort. For all our princes and
princesses. For our generals and vice-marshals. For John Major and his wife,
and all John Major's ministers, be they tatty and infirm. For our judges and
policemen and our newly-skirted clergy. For our tabloid newspapers, whose
efforts to please and serve us have awakened understanding of the bedroom
part of life. For cricket and football. Oak trees and bulbs. For our great
industrial processes. For Scotland, Ulster and Wales - our precious,
productive regions. And for the men and women who write law reports in The
Times.
I read one of these reports last week. 'Organ grinder is not liable for
VAT,' it was headlined, and was an account of a ruling made by the Court of
Justice of the European Communities (Sixth Chamber) regarding interpretation
of article 2(1) of the sixth council directive (77/388/EEC) of May 17 1977,
on the harmonisation of the laws of member states relating to turnover
taxes.
It was decided that an organ grinder, named Tolsma, who grinds his barrel
organ 'on the public highway in The Netherlands,' is not liable to pay VAT
on the proceeds he solicits by waving (while grinding) a collecting tin in
people's faces.
This struck me as enchanting - the sort of thing exactly, humdrum and
puerile, that Victor Pelevin and his countrymen can look forward to reading,
in the comfort of heated homes, if only they survive their ascent without
bursting - and live to see the sun.
