FT  21 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Frontier finance
To boldly go where no bank has gone before is the mission of the
International Finance Corporation, the private sector arm of the World Bank
Group. The question, however, is whether the bank's Starship Enterprise
retains a useful role and, if so, what.
The IFC is small compared to the World Bank itself; its annual report,
published yesterday, shows that it approved Dollars 4.3bn for 231 new
projects in fiscal 1994. But for most of its 35 years, the IFC has been able
to claim, with some plausibility, that it provides an important, if
peripheral service in bringing equity and loan finance to projects in
developing countries that private banks would not touch.
Since the late-1980s, two things have changed. Some of the countries in
which it has been most active, notably in east Asia but, to some extent,
even in hitherto lagging Latin America, have made large strides in
development of their private sectors. At the same time, the availability of
capital for companies based in emerging markets, which are the IFC's
potential clients, has soared.
The problem the IFC faces is that the 'window' in a country's development
during which its funds can play a uniquely valuable role is narrowing. On
one side, it is limited by its insistence on a 'commercial' rate of return
(although this criterion is somewhat fuzzy in the least developed sectors).
On the other side, it has the whole pack of international commercial banks
and investors at its heels, sniffing for any sign that country and project
risk has fallen to tolerable levels. The problem is acute in a role of which
the IFC is particularly proud, that of helping the development of capital
markets themselves.
In Africa and the former Soviet Union, for example, both regions that are
particularly in need of assistance, the IFC has invested and lent
comparatively little because of the difficulty of finding projects which
meet its criteria. Yet success stories, such as South Korea and Chile, have
already outgrown the need for IFC participation.
In defence of its role, the IFC points out that demand for its funds is
increasing. It also argues that international finance houses often fail to
service second-tier companies in developing countries. It is right, too, to
stress that financial markets may lose their current taste for developing
countries as quickly as they gained it.
However its principal donors will put the IFC under increasing pressure to
justify its role. Fearing budgetary cutbacks, it has started to explore
raising its own funds by issuing bonds secured against mature assets. If it
does sustain its activities by raising funds in that way, it will still have
to demonstrate that an adequate supply of reasonably high-quality
investments remains available to it. The challenge to the IFC, therefore, is
to demonstrate that it is not taking on excessive risk and, more
fundamentally, that it still has an essential role.
