FT  19 JUL 94 / Survey of Japan (9): Towards a new Far East role - Foreign
policy is in the melting pot
'If Japan evades the costs associated with free trade and stability, world
peace and freedom, we run the serious risk of denying ourselves our own
peace and prosperity.
'Despite the gravity of the situation, Japan's political world - which is
supposed to recognise harsh realities and steer the country in the right
direction - is at present unable to make any effective decisions at all.'
This passage from Blueprint for a New Japan, the political best-seller by
Ichiro Ozawa, the former government's backroom strategist, became painfully
relevant last month when the fourth government in the space of a year took
office, thus disrupting Japan's sensitive process of waking up to its
responsibilities in a newly unstable post-cold war era.
It is perhaps unfair to accuse Japan of not shouldering its burden, since it
has been the world's biggest provider of development aid for the past three
years. Moreover, Japan will lift its assistance budget by 1.6 per cent this
year, rather more than the overall state budget, at a time when other
leading donors are suffering from 'aid fatigue'.
Even so, the fact that until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 Japan
was spared the military or economic cost of stability is generally accepted
as an element both in its economic success and its diplomatic weakness.
While the US assured peace in Asia, partly through the presence of its
troops on Japanese soil, Japan concentrated on economic growth, a strategy
known as the Yoshida doctrine, after the prime minister who was the
architect of the post-war Japanese state. In return, Washington knew it
could count on Japan as a bulwark against communism in Asia.
The US-Japan balance, the pivot of Tokyo's foreign policy, has now become
less predictable, partly because of the end of the cold war, but also
because of Japan's own vagaries.
In theory, the Social Democratic Party of Mr Tomiichi Murayama, the new
prime minister, wants to end the US-Japan security treatment, the staple of
Tokyo's special relationship with Washington. In practice, Mr Murayama, has
pledged to honour the treaty, reflecting the fact that he owes his position
to the support of the conservative Liberal Democratic Party.
The conservative nature of the new government may keep the special
relationship with Washington intact. But it also marks a break with the
policy, created by the previous two coalition administrations, of abandoning
Japan's passiveness in international affairs and seeking to make a greater
contribution on the world stage.
One of Mr Murayama's first acts as new leader was to tone down the campaign
to be admitted as a permanent member of the UN security council, the top
table of the world's top powers. Bafflingly for Japan's foreign partners,
this came only weeks after his predecessor, Mr Tsutomu Hata, made an
unprecedentedly explicit bid for the council seat. The Murayama
administration is also more cautious than the previous one possible
sanctions against North Korea, cause for some anxiety in Washington.
While the political storms rage overhead, Japan's professional diplomats
have been striving to keep foreign policy on course. Indeed, the frequent
changes of governments have increased their responsibilities more than is
the case for most bureaucrats.
In recent weeks, Japanese diplomats won praise from western officials by
lobbying China to obtain good behaviour from North Korea and helping to
smooth relations between the UK and China over Hong Kong. Two prominent
Japanese, Mrs Sadako Ogata, UN high commissioner for refugees, and Mr
Yasushi Akasahi have played leading parts in Bosnia, a conflict in which
Japan's short lived governments have had no time to take an interest.
But perhaps the most sensitive task facing Japan's foreign policy makers
today is the subtle renegotiation of the relationship with the US.
The foreign ministry wants to keep the US security link as tight as ever,
yet at the same time other departments, such as the finance and
international trade and industry ministries, want to test the limits of
Japan's post-cold war freedom to be more assertive towards the US on trade
and economic issues. 'We are getting both more and less assertive towards
Washington,' says Mr Kiyoaki Kikuchi, a former ambassador to the UN.
Former prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa's agreement to disagree with
President Bill Clinton, at their summit in February, over US demands for
numerical targets for increases in imports to Japan, made it look as if
Japan was ready to tilt away from Washington.
It was a remarkable break with the comfortable tradition of US-Japanese
summits, in which the Tokyo side would hand over trade or economic
concessions in return for promises of everlasting protection.
Senior foreign ministry officials were, unsurprisingly, worried that the
trade row would spill over into security relations. To their relief, the
Clinton administration has softened its tone towards Japan.
The trade dispute might be under precarious control for the moment, yet it
is only the latest example of Japan's difficult search for a voice
independent of Washington.
It ignored Washington in 1990 by resuming aid to China after the Tiananmen
killings and was a persistent exponent of avoiding a link between trade and
human rights.
Japan ignored the US embargo on Vietnam two years ago and is now resisting
US pressure to step up aid to Russia because it first wants progress on the
disputed Russian-held Kurile islands north of Japan.
The common theme in these gestures of independence from the US is the
growing importance to Japan of its Asian neighbours. They represent Japan's
largest export destination, its fastest growing market and its fastest
growing destination for industrial investment.
Japan is cautiously feeling its way towards a new role in Asia. It is a
highly sensitive process, constrained by local wartime memories, which
prevent Tokyo from seeking regional leadership, and Japan's own wish not to
weaken that sacred link with Washington. 'How can we tilt towards Asia
without tilting away from the US?' muses one Japanese diplomat.
Japan's ministry of international trade and industry took an influential,
but discreet part five years ago in forming the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Forum, a grouping designed to foster economic cooperation in the
region.
But Japan has taken a low profile in Apec discussions. Its search for a
voice has not been helped by Malaysian prime minister Mahathir Mohamad's
calls for an East Asian Economic Caucus, to exclude non-Asians. Mr Mohamad's
scheme places uncomfortable pressure on Japan to do just what it wants to
avoid, choosing between the US and Asia.
So far, Tokyo has managed to suppress the dilemma thanks to an accord
between Asean countries to subsume Mr Mohamad's caucus into Apec. But Mr
Mohamad continues to criticise Japan's non-committal stance.
Japan will have an opportunity to move closer to Asia's centre stage next
year when Apec leaders are due to hold a summit for the first time in Tokyo.
Japan is, meanwhile, pushing regional cooperation on security through an
18-country Asean Regional Forum, inspired by a former Japanese foreign
minister, which will hold its first meeting in Thailand at the end of this
month.
Diplomats hope that this will at least start a regular exchange of security
information between often distrustful Asian neighbours, though the first
meeting is likely to be of merely symbolic value. The mere fact of getting
the militarily powerful China engaged in multilateral debat will be
valuable, say analysts.
The forum's Bangkok meeting will also be an indicator of the state of
Japan's regional image. Mr Hosokawa's unprecedentedly explicit apologies
last autumn for Japan's wartime record and the participation of Japanese
peacekeepers with the UN in Cambodia two years ago may have helped soothe
wartime memories.
Yet Japan's credibility was damaged by a former justice minister's claim in
May that an infamous wartime atrocity never happened; another reminder of
the constraints on Tokyo's tilt towards Asia.
