FT  08 APR 94 / AZT findings dash Wellcome's hopes
Results published today in The Lancet medical journal dash the hopes of
Wellcome, manufacturer of the leading Aids drug AZT, that fresh data and
analysis would vindicate its claims about the drug's benefits.
Full findings of the Anglo-French study of AZT confirm the preliminary ones
that shocked the medical world a year ago. People who are infected with HIV
derive no long-term benefit from taking AZT before they show any symptoms of
disease.
The team of scientists from the UK Medical Research Council and France's
National Aids Agency, who carried out the so-called Concorde study, conclude
that 'the results do not encourage the early use of AZT in symptom-free
HIV-infected adults.'
Concorde leaves more than 10m people worldwide, estimated by the World
Health Organisation to be HIV-positive but not yet suffering from Aids,
without any proven treatment to delay symptoms.
The study allocated 1,749 patients at random into two groups, one taking AZT
and the other a placebo. Their clinical progress was followed for an average
of 3.3 years.
People on AZT were doing better than the placebo group after one year. But
this 'transient benefit' had disappeared completely by the end of three
years, the Concorde scientists say.
Death rates after three years were 8 per cent for the AZT group and 6 per
cent for the placebo group; 18 per cent of both groups developed full-scale
Aids.
As the news was assimilated by the stock market, Wellcome's shares fell 8p
to 557p. They had stood at 762p before the preliminary results appeared a
year ago.
Mr John Robb, chief executive, said the final outcome was neither a surprise
nor necessarily bad for the drug. The company's strategy with the
development of Aids treatments would continue unchanged, he said. The future
lay in combining AZT with other drugs to contain the disease.
Several stock market analysts had miscalculated that the full version of the
trials would at least soften the harsh preliminary conclusions.
The Concorde team is now following patients' progress for a further 15
months. 'We are particularly interested in the mortality rates,' said Prof
Ian Weller, principal UK investigator. 'We want to find out whether the
trend to slightly higher mortality in the (AZT) group - 8 rather than 6 per
cent - has persisted or even increased.'
Sales of AZT, Page 8
Doctors divided, Page 8
