FT  13 MAY 94 / Chrysler protests over electric cars: Detroit says battery
technology can not yet meet Californian requirement
Chrysler, North America's third largest car maker, yesterday called on
California to drop legislation requiring minimum numbers of electric cars to
be sold in the state from 1998, claiming that battery technology is
insufficiently advanced for such cars to be viable.
In doing so, it has formed a united front with General Motors and Ford,
which have become increasingly hostile to the legislation as hopes of a
battery technology breakthrough in time for the legislation to be met have
faded.
During testimony to the Californian Air Resources Board, which is
responsible for setting air quality standards in the state, Chrysler asked
for consultants to be brought in to undertake an independent review of
battery technology and consider whether the Californian legislation could be
complied with.
Under the current legislative programme, from 1998 onwards 'zero emission
vehicles' must make up a minimum of 2 per cent of total sales of each
manufacturer selling its vehicles in California, rising to 10 per cent by
the year 2007.
While other technologies, such as hydrogen fuels, are also being
investigated, battery-powered cars currently are seen as the only means of
complying with the legislation. However, all 'big three' car makers have
encountered serious difficulties in building cars with the 100 miles-plus
range regarded as the minimum viable for sprawling Los Angeles - and at a
cost even remotely competitive with conventional vehicles.
'We believe California cannot achieve its clean air goals in a
cost-effective manner by mandating any technology,' Chrysler's manager of
environmental regulatory planning, Mr Gordon Allardyce, said yesterday in a
statement.
While stressing that Chrysler - like GM and Ford - is not opposed in
principle to producing battery-powered cars, the company said in its
testimony that the price and range limitations involved meant that it
seriously questioned its ability to meet the sales obligations.
Despite the increasingly strident lobbying campaign from Detroit, the air
resources board has so far shown no real willingness either to ease or
postpone the legislation, given the severe air quality problems facing the
Los Angeles basin in particular.
The issue is of great importance to the vehicle industry. This is not only
because non-compliance by any manufacturer could theoretically lead to its
exclusion from the Californian market, amounting to 1m-plus units a year,
but because other states are seeking to enact similar legislation.
