FT  12 DEC 94 / This Week: Cape Town's bid on the table - Sport
Surveyors carrying out the soil-engineering checks for the planned Olympic
stadium were left in no doubt as to the main priority. Whichever site was
chosen, Table Mountain had to be full-frame from the TV position on the roof
of main stand.
Cape Town is not about to hide its unmistakeable landmark come 2004. No
visitor to the city is left in any doubt that securing the Olympics is a
hugely important goal for every group in this self-proclaimed Rainbow
Community.
Street banners, advertising, and conversations all proclaim a burning urge
to combine the South African love of sport with the ultimate symbol of
rehabilitation and reconciliation into the international community.
From the other side of the deal, the proposal looks more complex. South
Africa's bid to host the games a decade from now represents one of the most
fundamental decisions the Olympic movement has been faced with. In some
respects, President Samaranch and his International Olympic Committee team
in Lausanne are increasingly coming to resemble a prosperous multinational
corporation - IBM, for example, in its glory days - with a turnover measured
in billions of dollars.
Yet here they are, marketing men and spin-doctors, being asked to risk
sport's top 'brand' and all its global success on a country with minimal
infrastructure, shakily emerging from two decades of internecine warfare.
As if to throw the risks into sharper relief, Cape Town's current principal
rival for the nomination is Paris; prosperous, glamorous and safe.
Those South Africans who saw presidents Mandela and Samaranch together
during the latter's recent private visit to Cape Town are gleeful. They say
the septuagenarian chemistry is excellent, the rapport impressive. And it is
increasingly clear that the IOC president wants to use the unrivalled
political and commercial power of the Olympics in an interventionist way
during his last few years of office, before standing down in 1997.
One can point to two landmark games in the post-war era, and discern a
political and economic impact out of all proportion to a fortnight's track
and field. Tokyo in 1960 had an enormous effect in bringing post-war Japan
back into the international community. Seoul in 1988 was an essential
ingredient in Korea's progress from dictatorship sweatshop to democratic
tiger-economy.
'After the euphoria of the elections there's now a realisation that there
isn't going to be a Marshall Plan for South Africa,' says Kevin Kevany, a
leading strategist in the Cape Town bid committee. 'The money that's come in
is just a show of support, and it's largely over.
'We're spreading the gospel that the Olympics is our own Marshall Plan. It's
an unparallelled two-week spotlight that will motivate the rest of the world
to come and spend time here.' There are two connected themes here. One is
that tourism is the Republic's fastest-growing industry. Cape Province alone
has had 30 per cent more visitors in 1994 than last year. Every Europe-bound
jumbo into or out of Malan airport is packed to the doors. The second is
that in global terms eco-tourism is the growth sector.
The affluent world has grown tired of beaches. Travel with a purpose,
whether it is saving whales or visiting game parks, is the target. With its
spiritual feel-good factor and abundant natural beauty, South Africa cannot
lose in this respect. The games would be the icing on a perfect cake.
Even the bid team evokes a certain hopeful warmth. Co-chairmen Raymond
Ackerman and Ngconde Balfour are definitely the odd couple. Ackerman is the
archetypical entrepreneur capitalist, founder of a hugely successful
supermarket chain. Balfour is a black political activist who was repeatedly
detained during the apartheid years. Part of that era he spent exiled in
Australia, working on Melbourne's unsuccessful bid for the 1996 games.
'It hurt me that I was not doing it for South Africa, but I knew the
experience I was gaining would come in useful one day,' comments Balfour.
As a member of the ANC, one of his prime tasks is to convince the black
population that the Olympics is not be some grandiose white benefit. 'We
have to make it clear to people, time and again, that the Olympics will not
take money from areas that are worthy of development funding,' he adds.
With a symbolism that has been lost on neither Samaranch nor any other
visitor to Cape Town, the bulldozed rubble from the houses of District Six,
razed under the old group areas law, will form the foundations of the new
Wingfield Olympic stadium.
District Six will be redeveloped as one of the games sub-sites. Economic
models from previous Olympics, particularly Barcelona, point to a tenfold
overall return on a total investment that could reach R6bn (Pounds 1.8bn).
Sure it is a vast sum, says Kevany, but what other project imaginable could
generate those returns for the community? As Beijing's possible repeat
candidature for the games sinks into a drug scandal, the Cape Town group see
the dream coming closer.
'People are starting to see it as our shot to become a second-world country
rather than half first world and half third,' says Kevany. 'With the
Olympics we could do it in a decade, rather than tottering along for 50
years before we finally get there.'
