FT  10 MAR 94 / Peace slips further from grasp: A look at the damage to the
talks process
British and Irish ministers will meet in London today in the aftermath of
last night's failed IRA mortar spectacular. They will be even more
determined to demonstrate that there will be no let up in the search for
peace in Northern Ireland. Privately, however, they concede they face a long
hard haul.
The window of opportunity, opened with December's Downing Street
declaration, appears to be creaking shut. The early hopes of imminent peace,
today even more difficult to sustain, have become bogged down in political
diversions which threaten to derail the two governments' initiative.
For London and Dublin, the challenge more than ever is to keep the show on
the road, to build on the genuine consensus which now exists between the two
governments and to insist that their broader, bolder objectives will not be
sidetracked by mortars or sub-plots. It is not going to be easy.
The wave of mass killings last autumn, which gave impetus to intensified
Anglo-Irish efforts to forge a durable settlement, has subsided, lowering
the sense of urgency which underpinned a renewed readiness among the
province's political parties to compromise.
On the political front, the European elections beckon. As a result, the
province's main political parties are already adopting a markedly more
aggressive tone in discussing the prospects for a settlement. The Ulster
Unionists are particularly mindful of the need to protect their flank
against the Rev Ian Paisley's hardline Democratic Unionists.
London has all but abandoned hope of reaching the stage where round-table
talks between Ulster's main non-violent parties and the two governments can
be resurrected until the elections are out of the way. In Dublin there is
also, in the words of one Northern Ireland Office official, 'an acute
awareness of the Ulster calendar'. In addition, the lengthening silence from
Sinn Fein - punctuated by potentially murderous assaults - is increasingly
being seen in both capitals as the republican movement's way of saying no to
the declaration.
A surprise acceptance or semi-acceptance, even now, has not been completely
ruled out. But few expect anything from Sinn Fein that would enable any
significant headway to be made this side of Euro-polling day on June 9.
Not surprisingly, both governments are playing down expectations for today's
session. All the more so since attention is expected to focus on strand two
of the three-stranded process: relations between Dublin and the north.
This, by common consent, is the most difficult circle the talks process will
have to square.
As Lord Fitt, the former leader of the Roman Catholic Social Democratic and
Labour party, told his fellow peers last week: 'It is strand two that will
cause all the difficulties. It has done so in the past and will undoubtedly
do the same again in the future.'
Today's meeting will take stock of the position, which was in effect done at
last weekend's meeting in Dublin between Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern
Ireland Secretary, and Mr Dick Spring, Irish Foreign minister. It will also
discuss progress made by the liaison committee, set up after last month's
so-called Twickenham summit between Mr John Major, the prime minister, and
Mr Albert Reynolds, his Irish counterpart, in reaching a common position on
the way ahead.
But it is thought too early for significant progress to have been made,
making it difficult to publicly demonstrate that the initiative is gathering
momentum.
Today's meeting will not attract the fanfare that surrounded the Downing
Street declaration or the publicity generated by last night's airport raid.
But, although peace is apparently as elusive as ever, the intervening two
months has done nothing to undermine the quiet determination in London and
Dublin to try to finish what they started in September.
