FT  16 MAR 94 / Sidelined by static income and narrowing remit
The Design Council was established by Winston Churchill's wartime government
in 1944 as the Council of Industrial Design, with a remit for 'the
advancement of British industry by the improvement of the design of its
products'.
This was to be accomplished by encouraging industry and commerce to
understand the positive effect good design can have on market performance.
For 40 years the remit was interpreted by the council and the Department of
Trade and Industry, its sponsoring department, as covering the need to
educate the public, as well as industry and commerce.
To the public the council became best known for its shop in London's
Haymarket and the triangular label it awarded to selected consumer products
which met a wide range of criteria for good design. This helped earn the
council a high public profile, especially during the 1970s, although the
organisation's impact on the quality of design in industry remained
questionable until the early 1980s.
From the mid 1980s, the council's government grant came under growing
pressure in spite of the declared passion for design of Baroness Thatcher,
who was then prime minister. In 1988 the council responded to this pressure
by dropping most of its public-awareness activities in agreement with the
DTI. The shop was closed and the label dropped.
The council continued to provide design teaching materials and advice to
schools, but focused most of its activities on services to industry and
commerce. To reach small and medium-sized companies more effectively, its
network of regional offices was also strengthened.
The council's refocusing of activities was intended to make better use of
its annual grant and DTI income, which have remained roughly static for
several years at about Pounds 7.5m in total.
But narrowing its activities had two side-effects. It virtually removed the
council from the view of politicians and other opinion-formers, and it
reinforced the impression that it was drifting away from its broad design
remit to an excessive concern with engineering aspects of design. As a
result, when the DTI decided to transfer the council's direct industrial
services last autumn to Business Links, the government's new network of
multi-purpose centres, Whitehall was uncertain about the shape, size and
direction the council should take. Hence the four-month review, and
yesterday's announcement by the DTI.
