FT  20 OCT 94 / Lloyd's keen on fresh deal out of court
Lloyd's of London is prepared to make a fresh attempt at forging an
out-of-court deal between loss-making Names and the professional agencies
they are suing, Mr Peter Middleton, chief executive of the insurance market,
indicated yesterday.
If there is a 'strong mood and some optimism' that a deal is possible, he
and Mr David Rowland, Lloyd's chairman, 'will do everything that we can to
see that that settlement is reached,' Mr Middleton said.
His comments, at a conference organised by accountancy and banking company
Smith &amp; Williamson, followed the opening this week of the latest court
battle mounted by Names, whose assets have traditionally supported the
insurance market.
The Feltrim Names Association is claiming Pounds 525m in damages for losses
incurred in the late 1980s as a result of 'spiral' insurance by which
underwriters agreed to cover others for excessive losses from catastrophes.
Earlier this year Names rejected a Lloyd's settlement offer worth Pounds
900m. Subsequently the Gooda Walker action group won damages it says are
worth Pounds 504m.
Mr Middleton believed the Gooda Walker case had not acted as the catalyst
for an out-of-court settlement for other legal actions largely because the
level of damages had yet to be agreed. A final level might not be set for
some weeks.
But he said that 'in a couple of weeks' he and Mr Rowland would assess the
strength of support for a deal among Names' groups and the
errors-and-omissions insurers who provided Lloyd's managing and members'
agencies with cover against negligence awards.
The insurers feel that the action groups might have to accept that they will
never recoup a large part of their losses - because the errors-and-omissions
cover is not sufficient and much of it is underwritten by other Names.
Mr Rowland and Mr Middleton, who are keen to mark a break from Lloyd's past
losses, are reluctant to make an enhanced central contribution to any offer.
But there is optimism among Lloyd's authorities that it might be possible to
strike a deal before the end of next year.
Lloyd's hopes to have established Newco by then - a company set up to take
on the liabilities outstanding from policies written in 1985 and before.
That might clarify the position of many Names involved in litigation.
