FT  26 MAY 94 / Leading Article: European peace
Today's EU conference on 'stability in Europe' is the brainchild of the man
who will open it, Mr Edouard Balladur. Nearly a year ago he launched his
plan for a 'stability pact' under which the EU would coax central and east
European states into settling their bilateral disputes over frontiers and
national minorities.
The rationale sounded good. The EU, having ignominiously failed in
Yugoslavia, should take timely action to prevent the same sort of thing
happening elsewhere. It should use its undoubted leverage over ex-communist
states to persuade them to work together, rather as the US did in western
Europe with the Marshall Plan. If these countries were to join the EU, they
must not bring unresolved conflicts in with them.
For all that, there were many reservations both among France's partners and
among the countries concerned. The mention of border disputes was felt to be
unhelpful: no state in Europe officially lays claim to its neighbours'
territory, but all too many would feel justified in doing so once the
subject was opened. To link the question to national minorities was doubly
unfortunate, since one of the main arguments used against giving rights to
such minorities is precisely the fear that this would prove the first step
towards loss of national territory.
The proposal has since been refined so as to avoid, or at least attenuate,
those objections. But it is clear that the central European countries
attending still do so with strong reservations, except perhaps in the case
of Hungary whose outgoing nationalist government (now disavowed by the
voters) made agitation on behalf of its 'kith and kin' in neighbouring
countries one of the main planks of its foreign policy. The other country
which seems increasingly anxious to do the same is Russia, whose foreign
minister Mr Andrei Kozyrev, will no doubt stress the issue in his speech.
That very fact will make Russia's neighbours even less keen on the whole
project.
Both central and east European states can legitimately object that, like the
victorious allies in 1919, the EU is trying to impose on them a standard of
minority rights that it does not apply to itself. And, while 'kin states'
can sometimes play a constructive role in managing minority issues - as
Austria has in the Italian South Tyrol and Ireland is trying to do in Ulster
 -it is dangerous to give such states a general licence to interfere in
their neighbours' affairs, especially when they have the size and record of
Russia.
In so far as such issues can be handled internationally, it is best done
discreetly and on the basis of a single, generally accepted set of
principles. That is the approach already adopted by the CSCE, 40 of whose 52
member states will be represented in Paris today, through its high
commissioner on national minorities, Mr Max van der Stoel. The EU's most
valuable contribution could be to give his efforts quiet support.
