FT  22 FEB 94 / World Trade News: Japanese airline applies to slash fares
A price war broke out yesterday in the Japanese airline industry when All
Nippon Airways, Japan's second largest airline by turnover, asked the
Japanese Ministry of Transport to allow it to slash international economy
fares by up to 55 per cent.
The move followed a request earlier this month from Japan Air Lines, ANA's
main rival, to cut fares to the US and Honolulu by up to 50 per cent.
ANA said it wanted to reduce its economy fares to Europe by an average of 41
per cent, although the maximum cut would be as great as 55 per cent. It also
wanted to offer a 44 per cent reduction for the standard fare to the US east
coast. JAL said it was looking to cut fares to Asia and Europe, but had not
yet decided by how much.
The ministry has the right to set maximum and minimum fares. The new
tariffs, if approved, would be available from April 1.
The moves represent urgent attempts by both Japanese airlines to boost their
passenger loads. They are suffering from poor demand, caused by Japan's
worst recession since the second world war, fierce competition from other
airlines, and high cost bases.
International routes have suffered particularly badly. ANA's international
loading factor - the proportion of available seats filled - fell from 69.7
per cent during the 1992 financial year to 63.2 per cent during the six
months to last September. Meanwhile JAL's international loading factor fell
from 70.9 per cent during the six months to September 1992 to 66.6 per cent
for the same period last year.
Meanwhile, ANA said it was suspending its joint flights with Sabena, the
Belgian airline, between Brussels and Tokyo's Narita airport. It also
revealed plans to set up routes from the new airport at Kansai to Shanghai,
Beijing, Dalian and Tsingtao in China, as well as Seoul. The company said it
aimed to set up an Asian hub at the airport, due to be opened in September.
ANA forecast it would increase the number of international passengers
carried during the 1994 fiscal year by 6 per cent to 1.6m.
