FT  29 NOV 94 / Survey of Bristol (7): Particularly strong ties - Graham
Bowley takes a look at academic links with industry
Bristol is home to two successful universities, both of which enjoy a close
relationship with commercial life in the city, across the UK and abroad.
The University of the West of England, or UWE, the former Bristol
Polytechnic which converted to university status in 1992, has its main
campus in the north of the city.
This area, close to the M4 motorway and Bristol Parkway railway station, is
undergoing rapid development and anyone travelling to the university will
pass through a dramatic landscape dominated by cranes and the skeletons of
new buildings - the headquarters of the Ministry of Defence procurement
operations, and headquarters for Sun Life.
The university is quite comfortable with such rapid change unfolding around
it.
'Being a former polytechnic, we have always had good links with industry,'
said Ms Linda Skinner, director of the university's Centre for Research,
Innovation and Industry, which was set up 18 months ago with the help of a
Pounds 160,000 grant from Department of Trade and Industry.
Its aim is to promote co-operation between the university and industry, to
help local business and to explore ways of putting the university's research
to commercial use.
'What this centre does is act as a middle man between industry and academics
 -the university is very good at coming up with ideas but we do not exploit
what we do as well as we could,' says Ms Skinner. 'Our researchers also work
with companies to develop any unused patents, which the company may have,
into something which is commercially viable.'
Ties are particularly strong between UWE and local business. A quarter of
the university's students come from the south west and 41 per cent of
graduates take up employment in the region. 'We draw many of our students
from the region and we place a lot of our students there, so it is in our
interest to promote Bristol because a thriving regional economy is
absolutely vital to this university,' said Ms Skinner.
The centre has a small-business liaison unit which provides advice and help
to small businesses within a 40-mile radius of Bristol. 'We are continually
asking ourselves how we can interact better with industry in the region and
how we can help businesses to innovate,' said Ms Skinner. She estimates that
of the five businesses a week the centre talks to, 35 per cent end up doing
some sort of collaborative work with the university.
Although it has ties with most industry sectors, the university works
particularly closely with the aerospace industry and Bristol's new
high-technology companies.
UWE works closely with Hewlett Packard, the second-largest US computer
company, which has its European research and development centre on a site
adjoining the university. The two are part of a group developing a new
high-speed communications network for Bristol - an information superhighway
for the Bristol area, called the metropolitan area network, or Bristol Man.
Close by the centre, and also part of UWE, is the Bristol Business School,
which has 3,200 full- and part-time students working for degrees in business
studies, international business studies, accounting and finance and
financial services.
'The latter is particularly relevant, given the growth of the financial
services sector in Bristol,' said Professor Michael Rees, dean of the
Bristol Business School.
Each year as many as 200 students are placed with industry in the UK and
abroad as part of their sandwich year out. The school also offers special
management qualifications for people already at work who wish to take their
training further.
The fastest-growing area in the school - and where the ties with business
are the strongest - are the 'partnership programmes' which the school
offers; courses tailor-made to the needs of a particular organisation. In
this area, the school works closely with Lloyds Bank - which takes about 100
people a year - the Bristol &amp; West building society, NatWest Insurance
Services, and also Avon county council and Bristol city council, to provide,
for example, much of these companies' early in-house training.
Bristol University, one of the UK's leading universities which can boast
several top-class research departments, is situated right at the heart of
Bristol.
Mr Don Carleton, press officer, said: 'The university has both long-term
strategic relationships with local organisations, ranging from very large
multinationals to quite small companies, and at the other extreme short,
sharp relationships of some commercial value.'
He said: 'Agreements are struck at the highest level with companies, ranging
from large multinationals to small local businesses, in acknowledgement that
our futures are intertwined and dependent on each other. Then, at the more
specific level, we have exchanges of staff and of ideas.'
The university has recently won a Pounds 1m grant from the Ministry of
Agriculture of Fisheries and Food to carry out research on applying
processing engineering to food.
The university is heavily involved, along with the UWE, the University of
Bath and commercial partners, with planning for a science park - called
Emersons Green - which is to be located to the north-east of the city. The
aim of the park is to attract new high-technology industries into the area.
'These would create jobs but they would also be consumers of what the
universities do best - there would be a strong demand for our high quality
graduates and research,' said Mr Carleton.
In anticipation of the park, the university is working closely on a Ecu5m
project concerned with advanced computing technologies with Inmos, a
subsidiary of France's SGS-Thomson.
Bristol University offers its own business degree - an MBA in international
business at its international business unit. This graduate course was
introduced in 1991 and is now on its fourth intake of students. The
students, who come from all over the world, can spend time on placements at
businesses in Bristol and have the opportunity of visiting universities
abroad.
