FT  29 JAN 94 / Scott probe hears of 'shambles' at DTI
Whitehall manoeuvrings over a trial at the heart of the arms-for-Iraq affair
were a 'shambles', a top civil servant told the Scott inquiry yester-day.
Mr Michael Coolican, head of the Department of Trade and Industry's Export
Control Organisation, described the lack of co-ordination between Whitehall
departments and confused legal advice in oral evidence: 'We (the DTI) were
in a state of not knowing what documents should not be disclosed or why . .
. it was done in an unco-ordinated fashion, a shambles.'
Mr Coolican referred to his own state of 'anxiety' after discovering that
Customs was prosecuting a company for exporting goods that had earlier been
approved by government ministers apparently for intelligence reasons.
'I had seen a stream of submissions going to ministers saying 'let's approve
these exports, don't hang around, there's nothing wrong with them', and here
is Customs saying that there is,' he said.
On October 1 1992 - 11 days before the start of the Matrix Churchill trial -
Mr Coolican wrote to another official complaining about the way the
prosecution was being handled by Whitehall and Customs.
At the time officials were getting conflicting advice from lawyers on how
ministers should use public interest immunity certificates to withhold
documents of relevance to the defence. 'The reasons we look like a bunch of
bungling amateurs is because we are being asked to do what we have never
been asked to do before,' Mr Coolican wrote.
Questioned persistently by Lord Justice Scott and his counsel Ms Presiley
Baxendale QC about his own involvement in the trial, Mr Coolican admitted
that his own witness statement should have been 'fuller'. The statement,
drafted under legal advice, had omitted a reference to machine tools granted
export licences after intelligence indicated they were being used to bolster
Iraq's military capacity.
Mr Coolican also told the inquiry how DTI officials had concluded that
advice given to Mr John Major, the prime minister, by Sir Robin Butler, the
cabinet secretary, had been misleading. Sir Robin's advice was that
government had not known about the military applications of Matrix Churchill
exports.
In further written evidence, described by the judge as 'extremely useful',
Mr Coolican has listed attempts by Whitehall since 1990 to boost efficiency
in its export-control procedures, such as requirements for information on
defence-related exports and closer co-ordination between officials and the
intelligence agencies.
Mr Jonathan Aitken, defence procurement minister, has been asked to give
written evidence by the Scott inquiry, it emerged last night. Mr Aitken told
the Commons this week that Saudi Arabia was under no obligation to give
details of the end-users of defence equipment supplied by Britain under the
Al-Yamamah defence deal.
