FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (7): Fierce clashes all the way
 -Bronwen Maddox describes the environmentalist backlash in England
'When they came to build the Channel Tunnel they told us they didn't need
the line. So we let them build the Channel Tunnel. Surprise, surprise - this
is what we find.'
Those are the opening lyrics of Joan of Kent, a new musical now touring Kent
and London which protests against the construction of railway links to the
tunnel.
The environmental impact of the tunnel has caused some of the fiercest
debates during its planning. Most of that heat has been focused on the size
of the terminals, and the route and design of the new rail lines between
London and the tunnel mouth in Kent.
While the tunnel debate has been underway for years, in recent months the
government has shown itself to be worried about public opposition to the
encroachment of development on the countryside. It has announced a
scaling-back of road building, partly on environmental grounds.
Conservative backbenchers suggest that the desire for more conservation may
play a part in the forthcoming local and European elections, particularly in
the Conservative strongholds in the south of England. However, in the case
of the Channel Tunnel, the consortium argues that it has gone to great
lengths to minimise the impact on the environment. In building the
Folkestone terminal the construction companies transplanted a 12-acre of
woodland called Biggin's Wood, the size of Heathrow's Terminal 4, to a site
nearby when it was clear that the trees were at risk.
Environmentalists have also welcomed some features of the railway route that
has eventually been chosen. It avoids the marshes near the estuaries of the
Thames and Medway, which are rich in wildlife, particularly migratory birds.
They have also supported the decision to lay much of the new track alongside
existing road and rail routes, thus minimising the impact on previously
unspoiled countryside.
But some campaigners are disappointed that more of the lines are not buried
in tunnels, and accuse the government of underfunding the project.
Mr Robert Baxter, chairman of the transport group in the Kent branch of the
Council for the Protection of Rural England, says that part of the line will
pass through sensitive downland on either side of the Medway river, and
ancient woodland near Cobham.
Local pressure groups are also concerned about development, as yet
unplanned, which will be precipitated by the tunnel. In particular, the
mooted construction of another passenger station in Kent 'will mean large
amounts of carparks and infrastructure', Mr Baxter says. 'Those will bring
more commuters into Kent and increase the pressure on its environment.'
Environmentalists also point out that the rail lines may have difficulty in
carrying large volumes of freight because the gradients on several stretches
are steep. Freight trains may need two locomotives to overcome the gradient,
they suggest. Freight traffic, they fear, may continue to use the roads,
thereby increasing air pollution.
Further concern about the tunnel's impact centres around the problem of
disposing of the spoil from the tunnel borings.
The solution has been to deposit the rock and sand at the foot of the White
Cliffs of Dover. A platform, reinforced with concrete, has been built from
the waste, extending 1km along the cliffs and a third of a kilometre out to
sea. The top of the platform has been made into a picnic area.
However local conservationists have been concerned that the platforms, which
are about a quarter of the height of the cliffs, spoil the view of
Shakespeare Cliff which was named after a scene in King Lear.
They also fear that the platform could alter tidal flows and affect the
wildlife on the site of special scientific interest at the head of the
cliffs.
Despite these concerns, many environmentalists acknowledge that the impact
of the tunnel is considerably less than was first feared.
The Great Escape Theatre Company, 071 485 5431. Cassettes available.
