FT  27 MAY 94 / Survey of Relocation in the UK (1): A new catalyst for
change - Activity has started to pick up, but the motive now is usually
restructuring
Relocation activity within the UK has started to pick up, after several
quiet years. But the moves now being made by companies are different in
character from those which took place at the turn of the decade, when
relocation activity reached an earlier peak.
'The theme has been retrenchment, rather than expansion,' says Mr David
Rees, a relocation specialist at accountants Ernst &amp; Young.
Companies are no longer being driven out of their existing locations by high
property costs and labour shortages, as they were in the late 1980s. Rather,
the catalyst for many corporate relocations is the need to reorganise and
rationalise businesses.
Restructuring is also important in determining where multinationals decide
to locate. The creation of a single European market has allowed companies to
seek economies of scale and rationalise the structure of businesses that
were originally designed for more fragmented markets.
Instead of placing a national headquarters in each large European country,
multinationals are establishing one European headquarters. Likewise,
companies are tending to consolidate their European manufacturing operations
into their most efficient or low-cost plants.
Examples of this trend includes the decision by Gillette of the US to cut
excess European capacity by closing a razor-blade factory near Seville and
transferring production to plants in west London and Berlin. In another
example, CPC (UK), a subsidiary of the US food group, is moving production
of its Knorr brand of soups and cubes from near Glasgow to more modern
plants in France and Italy.
These upheavals within European industry have led to some acrimony between
countries competing to retain and attract investment. Last year's decision
by Hoover of the US to stop making vacuum cleaners at Dijon in France and
move its operations to Scotland provoked charges that the UK was indulging
in 'social dumping' using lower wages and less favourable working conditions
to lure the company away from France.
In recent years, the UK has attracted a disproportionate share of the EC's
inward investment. In the last decade, the UK is calculated to have taken
nearly 40 per cent of all non-EC investment made in Europe. After Belgium,
the UK is home to a larger number of European headquarters of US companies
than any other European country, according to Ernst &amp; Young.
Direct investment in the UK in 1992 amounted to Pounds 9.2bn, a Pounds 800m
increase on the previous year. But inward investment is running at markedly
reduced levels compared with 1989 and 1990. The UK will have to fight
increasingly hard if it is to increase or even maintain its share of inward
investment coming into Europe.
Advantages of investing in the UK include a relatively cheap and flexible
workforce, factors that are reinforced by the UK's opt-out from the EU's
'social chapter'. Cultural and language considerations also play a part in
securing investment from the US and Japan.
But Britain cannot afford to be complacent. According to Ernst &amp; Young's Mr
Rees, potential relocators are often unimpressed by the UK's transport
infrastructure and the skills of its workforce. Moreover, the perception
that the UK is not 'at the heart of Europe' worries some potential
investors.
Competition from rival centres is becoming more intense. 'The UK is facing
greater competition both within Europe and globally,' says Mr Elias van
Herwaarden of Plant Location International, a subsidiary of Price
Waterhouse. US investors' attention is shifting to south-east Asia, he says.
At the same time, Ireland, Northern France, and parts of Belgium, the
Netherlands and the former eastern Germany are all fighting harder to win
mobile companies.
Even if the UK continues to attract a large number of projects coming into
the EU, the scale of investment may be diminishing. Mr van Herwaarden notes
that there is an increasing trend for US companies to embark on smaller
projects, valued at less than Dollars 5m. 'Companies are moving step by
step. There is an increased emphasis on flexibility with respect to adapting
to changing market needs and circumstances,' he says.
Similarly, if there is a second wave of investment from Japan, it is likely
to stem from supplier and sub-contractor activities rather than large-scale
projects. The number of large Japanese deals has diminished, partly because
so much investment was brought forward before the creation of the single
European market as a result of fears of a potential 'Fortress Europe'.
Competition for investment has also increased within the UK. Last year's
redrawing of the assisted areas map, when the government decided for the
first time to give help to parts of London and the south and east coast has
increased the pressure on long-standing assisted areas such as the
north-east.
Another reason why it is harder for outlying parts of the country to attract
investment is that some key factors driving companies out of London and the
south-east, such as labour shortages and high property costs, have
diminished in importance.
The gap between the cost of renting property in different parts of the
country has narrowed. Whereas rents in the City of London have halved since
1990, those in, say, Manchester have hardly fallen. The 1995 rating
revaluation, which will shift the rates burden from the south to the north,
will further erode potential cost savings for companies moving out of
London.
As a result, the incentive for companies to make long- distance moves has
diminished. Changes to the tax treatment of relocation expenses have also
tended to discourage such moves.
The cost of relocating increased substantially last year when the government
introduced a Pounds 8,000 ceiling on taxable allowances on relocation
expenses. The impact, however, was substantially lessened this April when
the Inland Revenue decided that tax would not be charged when an employer
buys an employee's existing home.
The prospect of cutting property costs is the single most important reason
for relocations, according to a survey by Jones Lang Wootton of large
companies that have moved out of London over the last decade.
But increasingly, operational considerations, such as the desire to
consolidate businesses, are becoming more important. The JLW survey found
that operational considerations accounted for half of the large corporate
moves out of London last year, compared with a third of moves between 1983
and 1992.
Large-scale corporate restructuring and rationalisation promise to be
increasingly important catalysts for relocations over the next few years.
British Telecommunications, for example, is considering moving up to 10,000
jobs out of 76 London offices over the next three to five years to locations
in and around the M25. As well as cutting property costs, the proposals
would allow BT to reduce its employees' commuting times and to pioneer new
forms of working based on advanced telecommunications.
Overall, the pace of UK relocation appears to be picking up. Last year, just
eight companies moved more than 100 jobs out of central London. But this
year, twice as many such moves are expected. A further 11 moves have already
been planned for 1995 and 1996.
As the worldwide recession lifts, the number of multinational and domestic
companies planning relocations is likely to increase. But competition from
other European centres and the diminished attractions of moving long
distances within the UK will add to the pressures as the regions try to
attract new investment.
