FT  14 JUN 94 / Toyota plant fails to boost Midlands economy
The economic effects of Toyota's Pounds 550m car plant at Burnaston,
Derbyshire, have been considerably less than politicians and planners
expected when the project was announced in 1989.
A report commissioned by the environment and employment departments and by
Midlands councils says assumptions that Toyota's presence would induce
companies to establish plants in the Midlands have been unfounded.
The report will be presented to Staffordshire County Council later this
week.
Production started at the Toyota plant in late 1992. So far about 2,600 jobs
have been created including 1,800 at Burnaston and about 800 indirectly.
Mr David Slee, Staffordshire director of planning and economic development,
said in a note for councillors: 'Extra employment has only partially
compensated for major job losses experienced at firms such as Rolls-Royce
and Pirelli.'
Ecotec Research and Consulting, which prepared the report after studying the
impact of Toyota on a region within 50 miles of Burnaston, said that 16
firms were known to have relocated or to have set up in the area since the
end of 1992.
It attributed the limited inward investment to:
Limited production volumes as Toyota builds up production.
Toyota not yet fully adopting a 'just-in-time' system of delivery.
Excess capacity among component suppliers.
The inward investment projects have used 32 acres of land, but Staffordshire
and Derbyshire made provision in their land-use plans for Toyota-related
developments to use 642 acres.
A similar miscalculation took place with housing. Ecotec said: 'It seems
unlikely that the additional housing demand which has been generated amounts
to more than 400 to 500 units. This compares with additional associated
structure plan allocations of 6,700 houses in Derbyshire and Staffordshire.'
Direct employment at Toyota is expected to rise to 3,000 as production grows
towards the end of the decade. By that time 6,900 people will be directly or
indirectly involved with the plant.
Ecotec said this would generate local income of Pounds 92.6m, but the size
of the local economy and the diffusion of the income across it 'mean that
most of the economic impacts should still be absorbed fairly easily'.
