FT  14 MAR 94 / Emerging Markets: Markets seek clarity on interest rates -
Currency Markets
A critical week lies ahead for foreign exchanges with the release of
inflation data in the US and UK, and a Bundesbank council meeting, likely to
point the way to future interest rate developments on both sides of the
Atlantic.
The focus of attention will be the mid-week publication of February producer
and consumer prices in the US. These data will set the scene for the meeting
of the (policy making) Federal Open Market Committee on the March 22.
Financial markets have had the jitters about US inflation ever since the Fed
lifted interest rates by 25 basis points last month. But some analysts argue
that the central bank will tighten less aggressively than the market
believes.
The US currency remains vulnerable to fall-out from the Whitewater political
scandal, but attention this week should focus on the economy.
The dollar is likely be stronger against the yen following the weekend
settlement of a long-running cellular phone dispute between the US and
Japan. The deal improves and accelerates the US company Motorola's access to
the Japanese market.
It is a clear victory for the strong-arm tactics of the US, and should help
the two countries resolve their broader trade dispute. Recent history
suggests that progress in these talks favours the dollar.
In Europe the market will be watching to see whether the Bundesbank uses
Germany's improving inflation outlook to quicken the pace of interest rate
cuts. The central bank's council meets on Thursday.
Foreign exchanges will also be watching yesterday's election for the Lower
Saxony state parliament, the first in a series of 19 regional and national
polls in Germany between now and October. A strong protest vote against the
political establishment could weaken the D-Mark.
In the UK, the release of producer inflation data, retail sales and
unemployment figures will set the tone for interest rates. There is no
consensus about the direction of the next move in rates, and there are
indications that the market may take its lead from the US rather than
Europe.
