FT  04 AUG 94 / Whitewater inquisitors find no 'smoking gun'
It was nearly two in the morning. For the umpteenth time a Republican
senator - on this occasion Mr Phil Gramm of Texas - was berating Mr Roger
Altman for being economical with the truth to Congress.
For the first time in 10 hours of testimony which ended early yesterday, the
deputy secretary of the Treasury allowed his anger to flare. But then he
checked himself and, yet again, repeated that he had not dissembled to
Congress and that he had not engaged in 'substantive' meetings related to
Whitewater other than the one, on February 2, at the White House, that he
had always mentioned.
Later, Mr Altman was back on the stand again, in front of the more friendly
House banking committee, along with Ms Jean Hanson, the Treasury lawyer,
whose recollections of who said what, when and to whom had differed in parts
from his own. Their boss, Mr Lloyd Bentsen, the Treasury secretary, was
practising his courtly wiles on former colleagues on the Senate panel. He
portrayed himself as above the fray while it was unfolding, but in no way
did he disown Mr Altman nor depart from the administration's basic defence
that it broke no laws, criminal or ethical.
Barring the unexpected, the congressional hearings seem to have reached an
impasse. Without doubt, Republicans have succeeded in identifying
inconsistencies in testimonies, but a big breach in the wall has not been
effected and no 'smoking gun' has been found.
This is partly because the hearings have featured much minutiae and been
replete with bureaucratic legalisms - 'pre-briefs,' 'recusals', 'tasked',
'redactions' and 'referrals'.
A week's hearings have embraced only a sliver of the Whitewater affair -
specifically the conduct of investigations into the Madison Guaranty savings
and loan company formerly owned by the partner of the Clinton family in the
Whitewater land development scheme in Arkansas.
There may be fireworks to come. Followers of political streetfighting relish
the upcoming confrontation between Senator Al D'Amato, the rough and tough
New York Republican, and Mr Harold Ickes, the rough and tough New York
Democrat who is now deputy White House chief of staff.
But no heads have rolled, though lesser fry, like Ms Hanson, must be rubbing
their necks. Mr Altman went into his testimony with universal predictions
that he would be the 'fall guy' for the administration's failings to come
clean. But his proud demeanour made it clear that he was not going to walk
the plank on the evidence presented.
Mostly partisanship has ruled, especially in the House. Senate Democrats
seemed to waver when first Ms Hanson and then Mr Altman were under the gun.
But, spurred on by Senator Christopher Dodd of Connecticut, they began to
rally round the deputy secretary, though without assistance from the
committee chairman, Senator Don Riegle. He is retiring anyway.
