FT  30 AUG 94 / Survey of Malaysia (4): Where chips eclipse smelters -
Penang is Malaysia's electronics power house
'I suppose you want to know when the bubble is going burst?' said Mr Ariff
Nazir, boss of the old tin smelter in the middle of Penang.
It was not an unreasonable question. The small island off the west coast of
the Malaysian peninsula has, for the past 10 years, been the most dynamic
growth region in Malaysia and one of the most dynamic in the world.
Average annual growth has been over 10 per cent since 1988, usually at least
two percentage points above the national average, and even when foreign
direct investment started to falter last year in the country as a whole it
was scarcely dented in Penang, the centre of Malaysia's electronics
industry.
Mr Nazir had just returned from a ceremony to launch a new programme linking
Penang's top electronics companies - Hewlett Packard, Hitachi, Bosch, etc -
to local small and medium-sized businesses. At the ceremony, Mr Koh Tsu
Koon, Penang's chief minister, and Mrs Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's trade and
industry minister, both emphasised the importance of deepening Penang's
industrial revolution and making it less dependent on low value-added
assembly operations.
Twenty years ago Mr Nazir's tin smelter was still the largest employer on
the island. Now its 500 employees are outnumbered by the 3,000 employed by
dozens of electronics plants. The smelter is still one of the biggest in the
world, producing about 30,000 of the 150,000 tonnes of annual world output,
but it is being run down gradually so that its owners (ultimately the German
group Preussag) can sell off a prime city centre site.
The smelter is not, however, immune to the symptoms of over-heating all
around it. Mr Nazir, for example, is trying to hire 60 extra labourers for
his unionised plant at a reasonable rate of close to MDollars 500 a month.
So far he has found just two.
But he remains an optimist. 'The bubble will not burst here because the
state government is sensible enough to let out some of the air', he says. It
is, for example, discouraging labour-intensive investments in Penang,
especially from the Taiwanese. Companies such as Dastek, which is shifting
disk drive production to China, are being encouraged to move to lower labour
cost parts of Malaysia or to other countries in the region.
The Northern Growth Triangle (NGT) - the agreement between the governments
of Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia to improve cross border economic
activity - should encourage this exodus.
'We are becoming a great deal more pickey about the kind of investor we want
in Penang,' says Miss Lim Pao Li, managing director of DCT consultancy
services, part of the Pengang Development Corporation. She said this while
sitting in the dark, thanks to one of the power cuts common in a region
knocking up against capacity constraints.
Such constraints on power supply as well as transport capacity will not be
resolved by upgrading Penang's production base. Nor will such upgrading
diminish the growing pollution problem which has made much of the sea around
the island unfit for tourists to swim in.
Nevertheless, Penang will remain the focus of Malaysia's belated transition
to higher value-added production. As wage rates continue to rise sharply,
some of the generous investment subsidies are phased out (part of the Gatt
agreement on world trade), and shifts in exchange rates become less
favourable, the region has little choice.
Wages in Penang are substantially above levels elsewhere in the country,
with basic wages (excluding many fringe benefits, but including overtime)
for skilled workers around MDollars 800 a month. Yet the electronics sector,
which employs about 60 per cent of the region's 170,000 manufacturing
workers (out of a total workforce of 450,000), has an annual value-added per
employee of only MDollars 14,000 per year, placing it way behind basic
industries such as flour-milling.
Low value-added electronic components - where Malaysian factories usually
add only about 30 per cent of the value of a product - still account for
about 40 per cent of the country's electronic sector, although that is down
from as high as 80 per cent in 1986. In Penang (which accounts for about
half of the country's electronic industry) there has been robust growth in
industrial and consumer electronics.
There are also some signs of increasing automation and the basing of more
design and R&amp;D work in Penang. Intel is building an integrated manufacturing
plant in Penang. Motorola already locates its worldwide R&amp;D centre for
mobile phones and pagers in Penang employing more than 100 engineers at an
annual cost of more than MDollars 5m.
But Penang, like Malaysia as a whole, lacks graduate scientists and skilled
technicians. Mr Ismail Mohamed Salleh, of the ISIS think-tank, says in a
recent paper on the electronics industry in Malaysia: 'While some products
are close to the forefront of technology  ..there has been little deepening
in the product design and technologies of the products themselves.'
Penang is still booming, but as one business leader put it: 'We have reached
the end of the road on our first phase of industrial development and we do
not yet have the people for the second phase.'
