FT  22 MAR 94 / Labour attacks utilities over avoidance of VAT
Labour yesterday accused Britain's gas and electricity companies of
depriving the government of millions of pounds in potential revenue by
allowing customers to pay for supplies in advance and so avoid paying some
value added tax when it is levied on domestic fuel.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, said the government could lose up to
Pounds 100m of revenue as customers rushed to pay for future gas and
electricity consumption before the introduction of 8 per cent VAT on fuel on
April 1.
Mr Brown said that gas and electricity companies would make windfall profits
from the interest earned on customers' advance payments. About 300,000
customers had taken advantage of pre-payment schemes and the figure was
likely to rise sharply in the next 10 days. 'The system benefits those who
have money and who need VAT help least. It gives no benefit to those who are
poor,' he said.
Some of Britain's building societies expressed concern yesterday that they
were suffering a large outflow of money as customers sought to make the
pre-payments. City economists have suggested that the overall transfer of
funds from banks to the energy suppliers could be as high as Pounds 1bn.
Last Friday Building Societies Association figures showed that in February
societies suffered an outflow of Pounds 404m from their retail funds - the
highest for 7 1/2 years. Mr Adrian Coles, the association's
director-general, said: 'It has been a factor, and will be one in March as
well.'
According to Labour party calculations about Pounds 10m is being transferred
in advance payments each day.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's environment spokesman, said yesterday that the flow
of funds from the retail banking sector was so great that it might be
difficult for the government to bring about another cut in interest rates.
Treasury officials have said, however, that there is little the government
can do to change the long-standing principle that VAT can be charged and
paid in advance for goods and not merely at point of sale.
Sir John Cope, paymaster general, said imposition of VAT on domestic fuel
would 'raise revenue in as fair a way as possible.' He accused Labour of
seeking to 'pile more taxes onto British business' and compared advance
payments to pre-budget purchases of alcohol and tobacco.
He said: 'To have stopped that would have involved an enormous amount of red
tape for everyone. That is the Labour way, but it certainly is not the
Conservative way.'
