FT  01 FEB 94 / The BMW/Rover Deal: Unions seek jobs reassurance - Workers
react
Union leaders yesterday sought reassurances from Rover that workers at the
group's seven sites would not face cutbacks or involuntary redundancies
following the BMW acquisition.
The deal, however, appeared to enjoy support from workers on the Rover
factory floor in contrast to the more cautious approach of union leaders.
Rover directors, expected to address workforce meetings today, are also
being urged to give undertakings that the deal will not mean plant closures.
Calls to protect working practices for more than 30,000 members of the TGWU
general, AEEU engineering and MSF white-collar unions were led by the Trades
Union Congress.
Mr John Monks, general secretary, said: 'The TUC will be supporting the
unions in Rover in securing real guarantees from BMW that jobs will not be
threatened and that research and development and component supply will
remain in the UK.'
His comment followed warnings from the International Metalworkers Federation
that BMW could try to impose new practices on Rover workers.
The Zurich-based federation, whose members include IG Metall, the union at
BMW, said the company had good relations with its German workforce but had
taken an anti-union stance in the US.
The federation's warning prompted calls for further safeguards from the
AEEU, which represents some 6,000 Rover workers.
Mr John Allen, the union's chief negotiator at Rover, said: 'Our first
priority must be the workforce, and we would like some assurances as to
long-term job security.'
Yesterday, however, workers coming off shift at Rover's Solihull plant -
home to Land-Rover production - did not appear as concerned as their union
leaders.
Those prepared to comment expressed no hostility to the new holding company.
Mr Dale Clarke, a maintenance supervisor, described BMW's planned
acquisition as 'a good move forward for us.' He said: 'It's also good we're
keeping the links with Honda. So the future looks rosy.'
Mr Steve Pitchford, a setter operator for 25 years, was more equivocal. 'I
want to know more facts. But BMW is a good company which makes good models.
The announcement could be for the best. As long as it keeps me in
employment, I don't mind.'
That pragmatic approach was not universal. Mr John Doyle, an assembly fitter
for 15 years, branded the deal 'a bit of a sell-out. I think BMW is after
this place; they're not interested in the cars.'
Union negotiators are expected to seek comparable conditions with workers at
BMW's Munich and Regensburg plants, where working hours and annual leave are
more favourable.
