FT  03 AUG 94 / Smurfit to double European operations
Jefferson Smurfit, the Irish paper and packaging group, is more than
doubling the size of its European operations in a FFr5.63bn (Pounds 670m)
deal to buy the paper and packaging business of Compagnie de Saint-Gobain,
the French glass and building materials group.
Smurfit is buying Cellulose du Pin, which has operations in France, Italy,
Spain and Belgium, and produces recycled paper, corrugated boxes, coated
woodfree paper and paper sacks.
The purchase will propel Smurfit to the number one position in the European
corrugated industry with 10 per cent of the waste-based paper market. The
group's enlarged European operations will have sales of Pounds 1.4bn.
Smurfit is taking on debt of up to FFr2.9bn as part of the consideration.
The balance of the FFr2.73bn will be paid to Saint-Gobain, half on
completion and the rest in two annual tranches.
Mr Howard Kilroy, Smurfit president, said the company was examining ways of
financing the acquisition. Initially, it would be funded through debt and
internal resources which could leave the group up to 100 per cent geared.
Mr Michael Smurfit, chairman, said the deal would give his company a 'major
position in France, where until now we have had only modest representation'.
Smurfit is expected to have up to 20 per cent of the French corrugated
market.
The deal is subject to approval from the European Commission.
Saint-Gobain said last night the sale of Cellulose du Pin reflected the fact
that, despite considerable investment, the group had not reached the
leadership position in Europe that Saint-Gobain had achieved in glass and
building materials.
Saint-Gobain said Cellulose du Pin, which last year lost FFr1.1bn on
turnover of FFr8bn, would be better off with a world-scale paper operation
like Smurfit.
Saint-Gobain said it was too early to say how it would use the FFr900m
capital gain from the sale.
Cellulose du Pin employs 8,000 people in France, Spain, Italy and Belgium
and makes 1.3m tonnes of paper and 750,000 tonnes of packaging material a
year.
MY Holdings, Page 18
