FT  03 DEC 94 / Food &amp; Drink: The Lebanese wine might be interesting, sir -
Trends in restaurant wine lists
If I were to venture an opinion on a future direction for the naming of
restaurants it would be this - that they will be called after their
enterprising sommelier or personable head wine waiter.
What, I hear you say, but we have just got used to meeting, eating and
drinking at Nico's, Marco's, Alastair Little's or Paul Heathcoate's.
I understand. But have you checked the bill when you've walked out of one of
these famous chef's establishments? Well you should - not to see whether it
has been added up correctly, but to see who has taken the most money off you
in your pursuit of gastronomic pleasure - the renowned chef or the anonymous
sommelier.
The answer, confirmed by a clutch of my own bills, is more than likely to be
the latter. This signifies a major shift over the past few years in the
relationship between, and relative importance, of the sommelier and the
chef.
The initial cause of this change was the recession. When it began to bite,
all sensible restaurants introduced fixed-price menus and adjusted downwards
the individual prices of their menu items. Yet, in spite of recession,
restaurants continued to open, competition increased and menu prices have
barely changed over the past three years.
This caused a sharp difference between food and wine prices, accentuated by
the fact that, as we have become more knowledgeable about wine, many find it
easier to impress with the wine list than the menu.
The expensive ingredients on any menu - truffles, oysters, caviar - are an
acquired taste. Many people do not not eat them because they do not like
them, an attitude that would not change even if someone else were paying.
But any lover of Chardonnay, used to drinking a restaurant's Pounds 15
offering from California or Australia, would not say no to an offer of a
bottle of white Burgundy from Coche-Dury or Niellon, at Pounds 50 to Pounds
60 a bottle.
And a top sommelier and an expensive bottle of red bordeaux, burgundy or
rhone bring with it their own theatre. Over the past decade chefs have
purposely, but short-sightedly, removed this element from the dining room by
plating all the food in the kitchen. But any order for a red wine that needs
decanting will turn the heads of other diners.
Over the past decade restaurants and wine bars have played an influential
role in the growing popularity of wine drinking: selling wines by the glass
to the neophyte wine drinker; popularising such dessert wines as Muscat de
Beaumes de Venise and converting people to the pleasures of wines from
California, New Zealand and Australia.
As well as adding glamour, the listing of several of the world's finest
wines on the list brings some financial security - a scarce commodity in the
restaurant world. Almost all a kitchen's ingredients need to be freshly
cooked. But fine wine appreciates in the bottle. The point is clearly made
by Barry Philips, proprietor of The White Horse, Chilgrove, West Sussex
(024-359219).
He says: 'As the top wines continue to escalate in value (due primarily to
Robert Parker and The Wine Spectator in America) it is easy to justify their
listing to the bank. They can be sold at auction or to the brokers at ever
higher prices. The cost of listing is purely the interest on the capital and
this is more than covered by their added value.'
Restaurants have become large customers for several wine merchants who have
seen their private customer business decline. Some merchants offer a service
to restaurant customers that includes not just the wines but assistance with
the writing of the list and staff training. To discover which wines
restaurants have been selling and what restaurateurs think we will be
drinking in 1995, I trawled five of the UK's finest wine lists:
Penhelig Arms, Aberdovey, Gwynedd, Wales. (0654-767215).
This seemed the logical place to start. A wine list created by the sheer
enthusiasm of its proprietor, Robert Hughes, in a hotel that has no business
accounts and where personal money is carefully spent. Hence, house champagne
at Pounds 3 a glass - a price not seen in London for some time.
Australia, especially Bailey's 1988 Cabernet Sauvignon, and the Rhone,
particularly wines from Seguret and Sablet, provided Hughes' customers with
their best value in 1994.
From Spain the white Murrieta and the red Contino were very popular. At a
recent tasting of red burgundy there was not much enjoyment among the guests
until it reached a cost price of Pounds 15 per bottle.
Petit chateaux clarets from 1989 and 1990 have been well received but this
is the place for claret lovers in 1995. Hughes will be listing several wines
of the lovely 1982 vintage - Malescot, Vieux Chateau Certan and Cissac -
from his own cellars.
The White Horse, Chilgrove, Sussex.
The 1995 Good Food Guide advises you to: 'Think of a wine, decide which
vintage, then ask for it. There is no need to look in the wine list, it is
almost bound to be there . . .'
Best selling wines are a Sauvignon de Touraine from France and a dry Blanc
de Noir from South Africa. Port and dessert wines by the glass are very
popular but the kitchen uses more liqueurs than are sold to customers. The
trend to New World wines continues with New Zealand whites, and Australian
and Chilean reds, the favourites.
Read's, Painter's Forstal, Near Faversham, Kent. 0795-535344.
A catholic range of wines has been in vogue this year: anything in half
bottle; champagne and port by the glass; New Zealand's Cloudy Bay Sauvignon
Blanc, which proprietor David Pitchford cannot buy enough of and Chateau
Musar 1981 from the Lebanon. Surprisingly popular have been Hamilton
Russell's Pinot Noir and Louisville Farms Chardonnay from South Africa.
In 1995 the Pitchfords - David cooks his wife Rona serves - will be looking
for good value wines from Chile, Argentina and southern France, convinced
that the French are waking up to competition at the lower end of the market.
Normandie, Elbut Lane, Birtle, Bury BL9 6LT. 061-764 3869.
A list, that proprietor Max Moussa explains, has no truck with wines 'in
vogue'. Max, and his sister Joanna who form the wine team, get great
pleasure from suggesting relatively unknown wines
. These include two Italians, a 1988 Turriga from Sardinia and Anselmi's
1991 single vineyard Soave, and the Ata Rangi Pinot Noir from Martinborough
in New Zealand.
Moussa finds predictions difficult to make but hopes that Australia's
production difficulties, caused by a shortage of good quality grapes, will
not lead to a huge rise in prices.
The Fifth Floor, Harvey Nichols, Knightsbridge, London SW1. 071-235 5250.
A monster list made especially inviting on Monday evenings by the company's
policy of charging shop prices - ie no mark-up. Among white wines, New
Zealand, the Loire and Burgundy have been the most popular sources but the
surprise of 1994 has been that more Harvey Nichols customers are drinking
red.
Thierry Dumont, head sommelier, believes this is due either to health
factors or the kitchen's increased use of Middle Eastern and spicy recipes.
Red Burgundy, Italian red wines and claret, have been popular but red wines
from Australia and California less so. Dumont believes that 1995 will be the
year for South African wines to emerge.
