FT  08 APR 94 / International Company News: Keeping the customer satisfied -
Citibank of the US is breaking into Japan
The sight of someone withdrawing money from a 'hole-in-the-wall' cash
machine at three o'clock in the morning in downtown Tokyo illustrates a
revolution in retail banking.
In most countries the sight might be commonplace, but in Japan there are
only 60 machines available 24 hours a day.
All 60 belong to Citibank, and the US bank's experience in Japanese retail
banking provides a telling example of how foreign companies can succeed in
the Japan.
In five years, the number of Citibank's retail customers in Japan has risen
from 30,000 to 200,000. Its retail operations in Japan, where it has been
the only foreign group to set up a branch network, should move into profit
next year, according to Mr Masamoto Yashiro, an executive vice-president.
Citibank had six branches in the early 1980s, but decided in 1988 to expand
rapidly. 'Japan represents an opportunity, even for foreign banks. If you
can succeed, the market is so large - the country is the world's
second-largest economy - that you can really flourish,' says Mr Yashiro.
Citibank believed it saw a gap in the market. Mr Yashiro explains: 'Contrary
to the conventional view, Japanese services are historically of low quality.
This is a producer society. Consumers are not well catered for. Banking
customers have been viewed as a source of cheap funds and their needs have
not been met.'
The barriers faced by Citibank when it entered retail banking were not, for
the most part, generated by Japan's bureaucracy. 'The ministry of finance
seems not to object to foreign banks,' says Mr Yashiro. 'By Japanese
standards - and I emphasise by Japanese standards - we've been treated well.
But it's a society that believes in stability rather than opportunity.
Invariably, if you ask for permission to do something new, you're told it's
not a good idea.' The bank is still unable to offer investment advice.
One of the biggest non-bureaucratic difficulties has been setting up a
branch network. The 11 leading commercial banks - known as city banks - have
huge branch networks; if Citibank was to even start competing, it had to
find good sites at reasonable prices, an almost impossible task during the
bubble economy of the late 1980s.
'Even though real estate prices are down, you often still have to provide up
to seven years' rent in advance - and you don't receive any interest on it.'
The bank now has 21 branches, mostly in Tokyo.
Another problem has been gaining access to the automatic teller machine
networks owned by the other banks. Mr Yashiro says: 'We can't really compete
by providing plain vanilla services. We have to be a niche player. We offer
the basic services, and then provide added value. This includes rapid
international fund transfers, multi-currency accounts - our customers can
hold accounts in 11 different currencies - and automatic bill paying.'
One of Citibank's main points of differentiation is its 24-hour cash-point
machines. The company has 40 on-site ATMs, with about 20 off-site. But that
is paltry compared with the Bancs network, owned by the city banks, which
has 27,000 machines around the country.
'We were not allowed to belong to Bancs because we were foreign,' says Mr
Yashiro. 'We are only affiliate members, which means we have to pay a
slightly higher customer fee. I openly say this is discrimination - not by
the government, but by the banks.
'On the other hand, it's a lot better than it might have been. When we first
approached them, we were asked to pay for half the development costs of the
entire system.' Citibank started negotiations six months ago with the
first-tier regional banks for access to their system, but its customers are
still unable to use them.
In spite of the problems and occasional long waits by customers for some
services, Citibank's added-value formula appears to be working. Turnover
rose 35 per cent last year, and most foreign bankers in Japan hold accounts
with Citibank, a fact which pleases Mr Yashiro.
However, profitability still eludes Citibank's Japanese retail banking
operations, despite a cost-reduction programme. Staffing levels have been
kept flat over the last two years, even though new branches are being
opened.
In spite of Citibank's relative success, Mr Yashiro expects few others to
follow. 'The main obstacle for foreign banks remains the cost of setting up
the infrastructure,' he concludes.
