FT  30 SEP 94 / Ukraine agrees to far-reaching economic reform
Yesterday's preliminary agreement for the International Monetary Fund to
provide Ukraine with Dollars 360m of financing from its systemic
transformation facility (STF) is contingent on the Kiev government
implementing a potentially far reaching economic reform programme.
Mr Michel Camdessus, the IMF managing director said, it was a 'strong first
step' in the direction of macroeconomic stabilisation.
Considerably more financial assistance will be available next year, with the
IMF hoping to negotiate a stand-by credit early in 1995. But while Mr
Camdessus and Mr Oleh Havrylyshyn, Ukraine's alternate executive director at
the IMF, expressed the hope that western governments would provide bilateral
support for Ukraine, British officials indicated that there are no plans at
present for such a move.
Mr Havrylyshyn said Ukraine hopes to obtain the Dollars 360m before the end
of October after approval by the IMF board. It hopes to have the Dollars 4bn
of support envisaged at the Naples summit by the G7 leading industrial
countries by the end of 1995.
Although there is likely to be some increase in inflation over the rest of
this year as a result of financing arrangements for the farm sector, Ukraine
has promised to have its monthly inflation in single digits for the rest of
this year and 'low single digits' for the whole of 1995, Mr Havrylyshyn
said.
He said Ukraine also promised to keep its budget deficit down to 10.5 per
cent of gross domestic product in the third and fourth quarters. Without
action to cut spending, the deficit would rise to 20 per cent from around 10
per cent in the first half of the year because of the commitments to finance
agriculture. The aim is to bring the deficit substantially below 10 per cent
next year.
The government will make some cuts in social spending that will hit the
middle classes. It also plans subsidy cuts.
It plans to start privatising state-run companies, starting on a small scale
early in 1995.
An important part of the plan will be the liberalisation of foreign exchange
arrangements, creating a genuine foreign exchange market around the end of
this year. The Kiev government hopes this will stabilise the Ukraine coupon
currency, which is currently worth around 75,000 to the dollar.
He said Kiev expects the IMF should provide about Dollars 1.5bn through its
STF and stand-by arrangements. The World Bank is expected to provide Dollars
400m while the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is
also expected to provide funds. That would leave about Dollars 1.5bn to be
provided by other lenders, such as western governments, Mr Havrylyshyn said.
However, senior UK Treasury officials disputed this breakdown. They said the
Dollars 4bn discussed at Naples would be supplied by the international
financial institutions.
If so illustrative G7 figures suggested Ukraine could hope to draw around
Dollars 1.2bn from the STF, Dollars 1.4bn through an IMF stand-by, about
Dollars 1.2bn from the Bank and Dollars 300m from EBRD.
Economic blueprint, see Feature Pages
