FT  07 SEP 94 / Recruitment: Drawing a line in the Blackpool sands - Jobs,
Trade unions seek clarification of the motives behind HRM practices
The sometimes uneasy relationship between trade unions and personnel
managers took a more hostile turn at this week's Trades Union Congress in
Blackpool as Britain's most famous seaside resort became the backdrop for a
showdown between the TUC and Human Resource Management.
The trade union movement, like a gunslinger who has long since put away his
sidearms, has been watching the antics of Britain's HRM hot shots through
half-closed eyes, wondering how it should handle them. A new TUC report on
HRM has demonstrated that the TUC is far from being as out of touch as some
employers may have believed.
Delegate after delegate mounted the podium at the opening day of conference
and declared they had just about had enough of HRM. They weren't scared of
it anymore and they weren't fooled by it either.
The main problem seems to be trade union suspicion of the motives behind HRM
practices. According to the TUC report, HRM is a 'slippery concept which
means different things to different people'. Although the report conceded
there was good and bad HRM, there were few such concessions on the
conference floor.
HRM initiatives appeared more frequently in unionised rather than
non-unionised workplaces, the report says. 'There is no correlation between
anti-unionism and the incidence of HRM. Indeed the more anti-union the
employer, the less likely it is that HRM techniques are being employed.'
Where trust appears to have broken down is over the use of HRM ideas to
replace collective bargaining. Mr John Monks, the TUC general secretary, has
accused hostile employees of using the language of HRM as a smokescreen for
anti-union strategy.
What is still not clear is just how many companies see advantages in
collective bargaining and how many see it as an impediment. The TUC's report
notes that 44 of the FT top 50 UK companies recognised trade unions for
collective bargaining purposes. Such companies, it says, saw the need for a
comprehensive strategy that may include many of the 'badges of HRM'. 'In
part this may be because they have to respond to international competitive
pressure, but it can be no coincidence that these companies also recognise
unions,' says the TUC report.
The trade unions should beware of rooting out conspiracies in every HRM
initiative. Neither should they assume that managements always know what
they are doing. There appears to be increasing evidence that some HRM
techniques have been introduced as ill-thought out panaceas that are
beginning to rebound on managements.
Delayering is a case in point. We had just become familiar with this term
for cutting out layers of mangement when out popped a piece of research from
Roffey Park Management Institute this week reporting a high degree of
cynicism among middle and junior management about its use.
The majority of some 200 managers surveyed for the report dismissed
delayering as nothing more than a cost-cutting exercise dressed up as an
efficiency tool.
Many employees in companies with delayered managements, the research found,
reported low morale and were cynical about the reason for its introduction.
They would have welcome allies at the TUC. The managers tended to be
dismissive about the idea that it speeds up decision-making and helps
companies become more responsive to customers.
Whole rafts of managers agreed with such arguments against delayering, says
Roffey Park. Junior managers, it found, were particularly hostile.
Linda Holbeche, the Roffey Park assistant director who has been carrying out
the study, found some organisations so disenchanted with the practice that
they were quietly reversing the trend. One organisation, she found, was
relayering by stealth, promoting certain individuals on the quiet so as not
to be seen that they were introducing a new tier.
Such an approach, she observes, appeared to conflict with company values
about treating people with honesty and integrity. Flattening the structure,
she notes, is only part of the method of changing the way an organisation
operates. In reality, she argues, 'few companies have found ways of working
more flexibly'.
How many times recently have we heard this observation about ideas such as
empowerment and profit-related pay? It seems that first there is the guru -
usually in the US - then there is the guru's lecture or book, or both. After
this we have the disciples who charge large consultancy fees for explaining
what their mentor is saying.
Next in the cycle come the companies whose executives are shepherded into
the new management fold, often by some bright management spark in a hurry.
As the Inland Revenue Staff Federation observed in guidelines to members on
delayering, 'managers responsible for delayering experiments are generally
ready to delayer any grade but their own'. Finally there is the pay-off: in
the case of delayering it is a swift impact on the bottom line.
The problem here is that where these principles are applied in isolation or
without adaption to suit the needs of the company and its business
environment, they can risk being rejected as readily as a body can react to
a transfusion of the wrong type of blood. It is not surprising therefore
that there seems to have been a flurry of recent reports questioning some of
the most popular HRM ideas.
British Telecom is one of the companies which has gradually introduced a
host of new initiatives on the back of business re-engineering over the past
10 years or so. Some ideas such as 'Living our values, saying thank you', or
LOVSTY, seem innocuous enough. In this case it allows the payment of gift
tokens for a good deed or job well done.
Some, however, appear to be hindering work rather than easing it. According
to one employee, 'you can spend all your time carrying out quality checks or
attending staff meetings about one thing or another. It has become a
self-perpetuating industry.' The company is now addressing the problem by
taking a fresh look at the way it runs its business.
Trade union criticism of HRM needs to be tempered because there are
companies which are effectively using combinations or components of many of
these principles. These are the companies which can tell the difference
between usefulness and fashion.
The Rover Group management, for example, was initially sceptical of Japanese
working practices when it first formed ties with Honda in the 1980s. What
helped change managers' minds was seeing how practices were adapted in a US
Honda factory. The result was a 'new deal' with unions and the introduction
of a series of HRM ideas that have so far proved successful. Not every idea,
however, has been wholly welcomed.
Far from being a scene of bloodshed, Blackpool may have injected some
welcome points into the HRM debate. If the trade unions can encourage some
greater caution about its use, their contribution should be welcomed; and if
it hastens the consignment of the most ineffective of management fads to
Boot Hill cemetery, the sooner the better.
