FT  23 JUL 94 / Books: Housewives and comrades - The women behind the
Kremlin walls
KREMLIN WIVES
by Larissa Vasilieva
Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson Pounds 20.00,
241 pages
The central interest of this book is the witness it bears to people - men
and women - living lives under conditions we cannot understand or judge
without a large effort of imaginative reconstruction.
It is only moderately well written (though it appears to be well translated)
and it is sloppy like much of Russian writing on current affairs - great
unevenness as the writer's interest waxes and wanes, analytical short
windedness, sentimentality breaking through and minimal sourcing.
But the fascination of the subject - the testimonies contained within it to
the lives of women who were at once monstrous and oppressed, most favoured
and most in peril of their lives, expected to be at once 'both Martha and
Mary, housewife and comrade' - compensates for these defects.
Apart from the last chapters, where recent Kremlin wives are presented as
brief cardboard cutouts, the character sketches are quite readable.
The portraits of the first wives are the best and most poignant. Nadezhda
Krupskaya, who married Lenin on his exile to Siberia in 1898 and who
outlived him by two decades, is drawn as a woman whose enforced modesty of
expectation for herself - genteel-poor and plain - led her to Marxism, then
to Lenin.
Inhibited and puritan, she and her mother were nevertheless friendly to
Lenin's probable mistress, Inessa Armand - her temperamental opposite but
comrade all the same. Lenin's amanuensis in the years of exile, she adapted
with avidity to the role of purger of bourgeois filth from the school
syllabus after the revolution - banning a vast codex of Russian and foreign
authors, including Dostoyevsky, Blok, Akhmtova and Pasternak.
Vasilieva comments, rightly, that 'had (she) wielded supreme power, she
would have inaugurated a cultural inquisition far more effectively than
Stalin because she was better educated than he was. It was not just a matter
of who ultimately led the party machine, but of the machine's ultimate
cruelty.'
At least Krupskaya was in charge of her own life to some extent and - though
famously sworn at by Stalin during her husband's final illness - was
untouchable after his death.
Stalin's own (second) wife, Nadya Alliluyeva, was half his age, gently
reared in Georgia, yet apparently strong willed.
Her suicide remains a mystery: Trotsky, an unreliable witness, believed it
was a murderously prompted suicide, with Nadya killing herself after being
'showered with obscenities' by Stalin at a Kremlin party.
Vasilieva, with no proof, appears to plump for murder, saying that she 'had
to die. Her presence would have prevented Stalin from fulfilling his
historic mission. He would tolerate no obstacles on his path, especially
female.'
Though Stalin, Vasilieva believes, had affairs, he encouraged a reassertion
of outwardly bourgeois morality in sexual behaviour which snuffed out the
bohemianism of the early Bolsheviks.
Armand herself, Alexandra Kollontai and the beautiful and flamboyant Larissa
Reisner were among the leading women proponents of a sexual liberation, that
included the acceptance of a woman's right to initiate sexual advances - a
huge leap for the generally middle class or even noble ladies who were the
leading revolutionaries.
None of those who lived into the 1930s were heroines, though many are said
to have been kind. The iron imperatives of the party and the terror it
inspired entered them as it did their husbands, displacing what our age sees
as the priority of personal satisfaction and individual affections with a
rigid assumption that the party always comes first.
Kollontai did not lift a finger to save a former lover from Stalin, even
when she was ambassador to Sweden: later, Marshall Budyonny, Commissar
Molotov and even Soviet President Kalinin all submitted to their wives being
arrested, imprisoned, tortured, probably raped and sent to camps while the
men - uncomplaining - laboured on in their high posts.
When released, these wives returned to their husbands and in the case of
Paulina Zhemchuzina, wife of Molotov and a victim of the anti-semitic purges
of Stalin's last years, to the party and to devotion to Stalin. When he saw
these men, Stalin would tease them about missing their wives.
Khrushchev, the de-Staliniser, makes the break for the wives too. Nina
Petrovna, his wife, 'reassured terrified Americans as they saw that this
vast empire was now ruled by a funny fat man and his provincial wife,
clutching her handbag to her ample stomach'. Nina Petrovna had had a tough
life in Ukraine before she ascended the increasingly comfortable ladder of
power.
Vasilieva says that her priorities were in the end personal: 'She still
loved the party and fondly recalled past purges(]) - yet she would not
sacrifice her life's companion to its gaping maw'.
While it is too diffuse and fragmentary to be a good book, it does lift the
curtain on lives where idealism, self-preservation, fanaticism, pity,
ruthlessness and stoicism mixed into a state of mind which was to dominate
and cow a country.
