FT  28 OCT 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russian claims aluminium
exports will fall this year
Russian aluminium exports will fall from the record 2.1m in 1993 by between
200,000 and 300,000, according to Mr Igor Prokopov, president of Concern
Aluminiy, the co-ordinating organisation for the Russian industry.
Exports would continue to fall in 1995 but only slightly, he added, during a
briefing at the Alumitech '94 conference here.
Analysts greeted Mr Prokopov's prediction with some scepticism. Mr Stewart
Spector, of the Spector Report, pointed out that, according to the Russian
Foreign Economic Ministry, by the end of September aluminium exports already
had reached 1.65m tonnes compared with 1.26m in the same months of 1993. Mr
Prokopov's forecast suggested that in the final quarter Russian exports
would be about 60 per cent down from the corresponding period blast year.
Mr Prokopov said Russia had cut its annual aluminium production by about
300,000 tonnes since the international trade agreement was reached in
February by his country and Australia, Canada, the European Union, Norway
and the US. Although Russia undertook to reduce output by 500,000 tonnes, Mr
Prokopov hinted that further cuts were unlikely because he said that 1995
production would be about the same as this year's.
He suggested that some 'adjustment' might be made to the terms to the trade
agreement when delegates from the six producing regions met again next month
in November. However he did not expect any move to re-start production
capacity recently shut down. Mr Prokopov said Russia's own consumption of
aluminium could not be expected to improve before the end of 1996 at the
very earliest.
He said Russia would be consuming three or four times as much aluminium in
packaging as it was at present, two or three times as much in transport and
twice as much in construction. This was not a forecast of what would happen
but only a 'wish list' for when the industry revived. It would not take much
capital to provide the extra products, just enough to modify some existing
plants.
Mr Prokopov said privatisation of the Russian aluminium smelters was
virtually completed and 'certain parties' including western trading
companies had built blocks of shares totalling between 20 and 30 per cent of
the capital of some smelters. He suggested that big western aluminium groups
eventually would regret not buying some of these shares. Western companies
were showing little interest in investing in the smelters in any way, he
said.
Analysts pointed out that this was understandable because, to attract risk
capital, Russia's political system had first to be stabilised and reliable
laws for the protection of investments introduced.
