FT  05 FEB 94 / Fishing: Softly, softly nets the prize
These fish were hard to catch. As we could not catch them we told each other
when one jumped: 'Did you see that one, Pierre?' The guides in wide-brim
hats, mosquito head-nets concealing heavy moustaches, egged us on.
The problem was the weather. Salmon in Quebec take the fly when the water
temperature is between 58`F and 64`F. It was 68`F. The sun was scorching,
and the nights lacked the chill they should have had.
The problem was also the fish. They were big, so big that when they jumped
they hung in the air so you could study them. They were pink, and had been
in the river awhile; disinterested in rising.
The last problem was the fishermen, as it transpired. Julien had an acute
and canny guide who stood beside him watching the water hungrily. While the
rest of us plied our tireless craft over the pools containing the big fish,
Julien was upstream casting over a rippling glide where the water was
cooler, more oxygenated, more activating.
In a brace of shakes he had lost two, great silver, twisting, gleaming
things taking to the air and spitting out the fly or snapping his tackle.
We all wanted Julien to get one. The line tightened. Guides began scrambling
to assist him, shouting instructions, charging towards him through deep
water. The fish played doggo, obviously a big one. Taking the rod the guide
tested the pressure: firm. Julien had hooked a rock.
In a Canadian phrase: 'There are fishermen, and there are fishermen'.
There are also fisherwomen. We had one in our midst, a professor of plastic
surgery, female record holder for the largest bluefin tuna. Ramrod-straight
and with an avalanche of white hair, Madame Colette was accompanied by
another tuna record holder.
He presented himself as the only man ever to have caught two bluefins of
more than 1,000lbs in a day. He said he was once world champion skeet
shooter, and also the shooter of some tall-sounding stories - 'I like to
shoot birds, many birds; in Argentina I shoot 8,000 doves in 12 days'.
On the morning of rude awakening, all but these two fishers were despatched
to outlying bits of river. Colette and her companion then did strange things
to land heavy salmon. They put on light tackle and microscopic flies the
size of gnats. Their approach to the pool in which the fish were
concentrated, history relates, was stealthy. Standing well back they
extracted two salmon in 15 minutes, Colette's the heavier. At 16lbs it was
the lightest, she informed us, she had ever caught on this river.
Quebec has over 110 major rivers for salmon, an awe-inspiring statistic.
Several are world-class fly-waters containing very large salmon. On the
Gaspe Peninsular's York River a man once caught a 47-, 37 - , and three
30-pounders, plus five more, in one day. Now catches are limited.
The land is formed of rolling rock plateaus almost uninterruptedly clothed
in spruce. The rivers cut canyons through pristine wilderness. Waters are
potable and totally clear.
The first people to appreciate the sporting charms of this fecund land were,
unsurprisingly, the British. In the 1870s Lord Dufferin, Governor General of
Canada, acquired leases on some of the Gaspe rivers, reached in those days
by Indians paddling up the shallows in canoes. Although half of the
province's salmon fishing is still in private leases from the government,
much in the last 40 years has been made public as the old leases expired.
Since the democratisation of salmon fishing, pressures on pools have
multiplied; several fishermen may rake one pool simultaneously. Canadian use
of the dry fly enters here. Fluffy concoctions are lobbed upstream and
allowed to tip down the ripples with no drag. This brings salmon up to try
and drown the nuisance if not swallow it.
Canadian fishers, unconstrained by British traditions and inhibitions, have
looked at salmon fishing in fresh ways. Getting a big fish off the bottom in
a clearwater grotto may involve a half-day campaign, employing look-outs
from above studying the fish's reaction to passing temptations.
Cultures reveal themselves in people's attitude to salmon fishing.
Indians in Vancouver exercise their historic hunting rights by scooping out
spawning salmon in supermarket trolleys. The French, who ruined their
migratory fish waters long ago, are enraptured with the mystique of le
saumon as an envoy from a lost world. The Irish leave all matters to be
settled by God and illegal nets. The French Canadians assemble at dawn on
remote riverbanks, nourished by beer from a chill-box, and tell stories.
Voltaire said that Canada was: 'A wretched country covered in ice eight
months of the year, inhabited by barbarians, bears and beaver'.
Clearly, he was not a fly fisherman. When British fishermen are thronging to
experience the discomforts attending big-number salmon fishing in Russia, it
is extraordinary that on Quebec's dream salmon rivers they remain virtually
unheard-of.
Information: Go Fishing Canada, Swan Centre, Fishers Lane, London W4 IRX.
Tel: 081-742-3700. Fax: 081-994-7388.
