FT  22 OCT 94 / Clinton the peacemaker to visit Syria
President Bill Clinton will meet President Hafez al-Assad in Damascus next
week to push for a peace agreement between Syria and Israel. Mr Clinton met
Mr Assad in Geneva earlier this year, but his visit to Syria on Thursday
will be the first by a US president for 20 years.
Mr Clinton said Syrian involvement in terrorism was still a serious issue
for the US, 'but I do not believe that we can permit it to keep us from
pursuing a comprehensive peace'.
Besides watching King Hussein of Jordan and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of
Israel sign a peace treaty in Aqaba on Wednesday, Mr Clinton is also due to
visit Egypt, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
After a series of violent terrorist attacks against Israel in recent days,
Mr Clinton said it was important 'that the United States stand with the
friends of peace,' adding that he hoped his visit would move the peace
process forward.
Israel responded to a wave of rocket attacks on northern Israel yesterday by
shelling suspected Islamic guerrilla positions in south Lebanon. In the
occupied West Bank Israeli commandos swept through a Palestinian village
looking for a Hamas Islamic Resistance member believed to have masterminded
Wednesday's suicide bombing of a Tel Aviv bus in which 21 died. Israeli
soldiers also said they would demolish the home of the suicide bomber's
family.
Mr Uri Lubrani, Israel's co-ordinator for Lebanon, said there was no
evidence to suggest co-ordinated military operations between Hamas and
Lebanon's Iranian-backed Hizbollah or Party of God which sent five waves of
Soviet-made missiles into Israel. The missile attacks forced residents of
northern areas into bomb shelters but there were no reports of casualties.
The United Nations, meanwhile, protested to Israel yesterday over the firing
of anti-personnel shells packed with hundreds of steel darts which killed
several civilians in a village in South Lebanon. The UN said such shells
were banned under the Geneva convention.
Amid escalating violence between Israel and its Islamic opponents inside and
outside the Holy Land, a senior Iranian spiritual leader said yesterday the
Hamas bus bomb in Tel Aviv showed that peace pacts between Israel and Arab
leaders could not solve the Palestinian problem.
Ayatollah Ahmad Janati attacked the Palestine Liberation Organisation for
arresting Hamas activists. The PLO, he said, 'has turned into an Israeli
tool to suppress the Moslems'.
In Israel signs of the deep social divisions left after this week's bus
attack were apparent as right-wing Israelis shouting 'Death to Arabs'
clashed with peace supporters holding a vigil at the site of the attack in
the commercial centre of Tel Aviv.
Despite the continuing atmosphere of violence Israel reaffirmed yesterday it
would continue peace talks with the PLO.
The Israeli foreign ministry said Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister,
would meet PLO representatives in Cairo tomorrow.
