FT  21 JUL 94 / Accountancy: Uncertain returns from a 50-year investment -
Why the the IMF and World Bank are coming under greater scrutiny from their
backers
Fifty years ago tomorrow, representatives from 44 countries signed an
agreement at the Mount Washington hotel in the forests of the White
Mountains in Bretton Woods in the US, which led to the creation of two of
the most powerful institutions on the planet: the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund.
They dispense over Dollars 30bn in funds every year to countries in Asia,
Africa, Latin America and the former Soviet bloc, the largest source of new
money for these countries.
But how effectively have these funds been spent? If we are to take the word
of the institutions, very effectively. If we are to believe a new coalition
of social and environmental groups that sprang up this year - called '50
years is enough' - or critics on the libetarian right, such as the Cato
institute, the institutions are the main source of poverty and environmental
degradation in their borrower countries.
Two years ago, Willi Wapenhans, a former vice-president of the World Bank,
was commissioned to examine its existing portfolio of 1,800 projects. The
results showed that 37.5 per cent of the bank's loans had failed to meet
their own minimum estimation of an economic rate of return.
Bank staff promptly replied that their standards were higher than most. They
could not explain why the failure rate had risen by 150 per cent over the
previous decade. 'This pressure is not temporary; it is attributable to deep
rooted problems which must be diagnosed and resolved,' wrote Wapenhans.
The Wapenhans review made two comparisons: it compared staff appraisal
reports, which are issued before a loan is made, to project completion
reports, which are written up after the last penny has been paid out, as
well as looking at reviews conducted by its operations evaluation
department.
What they had not looked at was how valid were the figures used in these
reports and how timely they are in order to ensure that there is some way of
correcting problems before it is too late. This process has now begun and
the first report that has come back is less than encouraging.
The Financial Reporting and Auditing Task Force, headed up by George
Russell, a financial adviser in the World Bank's central and operational
accounting division, shows that over 60 per cent of the audits of its
projects are not received within the grace period of four to nine months
after the fiscal year ends, 'making it inconsequential for project
management purposes,' according to the reviewers. And 7 per cent are not
received at all.
A fifth of those received have a qualified, adverse or disclaimed opinion:
the auditors believe that either additional information is required before
the audit can be signed, the audit is misleading or there is insufficient
information for the auditor to judge the audit.
In addition, Russell's team report that the 'format of the (financial)
information received often does not allow for, (1) comparison with staff
appraisal reports, (2) linkage of physical achievements with project
expenditures, and (3) reconciliation with bank disbursement records'.
Why is this so? Interviews with members of the team reveal that in many
countries, particularly in Africa, the government auditors have no clue
about how to prepare proper financial statements.
Even within the World Bank itself at its headquarters in Washington, the
importance of proper financial reporting has been downgraded. The Wapenhans
taskforce pointed out that in 1980, the bank had 270 financial specialists
of which 29 per cent were considered experienced. By 1992, it discovered
there were 190 specialists, 30 per cent less, of which a mere 22 per cent
were considered experienced.
As for the International Monetary Fund, its critics say that while it
provides interested parties with statistics galore, it leaves out the most
crucial information. Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard University, who has advised a
dozen countries from Bolivia to Russia on their economic policies, told a
recent Congressional hearing there was no way to judge the performance of
the institution because nobody knew any more than its most general
recommendations.
'I must say that the IMF resisted in a number of cases the very measures
which turned out to be enormously successful after the fact and then the IMF
is able to say, after the fact, we supported those policies because there is
no documentation to say to the contrary,' he said.
Between 1980 and 1989, 241 structural adjustment programmes were put in
place in 36 countries. As the United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef) points
out, over the same period, three quarters of these countries in Africa, Asia
and Latin America experienced marked declines in their per capita income.
This discrepancy in performance evaluation is about to change. Using advice
from activist groups like the Environmental Defense Fund and International
Rivers Network, the Senate has drawn up a list of minimum conditions the IMF
must meet if it wants more money from the US.
Under these recommendations, the IMF must encourage borrowing countries to
give them permission to publish the Article IV agreements, which are the
details of policies that the IMF wants the country to follow, the recent
economic development papers and the policy framework papers for each country
as well as the letters of intent.
To underscore their impatience with the IMF, the Senate slashed
contributions to the IMF's Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility from a
requested Dollars 100m to Dollars 25m next year. The House of
Representatives went further and recommended giving the IMF nothing at all.
Karin Lissakers, the US executive director on the IMF's board, who as the US
representative controls 18.3 per cent of the votes in the institution, says
she hopes to get the rest of the board to agree to make these changes. Last
week the IMF said that it was trying to put some of the policies into effect
by its annual meeting in Madrid in September.
Will this make a difference? The bank was persuaded, by similar pressure
from activists last year through the US Congress, to give out more
information through a new 'public information centre' and to set up an
independent inspection panel to review complaints. The panel will come into
existence next month, but the information policy has been in place for six
months. US Congressman Barney Frank called a hearing last month to review
progress.
Testifying before Frank was Lori Udall of IRN. She said: 'Since 1989 the
bank has had an information policy that states the general presumption in
favour of disclosure of information in the absence of a compelling reason
not to disclose. Despite this presumption, in practice the bank has
consistently restricted almost every type of information regarding bank
projects.'
Fifty years on, if it is not possible to evaluate the success of these
institutions, how are they are able to survive? First, they have sovereign
guarantees that ensure that the World Bank and the IMF have to be paid back
and that their debt cannot be rescheduled. Second, without their stamp of
approval, no country can receive international credit.
Thus the World Bank and IMF cannot fail no matter what recommendations they
make to countries. Things might be very different if these guarantees were
withdrawn and they were forced to compete with the private sector they are
so eager to espouse. At the very least, governments should be entitled to
know whether they are getting their money's worth. Fifty years of opaqueness
is enough.
The author is global environment editor for Inter Press Service in
Washington DC.
