FT  29 OCT 94 / The Nature of Things: Writing with atoms
A new generation of microscopes, more powerful than scientists would have
believed possible before the 1980s, is enabling researchers not only to
'see' individual atoms but also to pick them up and move them around.
These microscopes will be vital instruments for the coming era of
'nanotechnology', in which miniaturisation will produce atomic-scale
structures thousands of times smaller than those used in microelectronics
today. On that scale, all the words in the Bible could be written on the
point of a pin.
(A brief explanation of the terminology used in nanotechnology: the word
comes from the Greek nanos for dwarf. The fundamental unit of the field is
the nanometre, one billionth of a metre.)
The first of the new instruments, the Scanning Tunnelling Microscope, was
invented in 1981 by Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer at the Swiss
laboratories of IBM, the American computer group. The STM was a wonderful
leap of scientific imagination, recognised unusually promptly with a Nobel
Prize for Physics in 1986.
Conventional microscopes work by focusing beams of radiation or particles.
Optical instruments are limited by the wavelength of visible light, which is
about 500nm; even a perfect lens cannot focus on a point smaller than this,
so they cannot see atoms. To achieve greater resolving power, microscopists
moved to electron beams and X-rays, which have much shorter wavelengths, but
they use penetrating high-energy radiation which is unsuitable for imaging
atoms on surfaces.
Binnig and Rohrer decided to use 'electron tunnelling', one of the slightly
bizarre consequences of quantum theory. When a low voltage is applied to two
conducting materials which are extremely close together but not touching,
electrons 'tunnel' through the gap; the resulting electric current is highly
sensitive to the distance between them.
The instrument built by the IBM researchers had a stylus with the sharpest
possible tip - a single atom - which scanned a metal surface. The variations
in tunnelling current revealed the ups and downs of the atoms on the
surface.
The STM could only give images of materials that conduct electricity. The
next step was the Atomic Force Microscope invented by Binnig and colleagues
in 1985 to look at non-conducting materials. The AFM scans a tip attached to
a thin metal cantilever across the sample, and gives an image based simply
on the repulsive forces between the atoms at the end of the tip and those on
the sample's surface.
More recently, the STM and AFM have spawned a variety of other instruments,
known generically as Scanning Probe Microscopes, which produce atomic images
based on thermal, magnetic, optical and other interactions between the tip
and sample. By speeding up the scanning rate, scientists have even made
'atomic movies', showing how atoms move around on heated surfaces.
An estimated 3,000 SPMs are now operating worldwide, for a vast range of
applications, and the number is increasing. Most are used for research into
surfaces, helping scientists understand processes such as corrosion. They
are also moving on to production lines in the electronics industry,
inspecting semiconductors and other materials for surface quality.
In biology, SPMs have imaged the double helix of the genetic material DNA
and distinguished the chemical 'letters' which hold our genetic code. If the
technique can be speeded sufficiently, it may be possible to read genes by
microscope, instead of using chemical-based analysis.
But much of the excitement about SPMs concerns their potential for
manipulating atoms. Researchers at IBM's Almaden laboratories in California
showed the way in 1990 when pushed atoms of xenon across a nickel surface
with an STM tip, one by one, and arranged them to spell the company's
initials in atomic letters 5nm high.
Such demonstrations show that, in principle, data could be stored in
ultra-compact 'atom-scale memories'.
Decades of work will be required to bring atom-scale devices based on SPMs
to practical fruition. In particular, the speed with which atoms are moved
and scanned will need to increase millions of times.
But it is far from certain that SPMs are the main route to an atom-scale
future. Alternative methods of nano-construction are already further
developed, such as laying down atoms by molecular beams in a vacuum. These
are less sensitive than SPMs but far faster.
The future for the new generation of microscopes may lie more in observing
nano-structures and assembling prototype devices than in mass production.
However they have transformed the way scientists see the world in miniature.
