FT  17 FEB 94 / DTI fraud probes branded 'grossly unfair'
Lord Boardman, the former government minister and ex-chairman of National
Westminster Bank, yesterday criticised Department of Trade and Industry
fraud investigations as 'grossly unfair'.
In a debate in the House of Lords, he attacked the department's
'inquisitorial tribunals' for what he said was 'injustice and unfairness
which can be occasioned to individual participants'.
Lord Boardman, who is chairman of Heron International, the property and
trading group, accused DTI inspectors of often acting as 'detective,
inquisitor and judge'.
He was backed by Lord Clark of Kempston, who said the Financial Services
Act, which underpins City regulation, had not achieved the result that
ministers wished.
Lord Clark said the length of DTI inquiries was often 'completely barmy' and
against natural justice. He warned that if the City became over-regulated
other financial centres would benefit.
Concern in the City that traditional legal rights can be trampled on by DTI
inquiries stems from the compulsion to answer questions and the ability of
DTI inspectors to pass information gleaned in such interviews to the Serious
Fraud Office.
Lord Boardman said he was worried that the inquisitorial nature of DTI
tribunals 'was alien to the concept of justice generally accepted in the
UK'.
Lord Selsdon, who runs his own business, accused ministers of 'running for
cover' whenever there were fraud allegations, only to 'get someone to head
up an inquiry which was usually unfair and unjust'.
Lord Spens, whose trial on charges relating to Guinness's share-support
operation in the 1986 takeover of Distillers was abandoned, criticised the
DTI for using answers from those accused of fraud in evidence against them.
For the government, Lord Rodger of Earlsferry said that while there was
concern at the length of time it took the DTI to publish its reports, he was
satisfied that 'on balance the public interest is best served by the present
system'.
Tougher sentences for money laundering came into force yesterday under the
1993 Criminal Justice Act, which increases the maximum sentence to 14 years.
It increases the duty on banks and on auditors to report suspected cases,
and creates a new offence of knowingly possessing, using or acquiring the
proceeds of drug trafficking or terrorism.
