FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - The World's Economies
 -Europe (48): Hidden reserves of strength - Turkey / It can weather shocks
On a sunny weekend last spring, the combined retail muscle of the Turkish
automobile industry pulled together to sell exactly one new car. This
compares with previous figures of more than 1,000 a day. After a devaluation
crisis in January, and an austerity package in April, the Turkish economy
appeared well on its knees.
Or was it? With an ingenious bit of fixing, the two leading car
manufacturers, Renault and Tofas (Turkish Fiat), persuaded the government to
lower VAT. After some judicious price-cutting of their own, they managed by
the end of the summer to offload their entire back stock.
If Turkey's present difficulties prove anything, it is the ability of the
country to weather incredible shocks. First quarter growth figures of 3.5
per cent turned into a second quarter decline of 10.6 per cent, a spread of
14 per cent. Yet, part of the country's reserves of strength and true
liquidity are hidden in an unregistered economy estimated to be at least
half the size of the one on the books. Although Turkish industry may not be
the world's most competitive (the World Economic Forum rates it 29th), low
and still falling wage levels means it is not in terrible shape.
'It's not the economy that's ill; it's the total collapse of anything
related to the state,' according to Professor Asaf Savas Akat, economic
adviser to the fringe New Democracy Party. His is not the eternal lament of
a private sector which wants the government off its back, but the
increasingly common exasperation at the inability of successive governments
to get on with fiscal reform. Even if it were leaner, Turkish industry would
still have trouble competing with a state apparatus hungry to finance even
its current expenditure.
Clear indication of the problem is not just the public sector borrowing
requirement (PSBR) ratio (17.5 per cent of GNP last year) but the exorbitant
price which the government paid to re-enter the domestic debt market
following this year's 60 per cent devaluation of the Turkish lira. Recently
redeemed T-bills offered a 50 per cent real return over three months
(equivalent to Libor plus 195]) - a figure better then commercial rates.
This in effect limits corporate lending to all but short-term trade finance.
'The good companies don't borrow, and who wants to lend to the others?' said
one western member of Istanbul's banking community.
Anxious to restore Turkey's international standing Tansu Ciller, Turkey's
prime minister, has gone through the procedure of applying for a largely
symbolic standby arrangement with the IMF for Dollars 509.3m as an
endorsement of the economic package she introduced on April 5.
Working in Turkey's favour is that reduced domestic demand for imports along
with the return on short-term government paper has eased the trade position.
Foreign reserves have recovered from the central bank's Dollars 3bn battle
to uphold the value of the lira. Currency stability is regarded as important
in the fight against three-figure inflation, and the lira has survived a
drop in the terms of new Treasury auctions. Although 12-month inflation
figures are still at 126.5 per cent, this is partly the result of the
one-off price rises in state-controlled goods last April. There is some
evidence that the domestic doldrums may have at last detoxified the market
of its inflationary expectations.
Short-term outstanding external debt has also declined by roughly a third to
Dollars 12bn. This is something of a mixed blessing, signalling as it does
the demise of a strategy of 'hot money' through which foreign exchange was
lured into Turkish lira. It does mean, however, that Turkey is unlikely to
renege on its foreign commitments and thus lose its IMF seal of approval.
Standard and Poor's, whose downgrading of Turkish debt helped spark off this
year's crisis, no longer retains Turkey on its credit watch.
The result is that the Turkish government has rolled over its debts on the
internal market. Given the lower value of the lira, the burden will be at a
higher real cost as a percentage of GNP. About two thirds of targeted fiscal
savings is through expenditure restraint and keeping budget allocations
static.
Those negotiating Turkey's entry into customs union with the EU believe that
the crisis must reinforce the good habits which the country will need to
make closer integration a success.
This would in turn encourage much needed direct investment. If industrial
assets continue to be devalued, then Turkey may well recover some of its
attractiveness as an emerging market.
Much depends on whether the government has the will to undertake structural
reform. This would include the privatisation or disposal of the wasteful
state sector, the reform of the social security system, and also a permanent
change in the structure of agricultural support prices. Another area of
reform is the creation of a more efficient and equitable tax base.
While Turkey braces itself for another hard contraction of domestic demand,
an election is not something that Mrs Ciller desires. Recent blips in the
Turkish lira have more to do with the Central Bank trying to ease down
interest rates then a widespread conviction in an early poll.
For all that, Mrs Ciller's position, and that of the coalition government
with its mere three-seat majority, is far from strong.
The government has been forced to call by-elections on December 4 to fill 22
vacancies in the present parliament. Those caused by the expulsion from
parliament of Kurdish nationalist MPs are likely to result in victories for
the pro-Islamic Welfare Party.
This has established itself as a powerful alternative in the south-east of
the country to the nationalists. In other contests, too, the government is
likely to reap the ill effects of austerity measures.
