FT  24 SEP 94 / Motoring: Citroen discovers a cure for the bends
Open most motoring magazines and you will see pictures of family-type cars
being cornered savagely, with the wheels on one side pushed up under the
body and hanging down on the other. Pity the photographer who has to make
head-on action shots of the latest Citroen Xantia Activa. They will look as
if the car were standing still.
However hard it is cornered, the Activa refuses to roll. If you look closely
at the tyres, you might see a tiny amount of side-wall distortion - but that
would be all.
The secret? The Activa has an electronically controlled roll limitation
system. As soon as the body inclines by half of one degree, sensors activate
a pair of hydraulic jacks. Working in conjunction with Citroen's unique
gas/hydraulic suspension, they keep the body as flat as it would be on a car
with no springs at all - without compromising ride comfort in any way.
Although Citroen is reluctant to admit it, the roll-stifling system makes it
possible to drive the Activa round bends faster than ever. 'That is up to
the driver,' the company says. 'We see it as a useful innovation that
improves handling and gives the driver greater control.' Quite so.
A few days ago, in the Massif Central, I swooped along curving mountain
roads in a Citroen Xantia Activa at speeds no sensible family man - or even
a company rep in a hurry - would contemplate. It remained undramatically
controllable. To drive it like this, however, is to miss the point of active
roll limitation.
At realistic speeds, the ride was even more tranquil than that of the normal
Xantia XVS turbo-diesel, which is my present personal transport. That is
because the absolute lack of body roll makes winding roads feel almost
straight, a fact passengers appreciate even more than drivers.
The Activa (effectively, the top XVS two-litre, 16-valve, petrol-engined
model) with its active anti-roll system, makes its debut at the Paris
Mondial de l'Automobile opening on October 6.
Active anti-roll suspension was previewed on Citroen concept cars at the
past two Paris motor shows, in 1990 and 1992. It will be featured at this
year's show on a startling, though practical, concept car called the Xanae
(call it Zan-eye-eh).
Citroen says the Xantia was designed from the outset to take active
anti-roll suspension, but there is no reason why the big XM should not be
adapted to have it, too.
