FT  23 APR 94 / Outdoors: Trails to be blazed - Peter Whitehead is surprised
by conditions in Norway's mountains
This heat. This damned heat. Sun scorched my brow in the dazzling
wilderness. I could not go on without a drink. Through dried, cracked lips I
begged of our guide: 'Please . . . back . . . we must go back.'
'Very well,' replied Einar Raa Nilsen, the guide. 'And if you're thirsty,
drink the snow.'
I had no idea how adventurous cross-country skiing could be until this
end-of-season trek in the mountains above Voss in Norway.
Einar, who runs the ski school, had insisted I try something new and a
sparklingly sunny afternoon, plus the prospect of more comfortable boots,
persuaded me to join him on a cross-country plod.
As a downhiller, I always thought it looked so easy, so dull - just walking,
with a bit of sliding on the hills. I was mistaken: the heat, the wilderness
and my total lack of control of the wispy narrow skis fixed only at the toe
left me gasping with thirst. Walking and running on the flat or uphill was
bearable but even the gentlest downhill slope had me in a heap.
The Norwegians, by contrast, have a spring in their step: their football
team is on its way to the World Cup finals and the Winter Olympics at
Lillehammer were as good as anyone can remember.
And in the small town of Voss the locals are particularly keen to remind
visitors of the hatful of skiing medals won by its natives. They hope this
success will smarten up Norway's reputation as a serious skiing destination
and lay to rest the impression that the country is just a huge flat
snowfield only fit for cross-country.
The bare figures do little to dent this impression: Voss is only 57 metres
above sea level and the entire skiing area is below 1,000m - no altitude
problems here.
Just a glance tells you this is not the Alps: the mountains are not rugged
and hacked but gentle, moulded and rounded, seeming to go on for ever. If
this was France there would be lifts and pistes and refreshment huts
stretching out of sight.
But this is cautious Norway. Voss's ski lifts appear to be governed by tight
financial discipline and the prospects for expansion of the skiing area are
slim.
Downhillers are limited to 40kms of piste and nine lifts - one cable car,
four chair lifts and four T-bars, two of which run side-by-side.
Even so, the downhill racers' run is a tremendous challenge for skiers of
all abilities, and the giant slalom course is a treat with or without gates.
Most of the rest tends to be fairly easy.
This is the real joy of Voss: a small resort that can take beginners and
turn them into racers, ski-jumpers, cross country or Telemark skiers,
snow-boarders, or even paraglider pilots.
The atmosphere is one of refreshing youthful innocence, with the emphasis on
families and the young. Everything is on a manageable, human scale and
honesty is taken for granted. Remote huts, for example, offer shelter and
supplies to mountain trekkers who are expected - and do - leave their
payment behind.
And payments in Norway are high - four beers cost me about Pounds 15 and a
can of Coke more than Pounds 1.50, a price to dent the purses of the many
school parties from Northumberland, with which Voss has a special
relationship.
Voss the town, a little over an hour from Bergen by road or rail, stands
shivering in the fjord beside the frozen lake Vangsvatnet, its utilitarian
1950s architecture cold and unappealing.
But you warm to it on learning that Voss was flattened by German forces in
the second world war. The church (bombs bounced off its steeply pitched
roof, so the story goes) and the fairy-tale Fleischer's Hotel survive to
give a glimpse of how the town may once have looked.
Remarkably, the cost of staying in hotels such as Fleischer's or Park is
inexpensive: you would pay far more for accommodation of this elegance in
the Alps.
But while elegance was in short supply on my cross country adventure, I
still cannot wait for next season and the chance to repeat the unforgettable
experience of making fresh tracks in virgin snow and hearing the thundering
silence of soft mountains.
Peter Whitehead stayed at the Yarl Hotel. Information on Voss and other
Norwegian ski resorts is available from the Norwegian Tourist Board, Charles
House, 5 Lower Regent Street, London SW1Y 4LR. Tel: 071-839 6255. British
Midland operate direct daily flights from London Heathrow to Bergen. Tel:
0345 554554.
