FT  23 AUG 94 / Germany's nuclear fall-out: A look at the increasingly
controversial debate on how best to dispose of the country's nuclear waste
Seventeen years ago, the little village of Gorleben was a forgotten
backwater on the banks of the river Elbe, a stone's throw from East German
no-man's land.
Today its name is synonymous with an impassioned debate over the future of
Germany's nuclear power industry.
The fate of Gorleben could decide whether nuclear power has a future at all
in Germany. It could also have a big influence on the attempts by other
countries - such as the UK, Sweden, Switzerland and many others - to find an
economic and publicly acceptable way of disposing of their nuclear waste,
most probably underground.
In 1977, the village was a depopulated rural retreat in a blighted border
area of West Germany, its main roads cut on three sides by the East German
frontier. It was the ideal place to put something unpleasant - like a
nuclear waste dump.
At the time, the government called it a 'nuclear park', and planned to
include a huge reprocessing plant, employing 5,000 people, as well as
excavate a vast underground cavern in the nearby salt deposit, to dispose of
highly radioactive waste. It would have been the German equivalent of
Britain's Sellafield, or France's La Hague, with waste disposal thrown in.
Seventeen years and interminable planning inquiries later, not to mention
changes of government both in Bonn and Hanover, capital of the local state
of Lower Saxony, and innumerable protests, sit-ins and marches, the
reprocessing plant has been abandoned, and the waste disposal plan is still
the subject of furious resistance.
A huge interim waste disposal site has been developed behind
three-metre-high security fences and a rampart of earth. But the biggest
storage shed, for containers full of highly radioactive materials, is still
standing empty after 11 years.
On the same site, an extraordinary 'pilot conditioning plant' is being
built, with massive reinforced concrete walls, 1.5 metres thick, where the
waste has to be repackaged into containers capable of keeping it underground
for its entire half-life - of 10,000 years or more. Objections to its
construction from the state government and environmental groups have delayed
completion by at least two years already.
Over the road, just 1km outside Gorleben village, two deep shafts have been
sunk into the salt 'dome', to carry out exhaustive tests on its quality and
consistency to see if it can safely be used as a permanent deep storage site
for the waste.
To complicate matters, since 1990 Gorleben has been at the heart of reunited
Germany, instead of on a hostile frontier. The banks of the river Elbe have
been designated as a nature conservation area, and the idea of putting
nuclear waste down a salt mine on its doorstep seems incongruous in the
extreme.
In recent weeks, hundreds of demonstrators have blockaded the entrance to
the interim waste disposal site. They built a makeshift village, and tried
to tunnel under the road, to block deliveries of the first cast-iron
containers containing nuclear fuel elements to the temporary store.
They were forced to move, but an attempt by Mr Klaus Topfer, the (Christian
Democrat) federal environment minister, to negotiate an agreement on the
deliveries last week with Mr Gerhard Schroder, the (Social Democrat) state
premier in Lower Saxony, failed to break the latest deadlock.
Yet if agreement cannot be reached on the storage plans, it is not only
Germany's powerful nuclear industry, with 20 atomic energy plants churning
out electricity, which will be held to ransom. The irony is that the
opponents of nuclear energy, including a clear majority of the opposition
Social Democratic party (SPD) and the whole of the environmentalist Green
party, also need to find a waste disposal site somewhere in Germany to bring
the industry to a halt. If the power stations are to close, something must
be done with their waste.
'With nuclear waste, to do nothing is worse than doing something, whichever
side you are on,' says Dr Rolf Meyer, spokesman for DBE, the state-owned
company responsible for excavating and evaluating the Gorleben salt mine. So
both sides know that, really, they have to reach some compromise.
For a long time, the anti-nuclear lobby has identified the disposal of
nuclear waste as the weak link in the German nuclear chain, and therefore
the best target to attack in trying to force the country to abandon nuclear
power altogether.
Hitherto, reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel has been the preferred German
approach, on the grounds that it would maximise re-use of the original raw
material, and minimise the eventual waste for disposal. Big reprocessing
contracts have been signed with France's Cogema and Britain's BNFL lasting
into the next century.
The problem is that reprocessing is very expensive; it produces plutonium,
which is dangerous because it can be used for weapons manufacture, and which
requires in turn being transformed into mixed oxide (MOX) fuel elements to
be reused in nuclear power stations; and it means that Germany remains
committed to nuclear power generation for the foreseeable future. On top of
that, it still produces a small amount of highly radioactive nuclear waste
which has to be got rid of somehow.
The alternative - direct disposal of spent fuel elements - is seen as much
cheaper, and it does give Germany the option eventually of closing down its
nuclear power stations, and switching back to conventional forms of power
generation.
The Greens and the rest of the anti-nuclear lobby have targeted the weak
links in the nuclear chain in two ways: they have sought to block approval
of Gorleben as a waste disposal site at every stage of the process; and they
have so far successfully blocked a series of building and planning licences
for Siemens's MOX fuel element plant at Hanau, near Frankfurt, which is
standing 95 per cent complete, at a cost to date of DM1.1bn (Pounds 461m).
The environmental blockade against both plans has proved remarkably
successful so far, and has cause great frustration in the nuclear power
industry. Both the big northern electricity utilities - RWE in Essen, and
Veba's PreussenElektra in Hanover - have shown serious signs of being
tempted to pull out of nuclear power generation altogether, although they
deny it officially. They are observing a de facto moratorium on plans for
any new nuclear power stations. What they want above all else is some sense
of certainty about the future of their industry - and about what they are
going to do with their toxic waste.
This month, Siemens won an important legal battle in the supreme
administrative court in Berlin, which rejected challenges to three building
licences for the Hanau plant. But complaints are still outstanding against
two further building licences, and four licences for the actual process of
uranium and plutonium processing.
As for Gorleben, even delivery of waste for interim storage still appears to
be blocked, most recently thanks to fears about the safety of the Castor
cast-iron containers being sent across country from the Philippsburg power
station in Baden-Wurttemberg. In the middle of a general election campaign,
no one can afford to seem complacent.
The vast echoing hall built for the high-level waste stands empty. It has
the capacity to take 420 of the Castor containers, each one separately wired
up to monitors, which check that the pressure between their double lids
remains constant, in case of a leak. Highly radioactive waste will also be
delivered from La Hague and Sellafield in vitrified glass containers, the
first due from France before the end of the year.
The containers are supposed to stay there for six years at least, while they
cool down from their initial 200`C. After that, they are supposed to go to
the 'conditioning' plant to prepare for permanent disposal in the salt mine.
'The building is simply for protection from the weather,' says Mr Jurgen
Auer of Brennelementlager Gorleben (BLG), which runs the site. 'The
containers are what are supposed to be secure.'
The pilot conditioning plant has been built, as Germany's safety laws
require, strong enough to withstand an earthquake, or the impact of a jet
aircraft flown into it at full speed. At its heart is a T-shaped core which
will be totally sealed from human entrance, or the escape of radiation
inside it.
Inside the cell, which has stainless steel plates bolted to its walls to be
washed down for radiation, the Castor containers are to be opened, and the
fuel elements compressed by remote control, before being repacked in
65-tonne Pollux containers for permanent disposal. Humans will supervise,
watching through massive lead-glass panes.
The final stage in the process, if it ever comes to pass, will be the
disposal of the radioactive material underground in the salt mine.
The huge deposit goes down to at least 4,000 metres, and the plan is to
excavate a complex of tunnels some 14km long, 4km wide, and up to 3.3km
deep.
One of the great advantages of salt is that it 'creeps': after being
hollowed out, it will gradually close in again on whatever has been stored.
It also conducts heat, allowing the very hot waste to cool, and it does not
conduct water. However, it is not pure, and some forms of salt contain water
in crystalline form: if it gets warm, it could dissolve and flow towards the
source of the heat.
Hence the need for exhaustive checks on the precise 'geo-mechanical'
properties of the Gorleben salt deposit, conducted with legendary German
efficiency: so far, 120km of borings have been carried out and tested over
the past 14 years.
Dr Meyer, spokesman for the DBE, is philosophical about the whole exercise.
'I sometimes wonder how they would ever have built the Pyramids, or the
Great Wall of China, if they hadn't had slaves,' he says. He expects a final
decision on whether the project will go ahead or not after the turn of the
century. Then it will take another six years to prepare - providing storage
space for another 70 years.
The mining project is being pursued with fanatical attention from the local
media. 'If a sparrow dies here on the mine, the local newspaper will call up
to find out why,' Dr Meyer says. 'Every single detail of our job is in the
public eye.'
But the most challenging task of all, he believes, has nothing directly to
do with the mining. 'How do you identify a nuclear waste disposal site for
500 years,' he asks, 'let alone for 10,000?'
The use of Gorleben as Germany's main site for nuclear waste disposal has
been a burning political issue in local politics, ever since it was first
mooted by the Christian Democrat government in Lower Saxony in 1977.
Traditionally, the federal government in Bonn, whether SPD or CDU, has tried
to push the plan along, and the state government in Hanover has resisted -
regardless of political party.
Today Mr Gerhard Schroder, the SPD premier in Hanover, insists that other
sites must be investigated - preferably in granite deposits in southern
Bavaria, the state most committed to nuclear power.
At the end of the day, the issue does not simply divide the country between
left and right, between environmentalists and the pro-industry lobby. It
also divides the country between north and south.
The northerners, including their electricity utilities, RWE and
PreussenElektra, would not mind giving up nuclear power altogether. They
could provide alternative energy from coastal power stations fired by gas or
cheap imported coal. RWE has enormous reserves of relatively cheap brown
coal.
The southerners, including the third main generator, Viag's Bayernwerk, are
far more dependent on nuclear power. They have no coastline and no cheap
imported alternatives. So they remain firmly committed to the nuclear route.
No wonder few expect an early resolution of the conflict.
The outside chance of a coalition of left-wing and environmental parties
winning the October national election would certainly mean a firm decision
to abandon nuclear energy. Ironically, because of the need to find some way
of disposing of the waste, it would probably mean a relatively swift
decision to go ahead with Gorleben, at least for interim storage.
The more likely outcome, either of a continuation of the present
conservative-liberal alliance under Chancellor Helmut Kohl, or a grand
coalition of CDU and SPD, could leave a continuing stalemate. Then both
sides will be forced to try to negotiate an energy consensus, and reconcile
their differences. What the industry fears is that any such compromise will
simply leave it in continuing uncertainty.
