FT  23 MAY 94 / Loyalists admit Irish pub attack
The outlawed loyalist Ulster Volunteer Force last night claimed
responsibility for a failed bomb attack on a crowded Dublin pub on Saturday
night, during which one doorman was shot dead and another wounded.
The doorman was shot twice as he attempted to prevent two men from entering
the Widow Scallan pub in central Dublin shortly before closing time. The pub
is a well-known republican venue, and on Saturday night Sinn Fein, the
political wing of the IRA, was holding one of its regular fundraising events
there in support of republican prisoners.
Another man was shot in the neck after he had succeeded in slamming the door
on the attackers, who fired through the door as they fled. They abandoned a
holdall containing 18lbs of commercial explosive which failed to detonate.
More than 200 people were packed into the pub at the time.
A burnt-out car with Northern Ireland licence plates, believed by police to
be the attackers' getaway car, was found in central Dublin shortly after the
incident.
In a statement released in Belfast the UVF said it had 'struck at the very
heart of the republican movement in its own backyard'. It wanted to 'warn
the IRA and the Dublin government that the Ulster people will neither be
coerced or persuaded and will remain masters of their own destiny'.
The UVF said it had now overcome the 'logistical setback' caused by the
interception last year of a huge arms consignment destined for loyalist
paramilitaries and had a new supply of explosives.
The Dublin attack marks a dangerous escalation in the Northern Ireland
conflict, and follows a week of sectarian killings in Ulster in which four
Roman Catholic men were shot dead by loyalist paramilitaries, a part-time
British soldier was abducted and killed by an IRA unit, and a cleaner at an
RUC police station was killed by an IRA car bomb.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, yesterday appealed for an end
to tit-for-tat sectarian violence which he said was dragging the communities
apart. 'Sooner or later it has to stop. Why not stop it now? Let's get on
with working out an accommodation between the two communities (in Northern
Ireland).'
Mr John Hume, the leader of the mainly nationalist Social Democratic and
Labour party, said yesterday: 'It is another piece of evidence that ever
since peace started to really be on the agenda, there has been a clear
escalation of loyalist violence. . . an obvious conclusion is that they
don't want the IRA to stop.'
Mr John Bruton, the leader of the opposition Fine Gael party in the Irish
Republic, said the attack was designed to 'terrorise the people of the
republic' and was being encouraged by efforts to open political contacts
with the IRA. 'Any type of dialogue with an organisation which continues to
use violence encourages imitators to bid for the same status,' he said.
Loyalist paramilitaries have carried out attacks in the republic before, but
these have mostly been confined to firebomb attacks on shops in the capital
and in border towns.
