FT  17 MAY 94 / Survey of World Forest Products (1): Back on course after a
gruelling ordeal - The industry has been frog-marched into unfamiliar
territory, where it has had to re-examine the entire spectrum of its
business practices
A cartoon passed around the offices of the Swedish Pulp and Paper
Association aptly captures the mood of the world's forest-products industry:
'We're depressed, frustrated, alienated, disillusioned,' the caption reads,
'but we've adapted to the market.'
This sense of discomfort mingled with accomplishment is the culmination of
the gruelling ordeal which timber, pulp and paper producers have endured for
the past five years.
Already reeling from weak markets and heavy losses, the industry has been
frog-marched into unfamiliar surroundings, where it has had to re-examine
the entire spectrum of its business, from the way trees are cut to the
future of paper in the electronic age.
The challenge has been compounded by the fact that the industry, long a
bastion of conservatism, has had little control over the pace of change. The
marching orders have come largely from outsiders, including customers,
politicians, bankers and - not least - environmentalists.
An unexpectedly strong rebound in pulp and paper prices since late 1993 has
raised hopes that the worst is over. Most companies around the world, with
the notable exception of Japan, are likely to return to profit this year.
The prospect of better times ahead has also enabled debt-burdened producers
to repair their balance sheets, either by selling assets or raising new
equity. Canadian forest-products companies have floated four of the 10
biggest initial public offerings on the Toronto stock exchange in the past
18 months. The Swedish government launched its biggest-ever privatisation
earlier this year by selling 49 per cent of its stake in AssiDoman.
It would be wrong to conclude, however, that the road ahead is all downhill.
Welcome as the recovery in prices may be, it will not deflect powerful,
longer-term forces which are shifting the industry's centre of gravity away
from traditional products, operating methods, investment patterns and
corporate structures.
At one end of the production chain, forests have become the industry's main
environmental battleground. 'I have a feeling it's the thing we'll be
dealing with for the next five to 10 years,' says Pertti Laine, director of
industrial and environmental policy at the Finnish Forest Industries
Federation in Helsinki.
Calls for the preservation of old trees in British Columbia, spotted owls in
Oregon, and tropical rain-forests in Brazil and Indonesia have shrunk the
area available for logging, especially in North America. Environmentalists
have also pressed for more ecologically-sensitive forestry practices,
backing up their demands with threats of consumer boycotts and civil
disobedience campaigns.
The forestry companies have adjusted their logging practices by shrinking
the size of unsightly clear-cuts and leaving trees standing along lakes and
rivers. United Paper Mills of Finland two years ago stopped buying
old-growth timber for its pulp mills. It has gone so far as to replace the
mineral oil in its tree-felling machines with biodegradable vegetable oils.
Such changes have pushed up costs, forcing companies to examine the
efficiency of their entire forestry operations. But far-sighted members of
the industry have come to appreciate that environmental pressures also
create opportunities.
One example is a joint venture in Indonesia involving Enso-Gutzeit, the
Finnish group. Enso has insisted that all wood supplies for a proposed new
pulp mill in East Kalimantan must come from plantations, and not from the
rain forest. As a result, Enso's contribution to the project will include
reafforestation of vast tracts of grassland.
Pulp and paper mills have also undergone radical changes. Toxic emissions
have dwindled as chlorine gas has been steadily replaced by other, less
harmful bleaching agents such as chlorine dioxide, hydrogen peroxide and
enzymes.
Mill owners boast that fish are starting to return to once-polluted rivers.
Effluent from mills in some Scandinavian towns is now diverted to heat
nearby offices, and waste material is used to generate electricity.
Perhaps the industry's biggest upheaval has come from the drive to recycle
an ever-growing proportion of waste paper. Recycled materials now make up
more than 40 per cent of the raw material consumed by paper mills worldwide.
While global paper production has edged up by only about 1 per cent a year
in the early 1990s, consumption of recycled paper has grown by 5 per cent.
A law due to take effect in Germany in mid-1995 will break new ground by
requiring at least 80 per cent of used packaging paper and board to be
collected, and 80 per cent of that to be recycled.
The pressures on the forestry industry have reverberated all the way to
retail stores and construction sites. Cut-price warehouse outlets, mainly in
North America, are demanding that wood suppliers make their do-it-yourself
products more 'consumer friendly', for instance, by packaging components in
kits.
Efforts to broaden the use of wood as a building material have led to the
growth of engineered wood products, with a strength and consistency which
matches steel, concrete and aluminium.
This top-to-toe shake-up in the way forestry companies do business has
accompanied a structural transformation comparable to the upheavals in the
global steel, textile and shipbuilding industries in the 1960s and 1970s.
Production of commodity-grade items, such as market pulp and newsprint, is
gradually migrating to parts of the world - such as Brazil, Indonesia and
Chile - where trees grow fastest, costs are still relatively low, and
environmental standards are less exacting.
At the same time, growing demand for recyclable waste paper is shifting
production capacity from thinly-populated Canada, Sweden and Finland to the
'urban forests' of the US and central Europe.
The biggest investments currently under way by Swedish and Finnish companies
are recycled newsprint mills being built, respectively, by SCA at Aylesford,
UK, and by Enso-Gutzeit near Leipzig, Germany. Among Canadian producers,
MacMillan Bloedel and Fletcher Challenge Canada have drawn up plans for
similar mills in California and Arizona.
The three northern countries are moving towards more specialised products
which still require a relatively high proportion of virgin fibre. Trees take
from 80 to 110 years to grow in Canada, Sweden and Finland, but they produce
wood of unusually high quality.
Finland has become a leader in fine writing and printing papers, while
Sweden's emerging strength is in high-grade packaging materials. Many
Canadian west coast lumber mills have shifted from churning out basic planks
to more sophisticated building materials, such as decorative panels.
Weak prices and heavy debt burdens have also forced individual companies to
narrow their sights, mainly by selling assets. Abitibi-Price, of Toronto,
has decided to stick to newsprint and uncoated groundwood papers.
Conversely, Georgia-Pacific, the second-biggest North American group, has
withdrawn entirely from newsprint.
'We recognised that in our present size, we can't be all things to all
people,' says Harri Piehl, chief executive of Finland's Kymmene, which is
focusing on fine papers, lightweight coated papers and panels.
Only a handful of broad-based multinationals remain. They include
International Paper, the world's biggest - and still one of the most
aggressive - companies, and New Zealand's Fletcher Challenge, whose
operations stretch from Australasia to North and South America and the UK.
Perhaps the most telling sign that the worst is over is that long-suffering
forestry executives are gradually moving from defence to attack on
environmental issues.
A blizzard of publicity material from all the main pulp and paper-producing
countries argues that few other industries can match forestry's 'sustainable
cycle' of a renewable raw material, recyclable products, and energy from its
waste.
'This industry can be totally clean,' says Henrik Ehrnroodt, chief executive
of Jaakoo Poyry, the Finnish forest-products consultancy. But the industry
is still pleading for patience. To complete the job that has been started
will require more time and a lot more money.
