FT  03 MAY 94 / Capital inflow pushes yen ever higher / Focusing on the
reasons behind the recent rise in Japan's currency
The mechanics of the yen's recent jump against the dollar are not as
contrary as they look; a heavy net flow of capital into Japan is the main
technical factor at work; cash-starved Japanese financial institutions need
to raise yen and foreign investors are just as eager to supply yen to buy
the bonds, shares, golf courses and office buildings the Japanese are busily
unloading.
Japanese and US Federal Reserve intervention to support the dollar and drive
down the yen is probably due to fears that the dollar-yen at this level will
harm both their economies, throttling Japan's weak signs of recovery and
fuelling US inflation.
To many others, the yen's rise is plainly illogical. Why should a country
with a weak economy and powerless government have a stronger currency than
one with a recovering economy?
But such considerations do not overly concern the market. The French and
German central banks found this to their cost when they jointly intervened
last year in a fruitless attempt to defend what appeared to be an
economically justified fixed link between their currencies.
As the French and Germans also found last year, central bank intervention is
too small to control the giant forces of the foreign exchange markets. The
dollar-yen market turns over between Dollars 100bn and Dollars 150bn
worldwide daily, easily equivalent to the Bank of Japan's entire foreign
reserves, which amounted to Dollars 104.56bn at the end of April.
The biggest players in the current currency turmoil are the Japanese banks
and life insurance companies.
They have sold record volumes of Japanese shares over past few months, to
plump up their meagre earnings before closing the books at the end of March.
Foreign investors have been eager buyers, spending on average Y1,000bn per
month on Japanese shares in the first quarter of this year, according to the
Tokyo Stock Exchange. This has tailed off slightly since.
'Japanese institutions in general have a liquidity squeeze due to the
after-effects of the bubble economy,' said Mr Peter Tasker, chief strategist
at Kleinwort Benson, referring to the sharp inflation and then collapse of
Japanese asset prices at the turn of the decade.
'They can only generate cash by selling assets overseas and transferring
them into yen or selling yen assets to foreigners,' he added.
Japanese corporate holders of US property last year sold or partially
disposed of Dollars 17.59bn of US properties, nearly a quarter of the total
US property portfolio built up by Japanese institutions since the start of
their investment boom in 1985, according to Kenneth Leventhal, the US
accountancy firm.
At the same time, Japanese investors have sharply reduced their purchases of
dollars since the turn of the year thereby weakening the US currency - and
no doubt proving that they were right to do this.
In the final quarter of 1993, Japanese institutions bought Dollars 37.5bn of
US shares and bonds, a four-year record and more than Japan's current
account surplus in that period.
That dwindled to a mere Dollars 3.5bn at the latest count by the finance
ministry, for the first two months of this year.
This dramatic change reflects Japanese investors' loss of confidence in the
dollar, based on suspicion that the US administration is tempted by
competitive devaluation, according to Mr Geoffrey Barker, chief economist at
Baring Securities in Tokyo.
'The intervention we have seen by the Fed and the Bank of Japan has not yet
restored confidence,' he said.
All this suggests that the International Monetary Fund is right to believe
that there will this year be little change in Japan's record Dollars 131bn
current account surplus last year.
Yet these forces were in place before the latest surge in the yen, inviting
the question why did the foreign exchange markets choose now to move.
One popular explanation is the emergence last week of a weak minority
Japanese government, unlikely to agree on tax cuts needed to stimulate
demand and so likely to frustrate the US, which will then be tempted to push
up the yen to put pressure on Japan to open its markets.
The flaw in that view is that the new government is not much weaker than the
last one; and a strong Japanese administration might in any case worsen the
US trade dispute.
But there is a real political risk that this and future governments will
lack a clear economic agenda, argues Mr Paul Summerville, director of Asian
research for Lehman Brothers Japan.
That implies little chance of enlarging the tentative recovery, so far
limited to areas like housing and public works, which do not consume large
amounts of dollars.
Renewed fears of inflation in the US, fuelled by recent data, is another new
factor.
Either way, the brute weight of money is what counts in the end.
Foreign exchange analysts in Tokyo expect a fresh attack on the dollar and
upward push on the yen as soon as the Golden Week holiday ends on Friday.
They predict that joint intervention by the US Federal Reserve and the Bank
of Japan will be tested to new limits.
See Currencies page
