FT  11 NOV 94 / Sweden's No campaigners get their act together: Hugh Carnegy
sees performers in anti-Europe debate take to the stage as Sunday's EU
referendum remains a tight race
Activists for the No campaign, buoyed by opinion polls showing them within
sight of victory in Sweden's referendum on Sunday on European Union
membership, were pulling few punches when they mounted a gala evening for
undecided voters in Stockholm's City Theatre.
One after another, performers of 'The People's Movement against the EU'
invoked alarming images to press their case. One quoted from Vidkun
Quisling, the hated Norwegian wartime puppet leader who co-operated with the
Nazis (most Norwegians consider neutral Sweden did likewise), to show he
favoured European integration. Another sang powerfully at the gala last
Sunday of Nadja, a child victim of war in Sarajevo, linking her fate to 'the
new Europe'.
Claes Fredelius, a member of a Marxist group, went furthest. His indictment
of the EU, traced back to Europe's murderous colonisation of the Americas,
included a reference to the recent Estonia ferry disaster in which more than
800 Swedes perished. The connection to the EU was unclear, but the message
was not: The EU is today's evil empire which threatens to trample Sweden's
superior but fragile folk hem (people's home).
At its most extreme, the No campaign presents a maddingly difficult target
for Mr Ingvar Carlsson, the Social Democratic prime minister, his allies (on
the EU issue) in the right-of-centre opposition and the country's industrial
and trade union leaders, despite their dominant position on Sweden's
political heights.
The pro-EU message that membership will help stabilise an economy shaken by
recession and give Sweden its share of influence in a reshaped Europe sounds
at best mundane and at worst defeatist against the No side's appeal to
preserve the traditional lofty Swedish ideals of neutrality, egalitarianism
and universal welfare that were so long championed by Mr Carlsson's Social
Democrats.
The old system may be creaking - with unemployment running at more than 13
per cent of the workforce and the welfare system threatened by a huge budget
deficit equal to 13 per cent of gross national product - but many Swedes are
still reluctant to accept it cannot be made to work again.
Nor is there the same potency in Sweden, which has no border with Russia, to
the worries about future developments in Moscow that helped produce the Yes
vote in neighbouring Finland last month. So people hesitate to take a step
that is seen as an irreversible move away from the 'Swedish model'.
Mr Tomas Segenas, who runs a small lunchtime cafe in Stockholm, is one of
those people. 'I think people are scared of the EU,' he said this week.
'They think Sweden will be too small inside the Union. Yes - they are afraid
that Sweden's way of living will be changed.'
No-one is more conscious of this feeling than Mr Carlsson, who inherited the
leadership of the Social Democratic party in 1986 from the late Mr Olaf
Palme, the very embodiment of the Swedish model. Only in 1991 did Mr
Carlsson overturn decades of Social Democratic orthodoxy by lodging Sweden's
application for membership.
But the persistent suspicion of the EU among Social Democrats - recent polls
suggest fewer than half the party's supporters are convinced Yes voters -
has led Mr Carlsson to run a low-key campaign ahead of Sunday's vote, even
allowing cabinet members to campaign for a No. His judgment is that the way
to win over the undecided is by quiet persuasion, not coercion.
Yesterday, an opinion poll in the newspaper Dagens Industri showing the Yes
side moving into a 52-48 per cent lead suggested he may well be proved
right. But it is a high-risk strategy for there is much at stake on Sunday.
A No vote will make the government's most urgent task of filling the hole in
the public finances more difficult. A sell-off of Swedish bonds and the
krona will almost certainly drive up long-term interest rates, already well
above European averages, requiring deeper spending cuts to control a state
debt approaching 100 per cent of gross domestic product.
Sweden's big international companies such as Volvo, Ericsson and Electrolux
are likely to continue a trend well established for a decade or more of
investing heavily inside the EU, not at home in Sweden. In sectors vital to
Sweden such as the forestry and telecommunications industries, being inside
the EU, able to influence policy and regulations on market conditions and
standards, is of great importance.
Politically, too, much is at stake. Part of Mr Carlsson's low-key approach
has been to protect his position should he be faced with a No vote. Having
led the Social Democrats decisively back to power in September's general
election, he would probably avoid a fall from power if there was a No vote.
But his authority and that of key pro-EU ministers such as Mr Goran Persson,
the finance minister, would be badly damaged. The initiative would shift to
the anti-EU left of the Social Democratic party and, significantly, to the
Left party and the Environment party, whose support the Social Democrats
need for a parliamentary majority. The leftwingers oppose fiscal measures
which hit the welfare system.
Other economic policies currently being reviewed by the Social Democrats,
such as privatisation of Telia, the state telecommunications company, and
energy deregulation, would face sharper opposition.
On Sunday, many of the large numbers of still undecided voters who will
determine the outcome may ultimately choose instead to trust the unanimous
verdict of Mr Carlsson, Mr Carl Bildt, the former conservative prime
minister, and Sweden's industrial leaders that EU membership is essential
for Sweden's economic renaissance. But they will face a tough fight to the
finish.
In the No campaign's scruffy office in the southern city of Malmo last week,
Mr Henrik Skrak, the No side's chief local organiser, made the case that
Sweden's economy was returning to growth this year precisely because it
abandoned in 1992 the EU-oriented policy of pegging the krona to the Ecu.
'Canada depends on exports to the US and is satisfied with the North
American Free Trade Agreement. Nobody in Canada wants to join the US. Why
should we join a united Europe?' he declared.
Sweden must vote Yes for influence, Page 17
