FT  24 FEB 94 / Swiss put brave face on transit lorry ban
The Swiss government is putting a brave face on the anger in neighbouring
countries caused by Sunday's referendum vote to ban transit lorry traffic
through the Alps from 2004.
Mr Bruno Spinner, head of Bern's optimistically titled European Integration
Office, said in an interview that the complaints from Italy and Germany
about Switzerland blocking trans-Alpine transit routes were not justified.
Switzerland was not trying to cut off the flow of transit traffic between
northern and southern Europe, he said. On the contrary, it was investing
several billion dollars to build new rail capacity to handle the ever
increasing volume of traffic. 'We are doing this for Europe, not for us, and
no European Union money will be involved,' Mr Spinner said.
While he regretted that last Sunday's vote would oblige the government to
use force to move transit traffic from the road to the railways, he was
confident that by the time the ban came into force virtually all lorry
traffic would already have moved voluntarily because of the railway's cost
and speed advantages.
He suggested that in the longer term the most important of Sunday's
referendum votes would be the one that approved the government's plan to
relate lorry road taxes to distance travelled. This would enable the
government to push up the costs of using the road to the advantage of the
railways.
'In substance, the Swiss have chosen a solution that is perfectly well
centred in modern European environmental and transport policy. We may be a
few steps ahead of some others, but that is understandable since we and
Austria have the Alps in the middle of our countries.'
Mr Spinner admitted that the vote would make relations with the EU more
difficult in the immediate future. Switzerland has a long list of trade and
other bilateral issues to be negotiated. It fears the Commission will now be
less willing to advance talks, knowing that, as on the transit issue, any
agreement can be overturned by referendum votes.
Under Switzerland's system of direct democracy, all important matters must
be submitted to plebiscites and, in other cases, citizens can force the
holding of a plebiscite by petition. Mr Spinner said philosophically that
popular legitimation was a crucial element of policymaking in all democratic
countries, although different countries achieved it in different ways.
'No legislation can stand over the long term without popular support,
especially on emotional issues. Most EU governments understand that we
cannot go in a direction against the will of our people.'
Mr Spinner said the truck ban and the rejection by Swiss voters in December,
1992, of the treaty forming the European Economic Area underscored again the
need for the country to join the EU.
Relations between Switzerland and its neighbouring countries, like those
among all western European countries, were now so complex and intimate that
it was increasingly impractical to resolve everyday problems by negotiating
treaties. 'What we are doing is a substitute for common legislation,' he
said. 'Treaties require ratification procedures and can be undone while
internal rules cannot.'
The challenge, he acknowledged, remained to convince the Swiss people of the
need to join the EU.
Editorial comment, Page 15
