FT  18 NOV 94 / Lords battle their way to higher public profile: A new
readiness to challenge legislation
Mr John Major thinks he has done the double.
In the Commons yesterday rebel MPs were queueing up to declare loyalty in
the wake of the prime minister's threat to call a general election over the
European finance bill.
Up the corridor in the Lords, senior ministers were confidently predicting
that the upper house is also back under control.
Their confidence may yet turn out to be misplaced. The government has had a
traumatic year in the Lords, and there is no evidence that peers regret the
savage beating they handed out to ministers in the last parliamentary
session.
On the contrary, many peers relish the higher profile achieved by the Lords
as a result of its battles with the government. Even some senior Tories say
the house now has a better public image than its much derided democratic
rival.
The worst mauling was handed out to Mr Michael Howard, the home secretary,
whose bills to reform the police and the criminal justice system were
criticised by a succession of law lords and former Tory cabinet ministers.
But Mr Howard was not alone. Their lordships also ensured a torrid few
months for the education bill piloted by Mr John Patten, the former
education secretary. Mr John MacGregor, the former transport secretary,
faced stiff opposition to many of the provisions of his bill to privatise
the railways.
Government defeats in the Lords are not particularly unusual. There have
been an average of 15 to 20 a year since 1979. But there is nervousness
among some in government that the calibre of last year's tussles between the
upper house and the cabinet may have marked a step change in the Lords'
willingness to challenge legislation.
This year, ministers say, it will be different. The Lords is under fresh
management following the retirement of Lord Wakeham, the former leader,
whose reputation as the cabinet's consummate 'fixer' was tarnished by last
year's revolts.
Government business is now in the hands of Viscount Cranborne, a former
Conservative MP, and Lord Strathclyde, the 34-year-old chief whip, who has
held a series of minor government jobs since entering the Lords in 1985.
If ancestry counts for anything - and it remains more important in the Lords
than elsewhere - Lord Cranborne may have an easier ride than Lord Wakeham.
His family, the Cecils, has been in the House since the early 17th century.
The new team will also be helped by the cabinet's caution in framing the
legislative programme. Shorn of Post Office privatisation at the last
minute, the Queen's Speech contained little to provoke a fight in either
house.
The government's business managers have also learnt the lessons of last
year, particularly the importance of consulting senior backbench peers early
in the process of framing legislation.
Senior ministers say privately that much of the opprobrium that descended on
the heads of Lord Wakeham and Mr Howard during the troubled passage of the
law bills was ill-informed and undeserved.
But they are taking great pains to make sure that there is no repetition of
the clash between the home secretary and Lord Whitelaw, one of his most
eminent Tory pre-decessors, over the police bill.
Lord Whitelaw objected in principle to the centralising elements of Mr
Howard's police reforms, which he succeeded in watering down. But friends
say that much of the trouble could have been avoided if his opinion had been
canvassed earlier.
Other former Tory home secretaries, such as Lord Carr, were equally put out
by the government's apparent lack of interest in the views of knowledgeable
backbenchers. That, they said, was not how the Lords was supposed to work.
The business managers have taken care to start the Lords' legislative
programme with two relatively uncontroversial bills on the Scottish criminal
justice system and agricultural tenancies.
The bills, both of which were introduced yesterday, have the potential to
prompt spirited interventions from the back benches, but neither is thought
likely to provoke serious criticism of the government.
There could be problems with the third bill slated for the Lords, which will
merge a number of environmental agencies, with a potentially significant
impact on the management of the countryside.
But the government has gone to great lengths to minimise opposition to the
bill by consulting widely - inside and outside parliament - on its contents
and publishing draft clauses to test public and parliamentary reaction.
A senior peer said: 'There is awareness that the bill must be cohesive,
reflect government policy, and not fly in the face of people who can make
life difficult for us.
'Consultation does not guarantee a trouble free passage for the bill, but it
does make it more likely that the heffalump traps can be more clearly
defined.'
