FT  28 FEB 94 / Management: Secret messages - Electronic mail presents many
challenges besides the technological ones
Sun Microsystems, the Toronto Stock Exchange and the Los Angeles Times have
little in common, except that they are among thousands of companies whose
employees have discovered how electronic mail is changing life in the
office.
Sun's chairman Scott McNealy broke new ground with his Christmas message
last December. McNealy's voice, as well as his picture, were transmitted by
E-Mail to 12,500 employees around the world. A few clicks on a computer
mouse brought his video message on to their workstation screens. At the
Toronto Stock Exchange, at least one manager last Christmas quietly informed
subordinates of their 1994 pay increases by E-Mail.
Journalists at the LA Times, meanwhile, have had a sobering reminder of the
perils of E-Mail. The paper late last year recalled a Moscow correspondent
who found a way to read colleagues' private electronic messages. The
offender was caught after he revealed juicy but fake bits of office gossip
which his editors had arranged to be sent into another reporter's E-Mail
basket.
Electronic mail is transforming the workplace by enabling workers at all
levels to communicate with unheard-of speed, frequency and in many cases
anonymity with their bosses, peers and subordinates.
Junior employees no longer need to barge past a phalanx of secretaries for a
word with their boss. Indeed, many chief executives who might formerly have
kept in touch with workers by wandering around offices and factories, now
encourage them to put their thoughts into a private E-Mail basket.
Thanks to E-Mail, a faraway hotel room equipped with a computer jack is as
close as the office next door. 'I can manage as well from Paris as from
here,' says Bill Raduchel, Sun's vice-president for corporate planning, in
Mountain View, California.
According to a survey by the Electronic Messaging Association (EMA), a trade
group based in Arlington, Virginia, the number of E-Mail sites at head
offices and branches of North America's 2,000 biggest companies exploded
from 94,000 in 1991 to 180,000 last year. The number of users is rising by
17-19 per cent a year. Thanks mainly to the proliferation of local area
networks, messages among workers in the same office have doubled over the
past two years.
A growing number of companies are also extending their E-Mail systems to
customers and suppliers. To reflect its broadening use, E-Mail is
increasingly known as electronic messaging, or electronic data interchange
(EDI).
At Hewlett-Packard's California head office, for example, workers use E-Mail
to pick up itineraries from the company's travel agent. Dana Corp, the
Ohio-based automotive parts maker, uses an electronic messaging system to
ensure that its own and its competitors' clutches are shipped at the right
time and in the right quantity to nearby Ford assembly plants.
By combining a purchasing order, confirmation letter and computerised
drawing, it has become possible 'to do electronically what a purchasing
manager used to do with a stapler on his desk,' says Kurt Anderson, E-Mail
marketing manager at Digital Equipment.
As this new means of communication permeates the corporate culture, however,
it is presenting as many management challenges as technological ones.
E-Mail's accessibility and anonymity have flattened corporate hierarchies.
But it has also swamped managers and workers with more information than most
either need or want.
'It represents an incredible cultural change,' says Mike Frow,
vice-president for US corporate banking at Bank of Montreal.
Frow is in charge of a pioneering project to create a central electronic
file for each of the bank's corporate customers. All files will contain data
which used to be scattered in dozens of computer systems and paper files
throughout North America.
'You are actually threatening people's sense of themselves because they no
longer have the control over the information they had before,' Frow says.
Some companies are lightening 'information overload' by drawing individuals'
attention to electronic documents only when they need to see them, and by
carefully routing mail through the corporate hierarchy.
Hiring a new employee at Hewlett-Packard, for instance, requires the
approval of several layers of management, and sometimes more than one
manager in each layer. The E-Mail system automatically sends the necessary
documents from one person to another only as each signals authorisation.
Similarly, many companies are putting less pressing items into electronic
'bulletin boards' which employees can tap into.
The accessibility and the profusion of information on E-Mail systems have
heightened security and privacy concerns. E-Mail has given corporate
snoopers and gossip-mongers a powerful new tool, increasing the temptation
for disaffected employees to vent their anger on colleagues' computer
screens. Raduchel says Sun Microsystems' executives will not respond to
E-Mail rumours, 'no matter how outlandish or accurate they are'. Many
companies now have a rule that anyone caught reading others' E-Mail risks
dismissal.
The EMA advises members to draw up explicit policies to protect employees'
privacy. In doing so, it suggests that companies consider their rules in
roughly analogous non-electronic situations, such as monitoring employees'
phone calls, requirements that supervisors receive copies of subordinates'
correspondence, and inspecting files kept in an employee's offices.
In spite of the huge advantages of electronic messaging, there is widespread
agreement that it is no substitute for face-to-face contact.
The pros and cons of E-Mail were underlined in a New Yorker article about
Bill Gates, founder of the Seattle-based software company Microsoft. The
author had had several E-Mail conversations with Gates and reported one of
his replies: 'E-Mail is not a good way to get mad at someone since you can't
interact. You can send friendly messages very easily since they are harder
to misinterpret.'
Bob Walker, director of information systems at Hewlett-Packard, adds that
'our dominant form of communication is still flying people to a single spot
and sitting down with one another'.
