FT  08 MAR 94 / Consumer credit drop signals belt-tightening
Tentative evidence that consumers are tightening their belts before April
tax rises was provided yesterday by figures showing a sharp drop in consumer
credit in January. Net lending to consumers fell to a seasonally-adjusted
Pounds 235m, from Pounds 425m in December.
The Central Statistical Office said the main reason for the drop was a
decline in net lending by finance houses from Pounds 384m in December to
Pounds 255m in January. Consumers also repaid Pounds 6m of credit card debt
in January, after borrowing Pounds 36m in December.
Ignoring debt repayment, new credit advanced to consumers in January was
Pounds 4.74bn, down from Pounds 4.93bn in December.
However, this finding appears to contradict Finance and Leasing Association
figures, also released yesterday, which showed a 37 per cent year-on-year
rise in gross credit (ignoring repayments) in January.
The association's figures are taken from a wider base than those provided by
the CSO.
Mr Tony Mallin, chairman of the association, said: 'The tax increases
scheduled for April have not yet dented consumers' willingness to make
financial commitments for several years ahead.'
The association's figures do show a 6 per cent fall in lending between
December and January, but unlike the CSO statistics, its totals are not
seasonally adjusted.
A number of recent economic statistics covering December and January have
been erratic, indicating the problems of monitoring activity over the
Christmas period. If the figures over the three months to January are
aggregated, net lending is Pounds 980m, compared with Pounds 993m in the
previous three months.
Mr John Major, interviewed on BBC Radio yesterday, said that UK inflation
was likely to stay at around 3 per cent. The most recent figure for headline
inflation was 2.5 per cent in the year to January, while underlying
inflation (excluding mortgage payments) was 2.8 per cent.
Mr Major said: 'On almost any measure, we have inflation around 3 per cent.
It has been there for a year and there's no significant likelihood of that
materially changing in the near future.'
