FT  22 APR 94 / International Company News: Murdoch sells HK newspaper stake
Malayan United Industries (MUI), a medium-size Malaysian conglomerate headed
by Malaysian Chinese entrepreneur Mr Khoo Kay Peng, yesterday said it had
paid MDollars 361m (USDollars 134.3m) for Mr Rupert Murdoch's remaining 15.1
per cent stake in the South China Morning Post group (SCMP), Hong Kong's
biggest English-language publishing company.
The move gives Malaysian investors a 50 per cent stake in the SCMP. In
September last year Mr Robert Kuok, another Malaysian Chinese regarded as
one of south-east Asia's richest businessmen, purchased a 34.9 per cent sake
in SCMP for USDollars 349m.
MUI's purchase of the SCMP appears to have been executed at a price of
HKDollars 4.59 a share, compared with the HKDollars 5.16 a share Mr Kuok is
believed to have paid last year.
The sale by the News Corp chief to Mr Khoo was seen as friendly to Mr Kuok.
He and Mr Khoo have co-operated on various ventures in the past, but like Mr
Kuok, Mr Khoo and the MUI group are new to the media business.
Last December, MUI purchased a 30 per cent stake in Kerry Financial, a
private financial services group in Hong Kong oned by Mr Kuok, for HKDollars
60m (USDollars 7.78m).
MUI also controls a listed company in Hong Kong - Morning Star, in which it
owns a 53 per cent interest acquired for HKDollars 229m.
Mr Khoo is known as one of Malaysia's most reclusive businessmen. In the
late 1970s and early 1980s the MUI group, centred on banking and financial
activities, diversified into property, cement and manufacturing activities.
But the MUI group fell into political disfavour during a mid-1980s political
leadership tussle in Malaysia, with Mr Khoo alleged to be a key supporter of
Mr Razaleigh Hamzah, a rival of Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the prime minister.
There was also believed to be official displeasure that Mr Khoo spent
increasing amounts of time outside Malaysia devoting himself to other
business activities and to a charismatic Christian sect called The Christian
Abundant Life.
Reports say official pressure was used to make Mr Khoo sell the MUI Bank and
its finance company in Malaysia late last year.
But Mr Khoo extracted a good price: the Malaysian Hong Leong conglomerate
paid MDollars 1.1bn for the two institutions, giving MUI a considerable cash
hoard.
There is much speculation in Malaysia as to why Mr Khoo bought the SCMP
stake. A statement from MUI merely said that the SCMP shares had been
acquired for long-term investment as part of the group's investment
strategy.
In recent years MUI has been concentrating on its cement manufacturing
concerns in Malaysia and on developing its hotel and property interests. MUI
owns the Ming Court group of hotels in Malaysia and has made several foreign
acquisitions, particularly in the US. It recently bought a Marriott hotel
and office complex in Houston, Texas, and a 750-room hotel in Atlanta,
Georgia.
For 1993, MUI had a pre-tax profit of MDollars 103m on turnover of MDollars
657m.
Hong Kong's securities watchdog, the Securities and Futures Commission, said
it would examine the sale of the South China Morning Post stake to MUI,
Reuter reports from Hong Kong.
The market is speculating on whether the purchase by a close business
associate of Mr Robert Kuok complies with Hong Kong takeover and mergers
code, brokers said.
