FT  11 MAY 94 / Management: Blue-collar team, white-collar wise - How a
better-educated workforce is helping the US car industry to raise
productivity
When a handful of Chrysler assembly workers gathered late last year with
suggestions on cost-cutting, they came up with an innovative solution to
replace the expensive sealer used in car boots. The idea amounted to an
annual saving of Dollars 250,000 (Pounds 171,000).
The car company says this is just one example of the boost in productivity
derived from a better-educated, more participative workforce.
'The days of the cattle-call are over,' says Dennis Pauley, executive
vice-president of manufacturing at Chrysler. 'We used to put out the word on
Fridays that we needed X number of workers Monday morning. If you could walk
and breathe you were in. That's not how it is anymore.'
US car manufacturers hope tougher hiring standards will ensure they get the
skilled workers they need to stay competitive. Blue-collar employees in the
industry are looking more like white-collar workers in terms of educational
background.
At Chrysler's Windsor plant in Ontario, for instance, some 20 per cent of
new assembly plant workers are college graduates, while nearly 5 per cent of
new blue-collar employees for Ford Motor Company are university graduates,
up from almost none 10 years ago.
Even more striking is the surge in the number of workers who have completed
high school. About 97 per cent of the blue-collar employees Ford has taken
on since 1991 possess a high school diploma or higher degree. More
significantly, since nearly half the blue-collar workers at US car
manufacturers will become eligible for retirement over the next five years,
'this offers us a major opportunity to reshape our workforce', says Pauley.
The American car sector is taking its cue from Japan, where groups such as
Toyota and Honda have built up a highly-skilled employee base. 'The Japanese
assembly-line workers graduated in the top 20 per cent of their technical
school,' says David Jones, president of the consulting group HR Enterprises,
which advises US car companies on assembly line hiring. 'They put the same
energy into blue-collar recruiting that the companies here put into
management recruiting at the top universities.'
US car manufacturers now realise that to compete with the Japanese, they
need a workforce with similar accomplishments. 'In the past, we put our
energy into making sure we had a well-educated management force,' says
Pauley. 'Now, we know that assembly-line workers are just as important. My
workforce needs to be at least as good as that of the Japanese, or I'm out
of the game.'
Recruitment of the highly-educated is made easier because university
graduates are finding assembly-line jobs appealing. The work is less
physically strenous, and more intellectually challenging, than it was just a
decade ago. High salaries are also enticing. Hourly wages usually range from
between Dollars 15 and Dollars 18 an hour, generous even by university
graduate standards.
To select the best workers, car makers have adopted strict new screening
methods. Potential employees are required to take examinations which measure
reading, writing and mathematics ability, manual dexterity and
inter-personal skills. No specific degree is required, but the tests
automatically favour the well-educated.
'It is more likely that people with high school diplomas will do better on
the exams, and individuals who score higher clearly are more productive on
their jobs,' says Jones.
Changes in the industry over the last decade have made educated workers more
of a necessity. Companies have been eliminating middle management to slice
costs; as a result, more workers are being left to their own devices.
At Chrysler there are now 50 workers to every manager. Ten years ago that
number was 20; soon, says the company, it will be 100.
'Once you back out the supervisor, you need more self-directed workers,'
says Pauley. 'By having fewer managers, you redefine the job of the assembly
plant worker.'
Manufacturing jobs are also more technical than they once were. 'Many jobs
have changed beyond recognition,' says Arthur Johnson, supervisor in charge
of employment and training planning at Ford. 'For instance, a welding line
used to consist of a man holding a piece of metal on to the car, and someone
welding it with a hand-held machine. Today, robots do all that.'
These changes require new skills. The ability to read an instruction manual
is now more important than brute strength, and with new technology being
adopted all the time, workers must be capable of learning new tasks quickly.
Workers must have the flexibility to perform more than one job. To keep the
plant running smoothly, and cut down on overtime pay, assembly-line
employees are often expected to fill in for absentee workers, or ease the
work load in another section of the plant.
Employees are also asked to participate in the daily running of the company.
At the Dodge City Complex, a Chrysler operation which opened last July, each
worker has the right to halt the assembly line at any time. The company says
it helped them iron out the wrinkles and address inefficiencies which under
the old system would never have come to light.
'One guy suggested we put in a computer program which would tell him what
materials he'd need for a particular vehicle in advance. Now, he prepares
the stuff ahead of time,' explains Norman Hunt, a supervisor assistant who
will soon receive an engineering degree.
Even General Motors, which because it is not hiring has less flexibility in
shaping its workforce, is attempting to improve blue-collar educational
levels. The company, in conjunction with the Auto Workers Union, has
launched a programme which subsidises employees' tuition at university and
technical schools. The company says that 17 per cent of assembly-line
workers involved in the initiative are working towards a college degree.
An article on Rover's shopfloor revolution appeared on Monday's Management
page.
