FT  23 AUG 94 / Mexican Elections: Battle over rules goes on - The country's
poll results are still a source of political controversy
The final judgment on the probity of Mexico's presidential and congressional
elections is yet to emerge, but Mexico's two main opposition parties will
enter a period of reflection, if not crisis, as a result,
The government of President Carlos Salinas declared itself satisfied with
the cleanliness of the polls. 'We see the complaints as more or less
isolated incidents that will need to be looked into but which wouldn't have
affected the outcome of the elections,' said a spokesman.
Others offered a more negative view. Mr Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, candidate of
the opposition Party for Democratic Revolution, said the election was
invalidated through fraud. Mr Sergio Aguayo, head of Civic Alliance, a group
of non-government organisations and individuals which observed the election,
said yesterday: 'I want to announce that the quality of the election is in
question.' He added: 'Before proclaiming triumphs and losses, the legitimacy
of the elections must be determined.'
Despite advances in the Mexican electoral process, the elections are still a
source of political controversy and agreement does not yet exist on the
rules of the electoral game.
Electoral difficulties fall into three main areas:
Before polling day. These issues were summed up in a report published this
month by the Carter Centre of Emory University in Atlanta. 'An uneven
playing field which limits the ability of all political parties to compete
equitably remains of significant concern, especially regarding the
continuing bias of media coverage, the high cost of advertising, campaign
spending limits beyond the reach of any party except the PRI, and great
disparities in financial resources.'
Independent citizen magistrates appointed to oversee the elections have also
criticised slow processing of complaints - most against the ruling
Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) - about breaches in the electoral
law.
Voting itself. The possibility of padding the electoral roll with dead or
non-existent people - common in the past - is now small, according to the
Carter Centre, but it said an independent audit did not address the issue of
disenfranchisement of those who believed they were on the roll.
On the day, the main problem surrounded special polling stations, where
those away from home or not on the polling station lists could vote. The
number of ballot papers in each of these stations was limited to 300, as
part of an agreement among all the parties to try to prevent double voting.
The question being asked by the opposition Party of Democratic Revolution
and others is why were so many people on the electoral roll not on the lists
of their local polling stations - forcing them to vote elsewhere.
Civic Alliance also reported that preliminary assessments suggested some 20
per cent of polling stations allowed voting by people not on the electoral
list, and some 9 per cent allowed voting by people who had already voted.
Fraudulent counting. This appears to have been much more difficult than in
the past, in part because large discrepancies between exit polls and quick
counts - from polling stations where voting had been observed - would have
shown up attempts at centralised fraud.
Mr Cardenas's call yesterday for protests against the elections raised the
temperature of the election aftermath. But he did not claim victory as he
had in the previous presidential elections in 1988 and even some
sympathisers felt his credibility was weakened by his poor electoral
showing.
In any case, the left is likely to undergo a period of self-examination. Mr
Cardenas had started the campaign by moving towards the centre, but towards
the end of the campaign his speeches once again veered to the left. This may
have been because of concerns that Sub-commander Marcos - leader of the
peasant rebellion in Chiapas  - threatens to take over the left if he moved
too far to the centre.
Some are expecting a split in the PRD if and when Mr Cardenas steps down,
between those seeking greater engagement with the political process, and
those considering it futile because the political system remains
undemocratic.
For the right-leaning National Action Party (PAN), the result it obtained
would even six months ago have been considered a triumph. The one televised
debate among the candidates propelled its candidate Mr Diego Fernandez de
Cevallos into serious contention for a time. However, there was
disappointment in party ranks at the result and a debate seems likely to
ensue about the extent to which the PAN - in the past six years, highly
supportive of the ruling party - should continue to co-operate with and be
identified with the PRI.
For now, however, both main opposition parties are left dependent more or
less on the goodwill of the ruling party to engage them more fully in the
Mexican political mainstream. They are sceptical that, despite Mr Zedillo's
conciliatory statements after the elections, the PRI will voluntarily cede
power after such a comfortable victory.
