FT  15 AUG 94 / Tough start for Ernesto Samper: A week of graft, murder and
attacks in Colombia
Colombian President Ernesto Samper's presidency got off to an eventful
start. His first week in office included a political assassination, several
guerrilla attacks and a police emergency in Cali, where senior officers were
sacked or suspended for receiving money from the city's cocaine cartel.
The shooting of Mr Manuel Cepeda - the left wing Patriotic Union party's
only senator and a long-time member of the central committee of the
Colombian Communist party, sparked rioting, strikes and recriminations. Mr
Cepeda had been threatened a number of times and party militants immediately
attributed his killing to right-wing paramilitaries. His death is a serious
setback to the government's hopes of reviving a dialogue with the
guerrillas, not least because Mr Cepeda would have been a channel for
reaching the old style communist line Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC).
During his first week, the president also had to contend with a series of
corruption scandals among the police force in Cali. The scandals were so
extensive that the government called a 'disciplinary emergency' and
announced the creation of a special counter-intelligence brigade within the
police. More than 50 policemen, including 36 officers, were sacked for
accepting money from drug traffickers.
In an effort to make some sort of positive mark in his inaugural week, the
president announced a series of social and economic measures in line with
his campaign promises to increase social investment and speed up
devaluation.
Mr Samper launched a Dollars 4.6bn (Pounds 3bn) four-year social welfare
programme aimed initially at 3m of Colombia's 12m people living in poverty.
Most of the money will come from the national budget and foreign loans, but
the municipalities will have to provide over a quarter of the funds, a
figure which some analysts consider unrealistic even though transfers to
local government are increasing.
The two biggest items in the 'social welfare network' are food assistance
for mothers and small children and housing subsidies for half a million
families. The programme also includes employment schemes, training for young
people, subsidies for single mothers to ensure their children can go to
primary school and welfare provision for the elderly. Some of these schemes
are a continuation of programmes begun under the previous government but are
geared more specifically to the poorest sectors of the population.
The economic measures include restrictions on private foreign borrowing. Mr
Guillermo Perry, finance minister, says the government plans to prevent
further revaluation of the peso and wants to maintain a real exchange rate
reflecting the difference between internal and external inflation rates. One
of the main problems will be to manage steep increase in coffee and oil
income - Dollars 1.8bn in coffee earnings is forecast by the end of 1995 and
soon after Cusiana oil output is forecast to rise.
