FT  09 APR 94 / Minding Your Own Business: A novel way of feathering his own
nest - Clive Fewins meets a man who earns his living by fair means and fowl
It was the celebrated tale of American businessman Victor Kiam, who liked
Remington razors so much that he bought the company, that inspired Charles
Alexander to devote the rest of his life to chicken manure.
Alexander is an American who has worked and gardened in the UK for 23 years.
He liked the chicken manure fertiliser he used on his soil so much that when
the opportunity arose, he bought the company that made it.
In the two years since he bought Pelco Fertilizers, he has increased
turnover for its only product - Super-dug - by nearly 6 per cent per annum.
'Not bad in a recession,' he said. Six years ago, at the age of 50,
Alexander decided he was so attached to England and his garden, that he
declined an invitation from his employers to return to a senior post in the
US and took early retirement.
After a spell of financial consultancy Alexander learned that the man who
supplied his favourite garden fertiliser was about to sell the company he
had started and run for 33 years. The result is that since April 1992 he has
been in full-time work again, and it is the beaming faces of Alexander and
his wife, Elaine, that adorn the front page of the 2.4m. leaflets that drop
out of gardening and other magazines at this time of year.
Alexander's business is mail order. There are no vast stockpiles of chicken
manure behind his clean and clinical three-man rented office on the
outskirts of Bath. The only reference to the product that you will see
inside is one of the large green 25kg plastic sacks pinned up on the wall.
The rear of the sack clearly outlines the myriad of uses to which the
unsavoury broilerhouse by-product that forms the basis of his business can
be put. Sprinkled around flowers and bushes to promote growth; raked into
lawns to act as a feed and disperse moss; applied to the compost heap to
accelerate decomposition; or used as a liquid feed when soaked overnight in
a bucket of water in an old nylon stocking. If all this sounds a bit over
the top then Alexander will tell you that he had 21 years experience of
using Super-dug in his garden and on his two allotments before he found
himself selling it.
'Super-dug is many times more effective than ordinary farmyard manure,'
Alexander said. 'As well as being organic and rich in nitrogen phosphorous
and potassium it is relatively odorless, and weed-free. It has a fine
texture, and is light, friable and easy to use. We find it is particularly
popular with gardeners in urban areas because it can be delivered to the
door.'
You can only buy Super-dug by having it delivered. Up-front money is the key
to the business, as it was before Alexander bought the company.
'The man who started the company and sold it to me 33 years later - Peter
Ellis - was a keen businessman and chicken farmer,' Alexander said. 'I had
no reason to want to change the basis of the company. I was looking for a
mail order business to buy - I had always found that area of commerce
fascinating - and I was lucky in finding one with a product that I knew to
be good and that fitted in well with my interests.'
He injected into the business some of the marketing expertise that he
learned at university in Colorado and with Manufacturers Hanover Trust of
New York. Advertising is all-important - as is the ability to control it
tightly and monitor it by computer. This is simply achieved. All the coupons
printed on the Super-dug advertisements are coded according to which of 18
magazines they appear in. When they are returned it is easy to analyse which
is the most effective medium. He deals with the magazines - currently he has
a total promotional budget of Pounds 118,000 - himself.
'When advertising agencies approach me for my business I tell them that if I
did not handle the advertising I would not have a job,' Alexander said.
His facility with a computer also serves him well in his role as transport
manager. He uses 18 hauliers to distribute the sacks of Super-dug - they
come in just the one size - from the three producers from whom he buys the
material to the customers in their homes. Haulage and production is
currently 42 per cent of total turnover.
Alexander's main objective is to use all this promotion to good effect to
repay the money he still owes under the deal by which he bought the company.
He put in one-fifth of the purchase price, borrowed two-fifths from Barclays
Bank and two-fifths from Ellis who has now been repaid. Repayments to
Barclays start in July. Current net profit on a turnover of Pounds 700,000
is Pounds 118,000.
Once repayment is complete Alexander's plan is to look for new products. 'At
present we are a one-product company,' he said. 'I see no danger in that -
we get our raw material from three different sources and I can't ever see
there being a shortage of chicken litter. But it would be nice to add to our
range of products.'
He may launch in the UK a gardening tool that has been used on the other
side of the Atlantic for nearly 30 years.
'It is a worksaver that is tried and proven and can be sold all year round,'
Alexander said. 'We are hoping to introduce it over here this summer. But I
shall say no more just in case it doesn't get off the ground until next
spring.'
Pelco Fertilizers, 251 London Road East, Batheaston, Bath BA1 7RL. Tel:
0225-859962.
