FT  10 MAR 94 / Ill at home and unable to travel: Market reforms and
overseas competition are putting pressure on Japan's drugs industry
The Japanese spend more per capita on prescription drugs each year than any
other country. They are also more likely than most to visit a doctor - on
average once a month.
Japan's Ministry of Health and Welfare will be hoping to curb the cost of
such heavy medicine use today, when it reveals details of its latest plan to
slash drugs prices. The ministry has proved increasingly successful in
tackling growing healthcare costs; the consequent damage being inflicted on
the ailing pharmaceuticals sector threatens its ability to survive on the
global stage.
The industry's plight has come as a surprise. In the 1980s, western
competitors feared it would follow the path of the automotive and
electronics industries and dominate international rivals. The advantages of
Japanese drugs groups included a fast-expanding domestic market and a
skilled, well-educated scientific workforce. A decade ago, the country was
beginning to lead the world in development of some therapies, for instance
drugs to lower cholesterol levels.
But it is now proving a setting sun rather than rising star. In the domestic
market, growth is slowing: the prescription drugs market grew by 13.5 per
cent in 1987, 4.4 per cent last year, and observers expect no growth this
year. Mr Hiroaki Shigeta, president of Nippon Roche, the Japanese subsidiary
of the Swiss group, says: 'I'm very pessimistic for the overall growth of
the market. It'll be almost flat for the next five years.'
The ministry's reforms, which have caused the market to stagnate, have been
forced by an explosion in demand for healthcare, caused by a rapidly ageing
population. The proportion of those over 65 doubled from 6 per cent in 1960
to 12 per cent in 1990. And the ability of the government to pay for
healthcare is being undermined by the recession.
Total spending on medicine represents about 28 per cent of all Japanese
healthcare expenditure - the highest proportion in the world - most of which
is reimbursed by the government. The government wants to cut that figure to
20 per cent by 2000, according to the Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers
Association.
But Japan has become the world's second-largest pharmaceuticals market -
worth about Y5,800bn (Dollars 55bn) last year - on the basis of
over-prescribing of medicines. Disease is not more common; rather,
physicians have an incentive to prescribe because they also dispense drugs.
Mr Robert Schembs, project co-ordinator at the consultancy group PMSI, says:
'Every time a doctor writes a prescription, he is writing himself a cheque.'
The government is tackling the escalating drugs bill on two fronts: by
cutting prices paid to manufacturers and by curbing the volume of drugs
prescribed. Price cuts announced today - expected to average 6.6 per cent -
will be the latest in a series of reductions that began in 1982.
The government has also announced two other measures in the past 12 months
to control prices. First, additional price cuts are being imposed next month
on two successful types of medicine: cholesterol-lowering treatments and
interferons, mostly used for treating hepatitis. 'This is a worrying
precedent,' complains Mr Jiro Ichinaka, managing director of nese operations
at Yamanouchi, the drugs company. 'The ministry has never applied the rules
in this way before.'
Second is a scheme introduced to control the price of new drugs. Drugs
defined as 'innovative' can be priced at a premium of 30 per cent above
existing therapies, but the criteria for qualifying have been drawn so
tightly that only four or five medicines have been given the premium over
the past decade.
To curb the volume of drugs prescribed, the ministry has attempted, with
little success, to separate the prescribing and dispensing of drugs. It has
made more progress in giving geriatric hospitals an incentive to prescribe
fewer drugs by setting a fixed budget for each patient.
Another problem for the domestic drugs industry is the increasing aggression
of overseas companies in the Japanese market. Western groups are poised to
seize market share from Japanese companies, and thereby raise their profit
margins, by increasingly marketing their own products.
Most western groups have set up their own development facilities in Japan,
enabling them to prove their drugs' safety and efficacy to the ministry
without the help of Japanese groups. And those western companies that have
not done so already are setting up their own distribution system. In January
next year, for example, Zeneca of the UK will begin to terminate a 20-year
relationship with Sumitomo Pharmaceutical.
In the face of such developments, an obvious strategy for Japanese companies
would be to look for export opportunities. But Japanese global reach in
pharmaceuticals is limited for three reasons:
A lack of innovative products. Japanese pharmaceuticals companies spend a
substantial proportion of sales on research and development, but their lower
turnover means that, in absolute terms, they spend paltry amounts compared
with the industry's international leaders. Takeda, the chemicals group,
invests about Dollars 280m in drugs R&amp;D a year - the highest by any Japanese
company, according to brokers CS First Boston. In contrast, Merck of the US,
the world's largest group, expects to invest Dollars 1.2bn this year.
Even when Japanese companies discover potentially profitable drugs, most do
not have the international infrastructure to conduct clinical trials in the
US and Europe.
A lack of investment in marketing. Rather than constructing an international
presence by promoting a breakthrough drug - as SmithKline French did with
Tagamet in the 1980s - the Japanese have tended to license the promotion of
the medicines they produce to foreign drugs companies.
For example, Sankyo, Japan's biggest drugs group, has licensed out the
marketing of Mevalotin, the world's fourth best-selling medicine, in most
countries. As a result, the product generates limited international
revenues.
The efforts of Japanese groups to overcome such weaknesses have been
lacklustre. During the late 1980s, they made a series of ill-conceived
acquisitions in Europe and the US. Fujisawa, for example, acquired
Lymphomed, a US group making cheap, non-patented drugs in 1989. But in 1992,
the new subsidiary made a pre-tax loss of Dollars 29.9m on sales of Dollars
216m, largely because of a dispute with the US Food and Drug Administration
over the registration of some of its products.
Japanese pharmaceuticals companies remain among the least profitable in the
world because of their high costs. Margins have expanded, following the
introduction of a voluntary code 18 months ago that banned the most
expensive promotional practices, such as lavish entertainment for doctors at
medical conferences. Nevertheless, most groups still have big overheads.
Large salesforces are an obvious target.
Many observers also expect to see a spate of mergers over the next few
years. 'We must see a significant reorganisation of the top 20 Japanese
companies over the next five to seven years,' says Mr Shigeta at Roche.
Current speculation is focused on the possibility of three large drugs
groups, Shionogi, Yamanouchi and Chugai, forming an alliance.
If companies are reluctant to rationalise themselves, the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry may try to force the pace, as it has in
Japan's bulk chemicals industry.
Even then, however, the sector's prospects may not brighten significantly,
given the head start of western counterparts in R&amp;D and marketing. Japanese
drugs groups may be condemned to playing a marginal role in the
international medicines' arena.
