FT  03 MAY 94 / A cry for freedom: Central banks in ex-Soviet states remain
under the shadow of politicians
A struggle for independence is being waged by central banks in almost all of
the states of the former Soviet Union - a battle possibly as momentous as
the countries themselves underwent to achieve statehood.
For Mr Michael Bruno, chief economist at the World Bank, a central bank is
'the way in which society protects itself against itself'.
He made his remarks last week, to a conference mounted by Chicago
University's Law School which succeeded in getting most of the central bank
governors of the post-communist states together to talk about their problems
and listen to western bankers tell them how to protect their banks against
their politicians.
The legacy with which they have to cope is that of a Soviet state bank -
Gosbank - which monopolised the banking field and was subservient to the
Communist party, the government and the ministries. Money allocated to
projects and enterprises merely passed though the bank, requiring it to
develop no analytical skills; its foreign currency operations, though
prudent, were relatively rudimentary; its supervisory functions perfunctory.
The legacy is doubly malign in the non-Russian republics. Gosbank's
headquarters in Moscow possessed a tiny corps of highly skilled bankers; its
branches in the republican capitals, now independent states, had almost
none. 'It's very bad when politicians don't understand the basics of the
market economy. But when the central bankers don't, then it can be a
disaster,' says Mr Grigory Marchenko, deputy governor-designate of the Bank
of Kazakhstan.
But the largest complaint from the central bank bosses is the political
chaos in which they work. Mr Victor Yushchenko, Ukraine's central bank
governor, works with a parliament still in the process of elections but
tending against reform, a president lacking in authority, legislation to set
out the the central bank's remit endlessly delayed, a plunging economy and
tiny reserves. 'The central bank and the new commercial banks are in a very
tough position,' he says. 'They have to act as champions of change in an
environment where most of the government and the large state sector are
resisting or slowing such change.'
The central bankers' situations are diverse but they agree with great
feeling on one thing - that their political masters should not have any
right to interfere, either directly or indirectly, through over-politicised
appointments.
'The government is always looking for easy money,' says Ilman Rimshevichs,
the deputy governor of the central bank of Latvia, one of the most
successful of the ex-Soviet economies. 'In these conditions it's hard to
enforce independence and to sell off the state commercial banks which used
to supply cheap credit to the enterprises.'
At the other end of the scale from Latvia are republics such as Georgia and
Armenia, whose economies are ruined and where to talk of existence is more
germane than to talk of independence. In Georgia, for example, the currency
is close to losing all meaning: from trading at 35,000 to the dollar last
November, it fell to 180,000 by Christmas, and to 650,000 at the end of last
month.
At still another extreme is Belarus, where an agreement with Russia, signed
in April, appears to open the way for the merger of the two Slav states'
economies. However, Mr Stanislav Bogdankevich, the governor of the country's
central bank, is opposed to the deal, saying that Russian and Belorussian
interests diverge too much to make union possible and calling for a
strengthening of the national currency before any long-term monetary union
is contemplated.
Yet, he says, the conditions for a separate, fully-fledged national currency
in Belarus are absent and likely to remain so. 'Now, 90 per cent of our
economy is still state owned. The dominant part of the economy is composed
of enterprises with 10,000 or more workers, which make mainly for the
Russian or Ukrainian markets. If we let these enterprises go we will get 50
per cent unemployment. Investment in the economy has practically
disappeared. We don't need monetary stabilisation: we need a programme which
covers the whole economy.'
The brightest star in the post-Soviet firmament is Estonia. Its prime
minister, Mr Mart Laar, and its central bank governor, Mr Siim Kallas, put
the success down to the strength of the bank's commitment to a stable
currency. Estonia has linked the Estonian kroon to the German D-Mark and
given the bank no discretion to lend to the government. At the same time,
the governor cannot be fired and future governors will nominate their own
successors. The result has been a hard currency, low inflation (though
rising now) and an economy set to grow as fast as any in Europe this year.
For Mr Kallas, the reform showed that 'money is seen not just as money, but
as a crucial national symbol'. Rather more cynically, he confesses that the
laws guaranteeing bank independence, linking the kroon to the D-Mark and
barring the government from raiding the bank's coffers were passed through
parliament 'before the deputies quite knew what it all meant'.
Russia is still at the centre of the web - though none of its central
bankers came to Chicago. Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the present governor, takes
the contrary view to the prevailing credo of most central bankers everywhere
else, that his duty is to keep enterprises going even at the cost of high
inflation, and has said that he does not believe inflation is directly
related to the supply of money in the economy (by contrast, the Estonians
believe this with a kind of mystical fervour).
As the 'owner' not so long ago of these now 'independent' banks, the Russian
bank still exercises influence - the more so as Russia seeks to extend its
economic union, drawing other states into the same relationship as that it
wishes to have with Belarus. Mr Thomas Wolf, deputy director of the
International Monetary Fund department concerned with east Europe and the
former Soviet Union, noted that after the Soviet collapse, the former states
tried to do two contradictory things  - to build up their national
currencies and to discuss with the Russian central bank how best to draw
their economies closer.
This tension remains. For the central bankers, the success of Estonia and
Latvia is less of a beacon than a train disappearing over the horizon -
which they have missed. Unlike Mr Kallas, they were unable - or unwilling -
to get change in place early while the industrial and other lobbies were
disoriented. Now they must seek change in the worst kind of circumstances
and many of their political leaders are tempted to lean on Russia. The
Chicago gathering showed the bankers want to pursue independence: but it
showed, too, how far they remain under the shadow of politics.
