FT  15 JAN 94 / Wildlife hero quits after smear attacks
Corruption and venal personality power politics in Kenya yesterday claimed
Mr Richard Leakey, the international face of wildlife conservation and
anti-poaching efforts in East Africa.
If Mr Leakey's resignation is accepted by President Daniel Arap Moi it will
raise severe doubts among international donors. They have pledged up to
Dollars 300m and see Mr Leakey as personally responsible for successes over
the past five years to stamp out poaching and improve efficiency and
profitability of wildlife - the base of Kenya's tourism industry.
Mr Leakey, whose crusade led to a worldwide ban on the ivory trade,
announced his resignation from the Kenya Wildlife Service after a two week
smear campaign alleging racism, arrogance and irregular management
decisions. The government has set up a probe into Mr Leakey and the KWS
Service but refused to make public the terms of reference.
President Moi, who appointed Mr Leakey five years ago at the height of a
grave elephant poaching and corruption crisis has remained silent. In the
past Mr Moi has often quietly backed smear campaigns against ministers and
officials before sacking them.
At the heart of the row is the issue of land allocation in wildlife areas
made by Mr Leakey.
Mr Leakey, warned that his resignation would have 'far reaching
consequences', and said he had resisted attempts at what he called 'land
grabbing' by politicians. He gave four specific examples including an
attempt by 'certain political figures' to have 10,000 acres carved out of
the Tsavo National Park.
'Has my insistence that the wildlife protected areas be protected from some
greedy people been the reason for this charge (of arrogance)? I suspect so,'
Mr Leakey said. 'There are numerous examples where the national interest
would have been compromised had I given in.'
Close associates and friends of Mr Leakey admit that he is abrasive and can
be arrogant. He has built up an independent and powerful fiefdom at KWS and
bruised many political egos and created jealousies. Backed by the president
and embraced as the darling of international conservation groups, Mr Leakey
felt he was untouchable and often acted without too much consultation.
But many say he almost single-handedly restored international credibility to
the Kenyan wildlife department which was tarnished throughout the 1980s with
corruption, nepotism, political interference, inefficiency and allegations
that leading Kenyan families were involved with poaching of ivory and rhino
horn.
