FT  05 MAR 94 / International Company News: Micro compact car set for 1997
launch
Mercedes-Benz, the German executive and luxury carmaker, and SMH, the Swiss
watchmaker, are aiming to launch a 'micro compact car' in Europe by 1997-98.
The two companies are to form a joint venture incorporated in Switzerland in
which Mercedes-Benz will hold a 51 per cent stake and SMH, the maker of
Swatch watches, 49 per cent.
The combination of the prestigious German luxury carmaker and SMH, the
company which masterminded the rescue of the Swiss watch industry with the
development of the high quality, low-price Swatch, is unprecedented in the
world automotive industry.
The two groups are aiming to open up an entirely new segment at the bottom
of the car market for a two-seater urban micro car that would be only 2.5m
long (significantly shorter than the 3.05m Rover Mini) allowing it to be
parked in congested cities head-on to the pavement in the gap between other
parked cars. It is expected to cost less than DM20,000 (Dollars 11,739).
Mercedes-Benz disclosed yesterday that it had been working on concepts for a
micro city car since the early 1980s. It unveiled yesterday two prototype
micro compact cars that have been designed and developed at its California
design studio.
The expertise of the Swiss watchmaker, which has been working for more than
three years on its own Swatchmobile project for an environmentally friendly
city car, is chiefly in the development of a hybrid electric/petrol
propulsion system, in micro-electronics, low cost modular production, and in
the marketing of high volume low-cost fashion products, like the Swatch.
Mr Nicolas Hayek, chairman of SMH (Ste Suisse Microelectronique et
d'Horlogerie) and the creator of the Swatch revolution in the world watch
industry, said the joint venture would aim to sell the micro city car
worldwide.
The name of the new car and the possible distribution channels were still to
be developed by the joint venture, said Mr Helmut Werner, chief executive of
Mercedes-Benz.
A separate franchise would be created which could use both the Mercedes-Benz
and the Swatch names.
Mercedes-Benz's decision to press ahead with the development of a micro city
car comes only a few months after its announcement that it planned to
develop a small four-passenger car sized between a Ford Fiesta and a
Volkswagen Golf.
A concept small car, the Vision A-93, was unveiled last year, and the small
car - to be sold under the Mercedes star - is scheduled to enter production
at Mercedes-Benz's Rastatt plant in south-west Germany in 1997 with a volume
of up to 200,000 cars a year.
Mr Jurgen Hubbert, director of the car division, said that a production
version of the micro car would be around 2.5m long and 1.4m wide. The car
would be high to create inside space. There would be room for two passengers
and some luggage and the car would meet all the safety and emissions
standards of larger cars.
The short but high shape of the car will allow the engine and gearbox to be
positioned under the passenger compartment. Mercedes-Benz is aiming at a top
speed of 140kph for the micro car, a range of 500km and acceleration of zero
to 100kph in 13-14 seconds. Petrol, electric and hybrid propulsion systems
are possible.
