FT  26 OCT 94 / Business and the Environment: High hopes for hemp -
Producers are hoping to tap a growing market for natural fibres
To the untrained eye they look like bales of straw. But the bundles of long,
greyish fibre drying in the late autumn sunshine on 40 farms across
south-east England are attracting an unusually high degree of excitement.
The fibre is hemp, part of the cannabis family, a centuries-old crop which
is making a comeback in Europe and the US as an ecologically friendly raw
material for clothing and paper.
The association with the dope-smoking 1970s meant that not only farmers'
hopes for the crop were riding high when the first commercial plants
appeared in the UK last year. But the youngsters who raided a field and
filled dustbin bags with plant tops were disappointed. 'This is a low
narcotic variety,' explains Ian Low, a director of Hemcore, the UK's only
hemp merchant. 'You'd have to smoke 50 acres to get high.'
Hemcore, set up 18 months ago by an Essex farmer and a group of agricultural
merchants, persuaded the Home Office to license its first 1,500 acres of
hemp last year. It hopes this will give it a lead in the growing market for
natural fibres - particularly in the US and Germany. Neither country permits
domestic production because of the association with drugs.
Yet hemp's roots go back to the Middle Ages, when it was grown widely in
East Anglia. It was used in Europe for ropes, sails and sacking until early
this century, when it was ousted by imported cotton and jute.
Hemcore is hoping to turn the wheel full circle, reaping capital from the
fact that the first jeans were made of hemp in early 19th-century America.
It has contacted Levi Strauss, the leading US jeans manufacturer, which is
'very interested' in the fibre, says Low.
He admits Hemcore has some way to go in developing the technology to make
hemp soft and stretchy. It is collaborating with flax processors in Northern
Ireland on refining the coarse fibres.
Some textile agreements are already under way, however. Esprit, an
international fashion business based in San Francisco, plans to launch bags,
jackets, shirts and skirts made of hemp and hemp-and-wool mixtures next year
as part of its 'Ecollection'. One of its suppliers is Evergreen, a Yorkshire
textile company which buys its hemp from Hemcore.
'Hemp fits in with our environmental objectives,' says Lynda Grose, research
director for the Ecollection. 'It is grown with minimal watering and no
pesticides and herbicides. It is also very durable.'
The crop, planted in late spring, surges to about 10ft in three months.
Before planting, the soil has to be prepared with fertiliser because hemp
takes up a lot of nutrients. But no chemical sprays are needed as the plants
are hardy and grow quickly enough to outsmart weeds.
The powerful roots break up the soil, leaving it fertile for the next crop.
Experience in east Europe, where hemp was an important industrial crop
before the break-up of the Soviet Union, suggests that yields of wheat grown
in fields where hemp has previously been cultivated are 0.7 tonnes a hectare
higher than those achieved following any other rotational crop. Hemp roots
are also rapidly biodegradable, making ploughing easy.
The revival of interest in fibre crops in the European Union springs both
from growing consumer demand for 'natural' clothes and from farm policy
reforms. In France, Italy and Spain, hemp survived the onslaught of imported
fibres earlier this century and continued to be grown for paper pulp
production.
But the introduction two years ago of set-aside, the policy which obliges EU
farmers to take land out of food production, has boosted the search for new
markets for industrial crops such as hemp.
The European Commission provides generous subsidies of Pounds 245 an acre
for fibre crops and exempts such crops from set-aside rules. Cereal farmers
who grow flax or hemp can thus reduce the overall amount of land they have
to leave idle.
If 'green' textiles look like being the most immediately lucrative market
for hemp, paper-making is likely to absorb the biggest volumes. The long
fibres are particularly suited to thin or open-textured paper, such as
cigarette paper, teabags or coffee filters. They can also be used to
strengthen recycled paper.
A Fl 10m (Pounds 3.7m) four-year project funded by the Dutch government
recently concluded that hemp was an economically viable crop for making
anything from bank notes to newsprint.
A novel mechanical processing technique developed by the Dutch Land
Organisation, which carried out the research, is attracting interest from
paper producers in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Sweden and the UK.
Thea van Kemenade, project co-ordinator, said hemp could also be used for
building materials and as a reinforcing agent in plastic car components. 'I
would expect hemp to make a big comeback,' she said.
Earlier this month, the UK government announced a Pounds 100,000 three-year
grant to develop new markets for natural fibres such as hemp and flax.
Silsoe, the government-funded agricultural research station, has developed a
machine to strip the bark off the stem and extract the fibre from these
crops. Its aim is to enable individual farms to process their own hemp into
crude fibre, which could then be turned into padding and stuffing for the
furniture industry.
'If we can make full use of all the material from the plant, it will be in
the top league,' said Harry Gilbertson, natural-fibres expert at Silsoe.
Hemcore itself is investigating uses for other parts of the plant such as
the seeds, whose oil is suitable for cosmetics.
'If we look into the next century, I think it will be very big,' says Low.
'There could be tens or hundreds of thousands of hectares of hemp.'
But when vision threatens to overcome reality, Low points out that one of
the company's best markets today is decidedly down-to-earth.
Hemp, being highly absorbent, is increasingly popular in Germany and Britain
as bedding for horses.
