FT  27 APR 94 / Business and the Environment: Finding a dustbin for
corruption - Worldwide Waste / The lack of dump sites has put Mexican
companies under intense pressure
Behind Mexico City's international airport lies one of the capital's biggest
waste disposal sites. A lorry enters the site every few minutes, the driver
invariably tips the security guard at the entrance, and then dumps solid,
and often hazardous, waste into a vast open-air pit that stretches far into
the distance.
Hundreds of scavengers, from young children to old men, walk around the
fly-infested pit picking up plastic containers, bottles, cardboard boxes and
anything else that can be reused or recycled. Some scavengers sell any
reusable waste they find directly to the union which runs the dump, others
pay the union boss about Dollars 20 a month for the right to sell it
elsewhere. Either way, most appear to earn much more than the minimum wage.
The dumps are owned by the municipal government. The unions controlling them
are powerful supporters of Mexico's governing party. Admirers point to the
undeniable efficiency of the system at recycling waste; detractors attack
the corruption that has made union bosses extraordinarily wealthy, and the
appalling health conditions in which scavengers work.
With no commercial toxic incinerators, just one authorised toxic waste site,
and few modern solid-waste facilities, almost all of Mexico's household and
much of its industrial waste ends up in such pits. What does not make it to
these sites is invariably dumped in rivers, the sewage system, or empty
fields.
The government estimates that industry generates about 6m tonnes of toxic
waste a year. But according to David Robinson, a consultant with Quimica
Omega, an environmental services company in Mexico City, total installed
capacity for treating toxic waste is about 200,000 tonnes. He says almost
all of the 800m litres of lubricating oil used every year is dumped into the
sewage system - equivalent, he calculates, to one Exxon Valdez spill a
month.
The problem for many Mexican industries is that while there is hardly
anywhere to put their waste, the government is increasingly forcing
factories to comply with environmental regulations. The government now has
about 500 environmental inspectors, compared with less than 100 in 1989, and
inspected 21,996 companies between August 1992 and March this year, against
1,380 in all of 1989.
The level of enforcement is still criticised by many as insufficient, and
industrialists say the technical expertise and equipment of the inspectors
lags far behind the US. But Mexico is catching up and penalties for
non-compliers are increasing. In the 20 months since the environmental
ministry was reorganised, some 1,577 industries were closed for
contaminating the environment through inadmissible air or toxic waste
emissions.
The increasing focus on enforcement and lack of existing environmental
infrastructure has attracted scores of waste disposal companies to Mexico.
The US Chamber of Commerce recently published a directory of more than 40
such companies in Mexico City, including world leaders such as Chemical
Waste Management, most of which have opened during the administration of
President Carlos Salinas.
David McConnell of Chemical Waste says revenues of the Mexican subsidiary
increased by 40 per cent last year, and he expects a similar rise this year.
His company is seeking to build a new toxic waste site in Mexico, and sister
organisations are working with local government on building and arranging
private financing of solid waste sites.
Some Mexican companies are also investing heavily to minimise their waste,
or are coming up with creative ways of getting rid of it. Jorge Martinez,
head of Grupo Sidek, a steel producer, says it now sells waste to a
neighbouring cement company that uses the product to fire its kilns.
Nevertheless, many small and medium-sized Mexican companies cannot afford to
invest in environmental technology, especially since the recession and the
opening of the country to more foreign trade have squeezed profit margins.
Investment in environmental infrastructure projects, while growing fast, has
been less than many hoped for.
Environmental consultants blame insufficient investment in infrastructure on
government regulation, which they say is arbitrary and gives too much
discretion to government authorities. Jose Antonio Ortega, head of
Corporacion Radian, an environmental services company, says there are no
regulations for construction of incinerators, for treatment facilities, and
that regulations on rubbish dumps are too broad and ambiguous - all of which
has deterred investors.
The effect of the lack of decent infrastructure is that the cost of
disposing of toxic waste has increased to between Dollars 200-Dollars 300 a
barrel - higher than in the US, according to Ortega. This has meant that
disposal has become too expensive for many small businesses which therefore
continue to violate the law.
This concludes the series. Previous articles appeared on March 2, 9, 16, 23,
30, April 6, 13, 20.
