FT  30 MAR 94 / Survey of Investment in India (6): A multifaceted jewel in
the crown - The financial institutions have a wide choice of investment
options
India has earned the nickname of 'jewel in the investment crown' among those
emerging market specialists who scour the globe for new and exciting
investment opportunities.
Lured by the combination of the government's economic reform programme,
relatively attractive growth prospects, a vast array of listed companies,
and a gradual shift towards more modern stock market practices, foreigners
have been quick to take advantage of the various routes available - either
investing directly in domestically-quoted shares and internationally-traded
GDRs (global depositary receipts), or indirectly via the numerous collective
funds that have been launched in the last year.
Fund managers based in the UK point out that India has several attractive
features. They are encouraged by the process of economic liberalisation set
in train in 1991 by Mr Manmohan Singh, the finance minister. Such reforms
were born of necessity after India faced a balance-of-payments crisis and
came close to defaulting on loans. But three years into the reform
programme, many UK investors believe the process is irreversible, especially
since both the ruling Congress (I) Party, as well as the opposition BJP are
in favour of economic reform.
Mr Joe Scott Plummer, chairman of Martin Currie Investment Management
(MCIM), says the Edinburgh-based fund management group decided to launch its
Indian Opportunities Fund last July for several reasons.
'Our prime reason (for investing in India) stems from the major programme of
deregulation and the more efficient and effective management of the economy
forced on India by the IMF. India recognised the advantage of international
capital, and changed the regulations to allow it in,' he said. The Martin
Currie Indian Opportunities Fund raised Dollars 100m originally (which rose
to Dollars 150m in value), and is now raising an additional tranche of
Dollars 100m-Dollars 150m.
The process of liberalisation seems set to continue. The recent Budget (in
early March, 1994) was regarded as 'pro-industry' with measures to cut
customs duties and taxes, encouraging the import of goods and spare parts.
If foreign investors have reservations, they are more to do with the fact
that the reform process is associated so closely with the finance minister.
One UK-based portfolio manager points out, 'the danger is that the reform
process is so inextricably linked with (Manmohan) Singh that it would
clearly be a worry if he were to go, for whatever reason'.
Mr Jeffrey Chowdhry, director at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Investment
Management Limited which recently raised Dollars 510m for its India Fund,
expects economic growth to be about 5 to 5 1/2 per cent a year over the next
five years, which in the context of other Asian economies is not
particularly high.
But he points out that the growth in the Indian economy 'is dependent to a
lesser extent than, say, the Latin American countries and NICs (newly
industrialised countries) on growth in the outside world, because India has
nearly 900m consumers of its own'. Of particular interest to investors, he
says, is the presence of a rapidly-growing middle class, estimated to be
over 200m and increasing at 12 per cent a year.
The inducement of a very large population with rising aspirations and
increasing spending power may be a familiar one for international investors,
and is frequently cited in the case of China. But emerging market
specialists argue that the sheer size of India's stock markets and the
long-established tradition of investing in equities give it an added
advantage over China.
The Bombay stock exchange was set up in 1875 and with nearly two dozen stock
exchanges spread across India, investors have about 7,000 stocks from which
to choose, although in terms of liquidity and available research the
'universe of investments' is probably closer to 1,000 companies, according
to Mr Chowdhry.
China, by comparison, has more than 200 listed stocks, although several
companies have overseas listings. 'India has the advantage of a long
tradition of accounting standards, whereas China has a lot of opportunities,
but without the tradition' says one London-based emerging markets
specialist.
In spite of the large assortment of Indian listed companies, some fund
managers have reservations about the high price-earnings ratios. At present,
medium-sized companies are seen as offering better value for investors.
Mr Scott Plummer at Martin Currie points out that 'usually the pattern has
been with emerging markets that as foreigners discover a market, they tend
to go for the liquid blue chips'. However, he adds that while the big stocks
have p/e ratios in the 'high 20s  .. the second league companies have lower
p/e ratios in the region of 15-20 times'.
Overseas investors must register as Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs)
in order to invest directly in the domestic stock markets. Some of these
FIIs have been fairly active in the domestic market, although in recent
months, the long delays in settlement have hindered the process. These
problems are being addressed, but are still seen as time-consuming and
inconvenient particularly in such a paper-intensive stock market. Mr
Chowdhry of BZW says 'it has been estimated that about 400 pieces of paper
are needed for each Dollars 1m transaction'.
The other main way for foreign investors to gain exposure has been through
the international equity route, which has the advantage of providing
liquidity and avoiding the Indian domestic settlement problems.
Over the last couple of years, several of the biggest Indian companies have
turned to the international capital markets with international share
offerings.
In 1993, a total of about Dollars 900m was raised in this manner by Indian
companies, and a similar amount in the first couple of months of this year
as more and more companies rushed to take advantage of international
investor interest.
As a result of this spate of offerings, India's ministry of finance decided
in February to impose informal - albeit temporary - restrictions on Indian
companies seeking to raise funds abroad as it wanted to slow down the deluge
of international equity and convertible bond issues flooding on to the
market.
While international investors have had a wide choice of equity and
convertible bond offerings, Indian companies have so far shied away from
launching conventional eurobond issues. The Industrial Development Bank of
India (IDBI) was set to launch a eurobond this month, but held off because
of the volatile conditions in the international bond market.
However, talk of possible eurobond offerings has raised the question of
whether India's credit rating is likely to be upgraded given that it had
deteriorated from investment grade to speculative grade after the
balance-of-payments crisis.
Some of the more optimistic market participants appear to regard India as
another Mexico - in other words, as a country with the potential to achieve
investment grade thanks to its economic reform programme.
However, the credit rating agencies seem rather less bullish on this front.
India's long-term foreign currency debt rating is Ba2 (from Moody's) and BB+
(from Standard &amp; Poor's), both of which are below investment grade.
Mr Guido Cipriani, country analyst at S&amp;P, points out that the stable
outlook on S&amp;P's BB+ rating indicates that India is unlikely to be upgraded
for some time, although he adds that the agency is due to meet with
policy-makers in India to discuss the reform process.
While acknowledging that the government has taken several important steps in
the right direction, he still voices concern about subsidies and overmanning
in the public sector, and the need for further progress on the fundamental
structural reform of the public sector - a process which could take several
years.
