FT  31 AUG 94 / Leading Article: African compact
The warning signals from Africa are ominous. New tensions surface, and old
conflicts continue. The burdens of natural and man-made disasters, crippling
debt and enervating disease have become intolerable. Yet, as Africa's plight
has become more acute over the years, the international response has tended
to be belated and poorly co-ordinated.
Spasms of compassion have taken the place of pre-emptive action. Hastily
planned operations in Somalia and Rwanda have not been sustained. Other
states in need of help, such as Sierra Leone, have been abandoned.
Western policy has been damaged by allowing the principle that aid should be
linked to good governance and human rights to be influenced by short-term
expediency. In Kenya, the country's first multi-party elections for over 20
years were flawed, but nevertheless won international endorsement.
Elsewhere, the principle seems negotiable: a multi-party poll was a
precondition for resumption of normal aid to Kenya, but not for Uganda.
Nigeria is the latest test of the international community's willingness to
assist an African country in distress, before pictures of disaster appear in
western living rooms. Although the US was sufficiently concerned to have
sent an emissary to Lagos, Jesse Jackson was thought too close to former
military leader General Ibrahim Babangida, and to Chief Moshood Abiola, the
jailed opposition leader, to play honest broker. As for the UK, it emerges
with no credit, for it has not seen fit to send a foreign office minister to
assess a crisis which could destabilise the region.
Western powers may have assumed prominent roles in Somalia and Rwanda, but
they have failed to meet responsibilities elsewhere: in Zaire, for example.
The west must even bear some responsibility for the resumption of the
Angolan civil war after the 1992 election. Namibia's transition to
independence under UN monitors required some 6,000 personnel, while Angola
had to make do with barely 600.
Africa's problems are complex and daunting. But the west can act sooner, do
more and perform better. The continent's plight requires a more effectively
co-ordinated and longer-term effort. The disarray in the ranks of donors and
aid agencies must also end.
The way influential charities - such as Oxfam and Christian Aid - the
Economic Commission for Africa and other UN agencies are at odds with the
World Bank over reform policies is profoundly damaging. Yet there is more
common ground than seems to be the case. The need for radical debt relief,
greater attention to the impact of reform on the poor and strengthened
management capacity, are concerns common to all.
More than 10 years ago, the World Bank called for 'a new kind of social
compact, an agreement within the world community that the struggle against
poverty in Africa is a joint concern'. Such a compact is now urgent. Without
it, Africa's crisis could become a catastrophe.
