FT  29 JUL 94 / Too much of a good thing: The Czech Republic is experiencing
the problems of post-communist success
The ambition of Mr Vaclav Klaus, the Czech prime minister, to transform the
former communist state into 'a normal, standard country' was taken a step
forward with the recent upgrading of the Czech Republic's credit rating by
the US agency Standard &amp; Poor's. But the move is, ironically, likely to
encourage foreign capital inflows to a central bank already suffering an
embarras de richesse.
Few would have predicted this 18 months ago when the Czech Republic, formed
after the divorce from Slovakia in January 1993, was facing an outflow of
funds and hastily raising Japanese yen and US dollar loans to bolster
reserves.
Since then the republic has found markets in the west to compensate for a
sharp decline in exports to Slovakia and has returned to economic growth
after four years of declining gross domestic product.
The republic is now perceived as politically and economically the most
stable of the post-communist states. As a result, Mr Jozef Tosovsky,
governor of the Czech National Bank, has faced an uphill struggle over the
past nine months to neutralise the inflationary potential of increasing
foreign inflows.
'Without our open market operations (issuing treasury bills) to mop up these
funds, money supply would have broken through the nominal 14 per cent annual
M2 growth target consistent with 2 per cent real GDP growth and 10 per cent
inflation,' says Mr Tosovsky. 'The central bank has taken in Dollars 1.8bn
since the start of the year and we expect this to rise to Dollars 3bn before
the year is out,' he says.
The central bank now believes its forecast of 2 per cent GDP growth this
year probably understates private sector growth. But independent foreign
forecasters, such as Deutsche Bank research, are sticking to a modest 1 per
cent growth, against 3.5 per cent for Poland.
The capital inflow, which has seen net official reserves rise from Dollars
3.87bn in late 1993 to Dollars 5.18bn in mid-July, has sparked off a sharp
policy debate over the role of foreign investment and the timetable for
making the Czech currency, the koruna, fully convertible for both investment
and trade purposes.
Faced with potentially destabilising inflows of foreign capital, the central
bank is arguing for a tighter fiscal policy which would result in a budget
surplus rather than the current balanced budget. It is also pressing for
full convertibility of the Czech koruna by 1995, although this would
increase the attraction of the republic for foreign investors.
Mr Klaus, who dominates government economic policymaking, is more cautious.
He likens full convertibility to jumping out of an aircraft without a
parachute. He wants controls over capital movements until the domestic
banking system is better able to compete with foreign banks, and newly
privatised enterprises have been revitalised by their owners and managers.
What worries Mr Klaus is that much of the current inflow of foreign capital
takes the form of foreign bank loans to Czech companies. He argues companies
should take on foreign loans only when fully privatised and in the hands of
managers experienced enough to take on such debt and make sophisticated
investment decisions.
The self-confident and outspoken Mr Klaus has taken an increasingly tough
line on foreign investment. He is a critic of foreign advisers as 'purveyors
of soft advice for hard currency' and castigates would-be foreign investors
who seek favourable treatment from the government which would put them at an
advantage over domestic competitors. Earlier this year he showed his anger
over Volkswagen's failure to consult his government, still majority
shareholder in the Skoda/Volkswagen joint venture, before downgrading its
investment plans and cancelling a large foreign loan.
Mr Klaus's outspoken views, coupled with delays and confusion over the
future role of foreign oil companies, has given an impression that the newly
confident Czechs are becoming more ambivalent, if not hostile, to foreign
investment.
It is an impression Mr Klaus sought to dispel at a meeting with senior
executives from Siemens, the German electrical engineering group, in Prague
this month. He assured them he was in favour of foreign investment, but drew
a distinction between foreign equity investment by western companies and
financial inflows into Czech companies that may have been privatised but not
yet restructured.
Policymakers at the central bank are keenly aware of the irony of their
situation. They are gratified that sound money policies, low foreign debt
and political stability are attracting equity investment and reducing
dependence on international financial institutions. Earlier this year the
central bank even repaid in advance a Dollars 430m International Monetary
Fund loan facility not due until 1995. But faced with rising foreign capital
inflows, they worry that the economy is not yet ready to absorb it.
It is clearly better to be at the receiving end of foreign capital inflows
than suffer an uncontrollable capital flight such as in Russia, Ukraine and
other former communist economies.
Like other former communist states, the Czech Republic has a huge backlog of
much-needed infrastructure development in transport and telecommunications,
housing and the like. Thousands of new or newly privatised companies also
need fresh capital which the domestic commercial banks remain reluctant to
loan until the companies establish a reliable track record. The debate is
about how to make the economy better able to absorb the newly available
foreign capital.
Until now the emphasis of Czech economic policy has been on monetary
stabilisation, fiscal reform and privatisation. The question is how far
policy priorities can shift towards faster growth without re-igniting
inflation. Price rises fell to 9.4 per cent on an annual basis in May
against 22 per cent in 1993, when inflation jumped following the
introduction of value-added tax at a rate of 23 per cent on most goods at
the start of the year.
One option under review is to speed up the rate of bankruptcies among
loss-making enterprises and live with higher unemployment. Until now
industrial wage rates have been kept artificially low, under 10 per cent of
German labour costs, by an ostensibly free-market government which imposes
penal taxation on companies raising wages above inflation.
This policy has helped ensure that a large-scale transfer of labour to the
booming private sector has occurred without the high and potentially
destabilising transitional unemployment accompanying market reforms in
Poland and Hungary, and looming in Russia.
But unemployment remains below 4 per cent for two reasons. First, low wages
have reduced the pressure to close loss-making enterprises, ensuring that
thousands of under-employed workers still remain officially employed.
Second, hundreds of thousands of jobs have been created in tourism, banking,
retailing and services of all kinds.
The sceptics argue that artificially low wages and the government's
reluctance to implement a tough bankruptcy law merely perpetuate hidden
unemployment inside loss-making factories which have also survived by piling
up unpaid inter-enterprise debts.
A tougher approach to bankruptcies would expose the full extent of the
problem. So would tighter surveillance of bank lending.
As foreign funds flow in and the private sector in an increasingly
service-orientated economy expands, the Czech authorities are under pressure
to enforce fully the plethora of banking, securities and other new laws.
Foreign fund managers such as Mr Nigel Williams of Creditanstalt, the
Austrian-based bank, in Prague, say that giving substance to laws and teeth
to the new regulatory bodies is essential, if the foreign capital inflow is
to be sustained and used to build the 'standard' economy sought by Mr Klaus.
