FT  09 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Property sale behind rise at Laing
Shares in John Laing, the construction, housebuilding and property
development group, fell 21p to 269p after the company revealed that its
construction business operated only at break even in the first six months of
this year.
Group pre-tax profits, however, more than doubled to Pounds 11.9m (Pounds
5.1m) boosted by Pounds 9.9m of profits from the sale of a Belfast retail
development to MEPC property group.
The company is paying a maintained dividend of 3p out of earnings per share
of 9.4p (4.1p) after property profits.
The construction business earned operating profits of Pounds 5.2m in the
first six months of 1993. Mr Martin Laing, chairman, said
the business had been undermined by too many companies chasing too little
business in the UK, forcing them to bid for work at minimal or lossmaking
margins.
There was also strong international competition for overseas construction
work where margins, although better than in the UK, also were tight.
The group's strategy has been to invest in domestic and international
private sector infrastructure projects including the Second Severn Crossing
in the UK and power station projects in Malaysia.
These were expected to produce a more consistent and higher rate of return
than general contracting, but were unlikely to make a significant
contribution until the mid to late 1990s.
Europistas, the Spanish toll road company in which Laing has an 18 per cent
stake, however, was expected to generate dividends this year of Pounds 3.4m
against a book cost of Pounds 3m.
The first dividends from the Malaysian power station operation are expected
next year, while the Severn Bridge is due to be completed in 1996.
Elsewhere the company's UK housebuilding side recovered from a Pounds 2.5m
loss to a Pounds 2.1m profit. Property development profit, excluding the
Belfast surplus, fell from Pounds 5.2m to Pounds 3m.
COMMENT
Laing's strategy of selective investment in privately financed
infrastructure projects cannot be faulted. It has made more progress in this
area than any other UK company, barring perhaps Trafalgar House. It has a
strong balance sheet, with net cash of Pounds 16.2m in June. Pre-tax profits
of Pounds 22m this year and only slightly higher next year, when the tax
charge may be about 20 per cent, put the group on a prospective p/e of about
17 for both years. This looks expensive, but patient shareholders may find
it worth the wait.
