FT  08 AUG 94 / Partnership's success still up in the air: British Airways'
global ambitions hinge on recovery of USAir
British Airways will confirm today its reputation as one of the world's most
profitable airlines when it reports first-quarter figures expected to show
pre-tax profits of about pounds 85m-pounds 95m. But the UK flag-carrier's
consistently impressive financial performance has so far failed to lift its
shares, which have recently traded at around 430p compared with a high
earlier this year of 496p.
Although BA has outperformed an improving airline market - The International
Air Transport Association (Iata) reported last week that overall traffic
growth for its 224 member airlines rose 9.7 per cent in the first half of
this year compared with 7.3 per cent for the whole of 1993 - a combination
of factors have worried the financial community.
These include the impact of the European Commission's decision to approve a
FFr20bn (Pounds 2.4bn) three-year French government rescue package for Air
France, one of BA's main European competitors, and the ongoing litigation in
the US with Virgin Atlantic over the 'dirty tricks' affair.
But the biggest uncertainty involves BA's Dollars 400m (Pounds 258m)
investment in a 24.6 per cent stake in USAir, the sixth largest US carrier.
BA's partnership with USAir is an important component of the UK carrier's
strategy of acquiring stakes and developing alliances with international
carriers to strengthen its world airline network.
The global concept hinges on a strong partnership in the US airline market,
which still accounts for around 40 per cent of world air travel.
Much will now depend on the success or failure of USAir's management to
negotiate a recovery package with the airline's employees to secure its
future. USAir has not made a profit since 1988, and in March warned that
this year's losses would be greater than last year's Dollars 349m.
All the big US carriers are under pressure to cut wage bills to respond to
cut-throat competition from smaller, low-cost airlines. But the pressure on
USAir is greatest because its costs are so out of line with the rest of the
industry.
USAir's difficulties in launching a meaningful restructuring prompted BA to
state it was no longer prepared to make any additional investment in its US
partner until it was satisfied it was on a road to recovery. BA also warned
it was considering writing off its existing investment in USAir if no
progress was achieved in coming months.
The US carrier has taken steps to improve productivity, culminating in June
with the announcement that it wanted its employees to take pay and benefit
cuts worth Dollars 500m a year.
Last week, its pilots' union went some way to meeting this demand by
offering Dollars 2.5bn worth of labour concessions over five years. But it
set a high price on co-operation. The union says employees should get 25 per
cent of USAir's common stock, Dollars 700m in preferred stock, three seats
on the 15-seat board, and an immediate Dollars 450m investment in the
company by BA. If this plan becomes a reality, USAir would become the fourth
big US airline to exchange equity stakes for labour concessions. Employees
now own 26 per cent of Northwest Airlines, 45 per cent of TWA and 55 per
cent of United Airlines.
By the end of last week, virtually everyone concerned had rejected the
pilots' plan - but not outright. In all likelihood, the proposal for a
partial employee buy-out will form the basis of USAir's cost-cutting.
However, employee ownership has not yet proved to be the salvation that some
had hoped, as it tends to go hand-in-hand with no-redundancy clauses that
prevent managements from making necessary job cuts. Last week, the troubled
TWA announced a long-overdue 12 per cent cut in its workforce, but the move
will probably be insufficient to stave off a cash crisis this winter. Most
US airline industry analysts rank TWA as the carrier least likely to survive
another year. USAir, they add, is not far behind.
Although BA has said it will write off the US stake if necessary, it has
also emphasised that this will not necessarily have drastic consequences on
the commercial benefits it is already reaping from the USAir partnership. A
recent study by SG Warburg Securities says BA's alliance benefits are
stronger than originally forecast. 'Our estimate of Pounds 40m in benefits
from the USAir link will be met by 1994, but on top of that the company now
expects to draw an additional Pounds 30m in revenue enhancements and cost
savings from the partnership.'
BA is also financially strong enough to take an eventual hit on USAir.
Overall traffic performance is continuing to move into overdrive into the
second quarter with high-yield first and business-class traffic growing at
about twice the rate of low-yield economy cabin traffic.
From the beginning, BA's investment in USAir was seen as a gamble. At the
time, Mr Bernard Attali, then chairman of Air France, said that BA would
probably live to regret its USAir investment. The next few months will
decide who was right.
