FT  01 JAN 94 / Motoring: Where on earth is my electric car? - Motoring
around town in a battery-driven vehicle will just have to remain a dream for
this year
Like many people who live in town, perhaps you would like an electric car.
Noiseless, non-polluting, and almost as friendly to the environment as a
bicycle. Ridiculously cheap to run, too. Instead of pouring costly petrol
down its gullet, you would just plug it into the mains overnight and
recharge its batteries on a few pence worth of off-peak electricity.
How nice if this town motorist's dream came true in 1994. Alas, it will not.
This does not mean the car-makers are not interested in making electric cars
powered by batteries. They have all been at it for years, investing
millions. And do not run away with the idea that there is some kind of oil
industry conspiracy to stifle it at birth. Electric cars are as old as
motoring - they have been around for 100 years.
Early this century, there were fleets of electric buses and taxis in
European cities. And battery-driven cars were quite popular in the US among
motorists who hated swinging a crank handle to start the engine. Then, the
electric self-starter was invented and the battery car took a back seat
overnight.
The trouble with electric vehicles is that the conventional storage battery
is an inefficient form of propulsion, to say the least. Weight for weight,
petrol contains 230 times more energy than the best kind of nickel-cadmium
traction battery. The cheaper lead-acid type, used in every petrol or diesel
car for starting purposes, is even worse.
A battery is not a power source; it merely stores electricity generated
elsewhere. A battery car creates no pollution itself - that comes from
burning oil, gas or (especially) coal to generate the electricity on which
it runs.
To be truly 'green,' a battery car must be re-charged with electricity
generated by water, solar, geo-thermal, wind or atomic power. But the first
four are hardly relevant in Britain, and we all know what the environment
lobby thinks about anything nuclear.
So, it can be argued that the whole concept of the battery car as completely
friendly to the environment is flawed. Yet, you cannot get away from the
fact that it does not pollute the urban areas, where it operates without
exhaust emissions or noise.
Because the battery car's range is so limited - about 60 miles (100km) is a
realistic average before it needs an eight-hour re-charge - it must, by
definition, be a household's second car. And because production so far has
been tiny, an electric car costs at least twice as much to make as one with
a small petrol engine.
Another snag is that because the batteries take up so much more space than a
petrol tank, electric versions of small four-seat cars may end up as
two-seaters.
France, which produces nearly all its electricity in emission-free nuclear
power stations, has gone further with battery cars than any other European
country. PSA (Peugeot-Citroen) and Renault are running large-scale trials in
co-operation with Electricite de France (EDF).
In 22 towns, from Bordeaux to Avignon, Strasbourg to Douai, battery
re-charging stations are to be set up at the roadside and in public or
private car parks. These will give electric cars (based on models such as
the Peugeot 106, Citroen AX and Renault Clio) a quick, range-extending fix
of current during the day.
A battery hire system will be put in place because a set representing
perhaps one-third of the value of the car might last only three years.
Renting batteries could be more sensible than buying.
What, though, about high-tech miracle batteries that are claimed to be many
times more efficient than today's conventional kind? They are trundled out
often by publicity-seeking manufacturers - but people with their feet on the
ground should forget them, at any rate for years to come.
They work in laboratories or under controlled test conditions but are not
(and may never be) cheap, or even safe, enough for public use.
Many believe the best hope for the battery-electric car is legislation
banning vehicles with petrol or diesel engines from the most congested city
centres. If that happened, and the only alternative to driving a battery car
or hailing a battery-driven taxi was walking, then the goalposts really
would be moved.
We might see a variation of the park-and-ride scheme. Instead of leaving
your car on the outskirts of town and catching a bus, tram or train, you
would pick up a rental battery car and drive to your office or the shops in
a no-go area for internal combustion engines.
Another scenario involves the hybrid car. This offers the best of both
worlds; battery power for town driving, petrol or diesel for the open road.
Battery-driven, its performance and range would be modest but enough for
driving a few hours on 30mph (50kph) speed-limited roads. Out of town, it
would go more like a normal car with a small, low-emission engine running at
a constant speed and coupled to a generator. This would feed current via the
batteries to an electric motor driving the wheels.
The idea is not new and most major car-makers have produced experimental
hybrids.
One of the latest and most interesting is the Volvo ECC (for environmental
concept car) which was unveiled about a year ago. It has a tiny gas turbine,
running on diesel fuel and driving a lightweight generator at very high
speed.
Even though one-fifth of the ECC's weight is batteries, it is not a
particularly heavy car and is shaped aerodynamically.
Volvo, which is developing the ECC with its partner, Renault, says it has a
top speed of 108mph (175kph) and would go 416 miles (670km) on a tankful if
you did not exceed 56mph (90kph). Battery power alone would take it only a
fraction of that distance at a lower speed.
Do not put off buying a new car because you would like a battery-electric to
use in town or a hybrid for all kinds of motoring. They are still some years
off. Renault thinks it could be 2015 before electric cars represent 10 per
cent of the total market and 40 per cent of cars used in town.
California, which invented smog created by car exhausts, has bitten on the
bullet. State regulations stipulate that, by 1998, at least 2 per cent of
new cars on sale must be zero emission (in other words, electric) vehicles.
The quota will go up to 5 per cent by 2003 and 10 per cent by 2005.
Seventeen other states have either followed California's lead or have said
they will.
It looks like a bold move. But, as one Los Angeles car dealer said: 'They
can make me put electric cars in my showroom - but they can't make people
buy them if they don't want to.'
