FT  18 JAN 94 / UK Company News: Chiroscience set to raise Pounds 35m -
Flotation will provide fresh funds for research and development
Chiroscience, the pharmaceuticals company, yesterday said it would raise
Pounds 35m from its forthcoming flotation.
More than 80 per cent of the new capital will be used to expand research and
development at the Cambridge-based group, which is expected to have a market
capitalisation of Pounds 100m.
Mr Peter Keen, finance director, said the float would allow the company to
concentrate on the development of single isomer drugs - its core business
strategy. If successful, such drugs could give Chiroscience a turnover of
about Dollars 100m (Pounds 68m) by the end of the decade, he added.
The company based its estimates on industry forecasts which suggest demand
for single isomer products could account for more than half of all
pharmaceutical output by 2000.
Demand is expected to increase because, unlike most organic drugs currently
on the market, the new drugs do not have pairs of isomers - molecular
compounds which have identical structures but which can produce different
effects.
Ensuring patients get only the isomer they need from drugs can be vital. One
isomer of thalidomide, for example, cures morning sickness; the other can
cause foetal deformity.
Mr Chris Evans, chief scientific officer at Chiroscience, said: 'Our
programme is to get rid of the isomers which don't fit in.'
To that end the company has pursued three business areas: manufacturing
single isomer compounds for companies such as Glaxo, Wellcome and Abbott;
developing single isomer versions of existing drugs; and producing new
pharmaceutical products from its research arm.
Mr Keen said supply contracts with large manufacturers would offset losses
incurred by research costs. However, Chiroscience does not expect to make a
profit before 1998.
In the six months to August 1993, the company incurred a pre-tax loss of
Pounds 1.37m, although its manufacturing business generated sales of Pounds
1.34m.
In spite of the losses, Mr Keen said he was confident that the 45 per cent
public offer would be a success.
Terms of the placing and offer for sale are to be announced on January 27.
