FT  23 JUL 94 / The legacy of Stauffenberg: The attempt to kill Hitler - and
its lasting impact 50 years on
Count Colonel Claus Schenk von Stauffenberg left the Berlin suburb of
Wannsee for the military airport at Rangsdorf at 7am on the morning of July
20 1944. His adjutant, Werner von Haeften, was waiting for him. Together
they flew to Hitler's HQ, the so-called Wolfschanze, or Wolf's Lair, at
Rastenburg in East Prussia.
Count Stauffenberg was chief of staff to General Friedrich Fromm, head of
the Replacement Army. In theory, Stauffenberg was flying to Rastenburg to
arrange the creation of two new divisions to protect East Prussia, Germany's
eastern-most province, from imminent Russian attack.
In fact, his mission was to assassinate Hitler, a plan that had been years
in the making, and his briefcase contained 4lb of explosive.
At the briefing, Stauffenberg sat close to Hitler and placed his briefcase
under the table. Soon after, he left the room.
He and Haeften heard the explosion as they got into their car and could see
a plume of smoke rising from the bunker. By 1.15pm, Stauffenberg was
Berlin-bound and convinced that the bomb had done the trick.
But Hitler was not dead: his eardrums had been pierced, his trousers
shredded and his elbow badly bruised, but he had survived.
Confused reports reached Berlin. General Fellgiebel, the signals' chief, was
able to call his fellow conspirator Colonel Kurt Hahn in nearby Mauersdorf
before a communications blackout was imposed: 'Something's gone wrong,' he
said, 'the Fuhrer's alive.'
Reports that Hitler had emerged unscathed from the debris caused the
conspirators to dither in the Bendlerblock HQ in Berlin, from where they
were supposed to issue the Walkure orders - orders which would have led to
the take-over of the government and a negotiated peace with the allies. The
delay scuppered any remaining chances of success.
By the time Stauffenberg reached the Bendlerblock at about 3.30pm, Fromm had
discovered from Field Marshal Keitel, who had also survived the blast, that
Hitler had survived. When Stauffenberg arrived, Fromm told him the news. But
Stauffenberg was adamant: 'He is dead. I saw him carried out . . . The
explosion was as if the hut had been hit by a 6in shell. It is hardly
possible that anyone could be alive . . . Keitel is lying as usual.'
Concerned, Fromm refused to co-operate with the plotters and was arrested
and taken away.
According to the Walkure orders, the administrative centre of Berlin was to
be sealed off by the guards battalion and troops from the training schools
on the edge of the city.
Outside the Bendlerblock, other conspirators, including the young Rhodes
scholar, Adam von Trott zu Solz of the foreign office in the Wilhelmstrasse,
realised the attempt had taken place when they saw Berlin's centre closed
off by guards.
He watched the street anxiously from the window. To his relief the traffic
ceased and soldiers appeared. But three hours later, they shouldered arms
and marched off.
Hans Bernd von Haeften, brother of Stauffenberg's adjutant, was not slow to
draw the obvious conclusion that the Nazi forces had regained control. He
turned 'as white as a sheet'.
The Nazis survived thanks to Joseph Goebbels and Major Ernst Remer of the
guards battalion. Goebbels convinced Remer to speak to Hitler on the
telephone. Hitler put Remer in charge of operations against the conspirators
and promoted him on the spot. Later Remer would repay his trust by founding
one of Germany's first, post-war neo-Nazi parties.
Remer's men stormed the Bendlerblock. In the fray Stauffenberg was shot
twice and wounded. It was Fromm, released from captivity, who arrested the
ring-leaders. At 12.30am the conspirators were taken to the courtyard to be
shot. As Stauffenberg passed a familiar secretary he said: 'They all left me
in the lurch.' As he was led before the firing squad, the faithful Haeften
tried to throw himself between Stauffenberg and the bullets.
'Long live our sacred Germany,' shouted Stauffenberg. Then he collapsed and
died.
The assassination attempt of July 20 1944 was the fruit of plans laid in the
autumn of 1938. Colonel General Ludwig Beck had resigned as chief of the
general staff in protest at Hitler's plans to invade Czechoslovakia. His
civilian counterpart was Carl Goerdeler, the indefatigable former mayor of
Leipzig.
In the intervening years the conspiracy brought together a powerful cadre of
anti-Nazis - noblemen, officers, churchmen, trades unionists, socialist
politicians, diplomats and civil servants. Goerdeler busied himself with the
structure of the future government and drew up detailed lists of its
potential members.
These lists were to be the downfall of many. Of the 5,000 or so people
executed after July 20, only about 200 were actually implicated in the plot.
The rest were simply prominent opponents of the regime: the core of a future
Germany. The purge was to be one last great act of spite, a final attempt to
prevent Germany's post-war reconstruction. The SS was still murdering
prisoners as the Russians entered Berlin.
Officially, little mention was made of the plot before the creation of the
two German republics in 1949. The first time it was celebrated was in 1953,
just a month after an abortive uprising in the Russian zone of June 17. The
few east Berliners who fled to the west were encamped in the courtyard of
the Bendlerblock, and it was there that the mayor, Ernst Reuter, chose to
remind them of the martyrs of that earlier revolt against dictatorship.
Since the mid-1950s the July plot has been marked by a ceremony at
Plotzensee prison in Berlin, where many of the men of July 20 met their
deaths. But despite the hundreds of books which have been published on the
subject, little is made of it in schools.
Clarita Muller-Plantenberg, only a few months old when von Trott, her
father, was executed at Plotzensee, recalls that the girls at school treated
her differently. Many had lost fathers in the war, but they knew that she
was special: 'They thought I must be Jewish and stayed off the subject.'
Later she remembers a teacher blushing to admit that he approved of the men
of July 20 and what they stood for.
In a number of cases there was a reluctance to honour the dead of July 20 in
their hometowns and villages. Von Trott's brothers erected an impressive
cross in the woods above the family manor house at Imshausen, but in the
village church the verger resisted the idea of a monument.
It was the mid-1980s before von Trott's name appeared in the church, and
then only as part of a general plaque commemorating the dead of the second
world war. There were still a few Germans who saw the plotters as traitors.
There was also a natural tendency to see the leaders of the coup as a last
flowering of another Germany, no longer relevant to either of the two states
created after the war. The romantic history focused on the aristocratic
officers rather than the civilians of the plot.
The Grundgesetz of 1949 was to reaffirm the Weimar constitution's Article I
which abolished noble titles. The new Bundeswehr was also established with
the expressed desire to rid the armed forces of all connection with the
Prussian military tradition. Prussia itself, which had supplied much of the
core of the resistance, was rudely rubbed off the map in February 1947, its
eastern provinces being parcelled out among the Russians and the Poles.
It can be safely said that Stauffenberg's 'sacred Germany' bore little or no
resemblance to either the Federal Republic or the Democratic Republic.
But the plot still counts for something in Bonn and appears to be a useful
entry on a curriculum vitae. President Richard von Weizsacker, for example,
doubtless derived credibility from his father Ernst. While he was at the
helm of the foreign office, it was barely tainted with Nazism, and many of
his proteges went on to become ambassadors after the war.
For von Trott's widow, also named Clarita, July 20 is more important than
ever now that the two halves of Germany have been united. With the increase
in racial violence she feels that the young need role models who will teach
them how to react to blatant injustice.
But perhaps the real proof that German politicians still feel the need to
show themselves the heirs to Stauffenberg, Beck or Goerdeler is provided by
Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor himself. On July 20 of this election year
he decided that he alone would enjoy the right to address the faithful in
the grim execution chamber at Plotzensee Prison.
Giles MacDonogh's Prussia. The Perversion of an Idea, was published this
week by Sinclair-Stevenson (Pounds 20). There is a paperback edition of his
book, A Good German: Adam von Trott zu Solz, from Quartet (Pounds 10.99).
