FT  07 JUL 94 / Survey of Italy (5): Equities for the family - The stock
market
Even before Mr Silvio Berlusconi's right-wing alliance won an overall
majority in March, it was clear that equity investors had great
expectations. A leaked exit poll on the second day of the two-day general
election prompted a 4 per cent increase in Milan equities in a day.
The reaction was hardly surprising. In the short term, investors and
prospective politicians alike had been expecting a prolonged period of
haggling to form a coalition - a replay of old-style Italian politics. The
prospect that a single grouping, with a free market manifesto and a
pro-business attitude, could win a decisive victory was bound to charge up
the markets.
In the weeks that followed, the equity market continued to feed off such
optimism, in spite of the fact that Mr Berlusconi took his time to form his
government. In the first three months of the year, the Comit index rose 3.6
per cent to 693.52, but by the beginning of May it had surged to more than
800.
More shares were traded in Milan on some days during that period than on
Wall Street, and on one occasion the exchange was unable to open for
business because of the sheer weight of small orders it was having to
process. The scheduled changeover to full on-screen trading had to be
postponed by a day.
The significance of this unprecedented activity was twofold. It showed that
small investors were increasingly drawn to equities - a form of investment
which has generally been spurned by Italian households in favour of
government bonds - and it sent a strong signal to the new government that
there would be trouble if expectations were not fulfilled.
In recent weeks, it has looked as though disillusionment is already creeping
into the Italian equity markets. As this survey went to press, the
government was wrestling with the consequences of a constitutional court
ruling which could force payment of pensions arrears to the tune of more
than L30,000bn. That has scared both equity and bond investors, and combined
with a general slump on world markets to push the Comit index down to its
pre-election level, although analysts still suggest that the long-term
prospects for Italian shares are good.
But to be fair to the government, proposals have already been tabled which
indicate the government's willingness to act on its campaign promises to
bolster the stock market.
At the beginning of June, for example, the government agreed a decree which
would harmonise withholding tax on shares at 12.5 per cent, the same level
imposed on government bond interest payments. The effect was not so much to
reduce the overall tax liability of owning shares, but to simplify the
system.
At the same time, and more importantly, the government agreed a series of
measures to encourage more small companies to list their shares on the stock
market, and thus improve the liquidity of the Milan borsa. Among the
incentives was a proposed three-year reduction in tax for smaller companies
coming to the market before the end of 1996.
On a wider scale, the government has committed itself to continuing the
privatisation programme first launched by the Amato government two years
ago. The recent sale of Ina, the state-owned insurer, and the future
privatisation of Stet, the telecommunications holding company, Enel, the
electricity generator, and Eni, the energy and chemicals group, should
attract more attention to the stock market and further improve liquidity.
As Mr Attilio Ventura, the chairman of the Milan stock exchange, put it in a
recent speech: 'In Italy, more than in other European countries, the success
of the privatisation programme depends on the involvement of small savers,
given the great weight of financial wealth held directly by households.
Historically, most of the financial activity has been concentrated on bank
deposits and government paper. Fewer than 10 per cent of Italian families
hold shares - the lowest level among the industrialised countries.'
But, as Mr Ventura's comments indicate, if demand for 'state-owned equity'
increases, it could be offset by a drop in demand for state debt. Treasury
officials admit that it is a delicate balance. However, they point out that
proceeds of privatisation issues are often used to cancel debt, so there is
not necessarily a contradiction between the two aims.
In any case, reforms are also under way in the bond market. Foreign
bondholders, for example, can now take advantage of a fast-track scheme for
refunding withholding tax, which, under the cumbersome old system, could
sometimes take up to 12 months to come through.
The Treasury is trying to restructure its own portfolio of debt, so that
family shareholders are encouraged to take on longer-term debt, and the
market for short-term debt instruments - such as the 3- to 12-month bonds
(known as Bots) and floating notes - becomes more professional. It is
estimated that some 90-95 per cent of Bots are held by private owners,
whereas most of the three- to 30-year bonds are held by banks and foreign
investors.
Central bank figures also illustrate that a reshuffling of household
portfolios is almost inevitable as the stock market increases in prominence.
In 1991, for example, only 4 per cent of household savings were held in
shares, and 36 per cent in public debt.
'There has already been a shift from Bots towards other forms of investment
and in a way we encourage this movement, because families have been a strong
presence on our Bot market, which makes it very illiquid,' says one treasury
official.
This suggests a more sophisticated personal and professional investor is
emerging in Italy, encouraged by reforms in the banking market. Banks have
always been the main retail network for the purchase of government paper.
They are now performing a role as outlets for privatisation issues, and for
life insurance, personal pension and savings schemes. If that means that
households move towards balanced portfolios of equities and bonds - either
owned directly or through fund managers - then stock and bond markets could
benefit equally.
