FT  21 JUN 94 / Baltic states' varied roads to freedom: Philippe Legrain
reviews the economic records of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania since
independence
When Estonia flouted the International Monetary Fund's advice and ditched
the Russian rouble, its leaders did so in the conviction that a stable
national currency was a cornerstone of their country's hard-won
independence. But two years on, their initial success - inflation was held
to 36 per cent last year compared with nearly 1,000 per cent in Russia - has
been undermined by recent price surges.
Latvia's consistently better inflation record underscores Estonia's setback
and has called into question its northern neighbour's approach to monetary
policy. The Bank of Latvia, while allowing the lat to float, has adopted a
'strong lat' policy and maintains high interest rates to stamp out
inflationary pressures. Estonia, on the other hand, runs a currency
board-like system which leaves policy on 'autopilot'. The kroon, which is
pegged to the German D-Mark, is fully backed by foreign currency reserves
whose ebbs and flows determine the size of the money stock.
Large capital inflows, fuelled by foreign aid and investment and balance of
payments financing, have sent Estonia's money supply rising fast.
Consequently, inflation has shot back up to an annualised 66 per cent in the
three months to May, compared with 20 per cent in Latvia.
Renewed inflation has also increased the kroon's overvaluation, sucking in
imports and stunting export growth. Estonia's trade deficit widened to
EEK1.3bn (Pounds 66m) in the first three months of this year, equivalent to
a third of export volume or about 20 per cent of estimated first quarter
gross domestic product.
By contrast, thanks to its superior inflation performance, the lat has not
appreciated as much in real terms as the kroon and Latvia's current account
has remained in surplus - Dollars 125m last year, equivalent to 5.7 per cent
of GDP.
Despite these drawbacks, a recent study by Professor Jeffrey Sachs of
Harvard University and Mr Ardo Hansson of the Bank of Estonia defends the
currency board system, arguing that it gives the kroon much needed
credibility. The authors point to the shift in trade from east to west -
Finland has replaced Russia as Estonia's main trading partner - to back up
their case.
But Latvia has achieved a similar re-orientation. Although Russia is still
its main trading partner, like Estonia's, about a quarter of its trade is
with Russia.
On April 1 the third Baltic republic of Lithuania, often considered the
laggard in economic reform, plumped for the Estonian way. After a furious
debate involving accusations of betraying the motherland, the government
pegged the newly-issued litas to the US dollar. Inflation had stabilised at
an annualised rate of 36 per cent in the three months before the decision.
Lithuania recorded a 300m litas (Dollars 75m) deficit last year and trade
remains angled towards former Soviet republics.
Growth prospects for all three countries remain murky. Although industrial
output growth is still flat, the Baltic states are hoping for growth this
year for the first time since regaining their independence in August 1991.
Estonia seems to have the edge but evidence is patchy.
Estonia has also led the way in attracting foreign investment. Finnish and
Swedish companies have piled in more than half the EEK906m - equivalent to
4.3 per cent of GDP - that flowed into the small country last year.
Latvia is catching up, having overcome a legislative logjam which led
prospective investors to delay committing funds. While only about Dollars
60m (2.7 per cent of GDP) was invested in Latvia in 1993, Dollars 100m is
expected this year, according to the Latvian Development Agency. The
UK-based multinational Cable &amp; Wireless and Telecom Finland have announced a
Dollars 1.3bn plan to modernise Latvian telecoms, Dollars 40m of which has
already been invested. Kellogg, the US breakfast cereals giant, has set up a
Dollars 22m plant near the capital Riga.
Lithuania has attracted little foreign investment to date but is furthest
down the privatisation road. More than two thirds of the companies slated
for sale have been privatised, and more than half the workforce is now in
the private sector. However, allegations of corruption and of Soviet-era
'red directors' buying their companies on the cheap have nearly halted the
process.
Estonia has opted for the East German model, having set up a privatisation
agency modelled on the Treuhandanstaldt. Of more than 500 earmarked for
sale, 52 companies had been sold by the start of the year, with a new wave
of auctions under way. But the volume of receipts (Dollars 24m) and impact
on the economy have so far been minimal.
Privatisation has barely got off the ground in Latvia. A quarrel between the
newly set up privatisation agency and government ministries over
responsibility for the sell-offs and whether to opt for hard currency or
voucher sales has hindered progress. Although Latvia aims to sell about 200
companies a year, only 85 out of a list of 703 have actually changed hands
so far.
