FT  27 JUL 94 / EU ready to approve aid for airlines
Greece hopes to win European Commission approval today to grant Olympic
Airways, the loss-making state carrier, a capital injection totalling Dr54bn
(Pounds 147m) over the next three years, in return for eliminating certain
long-haul routes and opening up Aegean island routes to competition.
The rescue plan will be presented at the same time as the Commission gives
the go-ahead for a controversial FFr20bn (Pounds 2.4bn) state subsidy to Air
France, the French government-owned airline. Today's anticipated decisions
have angered Europe's non-subsidised airlines in what is being seen as a
test case in EU efforts to liberalise the air transport market.
The Olympic Airways rescue plan is aimed at making the Greek carrier
profitable by 1997. As well as the capital injection, it would allow Olympic
to write off Dr491bn of accumulated debt.
Airline officials said Olympic had agreed to waive its option on extending
its monopoly on domestic routes for five years after 1998, and would shut
loss-making routes to Tokyo and Chicago by the end of this year.
In return, the Commission has dropped a demand that Olympic immediately open
up ground handling operations at Greek airports to other carriers. Airline
officials say that retaining a monopoly on ground handling, which brings in
more than Dr35bn yearly, equivalent to 15 per cent of operating income, is
crucial to returning the carrier to profit.
However, the Commission has already said that it plans to use special powers
to break-up ground handling monopolies at larger European airports, a move
that would affect Athens airport, the country's only big airport.
The Greek government has also agreed to stop interfering in Olympic's
day-to-day operations and to accept close monitoring of restructuring by an
outside auditor, airline officials said. This will mean, among other things,
that cabinet ministers, civil servants and Greek Orthodox clergymen will no
longer be allowed special discounts on tickets.
Under the rescue plan, the airline's management is to be overhauled with the
help of outside consultants. Five out of 36 aircraft in its fleet will be
sold or returned to lessors, with no replacements before 1997.
The plan also calls for a two-year wage freeze and mandatory retirement of
1,950 employees over the next three years. Olympic's 10,000-strong workforce
will be made liable to Greek labour law, enabling seasonal and part-time
employees to be taken on during the peak tourist period.
The rescue plan forecasts that Olympic's Dr135bn loss in 1993 would be be
transformed into a Dr14bn profit next year, rising to Dr30bn in 1997.
Olympic Airways and Air France are the last of three airline aid cases to
come before Brussels so far this year. Earlier this month, the Commission
allowed Portugal to prop up the state-owned TAP-Air Portugal in return for a
commitment to restructure the company.
