FT  24 FEB 94 / International Company News: SMH advance slows to 7% as sales
remain flat
SMH, the leading Swiss watchmaking group forming a joint venture with
Mercedes-Benz of Germany to build an environmentally friendly city car, has
reported 1993 net income of SFr440m (Dollars 297.2m), up 7 per cent on 1992.
The rise was much smaller than in 1991 and 1992 when the group, known best
for its Swatch watches, recorded rises of 32 per cent and 64 per cent
respectively. Sales last year were flat at SFr2.86bn.
The group described the results as 'favourable' and said they were achieved
in spite of currency losses and largely unchanged end-user prices in soft
currency countries.
The directors propose to increase dividends from 18 per cent of par value to
20 per cent.
Shares in SMH, which revived the Swiss watch industry in the early 1980s,
have been highly volatile recently as investors worried that the growth
potential of the watch business and other ventures, such as Swatch
telephones, was fading.
Also, the withdrawal in December of Mr Stephan Schmidheiny, a Swiss
financier, from the group that holds the controlling shareholding in SMH,
unnerved investors.
For a long time, there has also been uncertainty about the so-called
'Swatchmobile' project. Mr Nicolas Hayek, SMH chairman, had long talked
about launching a revolutionary small, environmentally friendly car that SMH
had developed. Prior to reviving SMH, he spent most of his time as an
independent consultant to the automotive industry.
He saw the car as an 'emotional product,' much like a watch, and felt that
his experiences of both the car and watch industries qualified him to make
it a success. However, an attempt to form an alliance with Volkswagen to
build the car collapsed last year.
Mr Hayek has kept details of the project secret, but according to various
reports, the Swatchmobile will be 2.8 metres long and have an aluminium body
and a hybrid petrol and electric engine.
News of the venture with Mercedes has pushed up SMH shares. In the past two
sessions, the bearer shares have gained 8 per cent to SFr1,004.
