FT  20 MAY 94 / Pressure in Nigeria over forex market
Nigeria's military government is under increasing pressure to reintroduce a
parallel foreign exchange market, which was banned in January.
Such a move would be a first step towards establishing a market-determined
rate for the naira, an essential condition for renewal of the lapsed
agreement with the International Monetary Fund. Most members of the cabinet,
however, continue to resist this condition, and the government is likely to
tighten its control over foreign exchange allocations.
The official supply of foreign exchange has proved inadequate and last
week's allocation of Dollars 100m is only 3.6 per cent of demand for the
manufacturing sector, which receives 60 per cent of the total.
The parallel market last year helped industry pay for its imports by buying
hard currency from exporters or investors bringing money into Nigeria at
market rates.
After the budget in January pegged the exchange rate and outlawed the
parallel foreign currency market, both inward investment and export earnings
returning to the country have declined sharply.
Since February the government has allocated about Dollars 100m each
fortnight, at a fixed rate of N22 to the dollar, on a pro rata basis to
companies which can prove that they need imports.
The dollar trades for about N48 on the black market and there is enormous
demand by importers for the scarce supply of foreign currency at the
subsidised rate.
Pressure on the supply of foreign exchange will remain intense. Early
reports indicate that the budget deficit for the first quarter of this year
reached N18bn (Dollars 800m), and the government owes more than Dollars 700m
to multinational oil companies for production costs.
Finance minister Kalu Kalu is a leading advocate of economic deregulation,
which international donors continue to press for but he is isolated in a
cabinet dominated by populist politicians who oppose liberalisation of the
economy, and are backed by the head of state, Gen Sani Abacha.
Most of the cabinet, led by Mr Lateef Jakande, housing minister, say they
need more state control to allocate foreign exchange correctly.
A committee at the central bank which oversees foreign exchange allocation
pro rata to applicants is to be dismissed and is likely to be replaced by a
committee of cabinet ministers which will allocate foreign exchange to
companies at its own discretion, according to sources close the government.
