FT  27 MAY 94 / Divergent traffic forecasts highlight uncertainties
Traffic forecasting is an uncertain business: yesterday's announcement from
Eurotunnel included not one but three forecasts of passenger and freight
volumes.
The projections come from Eurotunnel, its consultants and the railways, BR
and SNCF. Not surprisingly Eurotunnel's numbers are the most optimistic,
only slightly for passengers but more substantially for freight.
Eurotunnel is now carrying daily about 100 trucks each way through the
tunnel on its freight shuttles. The initial response from lorry drivers has
been positive, and they react far more rapidly to a new service than the
leisure traveller. But with just one week of freight operations behind it,
Eurotunnel is still largely dependent on its traffic forecasts.
The underlying prospects are good. The cross-Channel market for both
passengers and freight has been growing strongly since the mid-1980s,
passenger traffic by 4 per cent a year and roll-on roll-off freight traffic
by more than 7 per cent. Both Eurotunnel and its consultants, TRC, expect
this growth to continue.
It is in the detail that the forecasts differ. Eurotunnel believes it will
take two years to build up to its projected 40 per cent share of the roll-on
roll-off freight market while TRC expects it to take three years.
Eurotunnel's estimates of freight and passenger revenues, Pounds 120m this
year rising to Pounds 737m in 1996, are between 5 and 7 per cent higher than
TRC's.
The railways, which will run passenger and freight trains through the
tunnel, are in rough agreement with Eurotunnel on its passenger forecasts
but Railfreight Distribution, BR's freight arm, makes a lower freight
forecast.
Eurotunnel claims to be closer to the market than TRC as it actually talks
to the freight companies. However, it may not be without significance that
Eurotunnel and railways are still in dispute over the railways' failure to
provide upgraded high-speed lines and new rolling stock on time.
Do the forecasting differences matter? Christopher Garnett, Eurotunnel's
commercial director, believes that the disparity between the projections
will make a difference of 'millions rather tens of millions of pounds'.
Graham Corbett, finance director, said that there was a 17 per cent margin
built into revenue projections before funding problems would arise.
It is also true that independent forecasts of traffic growth have generally
been too low. Analysts yesterday were taking a cautious view. One said that
even if Eurotunnel met its most optimistic projections, it would still have
trouble paying off its debts.
The great unknown in the debate is the extent to which the tunnel will
create new traffic as opposed to stealing passengers from the ferries and
from other longer Channel and North Sea routes.
A second crucial element in Eurotunnel's financial forecasts is the price of
tickets. The company believes it will not be possible for ferry companies to
maintain their present discount offers.
But the omens are not good. Stena Sealink earlier this week cut its prices
by 20 per cent, just five months after promising it would hold them steady
for the year. If the ferries are launching into such cut throat competition
before the tunnel is properly open, analysts ask, what will happen when it
is providing a full service?
