FT  17 DEC 94 / Perspectives: Fallacies that can be fatal in medical matters
 -Barry Groves challenges the research technique of meta-analysis
In the Weekend FT of November 26, Clive Cookson described recent uses of
meta-analysis in medical research. ('New conclusions from old studies').
This is a reader's response.
You are an ambitious medical researcher. You are working in a controversial
field - say, the effect of diet on heart disease. A number of clinical
trials have been published, but with conflicting findings: some show a small
but significant benefit, others demonstrate small but significant harm,
while most have results which are statistically insignificant.
Despite the large amounts of money and resources which have been devoted to
the studies, no convincing evidence is shown and no conclusion can be
reached. How can you make a name for yourself?
The greater the numbers of subjects and the greater the time-span, the
greater is the chance of achieving a statistically significant result. So
what you might do is to collate all the data from those studies and pool
them into one large study with the hope that significance can be shown and
the question resolved. It is a technique called meta-analysis.
Meta-analysis has become the modern way to demonstrate significance where
none appears to exist. But it is a technique beset with problems.
There have been about 40 studies of heart disease, for example, but their
methodology and endpoint have not been similar.
Some have looked only at dietary factors, while others have linked diet with
other 'risk factors': smoking and obesity. Some have cholesterol-lowering as
their goal, others count the numbers of fatal coronary events or add
non-fatal coronary events, and a few look at all-cause mortality. Pooling
them all could give a statistician nightmares.
Even if they were similar, however, such meta-analyses involve what is known
as the 'faggot fallacy'. Lash together a number of sticks, each weak by
itself, and you will have a bundle (faggot) which is much stronger.
In a similar manner, scientists bundle together studies, each weak or
insignificant by itself, in the hope that the resulting bundle will be
stronger. But it is a technique that should be regarded with extreme
caution.
It is only valid if the individual studies were valid, and you can be sure
that if it takes large numbers of subjects to show a significant benefit,
then the real benefit for any individual must be relatively unimportant.
The benefit to the individual is an important consideration which is often
forgotten.
Scientists are tempted to equate statistical significance with clinical
importance. But 'statistical significance' is only a measure of the
probability that a treatment will be of benefit; it does not measure the
magnitude of that benefit.
And where large numbers of subjects are needed merely to show a small
probability of benefit from a treatment, then the treatment itself is likely
to be of no real benefit to the patient.
In the search for an answer to the 'diseases of civilisation', time is the
scientists' enemy. Heart disease usually takes decades and cancers several
years to reach a point where symptoms become noticeable. Any trial,
therefore, has to be conducted for decades if it is to demonstrate a
significant effect. But most scientists cannot wait that long and so another
fallacy is introduced.
That is where a surrogate is substituted for the real endpoint. For example,
breast cancer screening is hailed as a success because of the
ever-increasing number of women being screened. The number of women
screened, however, is merely a surrogate for what should be the real
determinant of whether screening is beneficial: a drop in the number of
deaths from breast cancer.
Unfortunately, despite the 'success' of screening, the number of deaths from
breast cancer is still rising.
Another fallacy that creeps covertly into much of modern-day thinking on
disease management concerns the extrapolation of findings from studies: the
belief that if something is good for you, then 10 times as much must be 10
times as good.
Some studies have shown that a small amount of alcohol may be protective
against heart disease, but that does not mean that the heavy drinker will be
healthier than the teetotaller. Most things, even water, which are
beneficial in the right quantities, can be dangerous when taken to excess.
In this case, we have a further question: is it the alcohol that is the
beneficial agent? Or could it be that the type of person who drinks a couple
of glasses of wine during the week has a temperament which is beneficial?
Whenever the results of clinical or epidemiological studies are considered,
whether singly or pooled together, someone can be guaranteed to remark that
if this or that had been done sooner, many lives would have been saved.
This brings me to my last fallacy: that of cheating death. The health
fanatics would have us believe that we are members of an immortal species.
It is with regret that I have to inform them that we are not. No matter how
we alter our lifestyles, we will not get out of this existence alive.
Much of the medical research over the past 40 years has attempted to prove
that a change of diet away from fats will reduce the incidence of premature
heart disease and prolong our lives. But individual studies have
consistently failed to demonstrate convincing evidence of this, and
meta-analyses of them have not been much more successful.
That is not surprising: all the increases in heart disease deaths over the
past three decades have been in the over-seventies. Premature deaths from
the disease started to fall in Britain from about 1965. At that time we had
a high-fat diet, ate fried breakfasts and 'went to work on an egg'.
Meta-analyses of studies which start from an incorrect premise are no more
useful than the studies they analyse.
To find the right answers, you first have to ask the right questions.
