FT  10 JAN 94 / Public sector pay rise forecast: Most managers expect to
offer between 1% and 3% despite freeze
Most public sector workers will get pay rises in 1994-1995 of between 1 and
3 per cent despite the public sector pay bill freeze which the government
hopes to extend until 1997.
An informal Financial Times survey of senior public sector managers found
most confident that they could offer a pay rise at or above the rate of
inflation through efficiency savings and job shedding.
This is true in local government, where a pay rise of 2 to 3 per cent is
being pencilled in, and the civil service, where around 2 per cent is
expected. Similar rises are expected in government agencies and NHS hospital
trusts where collective bargaining is being devolved.
Where new pay systems are established, greater differentiation in pay awards
is likely, with some employees getting considerably more than 3 per cent.
Some of the 1.5m workers covered by the pay review bodies may also break the
3 per cent barrier. The review bodies - covering teachers, doctors and
nurses and armed forces personnel - are expected to submit recommendations
to government by the end of the month.
The government announced in September a pay bill freeze for 1994-1995. The
November Budget extended this to 1997. The freeze does not mean that the 5m
public sector workers will get no pay rise, but that any increase must be
paid for by improved productivity or reduced staff. The freeze follows the
1.5 per cent pay norm in 1993-94.
There was some tension last year when the government sidestepped the review
bodies with its 1.5 per cent limit, but there was no rebellion and the same
is likely to be true this year. On the other hand, some review body
recommendations may be difficult to meet from efficiency savings and might
have to be rejected.
A member of one of the pay review bodies said privately: 'Pay bills are for
the government. Our remit is to recommend a pay rise and that is what we
shall do.' The same member said that, if the government had attempted to
impose a pay norm for the second year running, there might have been open
revolt from pay review members but he added: 'This year's arrangements leave
us sufficient scope to do something useful.'
Aside from the possibility of recommendations for higher pay from the pay
review bodies, the government seems relaxed about the public sector pay
round.
Mr Stephen Dorrell, the financial secretary, wrote last month to Mr John
Monks, the general secretary of the Trades Union Congress, saying that
efficiency savings, and therefore a pay rise, should be possible in 'all
areas of the public sector'.
