FT  12 APR 94 / There's still life in the old model: Despite economic woes,
Germany's social market system has proved resilient and flexible
The economic battering that the German social market model has received over
the past three years seems to have weakened its claim to the title of the
European economic model - a claim that appeared well established at the end
of the 1980s.
Even admirers such as the French businessman Mr Michel Albert, who coined
the term 'Rhine capitalism' to describe the German social market model of
regulated, long-term, consensus capitalism, have predicted that it will be
undermined by the new competitive forces sweeping through the European
economy.
Germany's high-cost economy is particularly vulnerable to the squeeze felt
by many European countries between growing low-wage competition from
developing countries and the more innovative economies of the US and Japan.
To many commentators, Germany is poorly suited to the growth of smaller
businesses, which need to react swiftly to market changes and require
organisational flexibility and less rigid pay and hours.
There is some truth in this view. Recent developments in Germany also
suggest, however, that the institutions of the social market are proving
both more supple and resilient than many believed possible.
This is not just a question of cyclical upturn after the sharpest recession
since the war. Witness the following recent events: the reduction in real
wages achieved through collective bargaining earlier this year; the radical
restructuring of many large companies (Daimler-Benz cut DM4bn, or Pounds
1.6bn, in costs last year alone); the first stage of reforming health costs
achieved in the face of widespread scepticism last year; and the massive but
belated transfer of resources from rich west Germans to poorer east Germans,
despite the unpopularity this provoked.
Several times in the past two decades mainstream economic and business
opinion in the Anglo-Saxon world has underestimated the strength and
solidarity of German economic institutions.
Indeed, according to free-market textbooks the German economic machine
should scarcely fly at all. Its labour and capital markets are choc-a-bloc
with rigidities. Taxes are high and rising, unions are still strong, and
environmental (and other) regulations are stringent.
Yet Germany has outperformed most other large economies on most indicators
even in its mature period of the past 20 years. Just prior to unification in
1990, it had the fourth-highest gross domestic product per head in the world
(compared with Britain's 18th) and its 'misery index' - combining the annual
inflation and unemployment rate - averaged 7.5 per cent a year between 1971
and 1992, almost the lowest in the world.
Part of the explanation for this relative success is that social market
'rigidities' help to resolve problems which are scarcely recognised by
conventional economics - problems of uncertainty and conflict in daily
business life.
German political and corporate institutions not only generate a high degree
of economic stability; they are also better than liberal market economies at
binding together economic actors in pursuit of common goals.
At the political level, under the Ordnungspolitik system set up after the
second world war, the markets operate within a regulatory framework over
which governments have only limited discretion. A broad range of interest
groups, as well as semi-independent bodies such as the Bundesbank, have a
significant voice. Cross-party support for the privatisation of the German
rail network is a recent example.
At the corporate level, employee, supplier and bank representatives on
company boards, plus the lack of a contested takeover system for companies,
also make it easier for corporate 'stakeholders' to commit themselves to
long-term relationships without fear of losing market advantage or personal
benefits.
It is this 'stakeholder company' which is at the heart of the German system
of market regulation, not the state. It is here that current reforms are
being played out.
The stakeholder- (rather than shareholder-) driven company is complemented
by a web of organisations linking employers, such as chambers of commerce
and industry associations, which help to produce services that include a
good training system for school-leavers. Such developments are not the
spontaneous result of companies acting in their own profit-maximising
interests, as British governments know well.
Despite these underlying institutional advantages, Germany's social market
virtues can become vices. The model needs periods of turbulent renewal such
as the one it is experiencing. Because consensus gives many different groups
in companies and in politics the power of veto, reform can be too easily
blocked. This contributed to some economic policy mistakes of unification's
early stages. A combination of political cynicism and interest-group power
led to the wrong decisions about paying for unification and about industrial
restructuring in the east. The result has been a bigger bill than necessary
and the destruction of many businesses in the east.
Further, in an era of more volatile market relationships the disadvantages
of long-termism become as apparent as the advantages. How do you ensure your
long-term relationships with suppliers, for example, do not inhibit
competitive pricing? How do you react swiftly to changed market conditions
when corporate culture is about negotiating change with long-standing
partners?
Germany's companies thrive best when undertaking incremental changes to
existing products and production techniques. Hence the country's strength in
industries such as cars, chemicals, machine tools - and its relative failure
in electronics and computers.
This innovation weakness, combined with the decline in productivity to an
annual average increase of 1.2 per cent between 1980 and 1991, suggested to
some the model was in long-term decline even before the financial burden of
unification.
Unification reduced per capita GDP to the level of Italy in 1991. It also
played havoc with Germany's public finances, which are in a worse state than
they appear because most analyses fail to take account of the state's large
public sector pension liabilities.
Some commentators have thus concluded that Germany must hack away at its
welfare provisions and corporate bureaucracy to embrace the vigour of
Anglo-Saxon individualism. There are, indeed, both internal and external
pressures for greater flexibility.
First, the system of centralised collective bargaining is bending. Employers
have recently been clawing back some of the fringe benefits granted in
easier times, and some have left the national bargaining system to do so.
The power of employer-friendly works councils inside companies is being
enhanced at the expense of external national unions, as employers try to
increase differentials between high- and low-skill employees.
Second, the appointment of former General Motors hatchet-man Mr Jose Ignacio
Lopez to run Volkswagen's procurement division last year was symptomatic of
a new, and less friendly, relationship between companies and suppliers.
Lopez was the most extreme example of more ruthless market calculation in
company-supplier links, but other groups such as Mercedes-Benz have been
aiming in the same direction.
Third, the relationship between companies and their banks is changing and
the importance of equity capital is growing. Big companies can now raise
money direct from the capital markets, a practice which has downgraded the
strategic role of the big banks. In addition, a combination of international
banking practices and the European Commission (which favours open equity
markets and limits on bank shareholdings) threaten the cosy position of
German banks on the non-executive supervisory boards, where they have long
enjoyed access to inside information.
These changes may make the German social market a little less 'organised'
and a little less egalitarian. But it can afford a greater degree of
earnings inequality. The earnings gap between high- and low-paid workers
narrowed slightly in the 1980s - against the international trend - and it is
estimated that about 70 per cent of pay goes to middle-income households.
Despite signs of greater institutional flexibility, there are clear limits
to change. Germany's sectoral bargaining system appears to be restoring pay
restraint, and the alternative of decentralised bargaining with strong
unions is not an attractive proposition to most companies. The Lopez example
does not seem to have been emulated by many other big companies, at least
not as forcefully.
Finally, neither contested takeovers nor the power of footloose equity
capital are set for a large increase in importance because of the
concentrated ownership of companies in Germany. Of the 171 largest
industrial companies 86 per cent have a single shareholder which owns more
than 25 per cent of the concern. In most cases the shareholder is another
company or a family trust, which generally means that short-term profit is
not the primary goal.
Thus, backed by mildly deregulatory public policy reforms, the German
economic model is reinvigorating itself without abandoning the core
institutions of the social market, which can adapt and survive in the more
open and flexible markets of contemporary Europe.
Some aspects of the model are particularly well-suited to new manufacturing
trends. For example, when companies and their suppliers are used to
operating in an atmosphere of trust, it is easier for them to share research
and development costs as demanded in an era of rapid product turnover.
Successful adjustment to 'flexible specialisation' - which combines mass
production and customisation - requires a capacity for 'retooling' in
response to unpredictable demands. This needs surplus capacity in skills and
equipment. Investment in such capabilities is difficult to justify in
liberal market regimes with high short-term performance pressures and
companies dominated by accountants. The German system positively encourages
it.
The 'creativity' of German-style rigidities is now recognised by management
theorists such as Mr John Kay, who argues that long-term relationships are
crucial to the competitive advantage of companies. With the end of the cold
war and a new focus on competition between market models, there has been a
revival of interest in concepts such as takeholder company.
Adequate reform of the social market model is not guaranteed but the system
has reserves of strength. Even when productivity improvements were flagging
between 1970 and 1990 Germany remained the largest exporter of manufactured
goods in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and
increased its market share over that period. Further, the east German
economy could be on the point of take-off, which alone could help to shake
up the west.
Germany's job creation record is better than that of many industrialised
nations. According to the OECD, west German unemployment is now 6.3 per
cent, lower than the US, and falling. But it will remain high in east
Germany, and there is a danger that the strains of unification and high
immigration on Germany's labour market could create calls for protectionism.
Assuming this danger is avoided, the German model could soon be in a strong
position to claim market leadership again in the EU. The single market has
sharpened competition between different approaches to market regulation, and
Germany starts with the advantage that it is currently responsible for a
third of industrial output in the EU.
Already EU rules are more informed by a concept of Ordnungspolitik, which
allows market forces to operate within prescribed rules, unlike the public
policy system in France or Britain, and limits the scope for discretionary
intervention.
Apart from the financial services area, Brussels generally takes German
market institutions as its pattern. At a European level it wants to promote
organised employers, social partnership, and the stakeholder company, hence
its interest in works councils.
The strength of Germany's industrial lobby organisations in Brussels is
certainly no hindrance to the social market cause. And the arrival of more
countries with considerable institutional overlap, such as Austria and
Sweden, will be a further fillip. British supporters of a deregulated,
liberal, market, have got an uphill struggle ahead.
The author's pamphlet, The Reshaping of the German Social Market, is
published on Thursday by the Institute for Public Policy Research, 30-32
Southampton St, London WC2E 7RA; Pounds 7.50
