FT  02 JUL 94 / Builders step up fight over planning guidelines
An unprecedented initiative to unite industry against government planning
guidelines has been launched by the Housebuilders Federation, which fears
that development may face restrictions.
The housebuilders have approached carmakers and retailers to see if they
would join in opposing Environment Department guidelines which they say
pander to environmental activists and threaten economic recovery.
The move comes as the government is struggling to recapture its traditional
supporters in southern England, many of whom oppose development in rural
areas.
Companies approached by the Housebuilders Federation include car
manufacturers Ford and Vauxhall and retailer J. Sainsbury. It has also
contacted the British Road Federation, the British Property Federation and
Bacmi, the trade association of the British Aggregates Construction
Materials Industries.
Mr Roger Humber, federation director, said: 'We are merely sounding out
other industries to see if they share our concern about the way in which
planning policy is being shaped by the Environment Department.'
Housebuilders fear that government policies allowing local authorities
greater autonomy to determine housing requirements will restrict development
in shire counties where demand for homes is greatest.
The British Road Federation and the British Property Federation have also
criticised policy guidelines issued to local authorities by Mr John Gummer,
environment secretary, discouraging out-of-town developments that require
people to travel. A planning policy guidance note - PPG 13 - issued jointly
with the Transport Department said development policies designed to reduce
travel might help cut fuel consumption and emissions by 15 per cent over 20
years.
The BRF said yesterday: 'The Environment Department is in danger of becoming
a hostage to fortune to some of the more extreme elements in the
environmental movement.'
The British Property Federation said the wording of the Environment
Department's support of the policy on sustainable development could 'allow
local authorities to prevent worthwhile developments which are, in no way,
globe-threatening'.
The road and property federations said they would be prepared to consider an
approach with housebuilders. Ford said it was considering its position.
Sainsbury was unavailable for comment yesterday.
