FT  19 FEB 94 / Books: In search of Pan and the people of Thrace (1) -
Michael Thompson-Noel fails to keep up with Fiona Pitt-Kethley
THE PAN PRINCIPLE by Fiona Pitt-Kethley
Sinclair-Stevenson Pounds 16.99, 315 pages
A DRY SHIP TO THE MOUNTAINS by Daniel Farson Michael Joseph Pounds 15.99,
246 pages
Her Baedeker in hand and her knickers round her ankles, Fiona Pitt-Kethley
travelled to Greece to research the god Pan and the places where he was
worshipped. Not a bad idea. Probably worth a travel book. Start in Arcadia,
Pan's undisputed birthplace, and carry on from there. Temples and
mountain-tops, ceremonies in sordid caves. How extremely jolly. A bit of
ancient sex, too, which could hardly harm one's sales.
But be warned: The Pan Principle is not a book for an elderly aunt about to
embark on a Swan Hellenic cruise of Greece and her islands, for it is
stuffed with sex - modern sex, always with strangers, sometimes satisfactory
yet sometimes, as in life, grubbily inorgasmic. The reason for this is that
Ms Pitt-Kethley, excessively fond of a bonk, has sauced the tale of her
journeyings with kiss-and-tell accounts of all the sexual rompings she
enjoyed along the way.
Nothing wrong with that, of course. She is not a pornographer. She just has
these needs, and is a fastidious reporter - describing, for example, with
detachment and insouciance, which colour condom she chose for which Greek
member.
And it is refreshing, at least initially, to encounter someone not prepared
to don the wan garb of the average travel writer - sick-making lyricism,
dishonest romanticism and egregious selectivity. Nine-tenths of this planet
is in a god-awful mess, but you would never guess it from most travel books.
At least Pitt-Kethley is honest. But the mind starts to wander as she
grapples with yet another native. First there is Spiros the accountant, with
whom she groans and sags in a pied-a-terre in Pyrgos. Spiros has his own
condoms, a brand called STOP, and, being an accountant, is so extremely
cautious that he uses a rubber band to hold the thing in place.
Next is Giovanni, an attractive museum guard with whom Pitt-Kethley couples
on the marble floor of the archaeological museum in Naples during one of her
trips home. (Do not bother to try it: it proved excessively painful.) Then
Nick, a physics lecturer; Demetrios, all foreplay; Georgios the biker, who
bites her, rather thuggishly. And so on and so forth.
A few stray males escape Pitt-Kethley's clasp, including two boys, hardly
old enough to be driving, who pick her up in a van between Stamata and
Marathon. They are soon all over her, but they do not get a jump - mainly,
she tells us primly, because she cannot stomach acne.
Occasionally, Pitt-Kethley offers us an anthropological insight. 'In Greece,
as in England,' she confides, 'the men are predominantly homosexual by
inclination.' And although there are plenty of good-looking men in Athens
and elsewhere, there is something wrong with Greek male bodies. Greek men
hate to walk, she says; they drive everywhere, which atrophies their legs.
She is equally sharp on Greek pollution, which is 'slowly but surely
damaging every outdoor work of art.' And sharp, too, on Greek officialdom.
In Delphi's tourist office she encounters a woman who is remarkably
proficient at not giving information in several languages, which leads the
author to observe that she has never yet heard any expression of regret for
Greek ignorance voiced by a Greek.
What with all the sex, Pitt-Kethley's search for the ithyphallic Pan, the
master of diverse roles, who was revived, in Edwardian times, as a figure
representing raw sex and the subconscious in all its power, is often lost
sight of, though she has her moments as a travel writer, not least when
describing the people of the tiny village of Ano Karyes, on Mount Lykaion,
one of the most beautiful and mysterious of Greek mountains, from the top of
which you can see all the mountain ranges of the Peloponnese.
Twenty years ago, unknown to most of the world, the people of Ano Karyes
decided to restart the Lykaian Games, which had a pedigree almost as
honourable as that of the Olympic Games. There are only 27 people left
living in Ano Karyes, but their passion for conservation is so inspiring,
says Pitt-Kethley, that since meeting them she has often wished they were
running the whole country.
In a ruminative finale, Pitt-Kethley concludes that Pan is dead in most of
Greece - dead of pollution and the self-created problems in which Greece
wallows. But she adds, not convincingly, that he is alive elsewhere, at
least for the time being.
After the exuberance and knowingness of Pitt-Kethley, Daniel Farson's A Dry
Ship to the Mountains sits tamely in the hand. Farson sets out to complete
his father's 1929 attempt to cross the Klukhor pass in the Caucasus on
horseback. At the age of 64, this great-nephew of Bram Stoker imagined he
would take a jolly cruise down the Volga and then an idyllic ride across the
mountains. That is not how things turned out.
He writes fairly charmingly. Trouble is, I read him immediately after
rolling with Pitt-Kethley. Every time Farson met a new male character, I at
once started wondering how he would rate in bed. The suspense was all but
fatal.
