FT  14 OCT 94 / President seizes ball from opposing team: Can Ukraine
achieve the goal of economic reform
Ukrainians have been euphoric since last month's victory of their football
team, Kiev Dynamo, over bitter rivals Moscow Spartak. The Dynamo players
have been lionised by a nation hungry for symbols that it is able to
surmount its economic and political problems.
With President Leonid Kuchma's detailed announcement of a comprehensive
economic reform programme earlier this week, some Ukrainians are beginning
to hope that Kiev's government team is also poised to score, after three
years of mismanagement and decline.
Ukraine's plan, bolstered by the nation's first-ever loan agreement with the
International Monetary Fund, concluded late last month, is a belated version
of the radical reforms which have worked in eastern Europe. Mr Kuchma has
promised to liberalise prices, slash the budget deficit, overhaul taxation,
privatise state enterprises, stabilise the currency and eventually peg it to
the US dollar.
'I think the chances for reform are very good,' says Professor Anders
Aslund, a Swedish economist who was an adviser on Russia's attempt at
economic reform and is now advising the Ukrainian president. 'The question
should not be 'Will reforms work in Ukraine?', but 'Why wouldn't reforms
work in Ukraine?' '
Until now, however, Ukraine's parochial political elite, dominated by former
communists, has shown no sign of wanting market reforms. In three years,
this has earned the country a reputation as one of the most mismanaged,
economically backward former Soviet republics.
There has been no mass national conversion to the joys of market economics
since the election of Mr Kuchma in July. But the Ukrainian leadership
appears to have realised that, without economic reforms, Ukraine will not
survive as an independent state.
It is this realisation that seems to have persuaded Mr Kuchma - the former
director of the Soviet Union's largest missile factory who has little
natural affinity for the market - to undertake reforms. To implement them,
he has vested increasing authority in a small, but surprisingly able, group
of reformers.
Three years ago, western journalists were liable to be asked by the Ministry
of Foreign Trade to explain what exactly a balance of trade was. Today,
there are leaders in senior positions able intelligently to discuss money
supply and the budget deficit when IMF teams come to Kiev.
These young supporters of the market economy are outnumbered, and could yet
be overpowered, by post-communist time-servers, who oppose reforms because
they do not understand them. There are also communist politicians who are
resisting a radical reshaping of Ukraine.
The prime minister, Mr Vitalii Masol, a hold-over from the previous
administration, has reluctantly gone along with Mr Kuchma's programme, but
he could lead a future conservative backlash.
The Ukrainian parliament elected this spring could prove a more formidable
obstacle to economic reform. It is dominated by MPs who ran on communist or
socialist tickets and are opposed to reform.
Mr Kuchma has threatened to override the legislature if it tries to block
his reform programme, a threat that appears to have worked with Mr Oleksandr
Moroz, the socialist speaker of parliament, who this week glowingly endorsed
the reform plan.
Mr Kuchma has a powerful ally in the increasingly powerful businessmen of
eastern Ukraine - ironically the region that elected the bulk of the
hard-liners. They openly boast of their intention to bribe or coerce their
local communist MPs into backing reforms.
In some respects, the economic challenges are less daunting than the
political challenges. Professor Jeffrey Sachs, who advised Poland on its
'shock therapy' market reforms, points out that Ukraine's previous
administration had already administered much of the shock which accompanied
reforms in other post-communist economies. With industrial production having
declined, there are fewer inefficient factories left to close. And an
unofficial private economy, accounting for perhaps more than half of
economic activity, has been created in reaction to the suffocating net of
state regulations.
The Ukrainian central bank - in contrast to the Russian central bank - has
pursued a tight monetary policy since the beginning of the year and has not
been handing out credits to industry and agriculture. Unfortunately, the
counter-inflationary effects of this have been undermined by the
government's large budget deficit.
But pushing Ukraine into the market will be no easy task. Part of the
problem is its size: Ukraine has a population almost as large as Poland,
Hungary and the Czech Republic combined. It has also inherited a
disproportionate share of the former Soviet Union's defence sector, which is
difficult to convert to more market-oriented production.
Furthermore, Ukraine's dependence on Russian oil and gas has contributed
Dollars 1bn to the country's debt. Negotiations to reschedule the existing
debt - which depend on Russia's questionable goodwill towards its defiantly
independent neighbour - must be successful for reforms to succeed.
'The chance that Ukraine will adopt a market reform programme is very high,'
says Mr Daniel Kaufmann, the Kiev representative for the World Bank. 'But to
implement those reforms and sustain them, Ukraine will require enormous
western financial support.'
That support would help cushion Ukrainians from the initially devastating
effects of the reforms, which have already led to a collapse of the national
currency and could push the inflation rate up to 60 per cent this month,
from 2.9 per cent in August. Without it, the fragile political consensus for
change could shatter.
This summer in Naples, leaders of the Group of Seven industrial nations
pledged Dollars 4bn if Ukraine were to embark on serious market reforms. At
the time, it was an easy promise to make: Ukraine was in the middle of
contentious presidential elections and the economy appeared to be in free
fall.
Now that Ukraine seems to have mustered the political resolve to take up the
G7's challenge, the question is whether the G7 will find the political will
to respond.
