FT  02 MAR 94 / Inkatha deal with ANC lifts S Africa poll hopes
South Africa's two black political rivals last night stepped back from the
brink of violent conflict when Mr Nelson Mandela, African National Congress
leader, persuaded Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi to register his Inkatha
party for the first all-race elections in April.
Speaking after more than eight hours of talks with the ANC leader at a
Durban hotel, Chief Buthelezi stressed that his party's decision to register
did not guarantee its participation in the April 27 elections.
Inkatha would register only 'provisionally' - a final decision on
participation would depend on the outcome of international mediation of
South Africa's constitutional dispute.
The ANC last night agreed to such mediation in principle, although no
details were agreed about the identity of the mediating parties or whether
mediation would be binding.
Asked whether Inkatha was closer to participating in the election after the
meeting than before it, Chief Buthelezi replied: 'Not at all.' But he
stressed that Inkatha would participate if its constitutional demands were
met. His decision to allow Inkatha's name to be printed on ballot papers is
also likely to have a psychological effect on polling.
The intervention of Mr Mandela, who has not previously been involved in
face-to-face constitutional talks with Inkatha leaders, appeared to have
made it possible to avert an immediate start to a violent boycott campaign
by Inkatha.
After weeks of public acrimony, the accord holds out at least the hope that
a constitutional settlement will include Inkatha, a party with a strong
following among the Zulus, who number 9m out of the country's 38m
population.
The two men made a show of friendship. Emerging from 45 minutes of private
talks before the general session began, they held hands and posed smiling
for the cameras. After the day-long session, they addressed a joint press
conference and deferred to one another politely in answering reporters'
questions.
'I came in high spirits and I leave in higher spirits. I feel very warm
inside,' said Mr Mandela.
Chief Buthelezi implied that Inkatha would seek an extension of the election
period - possibly by delaying the poll in the Zulu heartland Natal while
proceeding with the national election elsewhere on April 27 as planned. 'It
would only be fair if we were given a little space to campaign,' Chief
Buthelezi said. The ANC is unlikely to accept any delay.
However genuine the commitment to seek a substantive deal, both sides were
clearly keen to use yesterday's accord to avoid blame for future violence.
Inkatha must complete its 'provisional' registration by Friday to qualify
for election participation.
