FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (1): Step that meets the spirit
of the age - The opening of the Channel Tunnel strengthens the argument that
the destiny of Great Britain lies in and with Europe
One more barrier in Europe has fallen, of supreme importance, though neither
the largest nor the last.
In 1987, when Britain and France ratified the Channel Tunnel accord, few
would have predicted that it would come to fruition seven years later with
east and west Europe reunited by the end of the cold war.
The tunnel to be opened today by Queen Elizabeth II and President Francois
Mitterrand forges a further link in the chain of contact and cooperation
across a continent that again is whole and free.
'It was the best of times, it was the worst of times.' After months in which
elation over the tunnel's prospective opening has been tempered by
frustration at delays and financial overruns, Charles Dickens' classic line
aptly describes the mood at Eurotunnel, the operator of the 32 mile (50km)
link.
Dickens' introduction to A Tale of Two Cities - now separated by a mere
three hours' rail journey between London's Waterloo and the Gare du Nord in
Paris - also sums up the state of Europe. The walls and the watchtowers of
east-west division have disappeared. Yet the continent is beset by strains
engendered by recession, deep-seated changes in economic structure, the
break-up of the Soviet empire and German reunification.
The continent must now manage an arduous transition. The momentous task of
tunnelling beneath the Straits of Dover symbolises the challenges Europe
faces and the trials it has yet to overcome.
The stretch of water between Britain and France has a central place in the
history and folklore of the two nations, both in peace and at war. During
the past 200 years, the idea of joining Britain and France has sporadically
occupied the minds of engineers and admirals, financiers and functionaries,
schoolboys, prime ministers and madmen.
The problems of constructing the world's longest undersea tunnel cannot be
gainsaid. Accomplishing this ambitious infrastructure project without
recourse to government funds has been more exacting than the optimists
forecast.
The tunnel's overall cost has grown to Pounds 10bn. This is more than double
Eurotunnel's estimate when construction started six years ago, a time when
buoyant economic conditions spurred wishful thinking.
As a result of tortuous teething troubles, a full freight and passenger
service will not start until October, causing a large financial loss in the
first year of operation and exacerbating pressure on banks and shareholders.
Yet when the overall assessment of the enterprise is drawn up, these burdens
should not be allowed to weigh too heavily in the balance. If the skill,
ingenuity and perserverance deployed in building the tunnel can be turned
towards fashioning the new Europe, then the continent's salvation is
assured.
The historic rapprochement between the UK and the rest of Europe advances
one more pace. Britain remains tied by formidable bonds of blood, heritage
and shared experience to America and the Commonwealth. Yet the tunnel makes
more evident and more acceptable the reality that Britain's destiny lies
with and in Europe.
The French President and the British Queen will today turn a new page in
relations between two countries joined and separated by a rich vein of
turbulent history. In 20 years, the chroniclers of the century's final
decade may speak of a new heading. In 50 years, with luck, they may be able
to point to a new chapter.
In psychological and geographical terms, today's event is unquestionably of
greater magnitude for the UK than for the French. Britain's land connection
to the rest of the European Union has hitherto been limited to the troubled
border between the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland.
France is already joined physically to Spain, Belgium, Germany,
Switzerland,Luxembourg and Italy. From now on, all these countries will
appear, to British hearts, a small but perceptible degree closer than
before.
Construction has marked an effort of colossal technical, financial and
political complexity. Environmentalists' objections have had to be acted
upon, politicians' egos massaged, bankers' nerves calmed, terrorists'
ambitions (with luck) thwarted.
The tunnel sets a milestone for many reasons. Achieving such a project
without public sector funding has necessitated imaginative and controversial
financing techniques.
The venture has literally unearthed new ground in construction and civil
engineering technology. It has spurred salutary competition on a
much-travelled route on which sea operators up to now have enjoyed natural
dominance, and has opened new perspectives for rail transport and freight
haulage across Europe.
The tunnel has intensified Anglo-French cooperation in areas ranging from
handling equity flotations and harmonising railway signal equipment to
commissioning boring machines and providing fences against rabies-carrying
foxes.
More than anything, it is a project both in line with and in advance of the
spirit of the times. The two governments were able to reach agreement on a
project embodying many of the concepts of economic policy that have come to
dominate the agenda of the 1990s: competition, the primacy of private sector
finance, the drive to complete the barrier-free single market.
For all the commonly-held belief in the constancy of national
characteristics, the tunnel illustrates what has changed in Europe. The
British were once renowned as a race of railway-builders, the French - at
least in the popular imagination of the English - as a people incorrigibly
wedded to time-honoured preservation of their forefathers' paysage.
In the latter part of the 20th century, these roles seem to have been
reversed. Ludicrously yet endearingly, Britain has failed to construct a
high-speed train link to join the tunnel to London. By contrast, the French
engineers of the Polytechnique and the Ecole des Mines have unswervingly
pressed new lines into service to ensure Eurostar trains race across the
Nord-Pas-de-Calais plain before ambling through the hop groves of Kent.
The tunnel, by itself, will make neither France less French, nor Britain
less British. It represents a step towards European convergence, but also
illustrates the continent's abiding diversity.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
TUNNEL'S TIMETABLE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Sept 11 1981:    UK, France announce studies of a fixed link across
                 Channel.
Jan 20 1986:     Twin-bore rail tunnels chosen.
July 29 1987:    The fixed link treaty ratified.
Nov 4 1987:      Pounds 5bn credit agreement signed.
Dec 1 1987:      Excavating starts.
July 26 1989:    Shuttle rolling stock ordered.
April 21 1990:   Half combined length excavated.
Oct 25 1990:     Eurotunnel gains additional Pounds 1.8bn credit.
Oct 30 1990:     UK-French contact in service tunnel.
Dec 1 1990:      First people cross to England by foot.
June 28 1991:    Main tunneling completed.
Jan 29 1993:     New UK envoy to France crosses through tunnel.
Oct 11 1993:     Eurotunnel says Pounds 1bn more needed.
Dec 10, 1993:    Contractors hand over tunnel.
April 21, 1994:  Delay in first rail services announced.
May 6 1994:      The official opening ceremony.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
