FT  11 JUN 94 / Hualon sweeps doubts aside at site ceremony
If any doubts persist about the Hualon Corporation of Taiwan or the bold
assault it plans to mount from Northern Ireland on European textile markets,
they were brushed aside yesterday as dignitaries stood in a wet field
outside Belfast to celebrate the culmination of four years of negotiation.
The field, at Corr's Corner, is the site on which Hualon will start almost
immediately to build a Pounds 160m textile manufacturing complex intended to
spearhead a drive into the European market for synthetic fibres.
Two years from now more than 500 employees should be arriving daily for
work. By the year 2003 the plant should be keeping 1,800 people busy
producing 2,000 miles of polycotton and nylon polyster daily.
The promise of such a huge bonus to Ulster's economy and to its claim to be
winning the European battle for inward investment has not surprisingly been
greeted with enthusiasm by the province's authorities and local politicians.
Suggestions in recent weeks, however, that Hualon's strategy may be
ill-founded or at least over-optimistic, combined with allegations against
two of the company's executives, have threatened to knock the cream off the
cake.
But yesterday, in spite of the cold rain of an Ulster June, the mood was
upbeat, if slightly defensive, as guests gathered to watch a ground-breaking
ceremony and to hear Mr Andrew Oung, Hualon vice-chairman, say his company
wanted to become a reputable, respected corporate citizen of Northern
Ireland.
He added: 'We are here, we are glad to be here and we are here to stay.'
Critics from the textile sector have said that Hualon's projections do not
square either with the present parlous state of European textile markets or
with its longer-term prospects. They challenge its ability to undercut Asian
producers, and say Belfast will be a low-technology operation which, even
so, is unlikely to generate the large number of jobs forecast.
The mere hint of alleged impropriety, although publicly known about for four
years, has renewed concern about the procedures employed to evaluate schemes
lining up for government cash aid.
But Hualon has secured its deal - involving Pounds 61m of public money  -
and yesterday defended itself. Mr Oung, who acknowledged that his company at
present sells only 'a few million pounds worth' of its Pounds 500m annual
sales into Europe, said Hualon was the biggest producer of polyester
filament in the world and its Belfast plant would use only state-of-the-art
machinery capable of efficient, high-volume production.
Large numbers of workers would be required to handle continuous production
programmes.
Mr Oung said overcapacity in Europe was not directly relevant to its own
target markets. The company would concentrate on a sub-sector of the textile
market demanding high volume, basic fabrics which had been abandoned by
European producers that had gone up-market in the face of import penetration
by Far East competition. He was confident that demand for basic fabric
products would remain strong.
He said the Belfast plant would be able to match production costs in Taiwan.
Labour costs would be about 15 per cent higher in Ulster but these would be
offset by other costs, such as those for land and power. He added: 'We are
relocating so to speak, so that we can offer a better and more direct
service.'
