FT  16 NOV 94 / Former bank chief accused of fraud
Mr Mario Conde, the flamboyant banker who was dismissed as chairman of
Banesto by the Bank of Spain at the end of last year, and nine former
directors of the troubled bank were yesterday formally accused of criminal
fraud by the public prosecutor of Madrid's high court.
A high court judge will now decide whether to charge Mr Conde and his
associates. The accusation came as members of a parliamentary commission on
the collapse of Banesto were drafting their conclusions to six months of
hearings. A member of the commission said the parliamentarians were likely
to recommend criminal action against Mr Conde.
The prosecutor's formal accusation yesterday brings to a head the second big
financial scandal in Spain in the past month. Mr Javier de la Rosa, the
Barcelona financier who together with Mr Conde became an emblem of Spain's
booming late 1980s, was imprisoned pending fraud charges three weeks ago.
The prosecutor, who demanded surety totalling Pta12bn (Pounds 59m) against
all the ten accused in the Banesto case, has passed the results of his
investigation to a judge at the senior court dealing with monetary offences.
Details of the accusations were not released at the prosecutor's request and
court officials said the judge had up to two weeks to decide whether to
bring the case to court.
Mr Conde was removed as Banesto chairman after a Bank of Spain inspection
revealed it had heavily overvalued its assets. A self-made millionaire, Mr
Conde became chairman in 1987 at age 39 after he used the proceeds of
disposal of a pharmaceutical business to buy shares in the bank.
The most damning public evidence against the bank's former executives came
from Banesto's present chairman, Mr Alfredo Saenz, who told the
parliamentary investigation: 'In Banesto there are cases in which money has
not been lost; it has disappeared and somebody has it.'
Mr Saenz became chairman of Banesto after it was acquired by Banco Santander
in April following a lifeboat operation involving Pta780bn in public and
private monies to salvage the institution. The Bank of Spain said Banesto
had been 'grossly mismanaged' when it ordered the removal of Mr Conde, who
claimed the move was political.
Spain has been gripped a by several spectacular public scandals this year.
Mr Mariano Rubio, the former central bank governor, was jailed over a share
sale and still faces charges. The former chief of the Civil Guard is on the
run from Spanish police and Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez is at the centre
of a controversy for allegedly favouring a family member with government
contracts.
