FT  12 MAY 94 / Backers sought for new Pounds 10m business newspaper
A senior Mail on Sunday journalist is trying to raise money to launch a
specialised business, industrial and financial newspaper.
Mr Clive Wolman - the Mail on Sunday's City editor and a former Financial
Times journalist - is seeking about Pounds 10m.
The idea was suggested to Associated Newspapers, which owns the Mail on
Sunday, a year ago, and was researched in detail and rejected.
The idea then was for a single paper which would be printed at 5am to get
late-breaking news missed by conventional newspapers, and then delivered by
motorcycle to offices in the City.
The editorial content would concentrate on niche areas such as commodities,
which Mr Wolman believes are not given enough weight in the existing press.
The concept now is for something closer to a daily trade newspaper - or
series of daily trade newspapers - than a conventional national news-paper.
'It would only be a national newspaper in the sense that it would be
available in more than one city,' said Mr Wolman yesterday. 'To see it as a
new national newspaper misses the whole point.'
Mr Wolman conceded that he did not yet have any financial backing for the
paper. It would probably have a common core and different specialist
segments aimed at particular markets such as, for instance, oil and energy.
Emap, the publishing and exhibitions group which also owns a large number of
business magazines, has taken an interest in the concept and has discussed
it with executives at Mirror Group Newspapers.
Mr David Montgomery, the MGN chief executive, is however considered very
unlikely to get involved in such a new publishing venture while he is still
involved in integrating the business management of The Independent and
Independent on Sunday with MGN.
Mr Wolman conceded yesterday: 'I'm really under pressure now when nothing
much is happening.'
Meanwhile another senior Associated Newspapers journalist is believed to be
working on the concept of an afternoon financial newspaper for the City of
London, although little is known about how real the project is.
