FT  08 JAN 94 / Arts: Drawn in the manner of Haarlem - Patricia Morison
enjoys Amsterdam's 'The Dawn of the Golden Age' exhibition
Unwary people could be fooled by the Rijksmuseum's cunningly chosen poster
for its stupendous and extremely costly new exhibition. They will catch
sight of baby Catharina Hooft and her nurse, an enchanting portrait painted
in 1620 by Frans Hals, and think, 'Ah, Hals] And that of course means the
Dutch Golden Age, Rembrandt, Cuyp, Vermeer, Jan Steen, and so on.'
In fact, Hals is the bait to lure the public to an experience which is
surely vastly more rewarding. Dawn of the Golden Age is a beautifully
designed and magisterial survey of the visual arts in the north Netherlands
between 1580 and 1620. So far as I know, no museum has ever made such an
ambitious commitment to the art of this complex and absurdly neglected
period. A marathon show, it demands a far longer visit than the press were
allowed. So allow at least a day for it, and if this period of Dutch art is
a blank on your cultural map, try beforehand to browse in the well-written
catalogue, a massive Thames and Hudson production.
Sixteen galleries are elegantly arranged with just about anything a Dutch
nobleman or burgher could have aspired to, around 1600; 160 paintings and
drawings, prints, sculpture, glass, silver, calligraphy, furniture, armour,
and superb tapestries. Two-thirds of the exhibits are loans, brought from
all over the world. Curious rarities include a needlework 'painting', an
extremely rare survival of a large woodcut of the Mocking of Christ such as
humble people pinned to their walls and, at the other end of the social
scale, unique example of a gauzey, Frenchified ruff.
Dutch craftsmanship was worth waiting for. A tapestry caparison for a parade
horse was made by the famous Spiering workshop for the coronation of
Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, but delivered years late. Francois Spiering was
a refugee from Antwerp. Many other artists in the exhibition were Flemish
Protestant refugees; the under-appreciated genius Jacques de Gheyn II,
theorist and painter Karel van Mander, Hans Bol who made miniature
townscapes popular, and Paschier Lammertijn, king of damask. What we think
of as the Dutchness of Dutch art was directly dependent on the impact of men
who had learned their trades in the highly specialised workshops of the
south.
There are many pointers to the bloody struggle for independence from
Catholic Spain. There is Hendrick de Keyser's model for the tomb of William
the Silent, and a superb gold tazza engraved with the scene showing the
wiley ruse which brought to an end the siege of Breda. Dutch towns were
fiercely proud and rapidly growing extremely rich. Many beautiful things in
the exhibition were commissioned by the towns as propaganda. Heroic failure
was no less worthy of record, as shown by quite one of my favourite
exhibits, an enormous tapestry which shows a naval disaster, from a series
commissioned by the States of Zeeland.
Few painters of the Dutch dawn are widely popular today - perhaps only Hals
and Avercamp, the mute who specialised in skating scenes. The giant of the
exhibition is the painter and engraver Hendrick Goltzius (1558-1617), a
dazzlingly and protean talent. Other leading masters of their day were
Cornelis Cornelisz, Abraham Bloemaert, Joachim Wtewael, and Pieter Lastman,
the history painter who for six months taught Rembrandt.
Rarely do Old Master exhibitions strike such an instant blow to the visual
nerves as the first room with Bloemaert's 'Death of Niobe's Children' (from
Copenhagen), Cornelisz's 'Battle of the Titans', Goltzius's 'Massacre of the
Innocents' and Wtewael's 'Deluge'. In the late 1580s and '90s, this group of
Haarlem artists were in thrall to the engravings of the well-travelled
Bartholomaeus Spranger, such as the famous 'Marriage of Cupid and Psyche'.
From their paintings, prints and drawings, it is clear to see how intensely
competitive these Haarlem Mannerists were. As Karel van Mander urged them,
Flemish artists had to show the Italians that they had caught up. They, too,
had drunk from the wisdom of the ancients. It was their turn to show that
they could not only represent the idealised nude with the skill of a
Michelangelo but show it performing terrifying gymnastics in incredibly
complex compositions.
Dutch Mannerism around 1600 repulses many people for being so frantic and
exaggerated. Artists were fascinated by the erotic, including incest and
homoeroticism, by violence and disasters, by the monstrous and irrational.
(Look at Jacques de Gheyn's witches, his almost human frogs, and the
repulsive little bronze monsters designed by Arent van Bolten.) Or could it
be that taste this century is tending in a direction similar enough to make
us receptive to even the wildest visions of the Mannerists?
Haarlem mannerism in painting is not everyone's taste. But anyone who likes
Art Nouveau must surely love the silversmiths, Adam van Vianen and his
brother, Paulus, goldsmith to Rudolf II in Prague. Their pieces in
auricular, ear-shaped style, make silver seem hardly more solid than whipped
cream. Ewers and goblets swirl biliously, giving fleetingly glimpses of
women, parts of the body, and grotesques.
If this seems a little unwholesome to fit your idea of Dutch art, be
reassured that there are more straight-forward delights, such as the early
landscapes, still-lives, flower-paintings, and the hilarious military
fashion-plates by Jacques de Gheyn. I particularly enjoyed the 'friendship
books' kept by several artists. As animal artists, Goltzius and Jacques de
Gheyn can hold a candle to Durer.
Again and again, the genius of Goltzius has one open-mouthed in admiration.
His pen-drawings in imitation of engravings are incredible, technical
show-offs which nonetheless have real beauty. Just see the merriment of the
'Boy with a Skull and a Tulip'. Marvel, too, at the 'Study of a Right Hand'.
Those three visble fingers look deformed. Is this Goltzius' right hand which
van Mander said was badly burnt, or is it simply 'by the hand of Goltzius'?
do not miss this wonderful chance to look at Dutch art in its cradle.
On cultural events being mounted as part of the Golden Age of Amsterdam
festival, contact VVV Amsterdam Tourist Office, 06-340- 34066. Dawn of the
Golden Age is sponsored by Unilever. The exhibition runs until March 6;
advance tickets can be purchased from Netherlands Reservation Centre, PO Box
404 (33-70-320-2500).
