FT  16 JUL 94 / Revenue to open up secret manuals for tax guidance
The Inland Revenue is to make public the secret tax manuals used by its
inspectors as the basis for their assessments, as part of the drive for open
government.
The manuals, which provide detailed guidance to inspectors on how to handle
all personal and corporate tax matters, have always been jealously guarded
internal documents.
Their appearance could make a substantial difference to the way taxpayers
and their professional advisers plan their tax affairs.
The Revenue confirmed yesterday that it would publish the manuals, but said
the details were still being finalised.
A timetable for publication had still to be decided, the Revenue said. It is
believed that the manuals will be made public over the next two years as the
existing editions are revised.
The move comes in the wake of the code of practice on government information
which became effective in April. It requires departments to publish
information, give reasons for administrative decisions and respond to
requests for information.
Tax professionals yesterday welcomed the decision. Some, however, expressed
scepticism over whether the most sensitive information on the interpretation
of tax and tactical advice to inspectors would be disclosed.
The Revenue said it would reserve the right to withhold information it
considered to be prejudicial to the administration or collection of tax, in
line with special exemptions to the code.
Information likely to be withheld includes legal opinions commissioned
internally, advice provided by officials to ministers and details of tax
avoidance and evasion schemes which come to its notice.
Previously, some out-of-date copies of the inspectors' manuals have found
their way into the offices of the larger accountancy firms, generally when
they have hired ex-Revenue officials.
Mr Roger White, head of tax at accountants KPMG Peat Marwick, said: 'This is
undoubtedly a major step in the right direction.'
Revenue misses targets, Page 6
