FT  30 JUL 94 / Last tango in the Middle East: A look at Syria's role in the
peace process
After the pomp and publicity of the White House garden ceremony on Monday,
when King Hussein of Jordan and Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's prime minister,
signed an end to a 46-year-old state of war on a sunlit table, the focus of
the peace process returns to the Middle East. This time it disappears behind
the firmly closed doors of the presidential palace high on the hills
overlooking Damascus.
Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, is expected in Syria again as
early as next week, just over a fortnight after his last round of talks with
President Hafez al-Assad, the Syrian leader. The visit is a clear attempt to
use the fresh momentum of this week's signing to push along the Syrian track
of the three-year-old Middle East peace process, which has proved the
slowest.
Mr Christopher will be hoping Mr Assad has read the signals from the White
House. The Syrian leader, who is seeking closer ties with the US and the
removal of his country from America's list of state sponsors of terrorism,
will have seen the warmth of the reception for King Hussein, who appeared to
have erased the damage done to US-Jordanian relations during the Gulf war.
He will have seen that peace brings material rewards - in Jordan's case, US
promises of military aid and debt relief worth Dollars 700m. Mr Christopher
might additionally hope that Syria will feel left behind in the peace
process, and that Mr Assad might quicken his step in the negotiations. For
as Mr Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, said yesterday that the sides
still remained far apart: 'Right now it's not a tango, it's not a dance
between the two (parties).'
Mr Assad will have digested these developments, though close diplomatic and
academic observers doubt whether he is susceptible to pressure on the basis
that he is being 'left behind'. One senior western diplomat suggests that a
man famous for sitting ramrod-straight for hours during diplomatic meetings
to convey the impression of implacable strength and resolution would not
give any sign of being hurried, even if he felt it.
In any case, he adds: 'Assad's patience is legendary, and if Syria has
already waited 27 years to get back the Golan Heights, then why not wait a
few more if that's what it takes to get the right deal?' The area between
Israel and Syria, which Israel has occupied since the 1967 Arab-Israeli war,
forms the heart of the antagonism between the two countries.
Further, while King Hussein accelerated his talks with the Israelis partly
to prevent the risk that his kingdom might be marginalised in the peace
process, Mr Assad harbours no such worries. He knows that both Israel and
the US consider Syria the crucial component in any overarching regional
peace deal. The other headline Middle Eastern events of the past week amply
suggest the reasons why - and why the Israeli-Syrian track of the talks is
proving the most complex and slowest to show progress.
The two bombings against Jewish targets in London this week, which left 19
wounded, and the car bomb which killed 96 in an anti-Jewish raid in Buenos
Aires on July 18, were brutal reminders that deadly and efficient opponents
both of Israel and of the peace negotiations remain at large. Whether the
Lebanese militant Islamic group Hizbollah was behind some or all of the
attacks, or whether the plots were ultimately hatched in the Iranian
capital, Tehran, as Israel charges, is still to be discovered.
There is reason to suspect the Iranian-backed Hizbollah, despite its denials
of involvement in any of these recent attacks. It claimed responsibility for
bombing Jewish targets in Argentina in 1992.
Moreover, it swore only last month that it would use its own 'long arms' to
exact revenge for an Israeli attack on a Hizbollah training camp deep in the
Bekaa Valley in east Lebanon, in which 30 of its fighters were killed.
As long as Iran remains hostile to any peace with Israel and capable at
least of inspiring acts of anti-Jewish terror, there is little Israel or the
US can do to banish the threat of such outrages altogether. But the
possibility of neutralising, or at least containing, such threats under the
present peace process lies largely in Mr Assad's hands.
For one thing, Mr Assad has shown that he can effectively contain
Hizbollah's threat to Israel from south Lebanon. While the group is
supported by Iran, its main camps in Lebanon operate largely in Syrian-held
areas of the Bekaa Valley and its arms must pass through Damascus. Last
year, when Israel pounded south Lebanon for a week in retaliation for
Hizbollah rocket attacks into northern Israel, Mr Assad's intervention
secured a 'gentleman's agreement' that such attacks would cease. That
agreement has essentially held.
While Israeli troops remain inside their self-declared 15km-deep 'security
zone' in south Lebanon, neither Syria nor the Lebanese government will act
to deprive Hizbollah of arms, which the group says it is using against an
occupying force. But few in Damascus or Beirut doubt that if and when an
Israeli withdrawal is agreed under an eventual regional peace plan, Lebanese
troops, backed by the 35,000 Syrian troops in the country, will disarm and
close down Hizbollah as a violent threat to Israel.
Moreover, it is widely thought that Mr Assad would be able to exert his
authority over Hizbollah without damaging his friendly relations with Iran.
The Iranians have few friends among Arab states and are antithetical towards
making peace with Israel. 'The Iranians have already said that, if Syria
made peace, Iran would continue to treat it differently from the other Arab
states such as Egypt,' says Mr Shahram Chubin, an Iran analyst at the
Institute of International Studies in Geneva.
Several European diplomats in Damascus believe Syria has already reached an
understanding with Iran that Tehran would cease to provide military support
for Hizbollah in the event of a Syrian-Israeli peace.
Syria's potential role as an intermediary and interlocutor with Iran is
almost certainly something Mr Assad hopes the US will acknowledge and,
perhaps, reward.
His influence over Hizbollah is a bargaining card that Mr Assad is playing
cannily as he negotiates with the Israelis for their withdrawal from the
Golan Heights. In return, Israel is seeking a Syrian commitment to a 'full'
peace of open borders, trade and normalised diplomatic relations.
Finding a formula to resolve the impasse over a 'full' Israeli withdrawal
from the Golan Heights in exchange for a 'full' Syrian peace with Israel is
in itself a considerable diplomatic challenge. The return of the Golan is
paramount for Mr Assad. But a solution to this problem alone is unlikely to
satisfy him if it does not also bring a wider acknowledgement of Syria's
importance as a regional power. His price for containing Hizbollah in any
peace is likely to be some US-Israeli recognition of continued Syrian
influence in Lebanon.
The detailed progress of negotiations between Syria and Israel is difficult
to interpret while both sides remain silent. But Mr Christopher's return to
Damascus indicates that the US believes Mr Assad is prepared to move the
talks forward. For Mr Assad to receive him suggests Mr Christopher is not
arriving empty-handed.
US promises of improved relations and material aid, though, are unlikely to
bring Mr Assad to the White House lawns with Mr Rabin. According to one
western ambassador: 'Assad would never be willing to give up certain
political principles just to get some money.'
