FT  08 NOV 94 / Business and the Law: Goodbyes are still golden - Investor
value is not always reflected in directors' pay
In the 18 months since Mr Alastair Ross Goobey, PosTel's chief executive,
wrote to the chairmen of FTSE-100 companies informing them that in future he
was 'minded' to vote against three-year rolling contracts for directors,
life for Britain's bosses seems to have changed little.
His concern was not that executives were receiving excessive rewards for
doing a good job, but that long rolling contracts were allowing executives
to walk away with huge pay-offs often when they had failed to come up to
scratch.
As head of the UK's largest pension fund, which owns 1.5 per cent of the
stock market by value, his views ought to carry some weight in British
boardrooms, and indeed, some progress has been made.
Mr Ross Goobey says three-year rolling contracts are now in a minority in
FTSE-100 companies. But wider recent research by Bacon Woodrow suggests they
are not yet a thing of the past. Bacon Woodrow found that of 954 directors
questioned, 39 per cent were on rolling contracts of three years or more.
The large pay-offs which result from these three-year rolling contracts  -
which at any time are assumed to have three years to run before expiry -
also show no signs of abating. In the year to June, so-called 'golden
goodbyes' topped Pounds 20m. The Pounds 4m paid to four former Tiphook
directors and the Pounds 2.02m package for Mr Peter Davis, former
co-chairman of Reed Elsevier, the Anglo-Dutch publisher, are recent
examples.
These pay-offs add to public concern about executive pay in general, which
although rising at the lowest rate of increase for five years, is still
outstripping the level of wage rises for the workforce as a whole.
According to a study published last week by the Monks partnership, an
independent remuneration adviser, the highest paid directors in British
companies with annual turnovers of more than Pounds 400m, received median
increases of 9 per cent last year, three times that of the workforce. The
study also showed that the number of UK companies that pay their highest
earning executive more than Pounds 1m has doubled over the past 12 months to
16. Only executives in Germany, Italy and the US are ahead of the UK's top
earners in cash terms.
Head of the list of top earners was Mr Peter Wood, chief executive of Direct
Line, Royal Bank of Scotland's insurance subsidiary, with a total
remuneration package worth Pounds 18.4m, way ahead of Mr Bob Bauman, former
SmithKline Beecham chief executive on Pounds 1.89m.
An increasing percentage of these huge remuneration packages is made up of
performance-related bonus payments. According to the Monks' study, bonus
payments account for an average 18 per cent of total remuneration and
contribute 15 per cent to the remuneration of the best paid directors.
But research by Datastream suggests there are some large disparities between
pay rises for executives and returns for shareholders.
This is backed up by a recently published study by American pay expert
Professor Graef Crystal. Prof Crystal compared total remuneration packages
of the top directors of the FTSE-100 companies with the total return to
shareholders of their companies and concluded many British bosses are
'overpaid'.
Great emphasis was placed by the Cadbury committee on corporate governance
on the role of the company 'remuneration committee' in curbing excesses in
boardroom pay. Composed of non-executive directors, remuneration committees,
whose role is to set remuneration for companies' executives, were seen as
the vehicle to ensure a better match between executive pay and shareholder
value.
Most UK public companies now have them, but there is growing acceptance that
they are still not functioning as they should. A follow-up to Cadbury is
promised for 1995, but many lawyers believe action is needed now.
Ms Denise Kingsmill, a specialist employment lawyer who counts Mr Peter Wood
of Direct Line, Cyril Stein, former Ladbroke chief, and George Walker,
former head of Brent Walker, among her clients, says a 'Cadbury 2'
concentrating on the role and powers of remuneration committees is overdue.
The big question mark over remuneration committees is their independence,
she says. They are made up of non-executives, but non-executives who tend to
be executives elsewhere, and as such they have an interest in keeping the
general level of executive salaries up.
Ms Kingsmill also believes it is time for a wider look at the role of
non-executives, and in particular at the way they are appointed. In spite of
placement companies, such as Proned, being a 'chum of the chairman' remains
the main route to a non-executive appointment.
Part of the reason many non-executives do not perform as shareholders would
hope, is because they are not properly remunerated, she believes. 'You don't
want a situation where they are paid so much that their independence is
compromised by their financial dependence on the company. But they must be
properly remunerated,' she says.
But how much is enough? The average is Pounds 15,000-Pounds 20,000 for about
10 days work a year. But that is neither enough money nor enough time, says
Ms Kingsmill. There are papers to read before meetings and good
non-executives need to get to know the business and stay abreast of
developments.
These responsibilities require proper remuneration, but non-executives
should not get pension arrangements or share options. They should, however,
be encouraged to buy shares to cement their relationship with the business.
There is also a need to widen the range of non-executives, she says. Most
companies only have one non-executive from an alternative background and if
they can double up by making the alternative a woman, so much the better.
Cadbury 2 could clarify the role of remuneration committees and
non-executives, but what criteria should remuneration committees follow in
setting executive pay to ensure a better match between remuneration and
shareholder value?
At the moment there is too much emphasis on what executives are paid rather
than how and why, Ms Kingsmill says. They need to distinguish between
come-to-work pay, set by the market place, performance-related pay, received
if goals are met, and profit-related pay. 'If you get the balance right,
you're on your way to ensuring directors don't get remunerated in
circumstances where the company is not giving shareholder value,' she says.
Ms Kingsmill says companies want to attract the best so they have to give
directors a certain level of pay and security. But this can be achieved
without long, rolling contracts. She wants an initial three-year fixed-term
contract, providing security and time for an executive to set objectives and
act on them, and then a one-year rolling contract. A one-year rolling
contract allows an executive time to find another job, she says, and
companies will not enrage shareholders by paying out huge sums.
But even if a Cadbury 2 clarifies the role of non-executives in curbing
excessive pay, getting companies to act on it is another matter. Golden
goodbyes look set to be with us for some time yet.
