FT  10 DEC 94 / Siemens forced to close key uranium plant
Siemens, the German electronics, power and engineering group, said yesterday
it was being forced to close its important uranium processing plant at
Hanau, near Frankfurt, as licensing standards required by the left-wing
state government of Hesse had made it unprofitable.
Hanau is one of three plants worldwide where Siemens processes uranium. The
work would be transferred to other sites within the company or awarded to
outside contractors, the company said.
'We want to remain one of the world's leaders in fuel assembly,' Siemens
said. 'We just want to put the business on a profitable footing.'
The closure is a blow for the German nuclear lobby and comes just ahead of
difficult talks to decide on how Germany's power generation mix is
structured between nuclear, coal and other sources. The talks were broken
off in October 1993 without a decision on the future of nuclear power in
Germany.
The Bonn government and the country's three large electricity utilities  -
RWE, Veba and Bayernwerk - are determined to retain nuclear power, which
accounts for about 30 per cent of the country's electricity, as a key
element in the national energy production plan.
However, the Hesse government, which is run by a coalition between the
Social Democrat party (SPD) and the environmentalist Greens, is just the
noisiest of several SPD-controlled Lander which have been calling for an end
to nuclear power in Germany.
As the SPD now controls the Bundesrat, the upper chamber of the federal
parliament which must approve any outcome from the energy talks, the
forthcoming round may be more difficult than usual.
The Hanau decision has no direct implications for the battle over Gorleben,
the controversial nuclear waste disposal site in Lower Saxony, but it is
likely to throw the nuclear lobby further on to the defensive.
The decision to close Hanau was taken recently, a spokesman said, but was
part of a wider restructuring programme begun earlier this year in an effort
to return the fuel assembly business of Siemens' power generation division,
KWU, to profit. KWU is suffering big losses because of growing competition
and falling prices.
The Hanau site had the capacity to process up to 1,200 tonnes of enriched
uranium fuel rods into pellets for re-use in fuels rods. However, pellet
production was suspended last summer and since then the plant merely
assembled pellets produced in the US.
Siemens said Hanau would be formally closed by September 30 1995, with the
loss of about 250 jobs,
KWU supplies fuel to 49 nuclear power plants around the world.
A spokesman said the other reprocessing plant, at Lingen in Lower Saxony,
was working at capacity and that other work would be transferred to a third
plant at Richland, Washington.
Yesterday's decision will not affect another plant at Hanau which will
reprocess plutonium into mixed-oxide fuel elements, but which the Hesse
government is also seeking to block.
'Work will be continued with the approval of the German utilities,' Siemens
said.
