FT  06 JUN 94 / The Pineau-Valencienne Affair: A feast for Europe's media -
International Press Review / Schneider
There are very few prisoners whose incarceration would inspire a former
French prime minister to write a front page newspaper article protesting
against their plight.
Yet Mrs Edith Cresson, the former Socialist premier, was moved to do just
that in last week's Journal du Dimanche following the imprisonment of Mr
Didier Pineau-Valencienne.
The protest from Mrs Cresson, who once worked for Schneider, was followed
inside the paper by a declaration of support for the Schneider chairman
signed by 36 of France's most eminent industrialists. The protest set the
tone for French coverage of L'affaire Pineau-Valencienne.
'Stupefaction and emotion' was the headline of an article in Monday's
edition of La Tribune, the financial daily. Le Monde recalled Belgium's past
criticism of French 'imperialism' in the corporate arena.
Even Liberation, the liberal-left daily, expressed astonishment: 'Company
chairmen have been imprisoned before, but this time, a linchpin of the
establishment has been hit.'
Le Figaro, the centre-right daily, struck a cautionary tone on political
consequences of Mr Pineau-Valencienne's arrest: 'A stumbling block in the
calm waters of Franco-Belgian relations'. Later in the week, the media
turned to long-term consequences on public perceptions of the business
world.
The news on Monday that Mr Pierre Berge, Yves Saint-Laurent chairman, had
been indicted for insider trading cast another cloud over the corporate
scene, as did continuing speculation over Mr Bernard Tapie, the left-wing
entrepreneur under pressure from Credit Lyonnais to repay part of his debts.
Liberation ended the week with an essay entitled 'Goodbye to business?' in
which Mr Michel Wieviorka, a leading sociologist, said idolisation of
business in the 1980s had been replaced with disillusion over the 'failure
of industry to reduce unemployment or to regenerate the economy'.
The Belgian press has been, as L'Echo, the francophone financial daily put
it, 'indignant that the French are indignant'. Many newspapers said that if
France had forgotten the principle of judicial independence, Belgium had
not.
'That this affair leads (in France) to unkind commentaries on the way
Belgian judges conduct business arises from confusion which borders on bad
faith and lends support to those circles that denounce, more often
incorrectly than not, French 'imperialism',' said La Libre Belgique.
La Libre noted that Mr Melchior Wathelet, Belgian justice minister, was
obliged to remind the French that, in Belgium, rule of law prevails.
De Standaard took a similar line, writing glowingly about the prosecuting
magistrate, Mr Jean-Claude Van Espen, as 'a judge like no other'. The idea
that the arrest of Pineau-Valencienne was a lapse at the end of Van Espen's
long career is just 'wishful thinking' by people who believe that 'a judge
should defer humbly before a certain class of people', said the Flemish
daily.
La Lanterne, a populist tabloid, rephrased the same thoughts. 'France in
shock: how could a little judge dare ..' it suggested.
De Standaard even contemplated a conspiracy theory. While it was inevitable
business and politics in Belgium and France should be intimately involved
with each other, it said, political reaction in France prompted by the
detention lends weight to the theory that the French have a dark political
and economic strategy of investments and takeovers in Belgium.
