FT  16 NOV 94 / Survey of Derivatives (8): Of naked dogs and bull spreads -
Emerging markets / A look at exotic ideas for trades
The naked dog basket is not the title of a film showing at your local art
house cinema, nor a contender for next year's Booker prize. It is, in fact,
an idea for a new financial product - one of the latest to emerge from the
'rocket science' laboratories of the world's leading investment banks.
And it provides a graphic illustration of the connections between
derivatives and the emerging markets of Asia, Latin America and Europe. The
basket of dogs is made up of a selection of Brady bonds, issued in exchange
for the rescheduled debts of developing countries.
The dogs are naked because the yield on the US long bond, which in its zero
coupon form serves as collateral for these issues, is stripped from the
return on the Bradies.
The coupon on the 'dogs' is therefore directly tied to the so-called
'stripped spread' - the difference between the US long bond rate and the
yield on the Bradies.
The instrument is one of the most exotic derivatives trades and there has
been limited activity to date.
Nevertheless the wider market in both traded options in distressed and
securitised emerging market debt is substantial. Even though activity has
tailed off to some extent since the upward move in US bond rates in
February, business has grown rapidly over the past two years.
Ms Alexandra McLeod, head of emerging markets at Bank of America, Illinois,
said in a recent paper that the 'astonishing' growth of the emerging debt
market has 'given birth to a new generation of derivatives'.
The notional value of emerging market options traded in 1992 was estimated
at Dollars 15.5bn and there has been significant growth since then, with
institutional fund managers, as well as hedge funds and specialist boutiques
all active in the market.
On offer are plain vanilla put and call options on Brady bonds issued by big
debtors such as Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela, Mexico and Poland, as well as
the distressed debt of Nigeria and Russia. Increasingly, too, structures
such as straddles, strangles, bull spreads, and butterflies, are also
available.
Overall options trading has now outpaced the growth of the cash market.
'With new participants and broking houses entering the market and increasing
its liquidity, volumes seem to be on an upward spiral,' added Ms McLeod.
Derivatives on emerging market debt were first sold in 1990, when banks
sought to enhance the yield on the debt they were holding by selling covered
calls. 'If a bank had 60 per cent provisions on its Brazilian loans and the
market was at 36, it would be happy to sell a call on its debt at 40, in
order to realise a fee,' Ms McLeod explained.
Since 1993, a liquid market has developed on all principal assets, with high
levels of options activity this year in Venezuelan and Russian debt paper,
reflecting high volatility and political risk in both countries.
One reflection of rising interest was the issue earlier this year by the
Emerging Markets Traders Association of their own master agreement for
over-the-counter options, designed to simplify hedging in emerging markets.
The agreement published in April, was accompanied by six recommended market
practices for options transactions on emerging markets.
Whereas the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) master
agreement provides for structures such as collars, straddles and strangles
to be built into OTC agreements, the emerging market documentation is
simpler, and more geared to plain vanilla put and call options.
Equity derivatives have been well known in the Asian markets over the past
decade, according to traders, with the range extending more recently to
Latin American markets. For example, earlier this year the Chicago Board
Options Exchange launched an option on a Mexican stock exchange index, based
on 10 US listed Mexican ADRs and ADSs.
Component stocks represent a range of economic sectors. One of the stocks,
Telefonos de Mexico, is the most widely traded equity option in the US.
On a smaller scale, this year has also seen developments in eastern Europe.
In January, the Austrian stock exchange issued warrants, denominated and
settled in Austrian schillings, were issued, based on baskets of blue chip
Czech and Hungarian equities.
And last month, Citibank announced the launch of a warrant on a basket of 10
Turkish equities, the first ever derivative product on a diversified Turkish
equity portfolio offered to both local and international investors.
Many of the products offer investors the chance to leverage up already
attractive sounding returns in exchange for greater exposure to the risks.
But derivative instruments can also offer investors a safer and more viable
means of entry into the markets. Willy Hemetsberger, vice-president equity
derivatives, emerging markets, at Citibank in London, insists that they can
eliminate problems linked to custody, documentation and settlement.
The primitive character of custody arrangements in Russia, for example,
means that investors may need to travel to a company's headquarters in a
remote Siberian town, for example.
Buying into Russia by means of a derivative whose value reflects that of the
underlying share is a more practicable option. And in highly volatile
markets, derivatives, especially those based on indices or baskets, can help
to diversify risks.
By reflecting the value of indices derivatives can also help investors gain
access to markets that can sometimes be highly illiquid. 'The trick is to
develop products that allow investors to participate. You can guarantee the
downside,' explains Mr Hemetsberger.
And there are increasing signs, too, that within the emerging markets
themselves local companies are becoming active users of derivatives, a fact
reflected in the emergence of a number of powerful local exchanges.
Last year, Brazil's Bolsa Mercadorias e Futuros was the world's fifth most
active exchange, with its interest rate, stock index and gold futures
sitting comfortably among the world's top 30 contracts.
