FT  01 NOV 94 / Survey of Australia (2): It's getting stronger - Economy
On a short-term view, the Australian economy looks as palatable as the
country's awesome beaches. On medium-term view, conditions are less certain,
writes NIKKI TAIT.
About a year ago, the country started to pull out of recession with
unexpected strength. Annual growth in gross domestic product hit the five
per cent mark early in 1994, before easing back to 4.3 per cent in the
second quarter. Inflation remained (and remains) low: the annual increase in
the consumer price index ran at 1.7 per cent in the same period.
Moreover, while consumer demand was the driving force in the recovery's
early stages, this is finally generating a pickup in business confidence. As
a result, the government's crucial target for business investment - a 14.5
per cent rise in 1994/5 - seems more attainable. There was a 'high
probability' of this increase being reached or even surpassed, remarked Ted
Evans, one of the treasury's senior officials, in September.
So, with some justification, Mr Ralph Willis, Australia's unassuming
treasurer, has been able to declare that his country has never looked better
placed to achieve a prolonged period of economic growth.
But even Mr Willis would not pretend that the skies are cloudless.
The most immediate concern is the severe drought which has hit key
agricultural areas on the east coast. The effects of this are still felt
widely, and it is hard to assess the final impact.
But, already, production of wheat, a significant export category for
Australia, is forecast to almost halve from around 17m tonnes last year to
10.4m tonnes in 1994/5. Feed costs for livestock producers are increasing,
and prices of both animal and grain-based products could rise. Rural
hardship cases are fairly widespread, prompting the government to announce a
ADollars 164m package of emergency aid measures, spread over two years. At
present, official estimates suggest that around half a percentage point may
be knocked off the nation's growth rate as a result of the drought.
Secondly, in spite of the strong growth rate, Australia's unemployment
situation remains grim. A year into the recovery, the jobless rate stands at
9.5 per cent, and the emphasis which the corporate sector is still putting
on productivity improvements suggests that any rapid decline is unlikely.
Some forecasts have indicated that a national growth rate of around 3.5 per
cent for the rest of the decade would still leave the jobless rate at seven
per cent by the year 2000. A growth rate of 4.5-5 per cent might get
unemployment down to five per cent.
Such predictions encouraged the federal government to launch a ADollars
6.5bn 'jobs programme' earlier this year. Its initiatives were various, but
included the offer of either subsidised employment, mainly in the private
sector, or work experience and training to all long-term unemployed people
of 18-plus.
The package was given the best possible gloss, and much of the cost is
actually spread over a four-year period. Nevertheless, while it was quickly
judged to be politically-astute, the business and financial community was
less impressed. In spite of government reassurances that it was sticking to
its deficit reduction strategy - which aims to cut the deficit to around one
per cent of gross domestic product by 1996/7 - it would have preferred a
faster rate of reduction, and more margin for error.
These calls were revoiced by Mr Bernie Fraser, the Reserve Bank governor, in
September and Mr Willis has suggested that they will be borne in mind in
shaping the next budget.
Thirdly, there is the matter of Australia's external account. Australia's
current account deficit has stabilised at around four per cent of GDP in
recent years, but the concern is that the balance of trade could go out of
kilter as business investment gets under way and imports of plant and
machinery surge.
Many analysts do predict some worsening of the current account: Bankers
Trust, for example, recently predicted ADollars 22bn deficit in 1995/6, or
4.5 per cent of GDP, although it adds that such a level 'will not pose a
serious problem for the economy'. Since then, the August trade figures have
been released - and the much larger-than-expected current account deficit
fuelled the pessimists' worst fears.
The authorities' response, meanwhile, centres on the huge effort to promote
Asian trade, and encourage Australian exports to the region. This, it is
hoped, could offset the rise in imports.
But most pundits also acknowledge that that there is an element of guesswork
in all of this. No one yet knows how strongly-sustained Australia's export
performance will be, nor the extent of any import surge. If the current
account does 'blow out', it is widely assumed that interest rate or tax
increases might have to follow - the political hope presumably being for the
latter - and that this could occur after the next federal election, in 1996.
Finally, there is the question of internal 'structural' reforms. Ministers
frequently point to the progress made by Australia over the past decade - in
terms of the steady lowering of tariff barriers, the move to replace
centralised wage agreements by enterprise-based bargains, the reduction in
the number of industrial disputes, the introduction of competition into key
sectors such as telecommunications, and so on. There is, moreover, an
ongoing effort to push the process further, especially at state level.
But the outside world, including the all-important Asia region, is sometimes
less appreciative. It still tends to see sporadic, but high-profile,
national strikes (in the coal and shipping industries, for example);
Australia's low savings ratio, contrasting sharply with that of its northern
neighbours; and the nation's egalitarian culture which distrusts commercial
success.
One recent survey of international competitiveness, by the International
Institute of Management Development, put Australia in 15th place, roughly
level pegging with the UK and Canada. Singapore, by contrast, came in second
to the US, Hong Kong was fourth, and even Malaysia and Taiwan managed 17th
and 18th places, respectively.
