FT  15 MAR 94 / Lords deal blow to government's teacher training plans
The government's higher education policy suffered a serious blow yesterday
after the House of Lords approved by a two-vote margin an amendment to the
education bill to ensure that schools act in partnership with universities
when training postgraduate teachers.
Universities lobbied hard for the amendment. They had already forced the
government to withdraw another part of the bill, restricting student unions
to a narrow list of core activities. Opposition spokesmen said the entire
bill should now be withdrawn.
Viscount Eccles, a former education minister and Lord Beloff, an academic,
were among Conservative backbenchers who joined Labour and Liberal Democrat
peers in supporting the amendment, which was carried by 123 votes to 121.
Assurances by Baroness Blatch, education minister, that only schools judged
to be suitable would be allowed to provide school-centred courses for
postgraduates failed to satisfy the critics. She claimed there was no real
difference between the government and opposition peers over the need to
provide for high standards and high-quality teaching.
Lord Judd, Labour spokesman on education in the Lords, who moved the
amendment, suggested that the qualifications of those who enrolled on
school-centred courses would be of limited value.
He feared the emergence of 'tinpot' certificates associated with one local
school.
Lord Eccles warned that if schools providing such courses did not have a
real working partnership with universities, the status of teachers would not
be improved.
'So long as teachers are considered beneath other professions we are not
going to get our education right,' he said.
Lord Beloff said that school-centred courses should only be undertaken by
schools in co-operation with institutions of higher education.
Lord Judd hailed the incorporation of the amendment in the bill as 'a
wonderful result for a civilised approach to education', while Lord Russell,
a Liberal Democrat peer, described it as 'a substantial damage limitation
exercise'.
Labour claimed that the amendment would have a serious impact on ministers'
plans to allow schools to run teacher training courses on their own. Shadow
education secretary Mrs Ann Taylor said it 'tears out the heart of the
Bill.'
She added: 'After the embarrassing climbdown over student union reforms
there is nothing left to argue about. John Patten should withdraw this
divisive and unnecessary bill immediately.'
Mr Don Foster, Liberal Democrat education spokesman, said: 'Given widespread
opposition to the government's proposals on teacher training, now is the
time for them to admit defeat and withdraw the entire bill.'
Professor Peter Mortimore, director of London University's Institute of
Education commented: 'This makes sense. To cut higher education out of the
equation is wrong and denies the students the chance to gain the skills not
only to do the job but to improve and reflect on it and also to see what
life is like outside that school.'
