FT  25 OCT 94 / International Bonds: Short-dated dollar deals aimed at
retail investors
The eurobond market was yesterday dominated by short-dated dollar deals
aimed at retail investors.
The World Bank announced it was planning a Y200bn global deal. Co-leads were
named as Merrill Lynch, Nikko and Nomura.
Sources in the market not connected with the deal said the World Bank bond
would probably be in the 10-year maturity, and be priced at 8 basis points
over the No 174 Japanese government bond.
One syndicate manager said that although the bond would be a global
offering, much of the demand would be in Japan. 'There is no demand for yen
bonds in the US and Europe now,' he said.
A long-dated Spanish peseta deal is also rumoured to be in the offing.
In the dollar sector, Peregrine Capital created an unusual structure for a
Dollars 250m bond with a 7 per cent coupon due 2001 for Hutchison Delta
Finance.
The bonds will be exchangeable into ordinary shares of Hutchison Delta
Ports, which has said it will seek a listing within seven years, Peregrine
said. If no initial public offering has taken place by the redemption date
the issuer is required to redeem the bonds at 124.078 per cent of the
principal plus accrued interest.
Peregrine said that demand had come from the US and Europe for the bonds,
which are guaranteed by Hutchison Whampoa, the Hong Kong conglomerate.
Also in the dollar sector, SBC brought its third issue this year for
Rabobank Nederland, a four-year Dollars 250m offering with a 7.5 per cent
coupon. This deal saw good demand from its target of Swiss retail and small
institutions. SBC said spreads on the two other deals for Rabobank this year
have tightened since issue.
IBJ's Dollars 150m offering from Swedish Export Credit was aimed at European
retail customers, mostly in the Benelux region and Switzerland, and as is
usual with issues of this type was expected to take a few days to clear.
Goldman Sachs brought a Y15bn floating-rate note issue for J-Cars and
reported good demand for the first securitisation of car loan receivables
from Japan. When freed to trade the spread tightened by 2 basis points,
Goldman said.
Deutsche Bank took advantage of unsatisfied demand for the recent World Bank
offering and brought a L200bn deal for the Republic of Austria. Sales were
mainly outside Italy.
A four-year DM200m deal for Export Development Corp of Canada, brought by
Merrill Lynch Frankfurt, was targeted at European retail and Canadian
institutional investors and met good demand.
