FT  01 DEC 94 / MMC to probe Performing Rights Society
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission is mounting an investigation into
allegations of unfair practices and administrative inefficiency at the
Performing Rights Society, which collects royalties for composers and
songwriters.
The investigation follows long-running complaints from composers to the
Office of Fair Trading concerning the level of the society's administration
fees and claims that its method of royalty collection is unfair to less
successful composers.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, OFT director-general, yesterday said he had 'grounds for
concern that the society may not be operating in a fully efficient and
properly accountable manner'.
The society, founded by a group of music hall composers in 1914, has a
monopoly of the collection of royalties for musical performances in the UK.
It raises more than Pounds 150m in royalties each year for 26,000 members.
Royalties are collected for radio and television broadcasts, as well as live
performances and the use of music in public places such as pubs and shops.
The level of royalties varies from Pounds 200 for a song performed on BBC1's
Top of the Pops, to a few pence if a society inspector spots music being
played in a supermarket.
The society has for some time come under fire from the music industry. U2,
the successful Irish rock group, earlier this year started legal proceedings
to challenge the society's right to collect royalties for live performances.
Mr Paul McGuinness, U2's manager, yesterday welcomed the MMC's
investigation. He described the society as 'superlatively inefficient',
saying that U2 often waited four years to receive royalties on songs
performed outside the UK.
The less successful end of the music industry has also criticised the
society, complaining to the OFT that its practices favour successful acts,
such as U2, to the detriment of obscure composers.
Chief target for their criticism is the introduction of a new system for
collecting royalties on live performances. This collects royalties on music
played in 550 big venues, whereas the old system levied them on any music
referred to in concert programmes. Some classical composers have complained
that their earnings have since been halved.
Both sides of the industry have been critical of the service provided by the
society and its overheads.
The society said yesterday that it had cut costs in real terms, with the
proportion of annual income spent on administration falling from 19.8 per
cent in 1991 to a projected 17 per cent next year.
Mr Wayne Bickerton, chairman, added that the society had 'already made great
strides' at addressing the issues due to be examined by the MMC.
Mr McGuinness called for it to be reformed. He advocated abolishing its
monopoly in favour of a US-style free market system of competing commercial
concerns.
Mr McGuinness said: 'The situation must be resolved before the development
of the new digital system of music diffusion.
'Otherwise we'll still be dependent on the PRS and it will do its job the
same way as it does it now - appallingly badly.'
