FT  21 FEB 94 / FT Guide to The Week
MONDAY 21
German strike ballot
The national executive of IG Metall, the engineering workers' union, meets
to decide in which region it will hold a strike ballot, with the intention
of calling a strike in early March. Baden-Wurttemberg and North
Rhine-Westphalia are the most likely contenders. Yet there are still hopes
for a negotiated solution to the dispute concerning pay and conditions, with
engineering employers seeking drastic cost cuts.
North Korea
Today is the deadline for North Korea to permit inspection of its nuclear
facilities. An eleventh-hour agreement with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) means that there will be no immediate clash with the UN
Security Council. North Korea's last-minute compliance ensures that it will
not be accused of violating the terms of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty at an IAEA board of governors' meeting today.
European Union foreign ministers meet in Brussels to discuss the Balkan
crisis and the enlargement of the union. Member states are expected to use
the meeting to lodge further protests at Greece's recent decision to
blockade Macedonia. Meanwhile the foreign ministers will also be seeking to
hammer out more details in the enlargement negotiations, in advance of the
special EU council meeting on enlargement next weekend. EU agricultural
ministers also meet today.
Euro Disney's 60 banks receive the final version of an investigative audit
of the troubled leisure group's finances from KPMG Peat Marwick, the
accountancy firm. A meeting with Euro Disney will then be arranged to start
negotiations about its emergency financial restructuring. The banks last
week discussed preliminary proposals for restructuring with executives of
Euro Disney and Walt Disney.
EU networks about to extend: The European Union's ambitious trans-European
networks initiative, which aims to develop telecommunications, energy and
transport networks spanning the region, takes its next step forward today .
Mr Henning Christophersen (above), economics commissioner, chairs the second
meeting of a taskforce consisting of senior officials from member states.
The group will consider which transport and energy projects should be given
priority and various options for finance.
Holidays: US, President's Day holiday. Federal government offices closed.
TUESDAY 22
Greenspan on policy
Mr Alan Greenspan,the chairman of the US Federal Reserve, gives his
bi-annual address to Congress on the state of the economy and current
central bank monetary policy. He is likely to be grilled about his decision
to raise interest rates on February 4. It was the first tightening of US
monetary policy in five years, and some in Congress criticised the decision
as likely to hinder, not help, the economy.
Gatt and the environment: In Geneva, the governing council of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade debates the link between trade and the
environment. The ministerial meeting in Marrakesh on April 12-15, to set the
course of Gatt's future work on the issue, is uppermost in trade diplomats'
minds. Greens say trade rules need changing to secure environmental goals;
developing countries fear greenery cloaks protectionism.
UK revised GDP figures will be watched closely by the markets, in the wake
of last week's disappointing economic statistics. Traders are likely to see
any downwards revision from the earlier estimate of a 0.7 per cent rise in
1993's fourth quarter as a sign that the recovery is faltering.
Women priests in prospect: The general synod of the Church of England meets
in London for a final debate on the legislation to permit the ordination of
women priests. If, as is almost certain, the synod approves the legislation
the first women to become priests will be ordained before Easter.
Giovanni Goria goes on trial: Former Italian Prime Minister Giovanni Goria
(left), a Christian Democrat, goes on trial for alleged corruption in Turin.
Mr Goria resigned as finance minister because of his alleged involvement in
irregularities in a savings bank scandal. More than 50 deputies and senators
and 1,000 senior politicians and businessmen were investigated.
Mr Geidar Aliev, only member of the Brezhnev-era Politburo to have survived
as a leader in the post Communist era, arrives in Britain with a large
demand and a large promise. The demand is that Armenia be recognised as an
aggressor against Azerbaijan after the forces from the Armenian-populated
enclave of Nagorno Karabakh within Azerbaijan captured swathes of Azeri
territory. The promise is of exploitation rights, for BP among other large
oil companies, of reserves in the Caspian sea off Baku which has the oil
industry entranced and the more enthusiastic of the Azeris talking of a new
Kuwait.
WEDNESDAY 23
Kohl to galvanise CDU
Mr Helmut Kohl, the man who brought Germany unification, continues his
Christian Democratic Union's election campaign at the party conference in
Hamburg. He must galvanise his party and revive its spirits in the face of
economic recession and a slump in electoral support across the country. The
question is whether Mr Kohl, with his very considerable political experience
and cunning, can reverse the downward trend in the polls. His hopes rest on
three things: a recovery of the German economy; the desire of electors to
return to the familiarity and security of the ruling coalition at national,
rather than local, elections; and his own ruthless political instincts in a
frantic election year. There are 19 separate elections ahead, leading up to
the general election on October 16. The conference ends today.
Zhu Rongji starts tour of Japan: The Chinese vice premier (left) begins a
nine-day official visit to Japan, to meet Mr Tsutomu Hata, foreign minister,
and other leaders. He is the first senior Chinese leader to visit Japan
since prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa took power last August.
Han Sung-joo, South Korean Foreign Minister, visits Mexico in the course of
what was originally planned as a trade trip in connection with the creation
of the North American Free Trade area. .
Race relations relaunched: Mr William Waldegrave, minister for public
service, and Mr Herman Ouseley, chairman of the Commission for Racial
Equality, will launch a new look for Britain's race relations organisation.
The CRE will adopt Citizen's Charter service standards and a new structure
in an attempt to provide improved services to members of ethnic minority
communities.
Fresh Guildford Four appeal: Paul Hill, 38, from Belfast, starts his appeal
against conviction for killing a soldier in Belfast in 1974. Mr Hill has
been on bail since the Guildford Four were released in October 1989. His
appeal against conviction for murdering a former soldier, Mr Brian Shaw, in
1974 will be heard by the Lord Chief Justice, Sir Brian Hutton, Lord Justice
MacDermott and Mr Justice McCollum.
THURSDAY 24
Anxiety at Yeltsin address
Boris Yeltsin is to address both houses of parliament, an event postponed
from February 18 because the Russian president was suffering from a cold.
His speech will now be heard with special attention as concern mounts
throughout the international community regarding the president's stamina.
His words will be especially scrutinised for indications of exactly how he
intends to maintain the progress of economic reform.
More US economic data are published today, providing further evidence of
whether or not the economic expansion is continuing this year. Figures
include durable goods orders and durable shipments in January, and initial
unemployment claims, state benefits, and weekly money supply statistics.
Romanian unrest intensifies: The farmers' union Agro-Star plans a one-day
strike in protest at government agricultural policies and the poor
administration of state farms. Romanian airport workers plan a one-hour
strike in support of wage claims tomorrow. Romania's three main labour blocs
strike on February 28 to back demands for a change of government. Last week
President Ion Iliescu met leaders of the Alfa trade union movement, one of
Romania's three main labour blocs.
Discontent has grown steadily among the 23m Romanians, fuelled by inflation,
since the one-party communist state collapsed in December 1989.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin ends his four-day official trip to Spain and
Portugal, hoping to persuade them to influence more Arab states to make
peace with Israel.
Tokyo court bribery hearing: Tokyo District Court holds its first hearing on
the alleged bribery case involving former Miyagi governor Shuntaro Honma and
executives at Daishowa Paper. Daishowa Paper is the country's second largest
paper manufacturer. The defendants include Mr Ryoei Saito, (above) honorary
chairman of Daishowa Paper, notorious for his desire to be buried alongside
his collection of Impressionist paintings. The arrest of Mr Saito, 77,
followed allegations that he authorised a Y100m (Pounds 630,000) payment to
a governor who approved a Daishowa-linked golf course and housing complex.
UN High Commissioner for Refugees Sadako Ogata visits Mbabane in Swaziland
to assess the situation with regard to refugees from Mozambique (until Feb
27).
FRIDAY 25
Greens seize protest role
In Mannheim, the German Greens begin their two-day party conference. The
Greens will be seeking to launch themselves as the main party of protest
against the political establishment in this marathon election year.
Moroccan unions take action: A Moroccan federation of unions plans a 24-hour
strike today to protest at the government's continued refusal to participate
in talks. A similar strike in December 1990 caused riots in several cities
in which at least 43 people were killed.
Keen hope for EU enlargement: Foreign ministers assemble in Brussels for a
special EU council meeting on the enlargement of the union. The participants
will aim to consolidate the progress made in preliminary talks earlier in
the week.
Japanese construction scandal: Tokyo District Court holds its first hearing
on the alleged bribery case involving Mr Fujio Takeuchi, former governor of
Ibaraki north of Tokyo. Four construction groups are involved in charges of
bribery relating to tenders for a government dam project.
WEEKEND 26-27
Group of Seven on CIS
Finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven (G7)
gather in Kronberg, in the Taunus hills north of Frankfurt, to debate the
plight of the Russian economy. Mr Theo Waigel, the German finance minister,
whose country is most exposed to Russia's debt problems, invited them.
Italy's election in March will be the first under a new simple majority
system but the voters are likely to be as confused as ever. Fully 320
polling booth symbols have been submitted for approval before Sunday's
deadline for filing candidates' names.
Twin Towers bombing: The anniversary of the World Trade Center bombing in
New York may be marked by the end of the four-and-a-half month trial of the
alleged bombers. Prosecution and defence should have concluded summations by
Monday, and the jury may pass judgement on the four defendants - Mohammad
Salameh, Ahmad Ajaj, Nidal Ayyad and Mahmud Abouhalima - shortly afterwards.
Compiled by Martin Mulligan. Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
