FT  11 OCT 94 / The Conservatives in Bournemouth: Party faithful scared of
the Blair factor
Standing in the taxi queue at Bournemouth railway station yesterday Mrs
Daisy Clement from Kent was looking grim.
'We have got to get our act together,' said the Tory party activist. 'Things
could not be worse than they are at the moment.'
As the Tory faithful assembled yesterday for their 111th conference the need
to improve the party's act was on the minds of many representatives.
The Tories are more than 20 points behind Labour in the opinion polls. The
economic recovery has still not brought a 'feelgood' factor in many parts of
the country. Above all, Mr Tony Blair's attempt to create a new Labour party
has raised a political challenge of a kind the Tories have not had for two
decades.
As Mr Peter Wormell, a delegate from Colchester put it: 'This is not the
Tory conference. It's 'Contain Tony Blair' week.'
Whatever worries they have the Tories at Bournemouth are not in a state of
panic. Last year there was incessant whispering at Blackpool about whether
Mr John Major would be challenged for the leadership. Yesterday praise for
the prime minister was modest but universal.
Some representatives also believe that Mr Blair's political ability has been
exaggerated by the media. Mrs Margaret Snowling from Newcastle said:
'Blair's performance does not bother me too much. He is a young leader and
has a great deal to prove. The media are too much in love with him.'
And the media's current pre-occupation with sleaze - in particular whether
Mr Mark Thatcher, the son of the former prime minister, received backhanders
from an arms deal in the 1980s - was not shared in Bournemouth's guest
houses yesterday.
Mrs Rita Hudson, a councillor from Humberside, said: 'There is sleaze in all
walks of life. If you have been in power as long as we have, there are bound
to be a few allegations like these.'
Where party activists were less certain was whether Mr Major should continue
to take the party on its current political course or move it further to the
right.
Mr Brian Delbridge from Yeovil said: 'John Major should stick to his own
agenda. The last thing we need is to move any further rightwards.'
Others were determined to give Mr Michael Portillo, the darling of the
right, a good reception when he delivers his speech as employment secretary.
'He alone embodies the determination we have as a party to cut back public
spending,' said one woman.
But one issue and one cabinet minister occupied everyone's mind yesterday.
After a wave of prison break-outs and bad crime figures, Mr Michael Howard's
performance as home secretary came in for severe criticism.
Mr Simon Kearney, a member of the Young Conservatives, said: 'Law and order
are absolutely vital to us. Michael Howard has got to pull his thumb out. We
can't let Tony Blair take the issue away from us.'
A delegate from the north-east was more forthright. 'I was much more
optimistic last year,' she said. 'I had great hopes when Michael Howard came
out with his detailed proposals on crime, but he is yet to get a grip.'
For her - and many others at Bournemouth - the home secretary's speech this
week will be the one thing that determines whether this party has really got
its act together.
