FT  09 MAY 94 / Letters to the Editor: Costings on works councils exclude a
number of obligations
Sir, Bert Thierron, general secretary of the European Metalworkers'
Federation (Letters, April 29), has let the cat out of the bag. His costings
for the 190 European works councils meetings EMF has organised are similar
to EEF's. The similarity ends if you know that EMF's costings exclude the
pay of workers' representatives to attend meetings, advisers' costs,
management attendees' time and costs, and all the costs of preparation and
reporting back. The obligations imposed on a company by the current proposal
involve far greater expense than the meetings EMF has organised, as it well
knows. We believe our estimate of up to Pounds 250,000 per meeting may well
be conservative.
Mr Thierron also chastises Unice, the European employers' organisation, for
suggesting that works councils would delay decision making. He says many
existing European works councils agreements provide for consultation
procedures and there have been no reported delays. How odd then that the
European Trades Union Congress's own case study should conclude that 'most
arrangements provide only information, typically covering corporate
strategy' and 'consultation is rare and negotiation is non-existent'.
European business should be aware of the trade union objective. ETUC, to
which EMF belongs, passed a resolution in 1988 on European works councils,
which called for 'the right for workers' representatives (trade unions) to
obstruct any decisions which are taken without prior negotiation'.
Effective information and consultation of employees is vital for any
business. The Commission's own research shows that there is no single
solution. Multinationals have different methods of informing and consulting
employees, reflecting domestic circumstances and cultural differences. These
should be encouraged with no threat of standardised and centralised models
being imposed by legislation.
EEF calls on member states to reject the latest Commission proposal on
European company committees. If member states are intent on pursuing this
legislation, they should listen to the concerns expressed by companies and
accept amendments to the proposal put forward by Unice, EEF and other
employer bodies.
Graham R Mackenzie,
director-general,
Engineering Employers' Federation,
Broadway House,
Tothill Street, London SW1
