FT  17 MAR 94 / Norway's opposition says referendum No vote likely
Norway's main opposition Centre party yesterday denounced Oslo's accession
agreement with the European Union as a sell-out and predicted a repeat of
1972 when the electorate narrowly rejected an earlier application for EU
membership in a bitterly divisive referendum.
'This will be a fight on whether Norway will continue to be an independent
nation or whether we will hand ourselves over to a union,' declared Mrs Anne
Inge Lahnstein, the party leader.
Other powerful anti-European Union groupings comprising farmers and
fishermen also said they would fight against membership, ensuring the
expected tough battle for the minority Labour government in a new referendum
despite its insistence that it won a good deal, particularly on the highly
sensitive issues of fish and agriculture.
Like fellow Nordic EU applicants Finland and Sweden, Norway is unlikely to
set a referendum date until the remaining row over enlargement within the
EU's existing ranks is resolved.
But Finland is expected to vote in September or October, with Norway
preferring to wait until after Finland and Sweden have voted.
There remains sharp disagreement in Sweden over the referendum date. Mr Carl
Bildt, the prime minister, favours June or general election day in
September, but Mr Ingvar Carlsson, leader of the opposition Social
Democrats, said yesterday the dispute in Brussels over post-enlargement
voting rights strengthened the argument for delaying at least until the
autumn.
The internal EU row over enlargement is likely to stiffen the strong anti-EU
movements in the three countries which remain strong despite recent opinion
poll swings towards the Yes camp.
In Norway, where opposition is most entrenched, opposition groups said the
government had sacrificed vital national interests by agreeing to a deal
which would flood the country with cheap food imports and give away fish to
countries which had mismanaged their own resources.
Mr Einar Hepsoe, head of the Norwegian fishermen's association, said Norway
had lost on all accounts. 'This accord is worse than I feared when we began
negotiations,' he said.
