FT  26 OCT 94 / Warning on threat to peace in N Ireland
Hardline extremists could try to derail the Northern Ireland peace process,
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, warned yesterday.
In comments made in Northern Ireland within hours of the reported abduction
of the son of an ex-Sinn Fein councillor, Sir Patrick called for 'the
greatest restraint and self-discipline' from all concerned. Those trying to
provoke a return to violence 'must not succeed', he said.
Sir Patrick said: 'I don't know if it's the case in this instance, but we
must expect there will be people who don't wish to see an end to violence
and who will be trying to provoke a return to violence.
'Whenever peace comes after a long period of conflict there is a risk
hardline extremists will try and provoke a return to violence.'
The disappearance of Mr Paul Carroll was the first apparently politically
motivated incident in Northern Ireland since the declaration of a loyalist
ceasefire two weeks ago.
Last night the mystery surrounding Mr Carroll deepened when his father said
that his son was 'in safe hands' and was in hiding from the police because
he was an informer.
Mr Tommy Carroll contradicted an earlier statement by members of his family
that his son had been abducted from his home against his will by masked men.
Police sources in Armagh City said that Mr Carroll had no terrorist
convictions and was not known to be linked with any terrorist organisation.
However, because of the staunchly republican credentials of members of his
family, police were working on the theory that he may have been abducted as
part of an internal feud possibly linked to the IRA.
Two of Mr Carroll's uncles were shot in separate terrorist-related incidents
in the 1980s. Roddy Carroll, a member of the INLA, an extremist group that
split from the IRA, was shot by police allegedly involved in a shoot-to-kill
policy. A second uncle, Adrian, was murdered by loyalist paramilitaries.
Loyalist politicians representing Protestant paramilitaries were in New York
yesterday. They were expected to meet low-ranking administration officials.
The loyalists, led by Mr Gusty Spence, a former paramilitary and a convicted
murderer, and Mr David Ervine, who has also been in prison on bomb-related
offences, said they were prepared to meet with Sinn Fein, the IRA's
political wing.
The loyalist groups, unlike constitutional unionist parties, have no
misgivings about Dublin's proposed cross-border institutions, as long as it
is not a 'Trojan horse leading to a united Ireland'.
Yesterday's events came as Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister,
told the Dail that the framework document with which the two governments
hope to inject momentum into talks involving Ulster's main political parties
on the province's future had to strike a 'very fine balance'.
Meanwhile, Ms Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, Irish justice minister, told the Dail
the government would act soon to scrap the republic's state of emergency,
effectively available as an anti-IRA measure for more than half a century.
