FT  08 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Medicine man seeks cure for indigestion -
BBA is undergoing a thorough restructuring. Tim Burt reports on progress to
date
Mr Roberto Quarta, the Italian-American charged with resuscitating BBA
Group, regards the nickname 'Bob-the-Knife' as too harsh for the surgery he
is performing on the engineering and motor components group.
He admits, however, that the group has been forced to swallow some horrid
medicine in the eight months since his arrival from BTR, where he was chief
executive of the automotive, electronics and building divisions.
More than 2,000 jobs have gone, 1,400 of them through redundancy, and some
Pounds 18m has been spent on restructuring.
'It's tough - this is not aspirin I'm dishing out. It's pretty strong stuff
and in the right dosage it should bring the patient back to life.'
Although BBA discounts talk of a near-death experience, Mr Vanni Treves, the
chairman, acknowledges that its condition deteriorated rapidly last year.
He blames the problems, which forced the group to make restructuring
provisions of Pounds 72.1m in March, on the illness last year of Mr John
White, Quarta's predecessor, and the management time taken up in fighting a
Dollars 300m (Pounds 194m) lawsuit over the 1989 purchase of IGH, its US
industrial subsidiary.
'It was a severe distraction and we lost our way when John White had to
stand down,' he says.
City analysts, and to an extent Mr Quarta as well, believe the problems went
deeper.
'They've spent more than Pounds 350m on acquisitions in the past five years,
they're just too diverse,' says one analyst. Another describes Mr White as
an acquisition junkie who always expected the next deal to deliver the
volume sales to revive the group.
While more circumspect, Mr Quarta admits he was surprised to see BBA making
acquisitions 'before its new subsidiaries were bedded in'.
He has put a brake on that activity and instead identified some 12
subsidiaries for disposal with combined sales of more than Pounds 200m. Of
those, Holden Hydroman, Perplas and Railko have already been sold.
'But we don't have to sell cheap. The balance sheet is in fairly good shape
and we will wait for the right opportunities,' he adds.
The dilemma for BBA, however, is whether continued redundancies, disposals
and cost-cutting will leave the group with enough muscle to establish a
profitable foothold in its remaining core areas.
Analysts are sceptical. They warn that some businesses, such as Signature
Flight Support, the aviation refuelling and servicing group, may not achieve
Mr Quarta's target of 10 per cent margins by 1996.
'They are not large enough in aviation to cut costs and then drive up prices
to get those margins, and it's going to be very difficult in the automotive
businesses too,' according to one analyst.
Mr Quarta, however, is undeterred. He believes an ongoing management review,
which has seen the departure of three divisional executives, has helped
spread a new ideology.
Discounting the reduced sales of Pounds 711m, down from Pounds 742m,
announced in yesterday's interim figures, he says: 'I am changing the
culture. Unlike the previous management, I don't believe volume sales are
the answer to our prayers. Margins are more important.'
In pursuit of those margins, the group expects to use another Pounds 18m of
its provisions to make further job cuts in the second half and refocus the
group's three core sectors: automotive, industrial and transportation. That
strategy appears to have paid off in the six months to June 30 with a 15 per
cent increase in pre-tax profits before exceptional items to Pounds 38.2m.
The challenge for Mr Quarta is to ensure that BBA emerges fit enough to
compete in world markets.
Acknowledging the size of the problem, he admits: 'Cutting is a difficult
skill. If you're not careful you can end up with a business which can't
survive. I don't think that will happen here.
'We can do great things, but first we must get our house in order.'
