FT  04 JUN 94 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Shoot the bureaucrats
Fifty years after the invasion of Normandy, we have turned western Europe
into a buffoon-state: a place where the bureaucrats control the asylum and
are running it in a manner that is an insult to the memory of those who
scrambled on to the Normandy beaches half a century ago.
This buffoon-state is a place of hysterical laughter, jokes and gibes
occasioned by the avalanche of directives and regulations emanating from
Brussels, as well as those concocted locally by bureaucrats working for
member governments.
How about this for a laugh: in Blackburn, the Cavalier Carpet Company,
surveying, in astonishment, the Pounds 28bn or so it costs per year to fund
the Common Agricultural Policy, has calculated that it would be much cheaper
to cover every square inch of the 12 European Union countries with
top-quality carpet.
Or how about this for a laugh: Oliver Field, of Berkshire, one of Britain's
top beekeepers, has been battling to stop Ministry of Agriculture officials
coming on to his honey farm to test his 500 hives for signs of 'foul brood',
a bacterial disease which can devastate bee colonies. The reason he did not
want them back is that in March 1992 they dosed six of his hives with the
anti-bacterial syrups used to cure foul brood - at four times the required
strength.
More than 250,000 bees died; he lost Pounds 3,000 worth of honey production.
He says that he could treat his own bees against the disease, as he used to,
but that the ministry's Bee Control Order makes that illegal. He has said he
would rather face prison than risk a repeat visit from the ministry's
blunderers.
Or how about this for a laugh: in November 1992, out in the North Sea, the
Peterhead trawler Sundari was battling mountainous waves. As she did so, her
crew struggled to hurl overboard 300 boxes of fully-grown haddock.
The skipper had to dump his entire catch, worth Pounds 8,000, because
Britain's annual haddock quota had already been caught.
If he had returned to port with his catch, he could have been fined up to
Pounds 50,000. But he couldn't help catching haddock. In the autumn of 1992,
haddock were present off the north-east Scottish coast in greater numbers
than for many years.
The trawlermen were trying to catch whiting. But every time they lowered
their nets they found them bulging with haddock. Meanwhile, other European
boats were catching almost unlimited quantities of haddock, knowing that
their own fisheries inspectors would not bother to enforce the quota rules.
Fifty years after the Normandy landings, you can laugh or you can cry at the
Europe that has been created, but you cannot ignore it. An excellent guide
to the pathology of the bureaucrats is a book, The Mad Officials, by
Christopher Booker and Richard North (Constable, Pounds 7.95), which
pinpoints what Booker calls the great regulatory disaster that has been
hitting millions of people, and thousands of businesses, in Britain alone.
But it is not all Brussels' fault. According to the authors, there is the
'Whitehall effect' - the way in which UK officials often tack new
requirements on to original EU directives, making their impact on businesses
much more damaging. In addition, there is a wave of regulatory law which is
entirely British-made and has nothing to do with Brussels. One of the
greatest problems of all is over-zealous enforcement.
'One thing which particularly struck us', they write, 'was that wherever we
looked . . . we found the great engine of bureaucracy and its myriad
officials behaving in the same, identifiable ways . . . using the same
jargon, causing the same problems, making the same mistakes.
It was as if we were always looking at the same enormous, blundering monster
which, although it had many heads, was always in the end the same
recognisable animal.'
The Mad Officials is important for the way it threads together the different
strands of the regulatory disaster caused by officials. But it has not
converted me from Euro-enthusiasm to Euro-scepticism. I am a federalist, as
it happens, if only because I detest and fear tribalism and nationalism.
The great thing that can be said for western Europe, 50 years after D-Day,
is that we are not ripping each other's throats out. We are muddling along
appallingly, but at least not warring. All we need to do is shoot the
bureaucrats.
