FT  09 MAY 94 / World Bond Markets: IMF agreement vital for Turkey -
International
Turkey's foreign debt strategy is under the spotlight again as Turkish
officials continue their talks with the International Monetary Fund on a
possible stand-by facility.
Agreement with the Fund is vital to restore domestic confidence in the
battered Turkish lira and the austerity programme of the prime minister, Mrs
Tansu Ciller.
An accord would also do much to dispel the growing mutterings from the
market that the republic could be pushed to meet its foreign obligations in
the current crisis.
Turkey's total outstanding foreign debt - public and private - stood at
Dollars 66bn at the end of September 1993, up from Dollars 55bn at the end
of 1992.
The country has to repay around Dollars 5bn of medium and long-term debt in
1994. Around Dollars 16bn, or 27 per cent of total debt, is short-term - the
maturity structure having worsened sharply with the big increase in
commercial borrowings by banks to finance last year's record 28 per cent
jump in imports. Even with a sharp drop in imports this year, some of the
repayment will need to be rolled over.
Turkey will certainly benefit from a more robust picture on the current
account. With the austerity programme, imports are expected to come back
sharply from the record of Dollars 29bn in 1993, while officials are
projecting a 12 per cent increase in export revenues to Dollars 17.5bn.
After a record deficit in 1993 of Dollars 6.4bn, Mr Necati Ozfirat the head
of the State Planning Organisation, says the current account should be in
balance in the current year.
More encouraging, Turkey's international reserves appear to be growing,
according to figures released last week.
Since the announcement of the April 5 austerity package, central bank
reserves have risen from Dollars 3.03bn to Dollars 3.3bn on April 29,
although this still represents only a little over one month's import cover.
Also, commercial bank reserves at around Dollars 9.4bn, will only be
accessible by means of further severe monetary tightening.
Turkey's policy options are thus constrained. In the wake of the rise in US
interest rates, emerging market borrowers like Turkey have gone out of
favour.
When Turkey pulled a Dollars 750m global bond in March, uncertainty mounted.
This has since been exacerbated by Islamic gains in the March municipal
elections and nagging doubts over the ability of the prime minister to
implement the package.
Underscoring those doubts, Standard &amp; Poor's has just downgraded Turkey for
the third time this year, from BB to B+. Turkey remains on CreditWatch,
which all but rules out an early return to the bond markets.
Traders say its Pounds 125m 10-year bond deal, launched last year by S. G.
Warburg and priced to yield 230 basis points over gilts, is now being
offered at around 600 basis points over gilts - and there are no buyers.
Much will depend on the outcome of Turkey's negotiations with the IMF. If
the talks fail, a rescheduling of Turkish debt seems unavoidable.
On the other hand, if the sides can agree a letter of intent, IMF officials
have indicated that up to Dollars 450m may be released as a one-year standby
facility.
The government says it is also considering a club loan with US banks, which
is likely to provide short-term financing.
That still leaves at least Dollars 3bn of maturing debt to cover. Some
bankers believe the multilateral and bilateral official creditors will be
flexible in rolling over repayments.
'This time, I don't think Turkey can borrow its way out of the problem.
Equity is the only way to go. For the fixed-rate investor, there is just not
enough information,' said one US banker.
The government hopes to raise Dollars 3.5bn from the sale of state assets in
1994. The plan was given a boost last week with Parliament approving an
enabling bill which empowers the government to use decrees for three months
to prepare state companies for sale.
However, the government's recent sale of a minority stake in Tofas, the Fiat
car subsidiary, did not set a very convincing benchmark. The issue raised
around Dollars 350m, compared with bankers' earlier estimates closer to
Dollars 700m before the currency collapsed, losing more than 50 per cent
against the dollar since the start of the year.
Chase Manhattan is now leading a consortium, also comprising Kleinwort
Benson and Salomon Brothers, to prepare the state refinery corporation
Tupras and the petrol retail company Petrol Ofisi for sale. CS First Boston
has been mandated to prepare the state-owned Erdemir Iron and Steel works
for privatisation.
S. G. Warburg confirms that plans for a Dollars 2.5bn convertible issue in
the state owned telecommunications company are also still under
consideration, although it may be some time before the markets are ready for
such a deal.
There is almost as much anxiety over whether Turkey's private banks will be
able to refinance their short-term liabilities. Much of this is trade
finance and many have healthy reserves. However, traders say that market
sentiment could be badly affected if the authorities fail to settle the
Dollars 200m owed to foreign creditors by the three Turkish banks that were
closed down last month.
As one London based dealer put it: 'We're not looking at year-end numbers,
we're wondering whether Turkey can make it through the next six months.'
