FT  15 OCT 94 / Books: Movie myths in real life
SONGS MY MOTHER TAUGHT ME by Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey Century
Pounds 17.99, 468 pages
THE KID STAYS IN THE PICTURE by Robert Evans Aurum Pounds 16.95, 412 pages
Sometimes a movie career seems like a giant rehearsal for the autobiography.
Years of signing deals, speaking the right lines, grinning for the cameras:
they all fall into place when the protagonist can at last say 'Ya boo'. No
more lies. No more lines. Here is how it was, and how he is.
But will the reader, brought up on the movie myths, recognise the truth when
he reads it? And what kind of truth is it? Are not the autobiographer's
verities as subjective as anyone else's? Here are two self-portraits that
seem as definitively non-definitive as any we have met.
Marlon Brando and Robert Evans collided professionally just once. At
Paramount in 1970, Evans gave the nod to Brando playing the title role in
The Godfather. A reluctant nod, claims Brando: Evans thought he was too
young. But soon the 47-year-old Method legend was stuffing cotton wool in
his cheeks, honing that Italianate croak and earning his second Oscar. The
first was for his historic mumblings and scratchings - that astonishing
essay in downplaying that should not have worked but did - in On The
Waterfront.
Now the two men collide again in the bookshops. Brando's Songs My Mother
Taught Me is a vast, slurred, exasperating ego trip that takes him all the
way from Nebraska boyhood - son of an 'off-the-shelf drunk' (mother) and a
'card-carrying prick' (father) - to Tahitian retirement.
That retirement has now lasted 20 years. Since the 1972/73 double whammy of
The Godfather and Last Tango In Paris, Brando has been lured back to the
cameras rarely, briefly and usually for the money. He picked up a cool
million for playing Superman's Dad. And he picked up even more for mumbling
lazily, as he admits, through Christopher Columbus as Torquemada. 'An
embarrassingly bad performance,' its perpetrator sums up: but he still took
the Dollars 5m.
Meanwhile, Robert Evans rose from brief indistinction as a juvenile-lead
actor to infant-prodigy movie mogul. He headed Paramount at 29, ran it for
ten years, and hauled it from bottom to top in the studio league table. The
Odd Couple, Love Story, The Godfather, Chinatown . . . Money disguised as
celluloid.
But where do you go after that glamorous uphill run? Only one way:
glamorously downhill. Evans's beautiful and damned life could have been
scripted by F. Scott Fitzgerald. (He played Irving Thalberg, model for FSF's
last tycoon, on screen and later produced The Great Gatsby). Cocaine and
murder suspicions whirled around Evans in the 1970s and 80s  - though his
part in killings connected to The Cotton Club were never proven - and he
finally fell back into movie production. Happy ending? Not quite. His first
film for Paramount after re-hab was the inauspicious Sliver.
Evans's life makes a better story than Brando's and a far better
autobiography. He seems to have written his own material. Snappy
conversations are set down with total recall. And the prose is glorious with
Tinseltown-speak.
Meanwhile Mr Lazybones of Tahiti, after rising on the rollers of his
god-given talent to the heights of Streetcar, Waterfront and Godfather, now
sits on his coral atoll expatiating on transcendental meditation, the plight
of the Indians and his numerous, supposedly rollicking sexual exploits.
These go on forever. Sometimes he talks about acting: and the book comes
alive when he does. We learn about the improvised genesis of the famed taxi
scene in Waterfront; about lying on ice to intensify the death scene in
Mutiny On The Bounty; about tearing out his emotional innards in Last Tango.
We even learn about those infamous cue-cards. Yes, Brando does read his
dialogue off bits of paper stuck round the set. But, he argues, it lends
freshness and the illusion of thought; and who, having seen Brando act, can
complain?
Both books are partial works in all senses. Self-justifying;
self-glamorising (sometimes through shrewd self-deprecation); and manifestly
short of the whole truth. The largest lacuna in the Brando book is the
murder trial of his son Christian. The largest hole in the Evans book is a
sense of the man in repose; indeed of anyone identifiably human.
