FT  21 JAN 94 / Reno names counsel for Clinton probe
The US attorney general, Ms Janet Reno, yesterday named a Republican lawyer
to head an investigation into President Bill Clinton's financial dealings in
Arkansas.
Mr Robert Fiske, a senior partner in the New York firm of Davis Polk &amp;
Wardwell, will examine Mr Clinton's investment in an Arkansas property
venture called Whitewater Development, and his links to Madison Guaranty, a
failed savings and loan institution.
While no direct allegations of wrongdoing have been made against Mr or Mrs
Clinton, they have been unable to dispel the perception of unanswered
questions. Mr Clinton last week bowed to a chorus of Republican complaints
and asked for the appointment of a special counsel.
Among the areas Mr Fiske will examine is the possible diversion of
depositors' funds from Madison to Whitewater, or to Mr Clinton's campaign
fund for his 1984 election as governor of Arkansas.
Mr Fiske said yesterday that he would also examine any links between
Whitewater and the perplexing suicide last year of Mr Vincent Foster, a
senior White House lawyer and old friend of the Clintons who was handling
the affair for them.
Mr Fiske was appointed chief federal prosecutor for Manhattan by Republican
President Gerald Ford in 1976, but continued to serve under Democratic
President Jimmy Carter.
He was asked to be deputy attorney general by President George Bush, but
withdrew after he was attacked by right-wingers in the Senate who claimed
that as chairman of an American Bar Association committee screening
potential judicial nominees he had helped to undermine some of President
Ronald Reagan's more conservative choices for the federal bench.
Whitewater appears to arouse much less interest in the US at large than it
does in Washington, but in a New York Times poll published yesterday 59 per
cent of those questioned said they thought Mr Clinton was hiding something,
even if he was mostly telling the truth. More than two thirds said they did
not know enough to say whether he or Mrs Clinton did something wrong.
