FT  22 FEB 94 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Portugal (6):
Results still awaited - Foreign investment
Portugal's Ministry for Trade and Tourism is in a sombre mood about last
year's foreign investment. Results are still awaiting official publication,
but all available information indicates there has been a drop of more than
50 per cent compared to 1992.
To make things worse, most large contractual projects will not meet
production and export levels agreed with the government. Lisbon is trying to
reverse the downward tendency by simplifying legal procedures and
establishing more direct contacts with potential investors.
'Really very bad', is the only comment from the ministry, while 1993's
figures for direct foreign investment remain tucked away in a drawer. A
spokesman says the drop from 1992's Dollars 4.375bn is 'tremendous' and
amounts to more than 50 per cent. The most recent official figure published
by the Bank of Portugal is Es111.7bn for the first seven months of 1993;
about half the total for the same period in the previous year. The first
signs of flagging interest emerged in 1992 - when direct foreign investment
suffered a 26 per cent drop compared to 1991.
In addition, estimates of what impact the seven big contractual investments
negotiated with the Portuguese government between 1989 and 1992 will have on
the country's economy, need to be revised. Until recently, the government
hailed these projects as stepping stones for an out-of-date industry on its
way into the 21st century. They would bring modern technology and know-how
to Portugal; create many new jobs and make a huge contribution to Portugal's
export statistics.
The height of euphoria was reached in 1991 when the government signed a
contract with Ford and Volkswagen whose giant joint venture, AutoEuropa,
will produce a multi-purpose vehicle at Palmela, south of Lisbon.
A study carried out last year by ICEP, the body that promotes investment,
trade and tourism in Portugal, said that once they started production in
1995, these projects could represent 20-30 per cent of exports and between 2
and 3 per cent of gross domestic product growth.
Last December, the Bank of Portugal published an article, saying that GDP
growth could reach 8-9 per cent when AutoEuropa started producing in 1995,
if ICEP's figures were correct and the aims established in the investment
contracts were met. But this scenario is turning out to be highly
unrealistic because most of the 'seven giants' - which together were
expected to reach production worth Es1,000bn and exports of Es926bn by the
year 2000 - will have to readjust their projections.
ICEP confirmed reports that the contractual projects were facing problems.
One of the seven, the tyre manufacturer Continental-Mabor, has already
reached agreement with the government to extend by three years (until 2003)
the date for reaching the targets originally agreed.
Two others - General Motors' Delco Remi, which produces electronic
components, and the Finnish petrochemical company Neste - are negotiating a
reassessment of their estimates.
The four remaining companies say they cannot possibly reach their
objectives, mainly because of the international recession. Neste, car
components manufacturer CofapEuropa, and Pepsico's potato chips factory
Laprovar are halving their export targets. AutoEuropa and the car radio
manufacturer Ford Electronica are not publishing their revised estimate,
saying production will depend on the market situation.
Despite the unfavourable circumstances, Mr Miguel Athayde Marques, ICEP
president, views 1994 with some optimism: 'Interest among big foreign
multinationals who visit us and ask for information has increased so we
expect lively economic activity'.
Portugal continues to present itself as an attractive place for foreign
investors, with low wages and overall costs, good productivity levels,
favourable European Union-backed incentives, rapidly-expanding
communications and other infrastructures, and a stable political situation.
To investors from outside the EU, the country maintains it is a gateway to
the European market.
ICEP itself intends to play a more active role in future and is working on a
new strategy to capture investors.
These efforts will be bolstered by a new law on foreign investment, aimed at
simplifying the process for investors and expected to come into effect this
year. New rules for registering projects will be established and the quality
of information on investment possibilities is to be improved.
By granting attractive incentives, the government is mainly trying to
attract investments in industries involving new technologies, particularly
those in areas with high unemployment. However, results for the first six
months of 1993 show that banks and other financial institutions, as well as
real estate and other services continued to be favoured, absorbing almost 70
per cent of direct foreign investment.
In industry, the AutoEuropa project is still managing to attract new
suppliers to the Setubal region. One of them is the Somer Allibert company,
which signed a Es11bn investment contract with the government at the end of
last year and is to create about 660 jobs.
Recent industrial projects in the country's interior region include two
Dutch factories in Ansiao. One will produce wooden boxes for cigars and
chocolates; the other will make panels for metal insulation. Total
investment for the two projects is just under Es700m, and some 60 new jobs
will be created.
Investment opportunities will also continue in infrastructure development.
In telecommunications, the Portuguese government is negotiating with ICL of
Britain and its parent company, Japan's Fujitsu, over the construction of a
factory for systems for the management of telephone lines and high-speed
optical fibre amplifiers involving an estimated investment of Es9bn. Talks
are centering on incentives, which would come from the government and EU
funds.
A decision on which of seven international consortia will be awarded the
contract for construction of what will be the country's largest dam, at Foz
Coa in northern Portugal, is also pending. This hydroelectric project
involves an estimated investment of Es43bn.
But not everyone is happy about international investors coming to Portugal.
National construction companies have protested because a foreign consortium
may win the contract to construct a natural gas pipeline between Setubal,
south of Lisbon, and the northern town of Braga.
They maintain that this Es40bn project should remain 'national', especially
because it does not require particularly sophisticated construction
techniques.
