FT  23 SEP 94 / Letters to the Editor: Argument that company cars are
tax-efficient is a fallacy
Sir, Mr Michael Landon (Letters, September 17) seeks to resurrect the old -
and ultimately self-defeating - chestnut that company cars are still 'a very
cost-effective way of providing a benefit to employees'.
The truth of the matter is that the government has finally achieved its
long-standing aim of establishing a level playing field in company car
taxation. That is not to say that all cars are tax neutral - indeed there
are many winners and losers. Rather, the playing field is now undulating,
but, on average, is level.
One common fallacy committed by those who argue that company cars are still
very tax efficient is to forget that a proportion of any cash alternative
can also be paid tax free either under the fixed profit car scheme or on the
strict statutory basis. Hence it is not correct to state that a private car
must be financed out of after-tax earnings - only the private use proportion
of the cost need be so funded.
In practice, the main factor in determining whether a company car is now tax
efficient is the relative purchasing power of employer and employee. As with
other benefits in kind (for example, private medical care), the ability of
the employer to negotiate a discounted rate is the true perk. However, even
here the playing field is beginning to level out as manufacturers and
leasing companies develop ever more sophisticated personal lease
arrangements and as phantom fleet insurance becomes more commonplace.
Notwithstanding the above, most employees will choose to retain their
company cars for a variety of non-monetary reasons: for example, there is no
hassle involved and they have no responsibility for the car.
My belief is that the status car culture is slowly but surely being eroded
as companies turn to flexible benefit packages and employees begin realising
the attractions of non-conventional pay practices. Those looking for an
overnight change in company car practice will, however, be sorely
disappointed. Brian Friedman,
head of compensation &amp;
benefits,
Arthur Andersen &amp; Co,
1 Surrey Street,
London WC2R 2PS
