FT  08 NOV 94 / Hostile bids ruled out in secret GEC and BAe deal
GEC and British Aerospace negotiated a two-year agreement in July last year
barring either from making a hostile bid for the other as part of friendly
discussions on a merger of their defence interests.
The 'standstill' agreement does not expire until July next year and contains
clauses forbidding either company from talking about the deal.
In the competition between the two companies to buy VSEL, the shipbuilder,
GEC asked the Takeover Panel, which governs City deals, to force BAe to
disclose the existence of the standstill agreement.
It is understood that GEC wanted the pact made public because it felt that
it had a material impact on the value of the shares BAe is offering VSEL
shareholders.
The panel considered submissions from GEC and BAe and declined to act. The
panel is reluctant to force disclosure unless such agreements have a direct
financial impact on either company.
The companies made confidential financial information available to each
other last year, including management reports and long-range profit
projections. BAe insisted that in return for exchanging the share-price
sensitive data GEC should accept a standstill.
BAe refused to confirm or deny the existence of the agreement yesterday. Mr
Richard Lapthorne, BAe's finance director, said: 'We have many contracts
with GEC, all of which were freely entered into by both sides. However, we
do not comment on any specific contracts.' GEC also declined to comment.
The standstill agreement is apparently considered to be legally binding by
both sides, and prevents a hostile bid by GEC for BAe until the middle of
next year, contrary to speculation before the bids for VSEL.
GEC has made no secret of its interest in merging BAe's defence operations
with GEC-Marconi, its defence arm.
Since BAe had well-known financial difficulties in 1991-92, GEC was keen to
gain as much information as possible on BAe as part of the friendly talks
last year. It thus agreed to the standstill, limiting its freedom of action.
