FT  21 MAY 94 / How To Spend It: Beating a path to Egg - Lucia van der Post
discovers an unusual shop where the owners sell what they like
There has to be some compelling reason why Richard Rogers, Issey Miyake,
Donna Karan, Rei Kawakubo, Joseph Ettedgui, Sir Terence Conran and a host of
other top designers have been seen recently heading for a small mews in
Knightsbridge, west London. There is - a shop called Egg.
Egg is a small, light and airy converted garage in which Maureen Doherty
(once Miyake's right hand in London and a noted arbiter of taste) and Asha
Sarabhai have joined forces to sell the things they like. Others seem to
like them, too: hence the activity in Kinnerton Street SW1.
What can you get there? Try, for instance, 'the best gym shoes in the world'
(at Pounds 20 a time) or a nubbly duster (Pounds 5). Then there are
exquisitely subtle tie-and-dyed silk pieces that would set you back Pounds
350 or more. The backbone of the shop is a collection of easy, unstuffy but
beautifully-made clothes, some indigenous ethnic designs from India, others
with ethnic origins adapted subtly to western living.
Sarabhai is a highly-regarded textile designer whose exhibition at the
Victoria &amp; Albert museum a few years ago was an eye-opener to many a
westerner used to the cruder, more mass-produced Indian textiles. Having
married into a wealthy Indian textile family, she has used the connection to
develop indigenous skills, improve quality and find markets for all her
hand-made work.
The shop has many of the garments and textiles produced in her small
workshop in Ahmedabad: cotton kurtas, for instance, made from high-quality
cotton with draw-string trousers and a long overshirt. These are loose, easy
and timeless in style. At Pounds 95 the set, they tune in easily with the
prevailing penchant this summer for easy trousers and long tops.
Elspeth Juda is an 82-year-old artist who visits Egg regularly. 'I work
every day,' she says, 'and I like very easy clothing, simple things that
cover every bump, of which I now have plenty. I used to be a size 12 and now
I'm a size 18.
'Trousers, I find, are habit-forming; they are so comfortable. I also love
the white shirts and I have a wonderful navy-blue cashmere gilet which was
my birthday present from me to me.'
Almost everything in Egg is hand-made, much of it labour-intensive - the
exquisite workmanship of the silk, tie-dyed pieces in particular but also
the pleating, the quilting and the smocking. There is a concern that every
detail should be perfect.
Besides the exquisite pieces, are quite homely things such as traditional
tin yoghurt pots from southern India, ranging in price from Pounds 20 to
Pounds 40; cotton khadi trousers and jackets from the Gandhi shops at about
Pounds 30 a time; and Chinese workmen's cotton tops (they make splendid
jackets for summer) in white and indigo.
Then there are cushions covered in rare and beautiful 18th century French
fabric which cost between Pounds 80 and Pounds 120 each; antique linen
sheets at Pounds 120 a set; and a few pieces by British designers, notably
Flyte Ostell's creamy linen knits and T-shirts. 'I like basic things that
can be worn by men and women,' says Doherty.
Egg is a shop that links the calm serenity of the east with a touch of
western sophistication. It seems to make for a happy marriage.
Egg is at 36 Kinnerton Street, London SW1, tel: 071-235 9315. Open Tuesdays
to Saturdays from 11am to 7pm.
