FT  06 AUG 94 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Buy a ticket, win world peace
I have been straining my brain so as to devise a new world game. The notion
that we need a new world game was advanced by Miss Lee, my executive
assistant, during the soccer World Cup a few weeks ago. Most games, says
Miss Lee, are fundamentally silly. She had read, however, that the man who
founded Nike had set himself the target of inventing a new game so as to
cheer us all up, and imagined that I could help.
Miss Lee is not in London. She is travelling in Umbria with next door's
gardener, a tall and braided youth whose grasp of gardening lore is scarcely
more profound than the instructions on a seed packet.
In her absence I have been sweeping and dusting the flat, producing
exquisitely tasteful meals for our exquisitely snotty cat - and straining my
brain so as to devise a new world game with which to astound Miss Lee when
she returns to London in the company of the braided one.
Here is my idea: global lotteries to fund good causes. In November we shall
see the debut of Britain's first national lottery since 1826 - a giant
tombola which is expected to produce an annual turnover of at least Pounds
4bn, part of which will fund massive donations to five good causes:
charities, the arts, sport, national heritage and the Millennium Fund.
Surprisingly, there are still a few grey souls who are not turned on by
Britain's national lottery. One of them is Allison Pearson, a columnist on
the London Evening Standard, who was rabbiting on this week about the
misfortunes likely to be visited on some of those who win big prizes.
'Poverty erodes the spirit, certainly,' wrote this pompous wowser, 'but
unearned wealth, wherever it comes from, can do the same.'
She has rather missed the point. What does it matter if a few big lottery
winners splurge their loot in decadent fashion because they are unable to
handle such large amounts of cash? In sub-Saharan Africa more than 34m
people are facing famine or severe food shortages because of the intractable
wars and strife that plague that doomed continent.
I would bet everything I own that all those people would like nothing more
than to get their hands on some 'unearned wealth'.
The gambling urge is ancient, universal and ingrained. Internationally, the
gambling business is growing frantically. You cannot extinguish gambling,
just as you cannot suppress various other human urges, so you might as well
regulate it and allow it to develop in a civilised manner as free of
shysterism or criminal influence as - oh - banking or insurance or financial
services.
While you are at it, you might as well cream off a percentage of gambling
turnover and direct it where it will do considerable and visible good. This
is why Britain's national lottery is so well-conceived and is likely to
establish itself as the world's biggest tombola.
But why stop there? Sooner, rather than later, I want to see the
introduction of globe-girdling lotteries to help fund planetary
rehabilitation. We have the computers, satellites and TV sets, so what are
we waiting for?
Instead of wringing our hands every time the UN fails to march into Rwanda
or Bosnia or some other hell-hole because it hasn't got the money or the
equipment or the nerve, why not fund our efforts at international
peace-keeping, or tackle catastrophes such as Rwanda's, with a UN mercy army
hundreds of thousands strong funded not by member governments but directly
via our first global lottery? I would buy tickets, and so - I suspect -
would you.
Want to save the elephant? The ivory holocaust and the explosive growth of
human population that have so endangered the African elephant affect Asian
elephants as well. Both Loxodonta africana and Elephas maximus are running
out of living space.
To survive, elephants will need huge tracts of land. So let us buy it. Let
us launch a global lottery that has as its declared aim the saving of animal
life, starting with the elephants. I would buy tickets for that lottery as
well, and so - I suspect - would you.
Who cares what dreary Allison Pearson thinks? We have got very little time
in which to do many of the things we have got to do if our world is not to
become known throughout the galaxy as Planet Stinko. Global lotteries will
prove our salvation, mark my words.
