FT  16 DEC 94 / Councils Shake-up: A knight who routs ministers - Profile,
Sir John Banham
Sir John Banham, who headed the local government review for England, proudly
describes himself as a 'difficult man to direct'.
Successive environment ministers seem to agree with him. Mr Robert Jones,
the local government minister and former chairman of the Commons environment
committee, described Sir John's performance as 'an extraordinary mixture of
self-contradiction, confusion and flippancy'.
He added that many people hoped 'the next tumbril rolling down Whitehall'
would have Sir John inside it.
There has indeed been much self-contradiction and flippancy in Sir John's
language during the past two years as he has guided the Local Government
Commission around England. But they have masked the workings of a canny
political operator who appears to have forced ministers to accept a local
government structure very different from the one they envisaged.
The principles Sir John has applied can be seen in his earlier career. As
first chairman of the Audit Commission, the watchdog body for local
government finance set up by Mr Michael Heseltine in his first spell as
environment secretary, he showed a rigid determination to limit costs.
Then he was director-general of the Confederation of British Industry, with
members that strongly opposed small, fragmented authorities. Large companies
wanted to deal with as few regulation and enforcement officials as possible
and did not want to pay for an expensive reorganisation. That led them to
call either for large unitary authorities, or for the status quo - the
predominant pattern of Sir John's first recommendations last year.
After opposition from district councils forced Mr John Gummer, the
environment secretary, to change his guidance to the commission in September
last year, Sir John's comments were trenchant. He said Mr Gummer's ruling
that the new government structures could be more expensive than those they
replaced was 'absolutely astonishing', and estimated the total cost at
Pounds 1bn.
He followed that with a letter to Mr Gummer saying that backbench
Conservative MPs wanted no change to the system, and a complaint to Mr
Jones's committee that the commission could not finish its work 'unless we
get Whitehall off our backs'.
When it came to reversing the commission's original proposals, Sir John
insisted that they had merely been 'options', and then held expensive
consultations which were not required by legislation. Sir John referred to
these as advisory 'referenda', even after commission staff had objected
strongly to the use of the word.
Once he had obtained the results he expected from the referenda, he knew the
government would find it difficult or impossible to overturn his final
recommendations.
And the man appointed to engineer a radical reform of local government added
a dose of cynicism. 'Any reorganisation costs more and delivers less than
its proponents suggest,' he said. Not an easy man to manage.
