FT  11 OCT 94 / Technology: Charged up for zero emissions - AEG's plans for
high-performance batteries for electric cars
In an upstairs room in AEG's Berlin works in Sickingenstrasse, a trainee
robot is making a hash of inserting a strip of metal into a stainless steel
tube. Its minder frowns, tweaks a button, makes a note. The automaton tries
again, misses, and bends the strip into an elegant 'J'.
It is one of a dozen or so in the early stages of programming for a venture
into high-performance battery manufacture, which the loss-making
Daimler-Benz subsidiary hopes will give it a charge of profitability in the
budding market for electrically-powered passenger cars.
The robot stands at the front of a fully-automated, DM20m (Pounds 8.1m)
pilot assembly line producing sodium/nickel chloride cells for assembly into
batteries weighing up to 300kg.
AEG claims it is the first company in the world to start series manufacture
of high-performance batteries. Despite widespread scepticism about the
weight, efficiency and high prices of electric drive technology for road
vehicles - a 300kg battery is expected to cost DM15,000 - it plans to stay
ahead of the rest. The intention is to build a full-scale plant to make
15,000 so-called Zebra batteries a year, opening in 1998.
Zebra - zero emission batteries research activity - is the first fruit of a
joint venture dating back to 1988 between AEG and the South African Anglo
American Group, which owns the technology patents.
The initial aim of the project was to produce power sources for fork-lifts,
diesel-electric vehicles and stationary units, but the project has gained
momentum following Californian legislation that insists that as of 1998, at
least 2 per cent of car makers' sales in the state must be zero-emission
vehicles. At current registration levels, that represents 20,000 cars a
year. The quota is scheduled to rise to 10 per cent by 2003.
Test results and support from vehicle makers have also been encouraging. On
a weight-for-weight basis, AEG says the batteries deliver up to four times
more power than conventional lead-acid units. In tests on the flat Baltic
island of Rugen, its power packs have proved capable of providing up to
150km range between charges.
Considering that they have been tested in conventional heavy car bodies, AEG
feels this is pretty good. It claims that vehicle manufacturers agree,
noting that of the 60 test cars of various makes scooting silently around
Rugen, 31 are fitted with Zebra power packs. Trials also show that the
batteries can be recharged up to 1,500 times - exceeding the vehicle makers'
minimum requirement of 1,000 - and are good for more than 100,000km.
In its own modest way, the Zebra project contributes to Daimler-Benz's
tarnished ambition of becoming an integrated technology group, drawing
together skills and technologies from disparate sectors of the concern.
The batteries' metal parts and pressings come mainly from Mercedes-Benz. The
core element - a special aluminium hydroxide ceramic electrolyte - is made
by a group subsidiary in the UK. Assembly techniques for such materials are
a particular speciality of the Sickingenstrasse works, which manufactures
more workaday filled-ceramic products such as capa-citors for fluorescent
light fittings.
Customers for the pilot plant's output of 450 batteries a year include Adam
Opel, BMW, Toyota and, naturally, Mercedes-Benz, AEG's more successful
sister company, although none has yet ordered commercial-scale deliveries.
