FT  04 AUG 94 / Arts: Pages's 'Renard' - Ballet
In this week's triple bill, just as the season ends, the Royal Ballet has
brought Ashley Page's Renard to the Opera House stage. Page created it
earlier this year for the welcome and enterprising Dance Bites tour which
took a group from our national ballet to smaller regional theatres with
newly made choreographies. I reported on the piece at its February showing
in Leicester. It is characteristic of Page's work that he should chose a
fine artist to give the production a vivid painterly image, and Bruce
McLean, who designed Page's Soldat for Rambert, has massed the stage with
bold shapes, bold colours.
Stravinsky's Renard is an awkward score, embedded in Russian peasant
tradition, and nothing Page or McLean do can make it either comprehensible
or very entertaining. (In a Diaghilev staging, the farmyard characters were
performed by acrobats, which suggests a certain despair about the piece).
Page's version looked rather better in the closer confines of the Leicester
stage than at the Opera House, where its faux-naivetes lose some point.
Interpretations at performances on Monday and Tuesday nights were strong,
and I much enjoyed the playing of Jonathan Cope as the Fox, Gary Avis as the
Goat and Matthew Trent as the Cat - big, clear dancing. But Renard is, I
hazard, an impermanency: that cussed score and thin narrative do not invite
repertory life, well played though the music was under Lionel Friend.
Jonathan Cope was also a persuasive Belyayev in A Month in the Country. The
staging is, alas, now looking very mannered. The characters go through their
paces like well-trained circus animals - nipping through various flaming
dramatic hoops; putting not a foot wrong, and not a living emotion right.
Some interpretations are now barnacled, and Ashtonian nuance, and
no-less-necessary Ashtonian chic, are lost in a flurry of silk, lace,
ribbons, and other items of old Russian knick-knackery. There is a good deal
too much semaphoring going on.
Cope takes the stage and we see a young man of undeniable physical allure,
and - rare in this role - potent masculinity, caught up in a turmoil he
cannot properly comprehend. The dance is full in tone, full in meaning. The
character is alive. So, too, is Sarah Wildor's Vera. Miss Wildor has an
inborn sense of how to time and sustain gesture, how to hold emotion on a
broad phrase of dynamics: it is the dance equivalent of bel canto. Her Vera,
like Jane Burn's sweetly vulnerable performance on Monday night, showed us
the girl's heart. Other performances only showed us the clothes. As a
cross-cultural note, I record that the footman, Matvey, is now played as one
of the lads from Takarazuka, with a good deal more maquillage than
credibility.
The bill is completed with David Bintley's Tombeaux, in gleaming condition.
The ensemble is sharp, clear in style; the central performances by Viviana
Durante and Bruce Sansom on Monday night were eloquent, elegant - Miss
Durante beautifully mondaine in manner. The closing moments in which Sansom
circles round his ballerina and sweeps away into the night is a wonderful
choreographic image. I still deplore the men's costumes: funereal long johns
that turn them into neckless monsters. The girls in their amethyst tutus are
beautiful.
The Royal Ballet season ends, with a run of performances of Romeo and
Juliet, on Saturday.
