FT  11 AUG 94 / Cubans face questioning in US over hijacking
Twenty-four Cubans accused of hijacking a Cuban government boat were brought
to a Florida resort city by the US Coast Guard yesterday to face questioning
about its voyage, AP reports from Key West.
The group, which included young men wearing shorts and at least two small
children, walked off the Coast Guard cutter early in the afternoon having
been detained at sea since they were picked up on Tuesday afternoon.
The Cuban government claimed a naval lieutenant was killed in the boat
hijacking on Monday night. But a US Coast Guard official said the refugees
insisted no-one was killed and that the purported victim was among those who
arrived in Key West.
Doubt was cast on the initial Cuban government claim that a death was caused
by the boat hijacking when Mr Alfonso Fraga, head of the Cuban diplomatic
mission in Washington, declined to repeat it yesterday at a news conference.
Asked repeatedly about the incident, Mr Fraga said he had received no
instructions about it from Havana.
The boat hijacking on Monday was the fourth in three weeks, Cuban officials
said.
The growing tide of Cubans fleeing the island continued, meanwhile, when a
single-engine Cuban utility aircraft carrying 14 members of the same family
landed safely in a thunderstorm at Marathon, about 75 miles north of Key
West in the Florida Keys. A sheriff's spokeswoman said the pilot had worked
for a Cuban crop-dusting company and stole the aircraft from his employers.
All of the Cubans were to be turned over to the US Immigration and
Naturalisation Service.
US officials have not prosecuted any Cubans on hijack-related charges since
1980, when three Cubans who seized a fishing vessel at knifepoint were
acquitted of kidnapping.
Cubans who have forcibly overpowered crews of boats or aircraft - usually
government-owned - are routinely released in south Florida.
Some Cuban exile leaders are speculating that the US government may be
cracking down on hijackers because of President Fidel Castro's recent threat
to allow unlimited emigration from Cuba to the US, as he did for some
120,000 people in 1980.
