FT  01 SEP 94 / Birth-rate successes moderate Iran's stance: A look at
attempts to rein in alarming fertility rates as population hits 60m
The Iranian government's opposition to next week's United Nations population
conference is not so great that it will join Saudi Arabia and Sudan in
boycotting it.
Iran is sending a delegation which it hopes will 'adapt the final document
to incorporate religious ethics'.
Criticism of the Cairo conference centres on the pragmatic approach taken
towards issues such as extramarital and adolescent sex.
Mr Ali Reza Marandi, Iran's health minister, said earlier this week, that
the draft document 'seemed to have disregarded the religious views of the
Islamic world and formulated the text with a sense of sexual liberty'.
Iran's own religious ethics underwent revision toward population control in
1988, when the government recognised the severity of the country's high
population growth rate.
The average population growth rate of 3.9 per cent a year in the early 1980s
was among the highest in the world. The Islamic government, which took over
after the 1979 revolution, laid greater emphasis than before on early
marriage and the woman's role as wife and mother and saw no reason to
encourage birth control.
It welcomed the growth in population, seeing it in terms of increased
resources to build the country into an Islamic model. By the mid-80s,
however, concerns about the economy led to fears that the high population
growth was a threat rather than an aid to economic development.
Iran's population grew from just over 37m at the beginning of the revolution
in 1979 to 57m by 1986, an increase attributed to the lack of a family
planning programme combined with improved health care since the 1960s.
Today, Iran's population is believed to stand at more than 60m.
Implementation of a family planning programme in 1988 has witnessed a drop
in the annual average growth rate from the 3.9 per cent peak to 2.3 per cent
last year and down further to 1.8 per cent in July, according to government
figures. Demographic experts, while acknowledging that Iran has been
successful in controlling its population growth, are sceptical of these
figures. They argue that such a rapid population decrease is impossible in
such a short period of time and cite the need for strengthened data
collection and statistical analysis.
The most reliable figures are those of the country's census, taken every
five years. This showed an annual average growth rate of 2.9 per cent in
1991, well above the current 2 per cent growth rate for developing
countries. Subsequent figures have been based on less reliable samples.
Mr Shu Yun Xu, Iran country director at the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), says that despite the controversial figures, Iran's family planning
programme has been 'a great achievement', partly because of the strength of
the government's commitment. 'It has been supportive of all contraceptive
methods, including male sterilisation. Only abortion is not allowed.'
In June, the UNFPA approved a Dollars 10m five-year country programme for
Iran and part of the funds are allocated to improving Iran's demographic
data collection.
The main thrust of the government's population control programme has been
based on an increased supply of contraceptives, the training of rural
midwives and counselling in family planning techniques. The Ministry of
Health, which established a Fertility Regulation Council in 1988 to
implement the programme, reports a decline in total fertility from 6.4
children per woman in 1988 to 4.25 in 1993.
Increase use of contraceptives has been partly fuelled by the lack of family
planning services for almost a decade. An active family planning programme
was launched under the Shah's regime, so the implementation of the current
programme has been relatively easy given the public's existing awareness.
Another reason for the success of the family planning programme has been a
relatively good health infrastructure which, according to UNFPA reaches 60
per cent of those living in the countryside and 90 per cent of the majority
urban population.
Mr Xu said: 'The primary healthcare network is very good especially in rural
areas and the infrastructure is much better than for many Asian countries.'
A women's health volunteer programme in the poor suburbs of southern Tehran
has so far produced good results and is to be extended. Under the programme,
women volunteers act as family planning counsellors in areas which are not
served by the primary healthcare network.
Iran has a relatively high literacy rate of 74 per cent and girls' enrolment
in primary school is nearly as high as that of boys. The spread of education
and literacy has increased a widespread desire for smaller families.
Despite the success of the programme to date, the UNFPA says the tasks ahead
are still 'formidable'. A relatively large number of Iranians, born in the
baby-boom of 1976-1986 will be of child-bearing age from 1996 onwards, so
fertility rates will increase.
Since 65 per cent of the population is under the age of 25, there is a need
for even more emphasis to be placed on education.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
POPULATION IN IRAN
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Population:                           1994                     63.2m
                                      2025                    144.6m
Average growth 1990-95                                          2.7%
Urban population 1992                                            58%
Fertility rate/woman   1990-95                                   6.0
Adult literacy 1990:                  male                       65%
                                      female                     43%
Family planning users   1975-93                                  65%
GNP per capita 1991                                    Dollars 2,170
Share of central govt spending 1991 on:
         education                                             20.9%
            health                                              7.9%
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: UNFPA
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
