FT  15 JAN 94 / Minding Your Own Business: Hard edge of the good life -
Clive Fewins meets a couple who eke out a living from the soil selling
vegetable boxes
When Tim and Jan Deane arrived at their 24-acre smallholding on the edge of
the Dartmoor National Park in 1984 they had to chainsaw their way in.
'The remains of the gate was buried under trees and other vegetation, and
the rest of the plot was in very poor condition,' said Tim, who had always
wanted to farm but had thought he would never be able to raise the money to
buy the land.
Nine years later, eight acres on the hillside venture are producing nearly
50 kinds of organic vegetable.
But while the Deanes' crops - or most of them - are flourishing, profits are
not. 'I fail to see how any small organic grower in our situation and with
our soil conditions can earn a really good living,' said Tim. 'Last year we
paid ourselves Pounds 3,100 each out of our profit of just over Pounds
6,000. In all our years here we have yet to reach the income tax threshold.'
On their meagre profits the Deanes have to support two children aged 15 and
12. They manage without complaining, and are convinced the future will bring
better times. Besides, they all enjoy their way of life at Northwood Farm,
which lies in an idyllic spot on the slopes of the Teign valley, 10 miles
from Exeter.
'Hardship is the price of continuing with our youthful idealism and doing
things the way we want to, with as little compromise as possible,' said Jan,
who, like her husband, is 43.
'Of course we would like a little more money. It would be nice to have a
house, as we have lived in two, and now three, caravans for the past nine
years. But we realised when we bought the land - it cost Pounds 28,000 -
that we would never be rich. We call our way of life homesteading.'
The organic farming co-operative the Deanes belonged to collapsed two years
ago, leaving them Pounds 1,000 worse off - a lot of money to them. Since
then they have concentrated on selling vegetable boxes, rather than
wholesaling.
'This season is the first in which all our production has gone into
vegetable boxes. And thanks to the weather it was a near disaster,' said
Tim.
Nevertheless, the Deanes have many satisfied customers in the surrounding
villages and in Exeter. There is a waiting list for the service.
This is how the vegetable box system works: each week the Deanes pack a
week's supply of vegetables into boxes which they deliver directly to houses
in the villages and to drop-off points in Exeter where boxholders help to
distribute in return for a concessionary box.
The customers have little choice. If they are regulars - as most are - and
do not like a particular vegetable, they tell Tim and Jan; otherwise it is
the Deanes who decide.
'Basically we pack what is best, freshest and in season,' said Jan. 'Most of
the produce is picked, packed and delivered within 24 hours.' Nothing is
weighed, and the charge is Pounds 4, Pounds 5 or Pounds 6 depending on box
size.
Every week the Deanes plan the contents of the boxes so that there will be
enough staples, but also variety to stimulate a good cook. They aim at a
minimum of eight vegetables and herbs, even in winter. They also try to
include one or two vegetables, such as kohlrabi and celeriac, not widely
available in the shops.
'Our customers say the produce is good - some even pay more than the asking
price - fresh, and reasonably priced,' said Jan.
All the Northwood Farm produce is organic. The Deanes believe in feeding the
soil, not the plants. They feed the soil with food, such as muck, compost,
and some rock phosphate and calcified seaweed.
This season Jan has been supplementing their income by working as a Soil
Association inspector in Devon three or four days a month. She also
organises occasional courses for the Soil Association. These activities keep
the family car on the road, while the business supports Tim's elderly
ex-Post Office parcels van.
Thanks to the vegetable boxes, profit on turnover has risen from 33 per cent
to more than 50 per cent. Nevertheless it is meagre. Turnover has never
exceeded Pounds 20,000.
'It should have been better this year, but the weather put paid to that,'
Tim said. 'All the way through it was wrong for our soil type. The potatoes
had no real root, so we produced two tonnes per acre, when eight to 10
tonnes would be a good organic yield. The cabbages, leeks and brassicas were
all poor because the heavy rain in May and early June washed the nutrients
out of the roots.'
The result was that the Deanes were short of produce. They had orders for
180 boxes, but could only supply 140 households. 'Forty boxes is the
difference between profit and loss,' Tim said.
'I fear our overdraft will be far higher than we'd prefer by February. This
is the time of year when we are usually better off, as it is the end of our
seven month delivery season. I just hope we have enough cash to launch
ourselves into the growing season.'
Fortunately, Tim has an understanding brother who several years ago took the
burden of the small mortgage. They pay him interest - but far less than they
would pay a bank or building society.
Tim admits that were it not for the generosity of Jan's father - he paid
Pounds 20,000 of the original cost of the property and has helped them out
when times have been bad - they would have had even more of a struggle to
survive.
'He has great faith in us,' Tim said. 'So does Jan's mother - her
great-grandfather, a Canadian, was homesteading well into his 90s.
'Over the years our bank manager has also been kind to us. He is a farmer's
son, and very pro organic farming. But now the account has been taken over
by another branch and our new manager has decided to pay us a visit - the
first here by any bank manager. Somehow when he sees Shacksville I think
he'll get a surprise.'
Northwood Farm, Christow, Exeter, Devon EX67PG. Tel: 0647-52915.
