FT  05 OCT 94 / World Bank to boost investor guarantees
The World Bank intends to increase sharply the financial guarantees it makes
available to commercial lenders and private investors to encourage greater
private investment in infrastructure.
Dr Ashoka Mody, principal financial economist at the bank's Project Finance
Group, said yesterday that partial credit guarantees would allow projects to
repay commercial loans over a longer period and provide insurance against
government agencies failing to meet contractual obligations.
Dr Mody's comments at a Financial Times conference on international
infrastructure finance in London represent an important policy shift by the
bank which previously has lent mainly to governments and their agencies.
The bank has outstanding loans of Dollars 104bn (Pounds 65.8bn) compared to
financial guarantees to private-sector lenders covering just Dollars 1bn of
loans.
Dr Mody said that the bank's executive directors intended to step up the use
of guarantees for private capital projects, making them 'a mainstream
instrument of bank operations.'
About Dollars 200bn a year was spent on infrastructure, of which less than
Dollars 15bn came from private sources. This proportion was expected to rise
sharply as governments found it increasingly difficult to finance
large-scale projects out of public funds.
Dr Jacques Rogozinski, president of Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios
Publicos (Banobras), the Mexican state-owned public works bank, wanted the
World Bank to provide direct investment to private infrastructure projects
as well as financial guarantees.
Dr Mody and Dr Rogozinski stressed financial guarantees and direct
investment by state bodies should not be used to underwrite normal
commercial risks. Dr Rogozinski said: 'If operators have got their sums
wrong, it should be their responsibility. If this means they fail, so be
it'.
The Chinese authorities are understood to have agreed to increase the rates
of return available to private-sector investors in infrastructure projects
in China. Mr John Mobsby, head of project finance at W S Atkins, the UK
engineering consultant, told the conference that the rate of return was
likely to be raised to around 15 per cent.
