FT  21 OCT 94 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (4): Pep up, but
delay retirement - Budget Countdown, What can you do? / There may be changes
to the rules governing personal equity plans and the age at which personal
pension annuities must be taken
One benefit of the move to a November Budget has been a reduction in the
temptation for investors to be rushed into action before a chancellor
speaks.
The combination of a March Budget and an April 5 tax year-end meant in the
past that financial-services firms could entice investors through a
combination of fear and greed, by suggesting that the chancellor was about
to close some lucrative tax haven such as the Business Expansion Scheme.
Now that there are four months between the Budget and the tax year-end,
investors can afford to take a more considered view of tax planning. Of
course, there is nothing to stop the chancellor imposing measures
immediately on Budget night, as he did last year with the change to capital
gains tax indexation.
But that move was met with howls of protest from traditional Tory
supporters, and was followed by an amendment to the Finance Bill to give
transitional relief to individuals who lost out from the measure.
Traditional Budget changes, such as increases in excise duties, will no
doubt continue to be imposed immediately, or within a few days of the
chancellor's speech. But after last year's furore, it seems likely that more
complex tax changes will be phased in on April 5, save perhaps for the
closing of outrageous tax-avoidance loopholes such as payment in wine to
avoid National Insurance contributions.
Nevertheless, investors may well be tempted by pre-Budget hoopla to rush
their money into tax-efficient schemes. Advisers warn against this strategy.
'In general terms, if you haven't done it, then don't panic to do it before
the Budget,' says Mr David Harris, of Chantrey Vellacott.
Most people expect the thrust of the chancellor's Budget to be on the
public-spending side, rather than on taxation. The chancellor appears to be
aiming to get the public finances in as healthy a state as possible, so that
he can cut taxes in the next Budget, closer to the likely election date.
Few see any reason why the government would want to abolish its existing tax
havens, such as personal equity plans (Peps) and tax-exempt special savings
accounts (Tessas).
'My guess would be that, if he were to do anything with regard to Peps, it
would be to slightly relax the rules,' says Mr Harris. There is some talk of
an expanded Personal Savings Plan, he says, which would widen the range of
Peps to cover other investments, such as interest-bearing deposits.
If a change is possible, that only reinforces the advantages of waiting
until after the Budget before making a Pep investment. This year's
turbulence in world stock markets is another argument for investor caution.
However, the existence of a different deadline makes the case for long-term
investors to try to use up their Pep allowances at some point during the
current tax year. In 1996 or 1997, a general election could usher in a
Labour government, which might very well decide to abolish personal equity
plans (a course of action recently advocated by The Guardian).
Despite the impact of charges on the tax relief in early years, a Pep should
be a very good long-term tax shelter. Imagine what the tax-free dividend
income will look like once your investment has been allowed to grow for 25
years. So, provided you are prepared to take a long-term view, there is a
case for getting as much as possible into Peps while you can.
Budgets often incorporate technical changes which are very hard to
anticipate. But Mr Harris says he believes this one may allow holders of
personal pension plans to defer taking their annuities until they are 75,
instead of at retirement age under current rules.
Taking the annuity on retirement exposes the plan holder to two risks: that
he or she will die shortly afterwards, robbing their spouse of much of the
accumulated value of the plan; or that the annuity will be bought at a time
of low interest rates.
Given these risks, Mr Harris believes that those contemplating retirement
over the next month or so might find it advantageous to delay things until
after the Budget on November 29, to see if they can benefit from any change.
However, there is a counter-argument. Financial advisers have a perennial
fear that a chancellor will one day attack the tax-free lump sum element of
a pension, which seems a bit anomalous in view of the restrictions of other
middle-class tax reliefs, such as mortgage interest payments.
This could at last be the Budget in which the tax-free lump sum is attacked,
although it is a move which would not be popular with Tory voters. Nor would
it encourage the growth of personal pensions, an important government aim in
view of Britain's ageing population.
'It would be unfair to tax somebody who was retiring on the day after the
Budget more heavily than someone who had retired on the day before it' said
Mr Mark Bolland of Chamberlain de Broe. 'I suspect that if anything is done
it will happen from some future date and at a fairly low introductory
level.'
In short, there are no obvious options for those trying to beat the
chancellor's tax net. But if the Budget merely spurs investors to start
thinking about their tax planning, ahead of the end of the tax year, it will
at least have served as a useful wake-up call.
