FT  16 NOV 94 / Survey of Derivatives (15): Increasing prices heighten
interest - Commodities / Rapid development of the OTC market
Commodities have become a hot topic this year. Explosive price increases in
raw materials such as copper and aluminium, fuelled by renewed economic
growth across most of the world, has triggered interest in how best to take
advantage of these rising prices, while at the same time protecting against
the risks that they represent.
The result has been a rapid development of the over-the-counter (OTC)
commodities swaps market. The exchange-traded market, highly liquid and
transparent and already widely used by many of the large commodity producers
and consumers, continues to expand. But it is to the over-the-counter market
that many new and traditional users of commodity-linked derivatives are
turning.
They are attracted by the flexibility and variety of the instruments offered
by banks in this market. Users can buy tools which allow exposure to
commodities on terms and over maturities simply not available on the traded
exchanges. Exchanges reduce instruments to their lowest common denominator,
which everyone can buy, trade and use, but which do not always correspond to
an investor's needs. OTC instruments, on the other hand, can be tailor-made
to the particular requirements of each individual user.
'There is infinitely more flexibility in the OTC market,' said Martin
Fraenkel, manager of commodity risk management at Chase Manhattan bank in
London. 'This manifests itself in a whole variety of swap, forward and
option contracts with different settlement periods to the exchange
contracts.'
At the same time, users are becoming increasingly aware of the vast array of
instruments available to them. They are also gradually acquiring a greater
understanding and appreciation of the benefits that the instruments can
provide.
'Many users really are looking at the market for the first time,' said Keith
Murphy, vice-president and head of commodity derivatives at JP Morgan in
London. 'They did not know some of the things we are offering could be
done.'
'We maintain relationships with 10 to 15 of the world's largest commodity
producers and around 90 per cent of these are actively hedging their price
risk using the swaps market. We have never been busier,' said one banker in
charge of commodity derivatives at a bank in London.
But it is not just producers and consumers of raw materials that are turning
in increasing numbers to the OTC market. Investors, keen to exploit the
spectacular price increases witnessed in many commodity sectors, are looking
to the OTC market to gain exposure to commodities.
The result has been the arrival in the market of a number of big operators,
such as Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, Merrill Lynch and other large banks,
offering a variety of instruments pegged to different commodity baskets or
indices.
In addition, a number of investment funds have recently been created. For
example, the BZW commodities trust will invest in various types of OTC
derivative instruments with the aim of outperforming the Goldman Sachs
commodity index. Fleming is to run a natural resources investment trust,
which will get exposure to commodities by buying shares in companies
involved in extracting and processing natural resources.
The thinking behind these innovations is that commodities are now ready to
be treated as an asset class in their own right - to be used by investors as
a way of diversifying their portfolios away from a simple reliance on other
assets such as stocks and bonds, as well as a hedge against inflation and a
play on economic growth.
Commodities tend to rise in price during periods of economic growth, whereas
bonds generally fall in value as inflation and interest rates rise, as has
happened in such dramatic fashion this year.
'There is now a lot of interest among investors in using commodities to
diversify away from stocks and bonds,' said Sohail Jaffer, vice-president in
the financial institutions group at Citibank in London.
'Investors are showing a new interest in metals and other commodities,' said
Mr Murphy. 'They have made a leap of faith and at last they are listening to
what we have been telling them.'
The growth of the OTC market has not detracted from the exchange-traded
market, however. In fact, quite the contrary - many of the users of the OTC
market and the intermediary banks that provide the OTC products have tended
to use the exchanges more and more to hedge their exposures in the OTC
market.
The exchanges, such as the London Metal Exchange, which moved to larger
premises in the City of London at the end of last month, will continue to
play an important role. This is especially true for those investors who
require quick and easy access to their investments. Sabre Fund Management,
for example, a fund which has Dollars 90m under management in commodities,
uses only the exchange-traded market.
'We take an active rather than a passive approach to fund management and
will not want to hold the same position over the course of, say, five years,
but will want to change our positions,' said John Demaine of Sabre. 'So we
use the exchange-traded market for its liquidity and transparency.'
Nevertheless, the development of the OTC market looks set to continue. This
is in spite of the bad publicity surrounding the heavy losses accrued by
some companies, such as Proctor &amp; Gamble and Metallgesellschaft, and the
charges that many derivative products are being marketed in an irresponsible
manner by some banks.
'Recent articles about losses on derivatives have not had a negative
impact,' said Mr Murphy. 'Instead, they have been positive in focusing both
consumers and producers on the pricing risk and on the possibilities offered
by risk management.'
However, further growth in the OTC market is unlikely to be uniform across
all commodity sectors.
'Five years ago the oil swaps sector was booming, but now it has fallen back
a lot,' said one commodity derivatives trader in New York. 'Over the past
two years, the natural gas market has taken over, going from five
transactions a day to 40 transactions a day now, mainly because of the
deregulation of the US natural gas market. So perhaps the next market to
boom will be the US electricity market since this is being deregulated at
the moment.'
