FT  19 AUG 94 / World Trade News: Export growth proves Nafta works, says US
Mr Ron Brown, US commerce secretary, yesterday pointed to strong export
growth in North America in its first six months as a free trade area as
evidence that the North American Free Trade Agreement was 'living up to its
promise'.
Although the US trade deficit with Canada is growing, and its surplus with
Mexico shrank in comparison with the first six months of last year, Commerce
Department trade analysts believe the Mexican recovery will soon propel US
exports and lift the trade surplus to at least Dollars 2.1bn in 1994, up
from Dollars 1.6bn last year.
The overall US deficit on trade in goods and services in June eased 1.6 per
cent to Dollars 9.37bn from a revised Dollars 9.52bn in May as growth in
exports outstripped rising imports. Nevertheless officials said the US was
on track for its second highest deficit ever on goods trade this year.
The deficit with Japan swelled 26 per cent to Dollars 5.52bn in June, from
Dollars 4.39bn in May, and brought renewed demand from Mr Brown for
corrective action. 'Those Japanese markets have to be opened,' he said.
US-Japanese trade talks have made little progress. The US has given Japan
until September 30 to reach agreement in a dispute over Japanese procurement
rules.
Mr Brown focused his comments on Nafta, hoping that the 'good news' about
the controversial pact would help gain support for legislation to implement
the Uruguay Round accord on world trade liberalisation. This legislation is
still bogged down in Congress.
Mr Mickey Kantor, the US trade representative, has spent this week trying to
broker a deal among the various factions of both parties.
The latest figures showed that US exports of goods and services increased
3.6 per cent to a record Dollars 58.17bn in June while imports were up 2.8
per cent from May to Dollars 67.54bn.
In the first six months of the year, US exports to North America surged,
accounting for 52 per cent of overall US export growth. US exports to Canada
rose 10 per cent to Dollars 55.6bn and exports to Mexico shot up 17 per cent
to Dollars 24.5bn in the first six months. But imports also rose, especially
in June.
The US export figures had some help from the World Cup. Exports of services
rose Dollars 270,000 in June, 'due largely to increased foreign travel
related to the World Cup,' officials said.
