FT  04 AUG 94 / Lagos comes to a halt as strikers challenge regime: Bid to
force release of opposition leader
Government offices, banks and factories in Nigeria's biggest city, Lagos,
were deserted yesterday on the first day of an indefinite general strike
called to force the military government to release the detained opposition
leader, Mr Moshood Abiola.
There were outbreaks of violence in the city, as police attempted to
dismantle barricades and disperse protesters. Three people were reported
killed.
In Abuja, the capital, the trial of Mr Abiola, the unofficial winner of last
year's presidential election, was adjourned again, this time until August
16. He is being tried for treason after he declared himself president on
June 12, the anniversary of last year's vote.
The judge said he needed time to decide whether his court had jurisdiction.
At last week's hearing, the prosecution was forced to admit that it lied to
the court when denying that it had received the defence's petition.
As the prosecution case falters, Gen Sani Abacha's government seems unsure
how to end the deadlock. It appears to have rejected a strategy whereby Mr
Abiola could be released and installed as head of a government of national
unity.
Mr Abiola's family, who are allowed access to him in detention in Abuja, say
that he has twice refused release on condition that he keep silent about
claims to the presidency.
Support for the strike is strongest in the south-west, where members of Mr
Abiola's Yoruba tribe see a chance to wrest political power from the north
Hausas and Fulanis who have dominated government. Northern branches of the
National Labour Congress are disregarding the strike, which they say is not
in the national interest.
The shutdown has completed a process begun over a month ago. A combination
of fuel shortages, lack of transport, and earlier political strikes have
been gradually bringing the commercial capital of Lagos to a halt.
People going to work risk intimidation from street gangs or being caught in
sporadic violence, as anti-government protesters become more mobile to elude
armed police. A strike by air traffic controllers, and lack of aviation fuel
in the south, has grounded domestic flights but military air traffic
controllers have kept the international airport open.
Labour representatives are due to hold talks with the military government
today. Central to discussions will be the disruption to oil production,
which is down by at least 20 per cent.
The oil workers, who went on strike a month ago, say the release of Mr
Abiola will not get them back to work. They want the regime to make way for
elected civilian rule. And they want it to pay arrears to the oil companies,
estimated at Dollars 800m, which have led to job losses and recession in the
industry.
'Abiola's following is growing among people who were marginalised,' a
businessman from the eastern city of Port Harcourt said yesterday. 'Some do
not like to see a big man brought low, and others feel a sense of outrage at
the government which has far less mandate to rule than he has. But people
are also impressed that Abiola is going through a spell in jail and is not
doing it just for himself.'
