FT  19 JAN 94 / Malaysia bemused at UK aid row: The events that led to a
boost for British exports
The furore in Britain over allegations that the Thatcher administration  -
and Mr John Major, the present prime minister - had agreed to large amounts
of aid for Malaysia in return for multi-million-dollar agreements to buy
British weaponry has been greeted with quiet bemusement in Kuala Lumpur.
When the allegations first surfaced late last year Mr Najib Tun Razak,
Malaysian defence minister, described them as 'baseless'. But officials in
Malaysia privately admit that a 1988 memorandum of understanding on defence
signed between the two countries was a catalyst for better relations.
In the early 1980s Dr Mahathir Mohamad, Malaysian prime minister, piqued at
what he perceived to be British high-handedness on issues ranging from trade
matters to higher fees for Malaysian students studying in Britain,
instituted a 'Buy British Last' policy.
But that has changed. In recent years British companies have won a
substantial share of business in Malaysia's fast growing economy. Not only
have British companies made an estimated Pounds 1.3bn of defence sales to
Malaysia under the memorandum: British officials calculate civil projects
have been worth substantially more than that amount for British companies.
When Mr Major visited Kuala Lumpur last September he announced that British
companies were negotiating contracts in Malaysia worth Dollars 1bn (Pounds
675m), which would secure 25,000 jobs in Britain.
The controversy centres on a UK government decision two years ago to sign a
Dollars 234m aid package for building a dam on the Pergau river, in the
north of Malaysia.
The decision was made against the advice of Britain's Overseas Development
Administration (ODA). There have been repeated allegations in Britain that
the aid package was directly linked to the defence memorandum - which could
be illegal under the 1966 Overseas Aid Act.
Earlier this week a ODA official told the House of Commons public accounts
committee Mr Major had taken the final decision on the aid deal.
Malaysian officials reject suggestions - first aired publicly in a report by
the British auditor general last October - that the Pergau project is
uneconomic and will result in Malaysian consumers having to pay more for
electricity.
Tenaga Nasional, partly privatised Malaysian electricity utility, has
repeatedly said Pergau is a sound project and there has never no suggestion
that, as a result of Pergau, electricity charges would rise.
Mr Samy Vellu, minister of energy, said from Malaysia's point of view, the
deal had been a good one. Last year's fall in the pound against the
Malaysian dollar had made the project cheaper. He told Malaysian MPs it did
not matter if others had lost - as long as Malaysia got the better deal.
But Pergau has, from the beginning, been a controversial project, with
Malaysian opposition MPs questioning the scale and cost of the project and
its environmental impact. The 600MW plant and dam at Pergau will cost an
estimated MDollars 1.8bn (Pounds 450m at current exchange rates).
There have also been questions about the process whereby Balfour Beatty, the
British civil engineering company, was awarded the bulk of the work at
Pergau. (Balfour Beatty is also a member of an Anglo-Japanese consortium
involved in work on a MDollars 8bn international airport being built outside
Kuala Lumpur.)
Work on Pergau is believed to be 60 per cent complete.
UK political row, Page 8
