FT  12 SEP 94 / Computer giants clash over strategy: Compaq attacks Intel
over advertising campaign and chip pricing
Relations between Compaq Computer and Intel Corporation, the two companies
which have jointly dominated the world personal computer business, were
strained to breaking point at the weekend after a bitter dispute over
commercial strategy burst into the open.
Intel is the world's leading supplier of microprocessors, which are the
heart of personal computer systems. Compaq is the leading manufacturer of
personal computers, and as a result, is Intel's largest customer.
Mr Eckhard Pfeiffer, Compaq's chief executive, accused Intel of pursuing
strategies which were damaging his company.
He accused Intel of launching an advertising campaign promoting Intel at the
expense of Compaq; of not rewarding Compaq for being Intel's largest
customer; and for making computers in direct competition with Compaq.
The dispute between the two companies, which have been close allies, has
been simmering for months, industry experts say.
The clash could open a new front in the 'microprocessor wars' which are
expected to determine the direction of the computer industry for the
forseeable future. The dispute is not simply over the future technology used
by personal computers but also the conflicting marketing strategies employed
by semiconductor makers and computer makers to establish a brand reputation
for their products.
The dispute burst into public in dramatic fashion at the annual Etre
conference, an two-day gathering attended by senior executives of virtually
every significant computer company.
Mr Pfeiffer, obviously angry and upset, left no doubt that if Intel did not
respond to his complaints, he would turn to other suppliers for Compaq
microprocessors. Such a shift of allegiance would mark a sea change in the
balance of power in the industry.
It was the synergy between the two companies which allowed them to take
market share from IBM, the former market leader. Compaq earned revenues of
Dollars 7.1bn (Pounds 4.58bn) in 1993, while Intel's revenue was Dollars
8.78bn that year.
Compaq has three chief complaints:
The 'Intel inside' advertising campaign was promoting the semiconductor
company at the expense of Compaq's brand name, Mr Pfeiffer said. The
campaign, which has been running for months and has cost Intel several
millions of dollars, is designed to ensure that personal computer makers
carry an 'Intel inside' sticker on their products.
Mr Pfeiffer believes the Compaq brand name gives him a significant advantage
in a market where competitive products are often very similar in price and
performance and that the Intel sticker devalues that advantage. Compaq
believes it is not being rewarded by Intel for its position as the company's
largest customer. Intel has been driving down the price of its flagship
microprocessor, the Pentium, to defend and improve its market position. It
already supplies the microprocessors found in 90 per cent of the 40m
personal computers manufactured annually.
Compaq says it should be able to take advantage of its bulk buying power to
secure discounts that would enable it to command higher growth profit
margins.
Compaq is angry that Intel continues to make its own personal computers in
competition with Compaq.
The row has delighted Intel's competitors, including the US companies AMD
and Cyrix who have been trying to break Intel's stranglehold on the market.
Mr Hans Geyer, Intel's general manager for Europe, replying to Mr Pfeiffer's
accusations, said that the company would not be deflected from its strategy
set out by Mr Andrew Grove, the company's combative chief executive.
Industry experts believe that only one or two microprocessors will have
significant market share in future. Competitors include Intel, IBM which has
developed a chip called Power PC, and Digital Equipment with its Alpha chip.
called Alpha. The row between Compaq and Intel, if not resolved quickly,
could significantly change the balance of power in this war.
