FT  16 DEC 94 / Survey of Slovakia (7): Sausages and charisma - Meciar, the
old warhorse, triumphs again
On the last weekend of September Slovak voters had the first chance to
register their verdict on the political record since independence.
When the general election votes were counted, Vladimir Meciar, who led
Slovakia into a divorce from the Czech republic in January 1993, re-emerged
as the dominant personality in Slovak politics. Once again Slovak voters
voted in large numbers for a charismatic leader whose style and personality
belongs more to the tub-thumping era of the past than the pragmatic, problem
solving approach of modern political parties.
His Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) won nearly 35 per cent of
votes cast and 61 seats in the 150 seat parliament, more than three times
the share of the vote gained by its nearest rival, the Party of the
Democratic Left (SLD), whose reformed communist leaders had hoped to emerge
as the new hegemonist political force in the country.
The vote was a personal triumph for Mr Meciar, who lost the premiership for
the second time after a parliamentary defeat in March, and a humiliating set
back for all his political enemies and rivals - including the president, Mr
Michal Kovac, and Mr Jozef Moravcik, prime minister of the coalition
government which replaced him in March.
Mr Moravcik, a former communist and academic who acted as the last foreign
minister of Czechoslovakia, earned Mr Meciar's implacable enmity by
defecting from the HZDS in 1993.
Encouraged behind the scenes by President Kovac, he helped to topple his
former leader in March and put together a broad based coalition. It ranged
from the reform communists of the SLD through to the christian democrats of
the KDH led by Mr Jan Carnogursky and included Mr Moravcik's own Democratic
Union, made up of dissident HZDS people and small liberal democratic
groupings.
The Moravcik government, which always saw itself as a stop-gap affair to
hold the reins before new elections, brought a new and more conciliatory
style to Slovak politics, raised the new republic's image abroad and
presided over a substantial recovery in the Slovak economy which began in
the fourth quarter of 1993.
However, the decision of the SLD, led by Mr Petr Weiss, to join forces with
catholics and liberal-democrats and help share the responsibility for
carrying through an IMF-approved economic policy of fiscal and monetary
austerity proved disastrous.
Instead of gaining respectability and votes by its participation in
government the SLD alienated its working class base who saw no reason to
vote for a party which shared responsibility for tight economic policies at
a time of declining real wages and high unemployment. They defected en masse
to the unashamedly 'workerist' Workers Union (ZRS) led by Jan Luptak and
Miroslav Kocnar.
A further 5.4 per cent of the electorate voted for the Slovak National Party
(SNS), the xenophobic, anti-Hungarian party led by Mr Jan Slota, the mayor
of the north Slovakian town of Zilina. Local wags call him 'Mr Zilinovsky',
a double pun on the town and the Russian nationalist firebrand Mr Vladimir
Zhirinovsky.
Mr Meciar spent six months fighting a no-holds barred electoral campaign
awash with beer and sausages and personal appearances in towns and villages
throughout his central Slovakian stronghold.
But he failed to win an overall majority and needs allies. He found them in
the SNS, which formally agreed to join a coalition, and the ZRS which backed
him in parliament and accepted positions in key parliamentary commissions
but declined formally to join a coalition government. Together the HZDS,
Nationalists and Workers mustered 83 seats, which gave them a working
majority but was still seven votes short of the 90 seats needed to unseat
the president and re-write the constitution.
Mr Meciar speaks of finding 'seven trusty men', like seven samurai, to give
him carte-blanche to forge a presidential system with himself at the head
rather than the parliamentary democracy outlined in the current
constitution. He also makes no secret of his desire to inflict personal
humiliation on President Kovac, another former HZDS supporter who defected
in frustration with Mr Meciar's domineering ways.
Mr Meciar's allies, such as Sergei Kozlik, the party's chief economic
spokesman, paint instead a more reassuring portrait of a rational, middle of
the road party.
He says the HZDS is fully committed to IMF-style macro-economic stability
but responds to the hopes and fears of ordinary Slovaks, especially those in
the bleak industrial towns of central Slovakia where the Soviet-era arms and
engineering plants are near to bankruptcy.
But Mr Meciar revealed a vindictive streak on the night of Thursday,
November 3, when the newly elected parliament reassembled. In a marathon
session lasting 23 hours Mr Meciar sat back and watched while his political
hatchet men and women proceeded with a purge of key office holders in
parliament and quasi-state institutions, including state radio and TV and
the privatisation agency as well as key parliamentary committees.
Mr Meciar also masterminded the setting up of a special committee to
investigate the circumstances which led to his own dismissal as prime
minister last March and passed a vote of no confidence in the privatisation
and interior minister of what at this stage was merely the caretaker
government.
Meciar allies dismiss protests as hypocritical and ask why foreign critics
in particular had not voiced similar outrage when Mr Vaclav Klaus, the
victorious Czech leader in the June 1992 elections, proceded to make a
similar clean sweep of his political opponents.
Diplomats privately reply that the difference is only superficially one of
style. In practice, the replacement of trained lawyers and other educated
office holders by poorly educated and politically untried nationalist or
workerist allies on such a scale and with such contempt shocked many
Slovaks, including opposition parties whose tacit complicity is required for
the political process to work smoothly.
Shortly after the event the German and French ambassadors called on
President Kovac to express the concern of the European Union at what is
locally known as 'bloody Thursday'. They were promptly accused of
impermissible interference in Slovakia's internal affairs by the redoubtable
Mr Slota.
But three weeks after 'bloody Thursday' voters had another opportunity to
register their views, at countrywide local elections. Mr Slota was
re-elected unopposed as mayor of Zilina.
But candidates closely associated with Mr Meciar and the HZDS performed much
worse than at the general elections. Mr Meciar may well form a new
government before Christmas. But his re-election has shocked his opponents,
forcing them to create a more effective and united opposition.
