FT  28 OCT 94 / Leading Article: Good news from Ukraine
Credit where credit is due. Back in July, the election of a new Ukrainian
president offered a chance, nothing more, that the country's government
might finally start to get things right. President Leonid Kuchma promised a
radical programme of economic reforms to reverse the dismal economic record
of the previous three years. Whereupon, the Group of Seven leading
industrial countries pledged Dollars 4bn to help him. So far, Mr Kuchma is
delivering on his promise: so must the G7.
Mr Kuchma was in Winnipeg yesterday to argue the case for receiving Dollars
900m to fill the gap in Ukraine's fourth-quarter balance of payments. His
claim is that, with the promise of International Monetary Fund support
arranged late last month, the country is now set on a programme of reforms
which will turn it around. But it needs help to ease the pain of this 'shock
therapy'.
Mr Kuchma is not the first leader to make such claims, but a number of steps
taken in the past few weeks provide reasons to take him at his word. Taken
together, these measures begin to tackle the heart of Ukraine's economic
problems: the trade balance.
Yesterday's unification of the exchange rate removes a sizeable tax on all
exporters' activities. At the same time, the announced reform of many
agricultural prices should, if implemented, begin to encourage a recovery in
the area, which is the country's best hope for export success.
Weighing heavily, as ever, on the import side of the ledger is the country's
chronic reliance on imported energy supplies. In the medium term, this will
continue to be a problem, but plans are now in place to bring domestic
energy prices up to world levels by the middle of next year. This will at
least encourage more efficient use of energy, although ultimately the bulk
of improvements in the trade balance will have to come from exports.
For all the encouraging signs, much could still go wrong with the Ukrainian
economy. Many of the recently announced measures still require parliament's
approval if they are to be implemented. So far, however, parliament has been
less obstructive than many feared. The bigger question marks are external.
In the medium term, the country will not be able to stay afloat without help
from Russia. A willingness to help Ukraine, by offering a grace period in
the repayment of its hefty arrears, has rightly been seen as a test of
Russia's acceptance of Ukraine as a truly independent state. On Tuesday,
President Yeltsin expressed himself willing, in principle, to consider a
three-to-seven year grace period.
In truth, it is in Russia's own interest to see success in Ukraine, since an
unstable Ukraine risks destabilising Russian politics. Helping Ukraine is in
the G7's interest too, but it is in a better position to help. The IMF has
decided to bet on Mr Kuchma. The G7 should back it up by pledging to help
Ukraine pay its oil bills now, not merely next year.
