FT  31 MAY 94 / Survey of the Computer Industry - Battle for the Desktop
(1): A business shaken to the core / Advances in personal computing and the
emergence of multimedia are leading to surprising alliances within the
computing and telecommunications industries
The recessionary storms of the past three years have served both to
camouflage and to exacerbate the effects of the profound structural changes
which continue to shake the global computer business.
As they abate, it is now clear that the explosive growth of microprocessor
and data communications technology has effectively brought about the death
of the traditional industry.
The remarkable change of fortunes at Compaq of the US, now challenging IBM
for the number one position in personal computers, exemplifies the
phenomenon. Three years ago it led the market for high performance,
high-priced PCs, but found its lead being undermined by Asian 'clones.' It
re-organised, re-engineered its products and cut prices, resulting in a
demand it has taken months to satisfy - 'we have the best understanding of
the market and the best strategy,' says Mr Ben Rosen, Compaq chairman. IBM
has had to slash its own prices to stay in contention.
The causes and extent of the microprocessor revolution were not, however,
immediately obvious which perhaps explains why so many companies delayed
taking action until the last minute.
Mr James Unruh, president and chief executive of the full-line manufacturer
Unisys, now back in profit after several years of red ink, explained the
dilemma: 'Everybody was still calling it a problem of the economic cycle,
but I was not satisfied by that. We went back to ground zero and the first
thing we concluded was that the business had changed in very fundamental
ways.'
A combination of downsizing, replacing the mainframe with a cheaper machine
of equivalent power - open or industry standard systems and client/server
computing - have together knocked the stuffing out of the high revenue, high
gross profit margin mainframe business. The change has encouraged some
unlikely alliances. IBM, for example, is manufacturing processor chips for
Unisys and selling its own proprietary designs to the Japanese electronics
group Hitachi, once a deadly rival.
It has also collaborated with Apple, the personal computer maker and
Motorola, a leading semiconductor manufacturer, to develop a common family
of processor chips - Power PC - intended to challenge Intel's dominance of
the world microprocessor market.
Three broad trends are now apparent. The single most important new
development over the past year has been the emergence of multimedia as a
serious commercial proposition. Multimedia means the delivery of information
of all kinds - video images, data processing, sound and text - to the home
and office in digital form. Once translated into bits and bytes, the various
kinds of information can be processed, merged and altered. The service can
also be interactive. Multimedia promises a broad range of both new business,
information and entertainment services.
It will also require the collaboration of three industries - the computer
industry for the processing, the telecommunications industry to provide the
channels into office and home and the information and entertainments
industries to provide the content.
The returns on the substantial investment required, while so far impossible
to calculate, could be great which explains why so many companies are
staking noisy claims for part of the multimedia pie. Microsoft, the world's
largest software company, and Oracle, the database specialist, for example,
have been trading insults over the best approach to 'video-on-demand,' the
most obvious first candidate for multimedia in the home.
Second, it is clear that the older, established companies - International
Business Machines, Unisys and Digital Equipment among them - have lost the
initiative in data processing and are unlikely to influence the future
direction of the business to their former extent.
For the most part, they are still shedding staff - IBM will have got rid of
more than 150,000 jobs since 1990 by the year end - and coming to terms with
the impact of the new technology. So, too, are their customers. Mr Louis
Gerstener, after a year at the top of the troubled IBM, told securities
analysts: 'Customers have become very sceptical of the constant flood of new
information technology. Customers are saying: 'Give us technology we can
manage, that is easy to use, that evolves at a reasonable pace and, most of
all, helps us achieve measureable competitive advantage.''
This explains to a large degree the new enthusiasm for 'outsourcing' where a
company entrusts its data processing activities to a third party which
guarantees to provide, for a fee, an agreed level of service. In many cases,
the outsourcing company takes on ownership of the client's computers and
computer staff.
Companies such as Electronic Data Systems of the US, the world's largest
software and services company, or Hoskyns, a part of the CGS group, in the
UK have been in the outsourcing business for more than 20 years. Among EDS's
recent outsourcing clients are Chausson in France, a joint subsidiary of
Renault and Peugeot, and Heineken in The Netherlands.
On the one hand, outsourcing might seem the perfect solution for a company
keen to concentrate on its core competences and anxious to remove the burden
of managing its own data processing operations.
On the other, outsourcing is itself a complex exercise in management and
already there are signs that companies which rushed eagerly into outsourcing
deals are having second thoughts.
The chief difficulty is the terms of the contract. Business Intelligence, a
UK based consultancy investigated outsourcing deals at 30 large European
organisations. It warns, in summary that 'many companies have been tempted
by these perceived advantages into poorly thought-out outsourcing
contracts.' It emphasises 'the caution required in negotiating with tough,
experienced outsourcing providers in order to achieve the intended business
objectives.'
The prospects for the older companies remain mixed. IBM, three times the
size of its closest rival, has been the most spectacular victim of the
changes. After three years of restructuring, the first sign of recovery was
seen in the first quarter of the year when it made a profit of Dollars 392m
compared with a Dollars 399m loss for the same period last year. Wall Street
analysts were mildly encouraged that the computer giant might at last be
seeing light at the end of the tunnel, although as Mr Gerstener pointed out:
'No IBM margins are ever going to return to the levels we used to have . . .
we do not have as part of our game plan to create a dominant position built
on high prices relative to costs.'
For Digital Equipment, the minicomputer pioneer once second only to IBM
among global computer companies, the gloom seems to be intensifying. Mr
Robert Palmer, its beleagured chief executive warned that the company's
future was at risk unless it could swiftly achieve a competitive cost
structure. The implication was that staff levels had to fall to about 65,000
compared with 85,000 at present.
A third important trend is the jockeying for position among the leaders of
the new industry - Microsoft, Intel, Compaq, Apple and Novell. Intel is
being challenged not only by IBM in collaboration with Apple and Motorola,
but by companies making functional copies of its own designs.
Microsoft, the dominant force in operating systems for single user computers
for more than a decade, is finding it less easy to establish its new,
networked system 'Windows NT' in the large organisations for which it was
designed. Novell, the market leader in networking systems, bought
WordPerfect, a maker of wordprocessing software, to flesh out its product
line and more effectively compete with Microsoft.
None of this makes life any easier for customers who now find their
uncertainties over technology compounded by uncertainty over industry
leadership. The vaccum left by IBM's 30-year domination of the business will
not easily be filled.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
          WORLDWIDE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MARKET BY REGION
    Percentage breakdown calculated on market values in Dollars bn*
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Region                         1993         1992        1993      1994
                 Value (Dollars bn)            %           %         %
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Western Europe             140.36           35.1        34.5      33.7
European Union             120.64           30.2        29.6      28.8
Efta***                     19.72            4.9         4.9       4.8
Eastern Europe               3.48            0.7         0.8       1.0
US                         158.92           37.9        39.1      39.4
Japan                       64.96           17.3        16.0      15.7
Four Tigers**                5.80            1.4         1.5       1.5
Rest of world               32.48            7.6         8.0       8.6
Total                      406.00          100.0       100.0     100.0
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
*IT, excl. ICT (information communication technology);
*** = European Free Trade Assn;
**S. Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore.
Data: European IT Observatory.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
ON OTHER PAGES:
Chip wars Page 2
Personal computers Page 2
Client-server systems Page 3
Large systems Page 3
National markets Pages 3-4
Advances in technology Pages 4-6
