FT  25 JUL 94 / Leading Article: Flight plan for Air France
Mr Marcellino Oreja, Europe's transport commissioner, is expected to propose
on Wednesday that Brussels approve a FFr20bn (Pounds 2.4bn) French
government rescue of Air France, the loss-making state-owned carrier. The
case is an important test of the EU's state aids policy and of its drive to
liberalise air transport. If Mr Oreja's fellow commissioners are committed
to those policies, they should scrutinise his proposal hard.
The decision matters because the planned bail-out is by far the largest yet
in the European industry, and because Air France and Air Inter, its domestic
affiliate, together have the biggest revenues of any European airline group.
Furthermore, France's reluctance to open Orly airport to competition
suggests it is determined to continue protecting Air France  - in violation
of single market rules and of the EU integration Paris claims to favour.
If Brussels waved the rescue through, it would further blight prospects for
fair competition in an industry already beset by excess capacity. For a
company of Air France's size to receive subsidies in the amount proposed,
and on terms not available to privately-owned rivals, would jeopardise more
efficient and profitable carriers. British Airways is right to cry foul on
that score - even if its own attitude to competition has not always been
impeccable.
In judging the Air France case, the commission should ask three questions.
The first is why any state aid should be permitted. Brussels' policy is to
allow troubled carriers 'one last chance' of aid before a total cut-off in
1997. But Air France has already had more last chances than most in the
industry. Three state capital injections totalling almost FFr5bn since 1991
have failed to cure its problems.
Slimmed down
The second question is why Air France needs so much money. Lufthansa,
Germany's state-owned airline, has recently slimmed down radically without
taxpayer support. The opacity of Air France's published accounts makes it
hard to be sure that any state aid will be used to finance restructuring,
and not to cover operating losses. The commission should not entertain any
proposal for government funding unless supported by detailed financial
information and economic analysis of Air France's operations.
In any case, the company has plenty of saleable assets in the form of stakes
in Air Inter and several other profitable airlines. Yet so far, it is
proposing to dispose only of its hotel subsidiary. State aid on the scale
proposed is unjustified when the company can raise cash by selling extensive
non-core activities. By requiring it to do so, Brussels can reduce Air
France's reliance on the public purse while enhancing opportunities for
competition.
Forced disposal
The third question is what other conditions - if any - the Commission should
attach to its decision. Air France's rivals are pressing for such measures
as restrictions on its fleet capacity and the forced disposal of
unprofitable routes. However, imposing on companies purely operational
decisions, which should be left to their managements, is one of the more
objectionable features of EU state aids policy. Such interventions should
not be necessary if subsidies are rigorously policed and markets work
effectively.
The problem is that neither condition is easily fulfilled where state-owned
industries are concerned. Not only are they protected by an implicit
guarantee against bankruptcy; the lack of a market for their shares makes it
unusually difficult to judge whether state aid is being granted on
commercial terms. The right remedy is privatisation. Brussels should press
for any state aid to be linked to a deadline for full privatisation of Air
France.
Firmness is particularly important because of the French government's
failure to tackle Air France's problems. One reason Brussels was given
strong powers over competition policy was to put spine into irresolute
governments. Decisive exercise of those powers will not only serve Air
France's competitors; it will help the French economy by ending policies
which have made the carrier an international advertisement for high costs,
poor management, indifferent service and institutionalised inefficiency.
