FT  22 NOV 94 / Cement companies face big EU fines
The European Commission this week may announce record fines against some of
the region's biggest cement companies after a five-year investigation into
alleged illegal market-sharing agreements.
European Union officials said yesterday they were very close to announcing a
decision, which some observers believe could come later this week.
Some 30 companies are thought to be involved in the inquiry, which, under
commission rules, could result in fines of up to 10 per cent of the European
turnover of the worst offenders.
The investigation originally involved more than 70 companies. The shortened
list is thought to include all the big suppliers including British, French,
German and Italian companies.
It would be the fourth time this year that the fines would have been imposed
by the commission for alleged market sharing or price fixing by European
companies.
The commission in July imposed record fines totalling Ecu132.15m (Dollars
167.8m) on 19 carton-board producers accused of operating Europe's 'most
pernicious' price-fixing cartel.
In February, Brussels fined 14 steel producers more than Ecu100m for price
fixing and market sharing.
Fines against cement companies, if imposed, are likely to be staggered, with
lesser offenders being fined smaller amounts, as occurred in the
carton-board case.
The EU investigations began in 1989 when officials staged a dawn raid on the
offices of 10 leading cement producers in France, Belgium and Germany.
The raids were ordered after customers complained of a low level of cement
imports in spite of large price variations between neighbouring European
countries.
Imports have risen since the late 1980s but still provide a low proportion
of total sales in most EU countries.
Reuter adds from Brussels: Neither the names of companies involved, nor the
size of any fines have been disclosed, officials said. The list would be
drafted at the very last moment to avoid turmoil in the companies' shares.
The probe originally concerned the whole sector, including Holderbank of
Switzerland, Italy's Italcementi, France's Lafarge Coppee, Belgium's CBR,
Britain's Blue Circle, Germany's Dyckerhoff, and Portugal's Cimpor, along
with national and European cement associations. Shares in Lafarge Coppee
fell last week on a press report that the company had made no provisions for
a possible fine. The French company denied the allegations.
