FT  24 OCT 94 / FDP poll result strains Kohl's coalition talks
Chancellor Helmut Kohl will today open negotiations to form another
coalition government amid signs that the talks are not likely to be as quick
and easy as he hopes.
The Free Democratic party (FDP), the small liberal party which has been in
coalition with Mr Kohl's Christian Democratic Union (CDU) since 1982, is
likely to be a difficult negotiation partner following internal wrangling
after the party's second worst election result since 1949.
The party leadership was meeting last night to map out a strategy for the
talks. Mr Jurgen Mollemann, a former economics minister and chairman of the
party's largest state branch, has come out in open opposition to Mr Klaus
Kinkel, the party leader and foreign minister.
While the indications were last night that Mr Kinkel would see off
opposition from Mr Mollemann, differences remain over negotiating strategy.
The CDU has said it wants quick coalition negotiations which would clear the
way for Mr Kohl's re-election as chancellor in mid-November, an election
where the government coalition will need every vote it can muster to
preserve its 10-seat majority.
Parliament will meet for its opening session in Berlin on November 10, and
the so-called 'chancellor vote' is scheduled for November 17.
The FDP has said it wants 'binding' commitments on the policies of the
future coalition government. A party spokeswoman would not spell out the
party's demands ahead of the negotiations, but the FDP is likely to push for
tax cuts, an end to government subsidies, and for measures to integrate
Germany's 6.5m foreigners.
The party is also likely to resist pressure to give up any of the five
ministries it controls in the 18-seat cabinet. The Christian Social Union
(CSU), the CDU's more conservative Bavarian sister party, has overtaken the
FDP to become the second strongest party in the three-party coalition and
has indicated that it will want the appropriate reward.
There are likely to be few changes at the most important ministries. Mr
Kinkel is expected to stay as foreign minister, Mr Theo Waigel as finance
minister and Mr Volker Ruhe as defence minister.
Mr Rudolf Scharping, the leader of the opposition Social Democratic party
(SPD), has said he will not stand against Mr Kohl in the 'chancellor vote'.
