FT  16 APR 94 / Private View: Jimmy Reid builds his own soapbox / A former
apostle of international revolution explains how his beliefs fit with his
Scottish nationalism
Once he was news. Now he is a purveyor of news. Jimmy Reid, the former
shipyard shop steward, Scottish folk hero and communist pin-up boy, is
turning media proprietor. He launches a weekly current affairs magazine at
the end of the month.
No doubt former comrades of the loquacious Reid will see his Seven Days
Scotland as a grandiose gesture typical of the man whose transit from strike
leader to chat show performer, TV presenter and newspaper columnist they
have so envied and derided.
Nor is history on his side. It is a media pundits' maxim that there is no
market in Britain for illustrated weekly news magazines. Look, they say, at
Sir James Goldsmith's Now] magazine or Brian Wilson's Seven Days.
But Jimmy Reid is no fool, even if he talks a hell of a lot. He can turn out
a sharp polemic on religious bigotry, soccer hooliganism or Northern Ireland
as neatly as any tabloid leader writer, and a piece of analysis as trenchant
as any political commentator's.
His spoken rhetoric may be ear-numbing and its fervour may seem contrived.
But that does not mean Reid is not sincere. The fact that he left school at
14 with not much more than a big personality and a lot of charm did not stop
him devouring the heavyweight political and literary classics in his early
teens.
Reid's home in south Glasgow, not far from the Gorbals slum where he was
born, is eloquent. It is a tenement in a handsomely restored building whose
high-ceilinged rooms have been decorated in smart suburban good taste. In
London, a flat like this would cost a fortune.
The big study is arrayed with books - dictionaries, poetry, politics, music
 -like that of a comfortably off Oxbridge don. On the walls hang the
mementoes of his activist past, including a famous photograph from the 1971
work-in at Upper Clyde Shipbuilders which forced the Heath government into a
policy U-turn and made Reid a national celebrity.
Reid has aged comfortably. Yet even in the quiet of his own study, with a
bright red pullover stretched over his middle-age paunch and a bottle of
whisky at his elbow, he has the hectoring manner of the 19-year-old
apprentices' strike leader. Listening to Reid is rather like listening to an
opera singer practising in his bath: the voice lurches dramatically from
rumbling piano to fortissimo squeak, from confiding recitative to passionate
aria.
When I asked him why Scotland needed a news magazine, Reid launched into a
fiery recital of past English repression: the ban on the kilt, the quashing
of clan names (Reid, meaning 'red,' was the name adopted by the Robertson
clan) and the unjust terms of the Act of Union.
'Now don't misunderstand me,' he said. 'When the Scots keep shouting, it is
because (he growled menacingly) 'they are fearful. That's why we shout about
our Scottishness.'
But the real reason was 'a crisis of politics'. By this he means that the
number of Conservative MPs elected in Scotland has fallen from 22 in 1979 to
only 11 out of the 72 seats. Scots thus find themselves 'virtually
disenfranchised. They are having imposed on them a political culture which
is profoundly alien to them. Even the Tories can't stand it up here, apart
from a few hacks.'
Reid's magazine will not be political as such. It will cover leisure, arts
and sport and although its editorial line will be left of centre and
strongly devolutionist, its pages will be open to all points of view.
'There are right-wing views which canna be just bloody dismissed. They're
legitimate. But what I want to see - what we don't get in Scotland - is a
debate.'
Reid has raised Pounds 100,000 start-up capital from private investors but
he and his co-editor, Bob Houston, a fellow Glaswegian with years of
newspaper production experience, retain control. The spirit of the venture
may be Glaswegian but the contents are designed to appeal also to genteel
Edinburgh.
When I said Scotland was a geographical entity certainly, a state of mind
perhaps, but probably no longer a nation, Reid was outraged.
'By any definition ever penned, Scotland is a nation: it has a settled
territory, a jurisprudence, an economy. Not only that, it is one of the
oldest nations in this world. Do you think when the Romans drew Hadrian's
Wall, that was an accident?' He quoted Tacitus at me: 'They create a
desolation and call it peace', a reference to an early Scottish warlord who
was able to field 30,000 men against Agricola.
He talked of the de-industrialisation of Scotland under a neo-Conservative
government. 'It's got a genocidal dimension. It wasn't the bullets of the
settlers that killed the Red Indians, it was when they destroyed their
economy. Whenever I see young people leaving Scotland, I see an almost
genocidal process.'
But what makes you think your potential readers see it like that?
'If I was a neo-fascist entrepreneur starting a magazine, its political line
would still have to be centre-left. The only thing is, he wouldn't mean it
and I mean it absolutely.'
We argued about the distinction between race and nation and Reid said: 'If
you can't love Scotland you can't love the world. If you're a socialist and
you can't love your family don't talk to me about your love of humanity.'
He was moving up through the gears now. 'I am an internationalist and a
nationalist. I believe in good loving relationships between those who have a
sense of their own national identity. And I'll go further: if you love what
is good in your own people, you will love and admire similar sentiments in
the breasts of other people.'
When he is talking politics these days, Reid seems to prefer fluency to
focus. It is as if details bore him; what matters is the grand sweep. But he
certainly has the gift of the gab: 'Every pimp will argue a case that
justifies his activities in terms of market forces,' he said at one point,
'every brothel-keeper, every drug trafficker, every arms dealer. Tell me how
you handle the destruction of the rainforests on the basis of a programme
that's funded from the market?
Both before and after he left the Communist party - the party which had
groomed him for its highest post - to rejoin Labour in 1976, Reid was
regarded as a natural for the House of Commons. He stood for Parliament
under both banners but never pursued the safe Labour seat that could have
been his. Was this a waste of his natural talents?
'All I can say is that I've always been interested in politics, but in the
ideas - where are we going as a society, and so on. I always had an abiding
suspicion of career politicians. To me politics was all about stopping
children getting murdered by their social circumstances.' (Three of Reid's
six brothers and sisters died in infancy)
'After I left the yards everyone thought I had it all cut and dried. I've
never in my life structured any career for myself. Middle class people say
(he put on a mocking whine):  'What shall I do? Shall I go into medicine or
the family business? What about politics?''
Do you feel you didn't make the best of yourself?
'There are people who think that way,' Reid replied cagily. 'I'm well aware
there were expectations of a role that I should have played. And to that
extent I'm sorry if these expectations could not be realised.'
But were they your expectations too?
'Well this is a thing I'm trying to answer - indeed for myself. There was a
genuine factor in there, in that I didn't think in these terms.'
Was it that you found the self-promotion demeaning - that you would have
liked the result but were not prepared to go through the process?
'No, I think that if I went through the process I couldn't be sure that I
would emerge the other end the person I was when I went in. All I'm saying
is that at an important stage in my life I developed a disdain for the
wheeling and dealing of career politicians.'
Perhaps you have a distaste for joining up, I said, for getting in among it.
You prefer to be on the outside of any institution.
'I think there is an element of me which believes that all establishments
eventually become intrinsically reactionary. That does not mean you don't
become involved. I've always worked with people. My compulsion is to
communicate if I see something beautiful.' He mentioned music, and
racehorses. 'I'm not a creative person, I don't think.'
We talked about his notorious defection from the CP. Reid has always said he
would have left earlier if his shipyard fame had not intervened.
'Suddenly I become the best-known communist in Britain. People are joining
the Communist party because of me. Right? What a bloody problem I had] Now
that's the truth.
'I had it made, I could have gone through life dead cosy and been the
darling boy of the left and I'm saying 'This is No True.' I had to pack it
in. People that knew me understood. It was the most painful thing in my life
because there's a bloody ego involved here. I had to stand up and say
publicly: I'm wrong.
'Life's too short to pussyfoot about with the truth. I'm not talking about
wee truths - I'll bloody lie to save any bugger's unnecessary pain. I mean,
I've compromised. I think life is a compromise with death. How can you go
through life without compromising? There's nothing undignified about
compromising as long as you don't abandon your strategic objective.
'But I'm not apologising for my life. Because I've done a lot of good, even
thus far.'
Perhaps Jimmy Reid has found his vocation after all.
