FT  30 APR 94 / Books: Class, competition and killer instincts - A history
with a Freudian slant
THE CULTIVATION OF HATRED: THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE VICTORIA TO FREUD by
Peter Gay HarperCollins Pounds 25, 684 pages
Peter Gay is an historian on the grand scale. His natural form of expression
is the magisterial multi-volume survey of the culture of an age, as in his
prize-winning two-volume history of the Enlightenment, and his four-volume
account of 19-century middle-class culture, The Bourgeois Experience,
Victoria to Freud.
Gay has of course written single-volume books, but he prefers a larger
canvas. The reason is simple. All writers accumulate masses of material in
the course of research. Most then select, as judiciously as they can; but
some, loth to waste, invent a reason for including everything. Gay is a
leader in this latter school. The result is fascinating but - because of the
implausible unifying framework into which the great miscellany is crammed -
tendentious.
This volume is the third of Gay's Bourgeois Experience series; the fourth is
yet to come. Gay describes his project as an exploration of 19th-century
middle-class culture based on the Freudian categories of sex and aggression,
and in the first two volumes he discusses Victorian sexual attitudes and
practices. In this volume he employs the notion of aggression as the key to
explaining almost everything else.
The fact that the whole enterprise is based on the implausibilities of
Freudian doctrine immediately puts one on guard. 'My aim,' Gay writes, 'is
to integrate psychoanalysis with history.' The psychoanalytic scheme of
human nature is, at bottom, simple: it is premissed on the thesis that an
infant sexually desires its parent of the opposite sex, and is therefore
hostile towards, because jealous of, its parent of the same sex; and that
because neither the desire nor the hostility is acceptable, internal
conflicts arise. Thus the wellspring of human nature in the gospel according
to Freud; and thus - in Gay's hands - the key to Victorian bourgeois
culture.
In this volume, The Cultivation of Hatred, Gay invokes Freudian views on
aggression to justify bringing together a wide range of subjects: social
Darwinism; racism; concepts of manliness; debates about crime and
punishment; developments in politics; views of women; the nature and use of
humour; the growth of interest in sport; and progress in education and
science. When Gay tells us straightforwardly about these aspects of
19th-century culture he is spellbinding; there are few historians working
today who write so knowledgeably and elegantly. But when he theorises; when
he psychoanalyses not a particular Victorian, but the whole of Victorian
culture; when he borrows from Freud a single explanation to tie together all
this diversity of material - he fails to persuade.
The reason is simply stated. To adhere to his Freudian schema Gay has to
believe that not only are fighting and quarrelling expressions of human
aggression, but so also are debate, dialectic, disagreement, competition,
and negotiation; more, that progress - for example in science and education
 -is also generated by aggression, although this time 'constructive
aggression', since it flows from attempts to gain mastery over the world. So
practically everything comes down to aggression as source and motive.
The problem with Gay's thesis is displayed by a characteristic claim. 'It
was a striking feature of 19th-century culture,' he writes, 'that
influential justifications for aggression relied on what their partisans
advertised as scientific proof. The alibi that conflict is necessary and
desirable greatly benefited from such claims. Its apologists proudly
asserted that the case for untrammelled competition, whether in the
economic, the social, or the military domain, was susceptible of
demonstration' (my italics). Here we slide from aggression to conflict to
competition, as if they are the same thing; and we have 'social competition'
and 'military competition' lumped together, as if the two kinds of
competition are indistinguishable.
It is not merely that these generalisations are wildly too sweeping; it is
that they embody a conceptual confusion: for not all conflict is aggressive,
and not all competition involves conflict. If, however, one ignores the
scaffolding of implausible theory, what remains is a marvellously enjoyable
and informative history of 19th-century ideas. One discards the shell to eat
a nut: follow this course here, for in all other respects this is a volume -
a series - to have on one's bookshelves.
