FT  16 DEC 94 / Shift from protest to power tests ANC: Party confronts
challenges its founders would have been pleased to face
At the official launch of his autobiography in Johannesburg last week, South
African President Nelson Mandela joked that such were the rigours of his
office that he sometimes longed for the relative calm of prison.
As his African National Congress gathers tomorrow in the Afrikaner city of
Bloemfontein for its first national conference since winning the April
election, it is a sentiment that will be appreciated by the 3,000 delegates
 -the transformation from liberation movement to government is proving much
more demanding, and the social and economic fruits of political victory far
more elusive, than expected.
Nevertheless, it is a task which Mr Mandela and his party are undertaking
with vigour as they celebrate the fulfilment a dream first articulated in
1912, in the same conservative town, when a small group of black men
gathered to form an organisation that would fight their disenfranchisement
in the newly established country of South Africa.
Eighty-three years after its foundation, having weathered decades of the
imprisonment, torture, exile and murder of its members at the hands of the
white government, the ANC will be hoping to emerge from its first
post-apartheid conference with a united front and shared vision for the new
era.
Although Mr Mandela's popularity among blacks remains at levels other heads
of government can only dream of, and is growing steadily among other race
groups, the ANC as a party is losing ground.
Paid-up membership has fallen off sharply since April, contributing to a
budget crunch that has forced the retrenchment of a large number of party
officers.
More seriously, while black expectations were never as unrealistic as whites
feared, the government's failure to begin implementing its much-vaunted jobs
and housing programmes has led to an upsurge in grassroots dissatisfaction -
with the result that opinion polls show the ANC's national support has
dropped from 60.6 per cent in April to 53.6 per cent in September.
Part of the problem is that members of the new national and regional
parliaments are finding that their experiences in the protest movement are
of limited use when trying to draft and implement legislation. As Mr Tokyo
Sexwale, premier of the Gauteng region, the country's most powerful
province, asked rhetorically last month: 'Are we in power or just in
office?'
The primary theme of the conference - 'From Resistance to Reconstruction and
Nation Building' - reflects this concern. It is a theme which acknowledges
the ANC's inability as yet to manage the transition to efficient
administration. It is also, however, a theme designed to appeal to the
party's core black constituency to try to offset disillusionment with what
some ANC members describe as the government's overly reconciliatory attitude
to whites.
In an official position paper for the conference, drafted last month, Mr
Thabo Mbeki, deputy president, called on the ANC to refocus its attention on
its mass base - 'the black working class, black rural poor and the
significant section of the black middle strata'. The government will be
hoping this Africanist rhetoric will be enough to defuse the radical
elements at the conference.
But there are other problems to be overcome, particularly concerning the
party's relationship with its traditional allies. Although the ANC remains
in formal alliance with the country's largest labour federation,
Cosatu, as the government it is now reluctant to condone strikes and
inflationary wage demands that a year ago it would have supported.
Similarly, while the civic associations which sprang up in the 1980s as
opposition movements to imposed local government structures are still
formally aligned to the ANC, the two groupings have clashed publicly (and
sometimes violently) on the issue of continued rent and service boycotts in
the black townships.
The government, desperately wanting extra revenue to fund development
projects, is insisting that residents resume payments or face eviction, a
stand the associations are unwilling to endorse.
Politicking within the ANC over who should hold senior party posts is
complicating the situation. Mr Mbeki remains the front runner to be elected
deputy president of the party in place of the ailing Mr Walter Sisulu, but
the occasion will also be an important gauge of support for his chief rival,
Mr Cyril Ramaphosa.
After his defeat in the fight for the deputy presidency of South Africa, Mr
Ramaphosa, who is the party's incumbent secretary-general, has kept a low
profile.
In recent months there has been speculation he may withdraw from politics,
perhaps accepting a job in the private sector. However, in the past few
weeks most of the ANC's regional groupings have voiced support for Mr
Ramaphosa, who now seems likely to retain his position.
But whatever tribulations the ANC-led government is forced to address, one
thought will be uppermost in the mind of every one of the delegates gathered
in Bloemfontein - they are challenges that the party's founders would have
been only too pleased, and proud, to face.
