FT  18 APR 94 / The Bretton Woods twins at 50: America
The International Monetary Fund and World Bank have every reason to
celebrate their 50th anniversary this July. Of course they have made some
bad loans and shown insensitivity on some issues, such as poverty relief and
the environment. But critics should remember that these institutions, on the
whole, championed the right causes. They advocated free markets and
conservative macroeconomics when such policies were reviled by the
developing (and developed) world's intelligentsia.
Yet at this moment of triumph the future of the Bretton Woods twins is
murky. Over the next 50 years the power and prestige of these agencies - and
many like them - is likely to decline. This should not be read as a
criticism of their mostly able and dedicated staff. It will instead reflect
profound changes in the economic landscape - changes that are already
beginning to reduce the demand for their bureaucratic services.
The fund and bank, admittedly, have adapted skilfully to changing
circumstances. The fund no longer supervises a fixed exchange rate system
(because that long ago vanished) nor is it concerned solely with short-term
macro stabilisation. The bank has long ceased to be simply a supplier of
project finance. Today, both institutions are engaged in 'policy-based'
lending; both are trying to promote structural reforms; both are concerned
with long-term development. This suggests a clearer division of labour and
some rationalisation of functions is possible, as the independent Bretton
Woods Commission is likely to recommend later this year.
But a 50th anniversary year review of their operations ought to dig a little
deeper. The fund and bank, I would argue, are engaged in three distinct
activities: the provision of economic advice; the supply of development
capital; and the certification of policies as sound or unsound. All three
activities are separable, and all three can, in principle, be provided by
the private sector.
On advice, there is now broad agreement on the market-friendly policies
likely to promote development. Private consultants are perfectly capable of
devising economic reform strategies for developing and formerly communist
countries. Meanwhile, the lifting of controls on capital flows and the
growth of pension funds and other forms of institutional investment in rich
countries has created a huge pool of mobile private capital.
From a trickle in the early 1980s, total private flows to developing
countries have become a torrent, worth about Dollars 110bn last year. They
look durable because the bulk is long-term equity and bond finance. Foreign
direct investment is now the single largest source of capital for developing
countries, rather than official aid or loans, which have stagnated.
Despite this revolution, agencies such as the fund and bank claim to have a
critical role even in the middle-income countries that can so easily attract
private capital. They say they are uniquely well placed to influence
economic policies - and thus promote development - because they can make
loans conditional on policy changes. By serving as scapegoats, they claim
they can also provide political cover for unpopular but essential domestic
reforms.
There is something in this conditionality argument. The fund and bank can
doubtless point to instances where reform would not have occurred but for
their prodding. But as the fund's problems in Russia illustrate, the
leverage of external agencies is pretty limited in the absence of a domestic
consensus for reform.
The long list of perpetual borrowers from the fund and bank illustrates the
dark side of policy-based lending. Governments promise to make reforms in
order to get loans, and then renege on their promises. After a cooling-off
period, the process repeats itself. The fund and bank thus become unwitting
obstacles to reform; their loans enable countries to pursue rotten policies
for longer than would otherwise be the case. Trying to be kind, they create
more, rather than less, misery.
The private sector alternative seems far cleaner. If a country wants to
implement market-oriented reforms, it can buy the necessary advice
privately. Once it has proved its good faith, bankers and private investors
will be clamouring at its doors. And it is not true, as some sceptics argue,
that private investors are willing to risk their shirts only in relatively
prosperous countries already under the tutelage of the bank and fund. The
example of China, which attracted more than Dollars 20bn in private inflows
last year, shows that countries with very low per capita incomes can attract
private capital without an official badge certifying good behaviour.
Yet the bank and fund are still needed. Even in a liberal global economic
order, governments must co-ordinate policies, so as to avoid destabilising
shifts in fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policy. There will still be
financial emergencies, such as the debt crisis of the early 1980s. It is in
these spheres, rather than conditional lending, that the fund has most to
offer. The bank, meanwhile, should accept that many of its historic tasks
can now be performed by private bodies; a slimmed-down agency should focus
its energies on the poorest regions, such as sub-Saharan Africa, where the
outlook for private investment is bleakest.
What the fund and bank can no longer deny is that the growing competence of
the private sector in all aspects of development finance logically requires
a tighter definition of their role. Public agencies, as they have long
argued, exist to perform tasks that the private sector either cannot do at
all, or cannot do well.
