FT  22 FEB 94 / Survey of European Finance and Investment - Portugal (3):
More painful results likely - Banking
Portuguese banks rose above bleak business conditions in 1993 to produce
overall profit growth of about 11 per cent. But the delayed impact of the
recession is likely to emerge in 1994 with more painful results.
Several factors combined to produce a pessimistic outlook for last year.
Industrial investment was contracting sharply, reducing the demand for
credit. Fierce competition for deposits was shrinking financial margins.
Bad credit was on the rise, demanding greater provisions. Pension funds
required additional provisioning and the central bank was about to demand
contributions to a deposit guarantee fund.
In the event, profits not only grew slightly more than in 1992 but the share
prices of banks, which account for 65 per cent of equity turnover on the
stock market, also rose by 53 per cent.
Part of the explanation for this buoyant performance was a shift away from
financial intermediation as a source of earnings to commissions, fee-based
income and the cross-selling of financial products.
'Financial margins fell by about one percentage point in 1993 to 3.5-4 per
cent. This is close to the European average and lower than margins in Spain,
for example,' says Mr Alexandre Vaz Pinto, president of Banco Espirito Santo
and of the Portuguese Bankers' Association.
'But in compensation, banks increased their commissions, equating them more
closely with real costs.' Supported by high margins, Portuguese banks had
traditionally waived commissions or levied charges at below cost.
Among the biggest sources of income were trading in public debt securities
and some lucrative foreign exchange operations during the currency crises
that assailed the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System
last year. The cross-selling of financial products also became increasingly
important.
'Banking is increasingly becoming a services-oriented business rather than
one based on the intermediation of money,' says Mr Joao Freixa, assistant
general manager of Barclays Bank in Portugal. 'Customers are looking for a
wide range of financial products and discerning advice on how to invest
their money rather than just a place to deposit it.'
Banks also adjusted their asset portfolios to offset the effect of
diminishing margins.
They moved into long-term government debt, offering rates of 20 to 25 per
cent in 1993, and into commercial paper, which attracted corporate borrowers
with rates two points below traditional bank credit.
At the same time, banks reduced the maturity of their deposits, persuading
customers into more profitable short-term deposits and away from anything
with a longer maturity than six months.
Stringent cost-cutting programmes were implemented, successfully lowering
the relatively high level of operational costs supported by most Portuguese
banks. Except for a number of smaller banks fighting for market share, most
institutions reined back the ambitious branch network expansion programmes
that have characterised the sector over recent years.
Investment in information systems also helped improve efficiency.
The most surprising element contributing to bank profits was a significant
increase in the amount of credit extended to customers, despite the
depressive effect of the recession. Official figures show that credit grew
by a sharp 17 per cent during the first half of 1993 and is estimated to
have risen by 10 per cent over the whole year. Allowing for inflation, this
represents real growth of about 3.5 per cent.
Bankers offer several explanations. There was a substantial increase in
private loans. Consumer credit, starting from virtually zero, exploded last
year. New entrants into the house-purchase credit market stimulated strong
growth of mortgage loans. In addition, large corporations that used to
borrow in foreign currencies from foreign banks because of lower interest
rates switched back to escudo financing from domestic banks to hedge against
risk following the European currency crises.
An additional explanation is that some banks deliberately renewed bad
credit, capitalising the interest due into the new loans, to avoid
provisioning against the bad debt. Mr Vaz Pinto believes this procedure had
considerable impact on the growth of credit in 1993 and on the balance
sheets of some banks.
But he says it is impossible to quantify the exact extent of such
'window-dressing'. Some banks are also thought to have domiciled bad loans
in their offshore branches in Madeira, where regulations on provisioning
against bad credit do not apply.
'Central bank regulations on provisioning for bad debt are not as strict in
Portugal as in many other European countries and some banks have taken
advantage of this to make the barest minimum provisions,' said an economist
with a leading bank. 'Auditors of banks who have renewed bad credit must
also be held responsible for failing to draw attention to the lack of
sufficient provisioning.'
A central bank spokesman said new regulations for provisioning for bad debt
were being studied. He said the authorities were monitoring the question of
refreshing bad loans but had found no cause for alarm. Portuguese banks are
required to set aside the equivalent of 2 per cent of their total credit as
general risk provision. The usual level in Europe is 1 per cent.
The total amount of bad debt in the Portuguese banking system is estimated
to have risen from Es450bn at the end of 1992 to more than Es650bn in
December, 1993; an increase from about 7 per cent of total credit to 8 per
cent. Bankers are agreed that the situation will worsen.
'The full impact of bad debt resulting from a recession does not usually hit
the banks until one or two years later,' said a Lisbon banker. 'And
provisions will have to be made sooner or later for existing bad debts that
have been rolled over.'
Some banks also eased the pressure on their balance sheets in 1993 by
delaying the capitalisation of pension funds. They were also saved from
making contributions to a deposit guarantee fund, now likely to be created
in 1994.
In this scenario, most bankers are not forecasting a significant increase in
profits in 1994 despite the forecast upturn in the economy. Stock market
analysts say banks remain undervalued in comparison with industrial stocks
and they forecast share price gains of 10 to 15 per cent for the banking
sector this year.
