FT  05 JUL 94 / The Full Employment Debate: Flexible work practices can be
more appropriate
Summary of paper by David Marsden:
Much of the debate about regulation of the labour market is made unduly
confusing because the main arguments and policies proposed are more relevant
to some sections of the labour force than to others.
The deregulatory path may prove effective at the top and bottom of the
earnings scale, but its effect on the middle is less clear-cut. In effect,
it relies on a strengthening of managerial authority and a concentration of
decision-making initiative in the management hierarchy.
In some work environments this may still be effective, but the success of
'lean production' in attaining new standards of productivity in
manufacturing casts strong doubt on the future competitiveness of systems
which concentrate control in the management hierarchy.
The alternative path is that of 'co-operative exchange'. This approach
stresses the importance of flexible work arrangements and
information-sharing among workers and their managers in the middle,
skilled-professional, section of the workforce. The grounds for believing
that this leads to better productivity and quality - compared with the
management-control model - are strong.
In so far as commercial success in world markets now seems to depend more on
co-operative exchange taking place, it is important for European countries
to make the right choice for regulation in the labour market.
Deregulation and reinforced management control would seem to be a recipe for
lower productivity and more unequal societies.
Co-operative exchange has much to recommend it, but it does depend on trust
relations, and these are vulnerable in periods of major economic change,
such as the implementation of the single European market and the general
internationalisation of business.
To sustain co-operative exchange the European Union's social dimension - and
in particular the social dialogue between unions and employers - has an
important role to play in enabling businesses to signal their continued
commitment to co-operation.
Germany comes closest to achieving co-operative exchange in large parts of
its industry, but in other European countries many individual companies
achieve this, albeit on a more fragile basis.
Where relations are of a more confrontational nature the increase in
competition associated with the single market could in fact provide an
opportunity for developing co-operative relations.
The problem of commercial survival forces both management and workers to
reappraise their practices, and the model of an effective social dialogue
offers a framework within which this can take place.
However, recent work in game theory suggests that it is difficult to achieve
mutual co-operation without the presence of trust - a mutual expectation of
co-operative behaviour - and without some social or institutional framework
to sustain that trust.
