FT  02 DEC 94 / An industry prone to price-fixing and cartels: Why cement?
Andrew Taylor points to high costs and a low value product in a cyclical
industry
The record fines announced on Wednesday by the European Commission on 33
cement companies for operating an illegal cartel are not the first penalties
European cement manufacturers have had imposed on them for allegedly trying
to fix their markets.
The German Cartel Office in 1989 announced fines totalling DM244m (Pounds
100m) against domestic manufacturers accused of operating a price-fixing
ring. In July 1992 the Italian anti-trust authority fined cement producers
L5bn (Pounds 2m) in the so-called Procal cartel in southern Italy.
Not all cartels have been illegal. A 50-year-old legal common pricing
agreement in Britain was ended by manufacturers in 1987. Another legal
cement cartel in Switzerland established since 1911 is to be dismantled at
the end of this year.
It will be replaced by a transport pooling arrangement to ensure that at
least 51 per cent of cement is transported by rail to protect the
environment. Rail traffic will be subsidised by a voluntary duty imposed on
cement carried on roads.
In most cases however, such agreements are illegal.
What is it that makes cement manufacturers so prone to operating market
sharing and price-fixing cartels?
The huge capital investment required to build a modern cement works - a
medium-sized plant costs about Pounds 100m - means that national markets
increasingly have become dominated by a small number of large companies.
Cement is a relatively low value product, sold to a highly cyclical
construction industry, making it even more tempting for producers to try to
ensure price stability by making clandestine agreements.
Annual cement sales in the European Union, according to the European Cement
Association (Cembureau), rose by 22 per cent during the five years between
1985 and 1990 only to fall by a tenth over the next three years.
Attempts to sell cement across borders to offset big falls in domestic
demand nonetheless have remained few. Imports as a proportion of total EU
consumption have risen only from 5.8 per cent to 12.7 per cent between 1987
and 1993, according to Cembureau.
'Companies may be reluctant to sell substantial surplus volume in
neighbouring countries as it could provoke retaliation and lead to a
devastating regional price war,' says Mr Lawrence Amboldt, construction
analyst with MP London Wall Equities.
For this reason few observers expect to see a dramatic change in the way in
which large European cement producers operate in spite of the Commission's
verdict. 'There may be some narrowing of price differentials between markets
but I do not expect to see a great upsurge in cross border trade,' says Mr
Amboldt.
According to London Wall, seven large suppliers account for about half total
European sales, excluding Turkey, the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), Albania and former Yugoslavia.
The largest European supplier is Italcementi of Italy, although Holderbank
of Switzerland is bigger worldwide. Italcementi, which has a European market
share of more than 11 per cent, also has a controlling interest in Ciments
Francais, the second-largest French producer.
Other members of the big seven are: Heidelberger of Germany, which has a
controlling interest in CBR, the largest Belgian producer, and has about 10
per cent of the European market; Holderbank with almost 9 per cent; Lafarge
Coppee the largest French producer, almost 8 per cent; Blue Circle of
Britain, 4 per cent; Dyckerhoff of Germany, 4 per cent; and Euroc/Aker a
Scandinavian joint venture with 3.5 per cent.
Many of these companies control subsidiaries based in other EU markets but
in most cases these make very modest cross-border sales.
Concentration of power is even greater in individual markets. Three
companies, Blue Circle, Rugby and Castle, supply over 90 per cent of cement
sold in Britain while four companies, Lafarge, Ciments Francais, Vicat and
Holderbank supply over 90 per cent of the French market.
The biggest threat to the large European producers comes from eastern
European countries, such as Poland, which under communist rule established
large cement manufacturing capacity now searching for foreign currency
alternative markets to sell surplus production.
Manufacturers in response have sought to gain control of eastern European
producers as these have been privatised. 'Between them Holderbank,
Heidelberger/CBR, Lafarge and Italcementi/Ciments Francais effectively have
bought up the cement industry in the Czech Republic,' says Mr Amboldt.
