FT  01 AUG 94 / Power scheme 'failed to cut wholesale price'
An attempt by the electricity industry in England and Wales to give large
users a role in power-price determination has failed to meet expectations
that it would cut wholesale prices by an average 1.5 per cent.
Although prices in the electricity pool, the wholesale market through which
power is traded, have fallen since the experiment was introduced, the pool's
administrators say this is because of other factors.
They say the effect on prices of the 'demand-side bidding' experiment,
through which large customers can agree to reduce consumption if prices go
above a certain level, has been negligible.
The scheme is one of a series of recent disappointments for intensive energy
users.
Earlier this month Professor Stephen Littlechild, electricity regulator,
decided against allowing large users to bypass the pool by buying their
electricity directly from suppliers including the generating companies.
Large companies had pressed for bypass arrangements in the hope that this
would lead to lower prices.
Unlike most power consumers, which have seen prices fall since
privatisation, the largest users, including such companies as Imperial
Chemical Industries and Blue Circle, have suffered price increases.
This is largely the result of the loss of cut-price electricity which the
power industry and government considered to be subsidised.
It was partly in response to large users' complaints over prices that the
pool, controlled largely by the power companies, agreed to the demand-side
bidding experiment.
The pool executive estimated that the experiment could lead to a cut in
average pool prices of about 1.5 per cent and reductions of 3 per cent at
times of peak demand.
However since its introduction last October the experiment has affected
prices on only 23 days - in some cases for only a half-hour period.
The failure of the experiment to cut prices will be seen by companies such
as ICI as vindication of their opposition to the scheme. ICI supported
demand-side bidding but said the pool's scheme would have little effect
because it provided insufficient incentives for companies to take part.
The pool hopes to devise a better scheme for the future, but will continue
the experiment until the end of this year.
