FT  21 JUL 94 / Peres breaks 46-year Jordan taboo
Another taboo in Middle Eastern politics was broken yesterday when Mr Shimon
Peres, Israel's foreign minister, crossed the border from Israel to Jordan
to hold peace talks with Mr Abdul-Salamal-Majali, the Jordanian prime
minister, and Mr Warren Christopher, US secretary of state, on the shores of
the Dead Sea.
Mr Peres flew in from Jerusalem in a military helicopter to become the first
Israeli cabinet minister to be received openly in the kingdom. 'It took us
15 minutes to fly over but 46 years to arrive to this place of peace and
promise,' he said on arrival.
The talks are the fifth in a series of trilateral negotiations which began
last October to focus on areas of economic and infrastructural co-operation
between Jordan and Israel.
They come a day after the close of bilateral border talks on land and water
rights and less than a week before Jordan's King Hussein is due to meet Mr
Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime minister, in Washington.
All three parties emphasised the historical importance of the meeting,
saying it was a critical step on the path towards peace between the two
countries. Mr Peres said that a similar meeting had been suggested six
months ago but 'at the time seemed an impossibility'.
Mr Christopher said that now the ice had been broken, 'high-level
negotiations could take place regularly.'
But having just arrived from Damascus he was careful to stress that progress
on the Jordanian track would not be to the exclusion of Syria, where he is
due to return tomorrow.
Mr Peres described the planned summit between the Jordanian king and Israeli
premier as 'the start of a new era' in Jordanian-Israeli relations, and Mr
Majali, who was acting in his role as foreign minister, did not rule out the
signing of some kind of agreement or declaration in Washington.
However, he warned against optimism that a full peace treaty between the two
sides would be signed soon.
Instead, peace would come in stages: 'Like a book, the peace will come in
chapters. Only when all the chapters have been written can a full peace
treaty be signed. Although this is not to say that along the way each
chapter can be put into practice,' he said.
Earlier in the day, King Hussein said: 'I hope to sign as soon as it is
possible. But not next week.'
Concrete agreements at the end of the talks were limited to further studies
on future projects and economic co-operation, including:
A master plan to develop the Jordan Valley into a joint national heritage
park.
A study of aviation routes to benefit both countries.
A commission to promote tourism which will include opening a crossing-point
between Aqaba and Eilat, on the Red Sea, for third-country nationals.
A site survey for a road linking Jordan, Israel and Egypt along the Gulf of
Aqaba.
Mr Peres spoke optimistically of open borders, trade and skies in the future
where 'farms replace soldiers and greenhouses replace army barracks.'
He said that the border dispute in which Israel occupies around 380 square
kilometres of Jordanian land was near resolution; 'We can mark out (the
border) now while respecting the sovereignty of both sides,' he said.
