FT  06 JUN 94 / Insurers face rush of unfair dismissal claims
Some of Britain's leading insurers, already under fire after allegations of
large-scale mis-selling of life policies, face legal claims estimated at
tens of millions of pounds from hundreds of their former sales agents who
are claiming unfair dismissal or loss of earnings.
About 100,000 sales agents have lost their jobs during the past four years
and more than 400 are believed to have filed claims through solicitors, with
possibly hundreds more in the pipeline.
Many of the former representatives are also being sued by their former
companies because of claims for repayment of loans or commission paid out on
policies that have lapsed. The amount at stake in these claims is put at up
to Pounds 20m.
According to Mr Witold Pawlak, a barrister involved with 40 cases, none of
which has yet come to a trial, those cases which have been filed 'represent
the tip of the problem' facing the life industry.
While the insurance industry is playing down the problem, evidence of such a
large-scale breakdown in relations between the companies and their former
representatives is a further blow to the business after revelations of poor
control of sales activities and a series of big fines handed out to leading
companies by Lautro, the industry regulator.
Legal &amp; General, Guardian Royal Exchange and the UK arm of Australian
insurer Colonial Mutual are believed to be involved with substantial numbers
of disputes, although none wanted to specify a figure. Royal Insurance,
Allied Dunbar and Sun Alliance also face claims.
Legal &amp; General declined to discuss the number of cases or how much money
was involved because 'we don't want to hang up our dirty washing in public',
while GRE said it was 'behaving reasonably' in trying to recover commission
on lapsed policies. Colonial Mutual would not discuss the number of cases,
saying it preferred 'to let legal proceedings run their course'.
In most instances the former sales people were self-employed or working
through arms-length 'tied agents'. Few of the disputes, being handled by a
network of about 40 firms of solicitors around Britain, have come to trial,
so their eventual outcome is unclear. Mr Alex Bevan, of Bristol solicitors
Bevans, said there were probably between 400 and 1,000 individual disputes,
with hundreds of thousands of pounds at issue in some cases.
Mr Robin Bloom, a partner in Middlesbrough legal firm Jacksons, said: 'It
would not be fanciful to think that up to Pounds 100m (in disputed claims)
might be involved. No one seems to have analysed the consequences for the
companies.'
