FT  04 MAY 94 / Gonzalez digs in his heels: PM 'will not resign' over
corruption scandals
Spain's embattled prime minister, Mr Felipe Gonzalez, is determined to beat
off calls to take the blame for growing corruption scandals involving former
leading members of his administration.
A senior aide said yesterday Mr Gonzalez had 'absolutely no intention of
resigning'. Mr Miguel Gil, the government's spokesman, said political
stability was assured because the Catalan nationalists had agreed to
continue backing the government. 'Their support is not in danger,' he said.
The 17 Catalan nationalist members of the Madrid parliament have now become
the power brokers of domestic politics after their vote ensured Mr
Gonzalez's nomination as prime minister following last June's general
elections, which left his Socialist party short of an overall majority,
The assurance of continued Catalan support was given on Monday by Mr Jordi
Pujol, leader of Catalonia's home rule government, the Generalitat, in a
telephone conversation with Mr Gonzalez. Mr Pujol reiterated his decision to
aid the 'governability of Spain' at a later meeting in Barcelona with Mr
Narcs Serra, the Catalan-born deputy prime minister. A former mayor of
Barcelona, Mr Serra would be the politician most likely to succeed Mr
Gonzalez should the premier resign.
The Catalan leader's stand may have gained Mr Gonzalez a breathing space in
which he will seek to regain the political initiative in the face of
continuing pressure from the main opposition party, the conservative Partido
Popular.
Conservative leader Mr Jose Mara Aznar told the FT that Mr Gonzalez had
'become an obstacle in Spanish politics, an obstacle we have to overcome'.
Mr Aznar believes the government has been so discredited by the spate of
scandals that Mr Gonzalez's position is unsustainable. 'It is not reasonable
to ask now for new elections. . . . but I can envisage the prime minister
will (first) hand over power to somebody else.'
Unable to unseat Mr Gonzalez in a parliamentary censure motion, Mr Aznar is
pinning his hopes on next month's European elections when he expects that a
clear conservative triumph 'will accelerate developments'. He forecasts that
general elections in Spain will take place between the autumn and next
spring.
