FT  24 OCT 94 / Diamond giants accused of rigging prices
Tomorrow morning in Columbus, Ohio, a court case opens on an apparently
mundane matter: alleged price fixing in the arcane field of industrial
diamonds. But there is much at stake for both accused and accuser. General
Electric, the giant US conglomerate, will be defending its reputation for
integrity, already somewhat battered by recent scandal at its broking
subsidiary Kidder Peabody.
The US Justice Department, on the other hand, is out to prove a point. Under
assistant attorney general Anne Bingaman, the department has launched a
stream of anti-trust investigations, from computer software to car rentals.
Last week it said it was looking at alleged uncompetitive pricing at Nasdaq,
the US stock market. The message is clear: under the Clinton administration,
the old laissez-faire days are over.
The charge in this case is simple: that GE and De Beers of South Africa,
which dominate the world market for industrial diamonds, rigged the world
price in 1991 and 1992. But the plot is complex, and takes in such fringe
characters as an ex-EU industry commissioner and the boss of America's
biggest fibre glass manufacturer.
One fact is not in dispute. In early 1992, GE and De Beers raised prices on
the same types of industrial diamonds at the same time. In GE's view, this
is perfectly natural. In a market with few players, a price move by one
supplier will be promptly followed by the rest. Proving there was a specific
agreement is another matter.
A pivotal figure here is Mr Philippe Liotier, who at the time of the alleged
offences was a director of the Belgian conglomerate Societe Generale de
Belgique (SGB). Among his other duties, Mr Liotier ran Diamand Boart, a
diamond tool-making company controlled by SGB, and a big customer of both GE
and De Beers. He was also on the board of Boart's immediate parent, Sibeka,
GE's chief rival in the manufacture of industrial diamonds. Though majority
controlled by SGB, Sibeka is part-owned by De Beers: more important, De
Beers markets the whole of Sibeka's output, and thus sets its prices.
It seems undisputed that Mr Liotier communicated regularly about De Beers'
prices with the head of GE's European diamonds business, Mr Peter Frenz. But
that, GE would argue, was normal as well. Mr Liotier was a customer; and if
supplier A raises prices, it is natural for the customer to pass the news on
to supplier B. Much therefore depends on whether Mr Liotier was talking to
Mr Frenz as a customer or a competitor.
Mr Liotier, who has now moved on to SGB's parent, the giant French
conglomerate Suez, is a defendant in the trial. He will not be turning up.
Neither will Mr Frenz: according to GE, the US authorities refused to
promise not to arrest him as soon as he got off the plane. The jury will
therefore be treated to a video of Mr Frenz's testimony, compiled in Europe
over six days in July.
Mr Frenz and Mr Liotier, says the Justice Department, were not acting on
their own initiative. On February 12 1991, the two met in Brussels along
with their respective bosses: Viscount Davignon, ex-EU commissioner and now
president of SGB, and Mr Glen Hiner, then head of GE's plastics division. At
that meeting, says the Justice Department, pricing was discussed for the
first time. Neither Viscount Davignon nor Mr Hiner have been charged. Mr
Hiner, right-hand man of GE chairman Mr Jack Welch and head of the US fibre
glass company Owens Corning, says the meeting was about other matters.
Beyond straightforward denial, GE's rebuttal comes in three parts. First,
the evidence is purely circumstantial. Second, GE can prove it made an
independent decision to raise prices in the autumn of 1991. Third, disparity
between the two companies' prices was greater after the 1992 price rise than
it was before.
The Justice Department has no great difficulty with the first two.
Conspiracy cases are usually circumstantial, it says. People are not in the
habit of sitting down to write a document agreeing to fix prices. Second, in
any conspiracy someone has to set the ball rolling. In this case,
apparently, it was GE.
GE's point about price disparity looks stronger. Granted, an illegal
arrangement cannot be defended on the grounds that it did not work. But in a
case based on circumstantial evidence, an apparent strengthening of
competition points the other way.
Meanwhile, what about De Beers? It is not turning up for the trial either,
but seems unconcerned. It flatly denies wrongdoing, and says US courts have
no jurisdiction over it anyway.
Veteran De Beers observers feel the trial is unlikely to have any
significant bearing on De Beers' business either way. Suppose there was
price collusion, they say: the world's most successful diamond company has
weathered far worse storms, and will carry on dominating the world diamond
market for quite a while yet.
