FT  28 MAY 94 / Japan threatens to quit whaling commission
Japan yesterday threatened to withdraw from the International Whaling
Commission following its decision to establish a whale sanctuary in the
Antarctic Ocean.
Officials at the ministry of agriculture, forestry and fisheries said the
government would consider what action to take when it had heard the full
report of the Japanese delegation to the IWC when it returned to Tokyo next
week. But they said Japan's departure from the commission could not be ruled
out.
At the meeting in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, the IWC agreed to ban all whaling
in more than 28 million square kilometres around Antarctica.
The ban is expected to protect 90 per cent of the world's whales, which feed
in the waters of the southern hemisphere. It was supported by 23 member
countries and opposed by Japan alone. China, South Korea and four other
countries abstained. Norway, the other significant whaling nation, did not
take part in the vote.
A succession of senior ministers swiftly denounced the decision. The chief
cabinet secretary, Mr Hiroshi Kumagai, said: 'We cannot say it is a
scientific decision. The Japanese government regrets it.'
Mr Koji Kakizawa, the foreign minister, said that debate over the sanctuary
should be based on scientific and research data, claiming that the
population of minke whales in the region, the main object of the
commission's ruling, was actually increasing.
Japan has 90 days in which to lodge a complaint against the decision, and
seems likely to do so.
Japan has threatened to withdraw from the commission in the past but has
failed to do so in order to avoid international condemnation.
Mr Mutsuki Kato, the fisheries minister, suggested that, short of
withdrawal, other options would include a detailed review of Japan's
significant financial contribution to the IWC.
But it was also possible that the government would seek an exemption from
the whaling ban or simply ignore it. The commission has no power to enforce
its edicts which have proved flexible in the past.
Saving the whales, Page 9
