FT  26 FEB 94 / Tories' battlegrounds to be tax and councils
The Conservatives yesterday signalled that taxation policy and local
government corruption will be the main battleground in the forthcoming local
and European elections.
The Conservative tactics were flagged in hard-hitting speeches by Mr Kenneth
Clarke, chancellor, Sir Norman Fowler, party chairman, and Mr Peter Brooke,
heritage secretary.
Labour was surprised by the attacks, which carried the campaign to what is
regarded as opposition territory.
The Conservative tactics reflect the government's determination in the
elections to limit its losses, which are expected to be extensive.
Mr Clarke told businessmen in Maidstone: 'The Conservative party is willing
to fight on the low-taxation issue any time and anywhere. We did last time,
we will next time, the time after that and the time after that.'
The chancellor defended the public-spending cuts in the November Budget and
insisted that he had raised taxes 'only with great reluctance'.
His message was aimed largely at convincing voters that the Conservative
party remains committed to low taxes. 'Our answer to those who ask 'Will
taxes ever go down again?' is: 'Yes, provided we control public spending','
he said.
He said Labour had tried 'to misuse statistics in a ridiculous way to try to
revive the old myth that we tax the poor but not the rich'.
Conservative officials said the thrust of Mr Clarke's speech would be
pressed home today by the prime minister at the Conservative local
government conference in London.
Sir Norman told a conference dinner that Mr John Smith, the Labour leader,
was heading a 'disreputable' campaign of 'smear, smear and smear again'
against Tory councils.
He accused Mr Jack Straw, Labour's local government spokesman, of making
unproven allegations against Tory-run Westminster council, which was accused
of gerrymandering in a recent district auditor's report. Sir Norman said
Labour councils were responsible for the 10 highest council taxes in band C.
Mr Brooke, MP for the City and Westminster South, praised Westminster
council's services, which compared favourably with neighbouring
Labour-controlled boroughs.
