FT  24 FEB 94 / Tories split over European allies' federal stance in poll
manifesto
The European People's party, the grouping that includes Britain's
Conservative party, will call tomorrow for a federal European Union with a
single currency and an independent central bank.
The group's manifesto for the European parliament elections in June was
agreed three weeks ago, but has been kept under wraps to avoid embarrassing
the Conservative party, which is deeply divided about the contents.
The manifesto will be released without fanfare in Brussels tomorrow.
However, a French translation obtained by the Financial Times says that the
EPP's member parties have decided 'to make the process of European
integration and unification proceed resolutely'.
The manifesto says that economic and monetary union is 'indispensable' to
stability and prosperity, and that the Union is 'incomplete' without the
social chapter of the Maastricht treaty.
It also calls for a European constitution; cross-border policing; a common
external frontier giving control of visas for non-Europeans to the Union;
harmonisation of national guidelines governing political refugees; a common
defence and security policy and stronger powers for Europe's parliament.
'It is only through a federal structure that the European Union can
guarantee the respect and diversity of the national and regional identities
and at the same time engender the common effort that is necessary to solve
the problems of the future of Europe,' it says.
Sir Norman Fowler, the Conservative party chairman, said the party was not
committed to the EPP manifesto. 'We will be standing on a British
Conservative manifesto,' he said.
Officials also pointed out that Mr John Major, the prime minister, has
secured an opt-out from some of the federalist elements of the manifesto,
such as economic and monetary union and the social chapter.
However, the EPP document will inevitably refocus attention on the party's
unsuccessful attempts to paper over a deep split on Europe, which emerged
during the debate on the Maastricht treaty last year.
Sir Teddy Taylor, Tory MP for Southend East and a leading critic of the EU,
said his party was 'closely integrated' with the EPP, which whips its
members along Westminster lines and has common spokesmen on departmental
issues.
'It is quite clear that the EPP is setting out in detail the principles of a
centralised socialist state in which a wide range of policies which have
been condemned by the Conservative party are set out and developed,' he
said.
'I genuinely don't see how the Conservative party can live with the kind of
arrangement that we have had. I would be happier being linked to the British
Labour party than to this extreme socialist party.'
The Conservatives' problems will be compounded today when European MPs vote
on a report on the Maastricht treaty, drafted by a Luxembourg member of the
EPP, which condemns Britain's decision to opt-out from the social chapter.
Tories launch Euro-poll campaign, Page 11
