FT  07 APR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Japanese copper cuts expected
after Gatt deal
Japan's copper industry will permanently close between 200,000 and 300,000
tonnes of annual smelting capacity - roughly one quarter of its present 1.2m
tonnes - as a result of its government's agreement to reduce tariffs on
refined copper imports, analysts suggest.
'This is a major sea change in the copper business,' says Mr John Champagne,
industry adviser to the US government during the negotiations on the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 'The Japanese smelters will no longer be the
power in the industry they are today.'
At present Japan imposes a tariff of Y15,000 (Dollars 145) a tonne on
imports of refined copper, equivalent to about 8 per cent on the present
price. As part of the Gatt Uruguay Round to be ratified on April 15, over
the next five years this will reduced in stages to Y9,700. Then in 1999 the
tariff will be changed to 3 per cent a tonne.
Mr Champagne points out that the change to an ad valorem tariff is important
in that the cost will reduce as world copper prices fall. 'The protection
the Japanese smelters will have in future will reduce when they need it the
most - when copper prices are low and the margins for treating raw materials
are under pressure.'
The present tariff barriers have enabled Japan to build up one of the
world's strongest copper smelting and refining industries even though it has
no copper mines. The tightly-knit Japanese copper smelting cartel, known in
the industry as the Japanese Smelter Pool, dominates the world market for
copper concentrate (an intermediate material), importing about two thirds of
all the concentrates traded internationally.
This dominant position gives Japan a disproportionate influence in the
financing of new copper mines anywhere in the world because owners usually
need a contract with the Pool before they can obtain finance.
The tariffs give Japanese producers a protected base from which to export
aggressively to third countries and allow Japanese smelters to offer higher
prices in global markets for copper scrap and concentrates, which are
imported duty free to Japan.
Mr Champagne, president of Magma Metals, part of the MagmaCopper group, says
that, while the Gatt compromise fell short of the US industry's goal of
removing all duties and other trade barriers on refined copper, it was 'an
important step to reduce distortion of the world copper market and will
benefit all copper consumers in Japan'.
He suggests that, 'while a loss of duty protection may hasten the closure of
some obsolete Japanese smelter capacity, it will not threaten the entire
industry. The more efficient plants will survive'.
Mr Champagne points out that the US has taken second place as a supplier of
copper to Japan behind Chile, a country that enjoyed a considerable
advantage from GSP (Generalised System of Preferences) status, which permits
tariff-free imports from developing countries under certain circumstances.
'If it were not for the Japanese duty, US exports might have been higher
still and quite possibly Chile's would have been less,' says the Magma
president.
Apart from being a reliable supplier of high-quality copper, the US could
deliver from its west coast ports to Japan in only two to three weeks,
compared with six weeks from Chile.
Analysts suggest that the Japanese smelters will not wait until the last
moment to rationalise capacity and expect closures in the next two or three
years. Top of the list of potential casualties, they say, is Dowa Mining's
55,000-tonnes-a-year smelter at Kosaka, which has very high transport costs
because of its inland site. They also mention the possibility of Mitsubishi
closing its Onahama smelter (250,000 tonnes) and of Nippon Mining shutting
one of the two furnaces at its Saganoseki smelter (180,000 tonnes).
World shortages of copper concentrate and scrap, as well as reduced economic
activity in Japan, are forcing the Japanese smelters to cut output in the
first half of this year. Dowa says it will cut by 10 per cent, compared with
the second half of 1993, to 9,846 tonnes a month; Nippon Mining by 14 per
cent to 24,000 tonnes a month; Mitsubishi by 12.4 per cent to 21,300 tonnes
a month; and Sumitomo by 9.9 per cent to 94,200 tonnes a month. All four
companies also intend to reduce lead and zinc output in the first half.
