FT  10 NOV 94 / UK Company News: Coal Investments Pounds 10m in red - Deeper
losses and delay in mine reopening programme hit share price
Shares in Coal Investments, the mining company, lost another 7 per cent of
their value yesterday after the company reported a 10-week delay in its mine
reopening programme and interim pre-tax losses of Pounds 10.2m.
The shares fall continues a trend which began when Coal Investments and the
Union of Democratic Mineworkers failed to secure nomination as preferred
bidder for either of the central English coal regions.
Yesterday's closing share price of 87p compares with a high, achieved early
last month, of 143p.
Losses for the six months to September 30 compared with a deficit of Pounds
68,000 last time. Turnover was Pounds 940,000 (nil) and losses per share 20p
(0.2p).
Mr Malcolm Edwards, chairman, said substantial progress had been made in
bringing the company's five mines back into production and the most
difficult part of the development had been completed.
Full production had been achieved at the small mine at Cwmgwili in Wales
following earlier geological problems.
Two of the four larger mines were now ready to start commercial production.
Mr Edwards said that next year's production and sales from all mines would
be greater than previously expected, although he declined to say by how
much.
The company said production delays resulted from late delivery of machinery.
The cumulative effect would be a lower than forecast level of production and
sales during the second half and consequent net cash outflow during that
period.
The company had agreed terms in principle for additional loan facilities of
Pounds 5m to meet this requirement.
It would refinance the loan as part of a further equity issue to be
announced soon.
Mr Edwards was confident about prospects for 1995-96 and beyond. Excellent
progress was being made in discussions with a number of coal buyers and
directors were 'confident that period sales contracts will be put in place
for the greater part of the group's production'.
COMMENT
Mr Edwards' high-flying shares have been floating back to earth recently,
but investors who have been in from the start can still reflect on a more
than fivefold increase in their holdings in the year since he took over. In
spite of the bidding disappointments and the production delays announced
yesterday, many investors are still prepared to put their faith in the
former British Coal marketing director. Losses could reach Pounds 14m this
year but providing the company can mine and sell 3m tonnes a year, as some
brokers believe is possible, it could make Pounds 14m in profits in 1995-96
excluding any effects of its holding in Mining Scotland, the preferred
bidder for British Coal's Scotland region. Profits of Pounds 14m would put
the shares on a p/e of about 5, rather low according to supporters. All very
well, but the company still has much to prove. It must get the next share
issue out successfully and it must show that it can meet its production and
sales targets. Failure to show solid progress by the end of the year could
meet with a stern response from the market.
