FT  01 SEP 94 / IRA calls a halt to 25 years of terror
'I do need to know that violence hasended - that it isn't temporary' - John
Major
'John Major and the leaders of unionism should seize the moment' - Gerry
Adams
'An historic opportunity to take thegun out of Irish politics for ever' -
Albert Reynolds
The high-risk effort by the British and Irish governments to create a
lasting peace in Northern Ireland took a historic step forward at midnight
with the start of an open-ended IRA ceasefire.
The dramatic announcement that 25 years of violence, which has engulfed the
UK and several European countries, is to end with 'a complete cessation of
military operations' was warmly welcomed in Dublin and Washington, and more
hesitantly in London.
At the same time the IRA's failure to comply with British and Irish demands
to declare openly a permanent end to its armed campaign triggered an
immediate note of caution from Mr John Major, the British prime minister.
Mr Major, whose standing will be enhanced by an enduring peace, made clear
the government would not contemplate allowing Sinn Fein, the IRA's political
wing, into talks on Ulster's future until three months after it had become
clear that violence had been renounced for good.
'I don't mind how it is expressed. . . but I do need to know that violence
has ended for good and that it isn't a temporary ceasefire,' Mr Major said.
Dublin, however, did not share Downing Street's caution. Mr Albert Reynolds,
the Irish premier, said he accepted the bona fides of the IRA. 'As far as I
am concerned the war is over,' he said. 'There is now an historic
opportunity to take the gun out of Irish politics for ever and to achieve a
new and far-reaching political accommodation in a transformed atmosphere.'
Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president, brushed aside Downing's Street's
reservations and called on Mr Major and unionist leaders to 'seize the
moment'. The IRA leadership had 'courageously created an unprecedented
opportunity which brings Anglo-Irish relations to a decisive point'.
Mr Adams indicated it was up to the British government to make the next
move. And he urged Britain to start the 'demilitarisation of the situation'
by releasing Irish nationalist prisoners and withdrawing troops from Ulster.
Republican sources were suggesting last night that, whatever London's view,
the ceasefire was intended to be permanent. It was not clear, however, how
or if this would be signalled.
The prime minister acknowledged that the IRA decision represented 'a great
step forward' but he moved to reassure unionists that there had been 'no
secret deals, no secret understandings'. He added: 'Northern Ireland is part
of the United Kingdom for so long as people in Northern Ireland wish to
remain part of the UK. They will do so with the support of this government
and I hope future governments.'
The IRA announcement comes nearly nine months after the British and Irish
governments signed the Downing Street declaration, which brought together
the two countries in an unprecedented attempt to establish common ground for
a political settlement in Ulster.
The declaration, made shortly before Christmas 1993, followed talks between
Mr Adams and Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly nationalist Social
Democratic and Labour party. Mr Hume said he believed the republican
movement wanted an end to the conflict which has claimed more than 3,000
lives in the last 25 years.
Since December, both governments have insisted that the republican movement
could be fully involved in the political process but only if it renounced
violence for at least three months.
Mr James Molyneaux, Ulster Unionist leader, echoed London's suspicions by
calling on the IRA to take the 'modest but very vital step' of confirming a
permanent end to violence.
In spite of the government's public hard line on the IRA's omission of the
word 'permanent' from its declaration, there were strong indications at
Westminster last night of an early lifting of the broadcasting ban on
representatives of Sinn Fein, including Mr Adams.
US president Bill Clinton, who described the IRA statement as a 'watershed
announcement', also called on the IRA to ensure that its violent campaign
ended permanently.
The US president yesterday spoke to both Mr Major and Mr Reynolds. Mr
Clinton made clear his government's intention to assemble an additional aid
package to help the peace process along.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said the British government
intended to stick to its three-month 'probation' period before talks could
begin on how to admit Sinn Fein to the political process.
'This is so important a matter that it ought not to be left at large or able
to be the subject of discussion and argument,' Sir Patrick added. He said it
was crucial that any future talks involving the IRA's political wing did not
take place under the implied threat that violence could resume.
Ministers will be hoping to avoid the threatened backlash by loyalist
extremists. There were no signs last night that the loyalists intended to
stop their campaign.
Shots were fired in three separate incidents in Belfast and County Fermanagh
shortly before the start of the ceasefire last night. There were no reports
of injuries.
Meanwhile, Ulster police were hunting a loyalist gang who murdered a
37-year-old Catholic after abducting him from a house in Antrim just hours
before the IRA's ceasefire declaration. The outlawed Ulster Volunteer Force
has claimed responsibility for the killing.
The IRA ceasefire, Pages 10-11
Editorial Comment, Page 23
