FT  27 MAY 94 / Survey of Relocation in the UK (12): Barrier that may fall -
Impact of the Channel tunnel on business
The Channel tunnel, the first land link between Britain and France since the
ending of the Ice Age 11,000 years ago, will have a profound impact on
travel patterns and the British psyche. It is also expected to have a
considerable influence on the location plans of business.
The tunnel should be able to offer a degree of convenience and reliability
which the ferries, subject as they are to the vagaries of the weather,
cannot match. Despite the improvements in the quality and the frequency of
ferry and airline services in recent years, the need to board a ship or take
an aeroplane has meant that the Channel has remained a psychological barrier
to business.
The creation of a land link between Britain and France should change all
that, though the tunnel is just one element in the rapidly evolving European
business environment. The creation of the single European market and changes
in manufacturing and distribution patterns also have an important influence
on a company's location decisions.
The tunnel's opening will have both a regional impact - on location
decisions in south-east England and north-east France - and also a broader
European impact on companies with a scale of operations and a location
strategy which embraces the entire continent.
At a regional level, location decisions will be influenced by the
development activity which is under way along the rail links between the
tunnel and London and Paris respectively. In Kent, Ashford has high hopes of
becoming a growth centre while across the Channel ambitious developments are
under way in Lille.
Ashford's position seems assured following the government's decision to
route Channel tunnel trains through the centre of the town rather than
bypassing it to the north. This should provide a boost for the new
international railway station currently being built in the centre of the
town.
But elsewhere along the route of the Channel tunnel rail link, the delays
and uncertainties which have surrounded the project have held back property
developments, according to Mr Kevin Lee, a property researcher at chartered
surveyors St Quintin.
Waterloo is the site of an impressive new international terminal but
completion of the Channel tunnel rail link in 2002 will shift the main
London terminus to St Pancras. The prospect of this move has left companies
uncertain as to the best location for fast Channel tunnel connections.
Similar uncertainty reigns over the site of another intermediate station on
the route with three contenders in the ring. Stratford in east London,
Rainham in Essex and Ebbsfleet in Kent are all seeking to win approval for
ambitious property developments though it is likely that only one will be
chosen. Too many stops on the high speed link would reduce the value of
building the link in the first place.
In stark contrast to this delay in the UK, the French government has pressed
ahead with the construction of a high speed line linking Calais with Paris
via Lille. Lille, which is now only an hour from Paris by train a grande
vitesse, is developing Euralille, a sizeable office and retail project on
the site of its recently completed TGV station.
On the broader, European scale, the vastly improved rail freight links
between, for example, the north of England and Italy, will clip hours, if
not days, off shipment times across Europe. This can be expected to
influence the location decisions of businesses with manufacturing plant
spread around Europe.
By the same token, rapid passenger journey times between London, Paris and
Brussels may prompt multinational corporations to rethink their decision on
the location of main or branch offices. Even before the high-speed rail link
is completed between the tunnel and London, through journey times should
prove very competitive with the airlines.
When the tunnel is finally open for business it will offer four principal
services to the traveller or the freight operator. Freight will travel
through the tunnel on long-distance services carrying containers, swap
bodies and trailers or on shuttles
The shuttles will carry trucks between Folkestone and Calais but the
long-distance services will run to a wide range of destinations throughout
Europe.
London to Madrid should be possible in 36 hours and Manchester to Mannheim
in 24 hours. In the absence of the delays associated with rail freight
shipments across the Channel by ferry, through journeys by train should take
only half as long as the equivalent road journey, according to calculations
by the organisations selling rail space.
Railfreight Distribution, British Rail's freight arm responsible for
container shipments, expects the opening of the tunnel to increase train
freight volumes from 2m tonnes a year to 6.5m tonnes after two years.
In the meantime, passenger services will also consist of through services,
initially between London, Paris and Brussels, and of car shuttles operating
between Folkestone and Calais.
The opening of the tunnel will make it easier for multinational companies to
include the UK in the rationalisation of their distribution operations. Many
companies have been moving away from national distribution centres - which
involve considerable amounts of inventory - towards continent-wide
distribution operations.
'Because the Channel tunnel provides a more effective link with Europe it
creates the option for distribution centres to serve the whole of north-
west Europe, including the UK,' says Professor James Cooper, director of the
Cranfield Centre for Logistics and Transportation.
This may mean that companies which at present have a UK distribution centre
in the Midlands will consider relocating to northern France or the Benelux
countries. However, such a move would not be without its problems because
supplying the Scottish and Irish markets would be more difficult.
Creating Europe-wide distribution centres may also run into the problem that
different national markets may have their own technical, language and
packaging requirements which reduce the scope for cutting back on inventory.
Delays to the opening of Channel tunnel services have proved a distraction
from the benefits that the tunnel will eventually bring. If it can show it
is able to provide a reliable, high-quality service it will become an
important factor in location decisions.
