FT  19 MAY 94 / Labour promises help to rescue CrossRail
Labour yesterday offered the government a way to rescue the Pounds 2bn
CrossRail scheme for a tunnel under central London but at a cost of at least
an extra Pounds 100m.
The scheme for a main-line rail link between Liverpool Street and Paddington
was blocked by a committee of four MPs under the obscure private bill
procedure.
Two of the MPs - Labour's Mr John Marek and Mr Ken Purchase - voted against
the bill mainly because it did not include connections to the proposed
Heathrow Express line west of London and the Channel tunnel high speed line.
The two MPs would have supported an amendment adding the connections to the
bill, but the committee was advised that such a change would not be legal.
Further legal advice obtained by Mr Frank Dobson, shadow transport
secretary, suggests such an amendment would be binding if the bill went back
to the committee.
The committee could reconsider the bill only if asked to do so by the full
House of Commons - which would require the support of the government.
In behind-the-scenes discussions, Mr Dobson has promised Labour support for
such a motion to Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary.
'It is up to the government now to make sure that the committee is
reconvened,' Mr Dobson said.
Mr MacGregor is a strong supporter of CrossRail, as is Mr John Major, the
prime minister, who intervened to overall an earlier treasury attempt to
block the scheme.
But the terms of Labour's offer mean that the committee would only approve
the bill if the government agrees to finance the two extensions.
The Treasury is unlikely to regard such a prospect with enthusiasm. Mr
Michael Portillo, the chief secretary, has made clear his view that even the
cheaper scheme blocked by the committee would not have been economically
viable.
The government has held urgent discussions about the future of the project
with the promoters, British Rail, Railtrack and London Underground.
Ministers are also under strong pressure to rescue the scheme from London
and Home Counties Conservative MPs, led by Mr David Lidington, MP for
Aylesbury.
Mr Richard Branson, chairman of Virgin, is preparing to join one of the five
consortia bidding to build the Channel tunnel high-speed rail link from
London to Folkestone, Paul Betts writes.
He said yesterday he had been approached by all five consortia and would
'definitely' join one within the next four weeks.
The winning consortium, to be selected next year, will run the British end
of the joint venture with the French railway SNCF and the Belgian railway
SNCB. They will operate Eurostar train services from London to Paris,
Brussels and Amsterdam through the tunnel.
The five competing groups include consortia led by Hambros, GEC, Warburg,
Salomon Brothers and Mowlem.
