FT  18 JAN 94 / International Company News: German banks to contribute more
to Metallgesellschaft
Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, the two biggest banks in Germany, have
agreed to increase their contribution to the Metallgesellschaft rescue
package by a total of DM300m (Dollars 177m), it emerged yesterday .
It is understood that foreign banks will be given the chance to scale down
their contribution to the rights issue element of the package to only a
fraction of the original proposal, a move which served to placate foreign
bankers' objections to acquiring new shares in the Frankfurt-based mining,
metals and industrial conglomerate.
Metallgesellschaft granted these concessions on Saturday during talks which
ended by securing the DM3.4bn rescue package.
The bail-out averted the threat of bankruptcy which hung over the group last
week, serving to trigger a sharp rise in MG's share price yesterday. The
shares rose 12.5 per cent to close DM27 up at DM241.
The deal has three elements:
A DM1.4bn rights issue. MG's core shareholders - a group which include
Deutsche and Dresdner, the Emirate of Kuwait, Daimler-Benz and the Allianz
insurance group - will contribute 62 per cent of these funds.
It was originally proposed that creditor banks subscribe to the remaining 38
per cent in proportion to their credit exposure.
This caused grave problems for foreign banks and it is understood that the
German banking community has undertaken to take up 85 per cent of the
balance. Bankers said yesterday that this left foreign banks' contribution
at 10 per cent of the level first proposed.
DM700m of fresh credit. Deutsche and Dresdner are understood to have agreed
to contribute DM100m each to this, thus reversing their original position
that they should not be required to contribute any further funds after
providing DM1.5bn in emergency credits last month.
Bankers will convert DM1.3bn of bank debt into junior convertible stock.
Following Saturday's negotiations, Deutsche and Dresdner have each
contributed an extra DM50m to this element of the package, leading to an 8
per cent improvement in the terms for other banks.
These securities will be convertible into MG ordinary shares at a price of
DM250 as of 1996.
Bankers expressed relief yesterday that the refinancing had been successful.
They said the package may remove the need to make provisions against their
loans to MG, whereas they would have had to write off up to half their loans
if the group had been declared insolvent.
MG said yesterday that Mr Kajo Neukirchen, chief executive, would outline
his strategy for the future of the group in February.
Shareholders will vote on the refinancing proposals at a special meeting
convened for February 24.
