FT  21 APR 94 / The Queen's Awards 1994: Medical men making money -
Novocastra Laboratories
Novocastra Laboratories, founded in May 1989 by three members of Newcastle
University's medical staff, has built a fast growing business producing and
supplying specialist antibodies to medical researchers such as those
involved in cancer research.
The company, which employs 14 people, is managed by Professor Charles Horne,
a practising academic histopathologist, assisted by Dr Brian Angus, also an
academic histopathologist, and Dr Geoffrey Toms, an academic virologist with
close links to the Royal Victoria Infirmary virus detection laboratory.
As such Novocastra is a prime example of the successful transfer of
technology from an academic environment to commerce.
Newcastle University retains a minority stake of 'less than 20 per cent' in
the company and provides Novocastra with an academic, research and facility
base.
Exports, valued at Pounds 660,000 in 1992/93, represent about 94 per cent of
turnover and are expected to top Pounds 1m next year reflecting the rapidly
expanding market for biotechnology derived products and the increasing need
for high quality low cost medical diagnostic and research products.
The company's main export market is the US followed by Japan, Germany, Italy
and France. The freeze-dried antibodies are dispatched by courier from the
company's Newcastle University premises to order.
Prof Horne, Novocastra's chairman and managing director who also received an
MBE in the new year's Honours list for services to science and export, says
the company could not survive in the UK market alone.
'We are very much export oriented,' he says, adding, 'there is really no
reason why we should not continue to grow rapidly.'
Novocastra produces more than 200 niche re-agent products, mostly monoclonal
antibodies which are marketed for use in immunohistochemistry by biomedical
researchers and histopathologists working in hospitals, universities and
other medical establishments around the world.
The technique enables researchers to identify specific molecules in tissue
when viewed through a microscope. For example one product is used to
identify breast cancer while others, which helped establish the company in
the market, can be used to test for muscular dystrophy and other muscular
disease.
Prof Horne says the fact that the company is run by people who actually use
the products in their own clinical research gives it a key advantage.
'We are in a position to identify what people need and want,' he says.
Several of the company's main research products have been funded by the UK
department of Trade and Industry through its SMART award scheme - Novocastra
has won six SMART awards.
