FT  03 SEP 94 / Economic diary - Forward events
MONDAY: US markets closed for Labor Day. UK credit business (July). National
Food Survey: household food consumption (second quarter). Housing starts and
completions (July). M0 figures (August-provisional). Full monetary
statistics (including bank and building society balance sheets, bill
turnover statistics, lending secured on dwellings, official operations in
the money market, sterling certificates of deposit and sterling commercial
paper) (July). European and southern African foreign ministers meet in
Berlin to discuss trade (until Tuesday). UN international conference on
population and development in Cairo (until September 13). International
Atomic Energy Agency holds conference in Vienna. Farnborough International
Air Show opens (until September 11). TUC Congress in Blackpool (until
Friday).
TUESDAY: Index of production (July). Advance energy statistics (July). Rio
Group presidents meet in Rio de Janeiro (until September 10). European
ministers responsible for regional planning meet in Oslo. Economic and
Social Research Council survey.
WEDNESDAY: Cyclical indicators for the UK economy (July-second estimate).
Overseas travel and tourism (June). Foreign misters of Organisation of
Islamic Conference hold emergency meeting in Islamabad to discuss Bosnia,
Afghanistan and Kashmir (until September 9). European Union meets in
Brussels. Mr John Major, prime minister, visits the Netherlands.
THURSDAY: Details of employment, unemployment, earnings, prices and other
indicators. CBI survey of distributive trades (September). UK National
Accounts 1994 edition (the CSO Blue Book) (1993). UK balance of payments
1994 edition (CSO Pink Book) (1993). Balance of visible trade (June). US
consumer credit (July). 24-hour strike by RMT signalmen.
FRIDAY: Construction output (second quarter). US producer price index
(August). Leaders of 12 former Soviet republics meet in Moscow. Trade
ministers from Japan, US, Canada and the European Union meet in Los Angeles.
