FT  04 JAN 94 / Green light for new drugs to enter big US market
Drugs with potential annual sales of hundreds of millions of dollars were
approved for sale in the US last week by the Food and Drug Administration.
Among companies whose products cleared the final hurdle are SmithKline
Beecham of the UK, Bayer of Germany and Genentech, the US biotechnology
company 60 per cent owned by Roche of Switzerland.
Success in the US market is essential to the fortunes of a new drug. The US
is easily the world's biggest drugs market, accounting for more than a third
of global sales.
Genentech's drug, DNase, is the first product in 30 years specifically
developed to treat cystic fibrosis, the inherited lung disease. It is not a
cure for the disease, but the FDA found that it made a significant
difference in the quality of life for sufferers.
DNase is likely to be one of the biggest selling products from biotechnology
companies. US stockbroker Lehman Brothers estimates sales at more than
Dollars 250m (Pounds 169m) a year.
SmithKline Beecham saw the approval of Kytril, to prevent nausea and
vomiting associated with cancer therapy. Kytril enters a rapidly growing and
lucrative market. However, it competes with Zofran, made by Glaxo, which not
only has a two-year head start in the US market but is available in an
easier-to-use tablet version.
Zofran already has sales of more than Pounds 300m a year and the tablet
version of Kytril is unlikely to be approved before 1995, said Mr Duncan
Moore, a pharmaceuticals analyst with US broker Morgan Stanley.
Bayer's newly approved drug is aprontonin, which can reduce the need for
blood transfusions in patients undergoing heart bypass surgery. Fewer
transfusions cut the chances of infection.
Other companies that saw approvals in the last days of 1993 were:
Bristol Myers of the US with Dovonex ointment, for the treatment of the skin
condition psoriasis;
Warner-Lambert, of the US, for Neurontin, an anti-epileptic;
Wyeth, of the US, for Effexor, a depression treatment;
US Bioscience for Neutrexin, an alternative therapy for pneumonia associated
with Aids;
Janssen, the Belgian subsidiary of US company Johnson &amp; Johnson, for
Risperdal, a psychosis drug.
