FT  19 SEP 94 / Management: Desert Island Manager - Lord Alexander
Lord Alexander of Weedon QC, 58, is chairman of National Westminster Bank.
He has been chairman of the Takeover Panel, and chairman of the Bar Council.
He is currently deputy chairman of the Securities and Investments Board.
What would you take with you?
My family. We have a builder, cook, vintner, garden designer, decorator and
banker. We could set up a travel lodge, Relais and Chateaux style, with a
journalist to handle the publicity and an insolvency lawyer if it fails
spectacularly.
What technology would you need?
The machine of the near-future: a voice-activated word processor. I would
need 48 hours' notice of departure for a quick training course. Then I could
simply live by talking, the ultimate joy for an advocate.
What would you like to leave behind?
London's polluted air. My own slight asthma returned this year for the first
time since youth. Pollution levels are intolerable, and I should like to
stay marooned until strong environmental action has been taken.
If 10 per cent of vehicles produce 40-50 per cent of air pollution, it seems
an admirable first step to clamp down on them. Meanwhile, we could use the
island versions of public transport - walking and swimming.
Anything else?
The way in which customer complaints are sometimes covered in the tabloid
press. Sometimes they are sadly accurate, which upsets us all. But when they
are distorted or over-hyped, they are annoying.
What would you miss most?
The theatre. The Royal Shakespeare Company and the National Theatre are
among our country's greatest glories. Charades by the camp fire would not be
the same.
What books would you take?
'Other Men's Flowers,' the poetry anthology compiled from Lord Wavell's
memory. And the complete Dickens. I love the 19th century but history books
can be dry. He is a wonderful chronicler of its darkness and light, richness
and drabness.
It would make me think about how much of our society has its roots in the
last century - the parliamentary franchise, the social mores, and the
infrastructure we still rely on. It was a time when we had come through the
most raw and crude parts of the industrial revolution but there was still an
extremely powerful economic engine in this country.
What would you eat and drink?
The island's fish and vegetables would supply our every want. My taste in
drink is simple. Champagne in winter and beer in summer.
What would you do for exercise?
I would take a beach cricket set.
An item to preserve sanity?
My London diary to remind me of the contrast. I feel that I am always
rushing at work, and when the pressure is released on holiday it is
glorious.
