FT  29 JUN 94 / FT Review of Business Books (12): Mexican prospects - NAFTA
/ Stephen Fidler looks at views on the trade agreement
For Richer, For Poorer: Shaping US-Mexican Integration
by Harry Browne Latin America Bureau, Pounds 7.99 128 pages
Mexico: Industrial Development Review: The Promise of Nafta
United Nations Industrial Development Organisation Economist Intelligence
Unit Pounds 95 (Dollars 150 in US and Asia) 222 pages
Here are two very different books looking at the same issue: the economic
consequences of the North American Free Trade Agreement and the increasing
economic integration between Mexico and the US.
The first describes sympathetically many of the arguments deployed in
opposition to Nafta, which joined the US, Mexico and Canada in a free trade
area which came into effect at the start of this year envisaging the
elimination of all trade barriers between the three countries over a 15-year
period.
The second is the latest of the country reviews of industrial development
produced by the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation and
published by the EIU which examines the ability of Mexico to compete in its
new North American environment.
For Richer, For Poorer typifies much of the muddled debate over Nafta. Its
underlying premise is that the agreement is essentially a charter allowing
large corporations to exploit cheap Mexican labour and lax environmental
regulation and to keep down US wages.
The implicit suggestion that Nafta ignores the needs of dynamic small and
medium-sized businesses on both sides of the border is an interesting one
that deserves further examination, but that's not what we are treated to.
Instead, a work full of contradictions suggests that Mexico's Dollars 280bn
economy will inflict huge economic damage on the Dollars 6,000bn US economy
and on American workers. What's more, as far as one can gather, it will do
so without producing any appreciable benefit to the Mexican economy or the
people who work in it.
The premise is that Nafta will encourage US companies to move to Mexico, but
that Mexican workers will not benefit because Nafta 'contained no mechanisms
that would allow them to resist their government's repressive, low-wage
strategy'.
This refers to the government's domination of the Mexican trade unions which
benefits corporations at the expense of workers. Evidence that Mexican
workers will not benefit from Nafta is the 20-40 per cent fall in real wages
they suffered between 1982 and 1991 - a peak-to-trough comparison
incorporating the years of the debt crisis.
Meanwhile, US workers will suffer even as labour productivity increases.
This is because the theory of comparative advantage - that overall welfare
increases when countries make the things they produce most efficiently and
trade them freely - does not work in the real-world absence of its perfect
market assumptions.
The evidence for this also comes from the 1980s where real manufacturing
wages declined 5-10 per cent. 'Although the number of jobs in the economy
increased by over 20m during the decade and the unemployment rate fell,
workers' incomes barely improved,' it says, as if the creation of 20m jobs
benefits nobody.
The inconsistencies are manifold and evidence used to illustrate one point
is contradicted to make another. For example, while it argues that Mexicans
won't benefit from the low wages to be paid by US companies, it makes the
point elsewhere that it is not only low-paid, low-skill jobs that will
migrate to Mexico.
The initial flavour of academic impartiality is quickly cast aside. Nafta,
though it came into effect but months ago, is somehow connected to the
terrible performance of Mexican agriculture which has turned the country
from being a net exporter of agricultural products into a net importer.
The drawbacks of the maquila system of in-bond manufacturing in place since
1965 - US companies establish manufacturing plants in Mexico and can import
their inputs duty-free providing they export the manufactured result - are
insinuated to be the same drawbacks of Nafta.
The spillover benefits of the maquiladora industry to the Mexican economy
have been limited, it is true. But under Nafta, the maquiladoras - which
earned an estimated Dollars 5bn in foreign exchange in 1993 - will be phased
out. As the UNIDO report points out, Nafta will remove the obstacles to the
maquiladoras' use of Mexican inputs and should help their integration into
the Mexican economy.
The UNIDO publication is both duller and better researched. It argues
electronic, food processing, motor vehicle, petrochemical and textile
industries in Mexico all stand to benefit from Nafta. Among maquilas, those
using Japanese and other foreign components will benefit least. Overall, it
estimates Nafta will lead to the creation of 600,000 new jobs in Mexico by
1995 - and an increase in wage rates.
