FT  26 JAN 94 / Gas regulator poised to announce tariff move
Ofgas, the gas industry regulator, is to announce this week whether it will
relax the tariff formula which sets the price British Gas can charge to its
monopoly market of about 18m residential customers.
Ms Clare Spottiswoode, Ofgas director-general, told the Commons trade and
industry committee yesterday that she had informed British Gas of the
decision. An announcement will be made at the end of the week.
The main element of the tariff formula is the efficiency factor, set in 1992
at the level of the retail prices index minus 5 percentage points. Last year
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission recommended that it be relaxed to RPI
minus 4 points because British Gas had lost a large share of its firm
contract market of mainly industrial and commercial users to new
competitors.
British Gas says that it accepted RPI minus 5 points on the basis that it
remained a fully integrated company with a monopoly of customers using up to
25,000 therms a year. The government has demanded the complete separation of
the transport and storage business from the trading arm and the monopoly
ceiling has been reduced to 2,500 therms a year.
Ms Spottiswoode was confident that the introduction of phased competition in
the domestic market from 1996 and its full liberalisation in 1998 should
bring prices down, even for low-volume consumers.
She was against retaining price controls any longer than necessary, but
would do so beyond 1998 if British Gas became the 'rump supplier' holding
most of the social obligations of the industry. 'I am very keen that British
Gas faces a level playing field and does not wind up with all the social
obligations,' she said.
Ms Spottiswoode admitted that Ofgas, which under its previous director Sir
James McKinnon had a stormy relationship with British Gas, had occasionally
'exceeded its powers' in some of its dealings with the company.
Questioned on whether the planned liberalisation of the gas market ignored
environmental and energy-efficiency issues, Ms Spottiswoode said she did not
believe a regulator should impose levies on gas customers which were
tantamount to 'regressive' taxes.
She noted that two schemes put forward for her consideration by the Energy
Saving Trust would result in a levy which would raise as much as Pounds 750m
to the year 2000.
