FT  27 JUL 94 / World Bank laments its Tanzania role: Hans Georgeson and
Michael Holman on an internal study that admits to uncritical support for
Nyerere
World Bank loans to Tanzania helped sustain a 'poorly thought out socialist
experiment', according to an internal report drawn up by the agency.
The analysis of relations between the World Bank and Tanzania between 1961
and 1987 is highly critical of the support given to former President Julius
Nyerere's socialist programme which he launched in 1967.
Thirty years after independence, and some Dollars 16bn worth of aid later, a
country which once aspired to self reliance has become aid dependent, with
nearly 50 per cent of its recurrent and development budget funded by donors.
The largest single contributor has been the Bank, while Scandinavian
countries have been amongst the largest bilateral donors.
Although compiled in 1990, five years after Mr Nyerere retired, the
unpublished report raises far reaching questions about the donors' share of
responsibility for Tanzania's economic decline, as well as questions about
current efforts to tackle Africa's wider ranging development crisis.
Mr Nyerere nationalised the country's industries and some 14m peasants and
their families were compulsorily regrouped in 'ujaama' villages in an effort
to make water, health and education more accessible. But the badly planned
exercise, conducted by an authoritarian bureacracy, severely disrupted
agricultural production and contributed to soil erosion and deforestation.
By 1985 the country's deepening economic crisis forced the government to
adopt market driven reforms. Mr Nyerere retired the same year.
Today Tanzania, like most of Africa, has introduced an economic reform
programme backed and monitored by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund.
The document suggests that Mr Nyerere's well meaning but impractical
socialist vision was indulged by senior Bank officials, notably Mr Robert
McNamara, Bank president from 1968 to 1981, although he is not mentioned by
name.
The report criticises what it calls a 'stance of uncritical support for
government policies' adding: 'Even where risks were noted, the board (of
directors) consistently reiterated that it was the Bank's role to be at the
forefront of social innovation and change, supporting new approaches to
development even at the risk of failure.'
'The Bank accepted Tanzania's road to socialism enunciated in 1967 as a fait
accompli', it says, adding that 'since 1967 and at least until 1980,' the
Bank viewed Tanzania 'as coming close to being a model developing country'.
But 'misgivings of successive missions concerning the effectiveness of the
planning mechanism, the workability of industrial policies and the viability
of an array of industrial projects initiated in the late 1960s and early
1970s did not evoke sober Bank reaction'.
Initial gains in literacy, primary school enrolment and life expectancy in
the post-independence era seemed to have validated Mr Nyerere's approach.
But by the mid-1970s several things were becoming clear: Tazania was living
beyond its means; aid projects were seldom self sustaining, and donors were
having to maintain as well as fund projects, such as roads; the
state-dominated industrial sector was increasingly inefficient; and
agricultural production was falling.
As a key passage in the report points out, 'Tanzania's unprecendented access
to concessionary flows of external capital has allowed it . . . to maintain
a high rate of largely ill-conceived and uneconomical industrial investment.
The cushioning effect of this access to funds, at least until the late
1970s, reduced the government's receptivity to external advice for badly
needed reforms in the country's economic planning and management system,
policy framework, and institutional arrangements.'
'It was not until 1981 that the Bank acknowledged that the situation was
getting out of hand. . . . This belated recognition . . . of the existence
of a chronically ailing economy casts doubt on the transparency of the
Bank's decision making process.'
The report continues: 'No effort was made to dissuade the leadership from
embarking on ambitious industrialisation programmes when fundamental
preconditions for such an undertaking identified by the Bank earlier were
lacking.
'The Bank remained an apathetic observer and an impotent bystander of
unfolding developments as Tanzania became the testing ground for an
allegedly 'unique' socialist experiment and one that was poorly thought out
at that.'
None of the donors challenged the conventional wisdom, though by the mid
1970s it was apparent that Mr Nyerere's vision was turning out to be an
egalitarian folly.
The report also highlights a problem still common among development agencies
 -government, multilateral and voluntary - in Africa today: a reluctance to
speak frankly about recipient government shortcomings.
'The Bank was not pre-pared to question openly the underlying conflict
between the ideological intentions and what was realistically feasible', it
comments.
'No attempt was made to communicate to the political leadership at the
highest level privately the true dimensions of the situation - at least not
until the late 1970s,' says the report.
By the mid-1980s Tanzania's honeymoon with the donors was ending and overall
aid levels have been falling over five years, reflecting a combination of
recession in the developed economies, aid fatigue and dissatisfaction with
Tanzania's performance.
With Tanzanians' per capita incomes more than halved since 1980, the
government of President Ali Hassan Mwinyi is trying to redress the legacy
with mixed results. Increasingly institutionalised corruption, permeating
the very top echelons of government, is threatening to undermine fragile
macro-economic stability. Western diplomats estimate that up to 10 per cent
of the aid disappears in this way.
Many donors are still cautious in their public comments, though a
Scandanavian foreign ministry official acknowledges that its aid programme
'supported Tanzania through a period when, in retrospect, we probably
shouldn't have'.
