FT  10 DEC 94 / Books: An epic study of the genesis of greatness - Patti
Waldmeir on Nelson Mandela, the man who refused to hate
LONG WALK TO FREEDOM by Nelson Mandela Little, Brown Pounds 20, 630 pages
Everybody likes a story where good triumphs over evil, where great men do
battle over humanity's most dearly-cherished ideals: freedom, equality, and
the brotherhood of man. That is why South Africa's story fascinated the
world.
It was a natural thriller, a story of human greatness culminating in one of
history's truly transcendent moments. As a crowd-pleaser, it could not fail.
Neither can the latest contribution to the tale: Nelson Mandela's
autobiography.
Mandela, who has recently completed six months as president of a new,
democratic South Africa is one of the most compelling figures of the 20th
century. He refuses to hate, although hatred would seem not only
understandable but more rational than its opposite. He is tireless in wooing
those who oppressed him, even to the point of angering his own supporters.
He always takes the long view. No wonder right-wing whites say he is a gift
from God, and supporters of the former ruling National party admit to
praying nightly for his well-being.
Mandela is not a saint, though. And although his autobiography reflects a
character seldom given to self-doubt - he seems certain that he always had
right firmly on his side - it profiles a man, not a super-natural agent of
good. His memoirs are never merely self-indulgent: each episode represents
an essential building block in the construction of the Mandela character.
From the moment of his birth into the royal family of the Thembu tribe in
the Transkei black homeland, he begins to learn the lessons of leadership
which he draws on - 600 pages and seven decades later - to guide a reluctant
African National Congress to eventual agreement with the white minority
government. For although Mandela often disclaims personal responsibility for
the deal which ended apartheid - going out of his way to stress the
deadlock-breaking initiatives taken by, among others, South African
Communist party chairman Joe Slovo - this is the story of the political and
emotional evolution of a great leader of men.
There are glimpses of human weakness: after young Mandela flees an arranged
marriage in the Transkei, he leaves a trail of lies and half-truths which
land him in endless trouble. And, to the very end, he remains unable to
detect guilt in his wife, Winnie, despite her conviction on kidnapping
charges; the book's most moving passages reveal his love for the beautiful
young Winnie, his desire for her during decades in prison, and his devotion
to her despite their 1992 decision to separate.
Winnie is the centre of Mandela's personal tragedy: that he was forced to
sacrifice his personal life to the liberation cause, not only while in
prison but for the five years since his release. Mandela today lives largely
alone, bereft of the family comforts which formed the substance of so many
prison dreams.
Forced to choose between his role as father of the nation or father of the
family, Mandela knows he chose correctly. He regrets the consequences -
among them, the pressures which probably helped to drive Winnie to illegal
acts - but he does not regret his choice. Commitment made that inevitable.
Mandela avoids dwelling on this personal tragedy, or on the demeaning and
de-humanising experiences of his long life as a prisoner. He mentions them
almost in passing and focuses instead on his efforts, often successful, to
triumph over his captors by using persuasion and charm - plus his sharp wits
as a trained lawyer - to defeat a brutal system.
Nowhere is Mandela's extraordinary character apparent more readily than in
his relationship with his warders: his steadfast refusal to blame the
individual for the evils of a political system; his joy at detecting a
'glimmer of humanity' in one of his guards; his patient efforts to persuade
them of his cause - efforts which, surprisingly, often succeeded.
This tale of struggle and suffering is leavened throughout by Mandela's
impish wit: ghost-writer Richard Stengel is remarkably adept at capturing
the voice of Mandela at its most relaxed and entertaining. Although his
prepared speeches often are heavy and dull, Mandela is a superb impromptu
raconteur. This survives Stengel's editing of the first parts of the book -
composed in jail and buried in the prison garden for safekeeping - and the
fact that he wrote most of the latter section on the basis of interviews
with Mandela.
Overwhelmingly, though, this is not a book about Mandela's love of gardening
(he provided home-grown vegetables to the prison warders); or about his
sight-seeing forays in the Cape, guided by warders who tormented him
unwittingly by giving him opportunities to escape which he knew he must not
take; or about his decision to build a retirement home in the Transkei based
on the floor plan of his prison bungalow. It is a serious book about his
political evolution - from Thembu loyalist, to African nationalist, to
violent revolutionary, to world-class statesman.
It is one of the most extraordinary political tales of the 20th century and
well worth the investment for anyone truly interested in the genesis of
greatness.
