FT  17 OCT 94 / International Press Review Tabloids find room to praise
heroism - Iraq
Tabloid journalism is increasingly a necessity in Iraq. Two of the country's
leading dailies, al-Jumhuriya and al-Qaddissiya, have both in the past few
months shrunk from broadsheet to tabloid format for want of newsprint in
sanctions-hit Baghdad. Gone are the sports pages and much of the local news
 -there is not a lot of advertising either.
But each of Iraq's main dailies yesterday, as all days, found plenty of room
to bash away at their favourite topics: the heroic wisdom of President
Saddam Hussein and the perfidious treachery of the west and above all, of
course, the US administration.
With extraordinary synchronisation, all the main dailies' photo editors
chose for the front pages a low-action shot of Mr Saddam sitting at the head
of a meeting of the Revolutionary Command Council, Iraq's highest ruling
body.
'Arab and world resentment at heinous American campaign against Iraq,'
blazed al-Jumhuriya. 'Russians threaten to use veto at Security Council.'
'Washington prolongs the embargo to justify petroleum and financial
interests in the region,' roared al-Qaddissiya. 'President presides over
meeting of RCC,' said Babel, Iraq's newest tabloid, edited by Mr Saddam's
son, Uday, less blazingly.
Inside Iraq's dailies, the tone is as consistent as the photographs - one of
indignant self-righteousness laced with mockery. 'Any military officer or
analyst with a reasonable degree of insight,' intoned al-Thawra, the ruling
Baath Party newspaper, 'would be astonished at the biased American claim
that two divisions (of Iraqi troops) could attack Kuwait and occupy it,
since it is logistically impossible.'
In unison, all the papers hail Russia and Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian
foreign minister, who takes to the UN this week proposals that Iraq
recognise Kuwait in exchange for some movement on the embargo - although
Iraq's papers fail anywhere to specify directly that Mr Saddam might
recognise Kuwait. Al-Jumhuriya speaks only, and typically, of 'protecting
the sovereignties and territories of the region's countries, whether Iraq or
Kuwait'.
So, 'Has a world coup taken place? Is the Iraqi victory nearing,' asked the
editor of al-Jumhuriya. Of course, yes: 'With the failure of the American
'TV game' in Iraq, the TV success which Clinton wanted to bolster his very
weak internal position has also fallen.' Mr Clinton, the successor of 'Bush
the famous criminal', and his regime are reported variously as 'sick',
'unstable' and even 'conniving with little pygmies'.
Sanction-weary Iraqis will remain sceptical. For most, it is the small
stories tucked away inside the papers which actually mean things.
Such as the story telling motorists who have lost their oil ration coupons
that they can now re-register. Or, on the back page of Babel, which has made
itself Iraq's campaigning paper, the list of the day's donors to the
newspaper's fund for the poor. Yesterday this included Ahmed Rathi and Laith
Hussein, two Iraqi soccer stars playing in Qatar, who each donated ID40,000.
Or, the despatch from Basra telling how prices of basic commodities fell
during the past few days as tensions lessened. A 50kg bag of sugar fell to
ID18,000 from ID25,000, while 50kg of flour fell from ID8,000 to ID7,000.
