FT  11 NOV 94 / Teachers finally welcome curriculum: Unions say proposals
vindicate boycott - Labour attacks 'Pounds 750m' spent on the reforms
The government's final proposals yesterday for the national curriculum for
England and Wales appeared to have successfully drawn a line under Sir Ron
Dearing's review after the plans were welcomed by teachers' unions.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, education secretary, said it would 'continue the drive
to raise standards, while at the same time giving teachers more professional
freedom'.
Mr David Blunkett, Labour education spokesman, also welcomed the results of
Sir Ron's consultation, but attacked the amount spent in the process.
He described it as a 'less prescriptive curriculum in line with what we have
been seeking all along'.
Mr Blunkett said the curriculum had cost the taxpayer Pounds 750m. Mrs
Shephard said this figure included items that would have been bought in any
case - such as textbooks - and described the criticism as a 'diversionary
tactic' by Labour, which had opposed introduction of the original
curriculum. The correct figure was about Pounds 600m, according to the
Department for Education.
Sir Ron's new curriculum answered the most serious criticisms from teachers'
unions but also shifted towards a more traditional emphasis in several areas
including standard English, basic arithmetic, British history and team
sports. These were interpreted by some teachers as concessions to Tory
rightwingers.
The curriculum will be compulsory in all state schools in England and Wales
from September next year and will stay in force for at least five years.
Sir Ron says that as a result of the review 20 per cent of lesson time will
be filled at teachers' discretion up to the age of 14. At this point several
subjects, such as history and geography, will from next year become
voluntary, and the curriculum only prescribes 60 per cent of children's
study for their final two years in compulsory schooling.
Documentation surrounding the curriculum has also been sharpened, with a
total reduction in content from 330 to 222 pages, while the 966 'statements'
of attainment, which teachers were supposed to use to measure pupils'
progress, have been scrapped. In their place are 200 'descriptions' of the
levels children have reached in different subjects. The '10-level scale' to
measure children's progress will now terminate at the age of 14, meaning in
effect that most pupils can only reach level eight.
Sir Ron joined Ofsted, the schools inspectorate, in arguing that there was
no need to keep detailed records of progress of every child in every element
of the curriculum.
In response to employers' concerns, Sir Ron has asked teachers to
concentrate on the basics of numeracy and literacy at primary school. In
secondary schools, children can concentrate on individual crafts as part of
the technology syllabus, and will be offered general vocational alternatives
outside the national curriculum after the age of 14.
Teachers' unions claimed the measures vindicated their boycott of the tests
used to assess the curriculum.
The NUT teachers' union, which is still considering a boycott of this year's
tests, guardedly welcomed the proposals. Mr Doug McAvoy, NUT general
secretary, said: 'After six wasted years and hundreds of millions of pounds,
a more manageable curriculum has been produced.'
But he added that concerns over prescription remained, particularly in
English, while teachers would want 'to see the fine print' before they were
convinced the new curriculum would reduce workload.
Mr Nigel de Gruchy, of the NASUWT teachers' union, said: 'The boycott has
served its workload-reducing purpose in respect of the government which is
clearly now listening to teachers.'
Editorial Comment, Page 17
