FT  25 JUL 94 / First meeting for Asia-Pacific forum
North Korea's nuclear programme, the Cambodian civil war and territorial
disputes over the islands and oilfields of the South China Sea will be among
the topics of debate today at the launch of an 18-member multilateral
security forum for Asia and the Pacific.
But the foreign ministers attending the first, three-hour meeting of the
Asean Regional Forum (ARF) in Bangkok say they are unlikely to make
substantial decisions on such issues until they have reach agreement on the
role of ARF itself.
The organisation, the first of its kind in Asia, is being founded to discuss
Asian security following the end of the cold war. Russia's power in the
region has diminished with the collapse of international communism, and the
US has withdrawn some of its military forces from the Pacific, while Chinese
economic and military influence is on the rise.
All three superpowers are members. ARF comprises the six countries in the
Association of South East Asian Nations (Asean) - Brunei, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand - as well as the US, the
European Union, Japan, China, Russia, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, South
Korea, Vietnam, Laos and Papua New Guinea.
The various foreign ministers already meet annually for political and
economic talks, and regional security has now been added to their list of
concerns.
Mr Chuan Leekpai, the Thai prime minister, opened this year's Asean meeting
by calling for urgent efforts to avert any armed confrontation that might
arise from territorial disputes in Asia. 'The competition for ocean space
and resources in the South China Sea is a particularly worrisome prospect,'
he said. 'A regional arms race is another concern. The creation of some kind
of regional arms control regime can deter arms build-ups.'
Some ARF members, led by Australia and encouraged by the US, want to ensure
that the organisation develops quickly and begins to take concrete measures
to improve security. They also want officials of the member countries to
meet more than once a year. China, on the other hand, favours a slower start
for ARF, apparently because it does not want to become enmeshed in
multilateral negotiations over territorial disputes when it has so much
clout in bilateral meetings.
Several ideas for enhancing regional security have already been aired ahead
of today's inaugural meeting. The first is an exchange of defence white
papers, so that each government can understand how the others perceive their
strategic interests and the threats that face them.
Another proposal is to establish a regional arms register, especially since
some ARF members have yet to disclose details of their weapons to the United
Nations register.
The need to settle territorial disputes is likely to remain near the top of
the agenda, especially in and around the Spratly islands in the South China
Sea, where six Asian countries have overlapping claims and China and Vietnam
have both awarded oil exploration concessions in disputed zones. One
suggested solution is a 'joint development zone' for oil and gas modelled on
the offshore zone now being exploited by Thailand and Malaysia.
