FT  13 JAN 94 / Leading Article: The case for lower rates
Nothing, barring a miracle, would do more to lift the spirits of glum Tory
backbenchers than a sharp cut in short-term UK interest rates. The question
is whether a prudent chancellor of the exchequer could justify such a cut.
The answer is that he could.
The last interest rate cut - by half a percentage point - occurred in the
week before the November Budget. That rate of interest was judged right
against prospects at the time, including the Budget. Two questions arise,
the first whether subsequent news alters the judgment and the second whether
it was sound at the time.
In November, the Treasury thought real domestic demand would expand at an
annual rate of 2 1/2 per cent between the second half of 1993 and the first
half of 1994. Over 1994 as a whole both demand and real gross domestic
product would be up 2 1/2 per cent. It also forecast the increase in retail
prices, less mortgage interest, at 3 1/4 per cent in the year to the fourth
quarter of 1994.
Nothing learnt since then fundamentally compromises this view. The
underlying annual rate of earnings inflation has remained at 3 per cent for
several months. Growth rates of both broad and narrow money have been
accelerating, but not worryingly so. The increase in real GDP in the year to
the third quarter of 1993 was 2.1 per cent, little short of the forecast
rate for 1994. The exchange rate has been appreciating, though more against
the D-Mark than overall. Yesterday's trade-weighted effective exchange rate
was only 1.5 per cent higher than on Budget day.
More cautious
One bit of news that might make the Treasury more cautious is the reduction
of 137,900 in unemployment during the three months to December. This
suggests either that economic growth accelerated in the last quarter of 1993
or that the underlying trend rate of economic growth is lower than most
analysts had thought. Either way, the authorities might feel more cautious
about adopting a more expansionary policy.
On balance, however, a significant change in the judgment reached two months
ago would seem unnecessary. The question is rather whether it was sensible.
The most powerful argument for cutting short-term interest rates
substantially - that is, by at least one percentage point - is that economic
activity remains well below full capacity on any conceivable measure. With
growth in GDP since its cyclical trough running at an annual rate of about 2
per cent, the economy should also be quite as far below full capacity now as
it was in early 1992.
Sensible policy
The extent of the subsequent decline in unemployment argues for caution on
that point. Nevertheless, if the principal source of disinflationary
pressure is the gap between capacity and actual output, further reductions
in inflation would seem guaranteed. Since inflation is also within the
government's target range, the sensible policy would seem to be to return to
full capacity as swiftly as possible.
The classic mistakes in past policy have been either to overshoot, because
of an over-optimistic view of full employment or, as in 1987-88, to approach
full capacity too quickly. The tax increases due to go into effect over the
next three years and the personal debt overhang make the second risk less
convincing. This economy is unlikely to take off like Lord Lawson's rocket.
Overshooting may be a more serious, if longer-term, danger. It is impossible
to know at what point the underlying rate of inflation might turn up once
more. It is disturbing, for example, that annual earnings inflation, though
down to 2 1/4 per cent in services, is at 4 per cent in manufacturing, even
though the labour force fell by 126,000 in the year to the third quarter of
1993, while that in services rose by 198,000 over the same period.
For all that, the disinflationary pressures still at work do provide a
strong case for a more expansionary monetary policy. Admittedly, it would be
easier to be confident of that advice if institutional changes looked likely
to preclude an early return to faster wage inflation. Policy needs to be
more credible. If the desirable period of rapid growth is not to end in the
traditional inflationary outbreak, independence for the Bank of England
remains the right medicine.
