FT  28 NOV 94 / Letters to the Editor: Airport proposals lack support of UK
airline industry
Sir, The call by the free-market Adam Smith Institute for the development of
Northolt and Redhill aerodromes to relieve pressure on Heathrow and Gatwick
('Plea for two more London airfields', November 21) is not supported by the
UK's airline industry.
The fundamental flaw in the Northolt and Redhill proposals is that they will
not create new peak time capacity at Heathrow and Gatwick to accommodate an
extra 30m passengers per year, as the Adam Smith Institute claims. This is
because business aircraft currently only use those take-off and landing
slots at Heathrow and Gatwick that cannot be used by airlines because they
fall at the wrong time of day for scheduling purposes.
Although Northolt is close to Heathrow, surface links and, in poor traffic
conditions, the road connection along the A40, M40 and M25 are too
unreliable. The Heathrow Express will not pass near Northolt. The
attractiveness of Northolt to interline and feeder traffic is therefore very
low. Furthermore, Northolt is used for ministerial flights and will soon be
the base for the Queen's Flight. Commercial schedules cannot be interrupted
by these categories.
The current Redhill proposal is too small in scale and has too short a
runway to provide a genuine relief for Gatwick. No leading airline supported
the proposal at the recent planning enquiry.
While we have no objection to the creation of a dedicated business aircraft
facility at Northolt, airlines believe that new capacity must be provided
where it will expand and complement existing facilities along the
Heathrow-Gatwick axis.
We hope the secretary of state for transport will initiate the process of
ensuring that London's two main airports will avoid gridlock and that
business and leisure passengers will retain the ability to gain access to
airports of their choice.
D R Hopkins,
chairman,
British Air Transport
Association,
5/6 Pall Mall East,
London SW1Y 5BA
