FT  01 NOV 94 / European Profile: Milosevic's wife brings their enemies to
book
The annual Belgrade book fair last week awarded first prize to a literary
novice, Mrs Mira Markovic, better known as the wife of President Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia.
The award marks the rise of Mrs Markovic, who has become increasingly
prominent in the Serbian political scene over the past few months.
Her hand can be detected in Mr Milosevic's current moves towards peace with
Croatia. She is behind Serbia's embargo against the Bosnian Serbs.
Mrs Markovic had made public her aversion towards Mr Radovan Karadzic, the
Bosnian Serb leader, a year before the Serbian president turned his back on
his protege.
The first lady of Serbia makes her views known by publishing her diaries in
Duga, the most popular Serbian magazine. Her book, 'Night and Day', is a
compilation of these musings which have heralded the demise of many
politicians - from Mr Karadzic to Mr Vojislav Seselj, the ultra-nationalist
MP, who last week was sentenced to three months in prison.
While her diaries provide a stage for settling political scores with her
husband's rivals - often erstwhile allies - they also ponder the beauty of
crickets, summertime, and ethnic tolerance.
Her book, said one critic, 'is polyphonic, a combination of scientific
analysis and poetic sensibility'.
After his Machiavellian turn-around three months ago, Mr Milosevic is poised
to purge nationalists from the ranks of Serbia's ruling Socialists (SPS) -
or at least get rid of those who had made the mistake of speaking too loudly
in favour of the war in Bosnia. This was portended by Mrs Milosevic, who
attacked Mr Mihajlo Markovic, the main Socialist ideologue.
'Mr Markovic betrayed her revolution by being too soft on the Serbs on the
other side of the Drina,' the river which marks Serbia's frontier with
Bosnia, wrote the Belgrade journalist Mr Milivoje Glisic,
In last month's column, Mrs Markovic warned Mr Markovic, her former
professor, that she 'has many comrades in the SPS, maybe many more than
Mihajlo Markovic. . . The only thing that my professor may be right about is
that he should not wage polemics with his former students and he especially
should not get angry if they are better than him.'
With her husband abandoning nationalism, Mrs Markovic has founded Jul
(Yugoslav United Left), a shadowy organisation including her university
students and retired generals. Indeed, writes Mr Stojan Cerovic, the
respected Belgrade journalist, 'the literary jury this time perhaps did not
want to reward only the skill or the good taste of Mrs Markovic in picking
her spouse, but also her efforts in rallying the left'.
Mr Milosevic's political shift has effectively marginalised the tiny liberal
opposition and radicalised the rest even more. While Mrs Markovic says she
supported peace all along, her husband was blamed by the west for being the
chief instigator of the war.
His recent moves have won kudos from international peace envoys and the
lifting of some UN sanctions, which give him a freer hand in Serbia.
While Mr Glisic wryly expressed relief that the Belgrade book fair was free
of political influence, the award signalled the extent to which the
Milosevics rule Serbia.
'If everything gets worse, Mrs Markovic will become all the greater writer,'
said Mr Cerovic, 'in the end, perhaps, the only writer whose books are
printed.'
See Feature
