FT  15 AUG 94 / A cure to relieve 'derivatives angst'
Recent well-publicised losses in the market for de-rivatives have
intensified public discussion of these complex instruments whose value is
based in part on some underlying financial market. A recurring theme has
been the call for increased scrutiny of derivatives activities and
legislative action to relieve what can be called 'derivatives angst'.
What is derivatives angst? It is the feeling that these new instruments are
so volatile, and their volume and use growing so fast, that they could
overwhelm the financial system. We need to be vigilant about systemic risk,
but the visions of melt-down are overblown.
The focus of any efforts, at this point, should be the marketplace, not
legislation. Aggressive action by private-sector participants, combined with
increased co-operation among regulators and supervisors, will go far in
alleviating derivatives angst.
Our objective is simple: to make sure that these instruments, which serve a
necessary and constructive purpose in helping to manage risk, are used
safely and soundly by all, in a way that increases stability and confidence
in the financial markets globally.
There is a clear need for private-sector action on at least three fronts:
improving disclosure standards and designing a new framework for tracking
capital flows;
ensuring high-quality and independent risk assessment capabilities at each
user firm;
and reducing, if not eliminating, settlement risks.
The type and quantity of information available to market participants is
insufficient. The current framework of financial disclosure does not suffice
to analyse risk when firms can so quickly transform their risk profiles with
derivative instruments. All market participants must have adequate
information to make informed, rational decisions, as a matter of efficiency
and equity. Knowing a firm's appetite for taking risk and its ability to
control that risk are essential for any shareholder, creditor or
counterparty.
To narrow the information gap, individual market participants must develop
bold and ambitious disclosure standards that go well beyond the traditional
balance sheet and income statement. Comprehensive disclosure of both risk
positions and risk management practices would also enhance the discipline of
the marketplace.
Moreover, enhanced disclosure would serve to heighten directors' and senior
managers' awareness of the dimension and the risks of derivatives and other
capital markets transactions.
Beyond financial disclosure, an information gap also exists regarding the
size and direction of capital flows within markets and around the globe.
Here, too, derivatives and related market innovations have reduced our
ability to discern the distribution of risks across capital markets. It
would take a great deal of ingenuity to design a comprehensive system to
measure capital flows, but it is worth the effort. The necessary first step
is to compile the main questions such capital flow data should help answer,
and we are ready to work with market participants to get the effort going.
A second priority that market participants must embrace is establishing
independent risk-management staffs and developing rigorous measurement and
analytical capabilities. While there has been progress on these fronts, more
needs to be done, particularly in ensuring a strong internal control
environment.
It is essential that skilled personnel are hired, with equal status, not
only for the trading floors and risk management staffs, but also for
back-office and internal audit functions.
Given that virtually all of the most significant trading-related losses have
involved internal control breakdowns, I am convinced that a substantial
commitment of monetary and human resources to internal controls earns a high
rate of return for dealers and end-users alike.
An important next step is to develop and implement sophisticated
stress-testing regimes. A firm needs to be satisfied that its resources are
sufficient to buffer it from a broad range of low-probability, extraordinary
events involving the various components of market, credit, liquidity and
operational risks. One of the most important functions of stress testing is
to identify unrecognised vulnerabilities, often the result of hidden
assumptions, and make clear to trading managers and senior management the
consequences of being wrong about their assumptions.
Finally, there is a critical need to take immediate action to eliminate what
we call 'Herstatt risk' - the risk of settlement failure in foreign
exchange. Several initiatives currently under way, including the development
of netting agreements in foreign exchange and efforts to create a foreign
exchange clearing house, are constructive and important. But additional
substantial progress must still be made before we can eliminate - or nearly
eliminate - Herstatt risk.
If we do not act with an aggressive agenda, the grip of derivatives angst
will be unrelieved. Derivatives are a positive force for the market, and we
must ensure that market practices inspire confidence in all participants,
private and public, dealers and end-users.
For our part, I recognise that we, the regulators and supervisors, must
acknowledge our collective responsibility for ensuring the success of our
primary mission: the preservation of a sound and resilient global financial
marketplace.
The author is president, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
