FT  29 OCT 94 / FT Schools 1000 - Survey of Secondary Education (1): Always
top of the class - A group of mainly single-sex, big-city day schools are
well entrenched
In this third year of the FT-1,000 schools guide, readers might be forgiven
for thinking they have seen it all before. League tables of schools based on
A-level performance are an established feature of the educational landscape,
and are telling a consistent story.
Fixed at the top of the table are a group of mainly single-sex big-city day
schools. They are very selective, very academic and have traditions so well
entrenched that standards are not going to change. For the record,
Westminster this year overtook St Paul's for the top position, but these
minor annual fluctuations need be of no concern to parents.
In the state sector, a select group of grammar schools again appears at the
top of the table. Regular readers will be used to names such as King Edward
VI Grammar School in Chelmsford, the Judd School in Tonbridge, and
Colchester County High, all selective, and established performers.
The state sector's performance, compared with independents, was similar to
last year's. There were eight in the top 100, the same as last year, and 20
in the top 200, down from 23. This year's top state school (Henrietta
Barnett, a grammar school for girls in Hampstead, London) ranks 53rd,
compared with last year's 37th by another girls' grammar, Colchester County
High.
GCSE performance tables focused attention on the battle of the sexes earlier
this year, as independent girls' schools dominated. At A-level, the gap is
narrower, but in the independent sector, girls' schools have marginally
out-performed boys', with results 13 per cent better than average compared
to the boys' 11 per cent.
As league tables have become established, educationalists' attitude to them
has changed.
From initial hostility  - most heads still believe that they do more harm
than good  - there is acceptance that the statistics will not go away.
Rather than fighting them, teachers now want to improve them.
Tim Brighouse, the chief education officer of Birmingham, who successfully
sued former education secretary John Patten for libel, sums up the mood: 'I
think we now want more information rather than less to be published, and
that would allow a more rounded picture.'
For example, rankings might take into account the social background of the
pupils, or their academic ability at the time they started at the school.
Both are hard to measure, but heavily affect final outcomes.
While A-levels and GCSEs provide well-understood performance indicators,
there are few public tests taken by younger children, so it is hard to
measure the value which secondary schools have added. Measures of social
deprivation are controversial.
A ranking which took these factors into account would produce a very
different table  - which might come closer to telling parents what they
truly need to know. Some comprehensives' results appear spectacular when the
domestic circumstances of their pupils are taken into account.
For example, Tamsyn Imison, head of Hampstead comprehensive, says the
school's name is misleading. She suggests it might be more accurately called
'Cricklewood High'. Of the school's 1,254 students, 55 per cent speak
English as a second language, using any of 80 different languages at home.
There are 150 refugees at the school.
Take this into account, and Hampstead's ranking of 414th, above average for
the 1,000 schools in the survey, looks very impressive. It might do even
better in a 'value-added' table.
Selective grammar schools, whose performances in league tables seem rather
stronger, take a similar attitude. David Levin, headmaster of Royal Grammar
School, High Wycombe  - top boys' state school for the second year running
 -says the school aims to select the top 25 per cent of boys academically in
its catchment area, and there is no point in comparing it with
comprehensives or 'super-stream' schools which take less than 10 per cent of
the age group.
Attempts to rank schools according to the value they have added between GCSE
and A-level reveal a confusing picture. Figures produced by the Department
for Education suggest that independent schools add more than state schools
between GCSE and A-level.
A more detailed survey by Peter Tymms of Newcastle university suggests a
much more limited effect. Comparing exam results achieved at state schools
with independent schools which were part of the Assisted Places Scheme, he
found that pupils in sixth-form colleges and independent schools were likely
to get 0.3 and 0.25 of a grade better respectively than pupils who had
started out with similar GCSEs at a comprehensive.
It also showed that students' chances of gaining a high A-level grade were
related to the average GCSE grades of the whole group. For every GCSE grade,
overall, by which a schools' A-level candidates were above the average, each
student would be expected to gain an extra 0.37 of an A-level grade.
This can be explained by large groups of academically able students
'sparking' each other. Tymms suggests this might lead to two separate
policies: 'Does it make sense to separate out the very able so that they can
feed, intellectually, on one another or should their beneficial influence be
as widely spread as possible?'
Such complex analysis may make the existing FT-1,000 obsolete, as it does
not measure value-added. However, it provides a sophisticated analysis of
schools' A-level results. Compiled after months of research, questionnaires
were sent to the 1,100 top-performing state schools as measured by last
year's government statistics. These represent one third of state schools
teaching A-levels.
In addition, the Independent Schools' Information Service (Isis) supplied
compatible data on more than 500 of its members. Head teachers were sent
proofs before the tables were finalised, to allow them to correct errors.
No school with fewer than 10 A-level candidates is included in our table, as
they are prone to fluctuations which are not statistically significant.
Only A-level results count towards a school's ranking. Schools which took
part in this year's pilot of advanced General National Vocational
Qualifications, intended as a vocational alternative to A-levels and good
for university entrance, have not had these results included. Only 3,000
students took the qualifications this year. But 50,000 students should be
leaving the sixth form with GNVQs in 1996. If this happens, A-level league
tables will need drastic adjustment.
The International Baccalaureate is also growing in popularity. The survey
includes independent schools which offer both A-levels and the IB, but have
not covered those which offer only the IB.
Rank positions represent a weighting of the average number of UCAS points
achieved per pupil (the quantity of grades attained) with the average number
of UCAS points per subject entry (the quality of grades attained). Grades
for general studies A-level are not included, as many universities are not
prepared to accept it. This leads to some discrepancies with the
government's data due to be published next month.
Rank positions greatly exaggerate differences between schools, particularly
in the middle of the range. For example, those ranked between 307th and
680th all achieved results within 10 per cent of the average  - roughly
equivalent to each pupil achieving three grade Cs.
The FT score is therefore more important than rankings. It has been scaled
so that a score of 1.00 represents the average performance of all the
schools considered for the FT-1000. The table opposite enables you to
convert FT scores into average A-level grades attained.
Also note the number of candidates a school has entered, as it is harder to
maintain a high average over a large number of pupils. King Edward's School,
Birmingham, was top overall on average over the past five years. It expanded
its intake, from four to five forms, seven years ago. That meant an increase
from 104 to 127 in its number of A-level candidates and a slight drop in the
degree to which it selected pupils. So, its slight fall this year to 12th
signifies very little.
Boarding schools, which have sustained falls of more than 5 per cent in
boarding numbers on average in the past two years, are also becoming less
selective. Their market has contracted as parents still resident in the UK
now mostly want to live within about an hour of the school.
Jonathan Leigh, head of Blundell's in Devon, a boarding school with a
smaller catchment area within Britain than many, says many boarding schools
are no longer truly selective although applicants sit the common entrance
exam. His school has started recruiting pupils from Russia.
As more statistics on pupils' achievements when they start school become
available, so we should be able to provide better guidance on which schools
add most value to the academic attainments a child brings with them on their
first day. This survey confirms the existence of metropolitan centres of
excellence, such as Westminster and St Paul's.
What it is beginning to suggest is that comprehensives and community
colleges in rural areas, which can afford to be far less selective, can
achieve similar excellence. If all the circumstances could be taken into
account, the performance of schools such as Queen Elizabeth's community
college in Crediton, Devon (554th), and West Somerset community college,
Minehead (562nd) might look just as good. Sadly, heads of state schools in
Cornwall decided not to co-operate with the survey.
