FT  13 JUN 94 / Beware Ivy League, central bankers
Last week's central banking symposium organised by the Bank of England was
attended by central bankers from 128 countries. The overt themes of the
conference were central bank independence, low or zero inflation and how to
achieve it. But there was a subtext, which reflected more nearly the main
concerns of the most important bankers present, but which was almost
entirely absent from the conference papers. This was whether it was enough
just to concentrate on restraining consumer prices, or whether the bubbles
which rise up and burst in the capital markets also need attention.
There was a justified scepticism about returning to capital market controls.
Direct intervention in markets for long-term assets obviously did not appeal
either. This left open only one option within the prevailing framework. This
was to take into account in monetary policy decisions, not only consumer or
product prices, but bond prices and even equities and real estate as well.
What would be the purpose of the whole operation? One justification might be
that large surges in asset prices will ultimately destabilise product prices
if allowed to go too far. But the real reason that central bankers lose
sleep is different. It is a fear that a slump in asset markets will one day
threaten the solvency of large banks whom they will have to bail out as a
result, as in the case of Continental Illinois.
There are also grounds for anxiety about the way in which central bankers
have become dependent on academic economists of the mainstream US Ivy League
variety.
An example occurred in the conference paper, Modern Central Banking, by
Professor Stanley Fischer of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who
is soon to become an assistant managing director of the International
Monetary Fund. I refer to his strong preference for a target for inflation
over a target for the price level.
An inflation target means that any upward overshoot in inflation above the
target range is not corrected. Bygones are treated as bygones and the price
level base from which future inflation is estimated drifts upwards. The
difference between the two is shown in the chart. With an inflation
objective, a series of modest unavoidable errors pushes the price level up
over some decades to a level four or five times as high as at the starting
point.
Fischer admits that with his preferred inflation objective, the price level
would not be predictable over generations. So Alan Greenspan's definition of
stable prices as a state in which inflation did not enter significantly into
business decisions would be violated.
Fischer's reason for accepting this fault is his extreme fear of the
deflationary episodes that would be required to correct overshooting, if a
target for prices, rather than their rate of change, was adopted. Assuming
that central bankers tried to correct half of any error in the ensuing year
output and employment could fluctuate violently.
This interpretation is a travesty of what price stability meant when we had
it. The author himself mentions that the same level of prices prevailed in
Britain in 1844, in 1881 and in 1914 under the gold standard. But that
standard did not mean that the Bank of England had to reverse any rise in
prices over the horizon of a short-term forecasting model.
There were several years at a time in which prices rose or fell; and over
the century as a whole, prices ranged between 70 and 130 (taking 100 as a
price index for the years just mentioned). Price stability meant that
looking ahead prices were as likely to fall as rise; and that the best bet
in long-term planning was that a pound in 30 years' time would be the same
kind of measure as a pound today.
The result was due to a policy regime, based on the ultimate convertibility
of notes and deposits into gold. It did not depend on having and
manipulating a model purporting to show how to manage output and prices over
the next few quarters.
What is the moral? Economics as taught in the US East Coast universities of
the United States is not to be written off as necessarily wrong or bogus.
But it does need to be treated with scepticism.
Mainstream North American economics is more like the speculations of
physicists on the origins of the universe or the nature of time than the
kind of physics used in splitting atoms or launching rockets.
