FT  06 SEP 94 / UK Company News: Paper price rises put Bunzl up 26% at
Pounds 33m
Bunzl, the distribution and cigarette filter company, yesterday wrapped up
its first half with the promise of an increased final pay-out and a 26 per
cent jump in pre-tax profits, excluding goodwill write-offs, to Pounds
32.8m.
The profits rise was due in part to long-awaited price rises in the
depressed paper industry, on which Bunzl depends for more than 70 per cent
of its earnings.
Mr Tony Habgood, chief executive, said paper prices had risen by 1
percentage point, against a 2-point fall previously. They were expected to
improve further in the second half, he added.
Although acquisitions also helped the return, he said Bunzl had still
achieved underlying profits growth of between 11 and 12 per cent.
Margins in continuing operations rose from 4.6 to 5.1 per cent.
Given the strong performance, 'we expect to be able to increase the final
dividend,' Mr Habgood said. The interim was held at 1.8p, as foreshadowed
last year, to adjust the balance between first and second half payouts.
During the first half, Bunzl sold its building products business for Pounds
61m. The disposal resulted in a net goodwill write-off of Pounds 35m which
must be taken through the profit and loss account.
Although this has no cash effect, it left Bunzl with a Pounds 2.2m interim
pre-tax loss, against profits of Pounds 26m last time. Sales were 11 per
cent higher for the six months to June 30 at Pounds 809.7m.
Of the group's four core businesses, cigarette filters and fine paper
returned the strongest growth.
Fine paper, which has seen prices fall by as much as 38 per cent in the last
three years, benefited from the general upturn and the withdrawal from
Sicily. Profits rose by 31 per cent to Pounds 6.4m.
Mr Habgood said the growing market for lower tar cigarettes had helped
Bunzl's filter business return a 31 per cent increase in operating profits
to Pounds 7.2m.
Paper and plastic disposables enjoyed 18 per cent profit growth to Pounds
19.7m. Plastic products also returned an 18 per cent rise to Pounds 5.9m.
The loss per share was 3.5p, against a 3.9p profit last time. Excluding the
goodwill write-off, earnings advanced 21 per cent to 4.7p.
COMMENT
Tony Habgood appears to have confounded the sceptics who criticised his
strategy just two years ago as a misguided focus on mature markets. The
rewards are undoubtedly rolling in. So far, they have been down to
management's herculean restructuring efforts. Now, with little left to
achieve on that front, the upturn in the paper cycle will do its bit for
Bunzl. If Habgood is not to be caught out, however, he needs to look ahead
to the next downturn. With the paper cycle expected to peak in 1997, Bunzl
may have to find a sizeable acquisition to keep up the momentum. Forecasts
are for about Pounds 71m this year, putting the shares on a prospective p/e
of about 15.5 times. This looks just about right for a solidly managed
company.
