FT  02 SEP 94 / Northern Ireland: Peace is still not guaranteed -
Paramilitaries
Renewed threats of civil war made by Ulster's loyalist paramilitaries
provide a grim reminder that an end to violence by the IRA gives no
guarantee of peace in the province. The gunning-down of a Catholic in
Belfast last night served to drive home that message.
Though the loyalists say they also want an end to 25 years of bloodshed,
they believe that almost any deal on Ulster's future acceptable to
republicans must undermine unionist interests.
Those interests, they warn, will be defended with a determination and
military skill equal to anything shown by the IRA over the past 25 years.
Those claims may be exaggerated, but their ultimate potential to wage war
will depend on the extent of support from a loyalist community feeling
increasingly cornered.
The fear, particularly in working-class areas, is that unionists - whatever
the assurances of Westminster - are close to being sold out.
The logic, in the minds of the loyalist paramilitaries, is that the IRA,
with minimal support, has pushed its cause to the top of the political
agenda using violence; if the strategy has worked for them then, the
argument goes, it will work to protect the majority loyal to the Union.
Ministers and politicians on all sides will have to work hard to set minds
at rest and convince the unionist community that, if the IRA reaches the
negotiating table, it will do so on the basis of the Downing Street
declaration alone and any agreement will fully safeguard the Union's future.
Most unionists have no more time for the loyalist gunmen than they have for
the IRA but that could change if, in the weeks ahead, the sands appear to be
shifting under Ulster's position in the UK.
Unionist politicians will play a critical role in determining the level of
support a nervous community might offer extremists. None of them condone
violence but in recent months there have been some attempts to rationalise
paramilitaries' actions in the face of the 'republican threat'.
Loyalist extremists believe they are well-placed to exploit new
uncertainties and old anxieties, and say they are able to launch a
counter-offensive which will render unworkable any political accommodation
with the republicans.
With loyalist action against the IRA and Sinn Fein cited as a reason behind
the switch in republican strategy, renewed attempts to draw the IRA back
into armed conflict can be expected.
The illegal Ulster Defence Association, the largest loyalist paramilitary
organisation, which mounts attacks in the name of the Ulster Freedom
Fighters, has traditionally portrayed itself as intent upon reacting only to
IRA atrocities.
But since the start of this year, the UDA claims it has tried to preserve
the Union. Failing that, the organisation - which said it would ignore the
ceasefire - wants to create an independent Northern Ireland.
After the three-day IRA ceasefire earlier this year, the UDA warned it could
extend activities to the Irish republic unless constitutional claims to the
north were dropped.
But for some years the UDA has not attracted the same levels of support it
enjoyed in the early 1970s. In 1974 it helped organise the workers' strike
that ended power-sharing in the province; that sort of influence and
authority has gone.
The Ulster Volunteer Force, also proscribed, has been responsible for some
vicious sectarian murders. 'The trouble is they just like killing
Catholics,' says one senior security officer.
The actions of loyalists have shown they have little to learn from the IRA.
This year, they have been responsible for a murder-rate almost double that
of the IRA.
The Catholic community is regarded as a legitimate target and the murderous
campaign is designed not only to spread fear, but to demonstrate the
loyalist capacity - in organisation and weaponry - to kill.
Security services do not underestimate that threat but say loyalist
extremists are not generally as well-armed as the IRA, are more loosely
organised and are more prone to infiltration. If the IRA remains dormant,
the Royal Ulster Constabulary hopes to direct more resources to the
loyalists.
The recognised danger is that politicians, in a search to embrace old
enemies, could supply fresh ammunition to loyalist extremists.
As one Ulster politician recently remarked, it is no longer impossible to
envisage them taking up arms against the very state to which they express
unswerving allegiance.
