FT  23 MAR 94 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (10): Thorough preparation can cut
costs - If the manufacturer of a product can save a year in its development,
that could be equivalent to the final year's sales. For a leading compound,
that could be Dollars 400m / Clinical Trials
Few industries operate under such stringent regulatory controls as the
pharmaceutical industry. The complexity and volume of the regulations
indicate a high cost area, one of which is clinical trials which are
expensive and time consuming.
The three phases of clinical research are the longest and most costly stages
in the development of a new drug. They take an average of four to six years,
although depending on the type of drug, they may in an extreme case require
10 years.
A single advance in efficiency can be both commercially and scientifically
beneficial. Considerable data is assembled from the trials which is
subjected to detailed statistical evaluation and medical interpretation.
Effective information technology (IT) management can be a competitive aid in
cutting high costs and helping to streamline the product development and
approval process. Companies cannot take short cuts with clinical trials, but
with well-planned IT, the risk of errors in documentation and testing can be
greatly reduced.
Today, an increasing number of the world's leading pharmaceutical companies
are looking to contract research organisations (CROs) to run part or in some
cases the whole package of clinical trials. Dr John Mills international
vice-president of Besselaar, one of the largest CROs worldwide, said there
is a 'dramatic increase' in the amount of contracting-out of clinical
trials.
'In the past couple of years we have had twice the number of proposals,'
says Dr Mills. Some companies request part service while others are
requesting the full works, he adds.
A measure of how much clinical trials cost is highlighted by Prof. Richard
Peto of the clinical trial service unit, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, who is
carrying out a significant trial on 20,000 people for the effectiveness of a
cholesterol-lowering drug. The trial costing some Pounds 20m is being
equally sponsored by Roche, Merck and the MRC.
But such large sums have to be viewed in proportion - 'what is Pounds 20m
when the sales of the drug are Dollars 1bn per year?' asks Prof. Peto.
According to a spokesman at the US Pharmaceutical Manufacturers'
Association, some clinical trials in the US are now costing Dollars 35,000
per patient over a six-month period.
There have been alternatives to clinical trials. In 1989, the US Congress
created the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) to comb
through vast databases of records accumulated by hospitals, insurers, and
government health programmes since the late 1980s. These studies are known
collectively as 'outcomes research.'
After spending nearly Dollars 200m on this type of research, AHCPR 'cannot
point to a single case in which its database studies have changed clinical
practice,' comments Prof Peto.
Many companies in the industry are hoping the International Conference on
Harmonisation (ICH) process will save a lot of time and money on clinical
trials.
There is a desire by the Japanese regulatory agency to harmonise its
requirements with those of Europe and America.
Dr Trevor Jones research and development director at Wellcome says: 'Until
now, we have had to repeat all of the stability data - storage, shelf life,
and so on. From now on, we will only do it one way. Some of it we will do in
Japan, though. The difficulty is the clinical side and it is still the case
that we have to repeat a lot of clinical work in Japan. We now have 65,
mostly clinical-related scientists in Japan to carry out the necessary Phase
III trials,' he adds.
Dr Jones says Wellcome has reorganised R&amp;D to meet global changes. A new
group set up in Wellcome called Euroclin, as a prelude to Worldclin. It has
200 staff spread geographically across Europe.
There is a large group in France with other groups in Italy, and Germany
with basic acquisition of data - 'this has been done without incentives,
such as tax relief but there are three very important advantages: to be in
touch with local clinicians; regulators; and local companies,' says Dr
Jones.
Dr Pierre Simon, research and development director of Sanofi, observes that
'you have to set high standards to get compounds into full development. We
look at strength, oral activity, duration of action, the toxicology and
genotoxicity.
'We also make sure that the molecule is metabolised in man. The drug has to
clear the bar, even if its set high,' says Dr Simon.
'When you have to organise a trial like we have for the anti-thrombotic,
Clopidogrel this is a real challenge,' he adds. 'We need a two-year study,
with 500 centres and 15,000 patients. This is difficult for a young company.
So far, we have enrolled 9,000 patients - far faster than we thought and
we've saved about six months: that's a huge boost to revenues for a large
compound.'
jAnother company that keeps a tight rein on its clinical trials preparation
is Fujisawa where Dr Hitoshi Oyasu, managing director research and
development division, comments: 'We don't like cutting out compounds from
our product pipeline, but clinical trials are costly.
'However, we now have 18 NCEs in the cycle - and that is too many.
'We look at the pre-clinical data and if there is no clinical advantages, it
gets 'killed.' We 'cut' a promising oral anti-histamine only last year,' he
adds.
The company believes that the ICH will make a difference to future clinical
trials - one day - but progress seems to be difficult at the moment.
Dr Oyasu says: 'We are trying to reduce the numbers of clinicians and
centres we use for our trials. We want to focus on those investigators who
are more reliable and deliver the data on time.
'In the past, some Japanese groups have used the clinical trials as part of
their marketing strategy - in some cases there was only one patient per
hospital. We want at least eight per hospital.'
Dr William Scott, senior vice-president exploratory and drug discovery,
Bristol-Myers Squibb, says: 'If you can save one year in development, that's
equivalent to the final year's sales.
'For a big compound, that could be Dollars 400m,' comments to Dr Scott. So
even if its costs more up front, saving time can be worth hundreds of
millions of dollars.
The problem is that the hurdles are getting higher all the time, he adds.
The regulatory process is becoming increasingly complex and demanding -
'just take the fact that you now have to do trials using active control
compounds so you can compare the new molecule against the old ones. And the
fact that regulatory authorities are asking for clinical end-points, rather
than just surrogate markers.
'Admittedly, one counter trend is in the area of life-threatening diseases
when there's no available therapy. There you can get accelerated approval
using surrogate markers. But the approval is only conditional. You can give
the drug to all that require it.'
Dr Scott adds: 'BMS did this with DDI - which we gave to 27,000 patients -
and with D4T which we gave to 9,600 patients, Taxol was also given
accelerated approval.'
The writer, Alan Archer, is editor of the FT newsletter, Pharmaceutical
Business News.
