FT  10 DEC 94 / We all live in a Trident submarine: The men who sleep with
nuclear missiles
Some time in the next 10 days, HMS Vanguard, Britain's first Trident
submarine, will slip below the waters of Loch Long and head for the river
Clyde. On board will be a crew of 130 officers and men along with 16 Trident
intercontinental missiles, each carrying up to six nuclear warheads capable
of destroying a city the size of Manchester.
Vanguard had those warheads fitted last week at Coulport, Britain's main
nuclear weapons store. It was a delicate operation and the finishing touch
to a programme which has taken almost 10 years. Now the warheads are mounted
on Trident missiles and a few final tests are being run. When they are
completed, Vanguard will simply fade away.
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the idea that Vanguard might fire
live warheads at a city has come to seem remote, unimaginable, to many
people.
But her crew must be ready, day and night, to begin the routine which could
kill 100m people, turn Russia's cities into rubble or, if such an order were
conceivable, destroy Japan.
To meet this terrible responsibility and the psychological pressure which it
brings, Vanguard's all-male crew can draw on the Royal Navy's long
traditions of discipline and camaraderie in cramped quarters.
Old habits, which Winston Churchill described as 'rum, sodomy and the lash',
have given way to a quiet professionalism and confidence that they are up to
the challenge. Yet, to be cooped up under water waiting for the end of the
world, must be a severe test of any tradition or individual.
The patrol which Vanguard is about to start is the first for Britain's new
Trident nuclear deterrent, and the crew will be at sea for, what they hope,
will be a pretty boring three months. Well away from British waters,
Vanguard hopes to chug around the North Atlantic at a stately but silent
4mph, avoiding contact with anyone and waiting for a signal.
If that day comes, the drill for firing the missiles will have been
well-rehearsed. A cabinet decision, made on the advice of the chiefs of
staff, will be sent to the Royal Navy's command bunker at Northwood near
Watford, Herts. In extremis, that decision might have to be made by the
prime minister and chief of the defence staff alone. From Northwood the
coded message would be sent via the very low frequency radio transmitter in
the Midlands to Vanguard.
Once Vanguard receives the launch signal, the captain and weapons officer
have to check the coded message against copies locked in the submarine's
safe. Both officers then have to use separate keys to give access to another
safe which contains the pistol-grip launch button. The Navy is disturbingly
coy about whether the captain and the weapons officer working in collusion
could launch the missiles without a valid authorisation from London.
However, as the Senior Service, the Navy has in the past resisted the call
for 'interlocks' which would require a third political key onshore to fire
the missiles. A naval officer's word is considered enough.
Legend has it that the firing button on both Polaris and Trident is a Colt
45 trigger. In reality it is a custom-made plastic grip. Hanging next to the
safe, is what looks like a standard issue Metropolitan police truncheon.
That may well be Britain's last line of defence against someone running amok
with the nuclear trigger.
The codes specifying the targets are fed from the submarine's computers into
the missiles. Neither the captain nor the weapons officer knows what the
string of numbers means, so they have no idea who will be destroyed by their
missiles.
All they will know is that they are using war plan A, B, C or Z. Once the
codes are entered the submarine moves up to just below the surface and the
missile hatches open. The captain authorises the firing and the weapons
officer uses his pistol grip to launch the missiles in a pre-set sequence.
Trident missiles are blown out of their tubes by an explosive charge. Only
when they are out of the water and into the air does the main rocket motor
kick in. Half way through the 4,000 mile, 40 minute flight, the missile,
clear of the atmosphere, takes a star sighting to make sure it is on course,
makes any necessary corrections and then fires its warheads towards their
separate targets. Each would explode with about 100 times the force of the
Hiroshima bomb.
The people who would fire these weapons are, by and large, family men,
engaging and likeable middle class graduates who have won success rather
than been born to it. Intelligent and reflective people, the captains are
typically in their 40s with weapons officers in their early 30s.
Vanguard has two crews which alternate. Both Commander Peter Wilkinson, who
will captain the first patrol, and Commander Jim Boyd, his opposite number,
have two daughters. Both have served in submarines for more than 20 years.
Provided you steered clear of the subject of the use of nuclear weapons they
and their fellow officers would make excellent dinner table guests.
All appear calmly adjusted to the job they are being sent to do. Wilkinson
acknowledges his 'awesome responsibility'. But significantly he goes on to
add that he is only carrying out the orders his political masters send, 'our
focus is on being professionals, not on politics'.
The officers have clearly debated the morality and efficacy of nuclear
deterrence, although one suspects slightly in the manner of those who know
the conclusion before they start. Having decided that Deterrence is Right,
however, their conversation admits no other view. Nor has that view shifted
with the fall of the Berlin Wall. 'Nothing has changed in our operations and
we always go out fully operational,' says Commander Boyd. Some seem almost
gung-ho. 'If you're not committed,' said one weapons officer, 'you might as
well not be here.'
If anything, the Navy seems keen to extend the technique which won the cold
war to other areas. Military debate is about sub-strategic deterrent: code
for the idea that the use of single nuclear weapons could be threatened to
keep tin-pot third world dictators in line.
The enlisted men seem bogged down in the mundane life on board and
unconcerned by what they may be called on to do. 'Have you read the latest
Tom Clancy?' one rating said to another in a thick scouse accent. He was
standing next to a missile tube containing warheads which could turn a dozen
Russian cities into boiling puddles of radioactive glass. 'It's about them
hostages in Iran and getting them out with helicopters and that, it's
brilliant.'
Tom Clancy's books are generally assumed to satisfy the hankerings of those
who do not know the inside story of military gadgetry and wished they did.
Maybe because the reality is so mundane, that existence on patrols is about
drills and being tidy and listening for things that you hope are not there,
Clancy also serves to retail the myth of hi-tech warriors to the men
themselves. Life not so much imitating art as simply wishing it did.
For both officers and men that mundane routine is much as it was in the old
Polaris boats. Three shifts work around the clock, monitoring the nuclear
reactor, listening at the sonar stations for any sign of ships or other
submarines, practising torpedo firings and the missile launch drill, and
cruising around at walking pace. For the rest it's eat, sleep and wait for
Armageddon.
Conditions are at least somewhat easier on board than on previous submarines
because the new fleet has to accommodate the bigger Trident missiles.
Vanguard is only slightly smaller than the Invincible aircraft carrier, and
at the same time the crew is smaller than on previous boats, as automation -
and a desire to save money - have taken their toll.
Still, while it is possible to walk around the boat without seeing anyone,
there is never a feeling of being alone.
To give some privacy, a personal stereo is supplied to each crew man, who
can listen to music while lying on a bunk
not much larger than a coffin. The macabre feel is emphasised by the fact
that many of the ratings' bunks are packed in around the bottom of the
missile silos: in that sleep near death who knows what dreams shall come.
At about the size of a small second bedroom, the wardroom catering for 15
officers is probably the largest public space on the boat. Its most
redeeming aspect is the lack of pipework - a feature omnipresent elsewhere -
and some soft furnishings.
Yet despite the best efforts of the Navy's designers, it is impossible to
suspend disbelief and imagine yourself away from this cramped place and this
responsibility. At heart, Vanguard is a nuclear-tipped sardine can with more
than 100 men locked closely together for months at a time. Every nook and
cranny is packed with electronic equipment, every ceiling a sprawl of
hydraulic pipework.
The tang of the air is familiar to anyone who has been inside a power
station or an engineering workshop. It is the metallic bite of machine oil
and the dry warmth of reconditioned oxygen. There is a constant background
hum from the nuclear reactor which is not so much heard as felt. It soaks up
through the soles of your shoes. This is a soulless place drifting on a
soulless mission.
The missile compartment is surreal. In the Polaris submarines they used to
call it The Forest, with 16 tall trunks stretching along the compartment.
Standing among them stretches the imagination beyond breaking point: could
the contents of these tubes mean the end of humanity?
It goes without saying that it takes a particular kind of person to survive
three months squashed inside a tin can waiting for the unimaginable. The
pressure from boredom and claustrophobia is obvious, the weight of the sea
above flattens the soul.
Yet there is also a paradoxical feeling of agoraphobia: thousands of miles
of empty ocean stretching away on all sides added to the vertigo of hanging
two or three miles above the sea bed. Whether the kind of person who can
adjust to such conditions is the right person to have a finger on the
nuclear trigger would make a good psychology finals question.
Stress is a problem. More than one sub-mariner has had to be brought back
from a Polaris patrol under sedation because he was unable to cope with the
psychological demands.
It cannot help that not all of the submarine's crew are volunteers. The
submarine service does not have sufficient applicants, so some have to be
pressed into service from other parts of the Navy. Even Commander Boyd
originally had ambitions to be a naval pilot. For all the Navy's proud
history of turning reluctant recruits into a fighting force, the demands
which are being made now are unimaginable to any crew member who genuinely
contemplates them.
That stress can only increase as the gap between the rhetoric of deterrence
and the likelihood of its being needed to counter an overwhelming threat in
the real world gets wider. Handcuffs hang ready to subdue anyone who cannot
cope. Its infirmary retains a high stock of sedatives.
The difficulty of matching the real world to Vanguard's capabilities is not
confined to the crew. For the Royal Navy, the launch of this spanking new
deterrent is also a slightly awkward affair. Tensions between the great
powers are at their lowest for 50 years, while the US and Russia are busy
dismantling 80 per cent of their nuclear weapons. This is not the best time
for the UK to launch a hideously expensive submarine fleet which
substantially increases the number, range and accuracy of nuclear warheads
Britain can deliver.
In part the Navy's weakened rationale for Trident explains the search for a
new role in deterring those who might land the odd Scud missile on the UK.
It is also behind the argument that nothing much has changed and that Russia
could soon turn hostile again.
Yet it is hard to hide the apparent pointlessness of long and stressful sea
patrols to safeguard against a sneak attack which is not going to come.
Perhaps the boat is at sea because a Trident submarine sitting in port would
be a white elephant even harder to hide. It can only be hoped that the
Navy's long run of avoiding large accidents continues.
