FT  19 AUG 94 / Clinton urged to act on flood of Cuban refugees
The governor of Florida declared a state of emergency and appealed to
President Bill Clinton for help yesterday to cope with a growing tide of
refugees from Cuba.
But the White House attempted to play down the refugee influx, declaring the
situation was 'orderly'.
US Coast Guard cutters picked up a further 330 Cuban refugees from small
boats and makeshift rafts by yesterday evening after rescuing 547 on
Wednesday and nearly 600 earlier this week. With nearly 3,500 picked up this
month, the refugee flow to Florida has swelled to its highest in 14 years.
The Florida governor, Mr Lawton Chiles, said thousands more Cubans might be
about to flee to the US, with President Fidel Castro's government apparently
encouraging them to go so as to ease unrest in the country.
Mr Chiles said he might have to call out the national guard to cope with the
refugees. Even so, he said, Florida urgently needed money and other help
from Washington to shelter and feed the Cubans.
US State Department officials believe Mr Castro has informally eased
restrictions on Cubans wanting to leave the country. 'The systems of control
seem to have been lifted,' an official said.
Cuba's relations with the US have deteriorated recently, with Mr Castro
accusing Washington of being behind recent disturbances and boat hijackings.
The isolated socialist republic has been struggling to cope with an economic
crisis since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the east European
communist bloc.
While the US is embarrassed by the prospect of a refugee influx, Mr Castro
has suggested Washington is getting what it deserves in view of hardship
caused by the US trade embargo.
The arrival of Cubans in boats, on makeshift rafts and clinging to rubber
rings is stirring memories of 1980, when 125,000 refugees fled to the US in
just a few months when Mr Castro declared they were were free to go.
The Clinton administration is bound by the Cuban Adjustment Act of 1966,
which grants refugee status to any Cuban who reaches the US. Although the US
sets aside 20,000 visas a year for legal Cuban immigrants, many Cubans see
risks in making a formal application in Havana and have a strong incentive
just to set sail for Florida.
The US is advising Cubans not to 'risk life and limb' in attempting to make
the crossing to Florida and has warned the Castro government that it will
not tolerate an exodus, though there appears to be little it can do to halt
the flow.
Ms Dee Dee Myers, the White House spokeswoman, said yesterday the US would
'not allow Fidel Castro to dictate immigration policy'. But the State
Department said it was looking at 'contingency plans for dealing with a mass
exodus'.
The Air Force began to erect a tent city at a base south of Miami yesterday,
though it claimed the measure was a drill.
