FT  14 JUN 94 / European Elections '94: Strasbourg set to tilt to the left -
A look at the new balance of power in the European Parliament after the
elections
In spite of strong gains for the right across the Continent, the balance of
power in the European Parliament has changed little. If anything, in the
consolidation of power rather than in absolute number of seats, the
Strasbourg assembly will tilt slightly towards the left.
The hitherto dominant Socialist group will have in the new 567-member
legislature proportionally much the same presence as in the outgoing
518-strong assembly. This assumes that the Left Radical list in France
headed by Mr Bernard Tapie either sits or allies with the Socialists.
Centre-right and right-wing parties are numerically strengthened. But the
right will be a highly fragmented force, with fault-lines subject to
continual political stress, facing a much more cohesive Socialist bloc.
As a result, the broadly bipartisan motor put together by the Socialists and
Christian Democrats in the last parliament may be much harder to crank up.
That could stall the parliament in the way it uses its growing powers.
'Negotiations (between the two blocs) this time are going to be that much
more complex, because of this new situation on the centre-right,' predicts
Mr Julian Priestley, secretary-general of the Socialist group, tipped to
take over as secretary-general of the parliament.
Strasbourg was invested with significant new powers by the Maastricht
treaty, enabling it to negotiate for the first time as a near equal with the
Council of Ministers.
Since Maastricht came into force last November, Strasbourg has begun
demonstrating that for the first time it has a sense of priorities, and can
apply its weight effectively - for example, in winning pledges for a
top-table seat for the 1996 Maastricht review.
The new parliament will have to struggle to maintain that momentum, at a
time when the Council's cohesion will probably be strengthened. Germany,
France and Spain will successively hold the EU's six-month rotating
presidency up to 1996, and are co-ordinating efforts to run as seamless a
management as possible. The seams on parliament's centre-right, by contrast,
are highly visible.
The traditional Christian Democrats, mostly from the six founding member
states, have been strengthened by Chancellor Kohl's victory, but have shrunk
to a core group of around 130 MEPs. This section could grow in strength if
alliances with other groups, including Britain's Tories and Forza Italia,
are concluded.
But even if such coalescence took place, the federalist European People's
party (EPP) would then contain within it a powerful Euro-sceptical force.
The Christian Democrats share with the Socialists a commitment to Europe's
social and welfare policies. A strengthening of Euroscepticism would
contrast with the Christian Democrats' track record as assiduous drafters of
proto-constitutions for a federal Union.
As debate on the EU's jobless crisis sharpens and calls grow for labour
market deregulation, and as the 1996 review approaches, the EPP could find
it hard to stay together as a broad church.
The earliest set-pieces defining the new balance of power, however, will be
in the carve-up of the main parliament jobs.
The presidency, until now a role hovering ineffectually between figurehead
and parliamentary speaker, will assume greater importance.
The Socialists say they will almost certainly put forward a candidate. But
first they must sort out their own leadership, up to now the most
influential position at Strasbourg.
Mrs Pauline Green, leader of the UK Labour MEPs, now by far the largest
national grouping in the assembly, is clear front-runner, in competition
with the German SPD leader Klaus Hansch. If Mr Hansch does not win, he has a
plausible claim to his group's backing for the presidency, as does Mr
Jean-Pierre Cot, outgoing Socialist group chief.
One other presidential candidate, Ms Elisabeth Guigou, European affairs
minister in the last French Socialist government, is an outside runner
because of lack of MEP experience. Ms Guigou is also likely to suffer from
the poor showing of France's Socialist list.
The fragmentaton of the French vote would make it difficult for any group to
sustain a French candidacy for the top job. Hopes that French centrist
Dominique Baudis, the mayor of Toulouse, might get the presidency appear to
have evaporated since his UDF-RPR list lost ground.
Either of the two former Belgian Christian Democrat premiers elected,
current EPP leader Leo Tindemans and Mr Wilfried Martens, could stand.
However, many on both sides of the house feel parliament should look to the
future rather than the past.
Once the presidency is settled, an unseemly scrap could take place for
control of the four most important committees: foreign affairs (probably
absorbing trade); budgets; environment; and economic and monetary affairs.
The Socialists currently hold the first three and the Christian Democrats
the last.
The growing influence of the committees in shaping and shepherding
legislation had won them cross-party support irrespective of which group
chaired them. But this bipartisan attitude could now be eroded.
Mr Ken Collins, the Scottish Labour MEP who heads the environment committee
 -arguably Strasbourg's single most influential body - wants to keep it. He
could face challenge not only from the right but from Mr Carlo Ripa di
Meana, former EU environment commissioner elected for Italy's Greens, and,
according to insistent rumour, from Mrs Glenys Kinnock, wife of the former
UK Labour leader, and now newly elected in Wales.
Competition for the chair of the foreign affairs/trade committee will be
even fiercer if the two are amalgamated. Currently occupied by Mr Enrique
Baron - former president of the parliament tipped as new head of the WEU,
the Union's embryonic defence arm - the foreign affairs job conceivably
could go to Mr Fernando Moran, respected former Socialist foreign minister.
But the Spanish Socialists hold few cards after their hammering by both
right and left on Sunday.
Mr Piet Dankert, Dutch European Affairs minister and a distinguished former
parliament president, has his eye on the budgets committee. But this could
be a prime target for the EPP, which because of its fragmentation is having
difficulty settling on candidates.
One other important decision will be the parliament's choice of the MEP to
elaborate its case for the 1996 review conference. On merit and experience,
this job might go to Scottish Labour MEP David Martin, whose constitutional
work prior to the Maastricht summit was widely respected and influential.
In the new, more fissiparous configuration at Strasbourg, however, the
premium on consensus could give way to a more partisan struggle, for both
spoils and control.
