FT  22 NOV 94 / Schools' League Tables: Dispute over time spent on teaching
unresolved
League tables of the amount of time schools spent teaching their pupils,
published for the first time this year, seem to have left one of last year's
biggest educational disputes unresolved.
Mr John Patten, the former education secretary, believed that the amount of
time spent teaching pupils had to affect academic achievement and asked for
the figures to be published.
Concerns about variations in the school day were first raised by Professor
Stewart Sutherland, the former chief inspector of schools, who said at least
1,000 schools were not meeting the department's guidelines. Recommended
school teaching time per week is 21 hours for those aged five to seven, 23.5
hours for those aged between 8 and 11, and 24 hours for secondary school
pupils.
Prof Sutherland found a variation of about 20 per cent between schools in
the amount of time they spent teaching each week - equivalent, as he put it,
to a day.
Mr Patten responded by asking Ofsted, the education watchdog, to conduct
urgent research into the effects of the variations. But they did not produce
a clear-cut answer.
Ofsted said quality rather than quantity of teaching time mattered most.
There was 'at most only a very weak association between the amount of taught
time and educational achievement'.
Today's league tabling exercise appears to give full support to Ofsted's
assessment. Secondary schools offering 23 hours teaching a week or less tend
to be slightly below the national average for GCSE passes, although the
figures are very uneven.
Some of the schools are atypical, including a number of tutorial colleges,
where teaching is intensive and takes place with small classes. Summerhill
in Suffolk, one of six schools which teaches for only 20 hours each week and
where only 8 per cent of pupils managed five GCSE C grades, is also scarcely
representative. It is an independent school with a deliberate and
controversial policy of allowing pupils to express themselves and has little
discipline.
Only two of the schools which taught for 35 hours or more had less than a 50
per cent success rate in gaining five good GCSEs.
However, the 82 schools which taught for more than 30 hours each week
included only four of the 97 which managed to get 100 per cent of their
pupils five good GCSEs. The others appear to have managed on less.
But the presence of one school near the bottom of the rankings for teaching
time suggests that Mr Patten need not have worried too much about the issue.
Manchester Grammar taught its pupils for only 22.5 hours each week last
year. All of them managed five GCSEs of at least a grade C. It was the
biggest school to achieve this.
Dr Martin Stephen, high master of Manchester Grammar since the beginning of
this term, told journalists yesterday that he was not enthusiastic about
league tables.
He said: 'They are misleading and I don't think people realise what they are
reading. I am not a convinced supporter of league tables because they leave
out some of the most important information about a school.'
In the case of Manchester Grammar, anchored at the top of both GCSE and
A-level tables, they appear to have included information that was
irrelevant. Following these results schools are more likely to try to
improve the quality of their teaching time rather than the quantity.
