FT  14 JUN 94 / International Company News: Tajudin in fresh attempt to take
over MAS
Mr Tajudin Ramli, a leading Malaysian entrepreneur, has announced a
controversial proposal to take over Malaysian Airlines (MAS), one of Asia's
biggest carriers.
The highly-leveraged deal would see Mr Tajudin take a controlling 32 per
cent stake in MAS for MDollars 1.79bn (USDollars 716m).
The proposal is subject to approval by Malaysia's regulators.
Mr Tajudin has talked of a shake-up at troubled MAS, with airline analysts
predicting that lossmaking domestic services would be sold off.
'In order for Malaysia Airlines to move forward, we would need to develop a
new vision to support our long-term objectives and strategies, taking into
account the company's strengths and weaknesses,' said Mr Tajudin.
'It could even involve an entire re-positioning exercise for the national
carrier,' he added.
In spite of Mr Tajudin's confident talk, a number of questions surround the
deal.
At the end of last year Bank Negara, Malaysia's central bank, announced that
it would sell a 32 per cent stake in MAS to Malaysian Helicopter Services
(MHS), a small listed company controlled by Mr Tajudin.
However, that deal foundered when the rally in the Kuala Lumpur stock market
lost momentum earlier this year.
The original purchase, based on an MAS share price of MDollars 8, was to
have been funded through issuing 112m new MHS shares at the then market
price of MDollars 16 a share.
MAS shares have recently been trading at around MDollars 5, while MHS has
been hovering around MDollars 8.
The new deal sees RZ Equities, an unlisted company owned by Mr Tajudin,
paying Bank Negara the MDollars 1.79bn in cash through a personal loan
financed by Mr Tajudin.
An MHS statement said Mr Tajudin had given MHS the option to acquire 100 per
cent of the equity in RZ.
No details have been given about how Mr Tajudin has raised such a large
loan. Questions have also been raised as to why Mr Tajudin's purchase of the
MAS stock is still based on a price of MDollars 8 a share.
'Financially, the deal seems to make little sense,' said one airline
industry analyst. 'But perhaps Tajudin feels carrying such a debt burden is
worthwhile in order to make changes at MAS and secure long-term profits.'
There are also thought to be political considerations in the deal.
Mr Tajudin is a close business associate of Mr Daim Zainnudin, Malaysia's
former finance minister and a close confidant of Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the
prime minister. Mr Daim is known as one of Malaysia's wealthiest
businessmen.
There is speculation that Mr Tajudin has agreed to the deal in expectation
of one of his companies being given a lucrative government contract.
Over the past three years MAS has been suffered some financial turbulence.
Pre-tax profits for the year ending March 31 1994, at MDollars 16.1m, were
90 per cent down on the previous year.
An ambitious expansion programme involving the purchase of 72 aircraft
valued at MDollars 10.6bn in the 1991-96 period has strained financial
resources.
Mr Tajudin's flagship company is the listed Technology Resources (TRI), a
fast-growing cellular communications concern.
Mr Tajudin also has a controlling stake in a private company which has
launched two Russian communications satellites with the idea of leasing
space to regional users.
