FT  28 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Late payment of bills
Late payment of bills is a recurrent problem for businesses across most of
Europe. But it is at its worst in the UK, where delays in settling invoices
have become endemic. The practice plays havoc with cashflow, kills off
thousands of smaller enterprises every year and wastes immense amounts of
time in chasing unpaid bills.
That much is easy to state. Finding effective ways of tackling this business
headache is harder. The UK government issued a consultative paper after the
November Budget exploring the options, including a statutory right to
interest on overdue payments. There has been vigorous lobbying over the
issue during the consultation period, which ends on Thursday. But when it
comes to assessing the responses, the Department of Trade and Industry is
likely to find that there is still no consensus over the use of legislation.
The Confederation of British Industry, for example, opposes legislation  - a
stance that is backed by its small business committee. The Federation of
Small Businesses would back it only after other measures have been tried. In
favour of immediate legislation are the Forum of Private Business and the
Institute of Directors. Large and small businesses are on both sides of the
divide.
Poor record
The arguments in favour of legislation are seductive. The UK has one of the
worst records in Europe for late payment, perhaps because most other
European countries have a statutory right to interest on overdue payments. A
survey by Dun and Bradstreet, the business information company, says that UK
companies have to wait on average 20 days longer beyond the due date than
their French counterparts, the next-worst payers in Europe. The CBI says
that late payment threatens the survival of one in five companies. More than
Pounds 15bn of trade debts to small and medium-sized businesses are overdue
at any one time, according to Lord Alexander, chairman of National
Westminster bank.
The impact is greatest on smaller businesses that can least afford to press
the large customers upon whom they depend for orders. They lack the
resources to chase up late payments, which larger companies control through
efficient debt management strategies. And factoring may be too expensive for
such businesses. Yet their prosperity is essential to the economy; small and
medium-sized enterprises will provide most of the jobs needed to bring
unemployment down.
Legal rights
However, it is not clear that a statutory right to interest on overdue debt
is an effective remedy. Debt payment times have lengthened in some countries
that have legislation, such as Germany. There, few companies exercise their
legal rights because it would jeopardise their relationship with the
customer. The introduction of statutory interest in the UK might simply
lengthen the payment times that large companies are prepared to agree with
their suppliers. European companies typically demand longer settlement dates
than their British counterparts.
And if legislation is likely to be infrequently used, or sidestepped by
changes in payment terms, then alternative strategies for improving payment
of bills might be more effective. Government departments, for example, must
now give details of their payment practices in their annual reports: larger
companies might be required to do the same. A British standard on prompt
payment could enforce such transparency and set standards for good practice.
Trade associations could be supported in helping their members combat late
payment. The DTI has already provided Pounds 30,000 to the Federation of
Master Builders to pay for a helpline that advises members on how to recover
debts. Guidance is also offered on how to check the creditworthiness of
potential customers. More of this could be done at no great cost.
If such measures have little success, the case for a statutory right to
interest would be much stronger. It would then be clear, as Lord Alexander
wrote in the FT in September, that legislation was needed to change the
culture. But until the alternatives have been fully tried, legislation
should be avoided. A combination of publicity and peer pressure is the most
attractive option for the DTI.
