FT  24 FEB 94 / Push to find new peace plan for Bosnia: US and Russia join
in efforts to widen ceasefire and get unhindered access for aid convoys
The US, the United Nations, the European Union and Russia are embarking on a
three-pronged strategy aimed at creating a new peace plan for
Bosnia-Hercegovina, western diplomats said yesterday.
The strategy, which coincides with talks between Bosnian and Croat military
leaders in the Croatian capital of Zagreb, involves diplomats concentrating
on certain regions in Bosnia with the aim of securing ceasefires, allowing
the unhindered access of humanitarian aid convoys, and the eventual
de-militarisation of these areas.
However, diplomats said the crucial success of any plan involves a
commitment by western governments to send many more peace-keepers to
Bosnia-Hercegovina. The omens are not good: a request by Gen Sir Michael
Rose, UN commander in Bosnia, for an extra 3,000 troops for Sarajevo has not
yet been met.
'We now have to apply pressure. But this must be underpinned by carrots and
sticks to all three sides,' a US diplomat said.
Yesterday, Mr Vitaly Churkin, Russian deputy foreign minister, and special
envoy to the former Yugoslavia, and Mr Charle Redmon, US special envoy, held
talks in Zagreb with Mr Thorvald Stoltenberg and Lord Owen, the
international peace negotiators.
The talks centre on Croatia and the Bosnian government agreeing to an
eventual 'confederation' for Bosnia, and in the short term, securing
ceasefires in central Bosnia and lifting the Croat siege of the city of
Mostar in western Hercegovina.
US officials had hoped Germany would play a greater role in persuading
Croatia to pull its troops out of western Hercegovina. Yesterday, Mr Mate
Granic, Croatia's foreign minister, who held talks in Bonn with Mr Klaus
Kinkel, his German counterpart, said Zagreb had withdrawn about 1,200 troops
from western Hercegovina. But US officials said the pressure from Bonn was
not enough.
The White House indicated an agreement between the Croats and Moslems might
be a way in isolating the Bosnian Serbs who often fight alongside Bosnia's
Croats against the Moslem forces. But Serbia and Croatia share the same aim:
the eventual annexation of parts of western Hercegovina to Croatia and
eastern Bosnia to Serbia at the expense of the Bosnian Moslems.
'It might be in the interests of the Moslems to sign up to a confederation.
If not, they will be left with an unviable state. If they are to have any
hope of survival, the Moslems must make a deal with either the Serbs or the
Croats,' said a diplomat based in Belgrade.
This is where Washington's role, as part of the second prong to the
strategy, is crucial. US and European leaders have told Mr Alija
Izetbegovic, the Bosnian president, that they will help with post-war
reconstruction in an attempt to win Moslem endorsement for the new
diplomatic peace initiative. But Mr Izetbegovic is cool to the plan largely
because Croatia still refuses to withdraw its troops from Bosnia. The third
element involves the Russians who are in a position to put pressure on the
Serbs.
'Trying to coalesce these three elements of the strategy will be difficult,'
a British diplomat said, adding that the pressure to capitalise on
involvement by Moscow and Washington must not be squandered.
