FT  26 JUL 94 / Van company acts on seatbelt safety concerns
LDV, the Birmingham-based van maker, is re-engineering all its minibuses to
provide three-point seatbelts and forward-facing seats as standard. All new
LDV minibuses which seat between 12 and 17 people will be supplied with the
new seats and belts from September.
The announcement follows concern over safety in minibuses, particularly
those used by schools, after a series of serious accidents.
LDV, formerly Leyland Daf Vans, said it aims to provide safety factors which
exceed legislation being considered.
Many older minibuses do not have belts fitted to passenger seats and as yet
there is no legal requirement for them.
The lack of seatbelts, combined with side-facing seats, was considered to
have been a significant factor in the deaths of 12 children and their
teacher on the M40 several months ago.
Mr Allan Amey, LDV chief executive, said yesterday: 'We all drive on
motorways and see 10-year-old converted vans being used as minibuses. That
is a concern. We can now offer our customers an improved level of safety.'
LDV said it expects to recoup the Pounds 1m cost of the programme, which has
taken nine months, through higher sales of its minibuses.
The market for 12 to 17-seater minibuses is typically between 3,500 and
4,000 units a year. LDV says it has about 50 per cent of that market, with
the rest of the market dominated by Ford.
LDV, like Ford, has been fitting lap belts only to all seats in its 12 to
17-seaters for several years. However, three-point belts require
modification of the vehicle's underbody, and Ford said last night that it
had no similar programme to LDV's.
Ford will announce today, however, that it is making available two-point
lap-belt kits for older minibuses, at subsidised prices to schools and
voluntary agencies. Ford said the kits would cost Pounds 350, including
value added tax and fitting, for 12-seaters and Pounds 400 for 17-seaters.
LDV also said yesterday that it would be creating 65 new temporary jobs at
its plant at Washwood Heath, Birmingham, to meet an increase in van
production from 250 to 300 a week.
The increase means that LDV will have increased its output rate by a half
and added more than 200 jobs since last spring. The plant now employs 1,180
people.
