FT  11 FEB 94 / Pressure on Sinn Fein stepped up
The British and Irish governments will press ahead urgently with the talks
process intended to bring an overall political settlement in Ulster, Sir
Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said yesterday.
The odds on peace were shortening and the terrorists were running out of
time as they confronted the 'irreversible will of the people' for peace, he
said.
Sir Patrick was addressing the Association of American Correspondents in
London, the day after meeting Mr James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster
Unionist party, in the first of a series of individual meetings with the
parties to discuss ideas for a political settlement. Today he will meet Dr
John Alderdice, leader of the Alliance party, although no date has yet been
set for a meeting with Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and
Labour party.
Sir Patrick's speech formed part of the continuing effort to maintain the
pressure on Sinn Fein to accept the Downing Street declaration.
He stressed that there was 'no daylight' between the two governments on the
joint declaration and warned those who had so far refused to join efforts to
find a settlement that they could join the process or stay out. 'But they
cannot halt it,' he added.
Both sides have said Sinn Fein should make its decision on the declaration
known by the time of its annual conference in two weeks' time. Sinn Fein
officials, however, are playing down suggestions that any decision will be
made by then or during the conference.
Attacking the recent visit to the US by Mr Gerry Adams, Sinn Fein president,
Sir Patrick said that those who justified the killing of Irish people 'may
be lionised briefly, albeit damagingly, abroad', but the people of Ireland
wanted an end to violence.
Sir Patrick reiterated the determination of both governments not to
renegotiate the joint declaration, which he said had 'no recommended
shelf-life'. It ruled nothing out, he said, including 'a united Ireland, the
union maintained', or any other formula. Britain, he said, did not aim to
frustrate any particular outcome.
