FT  27 JAN 94 / Political Notebook: Heads in the Euro sand
Europe is reappearing on Britain's political horizon. Groans of weary
resignation are already audible in ministerial offices across Whitehall.
The proximate cause is the approach of the elections in June to the European
parliament. After all, the outcome could decide Mr John Major's future. He
can hope to ride out a bad result, but if Conservative losses are as
disastrous as some are already predicting all bets will be off.
There is a more fundamental concern among those ministers and officials who
can still find the odd moment to think about policy as well as internal Tory
party politics.
As Germany and France start to put together the pieces after last year's
turmoil in the exchange rate mechanism, the government's post-Maastricht
triumphalism is fading.
Maybe the rest of Europe has not after all abandoned its federalist
ambitions in favour of Britain's inter-governmental agenda. With the franc
now back at its former ERM rate against the D-Mark, perhaps the idea of
European monetary union is not quite so fanciful after all.
The way that the Paris government has handled the franc since the near-break
up of the ERM last summer has confounded those who argued that sterling's
earlier ejection had been a symptom of its inevitable disintegration.
France never accepted the franc's devaluation was permanent. Unlike the
Treasury it did not replenish its foreign currency reserves at the devalued
rate. Now the franc has recovered it is doing so - without the billions of
dollars in losses suffered by the UK. There is talk of the ERM returning to
its narrow bands as soon as economic recovery is entrenched.
The fear in Whitehall is that the recovery will bring with it a rekindling
of the integrationist ambitions of the European partners in the approach to
the inter-governmental conference due in 1996.
The repeated assertion of Mr Douglas Hurd that Maastricht's
inter-governmental 'pillars' for foreign, defence and home affairs policies
had set the European Union on a new course no longer carry quite the same
conviction. Nor does Mr Major's description of European Monetary Union as
having 'the quaintness of a rain dance and about the same potency'.
None of this has yet been discussed in detail by senior ministers. The
wounds inflicted on the Tory party by Maastricht are still raw. As one
(pro-European) member of the cabinet put it: 'The hope is that if we don't
talk about it, it might just go away.'
The same nervousness envelops the preparation of the Conservative manifesto
for the European elections.
Mr Hurd is one of the cabinet's grown-ups. But in an untypical admission of
weakness he has decreed that even membership of the committee charged with
drafting the manifesto must remain secret. The Tory right might otherwise
think it was under-represented.
The only thing that ministers are prepared to say publicly about the
manifesto is that it will cast the Conservatives as alone among the three
largest parties in opposing something called a federal Europe. It hardly
adds up to the promised agenda to lead Europe into the 21st century.
It would be unfair, however, to suggest that the Tories are alone in burying
their heads in the sand. There are few signs that opposition parties have
thought through the implications of the 1996 conference.
The Liberal Democrats are busy toning down the un-diluted commitment to
European union on which they fought the general election. The judgment is
that singing the praises of Brussels is not the best way to win seats in the
European parliament from the Conservatives.
Mr John Smith, if his shadow cabinet colleagues are to be believed, plans to
treat the European elections as a referendum on Mr Major's tax record -
though there will, one supposes, be the odd reference to the social chapter
and to the need for concerted cuts in European interest rates.
Europe has so far been a convenient staging post for the Labour party on its
long journey to electoral respectability. But at some point Labour will have
to develop a more detailed approach than one of simply approving all things
European.
If the Tories are wrong to suggest that the social chapter would turn
Britain into an industrial wasteland, Labour is misguided in asserting that
a few works councils would transform economic prospects.
But Labour is in opposition. It is the government which must map out
Britain's strategy in the approach to 1996. The problem is that the
Conservative party will not let it.
