FT  27 APR 94 / Survey of Hong Kong (3): The speck that looms larger - The
view from Peking
Ask a young resident of Beijing or Shanghai what his or her view is of Hong
Kong and the row with Britain and the reaction is likely to be one of bored
indifference.
Typical of the responses was that of the representative in Beijing of a
foreign joint venture who said simply: 'It doesn't affect me in any way that
the talks (with Britain) broke down. In fact, I couldn't care less about the
issue.
'To me, Hong Kong has been doing fine for decades like this, I don't think
there is a need for political change.'
In the eyes of many Chinese, including an educated urban elite, Hong Kong is
a distant appendage which is destined willy-nilly to return to the
motherland's embrace at midnight on June 30 1997. Arguments about the
arrangements for the handover are details.
Chinese officials like to give the impression that they view Hong Kong
through a long-distance telescope in which the colony is a mere speck, but
in reality Hong Kong looms larger, though not nearly as large as Hong Kong
residents might imagine.
Sharply differing perceptions of scale between Beijing, the sedate imperial
capital, and the distant hyperactive trading post of Hong Kong are not the
least of the problems that have clouded the issue in a sometimes
cantankerous debate over the colony's future under Chinese rule.
Beijing's insensitivity to the real concerns of Hong Kong residents on a
whole range of issues is partly a product of these conflicting perceptions
from opposite ends of the Chinese land mass. It is also, of course, a
function of the gulf between respective laissez-faire and authoritarian
systems.
China's handling of the recent case of the Hong Kong journalist jailed for
12 years for 'spying and stealing state secrets' is a case in point.
By any standards, the penalties meted out to the reporter, who published
details of China's gold sales and its plans for exchange and interest rate
reform in the Chinese-language Ming Pao, were harsh.
In Beijing, the case barely rippled the surface, however. If there was a
view discernible among Chinese it was that the Hong Kong reporter deserved
some form of punishment for traducing a bank employee.
Needless to say, a contrary opinion did not appear in the official press. A
Chinese journalist summed up what seemed to be a common attitude when she
said that the reporter had 'become the victim of a political game' while
China and Britain remain at odds over Hong Kong.
In the colony itself, the jailing of Xi Yang brought protesters into the
streets, elicited a complaint from Governor Chris Patten and was widely and
understandably regarded as an ominous portent for press freedom post-1997.
But Chinese officials, with their long-distance view of Hong Kong, are
unlikely to have been much moved by these protests, just as they generally
remain impervious to criticism of their clumsiness in addressing the
concerns of Hong Kongers over threats, real or imagined, to political and
economic freedoms.
Beijing's appointments to the Preparatory Work Committee, which acts as a
shadow government in the run-up to 1997, show how an opportunity has been
missed. The PWC, headed by Qian Qichen, the Chinese foreign minister, is
mainland-dominated, suggesting few concessions to China's critics in Hong
Kong.
Feelings in Beijing towards Hong Kong are almost devoid of sentiment. With
its tangled colonial history, Hong Kong is still regarded as something of a
'western barbarian creation'. No Chinese poet or writer has ever waxed
lyrical about the barren rock that was home to a collection of fishing
villages before it became a launching place for the opium trade in China.
Beijing officials also harbour lingering suspicions about Hong Kong
residents themselves, many of whom fled the Communist revolution in 1949.
Behind these misgivings lie the innate prejudices of Chinese of the north
and the Yangtze river valley - who dominate the government - towards the
southerners and the Cantonese in particular, who predominate in Hong Kong.
They tend to be regarded as noisy, avaricious and untrustworthy.
Among Chinese official perceptions, the one that seems to be uppermost is
that the colony's status is a 'problem left over from history', and as such,
must be dealt with in those terms. This is not necessarily forward-looking.
Scarcely a week passes without reference somewhere in the official media to
the unequal treaties, infringements of sovereignty and so on. Chinese
officials in the past week or so assailed a House of Commons report on the
Hong Kong issue, saying that 'China is no longer what it used to be when it
was bullied and lorded over at will'.
But for all the mis-perceptions, wilful and otherwise, there is little sign
of Beijing losing its keen appreciation of Hong Kong's value as an
international conduit, and increasingly as a destination for mainland
investment.
Powerful Chinese corporations are flocking to Hong Kong, strengthening
business ties with the centre. In turn, this is providing a useful
educational function for a sometimes remote leadership. Indeed, many of the
younger Chinese businessmen most active in Hong Kong are the sons and
daughters of senior Beijing cadres, including Mr Deng Xiaoping himself.
While the political relationship may be fractious, business continues. This
was so even at the height of the cultural revolution when nervousness in
Hong Kong peaked about its neighbour.
Mainland businessmen make no secret of Hong Kong's value as a launching pad
for their broader international ambitions. It might be a cliche, but if a
place like Hong Kong did not exist the Chinese might be obliged to invent
one.
