FT  10 DEC 94 / Sport: A sport that is going up in the world - Climbing
The near-certainty that the climber will fall off spectacularly and have to
be lowered to the ground on a safety rope, makes watching a climbing contest
a nail-biting experience. Rock climbing has tension, drama, and in an indoor
arena, television cameras can move in close.
The popularity of the sport is growing rapidly and the televising in the UK
on December 28 of the fourth round of the International Climbing World Cup
at the Birmingham Indoor Arena could herald its golden era.
On the continent, televised climbing commands huge audiences and rock
climbing is as popular as football is in the UK. However, climbing in
Britain is now booming.
One place this is evident is at Plas-y-Brenin, the Sports Council's centre
for training mountaineers in Wales, which runs courses for all standards in
climbing, as well as canoeing, orienteering and winter mountaineering.
Martin Doyle, chief instructor at Plas-y-Brenin said: 'We run rock climbing
courses for people coming into the sport, and demand for these is
significantly increasing.' It also runs courses leading to the Mountain
Instructor Award. 'We train people who then train newcomers and this area is
absolutely booming,' said Doyle.
Because climbers now train on indoor climbing walls, the standard of skills
has not fallen, even though the numbers of people entering the sport has
gone up. In the 1960s and 1970s, few if any British climbers were able to
train, but many now have their own climbing wall in a cellar or garage, with
specially made holds bolted to panels of plywood.
'Some climbers have no intention of ever going near a mountain,' said Mike
Brown, managing director of Snow + Rock, the ski and mountaineering retail
group, which has five shops in the south of England.
Snow + Rock spent Pounds 25,000 sponsoring the competition at Birmingham,
and Brown said: 'This has been one of the best things that has ever happened
to climbing and it would have been a disaster for Britain not to have held
that competition.'
'The advent of the climbing wall has increased the popularity of climbing,
just as dry ski slopes pulled skiing forward in the late 1960s. We sell the
holds in our shops and some climbers build their own walls.'
Snow and Rock, which has an annual turnover of Pounds 2m, used sponsorship
of the Birmingham event to raise the profile of the company in a growing
sport.
The British climbing team is sponsored by Reebok, the sports clothing and
footwear company.
The company does not yet have a product directly related to the sport but it
plans to launch a specialist rock climbing boot, the Transcender, in the
spring.
Chris Gore, outdoor manager for Reebok, said: 'Rock climbing is one of the
most exciting visual sports.' Reebok believes linking its name to an
exciting sport such as rock climbing will lead to consumers seeing its
products in a glamorous light. The company plans to move on to sponsor
individual climbers.
Meanwhile, the sport continues to grow. A company called High Performance
Sports has been set up to turn a former water-pumping station in Stoke
Newington in north London into an indoor climbing centre called The Castle
at a cost of about Pounds 1.8m. It will offer climbs up to 80ft and it is
hoped it will be open next autumn.
