FT  26 APR 94 / Survey of A-Z of Computing (15): New ways to cope with fuzzy
data - Neural Networks
Parallels have always been drawn between computers and the human brain.
Early references to computers persistently spoke of 'electronic brains,'
despite the fact that they were nothing of the sort.
Brains and computers work in entirely different ways and each has its
virtues and problems.
Current views on how the brain works suggest that it is more like a network
of several computers - rather than only one. Power is distributed rather
than centralised.
Studies of the workings of the human brain have provided models for building
computers and their software. One of the most promising is a technique
called neural networks.
Conventional computers emulate the human brain - but not the way it works.
By contrast, neural computers work on similar lines to the brain, using a
network of interconnected parallel processes.
Although the theory of neural computing dates back to the 1940s, it was only
recently that it has crept out of the shadows of conventional computing.
Advances in hardware technology now make it possible to build neural
networks and employ them to do useful tasks.
The basic unit of computing in a neural computer is called a neuron. Each
neuron can accept one or more inputs - known as connections - and generates
only one output. Each connection is weighted according to its importance and
this is used to calculate whether an output signal is produced.
The neuron works by multiplying the input signals by their weighting value
and then adding them all together. If the value exceeds a predefined
threshold value, the neuron generates an output signal. If the threshold
value is not reached, then no output signal is generated.
A single neuron is, of course, not much use on its own. Neurons must be
connected together in a network if they are to be useful.
Unlike conventional computers, neural networks must be 'trained' rather than
programmed. There are several techniques to achieve this, with so-called
'supervised training' the most popular.
This is comparable to the method used to train a paint-spraying robot in a
factory. The part to be painted is carried on an overhead conveyor belt and
a human moves the paint gun to cover the required areas. Each move is
recorded by the robot's built-in computer and can be 'replayed'
automatically.
A neural computer is trained by feeding it with input examples and expected
output results. As input signals percolate through the network, the
weighting calculations are performed by each neuron and fed to the next
level until they reach the output stage.
Here, the results are compared to the expected values. The difference
between the two is used to alter the weighting values until the desired
output is produced. This exercise is repeated with thousands of examples
until the network produces correct results consistently. At this point the
weighting values are frozen and the network is ready to be used.
The main advantage of neural networks is their ability to cope with
incomplete or 'fuzzy' data. This makes them ideal for applications where
complex data are involved, such as pattern recognition or financial
forecasting.
Although it is still early days for neural technology, several companies
have developed applications in these two areas. The German computer
manufacturer Siemens Nixdorf, for example, demonstrated practical
applications of its Synapse-1 neural computer at the CeBIT computer fair in
Hanover earlier this year.
'Our research into neural computing has enabled us to build the concept into
a processing engine and put a workstation on the front end,' says Mr Andy
Smith, UK marketing manufacturer for Siemens Nixdorf.
'At Hanover, we demonstrated a real-time currency and interest rate
fluctuation simulator, which is being used by German financial institutions,
and a fast fingerprint recognition system which we are showing to the UK
police.'
EDS, the giant software consultancy, has also built a neural computer-based
fingerprint recognition system - this time to help combat credit card fraud.
The system, now undergoing field trials, can store the information needed to
recognise a fingerprint in less than 64 bytes, making it possible to store
it on the magnetic stripe of a credit card.
A number of UK banks, including Barclays, are watching the progress of the
trials 'with interest'.
The UK government has provided funding for neural computing research and
development though the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI). At the
beginning of last year, the DTI started an awareness scheme to promote
business applications of neural computing in the UK.
About 150 companies in the UK are now active in neural computing research
and the first applications have started to appear. These include a system
used by the BBC to predict audience ratings and one developed by IBM to spot
soldering faults in circuit boards.
These early applications of neural computing show great promise in what
could be a very large market.
