FT  12 MAR 94 / Books: Charlotte as a fierce survivor - A new biography of
the first feminist novelist
CHARLOTTE BRONTE: A PASSIONATE LIFE by Lyndall Gordon Chatto &amp; Windus Pounds
15.99, 403 pages
In 1837, a shy, hopeful vicar's daughter called Charlotte Bronte sent some
of her writings to Robert Southey, the Poet Laureate. 'Madam', came back the
devastating reply 'literature cannot be the business of a woman's life, and
it ought not to be.'
Ten years later, Charlotte answered Southey with Jane Eyre, the first voice
in English fiction of an angry, passionate woman struggling to maintain
independence of spirit and intellect. It was a revolutionary work and a
scandalous bestseller. 'Worth 50 Trollopes and Martineaus, with 50 Dickenses
and Bulwers to keep them company; but rather a brazen Miss,' wrote one male
critic.
Was Charlotte Bronte a brazen miss? She has always been seen as the waif of
literary history - a legend started by Mrs Gaskell, whose first Life of
Charlotte as a timid genius destroyed by hardship and suffering, influenced
all subsequent Bronte scholarship.
In this triumphant new biography, Lyndall Gordon turns the tables. Here
Charlotte is a fierce survivor who, in life and in art, turned loss to gain,
and found unexpected happiness. Outwardly she shrank and cringed, but the
clues to the fire and rage of Jane Eyre and Villette, says Gordon, lie in
'that unseen space in which gifted women of Charlotte's time were forced to
live.' Sensitive, open-minded, vivid, full of psychological insight, her
book is a brilliant reappraisal of Charlotte Bronte's life, work and the
flow between the two.
Born in 1816, Charlotte was motherless by the age of five and packed off to
a grim charity boarding school at eight. One of her early memories was
watching her sister Maria die, of starvation and physical abuse at the hands
of a sadistic teacher - recreated as the terrifying Miss Scatchard in Jane
Eyre. The experience was seminal for all the Brontes, pushing Emily toward
unworldliness and submission, Charlotte to rebellion.
As governesses to the idle rich, the Bronte girls continued to be
ill-treated and under-stimulated. Liberation came with an invitation from a
school friend to learn French in Brussels - the romantic city of Villette.
At 26, Charlotte fell in love with Monsieur Heger, her flamboyant professeur
of rhetoric] 'His mind was my library, and whenever it was opened to me, I
entered bliss.'
Sex flooded into the classroom. He puffed cigar smoke into her desk to let
her know he had left a gift. In her French essays, she responded with a
torrent of ambition and desire, announcing 'I believe I have genius.' Heger
retreated, and soon an outraged Madame Heger escorted her to the Ostend boat
and restricted letters to two a year. Back at her father's bleak parsonage,
polite schoolgirl missives alternated with wild outpourings - 'I love French
for your sake with my heart and soul.'
In this desperate encounter, argues Gordon, Charlotte found her own voice,
then transformed it into the pressingly truthful public speech of Jane Eyre,
where Jane talks to Rochester not 'through the medium of custom,
conventionalities, nor even mortal flesh - it is my spirit that addresses
your spirit . . . equal - as we are.' Feminist critics have read this as
gender antagonism, with Rochester blinded and emasculated at the end.
Gordon, relating the book to its origins in Charlotte's life, sees her as 'a
speaker for the soul as well as for women.'
Lionised over Jane Eyre, Charlotte refused to roar. In London she seemed
provincial and gauche - when Thackeray gave a party in her honour she
snubbed his society friends, huddled in the corner with the governess, and
Thackeray fled to his club.
A flirtatious friendship with her publisher, George Smith, also became
fraught. Smith was the model for charming Graham Bretton in Villette (1854),
but when Charlotte realised his shallowness, she wrote him out of the third
volume in favour of a Belgian teacher based on Heger. She always spoke most
eloquently to men on paper. Smith got the message - and underpaid her for
the book.
Villette, with its icy heroine Lucy Snowe, is the tale of a woman's rise
from frozen passivity to eloquence - Charlotte's own Brussels story. But in
life, there was a twist. By the time Villette finished, all Charlotte's
siblings had died of consumption and she was alone. At the height of her
creative powers, she married her father's curate, who she had always
despised as her intellectual inferior. He was loyal, kind but disapproved of
her writing; she abandoned it.
Perfection of the life, or of the work? asked Yeats. It was a sober but
valid choice. She swapped art for happiness, and when she died in pregnancy,
aged 38, 'Charlotte was the only Bronte to die with human love on her lips.'
Gordon explores her life in both a Victorian and contemporary context. She
contrasts Charlotte's approach with that of men about town like Dickens and
Thackeray, who had instant access to 'the Condition of England'. She places
her in a tradition of radical women writers - Emily Dickinson, Woolf, Plath
 -for whom periods of madness and depression were part of the creative
process. As literary and social history, this is a far-reaching, erudite
study. It is also a deeply-moving story.
