FT  09 FEB 94 / Reuters raises profits by 15% and splits shares
Shares in Reuters Holdings rose by 60p to 1971p after the UK-based financial
information and news group combined the announcement of a 4-for-1 share
split with strong results and a bullish forecast for revenue growth.
Pre-tax profits rose by 15 per cent to Pounds 440m in 1993, while revenue
increased by 20 per cent to Pounds 1.87bn thanks partly to sterling's
weakness. With currency changes stripped out, sales growth was 8 per cent
and reached 10 per cent in the second half.
Mr Peter Job, chief executive, said: 'We are maintaining price stability for
the third year running, barring some upward and downward adjustments which
reflect currency movements. We believe we have a sound basis for achieving
double-digit revenue growth this year without reliance on price increases.'
Mr Rob Rowley, finance director, said earnings per share would grow more
quickly this year than profitability due to the Pounds 350m share
repurchase, made at Pounds 14 per share in September.
Mr Job said the gradual improvement in the first half continued to gather
pace in the second: 'Conditions were good not only in our most developed
markets such as the US and UK, but also in emerging markets like China,
Latin America and east Europe. In our most sluggish major market, Japan,
there were early signs of improvement.'
The group said it was a 'particularly good year' for established transaction
products such as equity trading on Instinet, which doubled its revenue to
Pounds 120m and nearly tripled its operating profits to Pounds 38m.
Mr Job said: 'For our new products, the challenge is to gain liquidity.' The
foreign exchange matching product, Dealing 2000 Phase 2, showed promise.
Progress had been less good with Globex, which trades futures on screen.
Volumes continued to rise with the Matif exchange in Paris, and talks
continued with the Chicago exchanges.
As well as the 4-for-1 ordinary share split, each American Depositary Share
will be redefined to comprise six new shares instead of three. Subject to
shareholder approval, dealing in the new shares will start on April 18.
Earnings per share rose to 72p from 56p under FRS 3, but the previous year's
figure was reduced by the inclusion of a previously extraordinary tax
charge. Adjusting for that, earnings grew by 16 per cent. A final dividend
of 19.8p (15.9p) raises the total by 23 per cent to 26p (21.2p).
Details, Page 24;
Lex, Page 22
