FT  31 MAY 94 / International Company News: Japan's steelmakers under
pressure
Japan's steel industry faces demands from the country's carmakers this year
to reduce prices for sheet steel.
The situation highlights the pressures on the big integrated steelmakers,
which reported some of the worst results in the industry's history, in line
with their forecasts last March.
Unless it agrees to the carmakers' demands, the industry faces the
possibility of losing orders from its best customers. But lower prices is
the last thing steelmakers want, with profits already severely squeezed by
recession and fierce price competition.
The companies' dismal results underline the severity of the trading
environment. Kawasaki Steel suffered a net loss of Y39.1bn (Dollars 374.5m),
the largest in its history.
The losses were incurred in spite of significant asset sales aimed at
boosting earnings. Nippon Steel is the only one of the five largest
integrated steelmakers to pay a dividend but is being forced to dip into
reserves to do so.
The figures reflect the impact of the slump on domestic economic activity
and the sharp appreciation of the yen, which is undermining Japanese
competitiveness.
Private consumption has been in the doldrums, with capital spending
persistently weak and investment in new office buildings unlikely to recover
in the near future.
Neither has there been much relief for the steelmakers from public works
projects under the government's economic stimulus programme, which have been
delayed due to unfolding bribery scandals.
Diversification moves have largely yielded unimpressive results, with some
attempts going badly wrong. Kobe Steel has said it would take on the losses
of a financial subsidiary which has been hit by the property and stock
market slumps.
Against that background, competition is increasing from lower-cost
producers, such as the Korean steelmakers. South Korea's Pohang Iron and
Steel Company (Posco) said last week it had acquired a Japanese steel mill,
where it will make steel products for the Japanese motor vehicle,
construction and electronics industries.
Korean steel has become more of a threat to the Japanese industry as
recession and the high yen have forced large steel customers, from carmakers
to builders, to look for cheaper materials to cut costs.
Japanese wages are among the highest in the world - four times as much on a
dollar basis as wages in Korea, says Mr Takashi Imai, president of Nippon
Steel.
At the same time, lower-cost domestic electric-furnace steelmakers are
moving aggressively into product areas that have traditionally been the
domain of the integrated steelmakers.
Major customers, such as carmakers and electronics manufacturers are moving
production overseas in an attempt to moderate the impact of the yen's rise.
Even increased orders from south-east Asia, where Japanese customers and
local businesses are enjoying strong demand, have not been much help in
lifting profits.
In the fiscal year to March, steel exports to south-east Asia grew 15 per
cent and in March alone they grew 31 per cent year-on-year.
However, the yen's appreciation has prevented that growth contributing much
to earnings.
The key to recovery for Japan's steelmakers lies in their ability to
restructure operations and cut costs dramatically to improve competitiveness
and profitability. They may be forced to consider reducing capacity further
if the situation worsens.
All five companies have launched stringent cost-cutting measures over the
next few years.
But unless the Japanese economy shows stronger signs of recovery than it has
in the first five months of this year, the axe may have to fall deeper and
sooner than planned.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Pre-tax profits (losses)
                      Sales     Change    1993-94      1992-93
                      (Ybn)        (%)      (Ybn)        (Ybn)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
Nippon Steel          2,158      -8.9      (18.35)      28.90
NKK Steel             1,203      -4.6      (24.20)       4.12
Kobe Steel            1,068      -9.3       (3.42)      14.50
Sumitomo Metals       1,042      -5.9      (33.00)       5.30
Kawasaki Steel        1,005      -7.9      (38.90)       0.32
 ----------------------------------------------------------------
