FT  07 JUN 94 / Letters to the Editor: Contracting out by no means clarified
Sir, May I comment on your feature on the revision of the Acquired Rights
Directive, which protects employee rights on transfer of undertakings,
('Government near victory on contracting-out reform', May 31)? In
particular, will the revised directive solve a problem for contractors,
currently affected by wide interpretations of the present directive? You are
right to draw attention to the fact that the revised directive declares that
the outsourcing of only an activity of an undertaking does not in itself
constitute a transfer of an undertaking. This is underpinned by the preamble
which makes it clear that the principles of 'legal security' demand a clear
distinction between transfer of undertakings and transfers of only an
activity.
I wonder whether, however, celebrations may be premature. The directive goes
on to state that a transfer of an undertaking shall be considered to have
taken place in cases where together with the transfer of an activity an
economic entity which retains its identity is also transferred.
The revised version of the directive makes it clear that there is a
distinction between the bare contract for services and a transfer of an
undertaking. But it should be noted that, in the recent European Court case
of Christel Schmidt (the outsourcing of a cleaning operation) and in the
Court of Appeal case of Dines v Initial Health Care Services (the changeover
of contractors providing cleaning services to Orsett Hospital), it was
specifically found that there was a transfer of an economic entity retaining
its identity.
It is certainly arguable, therefore, that these cases would have been
decided no differently, even if the revised directive had been in place. If
that is the case, tribunals and courts battling with the revised version of
the directive (if adopted) may find in many cases that the distinction
between the transfer of an activity and the transfer of an activity that
amounts to an economic entity which retains its identity is extremely hard
to pinpoint. Any view that the new definition of a transfer is more
restricted will depend on the interpretation of new wording in the
directive's preamble that 'an economic entity (is) understood to consist of
several parts operating autonomously and pursuing a specific objective . .
.' However a lot more work needs doing on the draft directive if real
clarity is to be achieved.
John McMullen,
partner and head of
the employment unit,
Simpson Curtis, solicitors,
41 Park Square, Leeds LS12NS
