FT  18 JUL 94 / Water, land the issues in Mideast peace talks: Jordan and
Israel are eager for a pact which would embody a post-prandial sketch made
by Winston Churchill 66 years ago
Winston Churchill is said to have pencilled out the borders of Transjordan
after lunch on a Sunday afternoon. As colonial secretary of a troublesome
British Empire in 1928, he meant his sketch as a quick fix for mounting
problems between Jews and Arabs living under the British mandate for
Palestine.
Sixty-six years and three Arab-Israeli wars later, Jordanian and Israeli
negotiators meet today along their disputed border hoping finally to agree
on the demarcations laid out by Churchill.
These talks will set in chain a series of unprecedented meetings as the two
sides edge towards a settlement. On Wednesday, Mr Shimon Peres, Israel's
foreign minister will be the first Israeli politician publicly to enter
Jordanian territory, where, accompanied by US secretary of state Warren
Christopher, he will meet Mr Abdel Salam al-Majali, Jordanian foreign
minister, at a Dead Sea resort.
And next Monday in Washington, King Hussein is to meet Mr Yitzhak Rabin,
Israel's prime minister, for the first time in public in a summit described
by Mr Peres as marking 'the end of a state of war and the beginning of
peace'.
Although no final Jordanian-Israeli peace treaty will be signed in
Washington, both the king and Mr Rabin are seeking tangible benefits to take
home to critics of the peace process, many of whom are looking for ways to
exploit the lack of momentum.
The gap between the two countries is not large. Today's talks focus on two
key issues, borders and water. Israel has already agreed in principle to
redrawing the border and Jordan is claiming 360-382 sq km along the Arava
desert, which would entail moving Israeli barbed-wire fences back to
Churchill's line of 1928. Israel is likely to concede a substantial part of
this claim and seek other arrangements, such as a lease-back, for a strip of
disputed land now being farmed by an Israeli kibbutz. Both sides are also
likely to agree quickly on a maritime border.
The water issue is a little more difficult. Jordan, with one of the world's
lowest per capita rates of water consumption, is demanding an increased
water share from the Yarmouk and Jordan rivers, which it accuses Israel of
diverting. Israel opposes a redistribution of water and favours the
development of joint projects such as desalination plants to meet Jordan's
water needs.
The future status of Palestinian refugees, a third thorny issue, is to be
decided in a quadrilateral committee of Jordan, Israel, Egypt and the
Palestine Liberation Organisation.
Resolution of borders and water could be resolved by next Monday's
Washington summit. Details have been under negotiation for at least 18
months now, and the past month has involved numerous clandestine meetings.
Israeli officials say the outline of a treaty is largely in place. Mr Peres
said last week the border and water issues were 'technical problems which
can take time or be resolved quickly'.
Israel can hardly hide its impatience to sign anything close to a peace
treaty with Jordan. Such a move would be widely popular among the Israeli
left and right. A second peace treaty with a hostile Arab neighbour since
the Israeli-Egyptian agreement of 1979 would lessen Israel's sense of fear
and isolation and would considerably bolster support for the peace process
and for the Rabin government. Israeli officials believe it would also pile
pressure on Syria, and hence Lebanon, to be more flexible in talks.
However, Middle East experts have said King Hussein, always a cautious
risk-taker, is reluctant to move too quickly towards an official signing
which would leave his powerful neighbour Syria exposed and marginalised.
On the other hand, he is anxious to win concessions from Israel on borders
and water and present his deal to domestic critics as a victory for Jordan's
territorial integrity.
The king is also keen to take several economically beneficial steps such as
opening borders to tourists and trade and developing joint projects in the
Dead Sea and Jordan Valley to boost his economy's flagging fortunes.
In Jordan the king's change of gear has been met with surprise and
criticism. Less than two months ago officials and the state-run newspapers
were talking of a comprehensive peace and praising Jordan's co-ordinated
stance with Syria and Lebanon. Now they are trying to explain why the
kingdom has broken ranks and is sprinting towards the finishing line.
One explanation is the weight of US pressure on Jordan to reach an agreement
with Israel and the other is the king's frustration over the collapse of any
common Arab stance and the lack of co-ordination with the PLO and Syria. The
king is also anxious to maintain some influence on the embryonic Palestinian
state emerging on his border.
In a weekend television appearance to sell his peace moves King Hussein
mixed the promise of benefits, including a US promise to cancel Dollars 950m
(Pounds 625m) in debt, with a blunt warning: 'This country, under pressure
from all sides, may collapse.'
Although the pessimism may be overstated, there is cause for concern. The
kingdom's Moslem fundamentalists have condemned the latest peace moves. The
Islamic Action Front, which holds the largest parliamentary bloc, said a
Rabin-Hussein meeting was 'forbidden by history'. Unless the king is able to
deliver real changes on the ground his Jordanian critics may wonder whether
this new flurry of activity was all worthwhile.
