FT  24 DEC 94 / International Company News: Revamped Acer hits on winning
formula - Taiwan's biggest computer maker is heading for fresh records
A few years ago, some doubted that Acer would survive the crippling price
wars being waged in the personal computer industry. This year, Taiwan's
biggest computer maker has exceeded all forecasts and its share price has
almost quintupled since mid-1993.
In 1991, Acer sank into the red for the first time since it was founded in
1976. Its net loss of TDollars 607m followed the costly acquisition of
California-based Altos Computer Systems in 1990 and aggressive expansion in
marketing computers under the Acer brand name. The company returned to
profitability in 1992, and by 1993 posted net profits of TDollars 1.07bn.
Securities analysts forecast net earnings will top TDollars 3bn (USDollars
113.6m) in 1994.
They attribute the recovery to a group restructuring, a turnround in US and
European sales under the Acer label and increased orders from US and
Japanese computer makers.
Another factor has been strong demand for dynamic random access memory
(D-Ram) chips which has pushed up profit margins on this product. TI-Acer, a
venture with Texas Instruments, brought in 90 per cent of Acer's earnings in
1993 and is expected to produce 40 per cent of earnings in 1994.
Whether Acer can keep up the pace is the subject of debate. Some analysts
feel that the reorganisation has given Acer the flexibility to adapt quickly
to changing market conditions.
'What matters in the PC industry is technology and speed,' said an analyst
at a UK brokerage house.
'Many people believe there will be a shake-out in the computer industry in a
few years. When that happens, there will be only 10 or 12 big companies
left, and Acer will definitely be one of them.'
Others believe that while Acer should continue to perform well in the near
term, it remains vulnerable to the US personal computer market and to memory
chips, a heavily capital-intensive industry subject to cyclical swings in
prices.
'Profit margins in the PC business have improved but they are still quite
low - for Acer the margin is about 4 per cent at the operating level,' said
an analyst at a Hong Kong-based securities brokerage. 'We're concerned that
Acer is heavily exposed to high-risk areas.'
Further rounds of price-slashing in the US market or increased supply of
chips could damage profitability. Currently, TI-Acer is Taiwan's only
producer of D-Ram chips. There have been shortages of D-Ram chips this year,
but at least four ventures have been set up to produce such chips in Taiwan
and should begin operations in 1996.
Until then, at least, Acer's visionary chairman, Mr Stan Shih, appears to
have hit upon a formula which will allow the company to thrive in an
industry in which product cycles are constantly shrinking and
high-technology components obsolesce during shipment.
Using what Mr Shih calls the 'fast-food franchise' strategy, the logistics
of production and distribution have been fine-tuned to allow speed and
efficiency while keeping fast-depreciating inventory to an absolute minimum.
Semi-finished computers are shipped to remote assembly sites located in the
markets in which they will be sold, where key components such as the
microprocessor and the hard disk drive, which quickly lose value, are
installed. With offices in 75 countries, Acer now has 20 such assembly
plants and expects to set up 10 more in the next few years.
Under the reorganisation, marketing and production units separated along
regional and product lines within the Acer group were spun off into
quasi-independent entities responsible for making decisions as well as
profits. 'Vertical integration in a company is no longer competitive,' Mr
Shih says.
The group has been transformed into what Mr Shih calls a 'client server'
structure under which 'each unit is independent but acts as a server for its
sister clients', the other companies in the Acer group. Business units are
not required to source materials from other units in the group if components
can be had more cheaply elsewhere.
Acer plans to spin off 21 business units for listing on local stock
exchanges around the world by the end of the decade. The group will apply to
list Acer Computer International, an assembly and marketing unit, in
Singapore in 1995. A joint venture with Computec de Mexico, a Mexican
computer company, will be set up on January 1 and is expected to list on the
Mexican stock exchange in late 1995.
Listing plans met a temporary setback recently when Taiwan securities
authorities turned down applications to list Acer Peripherals, which makes
colour monitors, and Acer Sertek, a distribution arm, on the Taiwan stock
exchange. Regulators cited the two companies' brief record as independent
entities and Acer will reapply next year.
Another key element of Acer's turnround was a decision to refocus on
original equipment manufacturing (OEM), or producing under contract to major
computer companies. Acer is one of the few Taiwan computer makers to promote
its own brand name alongside OEM production. But in the late 1980s the group
decided to devote more resources to brand sales and cut OEM business from 40
per cent in 1988 to 25 per cent in 1992. In 1994, OEM sales had risen to 35
per cent and Mr Shih hopes to reach 50 per cent.
Acer's commitment to building a brand name, in contrast to other Taiwan
computer companies, means going head-to-head with the industry's giants. It
also means having to fight against prejudices left over from the days when
Taiwan was simply a high-volume, low-cost producer. 'The made-in-Taiwan
image is a burden,' concedes Mr Shih. 'People still have the idea that a
Taiwan company must be worse than a US company. It will take a long time to
overcome this problem.'
