FT  15 AUG 94 / World Bond Markets: Turning point in Europe's monetary cycle
 -Capital &amp; Credit
Bond markets usually err on the side of pessimism, but they were not
prepared for what hit them last week: the start of the monetary tightening
cycle in Europe.
Just when it seemed that the worst had been discounted, Italy and Sweden
raised their short-term rates, fuelling fears that interest rates elsewhere
in Europe would soon start rising amid stronger than expected economic
growth.
For the last seven months, bond investors have taken an almost unremitting
pummeling: first by aggressive profit-taking after last year's sharp rally,
then by earlier than expected US monetary tightening, and now by the spectre
of rising European interest rates.
'We feel that these two rate rises, even though they reflect unique domestic
circumstances, represent the turning point in the European interest rate
cycle,' says Mr Kit Juckes, international economist at S. G. Warburg
Securities. 'Against this backdrop, bond market sentiment is likely to
deteriorate further and convergence is off the agenda for now.'
The markets' reaction to the interest rate rises 'suggests a continued
bloody environment for bond investors worldwide', agrees Mr Edmond Warner,
head of strategy and economics at Kleinwort Benson. 'This is unlikely to
clear up overnight.'
By Friday, the yield on the German 10-year benchmark bond had jumped to 7.20
per cent, from 6.75 per cent a week earlier.
In the UK, which is further ahead in the economic cycle and tipped as one of
the next tightening candidates, the 10-year yield rose to 8.60 per cent from
8.35 per cent.
Sweden's 10-year yield rose a whole percentage point from the previous week
to 11.57 per cent on Friday, while Italy's 10-year yield rose to 11.70 per
cent, from 10.80 per cent.
All eyes are now on the Bundesbank, which until recently had been widely
expected to cut its 4.5 per cent discount rate at least once more. Even
before the Italian and Swedish rate moves, however, strong economic data had
prompted a reassessment of German easing prospects.
With July M3 money supply growth still in double digits and inflation little
changed, many feel the Bundesbank lacks justification for a rate cut when it
returns from its summer break.
Later into the autumn, the October federal elections may further cramp the
room for manoeuvre for a central bank keen on preserving its reputation of
political independence.
'We would not rule out a technical  1/4 -point discount rate cut but to all
intents and purposes, money rates in Germany have reached the bottom,' says
Mr Juckes. Even if key rates were lowered again, that would do little to
boost markets, which will regard them as the last cuts in the cycle and will
start anticipating the inevitable rise in rates.
In this environment, bond investors will have to continue negotiating highly
volatile markets, where bearish sentiment may occasionally be interrupted by
violent bear squeezes.
Heavy issuance is also likely to weigh on sentiment. Germany, one of the
laggards on the funding front, still has some DM110bn of net public-sector
borrowing outstanding. This week alone will see new two- and five-year
supply in France, a sale of five-year notes in Germany and bond auctions in
Italy and Sweden.
In this context, some say it is best to lie low. 'In this environment you
have to be reactive - don't try to second-guess the market,' advises Mr Bob
Tyley, senior strategist at Paribas Capital Markets. 'Investors should let
the market calm down and then decide what offers value.'
Until then, some may wish to keep some of their funds in cash until the
outlook clears; indeed, investors whose priority has become capital
preservation have been building up cash holdings in recent months.
Many bond managers certainly appear to be playing safe. 'We're keeping very
cautious in this environment and are pursuing a defensive strategy,' says Mr
Heinz Fesser, head of fixed income at DWS, Deutsche Bank's investment
subsidiary.
This involves 'being partly hedged in our foreign currency exposure, holding
no extremely long-dated bonds and keeping a substantial percentage of our
funds in cash.' DWS has been building up its cash holdings in recent months,
he adds.
While the peripheral, high-yielding bond markets are likely to remain
volatile, many feel that German government bonds, traditionally a safe haven
in times of market turmoil, offer relative stability.
'Bunds are the best of a bad bunch,' says Warburg's Mr Juckes. While he says
10-year yields may spike close to 7.5 per cent, he expects other markets'
yield spreads over Germany to widen out even further, making Germany a safe
bet at least in relative terms.
An even better strategy, he suggests, may be to get out of Europe altogether
and head for the dollar bloc. 'The advantage of the dollar bloc is that
they're further through the rate rise cycle and have discounted much more.'
