FT  29 SEP 94 / The European Pensions Ruling: Judges clarify uncertainties
over sex bias - Netherlands voices strongest reaction / A look at how the
many questions that arose from a legal landmark decision in 1990 were
resolved
FT reporters analyse yesterday's decisions of the European Court of Justice
which are expected to form a definitive framework under which employers and
scheme trustees can provide equal pensions for men and women
In the six judgments given yesterday, the leading judgment involved the
Coloroll group pension schemes. Coloroll, a UK wallpaper and furnishings
group, collapsed in 1990 leaving independent trustees in charge of
maintaining and administering several employee pension schemes. The trustees
were unsure of the effect, if any, of the Barber decision on schemes run by
independent trustees and asked the English High Court for its views. The
High Court referred the issues to the Luxembourg court.
The trustees asked the court whether the equal treatment rules in article
119 applied to independent trustees of occupational pension schemes or just
to employers.
The court reminded the Coloroll trustees that in its 1990 Barber judgment,
having decided occupational pension schemes were covered by the equal pay
rules, it had ruled that the conclusion remained valid even where the scheme
had been set up in the form of a trust and was administered by trustees who
were formally independent of the employer. This was because article 119
applied to consideration or pay received indirectly from the employer.
The court said the employer could not therefore avoid the obligations
imposed by article 119 in respect of pensions, by setting up a scheme in the
legal form of a trust.
The trustees, although not a party to the employment relationship, were
required to pay benefits which did not as a result lose the character of pay
within the meaning of article 119. They were therefore bound in paying those
benefits to do everything within the scope of their powers to ensure
compliance with the principle of equal treatment.
The Coloroll trustees next asked the court whether article 119 precludes
actuarial factors differing according to sex from being taken into account
in calculating contributions in occupational pension schemes. Since women
live on average longer than men, their future pensions are more costly than
those of men and require the employer to pay higher contributions. As a
result of such actuarial factors being taken into account, the sums to which
male employees are entitled, in particular where part of the pension is
converted into a lump sum to buy an annuity, are lower than those to which
female employees are entitled.
The court said it had already ruled last year in the Neath case (another
case arising from Barber) that the use of actuarial factors differing
according to sex in funded defined-benefit pension schemes (where the
benefits to be received in the form of periodic pension payments are clear
from the outset) did not fall within the scope of article 119 principles.
Companies can continue to use differing actuarial factors in these types of
schemes.
But the court said in money purchase schemes, where a lump sum was used to
buy an annuity, the schemes were contributory with funding provided by
contributions from both employer and employee. Moreover employee
contributions were an element of their pay since they were deducted directly
from salaries. The amount of those employee contributions therefore had to
be the same for all employees, male and female, in order to comply with the
requirements of article 119. The court said the principle of equal treatment
applied to all pension benefits paid by occupational schemes and did not
differentiate between different types of contributions.
In the second British case dealt with by the court yesterday, Smith v Avdel
Systems, five women brought a test case on behalf of 78 women employed by
Avdel Systems of Welwyn Garden City, Herts, who complained they were left
financially worse off when the company equalised the retirement age to 65 on
July 1 1991 to comply with the terms of the Barber judgment.
They asked the court if it was inconsistent with article 119 for an employer
to adopt a pensionable age of 65 for men and women, to the detriment of
women, so as to eliminate sex discrimination in an occupational pension
scheme in respect of benefits accrued for service after the equalisation
date of July 1, 1991 and for periods between May 1990, the date of the
Barber judgment, and the equalisation date.
The court said it followed from its previous rulings on discrimination in
pay cases that once discrimination in pay had been found to exist and so
long as measures for bringing about equal treatment had not been adopted,
the only proper way of complying with article 119 was to grant the
disadvantaged class of persons the same advantages enjoyed by those in the
favoured class. That meant in the present case for the period between the
Barber judgment and the equalisation of pension ages on July 1 1991, that
the pension rights of the men in the scheme had to be calculated on the same
retirement age as that for women.
For benefits accruing before May 1990 there was no requirement to ensure
equal treatment. But for periods after the equalisation date, article 119
did not preclude measures which achieved equal treatment by reducing the
advantages of the class previously favoured, the judges said.
In two Dutch cases decided yesterday the court said the right to join an
occupational pension scheme was covered by the equal treatment principle in
article 119. The first case, Vroege, looked both at the rights of part-time
workers and married women to join a scheme.
The court said it followed from an 1986 decision of the court that article
119 covered not only entitlement to benefits but also the right to be a
member of an occupational pension scheme. The same was true in the second
Dutch case, Fisscher, which involved the right of access to a pension scheme
which excluded married women. The court said an occupational scheme which
excluded married women entailed discrimination directly based on sex.
The court was also asked in these two cases to determine the effect in time
of the Barber judgment.
It said the reason for limiting the effect of the Barber judgment in time
was because derogations allowing the deferment of the implementation of the
principle of equal treatment in the social security field had reasonably led
employers to conclude that article 119 did not apply to pensions paid under
contracted-out schemes.
The court said the temporal limits of the Barber judgment only applied to
those kinds of discrimination which employers and pension schemes could
reasonably have considered to be permissible because of those derogations in
the social security area.
As far as the right to join an occupational scheme was concerned, the court
said there was no reason to suppose the professional groups involved could
have been mistaken about the applicability of article 119.
The direct effect of the article could be relied on retroactively, and this
could be done as from April 1976, the date of the court's Defrenne judgment
in which it held that article 119 had direct effect.
