FT  29 JUL 94 / UK Company News: Medeva loses patent case in European court
Medeva, the rapidly expanding pharmaceuticals company, yesterday suffered a
setback in its development programme after the European Patent Office upheld
claims that it had infringed patents owned by Biogen, its US rival.
The UK group said it was dismayed by the ruling, made at an appeal hearing,
which could prevent it developing a Hepatitis B vaccine.
The vaccine, which has been at the centre of a legal battle between the
companies for two years, was regarded as one of Medeva's best prospects for
growth in the late 1990s.
Industry analysts estimated 1995 sales for the vaccine at Pounds 30m with
the worldwide market worth more than Pounds 200m.
Biogen said it was extremely pleased by the ruling. But Mr Bill Bogie,
Medeva's chief executive, described it as 'a surprise and disappointment'.
News of the appeal, however, came after the market closed and Medeva's
shares were unchanged yesterday at 134p.
It overturned a previous ruling in favour of Medeva, and means the company
will have persuade courts in any country where it wants to sell the vaccine
to revoke the Biogen-held patents.
The company is already seeking such a ruling in London, where the Appeal
Court is re-examining the High Court's decision last year that Medeva's
activities had infringed the US group's patents.
That ruling, expected in September, is likely to determine whether Medeva
will take similar action in countries such as France and Germany. Mr Bogie
said the company would still develop the vaccine for use in east Asia and in
European countries where the Biogen patents do not apply.
'This is a setback. But the Hepatitis B project is one element in our
broader business portfolio. Although it has great potential it is not
critical to our future success.'
Emphasising the group's determination to develop the vaccine, he predicted
that it would continue to represent a large part of Medeva's research and
development budget.
Further development of the drug may be hampered by threatened legal action
by the two Swiss companies that sold Medeva the part-developed vaccine for
Pounds 9.3m two years ago.
Epitec and GA Investments received a Pounds 3.86m down payment, with the
balance due when development was completed and the product registered in
European countries.
Earlier this year Medeva was warned of possible legal action after the
completion date for development of the vaccine was put back to 1995 -
delaying payments to the Swiss groups.
