FT  13 JUN 94 / Arts: The rivalry that stimulates - Aldeburgh Festival
Although they were two of the leading composers of their day, Britten and
Stravinsky only exchanged passing glances. A degree of rivalry is evident on
both sides, culminating in Stravinsky's comment about Britten's War Requiem
that he could hardly hear the music for the 'Battle of Britten' chorus of
applause from British critics.
The Aldeburgh Festival has chosen Britten and Stravinsky as this year's
theme. Besides featuring major 20th-century figures who draw audiences, the
pairing affords intellectual stimulation. The post-war period found the two
composers responding to musical trends in very different ways and yet they
so often trod the same ground. Stravinsky himself commented grudgingly, 'I
seem to have shared too many titles and subjects with Mr Britten.'
At Friday's opening concert both composers had to be featured. As the
Stravinsky item Aldeburgh chose The Flood, one of the larger scores from the
composer's neglected later years. This is one of the subjects where the
composers overlap, although the concert (perhaps wisely) did not allow a
direct comparison: Britten's Noye's Fludde is scheduled to be heard later in
the festival.
The Stravinsky has generally been thought a lapse from his usual rigorously
high standards. It was written for television, and a desire for popular
approval (something he envied Britten) may have led to a softening of his
gritty intellect. The story of the flood and Noah's ark - taken in part,
like Britten's, from a Chester miracle play - is told in fast narrative
style, with some wit and copious knowledgeable references for the observant,
yet these favourite Stravinsky traits have been reduced to a lowest common
denominator appeal.
The Flood is difficult to classify. It was staged during Stravinsky's
lifetime (as part opera, part ballet, part play with music) but at Aldeburgh
was given simply as a concert performance. Oliver Knussen conducted the BBC
Symphony Orchestra, crucially making sure all the words could be heard, both
from the soloists and the chorus. The story flashes past as though in a
strip cartoon. One wonders how there would be time to take in visual
distractions as well.
On either side we had two pieces of music for the dead: Mahler's Todtenfeier
(the first version of the opening movement of his Second Symphony) and
Britten's Sinfonia da Requiem - another clever pairing which threw up other
connections, other resonances. The festival promises more
imaginatively-planned concerts in the same vein.
