FT  01 SEP 94 / The IRA Ceasefire: Sweet moments for SDLP leader - John Hume
The crucial word 'permanent' did not appear in the IRA's ceasefire
statement. But these must nevertheless be sweet moments for Mr John Hume.
The leader of the mainly Catholic Social Democratic and Labour party is
widely credited with injecting vital momentum into the peace process through
his meetings with Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, starting in April
1993.
He was pilloried savagely for his troubles - not least when he claimed in
November there could be 'peace within a week' if the joint initiative,
dismissed as 'sheer lunacy' by Mr James Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist
leader, was embraced.
But now he is entitled at the very least to a wry smile. His decision to put
his reputation on the line by insisting on the overriding need to bring Sinn
Fein on board, often against the instincts of his senior party colleagues,
may well have been vindicated.
No wonder he yesterday professed himself 'very pleased indeed' with the the
IRA's announcement and insisted that a total cessation of violence was at
hand.
The sheer bitterness of the vitriol that has at times been heaped on him
over the last year is in some ways readily comprehensible.
Apart from his determination to sup with the devil, as hardline unionists
have seen it, Mr Hume has a reputation for not being a good team player, and
for arrogance and bloody-mindedness. Interviews with him can quickly
degenerate into university-style tutorials.
His frustration at the comments of others in some of the heated Commons
debates as the UK-Irish initiative ground its way forward has sometimes been
counter-productive and all too readily apparent.
But Mr Hume, 57, is also a man of passion, generosity and integrity -
besides being enormously good company.
Although steeped in the cauldron of Ulster politics, the stress of the last
few months has been enormous. A cigarette is rarely absent from his grasp.
Talk of his retirement as MP for Foyle, a Westminster seat he has held for
11 years in addition to serving as one of the province's three MEPs, has
surfaced more than once. But it is a safe bet that such thoughts are far
from his mind at present.
Among his most pressing tasks will be to try to convince the British
government that yesterday's announcement is enough to start the clock
ticking on the three-month period within which London has promised to begin
talks with Sinn Fein in the event of a permanent end to violence. He said
yesterday that he hoped dialogue would begin 'as soon as possible'.
A respected figure in Washington and Brussels, he may also have a key role
to play in encouraging support for the substantial package of US aid which
is widely expected.
The transformation that heavy US investment has helped bring about in his
backyard of Derry - once the epicentre of the troubles but comparatively
calm in recent years - is seen by many as indicative of what might be
achieved throughout the province.
