FT  18 FEB 94 / Survey of Asian Aerospace (4): Politics snarls up the tarmac
 -Why Hong Kong's new airport plans are running aground
Hong Kong's plans to build Asia's biggest integrated transport network,
complete with showpiece airport and railway link, have run aground over
disagreements over how to foot the HKDollars 160bn bill. The levels of
borrowing have proved to be a bone of contention between the colony's
existing government and China, which will inherit both the airport and its
debts.
The latest offer from the Hong Kong government, approved by the executive
council on February 1, sees it increasing its equity contribution by
HKDollars 15bn (Pounds 1.3bn) to HKDollars 60bn. This offer, facilitated by
the government's healthy financial position, slashes the amount of debt
needed to fund the airport and railway elements of the project to around
HKDollars 23bn.
China, which may be obliged to make concessions of its own, has yet to
respond to the offer
This comes at the end of a fraught fortnight, with China declaring that
legal and financial obligations not approved by Beijing would be invalid
after 1997 and claiming breaches by Britain of the Memorandum of
Understanding on the project. This showdown was followed by Chinese
accusations - denied by London - of secret deals over the financing.
With Sino-British relations already at a low point, the airport is a sitting
target for attack. It is also a source of vulnerability for the colony,
whose dependence on tourism, trade and servicing China business makes a big,
efficient airport far more than just a matter of national pride.
The need for a new airport is underscored by the congested existing facility
at Kai Tak. With 24.2m passengers a year, it is the world's fourth (some say
third) busiest airport and still growing, at 10 per cent last year.
According to Mr Tony Norman, acting airport general manager, virtually every
facility is now at or very close to its design capacity limit. The runway is
now hosting the current permitted limit of around 28 movements an hour.
Mr Steve Miller, managing director of aviation consultancy Trinity Aviation,
says: 'There are delays on almost every flight now on the ground. When you
get on an aircraft, even though it is ready to go, at least two out of three
flights are delayed for 30 minutes or more because of congestion on the
ground manoeuvring and also in the air.
'That's going to get worse. There will be massive congestion in Kai Tak.'
While the diplomats are ferrying offers to and fro, brokering compromises,
the delays are expensive both for Hong Kong itself, whose trade-oriented
economy is dependent upon efficient cargo points, and for the airline
companies. Airlines are squeezed on both sides - inflation and spiralling
wage costs are putting the pressure on profit margins and room for expansion
is severely curtailed.
'Airline companies are having serious problems. Even in slow times in Hong
Kong you can expect to grow at around 5 per cent a year, but there's just
not that flexibility at present in Hong Kong,' says Mr Murray Bailey,
research director at Travel Business Analyst.
Mr Simon Heale, chief operating officer of Dragonair - a carrier co-owned by
Cathay Pacific, Swire Pacific and Beijing controlled Citic Pacific
specialising in Hong Kong-China routes - says short-haul operators are
especially hit as they are unable to utilise night hours for flying.
'As an airport, Kai Tak is run incredibly efficiently, but no doubt it is
reaching saturation and it's becoming increasingly difficult to schedule
operations so you can make use of incremental aircraft.
'Short-haul operators can run only during the day, so relatively speaking
need more take-off and landing slots. But now you cannot go at the times you
want - there are just slots at times like 8am, and it's a real problem. We
are obviously less efficient which has a cost penalty.'
The political stand-off has prompted the government to proceed on a
piecemeal basis: seeking approval for funds from legislators as the need
arises. Most recently legislators gave the nod to a HKDollars 1.29bn tranche
of funds for the next stage of construction and an additional HKDollars 377m
for day-to-day costs.
Chinese officials have repeatedly said that they do not want the post-1997
government to inherit a mountain of debt from the construction of the
airport. The latest financing packages proposed for the airport and railway
projects follow three others which failed to win China's blessing.
Political wrangling apart, Trinity Aviation's Mr Miller reckons the
government must shoulder a fair share of the blame for the outcome: a new
airport which has been put back several times and may now not see the light
of day until the next century, and a horrifically congested existing
facility.
'The government really has to carry the can for this. Chek Lap Kok would not
have been built by 1997, anyway. The new airport should have been started 12
to 15 years ago. It was a complete lack of foresight by the government and
messing around over a period of 15 years, when hundred of millions of
dollars were spent on consultancies to do studies,' he says.
Analysts believe the hold-ups could cost Hong Kong both passengers and
cargo, with Shenzhen and Macao - whose new airport is due to come on line
this year - being the winners. However, a host of practical issues,
including visas, access and administration, make the alternative of Shenzhen
in particular less feasible: albeit it is closer to Hong Kong than Narita is
to Tokyo.
Aircraft maintenance company Hong Kong Aircraft Engineering says the delay
has had the effect of curtailing its expansion - indirectly hitting its
business by keeping a ceiling on the number of flights coming in and going
out - but the impact is not that significant.
The government has so far awarded 36 contracts worth a total of around
Dollars 32bn. This represents over 78 per cent of the value of government
airport core project contracts.
Mr Heale says: 'If you look at the progress to date, most major contracts
have been let so far on time and most of those contracts are on schedule or
already ahead of schedule.
'So the key thing is the major contracts still to be let: the terminal
itself, the baggage systems which are fundamental to airports, the internal
train for moving people and the airport railway.
'My understanding is that it is still theoretically possible to let these
first three in the next few months and possibly to get them done by June 30
1997.'
