FT  05 MAR 94 / The Long View: Optional extras
It seems that Kenneth Clarke, the sharp-eyed chancellor of the exchequer,
has noticed that one or two top British businessmen appear to be paying
themselves too much. The same conclusion has been reached, at last, by some
of the institutional shareholders who have tolerated the amazing escalation
of boardroom pay over the years.
The case of John Cahill, the retiring British Aerospace chairman, who has
taken a Pounds 3.2m profit on share options after failing to complete the
term of his contract, is just the latest of many. The newspapers are full of
stories of escalating salaries, backed by profits on share options which
have often been enjoyed not just by brave and skilful risk-takers but by the
bureaucratic bosses of privatised monopoly utilities.
To the politicians there is the extra niggle of the constantly widening
differential between their pay and that of the private sector elite. Every
attempt to raise the salaries of MPs and ministers arouses public fury. But
the implied reduction in the incentive to take up a political career, and
the progressive reduction in quality of those in politics, is rarely
discussed, however obvious it is becoming.
Institutional investors are especially concerned because it happens that
many companies will be replacing their executive share option schemes in the
coming months. This is because many 10-year plans were implemented in 1984,
after changes in the tax legislation, and are due for renewal.
The option scheme replacement season got off to a bad start with an argument
over the proposal last month by the big unit trust group M &amp; G. This was
declared in breach of the official institutional guidelines. But M &amp; G went
ahead anyway, which was especially significant because until a few years
ago, when led by David Hopkinson, it was a leader in promoting the
principles of good corporate governance.
M &amp; G's alleged sin was in linking its options simply to the share price.
But because the share price of an investment management company effectively
represents a geared-up play on the stock market, the options will become
very valuable in a bull market regardless of whether the company is doing
well. The big shareholders insist that options should only become valuable
when the performance of the company can be shown to have improved against a
clearly defined benchmark.
Another fund management company, Gartmore, which was recently floated, is
seeking to devise a more complicated plan. Probably its formula will provide
that the options will not become exercisable unless the share price has
performed at least in line with the average All-Share Index constituent, and
will not reach full value unless the shares are among the top 25 per cent
for performance.
Institutional investors are seeking to organise themselves in order to block
nonconforming executive share option schemes. With many companies they will
be able to do so (although they were powerless at M &amp; G where the scheme was
voted through by a big shareholder, a charitable trust). The proxy battle is
a messy and undignified way of imposing shareholders' wishes, however. The
institutions' preferred method of gaining control over the explosion of top
executives' pay and bonuses was set out in the report of the Cadbury
committee, in the shape of a remuneration committee made up of non-executive
directors.
In theory the paragons on such a committee are raised above the normal
pressures of greed and envy and can lay down objective judgments. The
practice is different. Sometimes these non-executive directors are executive
directors of other companies. They are simply approving each others' pay
increases. Even when not personally slotted into the spiral, they are under
pressure to go along with what is happening elsewhere.
Institutional shareholders are subject to conflicts of interest. Many of the
big ones are listed, and have highly-remunerated chief executives who are
not particularly keen to make low-paid examples of themselves.
The idea behind option schemes is that they should reinforce the common
interests of shareholders and executives. When companies are no longer run
by proprietors but by their poorly-supervised hirelings there is a need to
design rewards that reflect shareholders' objectives. Otherwise, managers
will, for instance, go on empire-building sprees that do nothing for the
share price or earnings per share.
The institutions cannot agree on exactly how option schemes should be
designed. Those based on earnings targets are criticised (by M &amp; G, for
instance) on the grounds that the figures can be cynically manipulated.
Alternative approaches based upon beating market indices or sector average
performances are also flawed, because they may encourage short-termism and
may simply reward good fortune, as with the monopoly privatised utilities.
Declining industries may need good management too, but will not readily get
it if remuneration depends on beating the share price trends in growth
sectors.
Consequently the pension funds are hedging their bets by requiring that
companies devise their own customised performance objectives and obtain
shareholders' approval. But this does not exactly sound like decisive
leadership, and could leave managers struggling to understand what their
evasive proprietors really want; the uncertainty looks like providing
something of a bonanza for expensive consultants.
As for those schemes devised a decade ago, they appear to have encouraged a
relatively good UK stock market performance by international standards, but
they expire in circumstances in which UK companies are arguably
overdistributing and underinvesting. Doubtless, the well-paid managers have
been correctly respecting the priorities of their institutional
shareholders.
