FT  13 JUL 94 / Peres sees religious solution to holy sites
Jerusalem's holy sites 'required a religious rather than a political
solution,' Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, said yesterday, amid
reports the government was debating the ultimate form of authority over
Christian and Moslem holy sites in its Old City.
According to the Hebrew daily Ma'ariv yesterday, a proposal to establish an
international panel comprising Jordan, the Palestinians, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia and the Vatican to oversee the holy places has already been discussed
'in strictly general terms' during recent meetings between Israeli leaders
and Jordan's King Hussein and Morocco's King Hassan.
The Israeli Foreign Ministry immediately issued a denial that any
consultations had taken place, but Mr Peres appeared to indicate there was
some basis to the idea, saying Israeli and Vatican officials had already
held substantive talks on control of Christian sites in the city, and that
he welcomed King Hussein's recent calls for a Jerusalem 'religious
dialogue'.
The future of Jerusalem is arguably the most complex issue yet to be
resolved in the framework of the Middle East peace process. Israel annexed
the eastern half, including the Old City, after capturing it from Jordan in
the 1967 war, and leaders across the political spectrum have since declared
Jerusalem to be Israel's united and eternal capital.
But under the terms of its autonomy accord with the Palestine Liberation
Organisation, Israel agreed to discuss the future status of the city in
negotiations due to begin in 1996. King Hussein, concerned that Mr Yassir
Arafat, PLO chairman, would try to usurp the king's role as protector of the
Dome of the Rock and the Al-Aqsa mosque, Islam's third-holiest site, has
recently been strenuously asserting his rights.
Saudi Arabia's King Fahd, guardian of Mecca and Medina, along with Morocco's
King Hassan, who heads the Jerusalem Committee of the World Islamic
Conference Organisation, also have a deep interest in the issue.
Mr Peres stressed yesterday there could be no compromise over Israel's
sovereignty throughout Jerusalem, but then added he had no desire to see a
weakening of Jordan's influence at the Moslem holy sites, currently overseen
by the Waqf Islamic Trust, under King Hussein's control.
It may be that Mr Peres, who is among the most moderate and creative of
Israel's ministers, believes Israel's annexation of East Jerusalem might
gain international recognition if it allowed wider control of the city's
religious sites.
The issue of religious freedom in the city has been much-discussed in recent
weeks, in the light of Mr Arafat's frequently expressed desire to pray at
the Temple Mount, a request granted in principle by Mr Yitzhak Rabin's
government, but rejected in practice because of the security implications.
Mr Arafat returned to Gaza yesterday, with his wife Suha and her sister
Hala, to take up permanent residence.
In contrast to last week's triumphant homecoming visit, yesterday's
permanent return was a modest affair, with only a few dozen locals turning
out to welcome the PLO leader at the Rafah border crossing from Egypt. Mr
Arafat held an immediate meeting with Palestinian security officials, then
retired to Gaza City's Palestine Hotel to work on his agenda for the coming
weeks.
