FT  26 FEB 94 / Arts: Bussell dances Balanchine - Alastair Macaulay watched
this British ballerina show New York audiences a thing or two
While other ballet companies are still learning how to dance the
choreography of George Balanchine, New York City Ballet - the company he
founded in 1948 and, until his death in 1983, shaped - is forgetting. The
irony is tremendous.
This month, Darcey Bussell, the remarkable 24-year-old British ballerina,
danced five performances with NYCB, appearing in Balanchine's Agon and
Symphony in C. (She is the first Royal Ballet ballerina ever to appear with
this company; her success was such that the company gave an extra
unscheduled performance of Agon with her.)
It could be seen at once that these great two ballerina roles - one so bold
and modern, danced in leotard and tights, to Stravinsky's extraordinary
venture into atonalism; the other so resplendently serene, danced in white
tutu to Bizet's symphony - had not been performed on this scale since the
legendary Suzanne Farrell quit dancing them over ten years ago. True, there
is still plenty for Bussell to learn about how to dance Balanchine. But how
strange and thrilling to see that she understands much of the essence of
Balanchine style better than most of those about her.
Even until 1987, NYCB was like no other ballet company; more than that, it
was one of the supreme cultural institutions of this century. Classicism,
modernism, romanticism: you went to NYCB to see all these things in
excelsis. And at the same time you went to see a quintessential expression
of New York's own spirit. 'High-density grandeur' I remember writing on
umpteen postcards home during my first visit to New York 15 years ago; I was
referring to the thrill of both the city and its ballet company.
Today, New York City Ballet is a very proficient troupe. Probably no other
troupe in the world can match it for speed, or lower-body virtuosity. But
these are relatively superficial virtues. What has been gradually eroding at
City Ballet is the basic core of energy, musically shaped energy, classical
energy pouring from the centre of the body through gleamingly turned-out
limbs. What you used to see onstage at NYCB was as glorious as the Chrysler
Building in the sunlight; whereas now you see Trump Tower glitz.
That kind of coolly radiant classical energy is just what Bussell has in
spades. Dancing Agon, she is prodigious. The still astounding rhythms
(mixing jazz, atonalism, and baroque), bodily shapes (mixing Greek imagery,
Renaissance court dance, traditional ballet classicism), and phrases (taut,
lean, unpredictable, explosive) of this choreography have been scaled down
at NYCB over the past ten years - but with Bussell (as Covent Garden has
already seen) the 1957 masterwork becomes again huge, sharp, audacious. In
one lift in the great pas de deux, spread across her partner's back, Bussell
suddenly split her legs wide apart in the air - and, though the move has
always been part of the choreography, this time it caused a gasp around the
New York State Theatre - the kind of gasp that was once part and parcel of
the sensational ballet Agon used to be at every performance.
In Symphony in C, where Bussell dances to the long exotic legato lines of
the second movement's oboe solo, it is easier to see what she has yet to
learn (and not only for Balanchine). She has a band of muscle across the top
of her shoulder blades that gives tension to her upper body just where it
needs relaxation. Sometimes this makes her neck look shorter than it is; and
seldom does it allow her to show the upper-body plasticity and epaulement
that is a vital part of both American and British classical style.
At her first New York performance, when she was partnered by a nervous
novice and showed occasional (atypical) signs of nervousness herself, she
tended to cut Balanchine's adagio choreography up into separate sections.
(Even in Agon, she should acquire more sheer connective impetus and
momentum.) Though her dancing radiates upwards and outwards into space, she
has not yet learnt how to make its horizontal lines beam sideways with equal
amplitude. (Suzanne Farrell - even more than the greatest Kirov dancers -
was so much the mistress of this that she seemed to be dancing in infinite
space.) And, though Bussell is never unmusical, she does not yet dance as if
she is her music's mistress.
Yet these performances of Symphony in C showed me more than ever before how
vast and beautiful Bussell's talent is. There is something extraordinarily
luscious about her style - the very pliant feet, the curvaceousness of the
slightly hyperextended legs, the lack of harshness - and this is combined
with a very sweet kind of innocence. The basic strength of her technique is
wonderful. And she really spreads her own aura, creates her own world out of
sheer dance, and she communicates her own delight in tackling the beauties
of this choreography.
Now, let nobody suppose that Bussell's success in Balanchine is a
vindication of the Royal Ballet in general. The Balanchinean virtues
possessed by Bussell are not shown by any other British dancer. During the
1990s, the Royal Ballet - perhaps largely in response to her immense talent
 -has been acquiring more Balanchine ballets than ever before. Balanchine
choreography shows, more clearly than anything else, that most British
dancers today do not fully coordinate upper and lower body. Few of them
dance, as does Bussell, from from a clear centre.
It is to be hoped that Bussell returns to New York City Ballet. This time,
she was simply dancing (and with little rehearsal) two of the nine
Balanchine roles she has already learnt in London. It may be that there are
other places - Miami, Seattle, San Francisco - where Balanchine style is
fresher than it now is in New York, but NYCB has many more roles, and many
finer points of style, that she can learn; and there is much that its
dancers can (re-)learn from her. Balanchine loved youthfulness, and it is
hard to believe he would not have adored Bussell's innocence. As Londoners
have had the chance to see for four years now, the more Balanchine Bussell
gets to dance, the more youthful she becomes.
