FT  01 MAR 94 / Bank of Italy warns on budget deficit
The Bank of Italy yesterday warned of a growing budget deficit in 1994,
thanks to a deeper than expected economic recession and administrative
delays in public spending cuts.
The warning was contained in the central bank's half yearly economic report,
which was cautious on the possibility of an early recovery and predicted a
further deterioration in unemployment.
The report's publication yesterday coincided with the opening of the
campaign for the March 27 general elections and the announcement of the main
parties' economic programmes.
As such, the report is a sober reminder of the limited economic policy
options for the next government.
Behind guarded language, the central bank is attempting to hammer home the
message that the reform of Italy's public accounts by the Amato and Ciampi
governments is far from over. The implicit suggestion is that the next
government will have to introduce a mid-year mini-budget.
Such a view flies in the face of the electoral propaganda of the Forza
Italia movement of Mr Silvio Berlusconi the media magnate. Mr Berlusconi is
promising to reduce fiscal pressure and preside over an early recovery for
'a new Italian miracle'.
The report says provisional figures for last year suggest that the economy
recorded a negative growth of 0.7 per cent against the modest 0.9 per cent
increase the previous year.
Record export growth only partially offset the severe drop in domestic
demand.
For 1994, the bank says it is too early to judge whether the official growth
target of 1.6 per cent can be achieved.
The report says the 1994 budget's aim of holding the public sector deficit
to L144,000bn (Pounds 57.6bn), equivalent to 8.7 per cent of gross domestic
product, will be hard to achieve.
'The 1994 financial objectives will be complicated by lower than expected
growth in production, especially as a result of 1993, and by spending cuts
having less effect than desired because of difficulties in introducing
structural changes in a short time,' it says.
