FT  14 APR 94 / World Trade News: US concern on food safety rules - Uruguay
Round pact could undermine standards, report warns
A report by US consumer and environmental organisations is recommending a
moratorium on challenges against food safety, health and environmental
measures brought under rules to be inherited from Gatt by its planned
successor, the World Trade Organisation. In 'Trading Away US Food Safety',
Mr Ralph Nader's Public Citizen and the Environmental Working Group charge
that rules agreed in the Uruguay Round jeopardise key federal and state
standards. They want a three-year moratorium to give a trade and environment
committee the opportunity to rewrite the new rules and to 'democratise' the
new Gatt dispute settlement procedure.
US consumer and environmental groups have long warned that, under the
Uruguay Round global trade pact, many US standards would be subject to
challenge. In response, trade negotiators tightened language in the text of
the Sanitary and Phytosanitary and Technical Barriers section of the new
trade pact and now insist that they have safeguarded any rules which are
scientifically based.
However, Mr Nader says the new pact could undermine bans on hormone treated
beef, restrictions on food irradiation, meat and poultry inspection, and
nutritional labelling on rules. 'Nothing is more likely to pull down our
present US consumer and environmental protections and derail future advances
than the proposed trade deal,' he said.
The trade pact uses the standards of the Rome-based Codex Alimentarius
Commission (Codex), a voluntary organisation strongly influenced by the
chemical and food industries, as the model for legitimate standards-setting
when relevant scientific evidence is insufficient. Many US standards are
stronger that Codex standards, although sometimes the reverse is true.
The report says there are 241 foods and substances in which Codex allows
carcinogens and the US does not. In 47 cases both the US and Codex allow
carcinogens, but the US tolerance is lower.
'While the use of an international standard is not mandated, it may give
rise to reasonable expectations that such standards will be used,' the
report says. 'Some countries want to mandate the use of Codex and other
international standards when there are no relevant domestic standards, while
other countries (including the US) have resisted such an absolute mandate.'
It cites trade cases which allegedly threaten US standards. In one, the EU
has identified as an unfair trade barrier a US ban on wine with residues of
the pesticide, procymidone. The US Environmental Protection Agency
established an interim rule allowing procymidone in wine, in response to
trade pressure, the report says.
