FT  19 FEB 94 / World Stock Markets: Milan defies forecasts of political
turbulence - A strong Italian performance
This week's surprise cut in the German discount rate, which was followed by
a similar move from the Bank of Italy, gave Milan's increasingly
overburdened screen-based trading system an extra workload it hardly needed.
Spurred by the privatisation boom and the steady fall in international
interest rates, US policy notwithstanding, the Comit share index has risen
by 11 per cent so far this year and 1.3 per cent in the past week.
Meanwhile, daily equity turnover, arguably an even better indication of
sentiment, has soared. For a number of days this month, trading easily
exceeded L1,000bn (Dollars 591m). For brokers brought up on the market's
previous lowly volume, - let alone the nadirs of the summer of 1992 - such
activity seems virtually incredible.
This year's strong performance belies the pundits who, as recently as last
December, were recommending clients to sell ahead of growing political
uncertainties. Surprisingly, the expected political turbulence has not yet
materialised. Although an election date has now been set for March 27, and
the political scene remains in turmoil as parties scramble to form
alliances, investors have not taken fright.
Most analysts expect pre-poll nervousness eventually to have some impact.
The post-election period is also unlikely to be a honeymoon, as politicians
jockey for position in whatever new government takes shape, and matters may
be clarified only some weeks after election day.
So far, investors appear to have been unmoved by the possible turbulence
ahead. That is partly because of an energetic 'charm offensive' by the
Democratic Party of the Left (PDS), the former communists, who are widely
expected to perform well at the polls.
PDS leaders have for some time been meeting bankers discreetly to calm fears
about the potential consequences of an election victory. Later this month,
Mr Achille Occhetto, the party leader, and a group of top followers are
expected to take the message to the City of London at a seminar arranged by
a leading merchant bank.
Political anxieties may also have been eased by the arrival on the political
scene of Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate. If some polls are to be
believed, Mr Berlusconi - Italy's answer to Mr Ross Perot, the former US
presidential candidate - could make a strong showing. In the next
parliament, his political alliance with the Northern League could create a
strong centre-right wing counterbalance to a left-leaning government.
The market's performance, however, owes a great deal to the weight of money
flowing into equities, much of it from abroad. Many investors in the UK, let
alone the US, appear either ignorant of, or uninterested in short-term
politics. For many, Italy is a 'recovery story', where decades of corruption
and mis-government are being swept away.
On the corporate side, the outlook may be gloomy for 1994, but a strong
cyclical upswing is in sight. Moreover, privatisation, now speeding ahead,
offers both special situations in the short-term and more efficient, better
managed companies for the future.
'We are seeing a lot of big institutional investment, especially from the
US,' says Ms Marie-Christine Keith, of NatWest Securities in London.
Such investors, distanced from Italy's everyday political upsets and
continuing corruption revelations, are taking a longer term view. For US
buyers riding on the strong dollar, Italian shares are also rather cheap.
The focus on recovery means attention has switched from former star
performers such as Benetton, bought on the back of strong export prospects,
to cyclical stocks which could benefit from the upswing.
That has led to heady rises in industrial blue chips such as Fiat, Pirelli
and Olivetti, in spite of their unappealing immediate prospects. Fiat warned
shareholders of a potential L1,800bn net loss for 1993, while Olivetti is
expected to stay firmly in the red for 1993.
Even troubled companies such as the Montedison industrial group, which was
facing a very uncertain future as recently as late last year, have become
favourites. Montedison's stock has powered ahead on the back of possible
stake building, triggering massive speculation. But the group's own
'recovery story', recently recounted via a Warburgs presentation in London,
has also convinced investors.
The question is whether the current buying spree is premature. Exporters
have enjoyed a surge in foreign business because of the lira devaluation,
with sales to countries outside the European Union rising particularly fast.
How significant the impact has been on big industrials such as Fiat,
Olivetti and Pirelli is rather less clear.
If the upswing in the domestic economy is delayed, the big foreign investors
now pouring into Italy may have second thoughts. Expectations will play an
important part. Prices may already look high for those recalling the
doldrums of summer 1992, but shares could still have much further to climb.
'We have clients who bought shares at their lows in summer 1992, forgot
about them for the next 18 months and are now sitting on 300 per cent
gains,' says one trader.
