FT  08 APR 94 / Survey of East Kent (6): Crouching on the starting blocks -
David Lawson examines the potential for the region's business parks
Satellite pictures of south-east England reveal a strange phenomenon. Two
tendrils snake out of the pulsating blob of metropolitan London like some
amoeba stretching to link with another life-form. A few years ago, nodules
sprouted along these glinting lines but appear to have stopped growing
recently.
The analogy is not far from reality. As Britain moved towards economic unity
with the rest of Europe over the last decade, the M2 and M20 motorways
ploughed physical connections east and south through a region traditionally
left to farmers.
Developers were not far behind the earth movers, darting left and right to
stake out huge claims. In an area short on large towns, business parks were
considered the only outlet for future growth.
More than half a dozen now cluster around the southern strip from Ashford to
Dover, and another handful cling to the northern fringes of east Kent. But
the future has taken longer to arrive than anyone guessed. Impressive
gateways often lead off new access roads on to cleared fields; new
buildings, however, are few and far between.
Two schools of thought try to explain why these giants lie sleeping. One
inevitably involves the tunnel - 'we are all crouched on the starting blocks
waiting for it to happen,' says Steven Harris of agents Conrad Ritblat, who
is overseeing the 100-acre Orbital Park, one of five big schemes clustered
around Ashford.
'I have inquiries for more than 1m sq ft of space and expect to get half of
this scheme away as soon as they see trains going through.'
Not everyone has held back. BP Travel took five acres as a national
distribution centre for brochures imported from the Continent. Similar
regional break-bulk organisations are expected to pay around Pounds 300,000
an acre or 6.50 a sq ft for buildings in future.
'Around 30 per cent of all goods coming through the tunnel will end up in
the south-east,' he says. And if they fill this site, Eurotunnel
Developments also has the 200-acre Waterbrook Park across the road.
Others emphasise more wide-ranging reasons for the surge - and subsequent
slowdown, in building - 'we have suffered the same way as every other region
from the recession,' says Charles Stevens of Cluttons, which revealed the
weakness of tenant demand in recent property market study - 'delays to the
tunnel opening are merely a coincidence.'
That strikes a chord with David Easson, who is in a unique position to
assess the region. He helped build Stockley Park, the first and most famous
UK development of this kind, in the economic cauldron west of London. He now
sits just outside east Kent, running the 650-acre King's Hill development
for Rouse Kent near Maidstone.
'Kent suffered from poor roads and a general feeling among companies and
councils that the Garden of Kent should be left unploughed,' he says. Now it
is benefiting from easier access.
That is why Rouse wants to create almost 3m sq ft of business and leisure
space, plus up to 1,500 homes on the former airfield at West Malling. But it
is geared very much to taking London's office overflow paying up to 15 as ft
or 350,000 an acre. Most of East Kent's parks will be distribution centres,
which would probably have sprung up even without the tunnel, spawned by fast
roads and closer European ties.
The effects of recession show up more clearly along the northern coast. Mark
Cunningham of Cormorant, for instance, admits he would never have expected
things to take as long developing the potential 1m sq ft at Abbey Farm
Business Park, near Faversham, when it was planned during the boom - despite
the attractive location off the M2. But he has been handed a crucial
advantage through the new assisted area status, which should provide grants
for an access bridge as well as incentives for tenants.
The Wiggins Group has even more reason to celebrate, as its Kent
International park near Ramsgate is getting an extra benefit from Objective
Two status granted by the European Union - 'that will provide money to link
the site to the fast Thanet Way, giving dual-carriage or motorway links
right through to the M25,' says Geoff Lansbury, the managing director.
With labour costs 10 per cent lower than south Kent and land prices around
Pounds 100,000 an acre, he expects to grow faster than some of the newer
parks.
As they look to the tunnel, so he is concentrating on the neighbouring
airport and the build-up of an air-freight distribution centre.
So the tunnel is not the sole factor driving this region. It already has a
pedigree, growing faster than the rest of the UK in the 1980s, and is
expected to bounce back even higher as the economy recovers, because it now
has better infrastructure and the Single European Market in its favour. It
actually starts from a better base than areas more popular with developers
during the boom because there is no massive overhang of empty space,
according to a study by Nicola Morrison, Russell Chaplin and Jon Potter at
the Cambridge University Department of Land Economy.
This points out that East Kent - particularly Ashford and Folkestone - could
benefit from planning restrictions and lack of town-centre office sites
elsewhere in the county. And parking requirement seem likely to push that
activity onto the parks.
Overall demand will be far below that in the 1980s, however, whereas the
need for factories will be much higher right through the decade, says the
study.
Manufacturing premises (between 10,000 and 15,000 sq ft) are already in
short supply, particularly in Tunbridge Wells and Ashford.
Distribution seems set to hold the centre stage, however, and despite
hundreds of acres set aside for development, only a year's supply of
warehousing is immediately available.
'The potential for development is considerable, particularly once the
Channel Tunnel is integrated into the infrastructure,' says the study.
Ashford emerges once more as an important node because of its strategic
position. It is showing shortages of premises over 25,000 sq ft, even though
the region's total supply exceeds demand.
