FT  25 APR 94 / FT Guide to the week
MONDAY 25
Hata to take over in Japan
Tsutomu Hata, who has been foreign minister in Japan's ruling coalition, is
expected to be confirmed by parliamentary vote as the country's prime
minister. One of his first tasks will be to get a budget for the current
year through parliament. He also aims to issue details of a demand-boosting
permanent reduction in income tax, to be paid for by a rise in indirect
taxes.
Schneider affair: Georg Krupp and Ulrich Weiss, the two Deutsche Bank
directors most closely associated with the dud loans extended to the
bankrupt Schneider property group, tell the press their side of the story
this morning.
Their irascible chairman, Hilmar Kopper, who last week as good as said heads
will roll, will be on hand to keep order. The only significant person not
present (apart from the fugitive Jurgen Schneider himself) will be credit
supervision supremo, Ellen Schneider-Lenne, recently described by Kopper as
'the best man on the board'.
Swedish Spring budget:
Sweden's finance minister Anne Wibble (left) presents the country's
supplementary Spring budget. With a general election looming in September,
tough measures to cut the budget deficit look unlikely, but an improving
economy may allow her to speed up the savings programme she has already
outlined.
Anglo-Irish talks: British and Irish ministers meet in Belfast for the
latest session of the Anglo-Irish inter-governmental conference. It will be
the first opportunity since the IRA 3-day ceasefire earlier this month for
the two governments to review the peace process and to exchange ideas on the
formula for political progress in Ulster.
Mad cows and Englishmen: European Union farm ministers meeting in Luxembourg
today and tomorrow, will consider a German request to ban imports of cattle,
beef and veal from Britain because of the incidence of BSE (mad cow disease)
there.
Italy celebrates Liberation Day, the defeat of Nazi forces and the end of
the Mussolini era in 1945. A big anti-fascist demonstration has been called
in Milan. It is intended to remind the prospective right-wing Berlusconi
government of the origins of its partner, the MSI/National Alliance, and to
warn against rewriting history to make fascism respectable.
Holidays: Australia and New Zealand (Anzac Day); Egypt (Sinai Liberation
Day); Italy (Liberation Day); Portugal (Freedom Day).
TUESDAY 26
South Africans begin voting
Polling begins in South Africa's first all-race election. Following last
week's decision to take part by chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the
Zulu-based Inkatha party, it will be an all-party election too. A landslide
win for the African National Congress is expected, making its leader, Nelson
Mandela, South Africa's president.
Italian government: President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro is expected to ask media
magnate turned politician Silvio Berlusconi to form Italy's next government
today. But between selecting his ministers and obtaining the necessary vote
of confidence from both houses of parliament, at least a further week is
expected to lapse.
Alexandre Lamfalussy, head of the European Monetary Institute, the prototype
European Union central bank, gives testimony to the European parliament. He
is likely to talk about the planned move of the Institute to Frankfurt later
this year and closer monetary co-ordination between EU central banks.
Schengen treaty: Representatives of the nine signatories to the Schengen
treaty hold talks in Bonn aimed at bringing closer the implementation of the
decade-old plan to remove all border controls among them. However, Charles
Pasqua, the French interior minister, has upset the applecart with recent
comments that French border controls should be tighter.
German economy: Germany's six leading economic institutes present their
joint report, the most comprehensive twice-yearly independent diagnosis of
the economy.
Lloyd's action: The largest legal action by loss-making Lloyd's Names -
individuals whose assets support the insurance market - begins today. Some
3,095 Names, who were members of syndicates managed by the Gooda Walker
agency, are suing 71 of their own members' agents in a bid to win Pounds
629m in compensation.
Trade arena: Helsinki hosts a two-day meeting of the joint parliamentary
committee of the European Economic Area, the free trade zone comprising the
European Union and the European Free Trade Area countries. They will be
reviewing progress towards a unified market in such areas as competition
policy and non-tariff trade barriers. Four of the Efta countries, however,
are due to join the EU on January 1 1995.
Drachma drama: The Greek parliament is due to vote on ratifying a tax bill
which cracks down on
evasion among 1,300 categories of self-employed professionals and for the
first time taxes interest from repurchase agreements and mutual funds.
Unsurprisingly, the bill is not popular, and doctors, lawyers and dentists
have been on strike in protest.
WEDNESDAY 27
Anglo-German summit
German chancellor Helmut Kohl holds one-day talks with UK prime minister
John Major at Chequers, the latter's country retreat, as part of regular
twice-yearly summits. The two countries' foreign, finance, interior,
economics, and defence ministers also meet.
On the agenda are: how Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia can
be brought closer to the European Union, a priority for Germany when it
takes over the Union presidency in July; Nato's Partnership for Peace
programme; and preparations for the G7 Naples summit in July.
Another topic to be broached is possible successors to Jacques Delors (left)
as president of the European Commission. Mr Kohl reportedly leans towards
Jean-Luc Dehaene, prime minister of Belgium. Mr Major supports Sir Leon
Brittan, with Ruud Lubbers, Dutch premier, as second choice.
Bosnia's Moslem president, Alia Izetbegovic, hopes to visit Romania for
talks with President Ion Iliescu - if the situation at home permits (to Apr
28). Romania, which has a long border with Serbia and good relations with
most Balkan countries, is taking a leading role in seeking a diplomatic
solution to the conflict and stopping it spilling into other Balkan
countries.
In recent weeks, President Iliescu has received Serbia's president, Slobodan
Milosevic, Croatia's president, Franjo Tudjman, and Turkey's president,
Suleyman Demirel, and paid a visit to Greece.
UK pension provision: Peter Lilley, Britain's social security secretary,
will be questioned by the Commons social security committee about advice
given to people contracting out of the state earnings related pensions
scheme to buy personal pensions.
The cross-party committee will focus on government statistics which suggest
many personal pension sales were to those who could not benefit from tax
incentives and might be worse off as a result.
UK financial regulation: Joe Palmer and Colette Bowe, the chairman and the
chief executive of the Personal Investment Authority, which is due to open
shop in July, appear for a second time before the cross-party committee of
MPs examining financial regulation. The two gave evidence last month, but
faced scepticism from MPs about the plans for the watchdog.
Football: European Cup semi-finals between Barcelona (of Spain) and FC Porto
(of Portugal), and AC Milan (of Italy) and Monaco.
THURSDAY 28
Yeltsin looks to parliament
Russia's 'civil accord', proposed by President Boris Yeltsin, is supposed to
be signed by parties in Russia's parliament today. The pact is intended as a
charter for co-operation between president and legislature, so as to enable
the country to be governed more effectively.
However, opposition parties are dismissive of the idea, raising the question
of how far cohabitation is possible in a political culture that lacks a
tradition of compromise.
Chinese Wall Street: Arthur Levitt, chairman of the US Securities and
Exchange Commission, will sign a 'memorandum of understanding' with his
Chinese counterparts today in the latest step aimed at making it easier for
foreign companies to list their shares on US stock markets.
Ultimately, the agreement should lead to Chinese companies providing US
regulators with the kind of detailed financial information they demand from
companies selling their shares to the public.
Phones on the move: The UK gets its fourth mobile telephone network with the
launch of the 'Orange' service by Hutchison Microtel, telecommunications
subsidiary of Hong Kong-based Hutchison Whampoa. It says 50 per cent of the
UK population will be covered at the launch, extending to 90 per cent by
mid-1995.
Orange, like Mercury's One-2-One, uses digital technology, making additional
services possible. Unlike One-2-One, however, Orange will not be offering
the incentive of free local calls.
Credit Lyonnais:
The French parliament is to discuss proposals to mount an official
investigation into the financial problems of Credit Lyonnais, the troubled
state-controlled bank, which was bailed out by a FFr44.9bn (Dollars 7.7bn)
government rescue last month.
The debate will decide whether to endorse plans to form a 12-strong
cross-party committee, led by the outspoken Philippe Seguin, which will then
stage a six-month inquiry into the management of Credit Lyonnais.
Saleroom: The 3,000-volume library and archives of the author Graham Greene,
who died in 1991, are to be offered for sale by Bloomsbury Book Auctions in
London. One of the main interests of the collection is the many annotations
in Greene's hand that the books contain, along with numerous letters to the
author.
Horse racing: The 1000 Guineas, first of the English flat-racing season's
five 'classics', for three-year-old fillies, is run over a mile at
Newmarket.
FRIDAY 29
Rowdy AGM for Swiss bank
Union Bank of Switzerland, the country's largest bank, faces a rowdy annual
meeting in Zurich. BK Vision, an investment fund with nearly 10 per cent of
the shares, has put a motion on the agenda to force the bank to cut the
maximum number of its board members from 23 to nine. BK says that no
committee with more than 10 members can be decisive.
UBS directors are also likely to be questioned closely on how they got
caught two weeks ago holding Dollars 150m for a suspected Colombian drug
dealer.
No Golf Year has been declared by an organisation called the Global
Anti-Golf Movement, starting today. The group's aim is to draw attention to
the environmental problems caused by 'frenzied proliferation of resorts and
golf courses around the world'. These include loss of forests and farmland,
soil contamination, landslides and depletion of water resources.
Holidays: Japan (Greenery Day), Golden Week holiday starts; Cyprus, Greece
and Lebanon celebrate orthodox Good Friday; Denmark (General Prayer Day).
WEEKEND 30-1
Miners' redundancy offer
Saturday is the deadline for staff to accept British Coal's redundancy
package, which offers a maximum of Pounds 44,000. A less generous scheme
will be on offer from May.
Song for Europe: The 39th Eurovision Song Contest which takes place at the
Point Theatre, Dublin on Saturday night.
Horse racing: The 2000 Guineas, the second of the flat-racing season's five
'classics', for three-year-old colts and fillies, is run over a mile at
Newmarket on Saturday.
Motor racing: The San Marino Grand Prix takes place in Imola, Italy, on
Sunday.
NEXT WEEK
There is hope that the delayed agreement between Israel and the Palestinian
Liberation Organisation on Palestinian self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip
and Jericho area of the West Bank may at last be signed at a summit meeting
in Cairo.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles.
Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
