FT  17 FEB 94 / Brussels fines British Steel Pounds 24m for market-rigging
British Steel was yesterday fined Ecu32m (Pounds 24.3m) for breaking
European rules outlawing price-fixing. The fine was the heaviest single
penalty imposed by the European Commission on 16 leading steelmakers it
found guilty of operating a cartel to supply the construction industry.
The penalties on the 16 totalled a record Ecu 104.4m and were accompanied by
a stiff warning that the Commission would take a tough line against
market-rigging in any industry.
Brussels also issued an ultimatum to private steelmakers over plans for
capacity cuts agreed by EU industry ministers last December.
The commission said the Ecu240m fund to ease the redundancies created by the
restructuring would be withdrawn unless by April the steel companies came up
with the agreed capacity cuts.
The 16 companies were found guilty of infringing all the provisions of
Article 65 of the European Coal and Steel Treaty, which outlaws
price-fixing, market-sharing and exchanging confidential information.
'This was a case when everything that can be infringed has been infringed,'
said Mr Karel Van Miert, EU competition commissioner, justifying the
unprecedented severity of the fines. 'We needed to be tough,' he said,
adding: 'There should no longer be any doubt that the rules of competition
are applicable in this Community.'
Mr Van Miert said the Commission had levied the heaviest fines on 'those who
have sinned repeatedly'. Other ringleaders in the cartel to rig prices for
beams and girders, according to the Commission, were Unimetal, a division of
France's Usinor-Sacilor, fined Ecu12.3m; and Thyssen of Germany, fined
Ecu6.5m.
The Commission's decision was bitterly criticised during angry exchanges in
the House of Commons. MPs of all parties said the judgment was unfair to
British Steel.
Mr Tim Sainsbury, the industry minister, rejected claims that the fines were
linked to the Commission's plans to reduce capacity throughout Europe. Mr
Phillip Oppenheim, a Conservative backbencher, accused the Commission of
rigging the steel market and creating 'a mess of overcapacity'.
German steelmakers and British Steel said they would appeal against the
Commission's judgment to the European Court of Justice. Mr Ruprecht Vondran,
president of the German steel federation, said: 'German steel companies will
not accept this decision silently.'
Under the December deal, state-owned steelmakers in Spain, Germany and Italy
received government subsidies worth Ecu6.8bn in return for capacity cuts of
over 5m tonnes. Non-aided producers, however, are supposed to deliver
capacity cuts of between 19m and 25m tonnes. So far, according to Mr Martin
Bangemann, the industry commissioner, they have delivered 13m tonnes of
cuts, with 4m tonnes more promised.
Steelmakers to appeal, Page 2
Editorial Comment, Page 19
Lex, Page 20
