FT  01 MAR 94 / Heseltine questions legal advice on Iraq arms case
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, yesterday publicly
questioned the legal advice given to ministers in the Matrix Churchill case.
He told the Scott arms for Iraq inquiry he had been offered contradictory
advice by Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, on whether he should
sign public interest immunity (PII) certificates preventing disclosure of
Whitehall documents.
Last night Sir Nicholas issued a short statement saying his advice on PII
'has remained consistent'. He is planning to give evidence to the Scott
inquiry in three weeks' time.
Earlier, Mr Heseltine told the Scott inquiry that he had signed a PII
certificate extremely reluctantly, only after being advised by Sir Nicholas
that it was his duty to do so. He had also been reassured that his concerns
would be conveyed to the judge.
But following the collapse of the Matrix Churchill trial, Mr Heseltine
received further advice from Sir Nicholas that he was not duty-bound to sign
a PII in cases where revealing documents 'might be essential to ensure a
fair trial'.
Mr Heseltine said he found the apparent contradiction 'incredible' given his
strong reservations about not making documents available to the defence in
the Matrix Churchill case.
He told Lord Justice Scott: 'I certainly had the impression that (the advice
I was getting) was different . . . Ministerial discretion was being widened
in a way that I had expressly been told was not the case.'
In the Matrix Churchill trial, counsel for the prosecution, Mr Alan Moses
QC, made no reference to Mr Heseltine's worries and argued that the
documents were not relevant to the defence.
Mr Heseltine said he was in principle in favour of the need for
confidentiality to preserve working relationships between officials and
ministers and to protect intelligence services.
But he had at first refused to sign a PII certificate in the Matrix
Churchill case after a close examination of the documents involved.
They showed links between the intelligence services and Matrix Churchill
executives, and official approval of the export of machine tools to Iraq
known to be of military use. The prosecution said the businessmen had lied
to the government, and the documents were not relevant to the defence even
though they showed the executives exporting defence-related equipment with
full government knowledge.
Mr Heseltine said: 'It became apparent to me that if this series of events
were known at any stage, I would have to become engaged in a process of
non-communication. This I was not prepared to do.' He signed the certificate
only after insisting it was phrased so as to protect him from any
allegations of a cover-up.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, said: 'It is hard to see
how the attorney-general can now survive. His role appears to have been to
protect the government rather than the course of justice.'
Mr Gerald Hosker, the Treasury solicitor, will give evidence to the inquiry
tomorrow.
Picture, Page 12
