FT  05 JUL 94 / Argentina struggles in world league: High costs and poor
quality compound widening deficit - The new economic order
Argentina's trade balance has been deteriorating relentlessly since 1991.
Economists say the deficit could double to Dollars 7bn or Dollars 8bn this
year - not large for an economy with a gross domestic product of Dollars
285bn but worrying given exports last year of only Dollars 13.12bn.
The deficit raises doubts about whether Argentina will be able to sustain
its fixed dollar-peso parity, a central feature of economy minister Domingo
Cavallo's currency convertibility plan. Economists and industrialists
ascribe the rising deficit to an overvalued currency, a strong expansion in
domestic demand, heavy inflows of foreign capital, weak export markets, and,
at least until recently, low commodity prices.
But it has been compounded by the high cost and poor quality of Argentina's
products, and the country's heavy reliance on low value-added commodities -
grain, oilseeds and oil accounted for three-quarters of the 1993 exports.
Argentina has few world-competitive companies. No more than a handful can
meet world quality levels, conform to international safety and design
standards, or promote their products professionally.
Yet, because tariffs have been dramatically lowered and important quotas
largely abolished, companies can no longer rely on captive domestic markets
to buy their goods.
In the past, Argentine companies exported only at times of crisis in the
domestic market and abruptly ceased when domestic markets recovered.
Argentina had a Dollars 8.28bn trade surplus in 1990, a year it was battling
hyperinflation. When Mr Cavallo resuscitated the economy in April 1991 by
making the currency convertible, the surplus halved. In 1992, Argentina
registered its first trade deficit in 11 years and has not been in surplus
since.
Mr Cavallo says the deficit does not worry him, because it shows companies
are installing export-oriented capacity. He points to the growing imports of
capital goods - which rose by nearly half to Dollars 6.54bn in the four
months to April - and imported with zero tariffs, as the main reason for the
surge in imports.
However, at about 19 per cent of GDP, investment, though growing, is widely
considered inadequate. Furthermore, it is heavily angled to sectors such as
infrastructure, privatised utilities, consumer finance and housing - none of
which generates foreign currency earnings.
Mr Oscar Vicente, vice-president of Perez Companc, a conglomerate which
bought important stakes in privatised companies, argues that 'Argentina is
not competitive in industry because it had bad ports, roads, electricity,
telecommunications (when these) services were controlled by the state.' Now
managed by private companies, they are undoubtedly improving in efficiency
and reliability, if not always in cost.
Yet even where investment in industry is taking place, it seems
insufficient. Mr Bernardo Kosacoff of the UN's Economic Commission for Latin
America, says: 'Everyone is investing something. But they are very selective
investments at those points where there are bottlenecks.'
'We are not seeing investments to gain economies of scale to compete with
imports and meet export demand.'
There are a small but growing number of greenfield expansions, but they are
generally concentrated in protected sectors - notably the car industry - or
in industries targeted at the domestic market, such as breweries.
However, says Mr Cavallo, exports are increasing. Last year, exports were
nearly a tenth more than in 1991, with the growth coming from a big rise in
manufactures.
But this increase is from a low base and due primarily to privileged access
to the large Brazilian market through the Mercosur trade pact. Trade
barriers between the two countries have gradually fallen and should all but
disappear by next January, to be followed later by Paraguay and Uruguay.
Already Brazil is Argentina's main supplier and one of its principal export
markets. Brazil exports manufactures to Argentina and imports mainly
commodities.
But full exposure to Brazil's bigger and better-managed companies will
severely test Argentine industry.
Mr Jorge Mostany, president of Autolatina Argentina, the joint venture
linking Ford and Volkswagen in Argentina and Brazil, says his Buenos Aires
plant 'is the most inefficient VW/Ford plant in the world'.
Each worker turns out 14 cars a year, he says, nearly as many as at
Autolatina's much bigger Brazilian plant. But wages in Argentina are more
than double those in Brazil. An Argentine motor industry worker costs more
than Dollars 2,000 a month, including tax, overtime and social security
contributions.
Executives at other Argentine companies say the same thing: they pay close
to first world wages but get third world productivity. Productivity has
improved - Autolatina's output per worker in Argentina has tripled in three
years - but from a low level.
Mr Cavallo has negotiated special agreements into the Mercosur pact to
protect certain industries, notably cars. As a result, Argentina's car
companies more than doubled exports to Brazil to Dollars 500m last year.
Mr Cavallo has also intervened to protect other industries most threatened
by import competition - particularly from Brazil and south east Asia - by
raising import tariffs, imposing quotas or granting tax breaks.
He is also encouraging companies with subsidised loans and export incentives
to specialise in sectors where they are competitive, rather than making a
broad range of goods inefficiently for local consumption. The danger is that
this risks opening the door for demands for yet more protection as foreign
competition intensifies.
Mr Francisco Macri, owner of Socma, one of Argentina's most powerful
industrial groups, warns that underemployment and unemployment - which now
affects nearly 20 per cent of the labour force - could rise to 50 per cent
unless industry gets more time to reconstruct.
He recalls that a previous experiment with free market policies 15 years ago
collapsed under the weight of an overvalued currency and unsustainable
external deficits. That government, he says 'thought (trade liberalisation)
would make industry efficient but destroyed it. It took 15 years to
restructure.'
This article is the third in a series on the recovery in Latin America.
Previous articles appeared on June 24 and 30
