FT  04 OCT 94 / Survey of World Car Industry (10): Transplants step up
exports - At least 1m Japanese cars will be built in Europe by 2000
Toyota, Nissan and Honda between them will account for one-third of the UK's
annual car production by the year 2000, or 650,000 units, Koichiro
Yoshizawa, Honda's former chairman, predicted during a recent visit to
London. By then, he maintained, they will have spent a total of Pounds 2.2bn
on their UK facilities and be employing 10,000 people.
There is reason to think that Mr Yoshizawa was being conservative. Nissan is
already committed to 300,000 capacity but has hinted that 400,000 could be
the goal by the end of the decade.
Honda has committed to 150,000 by the late 1990s but is keeping long-term
options open on a move to 200,000. Toyota has already reached its phase one
production rate of 100,000 cars a year with just one car, the Carina; is
expected to add the smaller Corolla, and will almost certainly be producing
200,000 cars or more from its Burnaston plant in Derbyshire by the end of
the decade.
That is by no means the end of the Japanese manufacturing presence in
Europe.
Next spring, NedCar a joint venture between Mitsubishi Motors, the Dutch
government and Volvo of Sweden, is to start producing up to 200,000
lower-medium sized cars at the radically modernised former Volvo BV plant at
Born in southern Holland. One half of the output will be badged as
Mitsubishis, the other Volvos.
Both Nissan and Suzuki have production operations in Spain, capable of
contributing nearly 150,000 vehicles a year to Japanese production in
Europe, although both have run into difficulties.
Meanwhile Suzuki has done a deal with Subaru, part of Fuji Heavy industries,
under which Suzuki will build up to 12,000 four-wheel-drive cars a year at
the Hungarian plant at which Suzuki already makes its Swift
front-wheel-drive car. The 4wd vehicles will be badged as Subarus, with
deliveries starting next year. Swifts have been rolling off the Magyar
Suzuki assembly line for about a year now at Esztergom, 40km north of
Budapest.
Even allowing for the Spanish problems, then, it is likely that at the end
of the decade at least 1m Japanese cars a year will be in production in
Europe. Additionally, Japanese cars are finding their way into Europe's
markets from the US or from Japan itself.
However, the long-standing fear of the European motor industry - and the
expectation of many industry analysts - that Japanese carmakers, with their
standard-setting quality, would inexorably drive the Europeans into endless
retreat now look much exaggerated. One reason is the soaring yen, which has
made Japanese producers lose competitiveness. But more important in terms of
the Japanese transplants, there has been a strong product fight-back by
indigenous European producers.
Whatever the pros and cons of this debate, while total new car sales in
Europe rose by 6.8 per cent in this year's first half compared with the same
period a year ago, sales by Japanese carmakers fell by 5.8 per cent. Their
market share stands at about 11 per cent compared with 12.4 per cent a year
ago.
The setback provides no grounds for complacency. The European industry
expects Japan to regroup and Nissan, for one, is already revising its
approach to the European market, with more frequent facelifts now planned
for its models than is the norm in Japan.
Nissan, Japan's second-largest vehicle maker, began production at Sunderland
in 1986 and had built up production to 175,000 units a year by 1992. Last
year's output had been scheduled to reach 270,000 as the Micra small car
joined Primera production. However, with the UK market weaker than expected
and a steep downturn then under way in continental Europe, Nissan was
obliged to trim its sails and output levelled off at 246,000.
Nissan Motor Manufacturing (UK) managing director Ian Gibson says that
current output rates are about 220,000 units a year. He refuses to predict
what this year's total production might be.
Despite the problems, Nissan - which has won the Queen's Award for Exports
for three years in succession - emerged as the leading UK car exporter last
year, outstripping Rover group, Ford and Vauxhall. Indeed, the Japanese
transplants last year accounted for three of the top six places as UK car
exporters. Seventy-four per cent of Sunderland's output was exported.
A few weeks ago Honda, Japan's third largest car maker, announced plans to
increase by 50 per cent the capacity of its Swindon plant in south-west
England to 150,000 a year by the late 1990s. This will raise direct
employment by 500 to 2,500 and lift Honda's total investment in the Swindon
facilities to Pounds 700m, according to Kazue Ito, president of Honda Motor
Europe.
Production of a second model, the Civic, is just getting under way at
Swindon alongside the larger Accord range with which the plant went on
stream at the beginning of last year. The car will go on sale in some parts
of southern Europe in December, in Germany in January and in the UK in
March.
The Civic, which replaces the Concerto model which Rover had been building
for Honda on its Longbridge lines, is intended to lift Swindon's annual
output to 100,000 next year. If all goes to Honda's plan, Swindon will thus
provide about half the 300,000 cars a year Honda is hoping to be selling by
the end of the decade.
Honda plans to sell about 60,000 of the Civics in Europe next year, and
describes the car as the most important it has ever launched in Europe. The
sales target appears modest beside the 200,000 a year that Rover intends to
build of its version of the Civic, the Rover 400.
Rover is producing the 400 - which will look markedly different from the
Civic - under licence from Honda, continuing collaboration put in place
before Rover's sale to BMW by British Aerospace and the subsequent
dismanting of cross shareholdings between Honda and Rover.
Honda, initially dismayed and angered by the sale of its UK partner to BMW,
is taking a pragmatic stance about its European future.
Fears that the Japanese would simply build 'screwdriver' plants in Europe
with minimal local content have long since disappeared. Nissan, admittedly
the longest-established in the UK, already has 83 per cent European content,
makes its own engines and even has its own foundry to produce castings. The
latest, Pounds 30m investment is in a facility at Sunderland to produce
axles. The only major component still to come from Japan is the gearbox.
Indeed, exports of components produced in the UK for the transplants is also
on the increase. Toyota's Pounds 140m engine plant at Deeside, Clwyd, is
beginning to supply a new car assembly plant in Turkey as well as the UK
production lines. Several UK and continental-owned suppliers to Burnaston
are also seeing their components being exported to Japan itself.
Japan and the EU agreed three years ago to set annual EU-wide import quotas,
to be reassessed every six months, to pave the way for a completely open
European car market by the end of the decade. As part of this agreement,
restrictions which had previously been imposed by individual member states
became null and void.
In view of the resumption of sales growth in Europe, Japan was planning to
seek a bigger quota for car exports to the EU at the latest of the
six-monthly talks between officials of the European Commission and the
Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry, in Brussels on
September 29 and 30.
Inevitably, there were likely to be robust discussions while forecasts were
compared. But so far, the monitoring system seems to be functioning fairly
well.
