FT  21 OCT 94 / Storms break Russia's long political calm: Tension is
building across the nation as crisis piles upon crisis
The fabric of Russia's political stability is unravelling. There has been no
hot summer nor, so far, a hot autumn. The crises in the country's political
life - the collapse of the MMM pyramid selling operation, the civil war in
the southern republic of Chechnya, the growing evidence of a flouting of
civil rights in the regions - have all been contained. Now, however, the
price for that long period of calm is being paid.
The latest crisis - the more than 20 per cent fall in the rouble last week -
is not proving easy to calm. President Boris Yeltsin reacted like the
regional party boss he once was, by firing those apparently responsible - Mr
Sergei Dubinin, finance minister, and Mr Victor Gerashchenko, central bank
chairman.
He did not, while doing so, consult his prime minister, Mr Victor
Chernomyrdin, who was then on holiday. And though both the replacements for
these officials are of a reformist bent, the damage done to the authority of
the government by this executive action has been immense.
In a remarkable article in yesterday's Moskovsky Novosti, Mr Sergei
Alexashenko, the young deputy finance minister responsible for the budget,
rips into the president for his action. He accuses him constantly trying to
sabotage the tough budget policy by telephoning the finance ministry to
demand payments 'to this director or that general'; of acting
unconstitutionally by not giving the prime minister the chance to choose the
new appointees; and of engineering an 'economic military coup' by appointing
an investigatory commission into the rouble's collapse composed almost
wholly of generals (defence minister, interior minister, heads of domestic
and foreign intelligence services, head of Border Guards).
The weakness of Mr Chernomyrdin's position was graphically illustrated by
the rumours that he had offered his resignation on Tuesday night. Both he
and Mr Yeltsin have denied it, and the latter took a cabinet meeting
yesterday to discuss the budget.
According to Mr Igor Bunin, head of a think tank with strong links to the
Yeltsin apparat, 'the president understood that he needed Chernomyrdin, that
he is his last defence'. However, according to Mr Vitaly Tretyakov, editor
of the daily Nezavimiaya Gazeta, his resignation is only a matter of time.
One of Mr Chernomyrdin's own ministers, Mr Sergei Shakhrai, deputy premier
for nationalities, admitted on Tuesday that the government had suffered 'a
heavy blow'.
The government's main task now is to propose a budget to the Duma (lower
house of parliament) of unprecedented severity aimed at bringing down
inflation to 1 per cent a month by the second half of next year and
refraining from any further borrowing from the central bank. Drawn up by
radical young deputy ministers within the finance and economic ministries,
and supported by Mr Alexander Shokhin, deputy minister for the economy, and
by the prime minister himself, the budget also received initial assent from
the president's advisers.
Now, however, the gulf which has yawned between Mr Chernomyrdin and the
president may mean the latter will no longer lend it his necessary support;
and the Duma, fragmented as it is, may also revolt.
Crucial to the budget's success is backing from the International Monetary
Fund, whose senior officials are now in Moscow for negotiations on a
stand-by loan. The government is counting on at least Dollars 8bn in
stand-by and other credits to be agreed this year, and a further Dollars 6bn
to stabilise the rouble next year. It wants to calibrate repayments of its
Dollars 90bn foreign debt with IMF and World Bank assistance over the next
4-5 years, in an ambitious effort to restructure and stabilise its finances
over the medium term.
However, the IMF is in a sceptical mood. In rare public comments in Moscow
earlier this week, Mr John Odling-Smee, head of the department concerned
with Russia, said the government still needed to demonstrate that it could
put a cap on spending: 'Until then there is no hope of containing the
budgetary situation.' He warned that 'this is not the time to take the easy
line and to give way to pressure from industries. This is the moment to try
to get things under much better control'.
In remarks aimed at the government's hopes for loans, he said he was
concerned 'about the very large amount of financing expected from elsewhere.
I don't think all that money will be available, and I certainly don't think
it will be good for Russia'.
As the budgetary struggle intensifies, so the social situation becomes
bleaker. The unions, until now a dormant force, have threatened to strike
next Thursday - when the prime minister is due to present the budget to the
parliament - over the vast backlog of unpaid wages. Mr Oleg Soskovets, first
deputy prime minister, promised earlier this week to pay these wages but
that would blow another Rbs2,000bn hole in the budget if he did.
Yesterday in Moscow, a crowd some 5,000-strong heard demands for the
government's resignation from normally reformist journalists attending the
funeral of Mr Dmitry Kholodov, a young reporter on Moskovsky Komsomolets
killed on Monday a briefcase bomb. His death has been blamed on 'mafia
circles' in the military command, trying to protect secrets of corruption in
the forces Western Group which he was investigating.
These events, especially the crash in the currency, forced Mr Yeltsin to
postpone until December the meeting this week of the political parties and
groups which signed a joint agreement for national accord earlier this year.
The president has placed much importance on the agreement, seeing it as a
fundamental indicator of the desire of the main political participants to
resolve their differences peacefully.
National accord is now clearly impossible to proclaim - and will be hard to
do so in December. Inflation is rising - to over 10 per cent this month,
more in November. Unemployment is also increasing, as are the number of days
lost through strikes. Opposition, hitherto largely confined to the parties
in the parliament, may come out on the streets once more. Even the booming
stock prices, a real success story of the past year, have turned down,
though not by much so far. The situation may be saved, but it is very tense.
