FT  28 JAN 94 / US urged to keep ban on Adams
The government last night sent a clear signal to Washington that any
decision to lift its ban on Mr Gerry Adams entering the US would be
unwelcome, unless the Sinn Fein president renounced violence.
In comments made less than 48 hours before a decision on the ban is due,
Downing Street said it hoped a visa would not be given to Mr Adams unless he
made 'a clear and unequivocal renunciation of violence'. It was 'deeds not
words' that were required. It said the government had been in talks with the
US on the subject.
The signal came as the IRA left fire bombs at three stores in London.
Yesterday also saw two sectarian murders in Ulster. The attacks came on the
eve of the first session of the Anglo-Irish inter-governmental conference
since the two governments unveiled their joint peace initiative in December.
The conference is likely to provide the opportunity for both governments to
reaffirm their joint position on the peace initiative.
A display of unity over the progress of the political talks co-ordinated by
Mr Michael Ancram, the Northern Ireland minister, may be harder to engineer.
London has indicated that it intends to act, as promised, to give focus to
the talks fairly soon, although this may come in bilateral and private
sessions. Dublin is anxious not to divert attention from the peace process.
Mr Adams recently applied for a visa at the American Embassy in Dublin after
receiving an invitation to attend a conference in New York on Monday.
Under US immigration law, he is still officially ineligible for a visa but a
waiver can be issued by the attorney general on recommendation from Mr
Warren Christopher, the secretary of state. It is understood that President
Bill Clinton has been involved in the decision-making process and that a
series of meetings took place in Washington on Wednesday. A number of
Irish-American politicians have lobbied on Mr Adams' behalf.
The leaders of the Ulster Unionists and the hardline Democratic Unionist
party have already declined an invitation to attend the conference.
Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly Catholic Social Democratic and Labour
party, and Dr John Alderdice, leader of the Alliance party, are expected to
attend.
Unionist politicians and leaders of loyalist terrorist groups in Northern
Ireland have met to discuss the Downing Street declaration, according to the
BBC television programme Spotlight, which is shown only in Northern Ireland.
According to the programme, the paramilitaries, represented by the combined
loyalist military command have been seeking clarification of the opposing
views on the declaration taken by the Democratic Unionist and Ulster
Unionist parties.
