FT  03 AUG 94 / Altman defiant on Whitewater
Mr Roger Altman, deputy secretary of the US Treasury, defiantly told
Congress last night he had never impeded inquiries into a key
Whitewater-related matter and that neither he nor any official responsible
to him had ever conveyed 'improper information' to the White House.
But he did issue a qualified apology to the Senate banking committee for
past statements that may have been misleading. Referring to controversial
testimony given on February 24, he said: 'I see now that committee members
may feel I was being too precise in my answers.'
However, Senator Al D'Amato, the New York Republican, promptly accused Mr
Altman of participating in meetings beyond number with the White House.
Mr Altman insisted that he had only held one such 'substantive' meeting on
February 2. He stuck to the list of additional 'incidental' discussions
provided in his opening statement covering all the contacts he could recall
over the status of the investigations into the bankruptcy of Madison
Guaranty, the Arkansas savings and loan company owned by Mr James McDougal,
partner of the Clinton family in the Whitewater land investment.
Critical parts of his statement appeared clearly at odds with evidence given
to the committee last night by Ms Jean Hanson, Treasury legal counsel. Mr
Altman said he did not remember asking Ms Hanson to appraise the White House
of Madison criminal 'referrals' last September, though he saw 'nothing
wrong' in her doing so. He said he never knew of the September meetings when
he testified to Congress last February.
He also disputed her recollections of his February 24 testimony. She said
she had known, but failed to tell Mr Altman, of omissions in his response to
questions about meetings and about the possibility that he would 'recuse'
(excuse) himself from any role concerning Madison, over which he then had
overall jurisdiction as acting head of the Resolution Trust Corporation.
He said he had studied the video of these hearings and could, at one pivotal
stage, be seen turning to her and asking for advice. The video was shown
later to the committee but appeared inconclusive. But Mr Altman said he and
Ms Hanson later had lunch together and she had never raised her concerns
that the answers he had given were 'incomplete'.
Mr Altman insisted that the question of his recusal (because of a long
friendship with President Bill Clinton) was 'irrelevant' because he never
knew anything about the status of the Madison investigation. 'In retrospect
I might have recused myself off the bat,' he conceded, but the three-week
delay before he did so included no action related to Madison.
Earlier the committee had questioned Mr Josh Steiner, chief of staff to Mr
Lloyd Bentsen, Treasury secretary, on the content of his subpoenaed private
diaries. Mr Steiner disowned at least some of the entries, including the
note that Mr Altman had come under severe pressure from the White House not
to recuse himself.
