FT  16 JUL 94 / Let there be light: The Nature of Things - A British
breakthrough
How do you make everyday materials give out light without heating them?
Scientists have recently produced two new solutions in the form of plastics
and silicon that glow when an electric voltage is applied.
Both have immense commercial potential. Light-emitting plastics could make
paper-thin screens for televisions and computers. These would be far tougher
and more adaptable than either the cathode ray tubes used for conventional
televisions or the new generation of liquid crystal displays.
Light emission from silicon, the main material of electronic chips and the
semiconductor industry, could lead the way to the super-fast optical
processors that have been a dream of the computer industry for a long time.
Such devices, running on photons (pulses of light), would be much more
efficient and compact than the present generation of computers which use
electrons (pulses of electricity) to process data.
UK researchers have played a leading part in both advances. Leigh Canham and
colleagues at the Defence Research Agency, Malvern, discovered how to make
silicon glow. Richard Friend, Andrew Holmes and other scientists at
Cambridge University have led the development of light-emitting plastics.
Both groups have taken out strong patent protection, and the Cambridge
scientists have set up a company, Cambridge Display Technology. If the
discoveries live up to expectation, they will bring in significant royalty
income; but there seems little chance that what remains of the UK
electronics industry will be able to make either plastic displays or optical
computers on a large scale for world markets.
The common factor behind the two developments is a new understanding of the
way electrons behave on what scientists call the nano-scale. (Its name comes
from the nanometre, a unit of length equal to a millionth of a millimetre.)
The trick is to construct special conditions under which electrons release
energy as light, rather than the usual heat.
Leigh Canham's process for making light-emitting silicon is deceptively
simple. He treats a conventional silicon wafer, used for making chips, with
highly corrosive hydrofluoric acid. This eats away more than 80 per cent of
the material.
The porous silicon sponge left behind is, in effect, a web of extremely fine
silicon wires, each 70,000 times thinner than a human hair. When electricity
passes through such thin wires, some of the electrons lose energy by
emitting visible light. The colour of the radiation varies with the
thickness of the silicon.
Canham explains: 'The conventional semiconductor industry uses lithographic
equipment costing millions of pounds. Our structures can be made in a
bucket. It is really cheap and fast to process silicon wafers in this way.'
Even so, there are several essential production tricks - for example, how to
prevent the silicon sponge collapsing as the acid dries - which would not be
obvious to an imitator with a bucket of hydrofluoric acid.
Until now, researchers have had to use more complex and expensive materials,
such as gallium arsenide, as light sources for experiments in optical
computing. If silicon itself can give off light reliably - and, despite the
progress so far, this has yet to be proved - then the outlook for
opto-electronics will be far brighter.
Although optical computers are, potentially, the most important application,
Canham says light-emitting silicon could also lead to a new display
technology, particularly for high-resolution screens connected directly to
silicon circuitry. It could then be competing with the new light-emitting
plastics.
These are a development from the electrically conducting plastics discovered
in the 1970s. When you apply a voltage to ordinary plastics, nothing
happens. But they can carry electricity like a metal if they have a special
molecular structure in which mobile electrons can run along the long polymer
chains.
The Cambridge group first achieved light emission in 1990 by sandwiching a
conducting plastic, PPV, between oppositely charged electrodes. The positive
terminal removes electrons - which is equivalent to pumping positively
charged 'holes' into the plastic. When electrons from the negative electrode
fall into these holes, they give off energy in the form of photons.
Over the past four years, the Cambridge scientists and their main
competitors at the University of California have manipulated the structure
of their light-emitting plastics to improve their efficiency - now at 4 per
cent, compared with 10 per cent for an ordinary light bulb - and tune their
wave-lengths to give a range of colours. The main problem still to overcome
is that PPV and its derivatives break down and stop glowing with long-term
use.
Although the scientists do not understand fully the reasons for this
instability, they are confident it can be overcome. And just as porous
silicon could encroach on the main potential market for plastics - displays
 -the converse is also possible. If the plastics can be made compatible with
integrated circuits, they will be potential light sources for optical
computers.
So, a photo-finish is likely early next century in the race between
light-emitting silicon and plastic to achieve large-scale commercial
production.
