FT  10 FEB 94 / Technology: Make your own diagnosis - As more
over-the-counter medical tests appear on the market, Victoria Griffith looks
at their accuracy
Over-the-counter medical tests - including everything from a home
cholesterol test to a self-diagnosis kit for kidney disease - are
increasingly making their way into American homes.
With pressure growing to slice US health costs and push for early disease
detection, most officials believe home testing will expand over the next few
years. Yet controversy is growing over how far the trend should be taken.
Concern remains over the accuracy of some of the tests. And the possibility
of home tests for life-threatening diseases like colon cancer, prostate
cancer and Aids is worrisome to many.
'From a technological point of view, a home Aids test could be put out
today,' says Truman Sussman, president of Biotel, a US company which makes a
range of home tests, including ones for diabetes and kidney disorders.
'So could many cancer tests. The problem is, you have to ask what the person
will do with that information. The news of illness can be devastating. For
serious diseases, a medical person may also be able to act as a counsellor
when they give the bad news.'
Even in the case of non-life-threatening diseases, there is a danger of
wrong diagnosis. 'There are limits to how far we can realistically take
this,' says Carolyn Jones, director of in vitro diagnosis for the Health
Industry Manufacturers' Association in Washington, DC.
Home testing does offer a number of benefits, though. One reason for their
increasing popularity is that they can help consumers save money. A routine
visit to a physician in the US can cost Dollars 200 (Pounds 133), including
simple laboratory tests.
A home diagnosis kit is considerably cheaper, even in cases which
necessitate a medical prescription. The urinary tract infection kit by
Biotel, for instance, costs just Dollars 11 for a package of 12 tests.
Chronic sufferers often have running prescriptions from their doctors, so
even if the test is positive they can avoid a visit to the physician.
Home testing can also ease costs for the entire medical system, by boosting
early diagnosis. Cholesterol, kidney disease and internal bleeding tests,
for instance, can encourage patients to seek treatment early on.
Enthusiasm for home testing centres on success stories like diabetes
monitoring. A study published in the New England Journal of Medicine two
months ago revealed significant benefits to sufferers who constantly
monitored their blood sugar levels at home. Patients used the information on
blood levels to adjust their insulin doses.
Later this year, the Indianapolis-based diagnostics division of Germany's
Boehringer Mannheim will launch a new home kit for heart disease patients.
The monitor will test the blood of patients on anti-clotting medication.
Like diabetics, heart disease sufferers could then adjust their medication
levels accordingly.
One of the biggest challenges in home testing is to make sure that lay
people can easily obtain accurate results. 'We put a lot of emphasis on
creating labelling that will be easy for everyone to understand,' says
Rosanne Savol, manager of regulatory affairs for Miles, a US company which
puts out a number of home tests, mostly for diabetics.
'We use very large print, so that people with eye troubles will still be
able to read instructions. We also aim at a fifth-grade (10-year-old)
reading level to make sure people with lower educational levels will still
be able to use the product.'
Technological improvements have given impetus to the trend. 'Things are
easier now because we know exactly what substance we're looking for, and
we've come up with a specific chemical which will react with that
substance,' says Jack Bush, director of new business development at
Boehringer Mannheim.
'We will be launching an improved blood sugar test which screens out
interference factors better,' says Ann Setzer, director of products
marketing for Boehringer. 'To do that, we performed the tests under a number
of different conditions, high altitudes, below sea level, in frigid and
humid conditions. Now, the product will give an accurate reading almost
regardless of where you use it.'
Most industry executives believe home testing will gain momentum over the
next decade. 'There are some megatrends that will push this forward,' says
Sussman. 'For one thing, the population is ageing all over the world and the
elderly need better control over their health. The second trend is a push
towards cost containment in the medical sector.'
However, growth may not be consistent, or across the board. The Food &amp; Drug
Administration recently refused to approve a home test for strep throat, for
instance, because of doubts about accuracy. The use of home tests for
chronic, but controllable, diseases will probably see the most rapid growth.
'Allergies, asthma, epilepsy and heart attacks are prime candidates for home
tests,' says Rolf Classon, senior vice president at Miles. 'Wellness
monitoring, like cholesterol tests, will also be a big area.'
However, even as technology improves, home tests for diseases such as cancer
and Aids will continue to be controversial, and concern over the accuracy
and ease of home tests will probably linger for some time to come.
'New technology makes the options in this field more promising,' says Steven
Gutman, head of clinical laboratory devices for the Food &amp; Drug
Administration. 'However, we have robust concerns. I think what we'll see is
cautious growth.'
