FT  03 DEC 94 / Japan's million dollar mayor: A Wall Street banker who went
home to a clash of new and old style politics
When Wall Street banker Tetsundo Iwakuni went home to become a small town
mayor in south-western Japan he soon made an impact.
But it was not just bringing modern management to the town hall that did so
much for the town, it was also his old-style connections with a powerful
Tokyo politician that brought central government cash his way.
The experience of Mr Iwakuni illustrates the 'split personality' of today's
Japanese politics following the downfall of the Liberal Democratic Party
last year. Mr Iwakuni's town, Izumo, is a tranquil little place on the
south-west coast.
Mr Iwakuni, 58, is in the mainstream of political reform, a leading light of
decentralisation and a close friend of Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, the first
post-LDP prime minister. Yet he owes part of his success to the influence of
one of the most senior members of Japan's political old guard. He is Mr
Noboru Takeshita, 70, local member of parliament for the past 36 years, and
a former LDP prime minister.
Mr Iwakuni took a risk by leaving a Dollars 1m per year job as a senior vice
president of Merrill Lynch in New York to become mayor of his home town five
years ago, on the invitation of a local official related to Mr Takeshita. He
finds Izumo and Japan are changing.
The main change, he believes, is that voters have realised for the first
time since the war that there is an alternative to one-party LDP rule. And
yet Mr Iwakuni wonders whether democracy will ever catch on in Japan.
Mr Iwakuni's first step towards hauling Izumo into the 20th century was
symbolic, to change the local calendar from the old imperial to the western
system. He has also shaken up the town hall organisation, so that it won a
management prize as one of Japan's nine best-run corporations, along with
Toyota and Nintendo.
He has pushed the popular reformist cause of decentralisation by simply
ignoring the time honoured tradition of obtaining Tokyo bureaucrats'
permission for every small decision. Mr Iwakuni has proceeded, regardless,
with his own plans, like putting waste recycling bins at filling stations
and opening the town hall for service at weekends.
He is justly proud of his mayoral record, and won 87 per cent of the vote
when he was re-elected last year. Yet Mr Iwakuni makes no secret that his
real passion is to go into national politics, with the aim of making
domestically oriented Japan more influential in the international issues on
which its future increasingly hangs.
Mr Takeshita resigned as prime minister, to take responsibility for
political corruption in the LDP, in 1989, in the same month as Mr Iwakuni
took office, a coincidence which some argued at the time symbolised the
switch from the old style of politics to the new.
Yet there has not been a complete switch, rather a change in direction,
argues the mayor. Mr Takeshita, for example, has recently started to run the
LDP again, this time from behind the scenes. His power as a politician able
to help his own community, the secret of success in old style Japanese
politics, has never waned.
It is thanks to Mr Takeshita's influence with the public administration in
Tokyo that Izumo spends Y30bn (Pounds 189m) per year on public works, twice
as much as neighbouring towns. Today, Izumo hums with construction
machinery, diverting a river to reduce the risk of flooding at one end of
the town and building a by-pass at the other.
Mr Iwakuni freely admits that some of the glory for Mr Takeshita's
fundraising power rubs off on himself. Yet at the same time he points out
that Izumo's big public works budget only diminishes investments in towns
where there is no LDP heavyweight to pull strings in Tokyo.
The cosy nature of Izumo politics shows why Mr Iwakuni believes, with some
frustration, that political reforms alone will not change the way in which
Japan is governed. Old style Japanese politicians' weakness is that they
have to work so hard trying to channel central government money to their own
districts, that they have little time left for national, let alone foreign
policies, he argues.
The new system, under which multi-seat constituencies are replaced by a
mixture of single seat districts and proportional representation, will not
change anything, he believes. It will force politicians to work even harder
for public works funds and other local benefits because they will need a
bigger share of the vote to get elected.
'Local profits to local people will become the dominant factor in the new
style election fight, rather than what we do about the European Union or the
trade surplus,' argues Mr Iwakuni.
'If everyone competes in this way, who will direct the future of Japan? The
bureaucrats will.'
But in the long run, he says, parties with clear policies will be more
successful at influencing coalitions than traditional parties, such as the
LDP and the Socialists, which tend to believe that dogma is an encumbrance.
What if he is wrong? Mr Iwakuni shrugs his shoulders and says he would be
quite happy to go back to New York, to a mega-salary and his grown-up
daughters.
An old style politician would have held onto the mayor's job at any cost.
