FT  21 FEB 94 / Equity Markets: Other Markets
TOKYO
While upward pressure on the yen seems to have subsided, stock market
traders will continue to focus on the currency market and developments over
US-Japan trade negotiations. The Nikkei index is likely to fluctuate on low
volume, but may face selling by corporations realising profits ahead of the
March book closing to supplement weak operating profits.
FRANKFURT
After last week's discount rate cut, the pending M3 money supply growth
figures for January may come as an anticlimax, but there is the possibility
that the Bundesbank will turn its attention to the 6 per cent repo rate when
a DM72.2bn repurchase agreement expires on Wednesday. On Monday, IG Metall
engineering workers' union officials may have to decide whether to call a
strike ballot after the failure of pay talks.
AMSTERDAM
The big internationals feature, with Unilever's preliminary figures due on
Tuesday and the Royal Dutch/Shell group's full-year 1993 figures on
Thursday. Hoare Govett looks for a 4.5 per cent rise in net profits from the
consumer products giant, saying sterling's continued weakness through 1993
acts as a constraint on the guilder dividend; it projects a slight decrease
in earnings per share, but a marginally higher dividend from Royal Dutch.
OSLO
Weak oil prices and aluminium industry politics have not stopped Norsk
Hydro's upward share price career. Monday's 1993 results should produce
earnings up from NKr8.60 to NKr15.60 a share, says NatWest Securities.
COPENHAGEN
Bracketed by other major bank results - AIB in Dublin, Svenska Handelbanken
in Stockholm and UBS in Zurich - Den Danske is due with its 1993 figures on
Thursday. Markedly higher profits are expected: The Estimate Directory
offers a consensus EPS forecast of DKr47.0, up from DKr30 in 1992.
ZURICH
Alusuisse 1993 results are expected on Friday. The group has indicated a
sharp cut in 1993 net profits, due to weak economic conditions and poor
aluminium prices, as well as the additional costs of closing capacity in
aluminium production.
