FT  05 NOV 94 / Outdoors: Frogs at home in urban ponds - Michael J. Woods on
a country dweller forced to change its habits
The advent of the zinc drinking trough fed by clean piped water, spelt the
end of field ponds on most farms. Some were simply neglected and allowed to
silt up, others were deliberately filled, adding field area to the farm and
allowing the removal of trees, which shaded crops.
Other ponds were allowed to fill with pollutants, such as silage effluent.
The outcome has been bad news for frogs along with other freshwater species.
Some areas of Britain have lost more than three-quarters of their farm ponds
in the past half century and there is now a dearth of frogs in the
countryside.
But where the country frog has lost, the town frog has gained, for the
popularity of garden ponds and the relative safety of gardens for amphibians
has ensured that the frog population has boomed in urban areas.
Many breeding adults successfully survive from year to year and, come the
spring, join their own progeny to lay spawn among the water lilies beneath
the spray of fountains and the stony gaze of fishing gnomes. In some ponds
there are fish to feed on the hatchlings, in others great diving beetles,
newts and even the larvae of dragonflies that have made their home there and
relish the spring harvest of tadpoles.
But ponds harbouring few predators, in areas where there is little to eat
the adults, have seen a population explosion of spawn which can be of such
magnitude that the pond almost becomes a single quivering mass of jelly.
Meanwhile those with new ponds are generally keen to see frogs move in and
many County Wildlife Trusts now run a scheme encouraging those with too much
spawn and those with little or none to get in touch with each other.
Frogs can live to be eight or nine but may take three years to reach sexual
maturity so that new ponds may need the introduction of spawn for up to
three years before frogs readily find and return to them.
At the same time, ponds must be cared for in order to prevent an
accumulation of dead leaves and to keep the water sufficiently oxygenated to
support tadpoles. Eventually, of course, the new owner has a seasoned,
well-used pond and may then become a donor of spawn.
Unfortunately, now that frogs are comparatively common in gardens, their
loss from the countryside is tending to go unnoticed.
But the loss of any pond is of concern to conservation organisations and to
the National Rivers Authority, which is keen on conserving ponds and the
wildlife which lives in them.
Ironically, desperate frogs, unable to find anywhere more suitable,
sometimes leave their spawn, unfertilised, in the new drinking troughs. But
at least this would be good news for the goldfish living in one trough I
know.
