FT  10 MAR 94 / Clinton launches jobs plans
President Bill Clinton yesterday unveiled his plans to overhaul the US
unemployment system to retrain unemployed workers and move them back into
new jobs.
The plan would provide longer unemployment benefits for people who are
undertaking retraining, as well as laid-off workers who decided to open
their own businesses. Mr Clinton also promised to bring six separate state
and federal benefit, counselling and training programmes under a single
roof.
'The first element of the plan is to create one-stop shopping so workers can
go to one office and get the counselling and assistance they need,' Mr
Clinton said at a White House ceremony to launch the plan yesterday
afternoon.
The initiative, which is expected to face considerable modification in
Congress, is likely to be presented by the administration at next week's
Group of Seven jobs conference in Detroit as a centrepiece of efforts the US
is making to improve employment prospects.
While the US has generated far more jobs than the less flexible European
economies over the past decade, European governments have often suggested
that the US system conceals the real level of joblessness by simply cutting
off unemployment benefits after a relatively short period. They have also
criticised the inadequacy of US training schemes.
US officials this week have insisted that they want to move beyond that
1980s argument, insisting that each of the G7 countries can learn from the
others.
'We are still going to say to them in Europe that part of their problem
stems from the fact that their labour markets are very inflexible. . . . But
one of the places where we are going to learn the most is on training and
moving people from school to work, and we are going to learn a lot from the
Europeans on that,' said Mr Lewis Alexander, chief economist at the US
Commerce Department.
The plan put forward by Mr Clinton yesterday would provide benefits to
unemployed workers for up to two years of training, at a cost, when it is
fully phased in, of about Dollars 3bn (Pounds 2bn) a year.
US unemployment benefits usually run out after 26 weeks, although for much
of the last three years Congress has voted to extend benefits for between
seven and 33 additional weeks.
Mr Clinton said yesterday that the old unemployment benefits system was
designed to give people 'enough to live on until their old jobs came back
because most jobs were lost in ordinary cyclical recessions'.
That system was no longer adequate in an economy where three out of four
workers laid off last year expected never to get their old jobs back, he
said, and where the average US worker would change jobs seven or eight times
in a lifetime.
