FT  11 MAR 94 / Customs disregarded key reports on Iraq arms sales
Customs and Excise disregarded key intelligence reports because it did not
consider them 'firm evidence' in the Matrix Churchill prosecution, the Scott
inquiry heard yesterday.
Mr Peter Wiltshire, a senior Customs investigator in the case, told the
inquiry: 'Intelligence is not evidence because evidence has to be provable.
Intelligence is not provable.'
He was explaining why he helped prepare a witness statement for the
prosecution which omitted a reference to Whitehall officials being told by
the intelligence agencies of Matrix Churchill's involvement in building up
Iraq's military capability.
Earlier Mr Wiltshire said he had overlooked an intelligence report prepared
by GCHQ, the government's secret communications centre, on Matrix Churchill
which he admitted had a bearing on the trial.
The report was prepared prior to officials and ministers approving the
export of Matrix Churchill machine tools. The case for the defence was that
executives of Matrix Churchill, who were charged with breaching export laws,
had in fact traded with Iraq with government approval.
A classified document made available to the Scott inquiry shows that the
report was discussed by Mr Wiltshire and representatives of intelligence
agencies within a secret Whitehall committee called the Restricted
Enforcement Unit but was never made available to the defence.
Challenged by Lord Justice Scott to consider his conduct in the Matrix
Churchill affair, Mr Wiltshire accepted that the intelligence document was
'clearly relevant'. He conceded that he may have recommended that the case
be abandoned if the report had been circulated more widely.
The inquiry also heard that Mr Wiltshire chose as one of his key prosecution
witnesses a senior Department of Trade and Industry official in spite of a
warning from more senior colleagues at Customs that the civil servant was a
'weak witness'.
Mr Wiltshire yesterday described the civil servant, Mr Tony Steadman, as an
'honest but nervous' witness, who had suffered from health problems.
But he was challenged by Lord Justice Scott over the apparent
inconsistencies between evidence Mr Steadman gave in the Matrix Churchill
trial, reported conversations between him and Mr Wiltshire, and evidence
contained in Whitehall documents in the possession of the inquiry.
