FT  08 AUG 94 / Wellcome sees new hope
The world's leading supplier of medicines for Aids and HIV, Wellcome,
yesterday effectively admitted its second-top selling treatment, the
controversial AZT, would no longer be prescribed on its own.
'The era of monotherapy for the treatment of Aids and HIV is over,' Dr David
Barry, research, development and medical director at Wellcome, told the 10th
International Aids conference in Yokohama. HIV, the virus that causes Aids,
mutates so rapidly that eventually it develops resistance to all
anti-retroviral medicines when they are administered on their own, he says.
AZT is the world's top-selling HIV and Aids treatment.
However, Wellcome's admission is not the end of the AZT story. Dr Barry is
now proposing AZT should be used simultaneously with at least two other
drugs. 'We're talking about three drugs - three magic wands. New data about
combinations of medicines are giving rise to a renaissance of hope for the
control of this disease.'
This hope is based on at least two studies involving three drugs, including
AZT, which Dr Barry presented yesterday. These trials demonstrate that the
medicines can completely stop HIV, the virus that causes Aids, from
replicating. They would not destroy the virus, which would remain in the
body, but it would be controlled by the drugs. Dr Barry believes the drugs
may work together, possibly halting different parts of the virus's
life-cycle and possibly attacking the virus in different parts of the body.
Wellcome and Dr Barry are anxious not to be over-optimistic. 'We have not
yet tried to repeat the test-tube data in humans,' he stresses. 'But it
appears that two drugs are better than one, and three drugs are better than
two. With three drugs, we appear to reach a threshold. This was true of
tuberculosis, when researchers 40 years ago discovered three drugs were
required to defeat the disease, and it's probably true for HIV.'
'We need to identify the most effective and best-tolerated agents which can
completely suppress viral replication and thus suppress the development of
resistance over an extended period. Such trials are not only possible but
urgently needed,' he said. Dr Barry plans to start these trials next month.
The patients would be those who were HIV-positive and with CD4 counts of
between 200 and 400. CD4 is one of the most important measures of the
performance of the immune system.
The studies would include combinations of AZT, Roche's ddC and the same
company's protease inhibitor, Saquinavir; AZT, Bristol-Myers Squibb's ddI,
and Boehringer-Ingelheim's Nevirapine; AZT, ddI and 3TC, a drug discovered
by Biochem Pharma of Canada and partly developed by Glaxo; and AZT, ddC, and
Nevirapine.
Dr Barry believes it should take less than two months to find the 100
patients for each arm of the trial. All of the trials involve AZT because
combinations with that drug appear more powerful than those without. The
three drugs should be given simultaneously, rather than adding them one by
one, says Dr Barry. This avoids the virus building up resistance to each of
the drugs separately. For that reason the new trials will involve only those
people who have not previously taken AZT or other anti-viral drugs.
Although AZT has a reputation for being toxic, Dr Barry does not expect
severe reactions to the drug because the combinations chosen have relatively
low toxicity and do not interact. The initial data will be ready by this
time next year, says Dr Barry. 'Even with the triple therapy, we don't know
if the disease will progress in five or 10 years. We don't know the duration
of benefit, but it should certainly be longer than at present.'
