FT  18 MAR 94 / Leading Article: Africa's gloom
Sub-Saharan Africa's economic decline may have been arrested, and in some
countries modestly reversed. But the long-awaited World Bank report on
structural adjustment in the region is deeply worrying, nevertheless.
Current growth rates among the best performers are 'still too low to reduce
poverty much in the next two or three decades'. With today's poor policies,
it will be 40 years before the region returns to its income per head of the
mid-1970s, says the report.
The sheer misery of countries not covered in the report can only be guessed
at: Sudan, Africa's largest state, Zaire, potentially one of its wealthiest,
Angola, Somalia and Liberia. Meanwhile, Burundi, which was doing rather
well, has had a coup and Nigeria has slid backwards, after having been a
leading performer between 1987 and 1991. Last weekend it was given a
justified ticking off by Mr Kim Jaycox, the bank's vice-president for
Africa.
The fundamental questions are why Africa has been left trailing by the rest
of the developing world and what can be done to remedy the calamity. Some of
the answers may emerge in Tokyo this week, where the Japanese finance
ministry has brought together World Bank and IMF officials, other donors and
African governments, to discuss lessons from east Asia's success.
Mr Lee Kuan Yew of economically successful Singapore made a start last
November, when he offered Africa his own sensible checklist: clean
government; an effective and adequately paid civil service; family planning;
'pragmatism, not dogma, in economics'; letting foreigners and local
entrepreneurs 'get on with their business'; universal education; and going
'for results not political correctness'. Mr Lee had another piece of advice,
one that goes to the heart of Africa's development disaster: maintain
national solidarity and social cohesion.
Africa faces many formidable obstacles in its efforts to recover. The
infrastructure is desperately poor, privatisation painfully slow, the
external debt burden heavy, management weak and education inadequate. In all
of these areas outsiders can offer some assistance. But the continent's most
formidable hurdles, those of social fragmentation and brutal political
exploitation, are not susceptible to outside intervention. Too often
governments fail to act on behalf of their countries. Obligations extend,
instead, in concentric circles, beginning with family, village and clan, and
embracing tribe, but not country.
It is not Africa's fault that boundaries are arbitrary, that former nation
states were divided, or several nations encompassed within newly created
territories. The Organisation of African Unity's decision to retain those
colonial boundaries was right. But after independence, African leaders
failed to build either the machinery or, more important, the attitudes
required by functioning modern states. Building such a social compact may
require a new generation of leaders.
Make no mistake, structural adjustment is necessary, even though it is bound
to work slowly. But it may not work at all if those with power do not feel
obliged to serve the interests of the people.
