FT  04 MAY 94 / Leading Article: South Africa looks forward
South Africa's transition from minority rule to democracy is something to
celebrate. Not even the painfully inefficient election count can spoil an
event of such moment and one whose significance extends well beyond the
region. A stable, democratic and economically successful South Africa might
yet offer hope for a continent debilitated by debt, disaster and disease. It
could even become a model for other countries where ethnic and racial
tensions present seemingly insuperable barriers to economic progress.
Fulfilment of these hopes will be as difficult as the transition itself, but
South Africa has made an encouraging start. President FW de Klerk has left
office with a grace that has enhanced his reputation and augurs well for his
expected role as second vice president. General Constand Viljoen, the former
armed services chief, steered the conservative right away from confrontation
and into the election. He deserves credit for defusing what could have been
a destabilising clash.
Above all, the president-elect, Mr Nelson Mandela, leader of the victorious
African National Congress, is preparing for office with the pragmatism and
compassion that is his hallmark. With the grim legacy of apartheid all
around him, he was right to strike a note of urgency in his victory speech
on Monday night, promising that he and his team will roll up their sleeves
and get South Africa back to work.
Cabinet places
He was also wise to offer places in his cabinet to parties which failed to
reach the 5 per cent that would give them automatic representation in a
government of national unity: the liberal Democratic party, the radical Pan
Africanist Congress and Gen Viljoen's Freedom Front, which seeks reassurance
that Afrikaner culture will survive. It would be wise to extend a similar
invitation to Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, although his Inkatha Freedom party
may have attracted sufficient votes to secure it a cabinet seat. Chief
Buthelezi's difficulties with the ANC and its leader are well-known. Yet
nothing can be lost by attempting to bring this prickly personality into the
fold.
In selecting his cabinet Mr Mandela must also look beyond his domestic
constituency. A careful balance is needed to reassure international
investors, who look for stability. They will wish to see continuity of the
sound economic policies that have characterised the transition. The
retention of Mr Derek Keys, the present finance minister, in one of the main
economic portfolios would constitute a clear signal that this is understood.
Mr Chris Stals, the governor of the Reserve Bank, should be asked to stay in
his job. It may be difficult for Mr Mandela but room should be found for
both men, not as token whites but as key players in South Africa's new
economic team.
Investment code
Mr Mandela must also be on his guard against those who argue for an
investment code. Rev Leon Sullivan, the US-based campaigner, achieved some
success in urging foreign companies who decided to maintain their operations
in the old South Africa to end discrimination on the shop floor, introduce
training programmes and accept social responsibilities in the black
community. He and others now advocate similar terms for would-be foreign
investors. These objectives are well-meant, but to make them a condition
displays a misunderstanding of the tough competition for investment. No
lobby urges the same conditions for other developing nations.
Some investors are showing strong interest in post-apartheid South Africa,
whether as a market in its own right, or as a base for operations in the
rest of Africa. Yet the new government is in no position to lay down terms
that might drive investment capital to more attractive Asian homes. Indeed,
Mr Mandela should bear Asian lessons closely in mind as he looks to the
future. That implies a market-driven exchange rate, a competitive business
environment, a close partnership between government and the private sector,
trade liberalisation, encouragement of multinationals with their worldwide
marketing facilities, technology and management skills and an efficient
civil service. He will best serve the new South Africa if he applies these
principles. He might also then galvanise the rest of Africa, for whom he is
already an inspiration.
