FT  15 JUN 94 / International Bonds: Global offerings in pipeline for US
mortgage agencies
Bank Nederlandse Gemeenten (BNG), the Dutch municipal finance bank, plans to
take advantage of its newly-assigned debt ratings to launch a series of
benchmark international bonds. Yesterday, Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's both
officially rated the bank's debt triple-A.
Global offerings for two leading US mortgage agencies are also in the
pipeline. The Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) has
followed the lead of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie
Mac), which last week announced plans to launch its first global offering
via Salomon Brothers and Goldman Sachs.
Fannie Mae has mandated Merrill Lynch and JP Morgan to arrange its offering,
which could emerge as early as next week. Both offerings are expected to
total around Dollars 1bn.
Fannie Mae's 10-year US domestic bonds currently trade at a spread of about
28 basis points over the comparable Treasury yield, but a global bond would
be priced more tightly. The maturity of the global bond has not yet been
decided.
In addition, Belgium is considering a Dollars 500m bond offering, which
could emerge today, though a maturity is yet to be decided.
BNG plans to launch a series of benchmark issues in D-Marks, yen and
dollars, according to Mr Jakob Hekkelman, a member of the bank's executive
board.
Goldman Sachs, which acted as financial adviser to BNG on its rating, has
been mandated to arrange the first benchmark issue.
The decision to seek a rating was sparked by the expansion of the bank's
international borrowing. 'We are becoming increasingly active in the
international capital markets,' said Mr Hekkelman. 'It's better to have
explicit ratings,' rather than constantly to explain to potential investors
the bank's close relationship to the Dutch government. BNG is 50 per
cent-owned by the government and 50 per cent by Dutch municipalities and
provinces.
Already, BNG is one of the largest Dutch borrowers in the international
markets. Last year, it raised Fl 5.3bn equivalent in the international
market, and Fl 10bn in the domestic market. Mr Hekkelman said increasing
demand from local government clients will mean a further expansion of its
financing activities. The bank will host a series of roadshows in Europe and
Asia.
Among yesterday's new issues, Household Revolving Home Equity Loan Trust
issued Dollars 731m of floating-rate securities backed by first and second
mortgages. Lead manager Merrill Lynch said that around a third of the
offering will be placed in Europe.
In the D-Mark sector, Argentina launched a DM500m three-year issue priced to
yield 220 basis points over the comparable bund. The deal was largely
targeted at retail investors, according to lead manager Deutsche Bank.
