FT  24 MAR 94 / World Trade News: Brittan wants rights put on WTO agenda
Sir Leon Brittan, the European trade commissioner, called yesterday for
workers' rights to be placed on the agenda of the planned World Trade
Organisation, successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The European Union should propose this formally at next month's Gatt
ministerial meeting in Marrakesh, he said. However, he strongly opposed any
action against 'social dumping' when exporters owed their advantage purely
to low wage and social costs.
Sir Leon's statement, which was broadly endorsed by fellow commissioners,
follows US demands that human and social rights be made a WTO priority. It
coincided with an apparent softening in the position of France, which has
favoured vigorous international measures to combat 'social dumping'.
The French government said yesterday that countries should not be allowed to
gain undue advantage from lax labour and environmental standards. However,
it recognised low-wage competition as 'a fact of international trade' and
said environmental safeguards should not be used as a pretext for trade
protection.
French officials said that, by avoiding any proposal to discriminate against
exporters purely on cost grounds, they were more likely to win support from
other industrialised countries for a serious debate in the WTO on labour and
environmental standards.
Sir Leon's remarks were noticeably more positive than his earlier stance,
which appeared cool to US proposals for an early debate on workers' rights
in the WTO. But he told the Commission yesterday that if the EU held back,
other Gatt members were likely to go ahead.
He said a WTO debate should focus on actions to curb exports produced by
forced labour, such as slavery and child exploitation, and on securing the
right of free organisation. He suggested standards could be geared to
countries' level of economic development.
Though he expected no decisions of substance to be taken on the issue in
Marrakesh, his statement is unlikely to be welcomed by Mr Peter Sutherland,
Gatt director-general, who is reluctant to see workers' rights placed high
on the WTO agenda.
Sir Leon said there was 'no chance whatsoever of achieving any international
consensus in favour of permitting trade action to be used against countries
which do no more than benefit from lower wage or social security costs'.
Such measures would also do little to relieve EU unemployment.
However, he said the EU could consider laws to prohibit imports produced by
prison labour, though they could be hard to enforce. It should also examine
ways to monitor and enforce more effectively compliance with conventions
adopted in the International Labour Organisation.
