FT  14 JAN 94 / Survey of Drax - The Big Clean-up (1): Power station will
cut pollution - The impact of the FGD units will be felt throughout Britain
and, to a lesser extent other parts of Europe which have long complained
about the acid rain emanating from the UK
Mr Barry Fincham and his colleagues at National Power were not impressed
when a party of Japanese visitors to the Drax power station in the early
1980s suggested they followed their example and built facilities to lower
sulphur emissions. 'We all thought it was a bit of a joke,' he recalls.
They have had to change their minds. A decade or so later Mr Fincham has
just completed his 33-year career in the electricity industry with a
six-year stint overseeing the construction of the flue gas desulphurisation
(FGD) units which the Japanese recommended.
The Pounds 700m project passed its first milestone recently, just before Mr
Fincham retired, when Babcock, the largest contractor, handed over to
National Power the first two of the six FGD units which are scheduled to be
built by 1996.
The construction of the units is not the kind of story which can capture the
public imagination in the way that, say, the Channel Tunnel, has. But its
environmental and economic impact has been, and will be, felt throughout the
country and, to a lesser extent other parts of Europe, including
Scandinavia, which have long complained of the acid rain emanating from the
UK.
The size of Drax, named after a small village near the site in north
Yorkshire, means that almost anything coming out of or affecting the power
station has widespread consequences. It is western Europe's biggest
coal-fired power station, generating about 10 per cent of England and
Wales's electricity needs or enough electricity to satisfy the needs of half
of inner London.
Design, construction and manufacture of the FGDs constitutes one of the
largest environmental projects in the world. Building the FGDs has provided
employment for 2,500 people with peak activity requiring 1,700 employees on
site. More than 90 companies have been involved with contracts ranging from
hundreds of thousands of pounds to the Pounds 420m of work undertaken by
Babcock.
For some companies the project has been a turning point. 'Drax has set us on
our feet again,' says Mr Ivan Harris, engineering director of Birtley
Engineering which had a Pounds 25m contract to build the materials handling
system for the project. 'It put us on the map as a mechanical handler and
has given us the references to win contracts elsewhere including Saudi
Arabia.'
The fact that Birtley, Babcock and other contractors were able to pass the
first stage of the contract into National Power's hands on time and within
budget will be seen as a significant achievement for British industry, and
one that perhaps 10 years ago would have been unimaginable on such a
large-scale project.
Days lost through industrial action on the project amounted to less than
0.25 per cent.
But while the project - and allied programmes to reduce nitrous oxide
emissions - has been welcome for an economy which was either in recession or
growing slowly for much of the past six years, its most long-lasting effects
are likely to be on the environment .
Fitting the FGD units will cut 90 per cent of the more than 250,000 tonnes
of sulphur dioxide which are emitted from the plant each year. It will also
make a hefty contribution to the UK's target of reducing emissions to 60 per
cent of 1980 levels by 2003, as part of a worldwide effort to reduce the
acid rain which causes such environmental damage.
If the coal lobby were to have its way, National Power and PowerGen, the
other main generator in England and Wales, would follow the lead of their
counterparts in western Germany and fit FGDs to each of their coal-fired
power stations. That would give a far better chance of survival both for the
25 remaining coal-fired stations and the remnants of the coal industry which
in the past 18 months has shrunk from 50 to 22 pits.
If current trends continue - that is, if gas-fired electricity and nuclear
power increase their market shares as expected - there will be about 15
coal-fired power stations by the end of the century and no more than a
handful of pits to service them.
The chances of FGDs being fitted to any more than Drax and two or three
other coal-fired stations are remote. Later in the decade, National Power
may consider building more FGD units for burning Orimulsion, a bitumen-based
fuel imported from Venezuela, but it is unlikely to add any to its 17
coal-fired stations other than Drax.
PowerGen, with seven coal-fired stations, is already building an FGD plant
to clean about 2,000 megawatts of electricity at its Ratcliffe power
station, but there are doubts that it will fulfil the strong indications
given in its flotation prospectus three years ago that it would build a
similar facility at its Ferrybridge C power station.
Although the government has said it expects PowerGen to fit 4,000MW of FGD,
the company is likely to argue that it should be relieved of any obligation
at Ferrybridge because of the contribution it is making to cutting sulphur
emissions by replacing coal-burning stations with gas-fired plants which are
more environmentally friendly.
'We will continue to make future investment decisions on a step-by-step
basis as emission targets and market circumstances require,' the company
says.
When Scottish Power was privatised, the company anticipated building 2,000MW
of FGD at its Longannet power plant but there are strong doubts both at the
company and among environmentalists about the worth of doing so because of
the low sulphur content of Scottish coal.
One possibility is that Scottish Power be relieved of some of the
requirement on it to reduce sulphur content in return for contributing
financially to an FGD construction in England and Wales.
The generators' reluctance to commit themselves to anything other than Drax
and Ratcliffe is explained by the cost. National Power says the Drax FGD
will add 0.6p a unit to the cost of producing electricity which compares
with about 2.6p per unit for power traded in England and Wales's wholesale
electricity pool.
It argues it cannot simply pass all of this through to the customer because
that would lead to its losing market share to new independent companies
producing electricity from combined cycle gas turbine generators.
The company's critics say National Power can afford to absorb the cost
increases following its stronger-than-expected financial performance since
privatisation and the value to the company of coal contracts agreed with
British Coal earlier this year.
Whatever the arguments, Mr Granville Camsey, National Power executive
director for group technology, says the company is willing to pay a price
for the environment.
'Any industrial enterprise that doesn't take responsibility for the
environment will lose out,' he says. 'Increasingly towards the end of the
decade, investors will choose companies with high profiles on the
environment. You can no longer afford to take a de minimis approach.'
But Mr Camsey also acknowledges that National Power would be unable to
satisfy the requirements of the government's pollution inspectorate on
reducing sulphur emissions had it not constructed the Drax FGD. Its
construction of gas-fired power stations, which produce virtually no
sulphur, are unlikely to be enough.
Drax employees are unlikely to be too concerned about the motives of
National Power and the Central Electricity Generating Board, its predecessor
prior to electricity privatisation, for building the FGDs.
The 630 workers know that most of them will have a job until well into the
next century if they want one. Not many employees at coal-fired power
stations can have anything like that kind of confidence.
