FT  07 APR 94 / Survey of Danish Banking and Finance (1): Rescued by sound
ratios - The financial sector is changing, but Danish bankers can look back
on the last few years with satisfaction. Challenges are the same as
elsewhere in the region, but, unlike other Nordic countries, the government
has not had to step in
The financial services sector in Denmark is in the throes of change.
Competition is intensifying as a result of the liberalisation sweeping
through the sector in Europe; the banks are moving into insurance and
mortgage credit business; the insurance companies are operating their own
banks; and there is tough competition from foreign banks for corporate
banking business.
Yet, while the challenges are the same as elsewhere in the region, Danish
bankers can look back on the last few years with satisfaction.
Losses have been incurred as a result of the recession and the collapse in
property prices, but unlike in other Nordic countries, the government has
not had to step in with rescue packages for any of the big banks.
The country's banks have been able to avoid the crises experienced elsewhere
in the region because of their unusually strong solvency ratios. As a result
of these, while the banking sector as a whole has suffered losses not
significantly different from the loss ratios in other Nordic countries, it
has been able, with a few exceptions, to sustain the burden.
'The worst appears now to be over,' says Mr Knud Sorensen, who in addition
to being chief executive of Den Danske Bank is chairman of the Bankers'
Association.
Last year the banks and savings banks together made a profit of DKr6bn
compared with a 1992 loss of DKr11bn. There was a similar improvement in the
performance of the rest of the financial industry, including the insurance
companies and mortgage finance institutions.
This performance took place against the background of a stable but slack
economy. The GDP growth rate in 1993, according to preliminary estimates,
was well under 1 per cent and demand for bank loans declined slightly. But
the economy is also showing underlying strengths. Inflation last year was
only about 1.2 per cent, and the current balance of payments account showed
a surplus of DKr34.7bn, or about 3.9 per cent of GDP. Furthermore, the
budget deficit is among the lowest in Europe.
The main cloud on the banks' horizon has been a disagreement, arising out of
the collapse of a small bank, which has soured the normally good relations
with the government. As a result future attempts to rescue banks which are
in trouble could be made more difficult.
Sparekassen Nordjylland (Spar Nord), a Jutland savings bank, claims that in
late-night negotiations last August the government promised it a tax
write-off of DKr173m in return for its taking over most of the assets of a
small, local bank, Himmerlandsbanken, which had run into difficulties. The
legality of the write-off was subsequently questioned, leading to
allegations by Spar Nord that the government had reneged on the promise. The
case is currently the subject of a commission of inquiry being held in
public in Copenhagen.
Yet, while the financial performance of the banks was better last year,
their performance was supported by very large realised and unrealised
capital gains arising from the increase in bond and share prices in Denmark
and from substantial earnings from currency turbulence last summer.
'Without these special circumstances, return on equity capital would have
remained weak and insufficient in the long run to attract the new capital
needed for expansion,' says Mr Sorensen.
The problems appear to be especially difficult for a group of middle-sized
regional banks. These lack the strength to compete with the largest Danish
banks or with foreign banks, argues Mr Bjarne Jensen, a former banker who is
now an independent consultant on the banking industry.
The difficulties are illustrated by the weak performance of four such banks
in recent years: Midtbank, which serves north-west Jutland; Sydbank, serving
southern Jutland; Amagerbanken, a Copenhagen bank; and Aktivbank, serving
east Jutland and wholly owned by insurance group Topdanmark.
As Mr Sorensen points out, the challenge which these and other banks,
including the strongest, face is how to get their core earnings (excluding
windfall profits of the sort earned in recent years) up to a more
satisfactory level, and how to reduce costs.
'Even with the most favourable conceivable development in the economy, costs
in the financial sector are going to be higher than is warranted by future
earnings potential.'
In an attempt to cut costs, reductions in staff and in the number of bank
branches are already being implemented. Attempts to strengthen income are
focusing on customer fees, with most of the larger banks announcing new
charges for bank transactions this spring. But, as Mr Jensen points out,
this is a delicate balancing act for the banks. Fees could easily reach a
level at which customers stopped using the banks' own plastic charge card,
the widely-used Dankort, and switched to credit cards.
Yet, while the banks have avoided serious problems up to now, and can
concentrate on building for the future, the same has not been true for
another important Danish financial sector, insurance. The industry is still
recovering from the blows inflicted on it when the country's then two
largest insurance groups, Baltica and Hafnia, collapsed in 1992-93 as a
result of ill-judged ventures by the two groups' holding companies.
Hafnia had been trying to gain control of Baltica and, together with
Norway's UNI Storebrand, of the Swedish insurance company, Skandia.
When the value of the strategic share investments which Hafnia made in these
two companies fell dramatically in 1992, Hafnia Holding's equity capital was
wiped out. Baltica's problems arose from property investments and high-risk
property-related lending by Baltica Bank, which was wound up last year.
Hafnia Holding filed for bankruptcy last year, and its insurance and other
operations were taken over by Codan, controlled by the UK's Sun Alliance,
which thereby became the country's largest company in accident insurance.
Baltica was restructured with the assistance of Den Danske Bank, but in the
meantime Baltica Insurance is left with an ownership problem.
Following last year's reconstruction, Danske owns 45 per cent of the capital
of Baltica: the former Baltica Holding (now known as Gefion) holds 32 per
cent; and Codan 14 per cent. Danske is currently trying to find a Danish or
foreign buyer or buyers for its own and Gefion's holdings. If these efforts
fail, Danske itself may have to take on the full ownership of the group.
Intense competition between Hafnia and Baltica in the late 1980s, until
1992, created a problem for the entire insurance sector. 'Competition meant
that premiums did not rise between 1988 and 1992, but indemnities did,' says
Mr Bent Knie Andersen, chief executive of insurance company Alm. Brand, and
chairman of the Association of Danish Insurance Companies. This year, at
last, there has been a general 10-15 per cent increase in premium prices.
'This is not pleasant for customers,' he says, 'but in the long run they,
too, are better off if the insurance companies are sound.'
Like the banks, mortgage credit institutions were hit by the recession and
falling property prices, but they recovered strongly in 1993. They play a
much bigger role in Denmark than in most countries, financing most mortgages
with bonds issued on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange.
The two largest mortgage credit institutions, Nykredit, (assets DKr417bn),
and Realkredit Danmark, (assets DKr382bn), are not only larger than Den
Danske Bank, (assets DKr356bn), but among the largest mortgage credit
institutions in Europe. They are, however, meeting stiff competition from
the banks, which have started their own mortgage credit companies, while
they themselves are not permitted to open banks.
This may be one of the next structural reforms to take place.
