FT  30 MAR 94 / Krajina talks make progress: Negotiators hold out hope of
ceasefire in breakaway Serb territory
Croatian government officials and leaders of Krajina, the breakaway Serb
territory in Croatia, yesterday made headway in crucial talks on a
ceasefire, which Serb leaders said could avert another war in the region.
Negotiators held out the hope that the two sides might reach an agreement
late yesterday night.
'I don't see why the agreement cannot be reached today. . . . We are in a
perfect position. It is up to the two sides whether they want this
agreement,' said Mr Vitaly Churkin, the Russian special envoy to the region
who hosted the talks.
Mr Slobodan Jarcevic, foreign minister of Krajina, the self-styled state
which covers nearly a third of Croatia, said: 'If we get a ceasefire, which
is backed by the international community, then we could avoid war.'
Speaking by telephone from the Russian embassy in Zagreb, the Croatian
capital, where the two sides met for the second time in a week, Mr Jarcevic
said: 'The chances are fifty-fifty that we reach an agreement. The
atmosphere is very tense, but so much is at stake.'
International mediators see resolution of the Serb-Croat conflict, which
began in 1991, as the key to peace in Bosnia and stabilisation of former
Yugoslavia. 'They received a message that there is a sense of urgency and
even impatience in the international community that this opportunity should
not be allowed to pass by,' said Mr John Mills, spokesman for the United
Nations conference on former Yugoslavia.
Mr Charles Redman, the US special envoy, and Mr Peter Galbraith, the US
ambassador to Croatia, also urged Croat and Serb representatives to reach an
agreement, which was to include the withdrawal of infantry by 1km and heavy
weaponry by 20km, said diplomats.
Ceasefire talks collapsed last week amid disagreement over the front line.
The two sides remain far apart in their political demands. Serb leaders
insist on independence for their breakaway state, carved out over a
six-month war, backed by the Yugoslav army, while Croatian authorities are
pressing the international community to bring Krajina, which cuts Croatia in
two, under Zagreb's control.
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has reportedly suggested trading
parts of Serb-held land in exchange for the phasing out of UN sanctions on
what remains of Yugoslavia.
These areas include western Slavonija, which straddles the main motorway,
and Knin, the Serb stronghold in Krajina, which was once the key railway
junction for Croatia and has all but cut off access to the southern
Dalmatian coast.
