FT  24 MAY 94 / Management (The Growing Business): Unusual means to a happy
end - A novel financing deal helped in the rescue of Standard Platforms
Last week the London stock market witnessed one of its more unusual
corporate rescues. Standard Platforms, a supplier of optical imaging
systems, raised Pounds 450,000 through a share issue made necessary by a
disastrous expansion into the US.
It was not the size of the issue that was unusual, although raising such a
small amount would tend to be too small to justify the corporate finance
fee.
Nor was the reason for the rescue abnormal - the US has been a graveyard for
many UK companies which have thought North America was like their home
market, only bigger.
What distinguished the deal was that 30 private individuals subscribed an
average Pounds 17,000 in a rare, if not unique, example of a business angel
rescue.
To make the deal fly, IDJ, the corporate finance company that brought the
investors together, took its fee in shares. And 3i, the investment capital
supplier, agreed to convert Pounds 300,000 of loan stock into equity.
Standard Platforms had enjoyed a short and eventful public existence. With
the Pounds 1.6m raised when it came to the Unlisted Securities Market in
1990, it had tried to push into the US with a new product.
In the UK it had established a sound customer base supplying bespoke systems
to enable the likes of DHL and Securicor to store and retrieve optically the
records of thousands of documents they receive daily.
In the US the company had hoped to produce an off-the-shelf version of the
software it could sell to hospitals and clinics. Sales never materialised as
expected, losses mounted and the US subsidiary was sold.
The shares were suspended in March 1994 at 36p, valuing the group at Pounds
1.4m, when at their peak they had traded at more than 200p. In the 18 months
to September 1993 Standard Platforms had made a pre-tax loss of Pounds 1.1m
and had net liabilities of Pounds 574,000.
'The company was not exactly thriving but it was not bleeding,' says Peter
Dicks, who has joined as non-executive chairman. 'It was dead in the water,
not sinking,' says John Incledon, chairman of IDJ and the largest new
investor in Standard Platforms.
To sell the refinancing to new investors IDJ needed a manager respected in
the field. They found Iain Bowles who was, until the week before last, sales
and marketing director for the European operation of Fujitsu, the second
largest computer company in the world.
It then needed to convince 3i to convert its debt into equity, a move the
institution agreed to make if IDJ could get the share issue fully
underwritten by business angels.
'Getting the money was relatively simple,' says Mr Dicks. IDJ went on a
series of roadshows and sent 55 people an information package.
IDJ took a week to put the underwriting in place - all 30 investors were
required to sign a 'hold harmless' letter saying effectively that they were
aware their shareholding might prove to be valueless. It pulled off what
Dicks calls a 'typical US-style wipe-out financing' that diluted existing
shareholders to a 22 per cent stake but left the reconstructed balance sheet
with net cash of more than Pounds 200,000.
Could such an angel-backed financing be repeated? First, the group
organising such an underwriting needs a well-heeled list of investors who
have invested in private companies and know they may be saying goodbye to
their capital for a long time, if not for ever.
Of equal importance is the need to bring in good management without which no
investors would have been tempted. In the case of Standard Platforms, it
remains for Bowles to justify that faith in his abilities.
