FT  09 SEP 94 / Unions may join Channel tunnel link consortium
Trade unions have been invited to join one of the four consortium bids to
build the Pounds 2.7bn Channel tunnel rail link from Folkestone to London,
it was announced yesterday.
The German multinational conglomerates Hochtief and Siemens in alliance with
Costain, the UK construction company, want the GMB general union, the TGWU
general union and the three rail unions to form a 'social partnership' with
them to construct the 68-mile link, which is expected to create about 10,000
jobs.
Mr John Edmonds, the GMB's general secretary, said he was 'very excited' by
the project. His union is expected to join the consortium whatever the other
unions may decide to do. 'This is the first time we have ever been
approached by a private company to become involved in such a business
project,' he said.
Others involved in the consortia are Nishimatsu, the Japanese construction
company; Hambros Bank and John Prideaux Associates. Mr Edmonds would not
disclose at this stage the amount of money the GMB was prepared to invest in
the bid. Nor would he reveal details of the consortium proposals. However,
he stressed it was the symbolic significance of union involvement in the
project that really mattered.
'This is the reality of European social partnership arriving on our shores,'
he said. 'We have been invited to participate and to contribute money
because the companies recognise that working together is better for business
and employees. This type of relationship is common on the Continent and the
social partnership between unions and companies will be the industrial
relations model of the future.
'The prize is enormous. It means the unions can get involved from the very
beginning in the training, management and health and safety aspects of the
project.
'In the past we have had to barge in through the back door in such schemes.
The potential value for the members in the union being part of the
consortium is tremendous.'
All the unions concerned attended a presentation of the project made by the
consortium in Blackpool earlier this week. The others have yet to respond to
the proposal.
The final decision from the British government on who will be chosen to
build the link is expected by the autumn of next year and the plan is that
the line will be completed in 2003.
British unions believe the companies want their involvement partly because
tough European Commission building site safety regulations are coming into
force on January 1. They believe close co-operation with the unions is seen
as necessary to ensure the project is trouble-free.
Members of the Hochtief-led consortium said they could not comment on the
union statement because they had signed confidentiality agreements.
But sources close to the consortium said that an invitation had been made to
unions with the aim of creating favourable industrial relations on the
project.
