FT  23 DEC 94 / Controversy fails to curb the power of wind and waste: The
latest contest for renewable energy subsidies has revived arguments over
their cost
Wind power and other renewable sources generate only a fraction of the
electricity needs of England and Wales, but few aspects of environmental
policy power such controversy.
This week's announcement of funding for the third round of the Non Fossil
Fuel Obligation (NFFO) - the subsidy for renewables paid for by a levy on
electricity bills - is no exception.
The arguments this time have been more strident than in the past, partly
because the contracts are much bigger than in previous rounds.
The government approved more than 500 bids to generate almost 630MW in
England and Wales. In Scotland, bids for almost 80MW passed muster - twice
the government's original estimate.
Local planning objections, financial difficulties and - in the case of waste
power - problems with supplies are likely to put paid to some schemes. The
government estimates the latest round will add 300MW to 400MW of capacity in
England and Wales. It will roughly double the 340MW currently generated from
renewables - about 1.5 per cent of electricity needs.
The new contracts have brought a further fall in costs. The highest price
for wind-generated electricity dropped to 4.8p per kWh from a peak of 11p.
The average prices for electricity from landfill gas (3.76p/kWh), municipal
and industrial waste (3.84p) and wind (4.32p) remain well above the average
price of 2.5p/kWh for electricity sold to the wholesale electricity 'pool'
by PowerGen and National Power.
But the gap has closed steadily for various reasons. Technology has advanced
across the board and renewables have also gained operating experience,
bringing productivity improvements. Also, lenders' growing confidence in the
industry has triggered a fall in the risk premium operators pay for finance.
Longer payback periods have also helped. Bidders in the third round of NFFO
have been able to base their calculations on a 19-year period for subsidies
 -more than twice as long as in previous rounds.
In spite of controversy, wind and waste projects have been the main
beneficiaries this time. In England and Wales the government approved 55
wind schemes totalling almost 166MW and 20 gas projects entailing 242MW.
Supporters of both technologies had feared they would suffer from negative
publicity. Wind schemes have been criticised as being 'blots on the
landscape' and some successful bidders may yet stumble at the local planning
stage.
Country Guardian, a pressure group, has questioned the economic feasibility
of the latest wind power bids. Others have asked whether the lower prices
include allowances for dismantling wind farms which prove to be uneconomic.
Waste-fuelled generators have suffered from accusations that incineration
leads to emissions of toxic gas and that recycling is preferable to
combustion.
More innovative schemes to generate power from crops and forestry were the
main losers, although three agricultural schemes were passed, in spite of
costs about double that of electricity from other renewables. The Department
of Trade and Industry, which runs the NFFO, said it had tried to stimulate
diversity in awarding contracts.
The wrangling illustrates the difficulties facing the DTI in trying to
promote renewable energy sources while they remain more expensive than
conventionally generated electricity.
Professor Stephen Littlechild, the electricity regulator, had urged the
government to concentrate on landfill gas, waste combustion and wind,
requiring a total subsidy of Pounds 400m over 15 to 20 years. That would be
the most economic way, he argued, of meeting the government's target of
replacing 1,500MW of electricity generated by traditional methods by the
year 2000.
More exotic renewables, such as wave and geothermal power have already been
discarded as their costs are too high. Yet the DTI says it retains a
watching brief on technologies which have so far been excluded, in spite of
Prof Littlechild's arguments.
The DTI said: 'We want to get new technologies on a learning curve.' Any
scheme will be considered if it appears feasible and economically
competitive. Likewise, relatively costly projects, such as energy crops,
could be left out in future if they do not show signs of converging with
cheaper renewables.
