FT  27 JUN 94 / Rotterdam and Humber ports in trade drive
The ports of Rotterdam in the Netherlands and the Humber in northern England
are to jointly promote their growing shipping links to try to attract more
trade from UK and other European competitors.
The first of a series of presentations to manufacturers and distribution
companies will be held tomorrow in Wakefield, West Yorkshire.
The ports used to promote separately but started talking last year about
trying to make Humber-Rotterdam the principal trade route between Britain
and the European mainland.
Although the ports compete for deep-sea traffic they believe there is scope
to co-operate on roadborne freight needing North Sea passage.
The Humber is Britain's busiest estuary. It carried 60m tonnes of cargo last
year - surpassing the Thames for the first time, with about 40,000 shipping
movements. Its main ports of Hull, Immingham, Goole and Grimsby are
supplemented by 10 river wharves and about 100 other berths. It accounts for
17 per cent of the UK's seaborne trade and this share is expected to rise to
25 per cent in six years. Humber traffic has increased by 50 per cent in the
past 10 years.
A principal attraction is the UK's motorway network, which puts 40m people -
most of Britain north of London and the south-east - within a day's return
lorry drive.
Rotterdam handles 300m tonnes of cargo a year and offers direct links into
European markets of 320m people within 24 hours' drive.
The advent of the Channel tunnel has spurred co-operation. Both Rotterdam
and Humberside authorities say the tunnel will have little impact on their
operations because it will initially handle only about 8m tonnes of freight.
This compares with about 15m tonnes of container traffic through the Humber
and 60m tonnes through Rotterdam - the market where the tunnel is hoping to
compete.
The tunnel is, however, making shippers think afresh about North Sea trade
and evaluate alternatives. The Humberside Partnership - a joint venture of
local public and private sectors - is emphasising Britain's London
transportation bottleneck and the convenience of Humber-Rotterdam for
roadborne freight to and from continental Europe for Scotland, northern
England, the Midlands and Ireland.
Rotterdam Port Promotion Council, the partnership's Netherlands equivalent,
says the ports can offer 'considerable' economic benefits to businesses.
