FT  15 JAN 94 / Fashion: The infiltration of the designer suit -
Professional men are, at last, seeking more adventurous clothing
Although the designer suit has been worn by the more trendy professionals
for years, there are still some spheres - primarily the law, finance and
insurance - in which it remains largely uncharted sartorial territory. Many
men working in these areas still tend to stick to the tried and tested
uniforms of English classic style and remain suspicious of anything that
smacks of the new or avant-garde.
However, increasing numbers are adopting a more fashionable wardrobe: the
capital markets are awash with men in Armani suits, and adventurous ties
have long replaced more sombre neckwear.
While men have moved closer to fashion, the fashionable designers have
embraced the leitmotifs of classical tailoring. Katharine Hamnett has
produced a 'a softened-up Savile Row look'.
She says: 'It's all about knowing the rules and breaking them. There is
nothing sexier than a man in a Savile Row suit.'
Milanese designer Romeo Gigli who has just opened an impressive shop in
London's South Molton Street, has taken old-fashioned menswear cloths and
cut them in his thoroughly modern A-line shape. Likewise Rei Kawakubo, with
her simple blue gabardine suit, has stripped the traditional jacket of all
clutter associated with tailoring and reinterpreted it in a simple and
understated way.
But what exactly is different about a designer suit? It is generally cut in
a contemporary way that takes the classic ingredients and reinterprets them,
using them sometimes in surprising ways. A designer such as Gigli, for
instance, juxtaposes a casual patch pocket on to a dark suit, Hamnett cuts
her trousers in an altogether more body-conscious way than would be possible
in Savile Row and Rei Kawakubo abandons the heavy construction and padding
of old-fashioned tailoring in favour of a suit that suggests the natural
line of the body rather than imposing a shape on it.
Traditional tailors tend to work within well-established confines to produce
a suit of timeless appeal for the conformist; a designer produces a
fashionable garment aimed at more independently-minded individuals. It can
be made from subtly different fabrics that often make use of innovative
synthetics. It is built with a lighter, relaxed and more comfortable
construction. The designer suit is essentially a garment of now and its
appearance and feel mirrors society's move towards greater informality in
everyday life.
It is therefore a mistake to assume that it is inappropriate to office life.
The designer suit's components: a jacket, trousers and sometimes a
waistcoat, are traditional and its differences tend to be subtle. To find
out just how adventurous men are, we dressed three traditionally-minded
fellows in designer outfits. Two of them were so unused to sporting
ready-to-wear clothes that they did not even know their measurements. They
told us exactly what they thought of the designer suit.
John Morgan is associate editor of GQ magazine.
*****
ALASDAIR DUNDAS - INVESTMENT BANKER
'Apart from not having vents, the line of the jacket is exactly the same as
I would order from my tailor,' says Dundas, who feels he could easily carry
off his double-breasted Katharine Hamnett suit at an important meeting.
He is slightly less impressed with the quality of cloth and thinks the
slender trousers might have difficulty accommodating a big city lunch. He
likes the shirt, which comes with a detachable soft collar.
'Its fun, different, but it is the sort of thing I might be more comfortable
wearing in the evening, although its big soft collar does work well with a
city suit and probably would not turn heads. The City is much more
adventurous these days.'
NEIL CRICHTON-MILLER - MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT
Crichton-Miller, husband of How To Spend It editor Lucia van der Post, was
pleased with his transformation into a Comme des Garcons man.
'This suit is wonderful. I have never put on a jacket that feels so
luscious. It is really very special and totally comfortable.'
In spite of its modernity, he found the navy, wool, two-piece suit perfectly
wearable. 'It's a very suitable colour and the tailoring is very smart, and
much more suitable for a City environment than I could have imagined - I was
expecting something much more outrageous.'
He loved the subtle colours and he was tempted to buy the suit - but the
price put him off.
TERRENCE BRAMBLE - MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT
Bramble is partner in a venture capital firm and a former Queen's Dragoon
Guard. He was less enamoured of his Romeo Gigli metamorphosis. 'Although the
cloth is quite the sort of thing I would choose and the whole suit is very
comfortable to wear, I am not keen on the cut of the jacket: I don't like
its short, boxy shape or the patchpockets,' he says.
However, Bramble is amused by the large, single button on the cuff: 'There
are more buttons on my usual cuff than on this entire jacket.'
He added: 'The modern shape is fine for media types, but I just don't think
I would be taken seriously wearing it in my walk of life.'
