FT  14 JUL 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: CBoT hopes for big yield from
crop insurance futures - A look at a scheme that could cut the cost of
government disaster compensation to US farmers
The US government and the Chicago Board of Trade are collaborating on a
novel market-based effort to reduce the cost of government support to
farmers after crop disasters like floods and droughts.
The co-operation is a by-product of a major overhaul in the US federal crop
insurance programme this year, but the resulting options contracts could
find favour with a variety of agribusinesses that need to manage risks
associated with volatile grain production levels in the US.
The CBoT's futures and options pits already set the benchmarks for world
prices for wheat, maize and soyabeans. Those contracts offer producers,
grain dealers, and food processors a kind of price insurance mechanism.
The new options, which are still in the design stage and have not been
announced publicly, will provide a means for hedging the size, rather than
the price, of a crop in specific areas. The contracts would pertain to US
crops, but analysts say the concept could be applied anywhere in the world.
The 'area yield options contracts', as they are called, would work much like
similar price-based contracts. However, instead of selecting a strike price,
traders would select a strike yield for a particular crop in a particular
area. A holder of a call option for maize grown in the Midwest, for example,
might select a strike of 100 bushels an acre. If the actual yield, as
assessed by the US Department of Agriculture after harvest, was greater than
the strike, the call holder would receive a cash payment. Conversely, a put
holder would receive payment if the crop was smaller than the chosen strike.
The contracts would mature at harvest, and be settled in cash.
In essence, the options would be a production insurance mechanism, says Ms
Ann Berg, a CBoT Director and a champion of the yield options concept. She
expects a wide variety of grain handlers, barge and rail companies, food
processors, and bankers to use the product. 'There has been a long period of
consolidation and integration in agribusiness which has created big
companies with huge capital investments in storage terminals, export houses,
and other facilities whose profitability depends largely on the volume
handled, and hence the crop size,' she says. 'This could help them manage
that aspect of risk in their business.'
Ms Berg expects the options contracts to be ready to trade sometime next
year.
The USDA views the options as one way to attract more capital into the
re-insurance network that backs the government's vast crop insurance
programme for farmers.
That programme has been widely criticised for its lack of actuarial
soundness, low levels of farmer participation, and its high cost. For each
of the last seven years congress has voted additional disaster relief to
farmers, trying to fill the gaps left by the insurance system. Last year the
US paid out more than Dollars 4bn in disaster relief and crop insurance
payments to farmers following record floods in the Midwest. The money paid
to compensate farmers for crop losses represented one quarter of all federal
subsidies paid for wheat, rice, feedgrains and cotton programmes, including
export subsidies.
In an effort to manage the budget drain congress this month is expected to
approve a controversial overhaul of the crop insurance programme.
Under the new system, farmers will be required to sign up for crop insurance
so as to qualify for government price supports. This, USDA experts say, will
triple the size of the insurance programme and strain the nation's crop
reinsurance resources. Crop insurers liabilities could rise to Dollars 40bn,
from their current coverage of Dollars 13bn, according to USDA data.
Mr Joseph Glauber, principal economist in the USDA's Office of Economics,
says the insurance programme is expanding just as reinsurance capacity is
dwindling. 'We're worried there won't be enough capital,' he says. 'The
options markets would allow some wholesale management of production risks
and could bring in other players.'
While innovative, the yield options concept is unproven, and may not attract
any more customers than the CBoT's nearly-moribund catastrophe insurance
futures contracts. However, Mr Richard Sandor, the derivatives wizard who
helped invent financial futures in Chicago, is enthusiastic about the idea.
'This will appeal to many types of traders,' he says. 'These will be the
first contracts to bridge the agricultural, insurance and capital markets,'
at the CBoT.
