FT  30 APR 94 / Man in the News: New contender as Mr Fixit - Jean-Luc
Dehaene
Jean-Luc Dehaene is hardly a household name. Built like a slimmed-down
version of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the bespectacled Belgian prime minister
is known at home as the 'fixer', the 'plumber', or, simply, the 'carthorse'.
The idea that Mr Dehaene might succeed Mr Jacques Delors as the next
president of the European Commission seems hard to credit. Many Belgians are
rubbing their eyes in disbelief. In Britain, where the ruling Conservative
party risks splitting apart over Europe, Mr Dehaene is already being
caricatured as the Beast from Brussels.
An editorial in The Sun newspaper summed up the mood: 'Dehaene is dedicated
to a United States of Europe. He wants more power for Brussels . . . Dehaene
will decide what's good for us.'
Much of the fuss is premature. The struggle over the succession to Mr Delors
is taking place in secret, among the EU's 12 heads of government. They will
decide who gets the top executive job in Brussels, most likely when they
meet at the European summit in Corfu in June. Since the choice must be
unanimous, there is plenty of time for horse-trading.
Yet it would be foolish to ignore Mr Dehaene. He is a man of hidden talents
with powerful friends. The most important is Mr Kohl, who encouraged him to
become a candidate late last year as an alternative to Mr Ruud Lubbers, the
long-serving Dutch prime minister.
Mr Lubbers seemed the natural choice for the job, despite a long-shot bid by
Sir Leon Brittan, the chief EU trade negotiator, and a possible future entry
by Mr Peter Sutherland, who announced this week that he was leaving as head
of the new World Trade Organisation on January 1 1995 - which just happens
to coincide with the end of Dr Delors' tenure.
The Kohl-Dehaene connection gelled over a dinner in Brussels last October.
The occasion was a special European summit called to decide the location of
more than a dozen new Euro-institutions. By far the biggest prize was the
European Monetary Institute, the forerunner of a future European central
bank.
Mr Kohl was desperate to secure the EMI for Frankfurt, recognising that this
was the minimum needed to appease the German public's fears about giving up
the D-Mark for a future single currency. The Dutch and British were holding
out for Amsterdam and London.
'Dehaene was a model of self-control. He sat perfectly still and let the
others run out of steam until they realised there was no other answer (to
Frankfurt),' recalls a diplomat. 'That takes a lot of nerve.'
Mr Dehaene's style impressed colleagues during the six-month Belgian
presidency of the European Union which ended last December. Aside from
resolving the two-year battle over the division of Euro-spoils, the Belgian
premier presided over the entry into force of the Maastricht treaty; the
reconciliation between France and its EU partners over the Gatt world trade
talks; and the successful adoption of Mr Delors' white paper on jobs, growth
and competitiveness. 'He is the man to carry the ball,' says a senior EU
diplomat. 'He gets things done.'
What is striking is that the 53-year-old Belgian premier contributed to
these successes when political tensions at home caused by high unemployment,
labour unrest and last summer's currency crisis, which threatened to force
the fragile Belgian coalition to abandon its policy of shadowing the D-Mark.
Yet Mr Dehaene plunged ahead with a pact between government and employers,
the most ambitious attempt to curb social spending since the second world
war.
Mr Dehaene likes to portray Belgium as a test-case for the challenges facing
the EU: slow growth, high non-wage costs, high public debt, and political
disenchantment and separatism. He has clearly thought hard about these
issues, despite his cultivated image as Mr Ordinary.
His vision of Europe rejects the notion of a new super-state ruled from
Brussels. True, he supports a single European currency. He would press ahead
faster with a common security and foreign policy, and he favours
streamlining decision-making at the 1996 Maastricht review conference, at
the expense of the national veto.
But he also favours greater devolution of power to the regions. Without such
a shift, there is a risk of the political elite losing touch not only with
public opinion in general, but also with communities and different cultures,
he argues.
Here speaks Flemish man. For more than 15 years, Mr Dehaene has operated
quietly behind the scenes - first as chief of cabinet to then prime minister
Wilfried Martens in 1979, and latterly as prime minister in 1991 - to defuse
tensions between the French and Flemish communities and manage the
devolution of power to the regions of Wallonia, Brussels and Flanders. 'He
solves problems rather than creating them,' says a long-standing colleague.
'He is not an ideologue, he is a pragmatist.'
How far could these skills be transferred to the European level. A senior EU
diplomat says that what the Union needs after Mr Delors is a 'captain, not a
prophet'. People are a little weary of over-arching visions, according to
this view; they just want someone who can make the Union work.
The advantage of Mr Dehaene is that he might have the courage to take on the
task which Mr Delors ducked during his 10 years in Brussels: the
reorganisation of the Commission, a sprawling bureaucracy of competing
fiefdoms in which the 17 (soon to be 21) nationally-appointed commissioners
have staff cohortswho often duplicate and undercut the work of the 10,000
international civil servants.
Yet making the Brussels machinery tick requires more than administrative
ability. It needs a rare combination of intellectual skills and a persuasive
personality which, at his best, Mr Delors clearly possessed. The jury is out
on whether Mr Dehaene has these qualities; but it is by no means clear that
Mr Lubbers or Sir Leon Brittan fit the task either. Right now, the best
advice from tipsters is: sell Brittans, hold Lubbers, buy Dehaene, and just
maybe invest in Sutherland futures.
