FT  15 NOV 94 / Survey of European Airports (9): Keeping a good record - The
industry is environmentally conscious
In spite of accusations of noise pollution and aircraft emissions, most
airports are extremely environmentally-conscious. Airport managements,
especially in Europe, are not only aware that they can be penalised if they
transgress the regulations, but they are also just as concerned as local
populations with the well-being of the areas in which they themselves live
and work.
Many existing activities, especially in Europe and North America, are
already constrained by governmental regulatory requirements. These include
night curfews with severe restrictions on jet aircraft movements, as well as
the obligatory use of specified flight paths into and out of airports - to
minimise noise in built-up areas - take-off and landing 'noise abatement'
procedures, and strict operational procedures to minimise noise created by
aircraft on the ground.
The likelihood is that such environmental constraints will become even more
severe. The Airports Council International, representing the owners and
operators of almost 1,000 airports worldwide, believes that as environmental
regulations become increasingly important, the air transport industry,
because of its visibility and its continuing image as an elite mode of
transport, 'runs the risk of being singled out for special treatment in this
respect'. ACI believes airport owners must be ready for this.
But much progress has been made. Over the past 30 years, the noise of jet
engines has been progressively reduced through technology advances, while
legislation requiring the phasing out of older, noisier and dirtier aircraft
in favour of cleaner and quieter modern types has, together with improved
operational practices, transformed aircraft fleets.
The result is that airports today are much quieter places than they were, in
spite of considerable increases in air traffic. This process is continuing.
A meeting in December 1995 of the International Civil Aviation Organisation
 -which is responsible for establishing environmental standards for the
world air transport industry through its Committee on Aviation Environmental
Protection (CAEP) - is expected to recommend further tough standards on
aircraft noise and engine emissions, especially in the light of anticipated
big increases in air traffic.
The ACI and the International Air Transport Association (Iata, representing
over 220 airlines), are working through an Environmental Co-ordination Group
to develop 'joint positions' for that meeting. They are anxious to ensure
that any measures benefit the environment without involving unnecessary
costs to airports and airlines.
One possible measure is a further tightening of the rules on the
acceptability of aircraft in terms of noise and pollutant emissions. Many
airlines believe this could mean even earlier disposal than is necessary of
aircraft with many years of profitable service remaining.
Substantial research is being conducted by the aviation industry, including
airlines, airports and aircraft and engine manufacturers, to determine just
what environmental protection measures can be introduced without putting
brakes on the smooth growth of world air transport.
But the environmental record of most airports in Europe is generally good.
BAA in the UK, for example, has introduced extensive landscaping round its
airports and erected sound barriers to help shield local communities from
ground level noise. It has also helped house owners to reduce noise nuisance
by providing sound insulation grants.
BAA also publishes a detailed annual environment report, setting out its
activities, its targets and achievements. British Airways, the biggest user
of UK airports, does the same.
Throughout Europe, it is now impossible for any airport to undertake a major
expansion programme without first having to satisfy local authorities, as
well as regional and central governments, of its environmental
acceptability.
Winning acceptance for new developments can take a long time. In the UK, it
can take as much as 10 years from conception to in-service operation for
either a new terminal or runway.
In some places it can take longer. It took about 30 years to get Munich's
new airport up and running, although part of those delays were due to
financial problems.
BAA has a well-established track record in assessing the environmental
impact of ventures such as new terminals. Before submitting proposals for
such developments, it prepares comprehensive environmental assessments of
the project.
In the case of the proposed Terminal 5 at Heathrow, an environmental
statement was submitted with the application for planning permission in
February, 1993. BAA has also made meticulous preparations for the
forthcoming public planning inquiry into Terminal 5, which starts on May 16
next year and could take more than a year to complete.
Such inquiries are the best means of ensuring that everyone involved, from
the airport managements through to local residents and workers, can have a
voice in what is planned. No-one has yet devised a better way of ensuring
that environmental - and social - justice is done.
