FT  25 MAY 94 / Survey of Ireland (8): EU helps out with 'cohesion' cash -
John McManus looks at investment in transport and developments in the
tourist industry
More than IPounds 3.5bn will be spent on Ireland's transport infrastructure
and tourism industry over the next five years under the Irish government's
IPounds 20bn National Development Plan.
The money will come from the government, the private sector, and the
European Union which has promised in the region of IPounds 7bn under the
next tranche of cohesion funds.
The first objective of the IPounds 2.6bn investment in transport
infrastructure is to bring Ireland's roads, railways, ports and airports up
to the same standard as its EU partners'.
The main target is the national primary road network, which takes a quarter
of all Irish road traffic. More than IPounds 1.1bn will go to improve the
road links between the important cities, including the road from Dublin to
Belfast.
Spending on secondary and local roads will be much less significant: IPounds
115m will be spent on secondary roads and IPounds 475m on local roads. As a
result, the motorist in Ireland can expect little respite from the potholes
on the smaller rural roads and lanes. (They have become an election issue in
some counties.)
The rolling stock of Iarnrod Eireann, the state railway company, is to be
upgraded, as are the tracks and signal systems on the parts of the Irish
rail network which are included in the EU's Trans European Rail Network -
mainly the links between Dublin and the larger cities and towns.
With the opening of the Channel Tunnel, Ireland is now the only state in the
EU without a direct rail link to the continent. The Irish government has
promised to invest IPounds 100m upgrading strategic ports, including Dublin
and its satellite port of Dun Laoghaire.
No aid is available for improving ferries serving the routes between Ireland
and its EU partners, but the two main ferry companies, Stena Sealink and
Irish Continental Group, have announced ambitious ship building programmes.
In Tasmania, Stena Sealink is constructing one of the world's largest car
carrying catamaran ferries for use on the Irish sea this summer. The new
super-ferry will replace the existing Stena Sea Lynx catamaran service
between Dublin and the Welsh port of Holyhead. It will have capacity for 120
cars and 600 passengers, travel at 50 miles an hour, and Stena promises that
it will cut the sea crossing time by half, to 99 minutes.
Irish Continental has acquired one the the world's largest night ferries,
the IPounds 56m Pride of Bilbao, for use on the routes from Rosslare, in Co
Wexford, to northern France. The company has also commissioned a IPounds 46m
ferry for use on the Dublin-Holyhead route next year, with an option for a
second. The new Dublin-Holyhead ferry will triple the group's freight
capacity on the route, allowing it to cut costs and - according to Mr Eamonn
Rothwell, chief executive of Irish Continental - attract a substantial
amount of the traffic, originating in the Republic, which now exits via the
Northern Irish port of Larne.
A IPounds 340m investment is proposed in the state's airports under the
plan, on top of the IPounds 175m in state aid to the national carrier, Aer
Lingus, which was approved by the EU last December. The money is to meet the
cost of a big restructuring at the airline, which lost IPounds 56m last
year. Aer Lingus has agreed to cut its costs by IPounds 50m and has obtained
permission from the Irish government to fly direct from Dublin to cities in
the US, avoiding the compulsory stop-over at Shannon airport in Co Clare,
for the first time. Aer Lingus has also leased three new Airbus 330 aircraft
for use on the transatlantic routes.
The last 12 months have seen two new airlines enter the fiercely competitive
Dublin to London route. Virgin Atlantic's City Jet - an Irish company
operating a Virgin Atlantic franchise - started flying from Dublin to London
City Airport in January. British Airways Express - a UK company operating a
British Airways franchise - started flying from Dublin to Gatwick last year.
The three airlines already on the route - Aer Lingus, British Midland and
the small independent Ryanair - have all cut fares and cost as competition
intensifies. Aer Lingus's share of the route has fallen from 49 per cent to
39 per cent; a big shake-out is planned.
In a country with more than 16 per cent of its workforce on the dole, most
aspects of the economy are ultimately evaluated in terms of their ability to
create jobs. Ireland's tourism industry is no exception.
The IPounds 1bn investment in tourism over the next five years is expected
to create 35,000 jobs. Mr Matt McNulty, director general of Bord Failte, the
Irish tourist board, believes that it is a realistic aspiration. Five years
ago the board was set the target of doubling tourism revenue from just over
IPounds 1bn and creating 25,000 jobs by the end of 1993. 'Revenue is up 74
per cent and 24,000 jobs have been created, despite the Gulf war and
recession in our main markets,' Mr McNulty says.
Mr McNulty believes that tourism can create jobs more effectively than other
sectors of the economy; he points out that 75 per cent of the net job gains
in Ireland over the past five years have come from tourism. Bord Failte
estimates that the more than 3m tourists visiting Ireland each year spend
about IPounds 1.8bn.
The emphasis over the next five years will be to create 'sustainable tourism
and sustainable jobs' through an intensification of the board's
international marketing effort and extension of the the tourism season.
Ireland's tourist season is only 23 weeks, but the board believes it can be
stretched to 46 weeks by development of off-season 'products' and the
creation of year-round attractions.
More than 30 per cent of the IPounds 580m worth of EU cohesion funding hoped
for by the Irish government for tourism will be spent on international
marketing over the next five years. 'We have not fully exploited any market
 -particularly Germany, which is the world's biggest,' explains Mr McNulty.
Together with the traditional markets of the US, UK and continental Europe,
Bord Failte plans to aim at new markets. Two countries seen as having large
potential are Argentina and South Africa, both of which have strong Irish
connections.
The board's strategy is not to go for 'ethnic' tourism, but to target
countries where Ireland is well known to the whole population because there
is an Irish community there, Mr McNulty explains.
The UK is still a very important market for Ireland; visitors from Britain
made up 1.7m of more than 3m people who visited Ireland last year. The next
biggest markets are continental Europe, with 874,000 visitors, and North
America, with 417,000 visitors.
About IPounds 300,000 will be spent on projects to extend the tourist
season. The rest of the IPounds 1bn will be spent on training, a national
conference centre and other projects.
Mr McNulty believes that initiatives for projects to extend the length of
the tourist season must come from the private sector. 'If we create
something ourselves it is not likely to be sustainable,' he says. 'We have
to let things develop naturally and support them through marketing or grant
aid.' (Citing horse fairs, he points out that there have been many attempts
to develop international horse fairs in Ireland, none of which have been as
successful as the centuries-old horse fair at Ballinasloe in Co Galway, in
the west of Ireland.)
A good example of the type of investment that the board is trying to
encourage is a project to revive a woollen mill at Foxford in Co Mayo, in
the west of Ireland. The mill has been converted into a 'sheep to shop'
experience for tourists, Mr McNulty says. This sort of project is an
integral part of the role he sees for Bord Failte as 'Ireland's economic
agency for tourism.'
There is no doubting his enthusiasm for such projects. With something of the
manner of a proud father, he cannot resist showing visitors to his office in
Dublin an album of before-and-after shots of projects. He feels that he has
a right to be proud: only one of the 300 projects funded in the last five
years has failed - 'and we got nearly all our money back.'
