FT  23 SEP 94 / Breakaway Britain
The question will not go away. If Ulster is to be granted
self-determination, why not Scotland? Why not Wales? Even the most
recalcitrant Conservative, afraid of rationality, fearful of any dilution of
the mythical powers of a long-dissolved empire, must grant that there is
some anomaly here. There is an explanation, of course. Northern Ireland has
been the subject of terrorist violence for 25 years, while Scotland has not.
As an excuse, that awful observation is insufficient. It does not answer to
the Scottish nationalists, whose 60th birthday is being celebrated at their
annual convention this week. The secessionist party is riding high in the
polls, its faith in the democratic process not to be doubted. The inference
is unavoidable. A settlement in Ulster may be a long way off, but pulling at
the Irish thread could unravel the British polity.
Wait. Flash back. There on the videotape is Mr John Major, standing on his
soap-box. It is April 5 1992, the Sunday before election day. The prime
minister, fighting a campaign most people reckon he is about to lose, warns
against proposals for a Scottish parliament, or, worse in his eyes, Scottish
independence. 'If I could summon up all the authority of the office I now
hold, through the ages, I would put it into this single warning,' he
declaims. 'The United Kingdom is in danger. Wake up now before it is too
late.'
We will never know how many minds were changed by that uncharacteristically
passionate moment of oratory. Perhaps millions, perhaps none. Mr Major
himself is in little doubt that his Sunday speech, regarded at the time as
quixotic, helped the Conservatives win their fourth consecutive spell of
office. His views will certainly not have been unpopular in middle England.
'Consider the outcome - the walls of this United Kingdom that appear so
strong, undermined from within,' he said. He urged voters to shy away from
proportional representation, at that time proffered by the Liberal Democrats
alone. In European affairs Conservatives would 'speak for Britain' while
Labour and the Lib-Dems would 'act for Brussels'.
Now flash forwards on your virtual reality screen. It is spring 1996 or
1997. There is Mr Major again, in mid-campaign, looking more mature, more
filled-out than previously. The central issue is, as always, whether the
existing set of rascals is to be trusted with management of the economy, or
whether the rival gang is to be given a chance. Yet there is chatter on the
periphery. Senior politicians are arguing about the future shape of the
European Union, and Britain's role in continental politics. Ulster has its
own parliament, in session or on the way. We can imagine what the Scottish
nationalists say about that. Labour and the Lib-Dems, their campaign
literature stuffed with talk of national renewal, have undertaken to
renovate the constitution. High-flown talk of a 21st century settlement
between the peoples and governments of these islands has become commonplace.
Up springs Mr Major, onto the box. The prime minister recalls his words of
four or five years previously. 'Quebec,' he says, 'Slovakia', he adds, 'and
Serbia, Croatia, unspellable pieces of old Russia and what about Spain?' He
speaks of the historic glories of the United Kingdom, the distinctiveness of
the island nation, the enduring values enshrined in the most ancient of
parliaments, the true freedom of those fortunate enough to be born British.
He dresses from head to toe in the Union Jack. That, as they say in New
York, could go down like chopped liver.
Or perhaps not. The debate has yet to begin. The mainstream opposition
parties both promise systemic reform. Labour and the Lib-Dems would give
Scotland its parliament, bar hereditary peers from the House of Lords,
create regional authorities in England and perhaps an assembly in Wales,
enact a bill of rights, and introduce proportional representation for
elections to bodies other than the House of Commons. The latter is to be
decided by referendum. No one is surprised that Mr Paddy Ashdown, the
Lib-Dem leader who has had an unfortunate week at his party's conference,
favours such a programme. What now needs to be established is the strength
of commitment of Labour's new leader, Mr Tony Blair.
He must either campaign strongly on the reform theme, or quietly bury it.
The latter would be difficult. One argument for devolution was set out by Mr
George Robertson, Labour's shadow Scottish secretary, in a speech in
Frankfurt earlier this month. It is that some give, some flexibility, and a
great deal of decentralisation of power would prevent a break-up of the
United Kingdom. 'Today's British government plays into the nationalist hand
by a staggering lack of vision in adapting constitutionally as it has done
over 150 years,' he said.
There is, however, another case to put. Britain has not been well-served by
the concentration of power at the centre. Since 1979 the Conservatives have
behaved with the arrogance of the single party in a one-party state. They
have weakened or overturned one democratic institution after another. They
have neutered local government. They have appointed friends and cronies to
sit on school boards, hospital managements, and at every station on the
network of quangos. The Treasury controls these unelected bodies by
exercising authority over their expenditure. Meanwhile Ulster, Scotland and
Wales, not to mention Lib-Dem Cornwall and Devon, boast their own
traditions, separate from those of England. Across the water, Europe is
being reshaped. It is time to modernise the way Britain is governed.
Mr Blair has shown himself to be aware of the strength of this argument, and
conscious of the appeal it has in some quarters, not confined to Charter 88,
the energetic pressure group. Reform was consistently cheered by the
Lib-Dems this week. The Labour leader will be spared the embarrassment of
negotiating a post-election arrangement with Mr Ashdown if he can steal
enough of the latter's voters away. It is highly unlikely that an election
will be won on the issue of constitutional reform. Against that, there is
little else to enthuse opposition supporters. Labour's pronouncements on the
economy too closely resemble the Conservatives' to cause the blood to rush
round activist veins. If there is to be a Left vision, it has to be reform.
