FT  10 AUG 94 / World Trade News: UK airline to launch daily flights to Orly
British Midland, the UK's second largest scheduled airline, is to follow
British Airways by starting daily flights into Orly airport in Paris.
British Midland said yesterday it intended to take advantage of access
rights into the French airport with the launch next month of a
four-times-a-day service. The airline said that the new service would not
lead to any reduction in the eight daily flights operated into Charles de
Gaulle, Paris.
A British Midland spokesman said that the decision had been taken in
response to demand from passengers for more frequent flights to the French
capital and, in particular, for a service providing access to southern
Paris.
British Midland passengers will be able to fly out or back into either
Charles de Gaulle or Orly on the same ticket. Fares will range from Pounds
245 return for an executive ticket to an Pounds 81 summer saver.
Sir Michael Bishop, British Midland chairman, said deregulation of European
air routes meant British Midland intended to establish a comprehensive
network of services in Europe. The company had already launched four new
European routes this year.
British Airways has been operating a similar frequency service in Orly since
June, following France's decision to bow to pressure from the European
Commission and open up the airport to UK competition.
But BA, which intends to step up the number of flights into Orly this
winter, says it intends to challenge, through the Commission and the French
courts, proposals by France to restrict flight frequencies and the size of
aircraft flying into Orly.
France has resisted the liberalisation of its domestic air routes and when
Orly airport was opened to international carriers the French government
sought to restrict the impact of liberalisation by limiting services to
aircraft with 200 seats or more at peak traffic times.
France is also appealing a Commission ruling to allow competition on its
Orly-Toulouse and Orly-Marseille routes, two of the most profitable domestic
routes.
