FT  07 JUN 94 / Commodities and Agriculture (Farmer's Viewpoint): Germany's
political stone-throwing on BSE - The row over 'mad cow disease' is not
based only on concerns for consumers' health
Agriculturally speaking the Germans are living in a glass house but are
still throwing stones. For in spite of their continuing refusal to accept
that British beef is safe to import - a policy that is widely recognised as
being based more on politics than on science - they have animal health
problems of their own that are spilling over into other European Union
countries.
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy has already been identified in some German,
and for that matter French, cattle so it is not exclusively a British
problem. The campaign to ban British beef that has been waged by Mr Horst
Seehofer, the German health minister, in the face of the acceptance of the
Commission and all other EU member nations that it poses no health problem,
is embarrassing some of his colleagues and his countrymen.
With a clutch of regional and national elections in various parts of Germany
scheduled for the next few months, a political gesture in apparent
protection of green-minded German consumers was, perhaps, predictable. But
the German agriculture minister, Mr Jochen Borchert, is said to have
accepted privately that the new EU measures to ban the use of ruminant offal
in ruminant animal feeds across the union - which have been in force in the
UK, incidentally, since 1988 - 'should be sufficient'.
Meanwhile the health minister's stance is damaging sales of
domestically-reared beef in Germany. Some consumers, apparently, have been
put off eating any beef whatever its origin, much to the disgust of German
beef farmers and, one suspects, their agriculture minister. The fact that
beef exports from Britain to Germany were worth a mere Pounds 1m last year
puts the matter into perspective.
Meanwhile Germany has an animal health problem of its own that is
threatening to get out of hand. Since last autumn many herds of German pigs
have succumbed to classical swine fever - a highly contagious disease rated
in the top category of seriousness by EU veterinarians.
EU policy is to try to eradicate the disease as quickly as possible wherever
it breaks out and, to this end, affected herds are slaughtered, the
carcasses destroyed to avoid spreading the disease via the meat and
compensation payed to the farmers concerned.
During the last quarter of 1993 and the first quarter of this year 1.08m
German pigs were slaughtered under the scheme. This was equivalent to 4 per
cent of the national herd, about 3.5 per cent of normal German sales of pigs
during the period and just under 1 per cent of total EU pig sales. In Lower
Saxony, where the majority of cases occurred, some 12 per cent of the
region's pigs were slaughtered. In spite of the slaughterings, however,
outbreaks of classical swine fever are still appearing across Germany.
There are, perhaps, a number of reasons for this failure to control the
disease. One may be that not all infected carcasses have been destroyed.
German consumers, faced with rising pork prices, demanded that the meat
should not be wasted. In response the authorities decided to render that
believed to be safe for use in processing, a decision that may have been
influenced by the fact that the German allocation of EU funds for fighting
such animal disease had run out. And this compromise may have allowed the
problem to spread. In any event, Teutonic efficiency appears to have failed
in this case.
Classical swine fever has now spread from Germany into Belgium, whose
densely populated pig herd is at risk. There too the EU slaughter and
compensation policy is being implemented.
Needless to say, British pig farmers are becoming concerned that the disease
will cross the Channel and affect their herds. It would not be the first
time such a thing had happened - the last case of classical swine fever in a
British herd was thought to have been caused by a continental tourist
throwing the remains of his salami sandwich into a field in which pigs were
grazing.
Other diseases that have affected British pigs over the years and cost
British pig farmers dear, have been traced back to continental sources.
Aujeskys Disease, for instance, cost millions of pounds in lost production.
A UK producer-funded and ultimately successful eradication scheme raised
Pounds 27m to complete the task.
There is no need to spell out what farmers' feelings would be should it once
more be introduced from across the Channel.
Swine Vesicular Disease and Blue Ear Disease have all reached Britain's
shores via similar routes. And now the EU has relaxed border controls there
is a real fear among all British livestock farmers - not just those with
pigs - that herds and flocks may be decimated and incomes destroyed by some
disease or other crossing the water or coming through the Channel Tunnel.
The risks are exacerbated by the virtually open borders between eastern
Europe and the EU. It is well-known that all sorts of nasty diseases
originate from behind what was the Iron Curtain.
The UK minister of agriculture, Mrs Gillian Shephard, recently tightened
inspection rules on imported livestock and the House of Commons Agriculture
Select Committee is investigating health controls on imported animals. All
of which is intended to reassure British farmers and consumers. But, it
might take only a discarded sandwich from a German tourist to bring it all
to nought.
