FT  08 NOV 94 / Survey of India (12): It's almost a love affair - Wall
Street shows an unbroken confidence in India
American investors' ardour for India has held up remarkably well, even
though their love affair with emerging stock markets has cooled noticeably
this year because of the volatile performance of equities in many developing
countries.
While the impressive gains of the Bombay market in 1994 has played a great
part in sustaining US enthusiasm, Wall Street shows an underlying confidence
in India's long-term economic and political future. It reflects the
expectation that India's economy will enjoy steady growth over the next
decade, and that the government's policy of liberalising the economy and
financial markets will remain on course.
US investors participate in the Indian equity market mostly via the
specialist country or regional emerging market funds managed by the big
banks, securities houses and fund groups. There are also two closed-end
funds listed on the New York Stock Exchange - the India Growth Fund and the
India Fund.
There are no accurate figures on the extent of US portfolio investment in
India, but Mr Derek Hargreaves, an economist with Morgan Guaranty in New
York, estimates that of the approximately Dollars 5bn that foreign portfolio
investors are expected to put into the Indian market this year, 'a very
substantial proportion' will have come from the US. Although the rate of
inflows has dropped from its peak late last year of between Dollars 600m and
Dollars 700m a month to around Dollars 450m today, the total is impressive
considering that foreign inflows were negligible until a few years ago.
Foreign money has been moving into India in increasingly large amounts ever
since the government began to open up the domestic markets to outside
capital three years ago as part of its policy of liberalising the country's
once almost entirely closed economy.
Ms Joyce Cornell, a fund manager at the Boston-based investment group
Scudder (which has about Dollars 4bn invested in emerging equity markets)
says of the changes in India: 'Roughly three years ago they began to open up
to the rest of the world, and started to reduce their regulatory regime,
which had all but strangled the economy. That reversal, and the change in
policy to reduce regulation, reduce tariffs, and open up to world markets
has been a big plus.'
Mr Vinod Sethi of Morgan Stanley neatly encapsulates Wall Street's view of
India's liberalisation policy: 'Here is a country that after 45 years is
doing the right things.' Mr Sethi manages about Dollars 2bn of the US bank's
Dollars 7bn emerging markets equity portfolio, with investments in 170
Indian stocks, including leading companies such as the housing development
corporation HESE, the truck manufacturer Telco, and BHEL, the power
equipment manufacturer which went public in a quasi-privatisation earlier
this year.
Privatisations such as BHEL have played an important role in luring US funds
to India, and there are more in the pipeline. Mr Kishor Chaukar, who heads
an asset management joint venture set up earlier this year by India's ICI
Securities and the US bank Morgan Guaranty, says the Indian government is
currently preparing a sixth round of disinvestment in industries such as
steel, oil, and telecommunications. 'Every three to six months the
government is pushing a good bit of equity into the stock market,' he says.
The main attraction for US investors, however, is still the expectation of
healthy economic and corporate earnings growth. The US broking house
Oppenheimer, which manages the NYSE-listed India Fund, forecasts that
corporate earnings will grow by 35 per cent in the current fiscal year. Most
economists expect India's economy to grow at a rate of 6 to 8 per cent over
the next five to 10 years.
As Mr Sethi points out, there is considerable upside potential in Indian
stocks because there is so much room for the private sector to grow. 'The
private sector represents about 14 per cent of GNP, and is growing at twice
the overall GNP rate. So for every incremental GNP increase, the corporate
sector is doing twice as better.'
Investors also have the chance to benefit in the expansion of an already
vast consumer sector, says Mr Sethi. 'India also has a middle class of 250m
people today - as big as all of the US. This middle class is likely to
double in size over the next 10 to 15 years .. Stock market players make
money on the rate of change, and the rate of change in India is so high.'
Investing in India, however, is not without its risks. The stock market
scandal of 1992, which pricked a speculative bubble and interrupted a bull
market, left some ugly scars, and the quality of securities regulation
remains a worry for overseas investors.
There are also concerns that the poor state of the country's
telecommunications, energy and transport infrastructure will slow the
economy's growth. The stock market infrastructure is another source of
worry, says Mr Sethi of Morgan Stanley. 'Here is a capital market used to
retail investing, but its composition is moving toward institutional
investing, and the custody infrastructure is grossly underdeveloped.'
Political risk is another factor for US investors to consider. Yet, although
India has seen several of its most prominent democratic leaders
assassinated, has endured a series of violent clashes between different
ethnic and religious groups, and lives with permanent military tensions on
its border with Pakistan, US investors are surprisingly sanguine about the
political risks inherent in investing in the country. 'It is a much more
homogeneous society than we realise from outside,' says Ms Cornell of
Scudder. 'There are ethnic tensions, but there are in the US too. They are
not likely to shake the system to its roots.'
However, Ms Cornell does worry about whether liberalisation is proceeding
too slowly. 'They've done the easy stuff, but they've got the hard stuff
ahead of them. There is a lot of overmanning, and the laws make it difficult
to lay people off, so there are big inefficiencies .. The pace of change is
very ponderous.'
Yet, Mr Terry Mills, who runs JP Morgan's Indian corporate finance unit in
London, says that the slow progress of liberalisation is not necessarily a
negative. 'India has been criticised for not changing fast enough. My view
is that there may be some benefits to not changing too fast - it's giving
the economy and the social environment time to adapt .. It also makes it
easier to control inflation.'
Too slow or not, the majority of US institutions seem confident that the
changes in India are irreversible. 'They've gone beyond the point of no
return,' says Ms Cornell. Also, the economy appears set on a path of
sustained growth. Over the long term, that spells plenty of opportunities
for overseas investors. As Mr Sethi of Morgan Stanley puts it: 'You will
have some broken dreams in the emerging markets universe as some countries
don't live up to expectations. But this thing (in India) is for real.'
