FT  06 APR 94 / Survey of Business in Dorset (7): Back-to-the-future concept
 -Poundbury Project
On a greenfield site on the edge of Dorchester, within sight of the hill
fort of Maiden Castle, the first houses are being built in an ambitious
scheme, enthusiastically supported by the Prince of Wales, for the urban
development of Poundbury.
Eventually, over a 25-year period, there could be as many as 3,000 houses on
400 acres of land owned by the Prince's Duchy of Cornwall. This would entail
a surge in the county town's present population of 15,000. The start is much
more modest: 61 homes of which 35 are for the Guinness Trust housing
association to let to local people, and 26 houses to be sold by the builder,
the West Dorset company of C. G. Fry and Son, at prices of up to Pounds
150,000.
So far, the builder has had about 130 inquiries of which half are from local
people.
This first phase will in due course consist of 244 houses and flats, plus
offices, community shops and light industrial workshops. Poundbury, referred
to as an 'urban extension' of Dorchester rather than a village, is intended
to reflect traditional architectural styles. It will have a high density of
houses to foster community spirit, avoid grid layouts and try to reduce
dependence upon cars. In keeping with its back-to-the-future concept, modern
energy-saving techniques will be used in the buildings.
The master plan, by Mr Leon Krier, an architect, is regarded by some as a
dubious exercise in nostalgia, but has attracted international interest. Mr
Andrew Hamilton, Poundbury's development director, says similar schemes are
already being planned.
The Duchy emphasises that it is a landowner, not a speculative developer,
and that West Dorset district council allocated the land in 1988 to help
cope with the county's rising population. But that was before the recession
and slide in house sales.
If the development is to succeed, it has to create work for those who live
there - the aim is to provide jobs within walking distance. Commercial
development will be an important part of the second phase.
The Duchy is in talks with the county and district councils, and other
organisations, to stimulate the business interest which will be needed. 'We
cannot do it on our own, only in partnership,' the Duchy says.
