FT  12 APR 94 / Israel to delay military pull-out
Israel said yesterday it would not be able to meet tomorrow's deadline for
completion of its military withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and West Bank town
of Jericho, and blamed the Palestine Liberation Organisation for delaying
the peace process and the implementation of Palestinian self-rule.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, prime minister, said the PLO was responsible for the delay
because it had broken off peace talks in the wake of the February 25 Hebron
mosque massacre of 29 Palestinians by a fanatical Jewish settler.
Mr Rabin said Mr Yassir Arafat, PLO chairman, 'suspended the negotiations
after the massacre in Hebron and therefore the responsibility is not on us'.
Israel undertook the bulk of its military withdrawal last week and senior
officers said they could complete the operation within 12 to 18 hours.
However, Mr Rabin has insisted on an agreement including all aspects of
Palestinian self-rule before giving the army final orders to leave.
On a visit to Ankara Mr Shimon Peres, Israeli foreign minister, said the new
target date for signing would be the end of April.
At the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks in Cairo, the PLO appeared to resign
itself to the delay. Mr Nabil Shaath, chief PLO negotiator, said: 'If Mr
Peres says he is willing to respect the new target date, the date at the end
of the month, fine with us.'
Mr Shaath also said that despite the PLO disappointment about the
postponement, progress had been made in the past 48 hours of talks and if
progress continued the two sides might be able to make an announcement on
what they have agreed so far.
For the past two weeks the negotiations have been bogged down in wrangling
over the numbers and powers of a Palestinian police force, the timetable for
the release by Israel of up to 8,500 Palestinian prisoners and the zoning
arrangements for the Gaza Strip, which will leave some areas exclusively
under Israeli control to protect 4,500 Jewish settlers.
Mr Haim Ramon, a popular former cabinet minister touted as a successor to Mr
Rabin, said he would stand on his own list for elections to lead the
Histadrut, Israel's biggest trade union feder-ation.
Labour leaders said Mr Ramon's declaration of political independence could
split the party and weaken it at a critical time as it pursues peace with
the PLO.
