FT  03 JUN 94 / 'A respectable and respected public corporation': Statement
by Tim Smith, economy minister for Northern Ireland, about the controversial
Pounds 160m Hualon project
The Hualon project to be located outside Belfast in Northern Ireland is a
fully integrated textile plant involving dyeing, finishing, weaving and
spinning of polycotton, cotton and nylon polyester fabrics. The plant will
be established in four distinct phases over a period of eight years, and
will involve total investment of almost Pounds 160m.
Because of its size, and the need to obtain European Commission approval for
state aid, it has created particular interest. I welcome the opportunity to
clarify some issues.
Independent scrutiny: Before submitting the proposal for consideration by
the EC, the Industrial Development Board (IDB) subjected the Hualon business
plan to a rigorous appraisal process. This involved a detailed review of the
four main components of the business: marketing, production, technical,
management and finance. The IDB also examined the project under the headings
of viability, additionality and efficiency.
In considering the nature, scope and size of the plan, it was considered
that there were fundamental issues on which expert consultancy advice was
needed. Specialist marketing and production/technical advice was provided by
Kurt Salmon Associates, a leading independent internationally recognised
textile consultancy firm. KSA addressed the following issues: the specific
production and sales targets, the impact on European industry and the
marketplace, the size and cost of the capital expenditure programme, the
level of employment, and the costing structure. KSA's evaluation drew on key
sources among potential customers, manufacturers and other industry
interests throughout Europe.
Its market assessment report included the following comments: 'Based on its
wide knowledge and experience of the European textile and clothing
industries, and supported by specific interviews to investigate market
aspects related to the Hualon project, KSA believes that there is a
realistic market opportunity for a Northern Ireland production facility and
in the context of the changes occurring in the EC, Hualon's strategy is
valid.
'The market for clothing will continue to grow. Despite predicted import
penetration of 70 per cent by 2001, the manufacturing base in EC  - and more
particularly in Eastern Europe and North Africa - will still be substantial
and will benefit from a reliable, low-cost source of fabric such as that
proposed by Hualon.'
The consultants also confirmed that Hualon is a major successful world-class
textile company with an impressive track record, and that its product range
will compete predominately in the sector currently served by imports.
Perhaps I could emphasise the point that the market for these products is
not shrinking.
Hualon will be competing from a European base in what is by any standards a
substantial and growing market.
In assessing this project we were aware of the previous interest of the
Irish government in securing a project from the Hualon organisation and my
officials have been in touch with their counterparts in Dublin. However, it
should be made clear that the project originally announced for the Limerick
area during October 1990 by the then minister Mr Des O'Malley was much
smaller than the four-phase project destined for Northern Ireland. A
statement dated March 25 1991 by Mr O'Malley, on his return from Taiwan,
stated that this project had been 'put on hold'. Technology: The project is
very much high-tech. Hualon propose to invest in the latest 'state of the
art' weaving machinery. Waterjet and airjet looms from Tsudakoma will
provide Hualon with the ability to produce high-quality, high-volume fabrics
at the lower end of the market. Traditional European producers are generally
moving towards weaving more complicated fabrics at the higher value end of
the market which involves shorter runs and requires greater flexibility as
provided by slower rapier-type looms.
Hualon's success in Asia is built on its ability to operate at the leading
edge of weaving technology by running its airjet and waterjet looms at
greater efficiencies and speeds than its competitors can achieve. Indeed an
article in the Technology section of the Financial Times of August 6 1993
referred to the 'greater speed and efficiency' of the waterjet looms.
European Commission: In presenting our case to the European Community we
emphasised the economic arguments in favour of the project. We also pointed
out that the project would have a significant impact on a region which
suffers from the highest unemployment figures in the United Kingdom and is
recognised as an Objective 1 region in the European Union.
Our representations to Europe were actively supported by the Unionist, DUP,
and SDLP Northern Ireland members of the European Parliament, and the
decision by the European Commission was welcomed by all shades of political
opinion in Northern Ireland. The proposed location for the project, which
has been known for some time, is a greenfield site accessible to all areas
but particularly to North and West Belfast.
The Oung family: As minister for the economy in Northern Ireland I have
direct responsibility for the IDB, which is part of my Department of
Economic Development. Both Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary,
and I have been closely involved with the Hualon case.
We were fully aware of the allegations, which have been in the public domain
for some time. I wish to emphasise that the IDB has been negotiating with a
respectable and respected public corporation. As a matter of interest, we
have not had any dealings with the persons charged.
Safeguards: Northern Ireland does have the highest unemployment rate in the
UK. However, this does not remove from government the obligation to consider
most carefully each case which requires public funding. Invariably we build
in appropriate safeguards. In the case of Hualon these safeguards will
include continuing in-depth monitoring and the successful achievement of
objectives in each of the four phases will be necessary before approval is
given to grant-aid the next phase. There is absolutely no question of grant
aid of up to Pounds 60m being made available on an 'up front' basis.
It is a real challenge for ministers and for the IDB to attract industry to
Northern Ireland but success on this front is being achieved. In the
financial year 1992-93, for example, the IDB obtained ten internationally
mobile projects against very severe international competition. These
projects represent an investment into Northern Ireland of about Pounds 167m.
This achievement was followed by a further very successful year in 1993-94,
when 13 projects involving Pounds 259m investment were secured.
These successes have been achieved in the face of considerable difficulties.
Not least of our burdens have been continuing references to De Lorean which
occurred 13 years ago. Since then no less than 112 inward investment
projects have come to Northern Ireland and have established successful
businesses here.
The Northern Ireland project is a commercial venture and is not therefore
risk free. However, the willingness of the Hualon corporation to invest
about Pounds 160m in Northern Ireland is a welcome indication that
successful Asian companies regard us, and Europe, as a good location for
extending their businesses. In doing so they join Japanese, Korean,
Indonesian and Hong Kong companies already in Northern Ireland.
