FT  24 DEC 94 / Weekend Money (International Equity Markets): Players and
stayers in a game of extremes - There was money to be made on global equity
markets for those quick on their feet, but the unwary found a multitude of
traps
Is playing the markets worthwhile - or should you just get a broad spread
and stay put? Anyone investing in the World Index in January would have seen
little return from their initial stake. But an inspired trader could have
done far better. Michael Morgan's hypothetical Foresight Fund shows how an
international manager who made all the right switches would have trebled his
money.  But don't get too excited: the equally hypothetical Hindsight Fund
shows his accident-prone colleague losing almost 80 per cent of his initial
capital.
It has been the best of times, and the worst, in the world equities markets
this year.
Those able to read political runes, forecast currency movements and spot
improving economic trends found there was money to be made. But sudden and
aggressive shifts in asset allocations by some of the big global investors,
and the recurrent theme of rising US interest rates, have hovered in the
background to trap the unwary.
The Foresight Fund has, however, lived up to its name: indeed, it could not
have done better. The fund ignored the blandishments of those proffering
bonds, cash and commodities as alternative investments and remained
full-bloodedly in equities. Allocations were switched each month, with
returns calculated in dollar terms, as measured by the FT-Actuaries world
indices.
The strategy has been, quite simply, to be invested fully in the month's
best market.
JANUARY: Finland, Europe's best performer in 1993, had more miles to run as
a sharp slide in interest rates prompted a shift out of bank deposits and
into mutual funds. Optimism grew about the economic outlook, and foreigners
continued to buy as a strengthening local currency also increased
substantially the market's attraction for the dollar investor.
FEBRUARY: There was a switch to Malaysia, 1993's best market overall, as
Kuala Lumpur put in a renewed spurt after the previous month's
profit-taking.
MARCH: Hopes of a political re-birth grew in Italy as media tycoon Silvio
Berlusconi arrived on the scene ahead of the general election at the end of
the month. Enthusiasm for Italian shares seemed unbounded, with some
analysts talking in extravagant terms of the market's potential to rise.
APRIL: South Africa came into focus, also on the election theme. European
funds, which had begun flowing in after Nelson Mandela was released from
prison, were augmented by American money around the turn of the year as the
last of the US city, county and state restrictions on pension fund
investment in South Africa were lifted.
April's spurt accompanied the appearance of specialist funds for South
African investment from several leading US money managers.
MAY: Hong Kong was good value after the ravages of the early part of the
year. Worries about the health of the senior Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping,
were put aside as US and European investors returned, cheered by US interest
rate developments and plans to resume Sino-British talks on Hong Kong's
airport.
JUNE: Austria went to the polls to decide whether to join the European Union
and the market rose strongly ahead of the result, anticipating (correctly) a
'yes' vote.
JULY: Finland re-asserted its presence, powered higher by Nokia, the world's
second largest maker of mobile phones, which accounts for more than a
quarter of Helsinki's total FM180bn market capitalisation. Nokia's share
price has more than doubled this year in response to booming sales and
surging profits.
AUGU
Malaysia rallied after the declines in previous months on expectations of a
good corporate profits outlook, take-over speculation, and moves by the
central bank to spur investment, particularly by foreigners.
SEPTEMBER: Singapore had its moment of glory on the prospect of new foreign
money coming into the market in the form of Asian equity mutual funds.
OCTOBER: Finland was again the best performer.
NOVEMBER: Mexico's appearance at the top of the league table, as President
Carlos Salinas de Gotari prepared to hand over power to President-elect
Ernesto Zedillo after the election, was not so much a reflection of a strong
run in the country as an indication of poor performance elsewhere.
DECEMBER: Norway's vote against membership of the European Union at the end
of November at least dispelled one important source of uncertainty and had
been largely factored into the market already. The removal of remaining laws
discriminating against foreign shareholders was another positive factor.
Not a bad year overall, however, and as the chart (above/below) shows, each
Dollars 100 invested in January has now grown to Dollars 305.22.
Regrettably, the best that can be said for the Hindsight Fund is that it is
easy to see now where it went wrong. It has, on a monthly basis, shown an
unerring ability to select the world's worst-performing market.
JANUARY: Kuala Lumpur was the world's best market in 1993, rising by 126 per
cent. But it then fell prey to worries that it had risen too far, too fast.
Comments to this effect by Daim Zainuddin, a former finance minister, were
followed by central bank measures to sap liquidity and flush out hot money
in the banking system.
FEBRUARY: Hong Kong, the world's second-best performer in 1993,
traditionally rallies into the lunar new year, and this seemed a safe bet
again after the traumas of January when a number of US and Japanese banks
and brokers advised clients to cut their holdings. But hopes were not
fulfilled as US speculators played the futures market, destabilising the
cash markets, and worries about higher US interest rates put a cap on the
market's advances.
MARCH: Renewed life in Kuala Lumpur during February raised hopes that it
might be back on the upward path. The opposite proved true as the Pergau dam
row with Britain erupted and foreign investors again took the opportunity to
cash in some of their massive profits from 1993.
APRIL: Hong Kong took another tumble over such worries as US interest rates,
who might succeed Deng Xiaoping, the outlook for Sino-British relations, and
US renewal of most-favoured nation status for China.
MAY: Italy turned back from an eight-year high as election euphoria waned
and protracted negotiations over the composition of the new government gave
a hint of problems to come.
JUNE: Political traumas as Mexico began to prepare for August's presidential
election, on top of a sliding currency, took their toll.
JULY: Foreign investors took advantage of the strength of the yen to take
profits in Tokyo, while domestic Japanese investors worried about the
depressing effect of the high currency on the country's exporters.
AUGU
A raft of disappointing corporate results, including the 85 per cent drop in
pre-tax profits reported by Den Dansk Bank, Denmark's largest, took
Copenhagen lower.
SEPTEMBER: Weak German bonds, particularly in the second half, and the
shadow of the coming Federal election, left Frankfurt wanting.
OCTOBER: Re-evaluation of Mexico's political situation after the murder of
Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, secretary-general of the governing
Institutional Revolutionary Party, unnerved the market early. Worse than
expected third-quarter results from Telmex, the market bellwether,
compounded the misery later.
NOVEMBER: Hong Kong started the month with its biggest one-day rise in two
months. But recurrent worries about the outlook for US interest rates, and
asset re-allocations by a number of banks and brokers, took the colony back
into negative territory.
DECEMBER: Mexico was back in the frame as the financial crisis facing the
new government intensified and the peso fell sharply, undermining the value
of any attempt at a rally by the stock market. By Thursday night, Dollars
100 invested in January was down to just Dollars 21.47.
So, what are the lessons to be learned from this year's experience? First,
that past experience really is no guide to future performance. Second,
perhaps, that while hindsight usually is beneficial, a little foresight can
prove a great deal more profitable.
 -----------------------------------------
YEAR'S BEST PERFORMING MARKETS
(DOLLARS TERMS)
 -----------------------------------------
Country                 Per cent
 -----------------------------------------
Finland                   +43.88
South Africa              +23.96
Japan                     +18.89
Sweden                    +17.02
Norway                    +14.93
 -----------------------------------------
Source: Datastream
 -----------------------------------------
 -----------------------------------------
YEAR'S WORST PERFORMING MARKETS
(DOLLARS TERMS)
 -----------------------------------------
Country                 Per cent
 -----------------------------------------
Mexico                    -40.28
Hong Kong                 -31.66
Malaysia                  -17.94
France                     -6.71
United Kingdom             -5.47
 -----------------------------------------
Source: Datastream
 -----------------------------------------
