FT  12 DEC 94 / Rao poll losses may slow Indian reforms
India's ruling Congress (I) party has suffered serious defeats in a series
of state elections, which raised fears of a slowing of government pro-market
reforms.
The Congress party in Delhi tried to deflect attacks on Mr PV Narasimha Rao,
the prime minister, by arguing that the polls had turned mainly on local
issues and were not a rejection of the national government or its policies.
Privately, Congress MPs argued that the rural poor had deserted the party in
great numbers because Mr Rao's reforms included cuts in subsidies and public
spending.
When votes were counted this weekend in the four states which held polls
over the past six weeks, Congress suffered its biggest losses ever in the
two large southern states of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, and in the
mountain state of Sikkim. In Goa, Congress also lost its majority but was
trying to form a minority administration.
The opposition called for an early general election, which was rejected by
the government, but the results could undermine Mr Rao's authority and slow
the pro-market economic reforms he has pursued in the past three years.
Mr M J Akbar, editor of the Asian Age newspaper, wrote: 'This is the first
time that the Congress has lost an election because the people believed that
the party's economic policies were targeted against the poor.'
With polls scheduled in another four states early next year and a general
election due by mid-1996, Congress politicians are likely to put great
pressure on Mr Rao and Mr Manmohan Singh, his finance minister, to loosen
the purse strings.
Business leaders said at the weekend that the economic reforms, including
measures to promote foreign trade and investment, were irreversible. But
there was less certainty that the government would be able to keep public
spending under tight control.
The party's worst result was in Mr Rao's home state of Andhra Pradesh where
Congress won only 25 seats in a 292-member assembly. The winner was Mr N T
Rama Rao, a former film star, whose Telugu Desam party took 224 seats. In
Karnataka, victory went to the the left-of-centre Janata Dal.
