FT  03 OCT 94 / Stock Exchange may alter rules on short selling
The Stock Exchange is proposing to amend its rules on the short selling of
securities in order to limit market manipulation. Short selling is the sale
of securities one does not already own. Short sellers usually hope to be
able to buy back more cheaply the shares they have just sold.
The exchange has been under pressure from the Securities and Investment
Board, the City's chief regulatory watchdog, to review rules on short
selling. The Treasury has expressed concern because it believes current
rules may have the effect of increasing the cost of raising capital and
damage London as a financial centre.
In a consultative document to be issued today, the exchange indicated it is
reluctant to make radical changes to current rules which allow unrestricted
short selling but only by market makers - firms which agree to buy and sell
large quantities of stocks in all market conditions.
'If regulation of short selling is indeed needed in the UK, then it should
be introduced with caution, it should focus specifically on the areas of
greatest concern and it should not impede the liquidity of the market,' the
consultative document said.
The exchange concluded that the potential for market manipulation through
short selling is greatest during an 'international book-building' by an
issuer whose shares are already traded.
The exchange noted that these book-building exercises, common in the US,
significantly cut the cost of raising capital. In a book-building, the
issuer announces the intention to sell shares at a future date and the
advisers in the meantime attempt to find buyers. Because the price is not
set until the day the new shares are sold, investors have an incentive to
use all available means, including short selling, to drive the price down.
The exchange cites complaints about five such exercises in recent years. The
most recent were rights issues for Eurotunnel and EuroDisney earlier this
year. The UK government's sale of the second and third tranches of its
holdings in British Telecommunications were also cited.
The exchange said it had no conclusive evidence that short selling was to
blame for the sharp drop in prices in these cases. It is proposing a new
rule requiring firms to distinguish between short sales and outright sales
when reporting their own and their clients' business to it.
The exchange is also seeking comments on four possible approaches to
restrict the manipulative effect of short selling:
require, as in the US, public disclosure of the market's aggregate short
interest position;
ban the covering of a short position with shares bought in a secondary
offering;
give issuers greater control over who is allowed to buy shares in a
secondary offering, possibly requiring buyers to promise not to sell any of
their existing holdings until the book-building is complete; or
allow those offering the shares to insist they be dealt for cash or
purchases settled more quickly.
