FT  07 FEB 94 / Monday Interview: Kawamoto faces reality with a smile -
Honda's chief gives Michiyo Nakamoto his reactions to Rover's deal with BMW
BMW brings a broad smile to the wrinkled face of Mr Nobuhiko Kawamoto,
president of Honda. 'Of course we were surprised,' he chuckles. 'I thought,
so that is the way it is going to be after all.'
It was the end of the week in which BMW made its audacious move to buy 80
per cent of Rover Group, the British car manufacturer in which Honda has a
20 per cent stake. Yet Mr Kawamoto appeared able to talk with equanimity
about the German competitor which, to many in Tokyo, has impudently intruded
upon a 15-year-old relationship that was moving along quite happily without
it.
In a comfortable lounge overlooking the fashionable Aoyama district where
the company's Tokyo headquarters is located, the genial Mr Kawamoto hardly
appears angry and resentful as he was sometimes portrayed in the aftermath
of the announcement.
It emerges that the lengthy relationship between Honda and Rover did little
to bridge the gulf in business culture between the Japanese group and
Rover's British owners.
Honda's technology, production and management methods are woven into the way
Rover factories work. But on larger issues of corporate governance - the
obligations a company owes to workers and communities as well as
shareholders and customers - BAe's handling of the Rover sale is apparently
inexplicable for Honda.
Mr Kawamoto, in his first interview since the sale, says: 'We made a
proposal based on our principle and if that was not going to be accepted
then there was nothing we could do about it.'
Honda had not wanted to take over the entire company even though it had the
option to do so. 'Mr (George) Simpson (the Rover chairman) came on January
28 and said they were making this decision and was that all right with us.
We had the choice at the time to buy the whole company.'
But doing so would have gone against a Honda principle: a car manufacturing
enterprise plays such an influential role in the country in which it is
based that ultimately it should be controlled by the people of that nation.
'Car manufacturing has a very big social responsibility, in terms of
employment and resources, not just towards the current generation but
towards future generations as well. It is not possible to manage a car
manufacturer without taking that into consideration. That is our belief.'
Mr Kawamoto is not suggesting that foreign ownership leads to a lack of
responsibility. But Rover's case is special. 'Rover was the last original UK
car company. I think it is acceptable to take a 100 per cent stake in a
company if there are a lot of other car companies and if it is not the last
one to be controlled by the people of that country and if doing so does not
have such a crucial impact on the country's car industry.'
"Because Rover was the last, and the only, car company that is British, we
judged that it should be left British. That is not out of sympathy. We think
it is too simple to judge everything in terms of value for shareholders and
customers alone.'
The difference in Honda and BAe's priorities shocked the executives
cloistered at Aoyama. 'Rover's capital was sold, 100 per cent, all at once,
to a foreigner and I was surprised at the wide gap in our ways of thinking.'
'BAe never discussed with us how Rover's business could be improved. BAe
never approached us about that. Instead, we were suddenly told that BMW was
interested and what did we think. But I don't think manufacturing, which is
a process involving the combined efforts of an enormous number of people, is
so simple that the fate of a company can be decided in two or three months.
That is our way of thinking.'
Mr Kawamoto acknowledges that 'there is no doubt that this is one side of
modern business. Honda's top management, and we have had many discussions
about the turn of events, are realists.'
This realism characterises Mr Kawamoto's approach to Honda's European
strategy as well as the company's relationship with Rover and its German
parent. 'There are so many possibilities, aren't there? So until we hear
what BMW has to say we cannot make any decisions. However, even up to now we
have respected Rover as an independent company and our relationship was one
of two independent companies.'
His realism is combined with a stoicism that does not allow any moping over
what has happened. Asked whether he is concerned about Honda technology at
Rover passing into BMW's, the smile disappears from Mr Kawamoto's face. 'The
reality is that what technology is at Rover will go to BMW and that is the
reality. That is the truth, whether we like it or not. It is the truth and
we accept it as such.'
Honda has already gained much from its efforts to remake Rover. 'Rover has
become a much better company in the past 15 years and as a result we have
been able to receive cars manufactured by Rover which are purely European
and sell them in areas of Europe where the cars had to be made in Europe.'
Mr Kawamoto stresses that Honda is open to many possibilities for the
trilateral relationship, although would pull out if Rover lost its British
status as a result of BMW control.
'The only precondition is that we will stick to our principles and other
than that everything depends on whether it makes good business sense.
Rover's significance (to Honda) as a British company will be lost, but I do
not think it is easy for a business relationship that has been built up over
15 years to change tomorrow.'
Although by all measures, Mr Kawamoto has recovered from any initial shock
and resentment he may have felt and he is ready to make the best of the
situation, a nagging question remains. 'The British view that it is not
necessary to be concerned about the nationality of capital . . . what I
don't understand about this is, if you take the case of Japan, industry is
the only way to survive, but I wonder how the British people expect to make
a living in the future. The money game is fine and there must be a business
logic to it all but how do people expect to make a living in future, I must
study this some more. I would like to know.'
