FT  15 MAR 94 / FT Review of Business Books (28): The sun also sets - Things
are changing rapidly, warns Andrew Jack, and fugitives who are caught out
could be severely hurt / Tax havens
Tax Havens and Their Uses
by Caroline Doggart
Economist Intelligence Unit, Pounds 75
183 pages
Bjorn Borg and Boris Becker do it in Monaco; Anthony Burgess and Alistair
MacLean do it - or did it - in Switzerland; Arthur C. Clarke does it in Sri
Lanka.
Many well-known personalities are among those heading to sunny tax shelters,
but potential new fugitives should think carefully before they begin to pack
their bags. Things are changing rapidly in the world's tax havens, and those
who are caught out could be badly burnt.
'No amount of tax savings can make up for a life of loneliness and a lack of
affinity with foreign surroundings,' warns Caroline Doggart, in her survey
of offshore centres. And those that change their minds can be heavily
penalised if they make the wrong choice and move back home.
This guide - written in a very clear style reminiscent of The Economist -
offers an excellent introduction to the subject, which avoids jargon or
excessive technical detail. It provides a useful trot through the range of
tax-haven topics, including their history, company registration, personal
and corporation income tax and the relationship with other tax authorities.
There is also an important and lighthearted  - if somewhat superficial -
discussion of the lifestyle in the different havens. It does perhaps appear
to veer slightly too sympathetically towards tax flee-ers rather than tax
collectors.
Switzerland, it seems, was the world's first tax haven. Campione, on the
border of Switzerland and Italy, has become one by default since both
nations abdicated their fiscal responsibilities for the region. Minerva,
between Tonga and Fiji, was mooted recently as the world's only underwater
retreat. Albania and North Korea lack income tax but also, warns Doggart,
lack amenities. There is no tax on Ascension Island and just 4 per cent on
Norway's Svalbard Islands. But, as an official feasibility study for the
Falklands Islands concluded, havens in warmer climates have a distinct
advantage.
Doggart includes on her list some surprising candidates: France and Italy in
Europe, on some grounds; and even the US for many Europeans, because of its
comparatively low federal tax rates - even after US President Clinton's
latest rise.
Powers of investigation by tax authorities vary greatly. The US Internal
Revenue Service is particularly zealous in hunting down tax evaders. France,
India and the US all offer statutory awards for informers.
Eastern Europe is now beginning to get in on the act, with Hungary offering
a high degree of banking secrecy. By contrast, Switzerland's wall of secrecy
has now been pierced so frequently, says Doggart, that it is more like
Gruyere than granite.
Readers may sometimes find the structure of the report - based around themes
rather than countries - a little irritating if they are gathering
information on a single location. In compensation, the whole document is
sufficiently short and lucid to be skimmed through quickly.
Some of the examples mentioned are also beginning to look a little dated.
The UK Inland Revenue's penchant for dawn raids, for example, might have
been better illustrated by that on Nissan in 1991, rather than Rossminster
in 1979.
Because it is heavily oriented towards practical advice, the report fails to
pull out wider themes. It would have been useful to read more about the
changing pressures on havens, and what future they have as the trends in the
burden and collection of tax around the world have shifted. But, as Doggart
says, havens will continue as long as governments impose new and burdensome
tax legislation. So, too, no doubt, will guides like this.
