FT  09 JUL 94 / Outdoors: Real cross-border co-operation - Gardening
Behind every gardener stands another gardener: a parent or a partner, an
author or some poor soul on piece rates bribed to mow the lawn before Friday
evening. Behind me stands a German.
Thirty years ago, there stood a lot of Germans, because I was working in
their greatest botanic garden as one of the staff of 80. When I spill earth
on a path, I still fear German discipline. When I look at mixed hardy
planting, I see it as my German garden taught me, in terms of its countries
of origin. Chinese gentians still strike me as surprising when planted among
penstemons from the Rocky Mountains.
Last week, my old shadow came back to life in the Jodrell Lecture Theatre at
Kew Gardens in south-west London, where more than 200 high-paying visitors
had packed into an Anglo-German gardening summit. Our theme was Designing
with Perennials, under the challenging slogan of 'widespread ignorance of
revolutionary new approaches to herbacious planting, especially in Germany'.
The occasion was the brain-child of Tim Rees and Brita von Schoenaich, two
former Kew students, who showed signs of organising the landscape with all
the energy and style with which they organised five speakers, an itinerant
German task force, and a new cross-border initiative in Europe (in the full
botanical sense). As the German speakers stressed how different hardy
perennials have been classified for different ecologies, my old shadow felt
at ease.
Professional German order was back on the botanical map and we Britons were
being reminded that plants grow best in gardens when they are suited in
nature to the same geographic conditions.
Colour slides made happy reference to the flora of the steppe land. At the
sight of the Steppenheide (moorland), my old shadow started to frolic and
sprout a furry, grey coat of contentment.
This fascinating summit brought out the different strengths of German
gardening. In Britain, the best garden-makers are amateurs who are trained
privately and whose sights are raised by one another.
They view a Dip. Hort. as a short-cut to chopped bark and ground cover and,
rightly, trust their own good taste, which they bring from artistic areas of
life. German gardening strikes them as the Cinderella of Europe.
Can anyone name a private garden in Germany which a keen British aficionado
would go out of his way to visit on holiday? I wish I could, but much German
gardening is about technology and gadgets.
Germany has great gardens, but all of them are public and civic, like few of
those in the UK. I think of the rose garden at Zweibrucken near Saarbrucken
and the Weihenstephan nursery-landscaping near Munich.
Professional botanical knowledge is superbly strong in Germany, and beyond
it stretches a richer and more varied flora in the wild of moorland, the
flowery meadows of the Allgau and the high mountains of the south.
The cities have also gained from urban garden festivals. In Britain, the
festivals at Liverpool and Stoke fizzled out as gimmicks for the family. In
Germany, you still come on great legacies of festival planting, whether in
the excellent expanse of public planting beyond the main station in
Stuttgart or on a former gravel tip of hopelessness in the heart of Munich.
In 1983, Munich hosted a great Garden Festival in the city Westpark which
lay beside a housing estate in the city district of Laim.
European breeders offered dozens of their brightest irises and day-lilies
and it was left to an interior designer-turned landscaper to arrange this
challenge as a work of art.
None of her Kew audience would doubt that in Rosemarie Weisse we were
encountering one of Europe's outstanding landscape gardeners. She has
transformed the public space of the Westpark to the point where we all ought
to go and see her artistry, at its best in late May.
Munich is the place for keen gardeners to visit, when the great alpine
garden of its botanical gardens is at a peak.
What, then, of revolution? In her case, it consists in large-scale plantings
of herbaceous perennials outside the framework of a border, but in the
manner of a natural steppe among ornamental grasses for autumn colour and
seed heads.
Behind the style stands Professor Richard Hansen, now in his 80s, whose
master guide to perennials and their ecology has just been translated by
Cambridge University Press. The art is to suit perennials to the ecology of
the site so that they will persist for years and wander like dandelions.
Hansen's fine gardens at Weihenstephan put these ideas into practice in the
1950s and Rosemarie Weisse is one of his beneficiaries, adding her own
delicate sense of shape and colour.
Herbaceous perennials are often tricky and English gardeners are much more
wary of them than their image as masters of the herbaceous border implies to
foreigners. Many look beastly after flowering.
I remember hearing them described as 'gaily-coloured hay' and I did feel
that some of our professional speakers had a curious sense of what counts as
structure in a garden's planting.
Some of the most vigorous forms are a stale pink or a pussycat shade of
mauve and, in spite of the Germans' slides shown at Kew, I really do not
want big groups of dreary old polygonum bistorta, a plant which I am pleased
to have shown the red card from the garden many years ago.
In the British tradition, I thought back to William Robinson and Graham
Thomas. In the late 1960s, Graham Thomas's book, Ground Cover Plants,
pointed many of us to ways which were not so different to Hansen's results.
Readers of Robinson's Wild Garden in the 1870s will find that he was not
only thinking of dotting a plant here or there in a natural park. His
illustrations and references, to other gardens now lost, back up his
campaign for plantings of non-native plants running wild in light grass, not
yet more British buttercups, but irises, peonies, aquilegias and wisterias
up pine-trees.
He had none of the professional's knowledge of plants' persistence in these
surroundings, but personally, I am glad that he did not go in for ornamental
grasses but envisaged that style in the setting of British woodland and
meadows of modest grasses.
For Britain's gardeners our rough grass and orchards are nearest to
Steppenheide. The speaker who talked of forthcoming experiments with hardy
perennials, among less robust green grass on soil of restrained fertility,
seemed to me to be pointing Britain to a way forward.
When British gardens go back, the grass moves in, yet good things survive.
Perhaps we can reverse the traffic and put them out into roughly-mown
grasses.
In short, revolutions are often most revolutionary when they look back to
tradition and reapply them. I think that the great menace to artistic
gardening is the pedantic and increasing nostalgia for nothing but 'native'
plants.
This summit makes me even keener to resist it and much as I respect Hansen's
ecological ground-cover, it is still Robinson's challenge which stretches my
ideas for perennials in Britain. Give me another 10 years, and I too, may
know a little of what my shadows already know over there, in a growing
meadow of emphatically non-native plants.
