FT  11 AUG 94 / UK Company News: Westminster Health Care shows sharp gain to
Pounds 11.2m
Westminster Health Care, the nursing homes group, completed its first full
year as a listed company with pre-tax profits more than doubled at Pounds
11.2m, compared with Pounds 4.3m.
The results were at the top end of analysts' expectations and the shares
rose by 4 per cent to 338p.
The strong profits performance was fuelled by price increases, cost controls
and a Pounds 4m drop in net interest charges to Pounds 768,000 following the
flotation last year. Profits before interest and tax for the year to May 30
were 33 per cent higher at Pounds 12m, on sales ahead 36 per cent to Pounds
50.4m. Gross margins were stable at 32 per cent.
Mr Pat Carter, chief executive, was bullish about prospects for the current
year, which had started 'very encouragingly'. Westminster intended to step
up its nursing homes expansion programme and would begin to examine new
opportunities arising from changes in the health market.
Any expansion outside nursing homes would only be taken after a close study
of the group's skills, however, and have to be cash generative, Mr Carter
said.
Westminster intended to add some 1,000 beds a year for the foreseeable
future, he said. This compared with 704 last year, of which 26 per cent were
dedicated to the group's growing speciality business of caring for patients
with dementia.
Westminster finished the year with 3,947 beds.
Prices were increased by 6 per cent last year, partly due to new
developments in the more expensive market of south-eastern England.
Occupancy levels fell slightly from 93 per cent to 92 per cent as a result
of the implementation of the Community Care Act.
The final dividend is 2.75p, for a 4.5p total. This is 20 per cent higher
than the pro forma dividend included in the flotation prospectus. Earnings
rose by 46 per cent to 18.7p.
COMMENT
Westminster is careful to manage the balance between the lucrative and the
secure by mixing private and state-funded patients. The fruits of that
strategy are showing through and could bring interesting bonuses as the
health system contracts out tasks which could fit the group's skill profile.
Westminster's experiments with the Woodmill Hospital - virtually dedicated
to NHS patients seeking hip, knee or cataract operations - appear to be
paying off, but it is still early days. Fears of a rights issue to fund
expansion appear to be premature for the moment, although the group is
certain to come back to shareholders within the next two years. This should
only cause concern if the management story begins to unravel. Forecasts are
for Pounds 14.1m this year, for a prospective p/e of 15 times. The premium
rating appears to be well-deserved.
