FT  19 MAY 94 / Unlikely mix for a new Euro-recipe
Mr Philippe de Villiers, viscount, champion of a movement for French
morality and leader of L'Autre Europe, an anti-Maastricht list for the
European elections, was in uncompromising form.
On the stump in Strasbourg this week he delivered a tirade against the
Brussels technocracy, an assault on the Gatt regime of international trade
and an invective against corruption in France and beyond.
'The only good things which have come from Europe have nothing to do with
Brussels,' he claimed, citing the Channel Tunnel as an example. He condemned
the European Commission's failure to tackle the real problems of the day, in
particular unemployment, to the loud applause of the Strasbourg faithful.
But winning applause may be easier than winning votes for the
anti-Maastricht cause in the June 12 elections. French Eurosceptics are
spoiled for choice. From the Communist party and a rebel socialist-led
grouping on the left, to the National Front on the extreme right, voters who
fear the emergence of a federal Europe can take their pick from parties
which span the political spectrum.
'The debate transcends traditional left and right divisions,' says Sir James
Goldsmith, erstwhile financier and ecologist who is standing alongside Mr de
Villiers on the list for L'Autre Europe. Known as Jimmy in France, he is
opposed to what Sir James describes as the 'asphyxiation of a democratic
Europe,' and in favour of a 'Europe of nation states.'
The nature of the debate has brought an unlikely and colourful mix of
bedfellows both within and between the groupings of the anti-Maastricht
cause. In addition to Mr de Villiers and Sir James, for example, L'Autre
Europe also includes Mr Charles de Gaulle, grandson of the general.
To their left is L'Autre Politique, a list headed by Jean-Pierre
Chevenement, the former socialist minister.
To their right, by some distance, stands the National Front, headed by Mr
Jean-Marie Le Pen, the demagogue who draws a comparison between the
Maastricht treaty and the Treaty of Troyes, which paved the way for Joan of
Arc's France to be subjugated to English rule.
The various groupings share a set of common targets. From the Gatt -
described by Sir James as a 'monstrous crime' - to European monetary union,
condemned by Mr Chevenement as 'a suicidal choice for our economy which has
resulted in unnecessarily high interest rates,' there is much on which the
various groups see eye to eye.
But there is also much on which they disagree. 'The Non to Maastricht is
deeply-rooted in republican beliefs. On religion and the role of women in
society, our values are not those of Mr de Villiers,' says Mr Chevenement,
whose list is split between male and female candidates.
The communists differ from their rivals on the right in favouring a pacifist
Europe which gives priority to the protection of labour.
The often confusing messages do strike a chord with many voters. 'Tell me
where are the supposed economic benefits of the European Union?' asks one
businessman attending the Strasbourg rally. 'Our interest rates are tied to
the Bundesbank which cripples my business and two of my relatives have lost
their jobs over the past 18 months,' he adds.
Such sentiments, according to the polls, will give the anti-Maastricht cause
almost 25 per cent of the votes in the June 12 elections.
But the support is splintered, with the National Front on about 9 per cent,
the communist list on 6 per cent, L'Autre Europe on about 5 per cent and
L'Autre Politique on 4 per cent.
The total is also rather less than the 49 per cent of the votes which the
anti-Maastricht cause garnered in France's 1992 referendum on the treaty.
'There were two issues then, a vote on Mr Mitterrand as president, and the
vote on Maastricht,' responds Mr de Gaulle.
'We have had very strong attendances at our rallies, people are more worried
than they have ever been about the development of Europe.'
