FT  18 FEB 94 / Survey of Asian Aerospace (10): Keeping ahead of the game -
Kieran Cooke considers the challenges that Singapore faces
Singapore's aerospace sector is facing challenges familiar to most sections
of the island republic's industry. The aerospace sector has built up
expertise in a number of areas and now serves as one of the key aircraft
overhaul and maintenance centres in the Asia Pacific region.
But surrounding countries are constantly nibbling away at Singapore's
competitiveness: Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand are rapidly expanding
their own aerospace industries. Those countries pay wages that are
substantially lower than those in Singapore.
Singapore's answer is to become increasingly specialised - and make its
aerospace industry ever more efficient.
The industry grew out of the island republic's policy of aiming for greater
self-sufficiency in the military sector. In the mid-1970s it was solely
concerned with the maintenance and repair of military aircraft.
Defence-related work still forms an important part of the industry.
Over the years, international aerospace and industry-related companies have
decided to set up facilities in Singapore. The island republic has become an
increasingly important hub for international airline traffic: within the
Asia Pacific region Singapore handles about 14 per cent of aircraft traffic
from Europe and nearly 8 per cent of that from North America.
Foreign companies have also been attracted by the facilities offered by
Changi airport, which is consistently rated as one of the best airports in
the world both for passenger and cargo traffic. More than 18m passengers and
nearly 700,000 tonnes of cargo pass through Changi every year. A second
terminal opened at the airport in 1989 and a third is due to be ready by the
turn of the century. A fourth terminal is in the initial planning stages.
Perhaps most importantly for the aerospace industry, Changi has more direct
city links within the Asia Pacific region than other airports. 'Having an
up-to-date facility like Changi, with the best regional links, means we can
get aircraft in and out fast,' says a Singapore-based aerospace executive.
'Singapore has overcome its land constraints and still has the edge over
other centres. But other countries are catching up fast.'
More than 50 companies are now involved in the aerospace industry in
Singapore. According to the government's Economic Development Board (EDB),
the aerospace sector grew by 6.2 per cent last year with a total output of
SDollars 1.25bn (Dollars 800m).
Mr Png Cheong Boon, the EDB's senior officer monitoring the aerospace
industry, says the outlook for this year is still uncertain owing to the
depressed state of the worldwide aerospace industry.
'However, the booming Asia-Pacific region will hold the key to future growth
in the world aerospace industry over the next few years,' says Mr Png.
More than 90 per cent of the island republic's aerospace industry is devoted
to repair and maintenance. As in many sectors of the Singapore economy, the
industry is dominated, in terms of output and employment, by
government-linked companies. The biggest company in the sector is Singapore
Aerospace which, with more than 3,000 employees, ranks as one of the main
players in aircraft maintenance in the Asia Pacific region.
Major work undertaken in Singapore ranges from complete 'nose jobs' on 747s
to maintenance of some US air force fighter engines. But the emphasis is
tending towards the more high-tech sectors of the industry. In 1992 the
industry attracted investments of SDollars 116m. According to the EDB,
industry investments rose 29 per cent to SDollars 150m last year.
Recent investments include a USDollars 30m landing gear repair and overhaul
facility by Dowty and an overhaul facility for flight and fuel control
systems by Lucas Aerospace. Meanwhile Turbine Overhaul Services, a joint
venture between state-controlled Singapore Technologies and United
Technologies/Pratt &amp; Whitney of the US, has been expanding its facility for
upgrading aircraft jet engine turbine blades and vanes.
While manufacturing is only a small segment of Singapore's aerospace
industry, the island republic has scored some notable successes in winning
contracts to manufacture aircraft parts. For example, Airbus A320 cabin
doors are manufactured in Singapore, as are A340 engine mounts and Boeing
777 landing gear doors. But labour shortages and space constraints mean that
Singapore is unlikely to go into full-scale aircraft manufacturing.
While Singapore has plenty of trained engineers and technicians compared
with other countries in the region, job hopping is more prevalent as skilled
workers seek better wages and conditions.
Airline companies and manufacturers, seeking to cut costs in the midst of an
industry recession, are considering other regional sites where wages are
lower. As always, Singapore is trying to stay one step ahead of the game.
In time, the island republic's aerospace industry is likely to go regional
in order to take advantage of easier labour conditions and industry
opportunities overseas.
Late last year Singapore Engineering, the wholly-owned subsidiary of SIA,
said it would take a 10 per cent stake in a Dollars 63m aircraft maintenance
and repair facility being built in Xiamen in China. Wages in China are at
least two-thirds lower than in Singapore. And Singapore sees the venture as
an important opening into China's fast-expanding aircraft maintenance
industry.
