FT  04 JUN 94 / Old secret of the modern Don Juan: At the opera the seducer
inspires. In life he is mocked
There is a scene in Mozart's Don Giovanni which, I suspect, has puzzled many
others besides me. It is that passage in which the aristocratic seducer of
'old ones, young ones . . .' (and their daughters, I am sure) turns the full
power of his melody on to Zerlina, the peasant beauty, at her wedding lunch.
We know before she flutters her first hesitation, that she is lost; that she
is fated to be number one thousand and four, gaining at last nothing but
misery and shame, because no-one in those days would pay for her story.
But wait] Her lilting song entangles the don in one of the loveliest duets
ever written, peeping hesitantly at first and then gazing in wonder on the
rapture love. It is not necessary not be a moralist, nor to read leading
articles in British newspapers to know that this is not love. It is the word
that dares not spell its name, shameless, disgraceful and one which would
certainly have ruined our hero's political career, had he stooped to such an
occupation.
But - here is the puzzle - no-one is ever surprised that the deplorable
climax of this lascivious couple holds the audience in a spell of pure
beauty. Thousands of respectable parents, politicians and even newspaper
columnists, have been seduced by it. It would be too much to say that they
want the don to succeed, but certainly they delight in the attempt. And they
understand that, for the fleeting moment, it is love.
This is not the hypocrisy of those who relish a newspaper scandal, nor can
it be dismissed merely as a trick of the music; for the victim, Donna Anna,
remains a revolting moralist, even in her sublimest arias.
No, Zerlina's song captures exactly the concealed anti Christian message of
a story which has fascinated the warmer parts of Europe for 3 1/2 centuries.
The tale of the libertine dragged to hell by the statue of a murdered father
first hit the Spanish stage in 1630 as Tirso de Molina's play, The Seducer
of Seville. Why has it continued to hold the imagination? And why does it
now consume the British public to the exclusion even of European election
issues?
In our real life modern version, the father-judge is dead only to good
taste, and he drags the seducer merely into a living hell of press
interrogation; but the British son of a lord is heir to all the Spanish
don's arrogance, vitality and insouciant humour. He shares also a weakness
for chronicling his conquests.
And we love him, our Don Clark; or if not him, it. His ancient tale may not
be dismissed as an escape into male fantasy. For as my colleague with the
sparkling eyes observed: 'Women love a rogue. He understands them. And they
always hope . . .' That rascal Pushkin knew it too: His Juan found Anna
scandalously pliant even after he had murdered her father. Bernard Shaw gave
him the last word in hell. Many others, including Moliere and Baudelaire,
understood the story's dissident message.
Newspapers editors, alas, trade only in vulgar certainties and so force
their readers to become prigs or voyeurs. Yet Pushkin and Mozart are
honoured as gods for telling this story with elegant simplicity while
exploring, almost without our noticing it, a most uncomfortable truth -
namely, that the Christian sexual code never was accepted fully by western
society, whatever people pretended. It was and is defiantly ignored in real
life by bold dons and amorous women and secretly resented by many others who
may consume either great art and cheap newspapers - or both.
All understand that dons leave a trail of unhappiness: the tearful fury of
Mozart's Elvira, and the despair of Mrs Harkess, who cuckolded her husband,
the judge, only to become her daughters' rival.
But we know also that Zerlina is a pussy-cat longing to slip away to be
stroked and perhaps to bear her poor Masetto unexpectedly handsome sons.
Great art whispers, moreover, that the Christianised version of the myth
contains a deep untruth. In real life, Don Alan Clark, is not dragged into
the icy fires, nor even horsewhipped.
He suffers, like Leporello, the don's lecherous servant, some inconvenience.
Then he laughs defiance at the devil and lives happily ever after in his
castle with a wife who, not improbably, has the last laugh of all.
Real hell is the state of soul inhabited for evermore by Anna and Elvira
and, from last week it seems, by Mr and Mrs Harkess.
