FT  19 OCT 94 / International Company News: Philip Morris recovery continues
with 27% rise
Philip Morris, the US food and tobacco group, continued its bounce-back from
last year's depressed figures with a 27 per cent surge in net profits to
Dollars 1.2bn in its third quarter.
In April last year Philip Morris cut the price of Marlboro cigarettes and
its other premium brands in the US to win back market share from low-cost
rivals. This led to a series of adverse quarterly earnings comparisons which
only began to abate in the second quarter of this year.
The biggest single component of the profits growth reported yesterday was
the recovery in Philip Morris's domestic tobacco operations. Operating
income from this division shot up by 40 per cent to Dollars 863m because
volumes rose in response to the company's increased market share.
The company also saw profit increases in its other food and tobacco
divisions. International tobacco increased operating income by 18 per cent
to Dollars 800m, international food was up 12 per cent at Dollars 269m,
North American food up 6 per cent at Dollars 618m, and Miller Brewing up 18
per cent at Dollars 111m.
Overall, group revenues rose by 19 per cent to Dollars 2.7bn. Earnings per
share advanced 28 per cent to Dollars 1.42, a touch above the Dollars 1.40
expected by analysts, but the shares eased back Dollars 3/8 to Dollars 61
1/2 in a falling market.
Philip Morris said it sold 201bn cigarettes world-wide during the quarter,
up 16 per cent from the comparable quarter's figure.
Outside the US, the volume of cigarettes sold rose by 19 per cent to 144bn,
with growth in most markets except Turkey, where sales were affected by poor
economic conditions.
In the US, Philip Morris said profits from tobacco had been boosted by the
fact that a greater portion of the volume mix came from premium brands. It
quoted figures suggesting that Marlboro's market share had risen to a record
29.1 per cent in August, 7 percentage points higher than the period just
before last year's price cuts.
Mr William Murray, chairman, said he was confident the company would be able
to sustain its strong momentum.
