FT  01 SEP 94 / Cubans risk all for better life: A look at economic pressure
to become a refugee
As talks begin in New York today on the Cuban refugee crisis even government
officials in Havana admit that life has become plagued with hardships for
the island's 11m people.
The chronic shortages of food and other basic goods are the result of the
worst economic crisis in the 35-year history of the Cuban revolution. It
followed the collapse after 1990 of preferential trade and aid links with
the now defunct Soviet bloc.
While hundreds of Cubans risk their lives trying to reach the US in flimsy,
home-made rafts, those who stay behind view their departure with mixed
emotions.
'I'm a revolutionary and all that I have I owe to the revolution,' said Mr
Roberto Perez from Havana. He was explaining why he had not joined five
members of his family who, with nine others, clambered aboard a rickety
half-raft, half-boat that set off this week from a beach at Cojmar, east of
Havana. Their craft joined a dozen others on Monday afternoon aiming for
Florida.
Mr Perez added: 'Besides, I'm 54 and black. What am I going to do over
there?'
Gesturing towards his departing relatives, a brother, a sister-in-law and
three teenage grandchildren, he went on: 'I don't criticise them. They are
young, they aspire to other things. If I were young, I would go too.'
Further along the beach another elderly man was staying behind. 'I would
like things to improve here so that people wouldn't have to go,' he said.
Fear of making the risky, 90-mile sea crossing, reluctance to leave behind
family and friends and hopes that things might eventually improve are all
factors keeping many Cubans from joining the exodus from the communist-ruled
Caribbean state.
There is an air of desolation about the streets of Havana. The decaying
buildings and potholed streets of and the lack of shops, restaurants and
businesses operating normally are symptoms of an economic squeeze made worse
by a longstanding US trade embargo.
The desire for a 'better life' is the motive most cited by the departing
rafters, who appear undeterred by the change in policy announced by US
President Bill Clinton in mid-August. The change means that Cubans who try
to leave without visas will now not be granted automatic entry to the US as
they had been for years. They face indefinite detention at the US naval base
at Guantanamo Bay in eastern Cuba or at other US detention centres.
The dispute over immigration is part of the wider US-Cuban conflict and will
be at the centre of the talks in New York between high-ranking Cuban and US
officials. Senior US officials have made clear they are willing to discuss
ways of controlling the exodus of Cuban refugees, but not much else.
Cuban President Fidel Castro, who criticised Mr Clinton's recent policy
change towards the Cuban refugees as 'absurd', has said the talks should
include lifting the US embargo and ending the barrage of anti-communist
radio and television broadcasts directed from the US.
He also wants an immediate end to new sanctions announced this month by Mr
Clinton, which included a virtual halt to US dollar remittances from Cuban
Americans to relatives on the island.
Heading the Cuban delegation will be Mr Ricardo Alarcon, a prominent figure
in the communist party hierarchy and head of the island's National Assembly.
He is a former foreign minister and ambassador to the United Nations.
Mr Alarcon is an experienced diplomat who has faced the Americans before in
immigration negotiations. He helped to negotiate a previous immigration
accord in 1984, four years after the so-called Mariel 'boatlift' by which
about 125,000 Cubans left the island. Mr Alarcon is a staunch defender of
the island's one-party political system and can be expected to resist any US
demands for reforms in that area.
The Cubans hope the pressure generated by the humanitarian problem of the
refugees will persuade Mr Clinton to change the policy of hostility towards
Mr Castro's rule practised by successive US administrations since shortly
after the 1959 Cuban revolution. This may be a vain hope, as US officials
such as Ms Janet Reno, the attorney-general, have publicly blamed the
refugee exodus on the Cuban leadership.
Some relief to the refugee problem may come from third nations such as
Canada and Mexico, which have said they are willing to take some Cuban
refugees with families already living in their countries.
Meanwhile, as the exodus of rafters continues, Cubans staying behind will
wait to see if this week's talks can break the 30-year deadlock of
hostility.
