FT  18 JUL 94 / FT Guide to the Week
18
MONDAY
Middle East peace talks
Jordan and Israel hold their first peace talks in the region since the
Middle East peace process was launched in 1991. The talks will focus on
borders, security, water, energy and the environment and will pave the way
for the first public summit between King Hussein of Jordan and Yitzhak
Rabin, Israeli prime minister, in Washington on July 25.
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators also reconvene in Cairo to begin the
'early empowerment' talks which will lead to an extension of Palestinian
authority over civil administration in the West Bank beyond Jericho.
Bosnian peace plan: The Bosnian Serb assembly in Pale, the Serb stronghold,
and the Moslem-Croat parliament in Sarajevo are to meet today, the eve of
the deadline set by the international community, to reject or endorse the
plan to divide Bosnia along ethnic lines.
European agricultural ministers resume battle today over farm prices and
milk quotas for the coming 12 months. They will also discuss a proposal from
Mr Rene Steichen, EU agriculture commissioner, to tighten restrictions on
British exports of beef carcases from herds which have been free of the
disease for six years rather than the current two because of the threat of
bovine spongiform encephalitis, or 'mad cow' disease.
Japan's Diet begins an extraordinary session (to July 22). Prime Minister
Tomiichi Murayama makes his inaugural policy speech, followed by questions
from the ruling and opposition parties.
Gyula Horn, Hungary's prime minister, makes a one-day visit to Bonn, his
first after being elected last Friday. Germany is Hungary's most important
trading partner in Europe and Horn will be hoping for more substantial
commitments about future membership of the European Union.
Rolling settlement: The London Stock Exchange introduces rolling share
settlement, ending the 173-year old system of account periods. From today,
deals will have to be settled within 10 days, with first settlement day
August 1. The plan is then to move to 5-day settlement early in 1995 - or as
soon as feasible. The prospect of same-day settlement hovers at the turn of
the century.
Investor protector: The Personal Investment Authority, the UK's new watchdog
to protect the private investor, becomes operational. Intended to improve
the regulation of retail financial services, it has been the subject of much
controversy and only grudging acceptance by many in the sector - Standard
Life, the UK's largest mutual life insurer, last week signed up to the PIA
in spite of earlier opposition.
FT Survey: South Africa.
19
TUESDAY
OECD employment outlook
The Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the
group of leading industrialised countries, publishes its annual Employment
Outlook. It is expected to elaborate on several of the themes spelt out in
the recent OECD Jobs Study. Both reports underscore the necessity for OECD
societies to enhance their ability to adapt to structural change to achieve
the twin goals of higher employment and good jobs.
EU Commission presidency:
The recently-elected European Parliament, holding its first plenary session
in Strasbourg, is expected to vote this week on the appointment of the
president of the European Union Commission. Last Friday, the council of
ministers chose Jacques Santer (above), the prime minister of Luxembourg,
for the post. He is to address the parliament on Thursday, and the vote will
follow.
The inauguration of Ukraine's new president Mr Leonid Kuchma takes place
today. Mr Kuchma seems to have decided that market reforms are the only
solution to Ukraine's economic problems, but how far he is prepared to go
will not begin to unfold until the new government is assembled.
Saleroom: Books and memorabilia from the Moscow flat of the late Kim Philby,
the 'third' man among the Communist spies at the heart of British
Intelligence, come up for sale at Sotheby's in London. There are typescripts
of his memoirs and talks he prepared for training KGB agents, as well as
photographs and trophies given to him by the Soviet government. Also
included are books he inherited from another defecting spy, Guy Burgess.
Santa Clauses from all over the world descend the chimneys of Copenhagen to
convene for their annual congress (to July 21).
FT Surveys: Japan and Monaco.
20
WEDNESDAY
Five years of house arrest
Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese pro- democracy leader ends her fifth year
under house arrest and begins her sixth. The anniversary is likely to be
marked by human rights activists around the world, especially in
neighbouring Thailand, where many Burmese exiles live and where south-east
Asian foreign ministers gather at the weekend for their annual meeting.
Burma's military junta, however, shows little sign of being prepared to
release Ms Suu Kyi. Her National League for Democracy convincingly won an
election in 1990 - although she was already detained - but the armed forces,
in power since 1962, ignored the results.
Shimon Peres, Israel's foreign minister, sets foot for the first time
publicly on Jordanian soil, joining Warren Christopher, US secretary of
state, and Abdul-Salam al-Majali, Jordan's prime minister, to symbolise
recently renewed momentum in Israeli-Jordanian peace talks. The meeting, two
days after the start of detailed negotiations, is set to take place in the
Jordanian desert north of Aqaba.
President Nelson Mandela of South Africa visits Britain for celebrations to
mark his country's re-admission to the Commonwealth.
Moon landing: The world remembers the first moonwalk 25 years ago. Coming
soon is the 25th anniversary of the first game of golf on the moon.
German resistance: A series of nationwide ceremonies will take place to mark
the failed bomb plot against Adolf Hitler in 1944. Many are angry that the
occasion, usually the cue for much soul-searching, has been hijacked by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl who will make a speech in Berlin, and has been trying
to blot out the role played by left-wingers and communists who resisted
Hitler alongside the better-known aristocrats.
Some 5,000 people were arrested and many were executed after the bomb blew
Hitler's conference room and trousers to bits but failed to kill the Fuhrer.
UK economy: June's retail sales data will give further evidence of
consumers' ability to absorb April's tax increases. So far, the effect has
been milder than many feared, and the Treasury forecasts consumer spending
will be up 3.1 per cent this year. Nevertheless, retail sales were static in
May and analysts expect the annual growth figure to fall from May's 3.9 per
cent to 2.9 per cent in June.
21
THURSDAY
UK Labour party leadership
Britain's Labour party announces the result of a contest to succeed the late
John Smith as leader. Tony Blair, the young and modernising home affairs
spokesman, is expected to win, but there is a close contest for the deputy
leadership between two more traditional socialists: Margaret Beckett, the
interim leader, and employment spokesman John Prescott.
Commons recess: Britain's lower parliamentary chamber, the House of Commons,
rises for its summer recess, returning on October 17.
A US State Department conference takes place today to mark the 50th
anniversary of the Bretton Woods financial conference and the institutions
it set up (the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank of
Reconstruction and Development).
Tonight, a new London evening newspaper launches today. About 100,000 copies
of the paper will be distributed free to central London commuters on
weekdays and will be the first competition to the Evening Standard since the
closure of the Evening News in 1987. Mr Geoff Steggals, chief executive of
Tonight, said the aim was to provide a bright, cheerful read.
FT Survey: Albania.
Cricket: First Cornhill Test, Lord's: England v South Africa (to July 25).
Holidays: Belgium (National Day).
22
FRIDAY
Asean ministers meet
Foreign ministers of the six members of the Association of South East Asian
Nations (Asean) - Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore
and Thailand - hold their 27th annual meeting in Bangkok (to July 23). Also
there as observers and guests will be Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Burma.
The ministerial meeting is followed on July 25 by the first Asean regional
forum, which includes the US, China and Russia.
No place in the sun: German members of parliament, who like every upstanding
German take their holidays very seriously, are fuming about having to drag
themselves back to Bonn for a special session of the Bundestag.
Parliament has been recalled to throw its weight behind the constitutional
court decision last week which, for the first time since the second world
war, allows German soldiers to take part in United Nations' operations
outside the Nato area. The extra sitting will cost about DM150,000 (Dollars
92,000) and grumpy deputies say the vote could just as well take place in
September.
UK economy: The first estimate of second-quarter gross domestic product is
released today. Analysts are expecting quarter-on-quarter growth of 0.8 per
cent, which, combined with first quarter growth of 0.7 per cent, will put
the economy ahead of target for the Treasury's full-year forecast of 2.75
per cent. Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Angela Bleasdale. Fax: (+44) (0)71
873 3194.
23-24
Weekend
Japan and S Korea consult
Japan's prime minister Tomiichi Murayama is to travel to Seoul on Sunday to
hold discussions with South Korean President Kim Young-sam on the situation
in North Korea, following the death of President Kim Il-sung.
Mr Murayama's Social Democratic party has backed the idea of closer
relations with North Korea, however Mr Murayama has promised to support the
United Nations sanctions against Pyongyang if it refuses to allow
international nuclear inspections.
Ukraine: Parliamentary by-elections take place today in more than 100
constituencies which failed to elect members in last April's elections.
There are 450 members to be elected and therefore a change in the
parliament's character, which is currently dominated by leftist hardliners,
is possible.
Athletics: The Goodwill Games begin in Russia's second city, St Petersburg,
on Saturday and will continue until August 7.
Polo: England's smart set converge on Windsor for International Polo Day. At
half-time, spectators are invited to step on to the field to tread in the
divots of turf kicked up by the ponies' hooves.
Compiled by Patrick Stiles and Angela Bleasdale. Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
