FT  06 AUG 94 / Letters to the Editor: Bank attitude not helpful to industry
Sir, You reported the Bank of England criticising industry for seeking high
rates of return on investment ('Bank sounds warning on lack of investment',
August 1). You also reported, in splendid juxtaposition, the fear of an
early rise in interest rates ('Anxious wait for City on rates').
Those with even quite short memories will remember the official exhortations
to industry six or seven years ago to increase capacity. Building materials
suppliers were especially criticised for lack of manufacturing capacity, and
the size of the import-export trade gap. But pity building material
manufacturers which unwisely responded to those appeals. Many of the
investments were not even completed before the government imposed a slump on
the building industry and its need for building materials. Other new
capacity was closed or mothballed long before making a pay-back. As a
consequence many building materials share prices are lower today than they
were seven years ago.
Inflation is not the sole concern when making an investment decision. In the
past, inflation has masked many poor investment decisions, particularly in
property investment. It is more important to have stability of the market
place and interest rates. There must be demand to utilise the new capacity,
and there must be a margin over interest rates to service capital.
Is it beyond the intellectual capacity of the Bank of England to understand
that, when it constantly threatens to increase interest rates to prevent a
rise in inflation, it constantly reminds industry of the need to assume
higher interest rates when assessing rates of return on new investment? The
Bank's own performance hardly inspires confidence, with the confusion caused
by the new issue of Treasury bills last Friday as an example.
Can we hope that the Bank of England will cease posturing and try to provide
some constructive help to regenerate industry?
Peter H Quinn,
Dog House,
Latimer,
Buckinghamshire HP5 1UQ
