FT  02 DEC 94 / International Company News: Chrysler yields to Kerkorian and
increases payout by 60%
Chrysler, the smallest of the three big US carmakers, yesterday bowed to
pressure from its biggest shareholder as it announced plans to pay out more
of its growing cash hoard.
The company agreed to lift its dividend by 60 per cent, to an annual Dollars
1.60 a share, a move which will take the total dividend bill to about
Dollars 550m a year.
It also said it would start a Dollars 1bn share buy-back programme in the
first three months of next year.
The moves follow agitation in recent weeks from Mr Kirk Kerkorian, the
billionaire businessman whose stake of more than 9 per cent makes him the
company's biggest shareholder. Mr Kerkorian went public two weeks ago with
his battle to force Chrysler to pay out more of its cash, after his private
approaches to the board were rebuffed.
Chrysler said the steps agreed by its board yesterday had been planned
before Mr Kerkorian's intervention. However, it added: 'His interest and his
attentions may have altered our timetable.'
Chrysler yesterday also amended its 'poison pill' takeover defence, lifting
to 15 per cent from 10 per cent the maximum that any investor can hold
before measures dilute the holding.
This also reflects pressure from Mr Kerkorian, who has filed an application
with the US Federal Trade Commission to raise his stake in the company.
Mr Kerkorian's private investment company, Tracinda, responded to Chrysler's
announcement saying: 'We're very pleased with the programme. We think it's a
significant step for all shareholders.'
Although Chrysler raised its dividend last December and in May, it has been
reluctant until now to distribute more of its cash reserves.
The company, which was kept afloat by a government-guaranteed loan in the
early 1980s and nearly succumbed again to the recession of the early 1990s,
has been attempting to build a strong and liquid balance sheet to see it
through the next downturn.
Chrysler said that paying out more to shareholders would not deflect it from
reaching other financial targets.
It expects to raise its five-year spending plan by Dollars 2bn, to Dollars
22.9bn. It also expects to reach its target cash reserves of Dollars 7.5bn
and a fully-funded pension scheme by the end of this year.
