FT  31 JAN 94 / Management: Wealth eludes the salaryman - Western managers
are under attack for being greedy. It's a different story in Japan
A few years ago, Yutaka Kume, chairman of Nissan, acquired a small,
ready-built house, of what might be considered modest proportions, in the
outskirts of Tokyo.
A photograph of Kume's dream home, sitting on an undistinguished plot of
land, shocked the Japanese public when it appeared in a popular magazine.
Expensive as Japanese land prices might be, Kume's residence, located in a
distinctly middle-class residential area, was not what might have been
expected to be fit for the chairman of Japan's second-largest auto maker.
Executives of Japan's large and famous companies may enjoy prestige and a
high profile on the international stage, but wealth is usually not one of
the benefits that comes with their office.
Like Kume, many Japanese executives live in residences which would be
considered humble by western standards. And unless they are self-made
millionaires, or have inherited wealth, their personal fortune is likely to
be so insignificant that it would make American and European executives
blush at the comparison.
According to a survey last year by the Seikei Kenkyu-jo, a private research
organisation, the average annual income including bonuses of the presidents
of 46 companies listed in the first section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange was
Y37.25m (Pounds 223,000).
Although this is about 10.5 times the average pay of first-year salarymen,
according to the Seikei Kenkyu-jo, it is a paltry sum compared with the
millions of dollars paid in remuneration to the executives of America's top
corporations.
The exception to that general rule is the executive who is the company
founder or belongs to the founding family, owns a large number of shares in
the company or enjoys an unchallenged position at the top for similar
reasons.
Yoshiaki Tsutsumi, who inherited the Seibu Railway empire from his father
and was estimated by Forbes to be worth at least Dollars 10bn in 1992, and
Akio Morita, of Sony fame, who built up his radio business into one of the
biggest names in consumer electronics, are two examples.
But for most so-called 'salaryman managers', who are employed by public
companies, such wealth is the stuff of dreams.
One reason for the low level of executives' remuneration is that unlike
western companies, Japanese businesses which use a seniority-based
employment system do not make as much of a distinction between ordinary
employees and those with executive status.
'In Japan, the executive's job is seen as an extension of the work of other
employees, so it is considered inappropriate to create a huge gap between
executives' and other employees' pay,' explains Sadao Ohta, director of
Seikei Kenkyu-jo.
Nor do Japanese companies offer benefits to executives on the basis of
performance, such as in the form of preferred shares or stock options which
are commonly used in the west. Stock options have made many a businessman in
the west quite wealthy. But in Japan, where companies cannot buy their own
shares, no such system exists.
Even if it did, the Japanese view that a company's performance is the sum of
employees' work would prohibit rewarding executives alone for good business
results.
'Japanese companies take a long-term view of business performance which is
considered the outcome of measures taken over many years rather than the
result of one man's hard work,' says Ohta.
At the same time, the Japanese company executive is expected to set a good
example for other employees. Extravagance in any form is likely to be
frowned upon and would trigger criticism at the first signs of a business
downturn or unhappiness among employees.
So while many would sympathise with Kume, his self-restraint, according to
one industry official, 'is a model for the Japanese salaryman.'
That role of the company executive, as a mirror for other employees, has
been in particular evidence during the country's present economic downturn.
When business is low it is common practice in Japan for companies to cut
executive bonuses and pay first.
So while Japanese salarymen face the prospect this year of a freeze on pay,
many Japanese executives have already taken cuts in their bonuses, while
basic pay is also down for those at some companies.
Executives at Toyota, for example, have had their remuneration cut by 30 per
cent since the summer of 1992 while those at Nippon Steel have been living
with on average 10 per cent less of their pay since October of that year. To
add to their financial woes, Japanese executives are still expected to
attend countless weddings, funerals and other social events, and make cash
gifts befitting their high social status.
However, there are some remuneration compensations. The Japanese executive
does generally enjoy round-the-clock use of the company car and his own
chauffeur, as well as membership of the most exclusive golf clubs, an
entertainment allowance that is almost unlimited and other perks. Some
companies even have luxurious housing arrangements for their president.
As a result of such benefits, it is difficult to strictly compare the
remuneration of Japanese and western executives, says Koji Aoyagi, a
consultant at Wyatt-Seikei, the consulting firm. With Japanese companies, it
is hard to draw a clear line between perks that exist to benefit the
executive and those which are provided in the interests of business, Aoyagi
points out.
What is clear, though, is that such benefits only last as long as the
executive retains his position at the company. For the retired Japanese
executive, the exclusive golf club he has come to know so well often becomes
a distant memory.
