FT  23 AUG 94 / World Trade News: Turkey grapples with a looming power
shortage - The Dollars 1.3bn promised for the energy sector may be in doubt
Turkish energy policy is back on the front burner, as the authorities
grapple with the prospect that the country could face a power shortage as
early as the start of 1996.
Turkey confronts an awkward dilemma - how to invest in new capacity while
adhering to the foreign debt ceilings envisaged under the economic standby
agreement with the International Monetary Fund.
Mrs Tansu Ciller, the prime minister, earlier promised to allocate Dollars
1.3bn for the energy sector under the 1994 investment programme, although in
the wake of the current austerity measures the fate of that undertaking is
unclear.
Mrs Ciller is also pushing ahead with plans to privatise Tek, the state-run
utility.
Last September, the government submitted a decree dividing Tek into two
separate public companies, comprising the transmission and generation
businesses (Teas) and Tedas, the distribution unit. During the first stage
the government plans to privatise 10 lignite-fired power plants, starting
with the Afsin-Elbistan plant.
But, however much the government is able to stick to its IMF programme and
turn around the economy, if the country suffers power cuts the recovery
could be nipped in the bud.
According to a study by the energy ministry, Turkey needs to build 187 power
plant units by 2010 to meet electricity demand of 308bn KWh, compared with
71.7bn KWh in 1993. Total energy investment is estimated at Dollars 32bn
over the next 10 years, two thirds of which will be in power plant, and the
rest in distribution and transmission lines and resource development.
Energy experts say Turkey will need 1m kW additional capacity every year to
meet the demand to the turn of the century and 2m kW annually after that
date.
The energy ministry has drawn up plans for 24 lignite fired units, with
total generating capacity of 9.785m kWh; 27 natural gas fired units
generating 12.150m kWh; 21 coal-fired plants, with 10.5m kWh; 2 nuclear
power plants with 2.132m kWh and 113 hydro-electric units with capacity of
14.4m KWh of electric energy.
The plan represents significant opportunities for foreign companies wishing
to supply generation equipment.
In Turkey, the only locally manufactured equipment are hydraulic type
turbines for power units of up to 60,000 KW, and small boilers and
generators. In 1993, an estimated 90 per cent of the Dollars 360m spent on
electrical equipment was imported from foreign companies. An industry report
by the US embassy in February, estimated that equipment demand would grow by
9 per cent over the next 3 years.
Turkey's main constraint is finance, at a time when access to debt markets
has been closed by downgradings by US credit rating agencies.
One possible solution is Build Operate and Transfer (BOT) private projects,
which can be used to fund large scale public infrastructure without
affecting the country's debt profile. First championed by the former Turkish
president Turgut Ozal, BOT schemes allow private developers to recover their
costs for building a plant through operating it for a fixed period, before
handing it back to the state.
The argument in favour of BOT schemes is that they encourage project
discipline, in that the financial risks are taken by the developer, rather
than the state, and that project over-runs delay the start of the
developer's recovery of costs. The one grey area is what happens when for
reasons beyond the developer's control the project has to be abandoned.
The government is considering proposals from a number of consortia. Enron of
the UK and the Wing Group, the small US power developer, are in partnership
on a Dollars 600m dual fired gas and oil plant at Marmara Ereglisi, east of
Istanbul.
A consortium led by ABB, the Swiss-Swedish power giant, is considering a
similar scheme for the Marmara region. Trinity Partners have proposed a
coal-fired plant in Anatolia.
Meanwhile, Philipp Holzmann of Germany is negotiating terms for a
hydro-electric power station on the Euphrates river at Birecik, in eastern
Turkey, near the Syrian border. In total the BOT proposals represent some
10m KW of new capacity.' There is a greet need for these projects,' says Mr
John Wing of the Wing Group.
But all three Turkish BOT projects have met resistance from Tek, whose role
the private developers will replace.
The Enron-Wing consortium has linked up with Midland, the privatised UK
utility, to deal with the 'operating' part of the franchise, a pattern
repeated by a number of the UK's privatised utilities as the new companies
seek to maximise their 'unregulated' profits. It has also signed an energy
supply contract with Botas, the gas pipeline company.
However, the real sticking point is over the payment obligations of Tek,
which will take the power produced by the project. The consortium wants the
treasury to guarantee these amounts. There is also some concern over what
would happen in the event that Tek is privatised.
