FT  29 JUL 94 / One strike and they're out: ball players are set to walk
Baseball players in the top US professional league will down their bats,
balls and gloves on August 12 for an indefinite period if negotiations with
team owners over pay and other issues do not lead to the signing of a new
labour contract.
If the strike goes ahead, it will be the first baseball stoppage since 1988,
and the eighth in 22 years.
It also be especially ill-timed, because baseball's popularity this season
was beginning to recover from years of decline thanks to outstanding
performances by players who were threatening to rewrite the record books.
At least three young stars are currently on course to surpass the sport's
most hallowed record - the 61 home runs hit by Roger Maris of the New York
Yankees in 1961.
Yet this strike may make history of a different kind: it could be the
longest stoppage ever. Previous disputes have proved short-lived because the
owners quickly caved in to the players' demands. This time, baseball pundits
fear the stadiums could remain shut until the season ends in late September,
and perhaps even into next year, such is the lack of common ground between
the two sides.
The dispute involves the use of television and attendance revenues, and the
owners' insistence that a new labour contract includes a salary cap  - a
limit on how much each team is allowed to spend on player salaries.
The owners say rapidly increasing salaries have put clubs, especially those
in smaller cities, under a great financial strain, and argue that the sport
will only prosper over the long term if players agree to a cap and to split
revenues 50-50. Currently, there is no limit on how much each club can spend
on players, who receive about 58 per cent of total revenues.
The players' union, however, believes the cap would cost its members
millions of dollars in lost earnings and destroy free agency - the system
which allows them to move freely between clubs under certain conditions.
Since the union won the right to free agency in the mid-1970s, the average
player's salary has risen from just over Dollars 50,000 to Dollars 1.2m
(Pounds 770,000).
The union has also proposed that the minimum salary be raised from Dollars
109,000 to Dollars 175,000-Dollars 200,000, and that the rights to salary
arbitration be restored to players with two years of service in the major
leagues. The owners, however have rejected these proposals, claiming they
would cost clubs Dollars 1.57bn-Dollars 1.65bn over seven years.
Fans, meanwhile, view the developments with increasing disbelief. Many see
the dispute as a row over money between greedy millionaires (the players)
and greedy billionaires (the owners).
This week a group called 'Fans First' called for people to boycott a day of
baseball games next month in protest at the players' and owners' behaviour.
