FT  03 MAY 94 / South African Elections: 'Joyous night for human spirit' -
Nelson Mandela
The following are excerpts from Mr Nelson Mandela's victory speech.
This is indeed a joyous night. Within the last few hours I have received
telephone calls from State President de Klerk, General Constand Viljoen
(leader of the right-wing Freedom Front), Dr Zach de Beer (of the Democratic
party) and Mr Johnson Mlambo (the first deputy president of the Pan
Africanist Congress) who pledged their full co-operation and offered their
sincere congratulations.
I thank them all for their support and look forward to working together for
our beloved country. I would also like to congratulate President de Klerk
for the strong showing the National party has displayed in this election. I
also want to congratulate him for the. . .four years that we have worked
together, quarreled, addressed sensitive problems and at the end of our
heated exchanges were able to shake hands and to drink coffee.
To the people of South Africa and the world who are watching: This is indeed
a joyous night for the human spirit. This is your victory, too. You helped
end apartheid, you stood with us through the transition.
South Africa's heroes are legend across the generations. But it is you, the
people, who are our true heroes. This is one of the most important moments
in the life of our country. I stand before you filled with deep pride and
joy - pride in the ordinary, humble people of this country. You have shown
such a calm, patient determination to reclaim this country as your own. And
joy that we can loudly proclaim from the rooftops - free at last]
I am your servant. I don't come to you as a leader, as one above others. We
are a great team. I stand before you humbled by your courage, with a heart
full of love for all of you. I pledge to use all my strength and ability to
live up to your expectations of me as well as the ANC.
Tomorrow the entire ANC leadership and I will be back at our desks. We are
rolling up our sleeves to begin tackling the problems our country faces. We
ask you all to join us, go back to your jobs in the morning. Let's get South
Africa working. For we must together and without delay begin to build a
better life for all South Africans. This is going to be the acid test of the
government of national unity.
I appeal to all the leaders who are going to serve in this government to
honor that programme and to go there determined to contribute towards its
immediate implementation. If there are attempts on the part of anybody to
undermine that programme, there will be serious tensions in the government
of national unity.
But I must add we are not going to make the government of national unity an
empty shell. We want every political organisation that participates in that
government to feel they are part and parcel of a government machine which is
happy to accommodate their views within the context of the reconstruction
and development programme.
We also commend the security forces for the sterling work done. This has
laid a solid foundation for a truly professional security force, committed
to the service of the people and loyalty to the new constitution.
People have voted for the party of their choice and we respect that. This is
democracy. Now is the time for celebration, for South Africans to join
together to celebrate the birth of democracy. Let us build the future
together, and toast a better life for all South Africans.
