FT  07 MAR 94 / International Press Review
NEW YORK
While the New York City press remains unsure whether last Tuesday's shooting
of four young orthodox Jews on Brooklyn Bridge was a ploy by an Arab
terrorist to undermine the PLO-Israeli peace talks, or simply an
opportunist's attempt to gain revenge for the Hebron massacre, the
newspapers have agreed on one thing: that Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has earned
the city's respect for his skilled handling of the affair.
'Within hours of the shooting, the mayor and the police department created a
sense of control that gave the public a reason to feel confident in their
government,' said an editorial in The New York Times.
Under the headline 'Giuliani Had Right Stuff', Newsday reported that the
mayor's calm, assured performance in the immediate aftermath of the shooting
 -when it was feared that the attack might trigger unrest between the city's
Jewish and Arab populations - won widespread praise.
Other papers, including The Daily News, noted how the praise for Mr Giuliani
contrasted with the criticism that was aimed at the failure of his
predecessor, Mr David Dinkins, to react quickly to an outbreak of violence
between orthodox Jews and blacks in Brooklyn two years ago. Mr Giuliani
clearly wants to capitalise on all this goodwill, for Newsday reported that
he is keen to arrange a summit between New York's Jewish and Arab leaders.
While praising the mayor and the police for their quick work in arresting a
suspect in the case, the city's press has also followed Mr Giuliani's advice
not to jump to too many conclusions about what motivated an Arab man to fire
on a mini-van full of orthodox Jews. With four Arab New Yorkers having just
been convicted of conspiracy in the World Trade Center bombing, caution was
called for.
The Times said: 'If the attack was the act of one mad individual, it needs
to be divorced from the broader tension between Arabs and Jews. And if it
was a larger political act, there is all the more reason to demonstrate, as
the mayor emphasised, that most people in this city of immigrants are not
terrorists.'
GERMANY
The German government's decision last week to press ahead with the
Transrapid super-fast magnetic levitation train, by building a line from
Berlin to Hamburg, was presented as a technological triumph by its
supporters.
Mr Matthias Wissmann, the transport minister, warned against the familiar
'doubters' in the federal republic who might try to hold it up. This time,
he declared, they would not succeed.
Yet the German press appears to be full of them. Even Handelsblatt, the
conservative daily newspaper for the business community, is not convinced it
will really happen.
It is not just the vociferous environmental lobby which is already whipping
up a campaign against the 400 km/hour monorail train, the newspaper said:
'Many of the opponents of the project argue from a high level of expertise,'
not least the transport ministry's own panel of scientific advisers.
Their main objection, the newspaper's commentator Eberhard Krummheuer
pointed out, was over the private sector's financial and operating plans for
the Transrapid. They questioned the traffic forecasts and the likely level
of federal finance required. They warned it could all prove much more
expensive for the national exchequer than the present plans imply.
Industry is all for it, Handelsblatt admits, but mainly because of the lack
of export success of the high-speed ICE train against the French-built TGV.
Yet Transrapid's export prospects remain for the time being no more than
wishful thinking. Moreover, any big export contracts, as in the case of high
speed trains, will depend on a very high proportion of local content: they
will not create many jobs in Germany.
Munich's Suddeutsche Zeitung fears the whole scheme will be a 'multi-billion
flop'. 'The fact is that industry and the politicians are beavering away to
prevent the multi-billion risks of the project coming out into the open,' it
says.
As for the Frankfurter Rundschau, a traditional supporter of the opposition
Social Democrats, the whole decision is 'financially indefensible, senseless
in transportation terms, and questionable from the point of view of
industry'. Everyone else in Europe is pressing ahead with high-speed trains,
it says. And Bonn simply has not got the cash in the public kitty to go it
alone.
If the doubters in the press are to be believed, Mr Wissmann may still be
proved wrong, and Germany may yet go through years of further debate before
it launches the next generation of rail technology.
JAPAN
The sport of lambasting the prime minister's character and political
judgment in the national press has taken on in a big way in Japan over the
past week.
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa, Japanese prime minister, has received a drubbing
almost as merciless as that meted out in recent months to his British
counterpart, for his last-minute decision to abort a much-publicised cabinet
reshuffle and failure to avert US threats of trade sanctions.
The worst insult came from the Asahi Shimbun, Japan's second-largest
newspaper, which likened Mr Hosokawa to an unsuccessful sumo wrestler who
refuses to accept the rules of the game and keeps climbing back into the
ring after he has been defeated. 'This is typical of the second generation
salaryman,' the Asahi mysteriously comments.
'The prime minister brings up serious matters one after the other and
subsequently retracts them in confusion,' says the Asahi, referring to Mr
Hosokawa's recent U-turn on tax reform: 'What is in question is not so much
his leadership but. . . his judgment.'
Mr Hosokawa's personal authority has been diminished as a result of the
reshuffle row, said the Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's largest daily. However, it
cited as a mitigating factor that running a coalition government was
understandably difficult given that this was a new experience for Japan.
Mr Hosokawa's problem is that he belongs to the shinjinrui (generation of
'new human beings'), which gave him high ratings in the opinion polls but a
weak sense of policy direction, alleged the Mainichi Shimbun. 'Some people
say that Mr Hosokawa's political ideas and policies are hard to discern,'
wrote Mr Yoshihisa Inoue, a Mainichi commentator.
The Japan Times joined in the chorus, warning that the weakness of Mr
Hosokawa's leadership would jeopardise Japan's ability to resolve its trade
dispute with the US.
Contributions by: Patrick Harverson in New York, Quentin Peel in Bonn and
William Dawkins in Tokyo
