FT  26 OCT 94 / Letters to the Editor: Food irradiation little more than an
expensive quick fix
Sir, Proposing food irradiation as a solution to poisoning and death from
contaminated foods is a dangerous and expensive distraction ('Backing for
food process', October 19). In developing countries, where the problem is
most severe, it is not contaminated milk in need of irradiation that causes
child diarrhoea; it is diluting powdered milk with polluted water or using
unclean recipients. In developed countries, food handling and poor hygienic
conditions are also leading sources of food-borne diseases.
Furthermore, this expensive technology is suited only to a very small range
of foods. One of the prime uses for which it is being promoted is for
treating grains that have been infested during storage. Irradiating them
will leave grain full of dead insects or mice. Surely, it is better and
cheaper to improve storage facilities. Also, it is disingenuous to argue
that the loss of nutrients during irradiation - for example, vitamin E
levels can be reduced by 25 per cent - is 'really minimal' compared with the
loss through cooking. The fact of the matter is that irradiation only
compounds the problem of nutrient loss.
And while it is true that studies have shown that irradiated food at the
dosage levels recommended is safe to eat, few studies have been done on
humans for any length of time. Little is known, for example, about what
happens to pesticide and other chemical residues during irradiation. The
fear is that, as with many other subtle chemical changes, the impact will
not show up for many years.
It is one thing to monitor carefully administered doses in a laboratory;
quite another to do it for large quantities in an industrial plant.
Consumers have no independent means of assessing the validity of the
manufacturers' claims: as yet there is no cheap and reliable test for
inspecting the safeness of irradiated food.
What food irradiation does offer is an expensive quick fix. So instead of
ridding chickens of salmonella, as the Swedes have done, you irradiate them.
The priority of governments and international aid agencies must be to deal
with food contamination by improving harvesting, storage and manufacturing.
In the third world, spending scarce resources in providing clean water would
do much more for people's health than investing in expensive food
irradiation plants.
Maria Elena Hurtado,
global policy and campaigns director,
International Organisation of Consumer Unions,
24 Highbury Crescent,
London N5 1RX
