FT  22 JUN 94 / Minds over matter: Common perceptions about how wealth is
created are misleading
Collectors of dotty opinions may have noticed a fine example in The
Guardian's letter columns a few weeks back. It came in response to a
thoughtful and informative article in that paper on the subject of New Age
travellers, squatters, crusties and the like. The writer, Jo-Ann Goodwin,
had ventured the rash thought that some of those she talked to made 'no
connection between Income Support and the work and taxes of others'.
This was too much for Mr David Richardson, of Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex. Did
Ms Goodwin, he asked, ever wonder about her own income? Did it not come,
like the giro cheques of the New Agers, 'out of the general pool of
available resources?'
As a journalist, the letter continued, Ms Goodwin was no more productive
than those she wrote about. If only the obviously productive were to be
rewarded, 'it would be miners and their families featuring in the gossip
columns'.
The striking thing about this argument is not so much its absurdity as the
assumptions which underly it. Along with many of Britain's captains of
industry and not a few Tory ministers, Mr Richardson evidently believes that
wealth is created exclusively by producing physical goods that you can bark
your shin on. The rest of us, whether journalists, New Agers or piano
teachers, feed on the wealth thus created.
As a journalist myself, I am tempted to stand this nonsense on its head. The
newspaper industry involves quite a lot of physical production: the growing
and cutting of trees, the manufacture of newsprint, the printing and
production of the newspapers themselves. But all of it depends on the
ability of us journalists to inform and entertain. No readers, no papers. No
papers, no jobs.
Even upside down, the argument is still nonsense. It is partly based on what
might be called the Desert Island fallacy. In a state of nature, such as a
desert island, certain things such as food, warmth and shelter are essential
to survival, and thus take legitimate priority over other things. But the
modern developed world is not a desert island. Everything connects, and
everything depends on everything else.
In such a world, primary goods may or may not be of primary importance. If
Britain's farms were to vanish in a puff of smoke, life would go on: food
would simply be imported through existing distribution systems. If, on the
other hand, the nation's computer software and telecommunications were to
vanish, the result would be instant chaos and mayhem.
Behind this lies a deeper confusion: the notion that services - anything
from rock concerts to dentistry - are somehow luxuries to be paid for,
rather than a source of wealth in themselves. But in crude terms, the wealth
of a society - however that latter term is defined - consists of the sum of
its outputs. The more productive the members of that society are, the more
outputs there are to go round: and the more highly my output is valued by
others, the more of their outputs I can get in exchange.
As to the importance of tangible outputs in a society, one simple indication
is how people choose to spend their wages: that is, what kind of outputs
they seek out in exchange for their own. If we take household consumption in
the UK, as measured for the purposes of compiling the retail price index, we
find that about a third of expenditure goes on non-physical things such as
holidays, insurance or telephone charges.
That is only part of the story. About 35 per cent of people's gross income
in the UK is paid in taxes. Most of the things bought with that money are
non-physical: education, health, social security - which is chiefly another
form of insurance - and even defence. On the perhaps slightly dicey
assumption that the pattern of government expenditure ultimately reflects
society's wishes, that means that the average UK inhabitant chooses to spend
around half of his or her resources on intangible rather than tangible
goods.
The trouble about the New Agers, of course, is that they produce nothing
which the rest of us would willingly swap for the results of our own
labours. Thus, while they dip into the pool of available resources, they do
nothing to top it up again.
But Mr Richardson should not be disheartened. The dispelling of the
manufacturing fallacy, after all, cuts both ways. If the New Agers could
find a way of transmitting inner peace and harmony to the rest of us, they
would be doing quite as productive a job as any other worker by hand or
brain.
