FT  25 JUL 94 / Salinas to play on trade expertise in WTO fight: Aides say
Mexican president will emphasise his political experience
President Carlos Salinas will launch his campaign to head the new World
Trade Organisation after Mexico's August presidential election.
Advisers to Mr Salinas say that for domestic political reasons he will make
no public pronouncements on the position until September. He wants to avoid
accusations that he is putting personal ambitions before the country's
interests.
However, aides have outlined the sort of campaign he is expected to run. He
will emphasise his record as president of Mexico, which makes him the best
known of the four contenders, his long experience and interest in
international trade issues, and his belief that the WTO should not be
side-tracked from its main objective of promoting free trade and reducing
protectionist barriers.
The Mexican government expects the US to back Mr Salinas's candidacy. It
also reckons Latin American countries, apart from Brazil, which has its own
candidate, and Argentina, will, as they have already promised, support the
Mexican president. Mr Manuel Tello, Mexico's foreign minister, was in Chile
this week drumming up support for Mr Salinas.
Mr Salinas believes that 'point number one on the agenda is to make the WTO
an efficient and effective institution to promote freer trade in the world.'
As head of the WTO, he would have 'to make sure the multilateral system and
Uruguay Round work properly.'
Mr Salinas has reservations about incorporating strict labour and
environmental standards in world trade laws, as the US wants. An aide said
Mr Salinas believed the linkages between trade laws, environment and labour
conditions needed to be studied further, and that agreed-on standards
'should never be an excuse to build protectionist barriers.'
President Salinas sides with most developing countries in believing that the
best way to protect the environment and labour rights is by promoting trade
and raising the incomes of poor countries.
Nevertheless, under the North American Free trade Agreement, Mexico bowed to
US pressure and agreed to accept fines or sanctions if found not to be
enforcing some of its own labour and environmental laws. In the Nafta
negotiations, President Salinas was more willing to subject enforcement of
Mexico's environmental laws to US and Canadian scrutiny than enforcement of
domestic labour laws.
An aide stressed that Mr Salinas would set an agenda on the so-called new
issues in agreement with WTO members. Mr Salinas, he said, had a 'deep
knowledge' of both first and third world countries, which might make it
easier for him to appreciate the different interests of participating
countries, and build a consensus among members.
The long drawn out negotiations over Nafta have made Mr Salinas familiar
with the key issues of international trade. He was closely involved in the
Nafta negotiations, personally taking many of the key decisions on where to
give ground to the US, and the same kind of hands-on approach could be
expected if he was given the WTO job, the aide said.
'He combines a unique feature of being able to deal with the broad issues
and also to get into the details.' Mr Salinas, who has doctorate in
political economy from Harvard University, has been dealing with trade
issues since the mid-1980s, when he spearheaded Mexico's entry into Gatt
while budget minister.
Although Mr Salinas has pushed through Nafta, and several regional trade
agreements between Mexico and other countries and Latin America, his
emphasis would be on a multilateral approach to free trade. His aide said he
would seek to ensure that regional agreements are consistent with Gatt
articles.
