FT  24 MAY 94 / Pressure grows for car-boot sale laws
Car-boot sales, which are attended by more than 1m people a week during the
summer, were yesterday described as a free-for-all for traders of faulty,
unsafe and illegal goods. The criticism came from East Sussex County Council
as it launched a campaign calling for their regulation.
Unofficial traders posing as private sellers were offloading defective,
counterfeit and stolen goods, the council said.
Organisers of such sales were not obliged to keep records of traders' names
and addresses, traders were not required to document the source of goods,
and buyers' statutory rights to safe goods did not extend to private sales.
Mr Terry Randell, chairman of the council's public protection committee,
said: 'We have plenty of regulations to protect the consumer, but unless we
can prove that someone is in the business of trading, none of them apply.'
East Sussex is backing the Association of County Councils in calling for
national legislation on car-boot sales, based on the system in place in
North Yorkshire.
In 1991 North Yorkshire secured a local act of parliament to regulate such
sales through obligatory registration and records of traders as well as the
goods sold and their source.
However, each similar local act would cost taxpayers about Pounds 50,000.
'Multiplied by every county council in the country, we're talking millions
of pounds - just to get the law on the statute books,' said Mr Randell.
Meanwhile, in a single swoop on a car-boot sale at Eastbourne at the
weekend, East Sussex County Council found a wide range of unsafe household
items, including:
An electric cooking ring with no protective guard over the element, frayed
wiring and silver foil wedged into the plug instead of a fuse.
An iron with a broken thermostat which would have overheated on use.
A damaged motorcycle crash helmet.
A faulty child's car-safety seat.
The council also found unchecked sales of electric blankets, notorious for
causing household fires.
The council says that traders are also using boot fairs to launder money, as
takings are without receipts or records, and to evade tax and duty - some
traders resell duty-free goods brought into the country supposedly for
private consumption.
'Traders are even stealing to order,' said Mr Randell. 'Car radios, portable
TVs - no records are needed and people will buy them, no questions asked.'
