FT  01 DEC 94 / Burned again: 'How can we know this is the end?' - Simon
Davies finds T&amp;N under fire after new asbestos bombshell
When companies choose Budget day to announce bad tidings, they are
invariably suspected of trying to hide behind the chancellor's publicity
skirts. In the case of T&amp;N's announcement of Pounds 100m provisions against
future asbestos claims, this was clearly an unfortunate coincidence, but the
reaction has been strident.
Its share price reflected the blow to management credibility, falling 20p to
166p yesterday, after a loss of 35p on Tuesday, for a 25 per cent fall in
two days.
'The manner and the way in which the Pounds 100m exceptional charge has
arisen can only be described as disconcerting,' says Mr Sandy Morris,
research analyst at NatWest Securities.
Only in August, T&amp;N had put forward the argument that the worst of the
uncertainty over asbestos claims was over, after a US judicial ruling
provided a set framework to cover future claims. Mr Colin Hope, chairman and
chief executive, said at the time that 'there are good prospects that
asbestos-related costs will now stabilise and then enter a period of
progressive decline'.
But one analyst said: 'If you take this at face value, within a three-month
period, the asbestos problem has got worse to the tune of Pounds 100m. So
how can we know that this is the end?'
T&amp;N said the charge resulted from a change in the type of claims that had
appeared in the proliferation of cases that were lodged before the judicial
ruling.
These cases are handled by the Center for Claims Resolutions, which combines
claims against 21 member companies, who then pay a share of the costs
according to their exposure to the cases.
Mr Hope said there had been a dramatic shift towards industries where T&amp;N
had greater exposure, which became apparent after sifting through 'tens of
thousands' of claims over the past month.
'The only thing that has gone wrong is that we didn't pick up that there was
going to be this dramatic change in our share of the pre-global settlement
(claims),' Mr Hope said. T&amp;N's US subsidiary Flexitallic, for example, has
become party to as many claims filed in 1993 as in the entire previous
decade.
Back in September 1989, T&amp;N's shares tumbled 9 per cent, after the company
revealed a surprise Pounds 9m provision, in addition to its expected annual
charge.
Few analysts suggested that the market reaction to the latest provisions was
over-done. The absorption of insurance cover means that the annual
provision, which is on top of the Pounds 100m, will also rise to between
Pounds 30m and Pounds 40m.
In many ways, the latest shock provides a vindication for the work of Mr
Hope since he joined T&amp;N - then called Turner &amp; Newall - in January 1985.
The full extent of T&amp;N's potential liabilities related to its former
asbestos-producing operations was not then recognised, but Mr Hope became
the architect of a strategy to expand its automotive components and
engineering businesses.
T&amp;N had a market capitalisation of about Pounds 60m, and could clearly not
have withstood the Pounds 250m of asbestos-related costs that it has carried
since Mr Hope joined.
One of the ironies was that the latest provisions come at a time when T&amp;N's
core operations are showing 'continuing improvements in efficiency and
further strengthening of demand'. As one analyst said: 'The pity of it is
that you can't fault what the management have done strategically. If they
had been able to relegate asbestos to a minor item, they would have been
perceived as a high quality company.'
T&amp;N's past has caught up with it at an awkward moment. For three years, the
management has appeased investors by maintaining its dividend against
substantially lower earnings per share. It stemmed the impact by offering an
extremely enhanced scrip alternative, but despite this, cash outflows have
been substantial.
NatWest expects that high capital expenditure will lead to a net cash
outflow of Pounds 31.5m next year, excluding acquisitions. With a full cash
dividend, the figure would have exceeded Pounds 50m.
Gearing remains high - it was 60 per cent at the end of June - and will
remain at around that level at the year end, following these provisions.
At the same time, T&amp;N has identified a suitable German purchase, which would
fit in with its strategy of building up globally dominant shares in its
sectors. The problem is how to finance such a deal. Analysts estimate a 52.5
per cent stake in Kolbenschmidt, including the assumption of debt, would
cost T&amp;N about Pounds 380m. Gearing would therefore exceed 100 per cent.
A rights issue is expected, but after four cash calls in the five years up
to mid-1991, there seems to be little enthusiasm from institutions. One fund
manager pointed out that even before the provisions, earnings per share in
1995 would have been well below the 1989 figure.
Mr Hope said T&amp;N was not tied to the acquisition, and will decide in March,
after it gets a ruling from the German cartel authorities. 'We are
acquisitive in order to be a world player, so that we can ride the asbestos
wave and come out a winner at the end.'
