FT  11 APR 94 / The FT Interview: Earnest about important allies - Rudolf
Scharping, leader of Germany's SPD
For the past 10 months, Mr Rudolf Scharping, the leader of Germany's Social
Democrats (SPD), has been earnestly and anxiously seeking to prove to German
electors that he and his party are 'fit for government'.
Today in Washington he will carry on, in effect, the same campaign - but
this time directed at Capitol Hill, the White House, and the opinion formers
of the outside world.
If the German opinion polls hold true, 46-year-old Mr Scharping, currently
state premier of the Rhineland-Palatinate, is the most probable successor to
Chancellor Helmut Kohl after October's elections. Following the sharpest
recession to hit postwar Germany, the SPD is seen as the party most likely
to solve the problem of rising unemployment.
Yet foreign policy could be his Achilles' heel: it is the one area where
German voters agree that the present chancellor is far more experienced, and
Mr Scharping is an unknown quantity. Over the coming week in the US, he is
keen to prove otherwise, and show US President Bill Clinton that an SPD
government in Bonn would be a partner just as good as, if not better than,
the Kohl regime.
As he says, with disarming understatement: 'There may be a need for rather
more information in America about the policies of the Social Democrats and
their leader. I will very happily take the opportunity to provide that.'
For a start, he is determined to knock on the head fears that a 'red-green'
coalition in Bonn, between the SPD and the Green party, might see Germany
pull out of the Nato alliance and abolish the Bundeswehr, the German armed
forces. Such Green policies, he says, are 'pure nonsense'.
Since he became party leader last June, his main achievement has been to
shift the SPD firmly into the middle ground of German politics, away from
the temptation of becoming a coalition of minority interests. 'Rainbows are
very pretty,' he says, 'but rainbow coalitions simply cannot take the
strain. Only a party with a strong centre has the strength and independence
to face new questions and new developments, to protect small groups and
minorities and take up their ideas.'
He is adamant that a Social Democratic administration in Bonn would not mean
any growth in trade protectionism, in spite of the party's commitment to the
protection of jobs. 'There is no other economy in the world which is so
(internationally) interconnected, especially in Europe, as the German
economy,' he says. 'Protectionism makes matters worse. So does isolationism.
There is no debate on that any longer. The only question is how one should
organise one's open trade relations.'
As for the European Union, he sounds as passionate a believer in European
integration as Mr Kohl. 'There is no domestic political reason which would
justify undermining European integration,' he says. He fears, however, that
Mr Kohl is increasingly isolated among his own conservative allies on that
issue, whereas the Social Democrats are part of a genuinely pan-European
movement.
He maintains that both the EU and Nato must be open to membership of the
central and east European democracies, and a central theme of his trip will
be the need for the US, as well as Europe and Japan, to do more to support
the fragile democracies and economies of that region.
His other main theme will be the common ground that exists between the SPD
and the Clinton administration - on questions of population control and
protection of the environment.
It seems that, as far as foreign policy is concerned, Mr Scharping belongs
firmly in the mainstream of Germany's postwar European and Atlantic
commitment. 'There are various voices on the political extremes in Germany,
including occasional voices even in the SPD, which say we could do without
Nato, either replacing it with the CSCE or other instruments of European
security policy,' he says. 'I believe that is wrong. One cannot give up the
best functioning security instrument we have, in the uncertain hope that a
new one may arise.'
He is also clear that continuing US involvement in Europe is essential. 'The
Europeans have sadly not got very far with their own efforts at a common
foreign and security policy. The example of Yugoslavia is tragic evidence of
that. Europe cannot do without America's involvement, and not only for
reasons of security policy.
'In the development of world trade, help for underdeveloped countries, and
in the stabilisation of the freedom process in eastern Europe, a common
involvement makes more sense than for every country to act on its own.'
He supports the Nato programme of partnership for peace as 'a good first
step' to involve both Russia and the east Europeans in its processes. Yet
after a visit to Prague last week, he also knows the urgency with which the
central European states are seeking full membership of Nato and the EU.
'Perhaps they feel that they must use the present opportunity, because they
don't know if the chance will be as good in five years. Perhaps they are
also concerned that they don't know how things will turn out in Russia.'
He says it is essential for the 'prospect of membership' to be held out for
the central Europeans, but equally essential to avoid 'simply moving the old
(east-west) border a few hundred kilometres further east'. He cannot see how
Russia can be given some sort of 'special relationship' by Nato beyond that
it has by virtue of size and nuclear weapons.
'Since no one can say today how Russia will develop, one can only set a
goal: to do as much as possible to ensure it is as stable, democratic and
peaceful as possible. How that can be accomplished in detail, we will have
to work out as we go along.'
Mr Scharping's first foreign trip of 1994, Germany's marathon election year,
was to Paris, and he still believes firmly in the importance of the
Franco-German alliance within Europe. He quotes former Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt as saying that, in foreign policy questions, 'Germany should
wherever possible follow a common path, at least with France, and the French
should rather even be allowed to keep one step ahead'.
As for any greater assertion of German national interest, 'if you want a
common (European) foreign and security policy, you should not always try to
take the first step. One should not try to compel one's partners to follow.
'Germany has, thanks to its size, its population and its geography, a very
strong position in Europe. It is better for this weight to be bound into
Europe, otherwise we would be very rapidly back to the old axis-politics,
and everyone knows where that led.'
His party is in favour of a permanent seat on the UN security council for
Germany, but not as a top priority. And anyway, he says, 'if Germany gets a
permanent seat, we would wish it to be seen as a European seat'.
He denies that his party's opposition to the use of German troops outside
the Nato area would undermine UN peacekeeping missions. The SPD supports the
use of blue helmets, with the right to defend themselves and carry out their
mission, as well as the use of military force to support UN embargoes.
'That means everything the UN has done in the last 30 years, and which it
can realistically be expected to do in the coming years, can be done with
German participation, as far as the foreign policy of my party is
concerned.'
Mr Scharping is adamant that foreign policy in Germany will not decide next
October's elections: unemployment and the state of the economy will be far
more important. Yet he also knows that it is not entirely irrelevant, which
is why he is taking this week's trip to the US so seriously.
