FT  29 JUL 94 / Management: Innovation along simple lines - Book Review
There are two ways in which a company can create more value for its
shareholders, apart from the defeatist route of selling out. In the short
term, it can put itself on a slimming course by removing management layers,
'downsizing' its organisation and reconfiguring from scratch - or
're-engineering' - the main processes by which it operates.
But unless it wants to die of eventual corporate anorexia, it must also do
some bodybuilding. That means growing its existing businesses, acquiring new
ones or creating them from within.
After five years or more of painful slimming and 25 years of trouble with
growth-by-acquisition, it is not surprising that many companies are turning
their attention to internal business development. For the first time in a
decade, a renewed wave of interest in creativity and innovation is in the
making.
So a book which sets out to demonstrate 'how leadership and drive create
commercial innovations that sweep the world' is both timely and welcome,
especially when it does so through a collection of 14 case studies of a
warts-and-all nature. Creativity and innovation are untidy processes, yet
they are usually presented as sanitised hero stories from which all the
actual messiness has been removed.
Breakthroughs]*, written by P. Ranganath Nayak and John M. Ketteringham from
Arthur D. Little, the US technology-based consultancy, makes a virtue of
that untidiness. As the authors say, its stories reveal 'the creativity and
cursedness, the politics and persistence, the determination and the dumb
luck' involved in such radical innovations as JVC's video cassette recorder,
Sony's Walkman, Raytheon's microwave oven, Nike shoes, Nautilus fitness
machines, Club Med holiday centres, and Philips/Sony compact discs.
The last two examples have been added, along with some useful general
analysis, since the book was first published in 1986, when the ground was
less fertile for its message.
Unlike 3M's peel-off Post-it notes, Fred Smith's Federal Express courier
empire, and Toyota's 'supermarket for cars' (its famous just-in-time
production system), not all the stories in the book have happy endings.
EMI was unable, through a string of bad luck and strategic misjudgments, to
turn its body scanner into a thriving worldwide business; its larger rivals
did so instead.
Raytheon's pioneering 'black magic' microwave oven development in the 1950s
was overtaken by more innovative and marketing-aware Japanese companies
(although the US group had the sense to buy into one of them).
But, happy or otherwise, the 14 case studies share several common threads,
according to Arthur D. Little. Some are obvious, such as the importance of
teamwork. The initial spark for a new concept is usually created by a
technical or commercial inventor using what Arthur Koestler called
'bisociative thinking' (reassembling known elements in new patterns). But he
or she is only the first link in the organisational chain.
Some of Arthur D. Little's other conclusions are more controversial:
That many breakthrough innovations - as many as half - come from large
companies rather than small ones.
That successful breakthroughs are often technology-pushed, not market-led.
This is a deeply unfashionable view, albeit natural for a high-tech
consultancy.
That commercial breakthroughs do not require a special company climate -
though it helps. This conclusion is both inconsistent with some of the
book's data and perverse: Arthur D. Little may be right that breakthroughs
'can emerge from any environment', hostile or friendly. The question is
which type of organisation produces more of them.
The book is also at fault in its dogmatic and misleading distinction between
breakthroughs and innovation. Breakthroughs are indeed 'conceptual shifts
that make history', but innovation is not necessarily just 'the art of doing
the same thing, better'. In conventional terminology, that is 'incremental'
innovation, while Arthur D. Little's breakthroughs constitute 'radical'
innovation.
At a time when the stakes involved in different types of innovation are at
last beginning to be understood by governments and institutional investors,
the book takes an unhelpfully narrow view of it.
*Published by Mercury Business Books, Pounds 12.95.
