FT  18 NOV 94 / International Company News: BA, Qantas reassess flight plan
/ A look at the prospects for the two airlines on the lucrative
Australia-Europe routes in the wake of a decision to block their fares
proposal
British Airways and Australia's Qantas, in which BA holds a 25 per cent
stake, are expected to re-examine ways in which resources on their
Australia-Europe services could be combined. The move follows yesterday's
decision by the Australia's Trade Practices Commission to block a proposal
which would have seen the two carriers jointly set air fares and freight
rates on these routes.
In its ruling, the TPC, Australia's competition watchdog, said it believed
the proposed arrangement was likely to lessen competition, and that benefits
to the public from the services tie-up would be limited. It was sceptical
about the airlines' argument that they could achieve significant
cost-savings, and that these would be passed on to customers as lower fares.
Professor Allan Fels, TPC chairman, said the agreement was 'very
wide-ranging and open-ended', adding that price-fixing was viewed as 'one of
the most serious forms of anti-competitive conduct'. He also noted that BA
and Qantas had almost half the Australia-Europe air services market, and
that smaller players did not compete in terms of frequency and convenience
of flights.
The official response from the carriers was brief: both said they were
disappointed and needed to study the draft decision carefully.
The TPC ruling, however raises two immediate questions. First, where does
the relationship between British Airways and Qantas go from here? Secondly,
what repercussions does the TPC decision have for the Australian
government's planned stock market flotation of its remaining 75 per cent
interest in Qantas next year?
The proposed deal would have been significant for the carriers - a first,
large step towards implementing the broad commercial agreement they signed
when BA bought its 25 per cent stake in Qantas, for ADollars 665m (USDollars
500m), last year.
Although the airlines characterised their proposal as a 'co-operation'
arrangement, their planned 'pooling' of resources was to be extensive. They
wanted to fix prices - that is, jointly determine air fares and freight
rates - on all routes between Australia and Europe, including those going
via the US, and between Australia and south-east Asia.
They also wanted to jointly manage capacity and yields on selected routes
between Australia and Europe and Australia and south-east Asia. Finally,
they sought to co-ordinate flight scheduling, sales and marketing operations
on some of the routes.
The routes concerned involve big money. According to Qantas,
Australia-Europe services generate around ADollars 1.8bn a year for the two
carriers combined, and about a quarter of its own international capacity is
tied up flying these routes.
In submissions to the TPC, the two airlines argued the routes had not been
profit-spinners in the past, and that public benefits would result if their
viability improved.
Qantas, in particular, used two arguments. It noted that a rise in
profitability would increase the amount which the government - and the
Australian taxpayer - could hope to receive when the airline was floated on
the stock market next year. Conversely, it warned that if the agreement was
not allowed, it might have to reduce Australia-Europe services in an effort
to contain these low returns. This would penalise the travelling public.
The carriers estimated the gain from the proposed agreement at about
ADollars 90m annually, of which two-thirds would go to Qantas. In the
context of an airline which made a profit after tax and abnormals of
ADollars 156m in the last financial year, and which described a target of
more than ADollars 400m as 'the right return on shareholders' funds', this
would be a big bottom-line help.
However, the TPC was highly sceptical about the carriers' numbers. It said
other confidential information from Qantas contradicted this assessment.
At face value, then, yesterday's decision would appear to be a blow to the
airlines' potential relationship. But the story will almost certainly not
end here.
One possibility is that Qantas simply sticks to its threat and prunes back
services to Europe. However, the TPC's ruling is only a draft decision, and
interested parties can ask for a 'conference' on it within the next two
weeks.
Yesterday, more thought seemed to be directed at how the two carriers might
address the TPC's concerns, and still move towards operational
rationalisation on the routes. Some comfort, at least, seemed to be taken
from the thought that it was price-fixing which stuck most firmly in the
watchdog's gullet.
