FT  14 JUL 94 / Technology: Making it in space - A look at research into
processing materials in microgravity
The idea of making things in space still belongs to science fiction rather
than reality. In spite of the scientific advantages of manufacturing outside
gravity's reach, sending up the equipment is just too expensive.
But with the launch last week of a unique space laboratory to study what
happens to materials when handled in microgravity - the very low gravity
environment in an orbiting spacecraft - progress towards the processing of
metals, alloys, crystals and glass outside the earth's pull could receive a
big impetus.
The International Microgravity Laboratory, or IML-2, is dedicated to the
study of life and materials sciences in microgravity. It was carried in the
cargo bay of the US space shuttle Columbia that took off on Friday.
The 14-day mission, the second in a series of international Spacelab
missions, will carry out 77 experiments to explore how life forms adapt to
weightlessness and how materials behave when processed in space. The
European Space Agency has provided half of these, the rest coming from the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration in the US and space agencies
in Japan, Canada, Germany and France.
The life science experiments will use biological specimens, from single
cells to whole organisms, to study the effects of space radiation and
microgravity on genetic material, growth, reproduction and bone development.
The well-being of the astronauts will also be studied.
The materials science experiments will cover areas such as metal alloys
processing and the growth of crystals. These are of particular interest
because the microgravity environment is free from such gravity-induced
effects as convection and sedimentation. Normally, these limit the quality
of processing and restrict the scope of studies into the materials.
It was back in the late 1960s that Nasa began materials processing in space
(MPS). The first experiments were conducted during the return of Apollo
spacecraft from the moon, followed by pioneering experiments on Skylab, the
US space station, in the 1970s. The hope was that space would contain
factories of the future, producing miraculous new crystals and drugs and
processing materials of supreme quality.
However, although research has proved that many products processed in space
are of higher quality than those made on the ground, production in space is
unrealistic economically. Transportation costs, at approximately Dollars
100,000 (Pounds 66,000) per kilogram, are too high and the lead times too
long to be of commercial interest.
Yet industry is interested in microgravity research. Although commercial
processing in space is unlikely for at least a decade, the lessons from
research in space can be applied in manufacturing on the ground, leading to
improved industrial techniques and better materials.
To be considered for processing in space, materials have to be pretty
special in the first place. They must have superior or unique properties
compared with any rival material or substitute processed on earth; they must
be key elements in a system for advanced industrial, medical or other high
technology application; and they must have a high cost to weight (or volume)
ratio.
'What is needed to approach such a high risk activity as MPS are long-term
industrial commitments supported by a strong national policy,' says Hannes
Walter, chief scientist for fluids and materials in the ESA microgravity
programme. In Fluid Sciences and Materials Science In Space, an ESA
publication, he says: 'Progress in materials science and engineering
stimulates the growth of many sectors of the economy. The access to new
materials and processes results not only in qualitative improvements, it
frequently generates new technology.'
For example, knowledge from research into microgravity has led to
development of a casting process that produces even dispersions of lead or
bismuth in aluminium alloys - which has applications in self-lubricating
bearings. Germany's Metallgesellschaft is testing these for use in car
engines with the hope that reduced friction and wear will cut fuel
consumption and pollution.
A new technique for making glass fibres used in transatlantic communications
cables was also first studied in space. In the original terrestrial method,
the glass fibre constituents are melted in containers or crucibles. When
heated above 1,000`C, the containers sometimes melt, leading to
contamination and a reduction in the glass fibres' transmission efficiency.
In the space-perfected technique, containers are not needed - the
constituents are held in levitation in an electromagnetic coil - thus
avoiding contamination. Reductions in the loss of laser light (carrying
voice and data traffic) in the glass fibres of up to 10,000 times can be
achieved.
Industry is also interested in space-processed material samples for evidence
of their technical limits. Some companies want to know more about crystal
growth, in particular protein crystals. Humans are estimated to consist of
1m different proteins.
Understanding the three-dimensional molecular structure of proteins is
necessary to understand many biochemical processes and for better design of
therapeutic agents such as drugs and vaccines.
Since materials are a key to technological progress and thus
competitiveness, the IML-2 mission has an important role for industry. So
even if the costs of manufacturing in space remain prohibitive for some
years, research will go on.
