FT  20 AUG 94 / Schools: A search in uncharted seas - John Authers on how
best to navigate the new university admissions procedures
If you are about to put yourself through the clearing process to apply to a
university, you should first know the good news - statistically your chances
of getting a place are just as high as they would have been last year, when
admissions to UK universities were their highest ever.
The number of places available from universities will be almost identical to
last year, while the number of people applying appears also to be much the
same.
Overall, this year's A-level results suggest that the grades required to win
a place will be barely any higher than last year - the number of A-level
candidates dropped, by 0.4 per cent, but the proportion passing increased by
1.8 per cent, adding up to an increase in the numbers with grades good
enough for university.
The bad news is that you will have to navigate uncharted waters before
finally finding a place. And while the overall picture, as outlined above,
looks no worse than last year, the course which most interests you may well
have experienced a sharp increase in applications.
A brand new university clearing system is in operation - the Universities
and Colleges Admissions Service - which merges the old separate admissions
services for universities and polytechnics. For the first time, all degrees
and higher national diploma courses must be applied for through the same
system.
That means the tactics you need to adopt to get a place are slightly
different from previous years.
What are the changes?
Last year, UCCA, the old universities system, asked you to apply to up to
five courses, while PCAS, which covered the former polytechnics plus other
higher education colleges, allowed up to four choices. You could apply to
both, giving a possible maximum of nine choices. However, only 53 per cent
of candidates chose to apply through both PCAS and UCCA.
This year, UCAS allows eight choices, and the average number of choices by
each applicant is around seven. So universities have had to cope with far
more applications than last year, even though the number of people looking
for places is roughly unchanged.
How will it work out?
No one knows. But Tony Higgins, joint chief executive of UCAS, offers one
theory. He noted far more applications to institutions which ask for quite
difficult A-level applications, and 'very sizeable' increases in the numbers
applying for less-demanding institutions, such as colleges of higher
education.
The reason, he thinks, is that with a broader choice, applicants have
selected both the places they truly aspire to, and colleges which offer them
some 'insurance' of getting a place. As a result, some of the less
prestigious, but still excellent, universities may have more places on offer
for clearance than usual. But institutions which normally fill their
registers during clearance might already be full.
This phenomenon already seems to have changed the tactics of many hopeful
students. Advisers manning university helplines say that at the end of this
week they were receiving more calls than usual from people who had better
grades than their 'insurance' offer, and were interested in 'trading up'.
It would be unwise to assume too much. As Higgins puts it: 'Because there is
no historical precedent to work on, admissions tutors do not know how many
offers to make. In the past, they were able to get some idea of the ratio of
offers they had to make to the number of places available, bearing in mind
how many were likely or unlikely to meet the offer requirements. Now it is
getting close to guesswork.'
What should you do next?
This depends on how your A-levels went. If you satisfied the terms of your
first-preference offer (what UCAS calls the 'CF' offer) in full, or even
managed better grades than the university had asked for, then you have
nothing to worry about: the contract it made when giving you the conditional
offer is legally binding.
The terms of an 'insurance' ('CI') offer are equally binding. Note that the
obligation is both ways - technically the offer binds you as much as it does
the university, so attempts at 'trading up' would be unwise.
Life becomes more ambiguous if you have narrowly missed the A-level point
score your offers required. As many universities set high conditional offers
this year, they may well decide to take you after all. It is worth phoning
them, if you have not already done so.
Universities must send all their decisions on both CF and CI conditional
offers to UCAS by Friday this week. Barring postal delays, you should have a
decision by August 30 or 31, immediately after the bank holiday.
If the news is bad, and you still want to go into higher education next
year, then you will have to enter clearing.
What is clearing?
Instructions on clearing will be sent to all those without a place from
Monday onwards, and if you are eligible, you should have received all the
necessary documents, including the clearing entry form by the end of this
month. Vacancies definitely available through clearing will start being
advertised from Wednesday this week.
The form is vital. Having identified vacancies, you will need to contact the
university department concerned directly, either in person, if that is
feasible, or by telephone. You will need to quote your clearing number,
listed on the form, to prove you are eligible.
If the admissions tutor is interested, you must then send them your form. To
ensure that you are not being formally considered by more than one
institution at a time, you have to send them your original clearing entry
form, and not a copy. Again, ideally you should do this in person.
If you are unlucky, the clearing form will be returned to you, and you must
start the process again. Most university courses do not start until October,
so this could last a month.
It is hard to imagine a more stressful process, but 44,000 people
successfully won places through it last year, with the odds that even more
will do so this year.
Whatever happens, stay by a phone.
Extra sources of information:
Clearing the Way - Getting into University &amp; College through the UCAS
Clearing System, by Tony Higgins. Trotman &amp; Company, 12 Hill Rise, Richmond,
Surrey TW10 6UA. Pounds 5.95.
Channel 4 Text is broadcasting a regular update of all the vacancies on
offer on pages 644-648.
Useful telephone numbers include: UCAS (0242-222444), and the BBC freephone
helpline (0500- 505050, until August 26).
