FT  12 JAN 94 / British Steel doubts mettle of Brussels deal: Chairman Brian
Moffat tells Andrew Baxter that the subsidy issue is not yet dead
Judging by the stream of molten rhetoric flowing from British Steel's
headquarters in London this week, Mr Brian Moffat ought to add the title of
blast furnace No. 1 to that of chairman and chief executive.
It is nearly four weeks since European Union industry ministers agreed a
package of deals aimed at resolving disputes over subsidies for state-owned
steel-makers in Germany, Italy and Spain, and Mr Moffat is still
disappointed and concerned.
'We've had strong words in the past from ministers about subsidies. We've
got to ensure this time that the words mean something,' he says.
Disagreements over continuing state aid could delay or even put paid to much
needed capacity cuts, he warns, and slow the rise in prices in continental
Europe. As for the planned privatisation of Ilva, the loss-making Italian
producer, he asks whether it will be a privatisation 'the way you and I know
it, or will it be an Italian farce?'
Mr Moffat is right to be concerned about the Brussels deal, which will lead
to 5m tonnes of capacity cuts by subsidised producers. The deal was meant to
clear the way for non-aided companies to offer capacity cuts totalling 25m
tonnes, making a total of 30m, although many in the industry say the real
cuts will total 20m tonnes, about an eighth of the industry's effective
capacity. This, in turn, would underpin the industry's ability to raise
prices and return to profit. Europe's steelmakers lost Pounds 3bn in 1992,
and probably more last year.
'The key question for British Steel is whether they believe, and are right
to believe, that the subsidy issue is over,' says Mr Jeremy Fletcher, an
independent steel consultant.
Already there are clear signs that the subsidy issue is not dead, even if
the cases covered in the Brussels agreement do finally prove to have been
resolved. Mr Moffat is particularly upset about a plan backed by the city
state of Bremen which would rescue its Klockner-Werke steel mill. He wants
the Commission to smooth the way for a rival deal in which Bremen's
hot-rolled capacity would be shut down.
The Bremen issue is important because non-aided flat products producers view
it as a test case, and are unlikely to offer capacity cuts if the city
consortium's deal goes ahead.
But Mr Moffat stresses that he is not desperate. British Steel is the lowest
cost producer in Europe, he says, and will continue cutting costs
remorselessly to maintain its lead - although the focus of the efficiency
drive has switched from manpower to operational factors.
It is one of the few European producers to be trading profitably - it had
pre-tax profits of Pounds 27m in the first half of 1993/4. It also 'calls
the tune' in its home market, with a share of about 56 per cent, which Mr
Moffat sees as a significant advantage over German producers whose home
patch is often a 'battleground' between rivals.
Mr Philip Hampton, finance director, adds that: 'It's not a terminal case
even if the problem of continuing state aid is never settled, provided you
have a good cost advantage, which we happen to have at British Steel, and
provided you are not faced with a big capital investment, which we do not
face for a number of years.'
British Steel may need to use these strengths to weather any short-term
difficulties caused by fall-out from the Brussels deal, and take advantage
of the long-term implications. Continental steel prices are rising, giving
hope that the worst of the recession is over. But producers' reluctance to
make capacity cuts could slow this, says Mr Moffat.
Analysts such as Mr Fletcher believe British Steel could face stronger
competition in the UK, where steel demand is picking up faster than the
Continent. 'Once the Channel tunnel is open, there is no way Usinor-Sacilor
will not flex its muscles in the UK,' he says of the French producer.
Mr Moffat is more concerned, though, about any increase in imports from
central and eastern Europe, now subject to a 'gentlemen's agreement' which
took much of the heat out of a trade dispute early last year. 'If I was one
of those players and saw subsidies blatantly continuing in Europe, why
should I be responsible?' he says.
Overall, it will be difficult to make good returns from steel in Europe,
says Mr Hampton. Returns will be 'pretty dependent on south-east Asian,
Chinese and other export markets'.
This suggests a long-term message for British Steel. Mr Moffat is pledged to
enhance revenue at the company, which means cutting costs, increasing sales
or both. 'Europe will always be a priority,' he says, 'but strategically
you've got to look to grow the company somewhere else. There are growth
prospects in other places, and I guess we are looking.' Mr Moffat will not
be drawn further, but it would be a surprise if Asia, and particularly
China, was not in his sights.
Paradoxically, British Steel could be a long-term beneficiary of the
resentment in the steel industry following the Brussels agreement. The
non-aided German companies were exasperated by it, says Mr Fletcher, in
particular the agreement on subsidies and new capacity at Ekostahl in
eastern Germany. By the year 2000, there could be a single German producer,
or at most two, he says.
Mr Moffat is strongly in favour of mergers in the industry, because he
believes this is the best way to rationalise capacity. Fringe players should
be taken over by larger groups, or should merge with each other, and the
Commission should encourage the process, he says. 'Fewer players means
greater discipline, and a degree of transparency which is not there today,'
he says.
