FT  25 APR 94 / Final march of the old guard : As more EU leaders step down
or are cast aside, the European ideal is under challenge
Following the revolutions in the east, Europe is now coping with upheavals
in the west. Five years after the surge of central and eastern European
discontent that led to the fall of the Berlin Wall, the ground is shifting
under western Europe's political leadership.
Four weeks after Italy's general election, and with the countdown under way
to polls in the Netherlands on May 3 and for the European parliament on June
9 and 12, the continent is in the the midst of a period of intense
electioneering.
Coming political contests also include Germany's general election in October
and the presidential tussle in France in May 1995. By summer next year, most
of the leaders who launched a dynamic phase of European integration leading
to agreement on the Maastricht treaty are likely to have left office.
The Maastricht summit in December 1991 represented a high point both in
enthusiasm for European union and for the careers of a remarkably long-lived
set of European leaders. Of the 13 main participants at Maastricht, 11 had
been in office (some for more than one spell) for six years or more. Since
then, their political fortunes, like the European economy, have turned down.
Five of the 13 have left office. At least three more will go over the next
year. Of the 24 European Union finance and foreign ministers who signed the
treaty in February 1992, only seven remain.
The new generation must manage a difficult transition. Europe's challenges
include:
Handling the slow recovery from recession, in one of the most difficult
periods for the European economy since the 1930s depression;
Finding a common foreign and security policy to counter instability in
former Yugoslavia, the ex-Soviet Union and northern Africa;
Holding the 1996 conference to renew the EU's structure and preparing for
enlargement to eastern Europe after the planned 1995 accession of Austria,
Finland, Norway and Sweden;
Rediscovering currency stability following the exchange rate mechanism's
collapse in 1993 and doubts over the Maastricht goal of economic and
monetary union (Emu) by 1997-99;
And re-establishing fiscal control after a rise in government borrowing to
well above Maastricht Emu targets.
The Maastricht treaty has become law, but it looks out of kilter with public
opinion. The latest opinion surveys in Brussels show only 39 per cent of EU
voters support the treaty, with 22 per cent against it and 39 per cent
undecided.
Most governments expect a large protest vote in the European elections. The
treaty gives the parliament greater powers. Yet an increased number of
anti-Maastricht MEPs is likely to enter the Strasbourg chamber.
'The elections are taking place at the worst possible juncture  - a time of
malaise and disdain,' says Mr Michael Sturmer, director of the Stiftung
Wissenschaft und Politik, a German government policy think-tank. 'All
governments have failed to explain to their populations why Europe is good
for them.'
Political and economic strains have undermined earlier assumptions about
European integration. No government at present wants to press for
initiatives ahead of the 1996 Maastricht review conference. This includes
reconstructing the ERM. Mr Erik Hoffmeyer, governor of the Danish national
bank, and Europe's longest-serving central bank chief, says last summer's
break-up of the narrow-margin ERM has led to a 'vacuum' in Emu planning.
'This setback has paralysed the political process.'
The changes in Italy, a traditional supporter of European union, are
particularly striking. The new government to be formed soon, probably under
Mr Silvio Berlusconi, is likely to be more inward-looking than
administrations run by the now-eclipsed Christian Democrats over the last 40
years.
Most EU members' policies are increasingly focused on national interests.
This is underlined by France's support for its farmers during Gatt
negotiations, the row between Greece and the EU over Macedonia, and
Britain's attempt to maintain its EU voting power after next year's
enlargement.
Priorities seem to be switching in Germany and France, the main partners
behind European co-operation. Pointing to unrest in the former Soviet Union
and the Maghreb, Mr Richard Portes, director of the London-based Centre for
Economic Policy Research, says: 'Germany will be looking more to its
interests in the east, France to its interests in the south. These are
diverging perspectives.'
A crucial factor behind the Maastricht treaty was the French and German
governments' desire to reinforce the framework of integration to tie
reunited Germany to western Europe. Leading figures in France and Germany
admit that the plan to subsume the D-Mark into a single European currency
was based partly on the perceived need to restrain German power. As
ex-President Valery Giscard d'Estaing recently put it, 'We need an organised
Europe to escape German domination.'
However, the German electorate's hostility to abandoning the D-Mark has
added to the difficulties of realising Emu. Chancellor Helmut Kohl says he
no longer wants 'the United States of Europe'  - a goal he formerly
specifically endorsed.
According to Prof Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann, head of Germany's Allensbach
opinion research institute, whose polls are influential with Mr Kohl, 'There
is a great determination in Germany not to go towards a federal European
state. People want to keep national variations unchanged. Before Maastricht,
this was not an issue.'
Ms Noelle-Neumann's surveys show German opposition to Emu has softened
recently because many Germans believe its prospects have receded. On the
balance between deepening western European integration and extending the EU
eastwards, Ms Noelle-Neumann says Germans have 'an unswerving wish' to open
Europe to the east. 'This could create difficulties with France, Italy and
Spain.'
In France, business leaders recall Mr Edouard Balladur, the prime minister,
a possible successor to President Francois Mitterrand, previously voiced
strong doubts about Emu. 'Union or not, we have to solve our own problems,'
says Mr Gerard Worms, chairman of France's Suez financial conglomerate.
'What will happen in 1997 or 1999 is not the most important question.'
One top French official says wistfully, 'If the Soviet Union had not fallen,
we could have had a triangular relationship between West Germany, Britain
and France.'
All hope for the Maastricht blueprint has not been lost. Economic recovery
will rekindle enthusiasm for western European integration, just as it
revived after the 1981-82 recession. The Union is likely to find a more
coherent policy to deal with turbulence on its borders. Whatever the German
population's scepticism, the German government will not want to escape its
treaty commitment to Emu. None the less, as Europe's political landscape
changes, none of these three forecasts can be assured. As the 1980s leaders
disappear from the stage, the objectives they espoused, too, may start to
fade from view.
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Total years in office as of Dec 1991
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Wilfred Martens**                        Belgium       12
Francois Mitterrand*                     France        10
Poul Schluter**                          Denmark        9
Ruud Lubbers*                            Netherlands    9
Felipe Gonzalez                          Spain          9
Helmut Kohl*                             Germany        9
Giulio Andreotti**                       Italy          8
Jacques Santer*                          Luxembourg     7
Charles Haughey**                        Ireland        7
Jacques Delors*                          EC president   6
Anibal Cavaco Silva*                     Portugal       6
Constantine Mitsotakis**                 Greece         1
John Major                               UK             1
 ----------------------------------------------------------
*Facing election or end of office by 1995
**Have left office
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
                     EU ELECTIONS 1994-96
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
Italy                Parliament                27-28 March 1994
Netherlands          Parliament                          May 94
EC states            European Parliament                June 94
Luxembourg           Lower Chamber                      June 94
Germany              Parliament                          Oct 94
Denmark              Parliament                          Dec 94
France               President                           May 95
Belgium              Parliament                       Autumn 95
Portugal             Parliament                          Oct 95
Spain*, UK*          Parliament                Possibly in 1996
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
The Spanish and UK elections will probably be held before their
June and April 1997 deadlines respectively
 ------------------------------------------------------------------
