FT  16 JUL 94 / OECD supports 'bold' reforms of health service
The government's reforms of the national health service are producing
'increasingly encouraging results', the OECD says in a review of the UK
economy.
It says the reforms, 'a bold attempt to introduce elements of competition
into the centrally-financed healthcare system', have increased the NHS's
efficiency.
They have also made hospitals respond better to patients' needs. And the
fundholding family doctors who purchase health services on behalf of their
patients have done much to challenge hospital practices and demand
improvements.
The OECD says, however, that the government has made little effort to
monitor the impact of the changes. It warns that political pressures over
the closure of hospitals may weaken the process of adjustment.
It says that the district health authorities, which purchase healthcare on
behalf of most people, are short of purchasing skills. The result is that
changes in patterns of healthcare are slow, as districts tend to deal with
the same hospitals as before rather than shopping around.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, said it was gratifying that the
OECD had recognised the achievements of the reforms.
The organisation says that the NHS has traditionally delivered healthcare at
a lower cost than comparable countries. Infant mortality and life expectancy
are close to OECD averages.
The centralised control of the health service has been effective in holding
down costs, the OECD says, making the NHS a 'remarkably cost-effective
institution'.
The report says GP fundholders have been particularly successful in
improving the quality of treatment. It acknowledges the criticism that
fundholding may create a two-tier system, but compares that with the already
wide variations in the standards of family doctors before the reforms.
It says: 'The answer to potential inequity is not to abandon this effective
form of purchasing, but to extend fundholding and GP-based purchasing to
cover more patients.'
Mr David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, said it was easy for Paris-based
economists to see the changes through rose-tinted spectacles.
He said: 'The reality for patients, nurses and doctors who experience the
NHS every day is different, with greatly increased bureaucracy and falling
standards of patient care.'
