FT  29 AUG 94 / International Press Review: Sharif adds heat to nuclear row
 -Pakistan
Pakistanis love to talk about their country's controversial nuclear
programme, even if the occasion is one where restraint or caution is
advised.
Last week, an admission by Mr Nawaz Sharif, the former prime minister and
the country's main opposition leader, that Pakistan had produced nuclear
weapons, once again sparked a heated debate.
Politicians on both sides of the divide were concerned that on an issue
which is as popular as the nuclear programme, they should neither be seen as
weak or willing to compromise.
The government took the view that Mr Sharif's statement would threaten vital
national interests, while the opposition in its defence argued that their
leaders' 'disclosure' had removed ambiguity surrounding the nuclear issue
and would now deter India - Pakistan's arch enemy - from any 'adventurous'
moves.
The charges and counter-charges were enough to baffle many ordinary
Pakistanis.
But that could not be said about the Pakistani press, which by and large
criticised Mr Sharif's move, making use of the latest opportunity to write
extensively about one of its favourite topics.
'It's difficult to understand why the leader of the opposition, who is also
a former Prime Minister, would take a position that could create serious
difficulties for the country' declared the Jang, Pakistan's largest selling
privately owned Urdu newspaper, which traditionally follows a liberal
editorial policy.
The paper said that countries which are opposed to Pakistan's nuclear
programme, would use the statement to mobilise international opinion against
Islamabad.
'In Pakistan, a statement full of gung ho words on the country's nuclear
programme sells like hot cakes,' explained The News, another liberal paper,
adding that the opposition leader was playing to the domestic public
gallery.
It suggested that Mr Sharif had probably not considered Pakistan's strategic
concerns in making the statement. Rather, like all out-of-power politicians,
this was an effort on his part to attract public attention.
The Nation, a right-of-centre conservative paper, also joined the criticism
. 'It goes without saying that by letting the cat out of the bag, he has
created quite a stir in quarters that have traditionally been apprehensive
of Pakistan's nuclear ambition, and it wouldn't be surprising if the bogey
of 'Islamic bomb' is once again brought to the fore with renewed vigour'.
While arguing that Pakistan has the sovereign right to determine the
direction and the pace of its nuclear programme, the paper said the issue
should not be dragged out in partisan politics.
Dawn - the country's largest selling liberal English newspaper, which has a
large circulation among left-of-centre intellectuals, expressed similar
views, but went at a greater length to discuss different aspects of the
issue. 'If there is anything in this country about which verbosity should be
discouraged - even if it takes an act of parliament to do so - it is its
nuclear programme.'
The newspaper argued that it was best for the country to continue with its
practice of maintaining a 'nuclear ambivalence' because that leaves Western
anger at bay and keeps India guessing about the exact nature of the
programme. In describing the policy of ambivalence, the paper wrote:
'Although we have the capability to build a bomb, so goes the official line,
we have chosen not to do so because we are not a warmongering nation.'
Dawn also responded to speculation that the powerful Pakistani military may
have given the go-ahead to the opposition leader. 'We should credit our
military with possessing more sense than that.'
'This is a blunder of Mr Sharif's own making and no one else is responsible
for it. Instead of compounding his folly by going into all sorts of
unbelievable explanations, he should think of tendering the nation whose
interests he has damaged, an apology'.
Despite the criticism, the often conservative and pro- opposition
Nawa-i-Waqt, Pakistan's second largest Urdu paper, described the nuclear
programme as a guarantee for peace and supported Mr Sharif's statement.
In an editorial entitled 'Atomic ability - guarantee for peace', the paper
said the past two decades had seen both Pakistan and India refraining from
war, since New Delhi conducted its first nuclear test in 1974, followed by
Islamabad's decision to set up its own programme. The two countries would
benefit from their nuclear deterrence, and the opposition had helped
Pakistan towards that goal.
