FT  11 NOV 94 / Dublin halts IRA prisoner release: Prominent republicans
held after post worker shot in Ulster
The Irish government abruptly rescinded the planned release of nine IRA
prisoners before Christmas after two prominent republicans were arrested in
Northern Ireland after the murder of a post office worker yesterday.
The shooting, the first since the IRA and Loyalist paramilitaries declared
ceasefires, cast a shadow over the Northern Ireland peace process.
It will almost certainly increase pressure on London and Dublin to step up
their efforts to secure a dismantling of paramilitary arsenals.
Dublin's decision to cancel the early release orders for the IRA prisoners
was announced by Mrs Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, the Irish justice minister,
after a meeting with Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said he was 'deeply angered'
by the 'callous and wicked' murder. There would be 'very natural suspicions'
as to the motive for the crime.
The attack took place in Newry. Three armed men, dressed as postmen and
using a post office van, entered a fenced sorting centre. An employee was
shot dead. Two of the men were arrested after a chase involving helicopters
near the Irish border. The third escaped and was last night being sought by
the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
The RUC said the two men arrested were reported to be known republicans. But
Sinn Fein indicated last night that the raid was not the work of the IRA and
did not represent a breach of the two-month-old ceasefire.
Republican sources in South Armagh, a strongly nationalist area, said the
raid was the work of renegade, freelance republicans commiting a
straightforward criminal act.
Mr Gerry Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, was
reported to be 'visibly shaken' when told the news by a reporter. He said:
'The RUC is engaged in a transparent attempt to damage the peace process.'
A statement from the IRA said: 'On August 31 the IRA announced a complete
cessation of military operations . . . This position has not changed.'
Yesterday's killing came on the eve of a meeting between British and Irish
officials to discuss the framework document which the two governments hope
will form the basis of a durable political settlement in the province.
Sir Patrick and Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, are to discuss
the document in the Republic of Ireland on Monday. There have been signs in
recent days that the two governments have made progress - particularly in
the area of north-south relations - after a period of little progress.
British and Irish politicians said the shooting showed the need for a rapid
surrender of weapons.
Mr Seamus Mallon, MP for Newry for the moderate nationalist Social
Democratic and Labour party, said: 'All we do know for certain is that these
people had a certain close relationship with the IRA, that they had weapons,
and they had very clearly planned this operation . . . the same kind of
operation they have used before.'
His view was echoed by Mr David Trimble, Ulster Unionist party spokesman on
legal affairs. He said: 'Freelance operations don't take place in that area
unless they're licensed by the IRA.'
