FT  31 DEC 94 / Survey of Personal Pension Plans (12): What to do if
something should go wrong
Personal pensions can be sold in inappropriate circumstances, and if you
think this has happened in your case, you should complain. Do consider
carefully before taking action, however.
Unfortunately, if you experience dismal performance due to poor investment
management and high charges, this will be regarded as bad luck and not
justified grounds for complaint.
If, however, you were sold a personal pension when you had access to a
company scheme, you are likely to get a hearing. This was one of several
circumstances highlighted by the Securities and Investments Board in its
recent investigation into plans sold on the basis of poor advice.
Anyone who transferred company-scheme benefits to a personal plan, opted out
of a company scheme or did not join a company scheme because they were
advised to take out a personal pension, should check whether they qualify
for compensation (see below for PIA pensions helpline).
How to complain
Write first to the compliance officer at the company that sold you the plan.
This may be an independent adviser or a company representative for a
particular life office. You should include the following details and keep
copies of all correspondence:
State clearly the nature of the complaint.
Include your full address and daytime telephone number.
Provide the name of the product, the date you took it out and the name of
the salesman (if relevant).
Quote all policy and reference numbers.
Enclose photocopies of letters and any other supporting material.
Impose a deadline for reply. You should receive an acknowledgment of your
letter within seven days, but allow two months for the actual investigation
before turning to the ombudsman.
Who to complain to
If you do not hear from the company that sold you the pension plan, or you
are dissatisfied with their response, you should take the matter to the
Personal Investments Authority (PIA), the new regulator for independent
advisers and insurance companies selling financial products. Write to the
PIA Ombudsman, 6th Floor, 1 London Wall, London EC2Y 5EA. Tel 0171 600-3838,
fax 600-4727.
Your case may be referred to the Pensions Ombudsman.
If you have a query about a personal plan and want advice, telephone the PIA
pensions helpline on 0171 417-7001, fax 417-8100. You should also phone this
number if you think your case falls into one of the categories investigated
by the SIB mentioned above.
