FT  04 OCT 94 / Leading Article: SDR wars in Madrid
When an essentially innocuous proposal to raise international liquidity
promotes a near-brawl among the world's most influential economic leaders,
something is clearly amiss. The representatives of the Group of Seven
industrial countries and the managing director of the International Monetary
Fund clashed over the issue on Sunday, mainly because each had an
exaggerated sense of what was at stake. Their inability to resolve their
differences is regrettable, not merely for developing countries which would
have benefited from Mr Michel Camdessus's proposal, but for the G7's ability
to adapt to the fact that it is no longer the only game in town.
Mr Camdessus's proposal for a new allocation of special drawing rights - the
IMF's reserve currency - has been around for some years. Justifying such an
injection of liquidity into the global financial system means answering two
potential doubts: first, about whether it is strictly needed; and second,
whether it will be globally inflationary.
Mr Camdessus claims that a low level of reserves is putting unnecessarily
harsh constraints on the import capacity of some developing and
post-Communist countries. Many developing countries now have access to
alternative, private sources of financing; the case for supplementing these
with IMF resources would appear to be quite weak. But Mr Camdessus is
correct to point out that not all countries are so fortunate, and may need
further emergency assistance from the fund.
Providing transitional help to developing countries in macroeconomic
distress is one of the least controversial aspects of the IMF's role in the
world. Such countries might be supported by other means - by enhancing the
fund's resources for making structural adjustment loans, for example. But
the managing director clearly believed that a proposal which did not require
individual members to contribute the extra funds directly would have more
chance of success.
Neither Mr Camdessus's proposal nor the compromise agreed over the weekend
among the G7 countries themselves was an optimal solution to the problem he
identifies.
But neither in itself was likely to prove highly inflationary either. The
sums involved were simply too small. In truth, Sunday's stand-off in Madrid
owed less to this concern than to the fact that issues of much greater
importance were thought to be at stake: namely, the existence of a global
'capital shortage' and the future role of the IMF.
The fear that rising investment demand is putting upward pressure on global
real interest rates is unlikely to go away. But just as the future course of
global inflation will not be altered by a phased Dollars 23bn increase in
SDRs, nor will such an injection alter the fact that net saving rates in
Europe and elsewhere are currently too low. Mr Camdessus and the G7
representatives did themselves a disservice by appearing to suggest it could
do either.
