FT  06 SEP 94 / Leading Article: Time to end the rail dispute
The summer holiday period is ending without a settlement in Britain's
long-running rail dispute. Signal staff will strike on Thursday, the 13th
week of disruption on the rail network. No negotiations are under way over
their pay claim and further strikes are planned for the next two weeks.
There is little sign of a return to work by the overwhelming majority of
signal staff who continue to support their union, the RMT.
Railtrack, the state-owned company that runs British Rail's track and
signalling operations, continues to use supervisors, non-striking signalmen
and other qualified rail staff to provide services on strike days. It may
succeed in running more trains on Thursday than on previous strike days. But
the scope for further improvements is limited without a break in the
strikers' resolve. The stalemate looks set to continue.
Yet the strikes are in the interests of neither staff nor management. As in
any industrial dispute, business will have been lost to the railways. Some
passengers will continue to use the alternative forms of transport they have
adopted on strike days. Some freight customers will conclude that railways
can never be reliable where time is of the essence. RMT members will be
among the losers as a result.
By contrast, those who wish to see less spent on the railways will have been
heartened by the strikes. Commuters have been able to get to work on strike
days with less frequent services and few trains in the evenings. Towns and
villages served by marginal branch lines have suffered no visible loss from
the absence of trains. The case for subsidising the current level of rail
services has been weakened.
Privatisation challenge
The dispute will also make it much harder for the government to privatise
British Rail in the immediate future. The train operating companies have
lost millions of pounds by being unable to run services on strike days.
Their vulnerability to disruption at Railtrack has been underlined to
potential investors. And the more that train operators are indemnified
against such costs, the less attractive Railtrack will be to the private
sector. Opponents of privatisation such as the RMT will rejoice, but the
government has been foolish to allow the dispute to drag on.
The strikes cannot be allowed to continue into the autumn. Railtrack must
act now to bring the dispute to an end. If there is no agreement before the
end of September, signalmen stand to lose valuable pension rights when
British Rail's pension fund is divided between the successor rail companies.
They are therefore likely to be ready to end the dispute given sufficient
cause.
Flexible practices
Railtrack has already lost more than Pounds 100m because of the strikes. A
private business facing such losses would increase its pay offer by enough
to get the strikers back to work. This would be followed by restructuring to
recoup the cost, through improvements in efficiency. Individual contracts of
employment would be introduced, after giving the requisite notice and
consulting as necessary, to encourage more flexible practices.
Such an approach may no longer be an option, however. The government fears
that a higher offer - even if self-financing - would be seen as a defeat for
its public sector pay policy. Its intervention in the dispute almost
certainly means that this is true: higher pay claims would follow elsewhere
in the public sector where efficiency cannot be improved so easily.
That leaves the sort of strategy which a leaked letter last week indicated
that Railtrack appears to be considering. This involves inviting individual
signalmen to accept the offer on the table, sacking strikers and
re-employing those who wish to return on individual contracts. Such an
approach could cost Railtrack more than Pounds 16m in compensation for not
giving adequate notice of the change in working conditions. This would be
embarrassing, not least because it is three times the annual cost of
settling the RMT pay claim. However, it is a price that Railtrack - and the
government - may have to pay to end a strike that incompetence has allowed
to drag on for 13 weeks longer than was necessary.
