FT  03 DEC 94 / Fashion: Costume to wear on the world's stage - John
Galliano's theatrical designs can make anyone feel like a dramatic heroine
The fashion world, like any other competitive milieu, can be an uncomradely
place to work. The pattern of its days is a rollercoaster of triumph and
disaster, and the price of success is often someone else's misfortune. The
rewards for success can be spectacular, but failure can also be very public
 -and a source of joy to rivals.
So although fashion people may appear to be extravagantly affectionate after
the manner of the theatre, they are often malicious, even, dare we say it,
bitchy. No name or reputation is safe from calumny.
But there are a handful of designers whose talent is so extraordinary that
even the most envious of competitors still their tongues, aware that a world
that lacks giants is dull indeed.
Among these heroes are Issey Miyake and Yohji Yamamoto, Jean-Paul Gaultier,
Vivienne Westwood and, now, John Galliano.
Galliano was born in Gibraltar, where he was christened Juan Carlos Antonio.
He came to Britain with his parents and two sisters in 1966, when he was six
years old, and the family lived in Battersea, London, where John's father
worked as a plumber. The boy survived Wilson's Grammar School and went on to
study fashion design at St Martin's College of Art, where his graduation
collection caused the kind of sensation of which legends are made.
He called it Les Incroyables and based his designs on the clothing of
dandies during the French Revolution. Joan Burstein of Brown's in South
Molton Street, bought the whole collection, put it in her window, sold out
and came back to reorder.
Galliano, who had been all set to take a job as an illustrator in America,
decided to risk a career as a designer, and stayed in London. With a bunch
of friends - John is always surrounded by eager, admiring and adoring
friends - he made the second order on his mother's kitchen table.
In the ensuing decade, John Galliano has suffered his share of triumph,
disaster and calumny but, at present, no one has an unkind word to say. Karl
Lagerfeld has described his talent as 'a genius'. The fashion writers who
once found him and his work 'weird' are lavish in their accolades. The
stores that once wondered whether he would ever deliver are placing huge
orders and boasting that they 'have him'.
Galliano's new backer, John Bult, glows with entirely justified confidence
and gives him the space and support he needs. The supermodels adore him and
would show his clothes for free. They know that they will never look more
beautiful than they do in Galliano and they know they will rarely have quite
so much fun on the catwalk.
For at the heart of Galliano's clothes there is always a story, a romance,
or a heroine with a history. The women who model his clothes, who are so
often asked by other designers to slouch along slowly, wearing an
unflickeringly morose expression or a glazed, disengaged stare, are given a
chance to act - or, in the opinion of at least one person in the audience at
last October's Paris show, to over-act. 'To be someone,' is how the
supermodel Kate Moss expressed it.
When it comes to clothes, our modern pragmatism dictates that we need to
look clean, tidy, smartish, and fashion-aware, if not fashionable. We also
like to look affluent, possibly sexy and perhaps authoritative.
These are fairly simple demands to make of our clothes and they are fairly
simply answered. But, according to the historians and semioticians of dress,
all that is only part of the purpose of clothes.
Much more important is the magic element. Clothes speak a symbolic language
that everyone can interpret.
A character in a portrait, a play or a film is described by his or her
clothes. Beyond that simple description lie layers of associations, placing
the character in time and social milieu. Mere clothes can summon up for us
the smells, tastes, passions and preoccupations of the period in which the
character is supposed to have lived.
Those who design for the stage or for film are skilled at the business of
imparting huge amounts of information through shape, colour, texture and
detail, which the audience will absorb in a glance.
While the theatre designer, however, is working to a brief, to realise a
director's vision, Galliano, the fashion designer, is creating his own
mise-en-scene, his own heroine, and dressing her. For the 1995 spring
collection, this heroine is the haughty bohemian, opium-smoking poets' muse
called Misia. She is his well-researched starting point and the well-spring
of his creativity. But he is not merely costuming her, he is creating from
her life and wardrobe a collection of clothes that are both intensely
romantic, and emotive and also absolutely right for now.
The problem of how clothes can be simultaneously archaic and modern
perplexes those not used to the complexity of what makes fashion.
We use our clothes to tell those we encounter about ourselves and, more
importantly, to tell ourselves about ourselves. Dress is often,
surprisingly, not about its effect on an observer; it can be a very intimate
exercise in self-discovery. Put simply, fashion can be therapeutic.
The self-discovery element is a clue to why fashion (or very distinctive
minority styles of dress) is so important to the young and progressively
less important to us as we grow older.
While we are finding out who we are, we need to try on many roles for size.
We need to express aspects of our personalities that are hard to express in
any other way. The supermodels may be enviable, but they are young women
whose lives are full of hard work, discomfort and life-disrupting travel.
They have rather ordinary boyfriends, suffer from meretricious hangers-on,
go to banally wild parties and are fair game for exploiters of every sort.
So when they are told to play Galliano's muse, Misia, defined by Cocteau as
'one of those warm-blooded and deep women who live in the shadows of great
men and who, from the margins of artistic creation have a mysterious effect
merely by generating ring-like waves more beautiful than necklaces', they go
for it.
There may not be a Misia deep inside every woman, but she is an aspect
buried in most of us, and life offers her few outings.
Galliano has a partner in his search for heroines. She is Amanda Grieve, now
Lady Harlech, who lives a fairly rural life nowadays in Wales with her
husband and three children. She and Galliano met when he designed the
clothes for a Malcolm McLaren album photograph that she was styling.
Beautiful, intelligent and hugely stylish in a richly eccentric way, Amanda
is the original Galliano heroine, her clothes the outward expression of a
resourceful imagination and a non-self-indulgent romanticism which allows
for some humour.
John himself constructs his own appearance from disparate elements. The aim
of the stylistically cacophonous overall effect has always seemed to be more
about high comedy than high camp. His outward persona is lighthearted, even
giggly. He is a terrible flirt. But he is more often quiet and watchful than
rowdy. Serious, even intense, about his work, he is driven, as the truly
creative usually are, by the joy that comes from the conception of his
vision and the perfect execution of it.
But all this would not be enough to attract the genius label if it were not
for the fact that Galliano's vision of his heroines is always beautiful,
often breathtakingly so, and he is technically skilled.
Galliano would never design anything that would perplex succeeding
generations. In him vision and skills are in perfect balance.
So much so that, as the crowd straggled away from the showing of his
collectiion in October, one hardened veteran of several thousand fashion
shows gulped hard and announced, 'It was so perfect, I want to cry. I can't
bear to wait to wear it. I can't wait to be it.'
