FT  22 FEB 94 / Markets Report: Dollar recovers ground
The dollar yesterday retraced recent losses against the yen, finishing in
London at Y106.25, nearly Y2 up from Friday's close of Y104.30, writes
Philip Gawith.
The lack of any fresh data, and a public holiday in the US, contributed to a
quiet afternoon's trading, but dollar/yen trading in particular was fairly
brisk in the morning.
In Europe the D-Mark traded steadily in spite of the IG Metall engineering
union calling for a strike ballot in one of the regions. The French
government resisted the temptation to ease policy and kept its repo rate
unchanged at yesterday's auction.
A lot of attention will today be focused on Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of
the US Federal Reserve, who will deliver his biannual Humphrey Hawkins
testimony to congress today.
The most significant move in the markets yesterday was the sharp
appreciation of the dollar against the yen in Asian trading, and later in
Europe. Traders said the dollar's rise had been helped by Bank of Japan
intervention. The US currency reached a high of Y106.80 before closing
moderately beneath that level.
Mr Nick Parsons, chief economist at CIBC, said that with US markets closed
because of the President's Day holiday, American banks left stop-loss trade
instructions in London. A number of these were triggered at Y106.10 and the
selling thus triggered had forced the yen down to Y106.80.
Mr Jeremy Hawkins, chief economist at Bank of America in London, said the
strength of the dollar could reflect nervousness ahead of the weekend
meeting of G7 finance ministers meeting in Frankfurt. He added that markets
were wary of a statement emerging whereby other countries agreed to assist
the BOJ in its efforts to stabilise the yen.
Ten days after the failed trade summit in Washington between President
Clinton and Mr Hosokawa no proposals have emerged yet from Japan about how
to curb its large trade surplus with the US. Mr Koichiro Matsuura, Japan's
deputy foreign minister (and chief trade negotiator), said yesterday:
'Prospects for proposals which will lead to agreement are far from certain.'
The D-Mark was weaker against most other European currencies. A firmer start
was cancelled out by fears that industrial unrest in Germany might escalate.
IG Metall, the giant engineering union, yesterday announced that it would
hold a strike ballot in Lower Saxony from March 1 to 3.
The news caused the D-Mark to weaken more than  1/2 pfennig against the
dollar to DM1.7310, but it ended slightly firmer in London at DM1.7275. a
net pfennig down from Friday's close. Analysts said that if anything the
market had overreacted to the news. From an inflation perspective the key
issue is the quantum of the wage settlement and it appears already likely
that there will be no real growth.
Mr Parsons said the dollar was also benefiting from foreign exchange markets
catching up with bond markets, which have taken a view that a further
tightening in US monetary policy is likely.
Sterling was modestly higher against the D-Mark, ending in London at
DM2.5488, after Friday's DM2.5406. Mr Hawkins said this reflected the
general weakness of the German currency and a retreat from the recent
sell-off of the pound, which had been 'fairly aggressive'.
He said the market was using the opportunity to buy back sterling. 'The
underlying fact is that the UK economy is growing substantially faster than
most of continental Europe, and the downside for UK interest rates is also a
good deal less than in those countries,' he added.
The pound closed mildly easier against the dollar at Dollars 1.4755, from
Dollars 1.4788 on Friday.
Attention will shift firmly back to the US today when markets reopen after
yesterday's public holiday. With the recent  1/4 percentage point rise in
the Fed Funds rate having unnerved international bond markets, Mr
Greenspan's comments will be closely watched.
Mr Parsons said that, whereas European markets took the Fed's recent
tight-ening of policy to be a pre-emptive strike against inflation, US
markets had taken it as a sign that the Fed was privy to information showing
inflation to be worse than previously thought. 'You had the bizarre
spectacle of a 25 basis points rise in the discount rate putting 40 points
on bond yields,' added Mr Parsons.
He predicted that the Fed chairman will today try to reassure the bond
market by stressing that the inflation outlook is a healthy one.
The Bank of England provided the UK money market with Pounds 200m of
assistance yesterday, in line with its forecast of a similar liquidity
shortage, revised from an earlier Pounds 350m estimate.
