FT  20 OCT 94 / BR to shed maintenance jobs
Nearly 1,800 railway maintenance jobs will be lost as a result of
privatisation and a reduction in the work available, British Rail said
yesterday.
British Rail Infrastructure Services plans to make 1,400 of its track and
signal maintenance staff redundant as part of its preparations for
privatisation while British Rail Maintenance, which looks after rolling
stock, will shed 350 jobs because of lower workloads.
Unions said that the cuts could lead to a further reduction in maintenance
work being done on the railway. Work levels have already fallen back since
Railtrack took over responsibility for BR track and signalling in April,
they added.
The redundancies amount to a reduction of 15 per cent in the white-collar
workforce of infrastructure services. The unions expect that to be followed
by cuts in the number of blue-collar jobs. Managers and administrative staff
account for nearly 9,000 of the total infrastructure workforce of 30,000.
The reduction, which BR hopes to achieve by voluntary redundancies, will be
spread across the country at infrastructure offices in Derby, Birmingham,
Bristol, Newcastle upon Tyne, Doncaster, Peterborough and London.
As part of privatisation BR is splitting its maintenance, track renewal and
design activities into 20 separate companies. Last month it invited
potential bidders to register their interest with the aim of completing a
sale by the end of next year.
The Transport Salaried Staffs Association said its members were resigned to
the cuts and that morale was bad. 'The message we get is that there has been
a falling off in the work that is being done,' it said. It denied that there
was any threat to safety.
Railtrack said during the recent signal workers' strike that it was carrying
out only essential work to save money but some train operating companies
complained about declining maintenance standards before the strike started.
Railtrack has already started seeking competitive tenders for maintenance
work. This has meant in some cases that work has gone to a company in
another part of the country and not, as was previously the case, to its
local region.
Mr Robert Horton, Railtrack chairman, has promised a squeeze on the
railway's annual Pounds 1.8bn maintenance bill.
Infrastructure service companies have a combined turnover of more than
Pounds 1bn - including seven maintenance companies with turnover of Pounds
850m and six track renewal companies which carry out heavier work and have
sales of Pounds 200m. There are also seven design offices.
Mr Brian Wilson, Labour transport spokesman, condemned the job losses as a
consequence of the fragmentation of the railway.
