FT  20 DEC 94 / Technology: Calluna's future on the cards - James Buxton
reports on how a Scottish disc drive maker plans to conquer the world market
In a pressurised cleanroom inside the Scottish plant of the electronics
company Calluna, men and women wearing pale blue suits and white masks which
leave only their eyes showing are assembling delicate miniature hard disc
drives. They look like astronauts inside a space station.
Their goal is to make Calluna a world leader in the market for 1.8in hard
disc drives, products that cover no more than the area of a credit card.
Calluna was formed in late 1991. After three traumatic years surviving on a
tiny amount of capital, it raised Pounds 10m on the London Unlisted
Securities Market in late October. It now has a market capitalisation of
Pounds 50m and the resources to expand.
Calluna's 1.8in disc drives, which it calls Callunacards, stand only 10.5mm
high. They can be installed as an embedded component of a notebook computer,
but more importantly they also come in a portable version that can be
inserted in and removed from any PC that has an expansion slot conforming to
the standard set by the Personal Computer Memory Card International
Association (PCMCIA).
PCMCIA slots, now being installed in many new notebook PCs, are widely seen
as the gateway to a new method of moving data between PCs  - transferring an
entire credit card-sized disc drive which would either be the PC's main
drive or a supplementary one.
The new 1.8in drives have very high storage capacity for their size  -
Callunacards, for example, range from 70MB to the recently launched 260MB
product, the biggest in its category. But they need it: hard disc drives are
becoming bigger as software companies produce programs that are ever
hungrier for storage space (Microsoft's Windows Office needs about 82MB for
the program alone).
Norman White, Calluna's founder and managing director, envisages that one
day travelling PC users will carry only their 1.8in disc drives with them,
slotting them into a host PC when they need to work on their data. 'This is
the floppy disc of the future,' he says. 'The personal element in personal
computing will become the portable disc drive.'
There are also openings for Calluna's products for non-computer use. A
company in Spain is developing a 'speech integrator' using the Callunacard
from which visitors to museums and tourist attractions will hear
commentaries in different languages. The miniature drives can also be used
to store and transport the recordings of security video cameras.
White was a founder and technical director of Rodime, the Scottish disc
drive company which in 1983 produced the world's first 3.5-in hard disc
drive. But Rodime made a series of strategic blunders and ceased
manufacturing in 1991. It now lives by licensing its past know-how.
All Calluna's senior executives worked for Rodime, making the new company
Rodime's technological heir. 'These people have been around the business for
a long time,' says Bob Katsive of Disc/Trend, the San Francisco-based market
research company.
The team has succeeded in building up Calluna and developing innovative
products despite having raised only Pounds 5m in venture capital, plus
grants, before the flotation  - money was so short at times that the 40
staff had to take salary cuts.
Calluna's disc drive components are made and tested to its specifications by
suppliers in East Asia, England and California. They are then assembled in
Calluna's plant at Glenrothes in Fife.
It has established relationships with computer manufacturers in the US and
Europe which have confirmed the compatibility of its products. In Europe it
has a network of specialist distributors, while in the US a company rebadges
Calluna's products for sale under its own label.
So far Calluna's biggest orders have been for two consignments of 2,500
units each for distributors in the US and the UK. The order book is growing,
though the 25,000 sq ft plant is tooled up to produce 50,000 drives a year
and could ultimately be expanded to make 450,000 annually.
Despite its technological prowess Calluna faces awesome challenges, as the
two pages of risk factors listed in its flotation prospectus attest.
Its strategy has three elements. First, White says, it needs always to be at
the leading edge of disc drive technology. As a small company it cannot
compete with larger disc drive makers on price in high volume manufacturing.
Instead it must use its engineering expertise continually to incorporate
more storage capacity on to its drives. White envisages Calluna developing a
miniature 500MB drive by 1997 and later progressing to 1,000MB.
Second, however, it still needs to develop a good level of business with
original equipment manufacturers in the PC industry making less powerful
drives, even though margins here are not very attractive. It could later
license or sub-contract this part of its out-put.
Producing in some volume will enable Calluna to buy components more cheaply
to develop the third leg of its business, the higher margin business of
making removable PCMCIA drives which could be sold by dealers direct to the
consumer.
However the market for 1.8in drives is still in its infancy. Disc/Trend
forecasts that as more notebook PCs are manufactured with PCMCIA slots, the
number of PCMCIA disc drives shipped worldwide will rise from 360,000 this
year to more than 4.3m in 1997.
But this forecast and others by Dataquest have yet to be confirmed by
reality and White says the market for removable drives is still moving
forward slowly, though that for embedded drives is growing faster.
Only three competitors, the US companies Maxtor, a long-established disc
drive maker, and two recent start-ups, Integral and MiniStor, have products
in the same category as Calluna. However, Katsive believes bigger
manufacturers such as Seagate, Conner, NEC and Hitachi which had earlier
dabbled in the 1.8in drive market will return to the market as demand
improves, possibly late next year.
Katsive says survival for independents like Calluna depends on staying ahead
of the giants. 'It will have to be fleet of foot,' he says.
