FT  01 DEC 94 / Contacts with IRA reopened after Newry killing
The British government reopened secret contacts with the IRA last month
after the killing of a Newry postal worker in a raid by republican gunmen.
This emerged yesterday as the government looked poised to send a letter to
Sinn Fein indicating its readiness to begin preliminary talks with the IRA's
political wing before Christmas.
These are now thought likely to start either on December 12 or December 16.
Sir John Wheeler, Northern Ireland security minister, said he had no doubt
exploratory talks would begin 'within a few days'.
The government has also promised to start preliminary dialogue with loyalist
representatives by the end of the year.
It is understood that the government contacted republican leaders
immediately after the Newry murder to demand in the strongest terms an
explanation for what happened.
The demand brought an admission from the republicans that they did not know
what had prompted the raid and that they were trying to find out. The
government then sent a second message demanding firm answers.
The exchange underlines how close the killing - the first since the IRA and
loyalist paramilitaries declared ceasefires - came to derailing the peace
process.
Mr Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, initially
accused the Royal Ulster Constabulary of trying to damage the process by
blaming republicans for the shooting. But the IRA later acknowledged its
members were responsible.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said on the day of the
killing on November 10 he was 'deeply angered' by the 'callous and wicked'
murder. The next day he stressed the peace process was 'on course'.
It is believed the secret contacts may have been initiated by Downing Street
but were probably carried out by MI5. A Downing Street official said
yesterday he had seen 'no evidence' such contacts had taken place.
Yesterday's developments came as Mr Adams said the government had reopened
its secret contacts with Sinn Fein to advise it to expect a date shortly for
exploratory talks.
Earlier Mr Adams and Mr John Hume, leader of the mainly Catholic Social
Democratic and Labour party, issued their first joint statement since the
IRA ceasefire. They urged the government to be more positive in its attitude
to the peace process.
Mr Adams has also been invited by Mr Anthony Lake, President Bill Clinton's
national security adviser, to meet him at the White House next week to
discuss ways of advancing the peace process.
