FT  24 MAR 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Argyle digs deep for precious
prizes - The world's biggest diamond producer
The massive, man-made Argyle dam is blood-red from the sandstone in the silt
carried to it by the Ord River after the wettest wet season experienced for
100 years in this remote region in the far north of Western Australia.
About half a metre of rain in the past month has washed out one of the roads
leading to the huge open pit at the Argyle diamond mine. But the weather has
not delayed a ADollars 100m project designed to ensure that Argyle remains
the world's biggest diamond producer into the next decade.
Argyle produced 7.9 tonnes of diamonds last year or 34 per cent of the
global total. However, as the pit goes deeper the deposit contains fewer
diamonds and Argyle has been spending so as to increase the tonnage of
material shifted each year - to about 40m tonnes.
This will give an extra 2m tonnes of ore (taking it to an annual 8.6m
tonnes) and should keep diamond output relatively constant for another seven
years. By that time the pit will have reached its maximum depth of 320
metres.
Argyle's diamond output is likely to rise a little this year and next before
falling back again in 1996, according to Mr Ron Bates, general manager,
operations.
By 1996 the pit's owners, CRA, the Australian affiliate of RTZ Corporation
of the UK, with 60 per cent, and Ashton Mining, about one-third owned by the
Malaysian Mining Corporation, will have to decide whether to build an
underground mine at the bottom of the pit. Mr Bates says Argyle has been
scouring the world for suitable low-cost underground mining methods but it
is far too early to say whether the scheme would be viable.
The partners' search for more diamond deposits nearby has drawn a blank so
far. The joint venturers spent ADollars 150m on exploration and feasibility
studies and then ADollars 475m to bring Argyle into production in 1985.
Since then the mine has produced about 40 tonnes of diamonds and given the
partners on average a handsome 30 per cent return on their investment.
Indications from the partners' annual results suggest that Argyle's output
last year was worth about ADollars 500m and produced an after tax profit of
about ADollars 100m for them to share.
Although Argyle ranks first in diamond output by weight, it is only sixth in
the world in the value of diamonds it produces. Some 5 per cent of the
diamonds from Argyle account for 50 per cent of its revenue while 50 per
cent are industrial stones of little value and produce only 5 per cent of
the revenue.
Mr Bates points out that in mining terms the industrial stones should be
seen as a by-product that must be extracted along with the mine's main
product. The remaining 45 per cent of the mine's output is of cheap gem
stones.
The key to Argyle's success, therefore, has been new technology that enables
it to sort billions of diamonds - many of them virtually worthless - a task
traditional sorting methods could not handle. CRA has developed a system
using X-rays to locate the diamonds in crushed ore - they glow in the beams
 -and then micro-computer-controlled machines blast air to blow each one out
of the material at a rate of up to 500 a second.
