FT  06 OCT 94 / IMF/World Bank: IFC investment firstfor South Africans
The International Finance Corporation, a member of the World Bank Group,
yesterday announced its first equity investments in South Africa as part of
a strategy to encourage new businesses among the country's poor black
population.
Mr Jemal-ud-din Kassum, IFC vice-president for operations, said that the
investments - which will be made in a franchise financing fund and a life
assurance company - would 'help bridge the gap between the first and third
world parts of the economy'.
The IFC, which promotes private sector activity, will invest R12.5m (Pounds
2.4m) in the South Africa Franchise Capital Fund. This will be a R50m
vehicle to provide loans and equity to members of 'previously disadvantaged
groups' so they can acquire franchises in businesses such as fast food, dry
cleaning and photocopying chains.
The IFC will also invest R41.6m in a 10 per cent stake in African Life
Assurance (Aflife), a life assurance company that does most of its business
with poor blacks. The franchise fund will help black businesses overcome
shortages of capital and give them access to accounting and marketing
expertise as well as the research and development facilities of larger
organisations, Mr Tei Mante, director of IFC's sub-Saharan Africa
department, said.
The life assurance company, which is being restructured to be predominantly
owned by black interests, will provide a home for savings from people in the
townships and provinces. The two investments 'are all part of building a
climate that provides a stable base for economic growth', Mr Mante said.
The Aflife restructuring, which will entail the building up of a new sales
force to cover black residential areas, was an 'example of the changes in
ownership and control that are necessary for increased participation by
previously disadvantaged groups in the formal economy.'
IFC's partner in structuring and arranging the leasing fund was Nedcor Bank
of South Africa.
Nedcor will take a 25 per cent stake in the fund. The rest of the shares
will be placed with a small group of international and South African
institutional investors.
In remarks to the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and
World Bank, Mr Christo Liebenberg, the South African finance minister, said
the Bank's multilateral investment guarantee agency would soon give its
first guarantee for an inward investment into South Africa.
It is understood that this concerns an investment in the manufacturing
sector.
