FT  01 SEP 94 / The IRA Ceasefire: Cautious response urged on Major - UK
reaction
The prime minister was yesterday urged by rightwing Conservatives not to
embark on constitutional talks with Sinn Fein until the IRA agreed to a
permanent ceasefire.
Among Northern Ireland politicians, nationalists greeted the ceasefire
announcement with delight while unionists voiced suspicion that the
statement did not signal a permanent end to the IRA's terrorist campaign.
Sir George Gardiner, chairman of the 92 group of Thatcherite Tory MPs,
warned of the risk of 'igniting opinion in the majority of Northern Ireland'
if ministers moved too fast in response to the IRA ceasefire.
Mr Andrew Hunter, a member of the Commons Northern Ireland committee, feared
it could be 'a tactical ploy - a pause in the killing'.
He said: 'You cannot possibly sit at a table and negotiate with people who
will resume killing if they don't get what they want in those negotiations -
that is an impossible situation.'
An indication of the potential Tory opposition to constitutional talks with
Sinn Fein came with the publication of a pamphlet by Mr Norman Lamont, the
former chancellor, who argued against involving Sinn Fein in talks.
The pamphlet, written before yesterday's announcement, said Sinn Fein's
participation in a constitutional conference would put ministers 'in the
position of being held responsible for the next round of terror if they do
not give in to the IRA blackmail of threatening to pull out'.
On the left of the Tory party Mr Peter Temple-Morris said people were
'afraid of peace'. Another Tory backbencher urged unionists to 'seize the
opportunities of peace' and break the 'hatred of the past'.
Mr Tony Blair, Labour leader, gave a cautious welcome to the IRA ceasefire,
but stressed the test would come in whether it led to a permanent
renunciation of violence.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, said: 'If the IRA has at last
realised that it cannot achieve its aims through violence, then this is a
very important moment for peace in Northern Ireland.'
In Northern Ireland, unionist politicians said the IRA should surrender its
arsenal of weapons and explosives to prove it was serious about ending
terrorism for good.
But Mr John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labour party, who put
his reputation on the line by talking with Sinn Fein, said the ceasefire
would be 'welcomed by Irish people everywhere, but particularly by the
people in the streets of Northern Ireland. Now we face the primary challenge
which is to reach agreement among our divided people.'
The Rev William McCrea, an MP from the hardline Democratic Unionist party,
said the IRA was not seeking peace but trying to blackmail the government
for more concessions.
Dr John Alderdice, leader of the moderate Alliance party, commented that
actions would speak louder than words.
Mr Terry Carlin, regional officer of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions,
called on 'all paramilitary organisations to halt the violence. There's a
lot of work to be done in healing the wounds and the mental and physical
scars of social deprivation.'
A number of broadcasters, led by Mr John Birt, the BBC director-general,
last night called on the government to reconsider broadcasting restrictions
on Sinn Fein members in view of the ceasefire.
