FT  28 DEC 94 / 'Are we losing our grip, sensei?': William Dawkins
eavesdrops on the fears of Japan's bureaucrats over the pace of economic and
political reform
Snow is falling in the mountains north of Tokyo. Steam rises from a rock
pool of scalding water, fed by a volcanic spring. Two men are basking, up to
their necks, in one of Japan's most exclusive onsen, or therapeutic hot
baths.
The older of the pair is Takeshi, a retired yet fit-looking former
bureaucrat from the all-powerful Ministry of Finance. He now works as an
adviser to several of what used to be the world's largest banks.
Takeshi's banks are less large today than they were a year ago, the last
time he came to this onsen. Their assets have been diminished by bad-debt
write-offs and a declining domestic loan book. But he still has enough cash
and free time to develop one of the best golf handicaps in Tokyo.
His companion, Tokoro, an ambitious and overworked rising star in the
ministry, used to work for Takeshi in the old days. Since Tokoro cannot
afford to play golf on his meagre pay, they meet in hot water once a year to
chat about the ways of the world.
'Always a pleasure to hear how things are going with you, young man, but why
so tired?' asks Takeshi, pouring out two cups of sake, from a stone flask on
a floating pine tray.
'Sensei, I've been working overtime trying to engineer a nice gentle
economic recovery without rekindling inflation,' says Tokoro.
'It hasn't been made easy by the tendency of the three coalition governments
we have had over the past year to throw their weight around in a way that
plays havoc with my budget projections,' the young man complains, as he sips
his sake.
Takeshi nods his head. 'Yes, I too have wondered at times over the past 12
months whether the ministry is losing its grip.'
Tokoro continues: 'But despite the havoc caused by those warring
politicians, the economy did start to pick up, just as you said it would,
sensei. As you also warned, it is a weaker upturn than we are used to. We'll
be lucky to see gross domestic product rise by more than 1 per cent this
year. After that, we'll be seeing pretty slow growth rates, two or three
points below the 5 per cent a year we got used to in the roaring late 1980s.
'It has been hard work, but we in the ministry are moderately pleased. We
have come through the worst recession since the second world war with only a
small rise in unemployment, to 3 per cent, and without letting your banks
get into trouble. In the process, we have managed to sort out some urgent
matters, like putting through that long overdue rise in sales tax, so that
the state will have enough money to pay me a decent pension when I retire.'
The older man looks dubious. 'You are right to be cautious about the future.
But you are in danger of not being cautious enough. Of course, the recovery
will continue, and it would even strengthen a bit if you could stop worrying
too much about inflation and ask that new boss at the Bank of Japan, Mr
Yasuo Matsushita, to cut official interest rates. Yet we are, on the whole,
in poor shape to face the next downturn,' he says.
A sudden breeze whips handfuls of snow from the trees, and clears the steam,
giving Tokoro an uncomfortable sense of impermanence. Both men look up and
see storm clouds massing over the mountains. Tokoro looks pained. 'Aren't
you looking too far ahead?' he asks.
'You don't get a golf handicap as good as mine by being short-sighted,'
replies Takeshi. 'This is a reprieve, not a recovery. It is driven by an
unsustainable rise in export sales to the booming US economy and to our
fast-industrialising east Asian neighbours.'
Takeshi continues: 'Now the US, our biggest single market, will probably go
into its next downturn in 1996. The east Asian import boom will lag too,
because it is supported by a short-term shortage of capacity there. Come the
next downturn, our Asian competitors will have built up more capacity, to
produce higher volumes of goods at prices that we cannot beat.'
'So what?' says Tokoro. 'We have ridden through ups and downs in world
markets before. We can do the same again. Many of our exporters have risen
to the challenge posed by the rise of the yen. They are getting leaner,
especially in the car and electronics industries.'
The sensei smiles sadly at the young man's optimism. 'Sure, some sectors
have shed a bit of fat. But overall, restructuring has been only cosmetic.
The number of corporate employees is still higher than at the start of the
downturn. Capacity utilisation is barely more than 70 per cent, the lowest
for 18 years.'
The older man continues: 'The danger is that this upturn will reduce the
pressure on domestic industry to rid itself of surplus capacity. Companies
may get complacent again. That would not matter too much, if we could
somehow stoke up domestic demand before export growth falls away. But people
these days are willing to spend only if they can find a bargain, which for
the most part means imported electronics, clothes and food - not much help
to domestic producers, nor to Japan's economic growth.
'On the subject of spending, I noticed with distress that you arrived by
bus. Isn't it time to renew that old car you bought before the recession?'
'Wait a minute,' says young Tokoro. 'You don't do much to use up our
industrial overcapacity yourself, what with that imported BMW you picked up
cheaply because of the rise of the yen.'
Takeshi laughs. 'That's just the point. But I can buy a German car with a
reasonably clear conscience because I know that weak demand for Japanese
goods is only a symptom of the real problem: the maturing of the economy.
How can we increase the economy's capacity to grow, as our population ages
and as more of our basic industries relocate to lower-wage countries?'
'What about service industries?' says Tokoro. 'A surge in the service sector
has done wonders for the US economy. It might do the same for us. More
Japanese jobs are being created in services today than in manufacturing, for
the first time since the war.'
'You may be right there, in the long run,' says Takeshi. 'But the comparison
is flawed in the short run because our service industries are nothing like
as efficient as their US counterparts. Ours are chronically overmanned,
because of the service sector's traditional role in mopping up surplus
manufacturing jobs. Our services are also more sheltered from foreign
competition than their US counterparts.'
Tokoro interrupts: 'We can deal with that. I will ask those forward-looking
types at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry to dream up a
policy to sharpen up the service sector. Path to enlightenment, we'll call
it.'
'That is dangerous talk,' replies the older man. 'There would have to be a
labour shake-out before our service sector can reach US productivity. Nobody
wants a sharp rise in unemployment. You chaps must go on ensuring that
deregulation happens slowly enough to keep yourselves in a job - and
incidentally avoid damaging our stable social structure.'
Tokoro replies: 'I agree. We have only just held the line on deregulation so
far. To be honest, sensei, I do partly agree with you about losing our grip.
The pressure for change is uncomfortable.'
The young man continues: 'For the first time, all the main political
parties, big business, the US and the European Union are simultaneously
begging for deregulation. Until now, we have been able to fend them off by
paying lip service to the idea and doing little.
'But there are worrying signs that economic deregulation has built up a
momentum of its own, independently of political pressure. Look at the
explosion in the number of new discount supermarkets and the rise in cheap
mobile telephone sales since we eased controls in those areas early in the
year. It all looks fine from the consumers' point of view, but it's more
than we expected. I worry that prices might collapse across the board,
taking the wind out of the recovery,' concludes Tokoro.
'Cheer up,' says the sensei. 'You are still one of the few finance
ministries in the world to control budget outlays and revenue, taxation,
monetary policy, the financial system, anti-trust policy and any industrial
policy that needs public money. You can't stop the clock like you used to,
but you can still control the pace.'
Tokoro asks: 'But can we really? Can we be sure that the new order will
learn to be as co-operative as the old? Ministers have even started asking
to be consulted about budget spending. Most irregular. What about this big
new opposition party that promises to drive the Liberal Democratic Party out
of power and change everything? What about the reform-minded younger
generation in the LDP itself? Won't that make things worse?' He looks upset.
'Don't worry too much about the politicians,' replies Takeshi. 'The old
order hasn't changed as much as it seems.'
Takeshi smiles in a way that Tokoro finds slightly sinister, and explains:
'The LDP reformists who left the fold and formed that new opposition party
are still conservatives at heart. New labels, but the people are the same.
The younger generation in the LDP has not won the battle yet. The old guard
has just begun to feel at a comfortable distance from the scandals that had
forced them into the shadows. Now they are back.'
Politely, the young man dissents. 'But for the first time, the LDP faces a
strong opposition. Its new enemies tasted power for nearly a year until June
and might win again. Their new party won't be in league with the bureaucracy
like the LDP was. Don't you remember how unpredictable it was working with
Mr Morihiro Hosokawa's coalition? It took all of six months to get him under
control.'
'Things have moved on since Hosokawa,' says Takeshi. 'Present and former
factions of the LDP have now found a way to keep themselves in power for
ever. They have split into two, taking it in turns to govern. They might
sometimes misbehave to keep the voters happy. But ultimately, they know that
they must work with, not against, you. The old order has fragmented, not
collapsed.'
Tokoro: 'So the economy will stay in safe hands then?'
Takeshi: 'You can bet your bottom yen it will.'
The pair clink sake cups and drink a toast, as storm clouds overhead burst.
They are hidden from sight by a blizzard.
