FT  30 AUG 94 / Spanish vow to banish drift-nets: Fishing disputes have
risen up the diplomatic agenda. FT reporters examine the conflicts worldwide
A thin curtain of drizzle, mist and diesel fumes hung over the wharf at
Bermeo when dawn broke on Friday as the largest fishing fleet on the Basque
coast hoisted from its holds its diminishing catch of Bay of Biscay tuna,
the prized bonito.
The mood was sullen and aggressive. Posters and fly-sheets along the quay,
and lapel badges throughout the Basque Country, proclaimed why: 'Bolantarik
Ez'. No to the drift-nets - used by France's (often French Basque) fleet,
with which the Spanish Basques have been skirmishing at sea since the Biscay
bonito season opened in June.
'If this is not settled soon,' says Mr Jose Manuel Gabantxo, president of
the Bermeo Cofradia or boat-owners association, 'then that's it; we're going
to war. There could well be deaths and sinkings.' Mr Gabantxo forecasts
confrontation in October unless European Union fisheries minister agree to
ban drift-nets at their meeting in Brussels on September 28.
The latest chapter in this six-year old conflict began in mid-July when
trawlers from the Basque Country and Galicia surrounded a French vessel
using a 5.7km drift-net - more than twice the standard EU limit - and forced
it into a Spanish port.
Drift-nets, increasingly banned internationally, are mesh walls up to 20km
long which indiscriminately entrap undersea life in their path. They scoop
up the bonito effectively and cheaply as it migrates into the Biscay gulf in
the second half of each year.
But much of the drift-net catch is undersize, thereby depleting the spawning
stock which renews the shoals; an unquantifiable amount slips dead out of
the nets; and great hauls of other species, including dolphin and blue
shark, come up dead, to be thrown back into the sea.
'If we don't get rid of drift-nets now, the French will have killed off the
fish stocks within four to five years, and this town will die,' says Mr
Gabantxo. But before that, he vows, 'we will burn their lorries for as long
as it takes, and the Spanish authorities know it'.
Drift-nets allow the French to capture three times as much per boat as
Spain's northern fleet, while using half the crew. Spain, meanwhile, is by
far Europe's biggest consumer of fish. And its (mostly Basque) fish
processors provide the main market for the fish caught by drift-nets.
The bonito are caught by rod, using live bait, or by currican, a series of
trawled lines with lures. The fish caught tend to be mature, fresh and
whole, whereas drift-net tuna often lose their skin and turn bland because
of the long churn through the water.
'These are methods which require a lot of people and a lot of
professionalism,' says Mr Leo Belaustegui, a fisherman of 30 years
experience from Motrico, who points out that bonito crews habitually work
18-20 hours a day when at sea.
As a result, France had largely given up on Biscay tuna. But its southern
Atlantic fleet was revived by the drift-net and the access to traditional
Spanish fishing grounds conceded when Spain joined Europe in 1986. Five
years ago, the Spanish Basque fleet landed 23m tonnes of bonito against 14m
tonnes last year; France has in the same period climbed from virtually
nothing to 7m tonnes.
'They're more profitable, but for how long?' asks Mr Gabantxo, whose
Cofradia dates from the 14th century. 'They say we're out of date, but with
our traditional arts we have a future, which is better than exhausting the
stocks in five years. The sea has to have continuity.'
But Mr Belaustegui, recently appointed a full-time union official in the
port of Ondarroa, says: 'The problem is not what method you use, but how you
use it, and in particular how to create better working conditions while you
conserve fishing stocks.' If smaller, modified nets were used more
discriminately, he asks, 'maybe you can catch 20,000 kilos in 10 days
instead of 20. The question then is are you going to be forced to work
another 10 days for another 20,000?'
Support for the fishermen has come from across Spain: from ecologists, fish
markets, housewives groups, neighbourhood and consumer associations, trade
unions, and political parties. ETA, the armed Basque separatist group,
scenting a populist cause it can hijack, wrote to the Cofradias in April
offering to intervene. The Basque autonomous government, Madrid and Brussels
have all had to react.
The main result so far is that from Thursday, tuna caught by traditional
means will have a green aluminium logo clipped on the tail. This could be a
useful marketing ploy. But for the foreseeable future it will not fill the
gap in supply which sucks in imports from France.
