FT  10 SEP 94 / God the economist: Michael Holman finds Christian Aid on his
doorstep
Christian Aid says: 'It seems that God is very interested in economics.'
It may well be that this respected British charity is absolutely right.
But as the opening argument in Christian Aid's indictment of the World Bank
and IMF, it is somewhat disconcerting.
We all know the feeling. The doorbell rings, and there stands an intense,
well-meaning evangelist, tract in hand.
Common courtesy then requires that we at least give the visitor a hearing,
but we are determined we will not get drawn in. Otherwise before we know it,
we are engaged in a debate based on a premise which we were too polite to
reject, but which takes on a logic of its own.
Thus it is with Who Runs the World, Christian Aid's analysis of the Bank and
the Fund. It contains a blast of Old Testament fire and brimstone, with a
whiff of humbug.
It begins: it seems fair to assume that God may well be 'very interested in
economics'.
Christian Aid, ensconced on my mental doorstep presses on. The text starts
to take on a conversational life of its own, assisted by its use of italics
and bold type.
Christian Aid now fixes me with the gaze of the proselytiser who has made a
breakthrough.
'The main reason for failing to worship the true God is our unchallenged and
sinful allegiance to other sources of power in our world.'
There is no answer to that. 'Yes, well, I see what you mean, even if I do
not actually believe in God, as such . . .'
The doorstepper now gets a glint in their eyes. The voice shifts from
italics, which was bad enough - the visual equivalent of enunciating words
slowly and carefully to someone who is either a foreigner, or mentally
challenged.
I am now addressed in bold.
'So if our financial institutions destroy poor people they must be judged.'
I am now the quarry caught in the headlamps, bemused.
I search for an escape. Humour them, always humour them . . .'Yes, you may
well have a point,' I mumble. I am about to say: 'I think that is my
'phone.' Too late.
Christian Aid, foot now firmly in the doorway, cunningly changes the tone.
Calmly, in a voice patient and reasonable, the logic of the premise is
pursued: 'Behaviour that destroys the poor person is always condemned (in
the bible).'
Without warning, another burst of bold:
'So if we accept powerful financial systems without question we may fall
into sin.'
One final salvo and Christian Aid, armed with the Good Book and the
testimony of its ideological missionaries in the field, has cleared the way
for the onslaught on the IMF and the Bank:
'So we are called upon to dream about God's will done on earth.'
I shake myself awake: 'Were not these countries in a spot of bother before
the Fund and the Bank had a go at them?'
Christian Aid makes a small concession. 'Even before Structural Adjustment
Programmes came on the scene, third world countries were already in great
difficulties. In some, a few people with influence in government or business
had sufficient power to protect or even enrich themselves . . .'
I start to splutter. Worse, I find myself speaking in italics. 'A few?' I'm
even tempted to use bold, but stick to italics. 'Even enrich themselves?'
I want to add: 'Is that all you can say about a whole generation of
kleptocrats?' But Christian Aid is in full flight.
'Third world governments had borrowed money in the 1970s . . . to cover the
cost of rocketing oil prices and to build and improve necessities such as
roads, schools and factories.'
This is too much. 'Hang on] What about white elephants, French chateaux and
Swiss bank accounts?'
But Christian Aid has moved on, offering testimony from those Third World
citizens afflicted by the IMF and Bank policies.
'There is an astonishing level of knowledge' about the activities of the
duo, says Christian Aid, quoting the testimony of the 'victims'.
I try to calm down. 'Yes, but they do not always get the full picture. You
know, no money for medicine but enough to buy those new tanks.'
Again, Christian Aid has a ready response on behalf of the 'victims of the
World Bank's failure to listen'.
'Some governments too do not listen to their people.'
'It is more than some, it is most governments,' I want to add.
I am now getting even more irritated. 'Will you not at least concede that
something had to be done?' I ask.
Christian Aid frowns: 'Some failures have certainly been due to the
incompetence or corruption of third world governments . . . Change certainly
had to happen.'
I nod vigorously - but too soon.
'We do not absolve governments of their responsibilities . . . but argue
that the World Bank and the IMF should take into account what governments
are actually likely to do and what it is politically possible for them to
achieve.'
I have one last go. 'I do not quite follow. Could you explain how this would
apply to Daniel arap Moi, widely believed to be putting away a bit of the
old what-have-you while living above the shop?'
But by now we have lost each other. Shared passions, shared concerns, but
divided by our convictions. Who is right? God knows.
Who Runs the World?, Pounds 4.99, Christian Aid, PO Box 100, London SE1 7RT
