FT  30 SEP 94 / Survey of World Economy and Finance - Industry (26): Bitter
medicine for producers - Pharmaceuticals / Paul Abrahams discusses the
attacks on drugs bills
Worldwide recession and falling tax receipts have focused attention on
escalating healthcare costs. Last year the US spent almost Dollars 1,000bn
on healthcare, equivalent to 14 per cent of the country's GNP. That is more
than two and a half times the proportion it was spending 30 years ago. The
US is not alone. In Japan over the same period the proportion of GNP spent
on health more than doubled from 2.9 per cent to 6.6 per cent, while in
France it also doubled to 9.1 per cent.
The cause of the increase is ever more expensive and advanced technologies
and ageing populations. For some nations the ageing problem presents
appalling difficulties. Naturally, an elderly population consumes greater
healthcare resources than a young one. In Japan, the most affected country,
the proportion of those 65 and over will increase from 5.7 per cent of the
population in 1960 to 23.9 per cent in 2025. The trend is less pronounced in
most developed nations.
Faced with ever-greater healthcare costs, payers, ranging from governments
to insurers and businesses, have been targeting pharmaceuticals. In some
respects this is unfair. Except in Japan, drugs seldom consume a significant
proportion of healthcare spending. In the UK and US, for example, spending
on medicines represents 10 per cent and 7 per cent of all healthcare
spending.
However, politicians realise it is easier to slash spending on drugs than to
cut hospital beds or suppress medical posts. The industry, particularly in
the US, has not helped itself. In the late 1980s, many companies in the US
raised prices in a manner that some senior executives now admit was
scandalous. During six years in the late 1980s and early 1990s the price of
some drugs increased by more than 100 per cent, while the consumer price
index rose only 26.2 per cent. Subsequent arguments put forward by the
industry about the cost-effectiveness of using drugs were swept aside.
Attacks on medicine bills have hit every significant pharmaceuticals market
over the past 24 months. Last year, the German market collapsed by 9 per
cent after healthcare reforms. The US market also decelerated to only 5 per
cent growth, compared with double-digit growth in the late 1990s. This year
it has been the turn of the Japanese, French and Italian markets to
collapse, all registering static growth or falls. The UK, Spanish, Dutch and
Belgian markets have also recorded reduced growth rates.
The world pharmaceuticals market, which during the late 1980s was growing at
between 17 per cent and 20 per cent - including US price rises - slowed to
only 4 per cent last year, according to IMS International, the London-based
market research company. It is growing no faster this year. Brokers Lehman
Brothers estimate the world market will grow at no more than 5 per cent for
the rest of the decade.
The impact of this deceleration in growth on the pharmaceuticals industry
has been marked. Faced with falling volumes, the inability to raise prices
and, in the US, price competition, individual companies are suffering.
Brokers Goldman Sachs estimate Glaxo's sales growth will slow from 20 per
cent last year to 5.4 per cent next year and only 3 per cent in 1997.
That is one of the industry's success stories. The sales of Marion Merrell
Dow are, in contrast, in free fall. Down 16 per cent last year, the brokers
believe they will fall 12 per cent this year, 8 per cent next year and a
further 4 per cent in 1996. The drugs industry's reaction has been to
rationalise and consolidate. Job losses, particularly in the US, have
already begun. More are in prospect. Lehman brothers reckon up to 200,000
jobs could disappear worldwide before the end of the decade.
Cost-cutting is already affecting spending on research and development,
hitherto viewed as the industry's life-blood. Last year, five of the world's
top 45 drugs groups actually cut spending on research and development (R&amp;D).
Among the US's largest 12 companies, 11 moderated the growth of R&amp;D spending
in 1993. Pfizer was the only exception. In the UK, the speed of deceleration
has been spectacular. Glaxo increased its spending by 25 per cent two years
ago, 24 per cent last year, 16 per cent this year and expects to increase by
less than 5 per cent in 1995.
The deceleration in R&amp;D spending may not be a bad thing. According to the
UK-based Centre for Medicines Research, R&amp;D spending increased from Dollars
5.5bn in 1981 to Dollars 30bn last year. Lehman Brothers, which estimates
R&amp;D spending was Dollars 28bn last year, reckons that if companies want a
return on R&amp;D investment of 10 per cent, and the market grows only 5 per
cent a year, then the industry can support R&amp;D investment of only Dollars
11.8bn - an overspend of more than Dollars 16bn.
In spite of this overspend, some groups clearly do not invest enough to
sustain a regular flow of innovative medicines. Developing copy-cat drugs,
known as 'me-too' drugs, is no longer adequate for survival. Healthcare
payers will no longer fork out premiums for only slight medical
improvements. In addition, most drugs groups do not have the capability to
develop medicines on an international basis, in the world's three largest
markets: the US, Japan, and Europe. Unless companies have such a capability
they will not adequately recoup the cost of their R&amp;D investment.
Some drugs companies have attempted to boost their chances of developing
innovative drugs by forging links with biotechnology companies. Many of the
most exciting ideas in medicines are emanating from this source.
The failure to develop innovative drugs is causing a rationalisation of the
industry's structure. Syntex, the US group which failed to find replacement
products for its top-selling medicine after its US patents expired, was
forced to sell to Roche of Switzerland. American Home Products slipped from
being the world's biggest drugs company in the 1970s to number seven because
it failed to develop enough good quality drugs. Last month, it bought
American Cyanamid for Dollars 9.7bn.
Other companies are diversifying. Some, such as SmithKline Beecham, have
strengthened their non-prescription business because the over-the-counter
medicine market is growing faster than the prescription business, and
because although margins are lower, the revenue streams are more
predictable.
The drugs industry remains fragmented. Merck, the world's largest group,
controls just 5 per cent of the global market. In 1993, the top 10 companies
had a combined market share of only 29 per cent. The top 20 controlled just
50 per cent. It is clear the industry must consolidate even more.
