FT  23 MAR 94 / Survey of Pharmaceuticals (12): Demand for economic
specialists - New drugs must not only be safe to use: producers must prove
to buyers that their products are clearly cost-effective, too / Drug
development costs
Wanted: health economics specialists. Excellent pay and prospects with some
of the world's biggest corporations. Perks include travel, rubbing shoulders
to top management and a key role in the successful launching of products
with potential sales of more than Pounds 1bn a year.
This is the message that the world's big pharmaceutical companies are
putting out. One of Europe's top companies recently approached Professor
Alan Maynard of the Centre for Health Economics at York University in the UK
and asked him for the names of five PhDs it could recruit. It did not
receive the answer it wanted.
'They are just not out there,' says Professor Maynard.
The demand has arisen because the structure of the drugs industry is
changing. Where once companies sold to doctors and hospitals, they now sell
to governments, insurers and, in the US, corporations from a range of
industrial sectors. These are the organisations that actually pay for
medicines, and they are beginning to flex their buying power muscles.
For drugs companies, this means that it is no longer enough to show that a
drug is safe and works, although this is still required by regulatory bodies
such as the Washington-based Food and Drug Administration. Now the task
includes demonstrating to the payers that a drug is cost-effective too. The
discipline even has a name of its own: 'pharmacoeconomics.'
Nowhere is the importance of this new area clearer than in Australia. Since
January 1993, any drug submitted for approval there must be accompanies by
not only the results of clinical trials but an economic impact analysis.
That analysis must be based on comparisons with existing treatments. It must
cover not only the price of the drug, but the impact on spending on other
medical services and the time a patient spends occupying a hospital bed.
Sometimes, in the case of for example, elderly patients, social services
costs can be included.
The Australian scheme is still in its early days. Much has yet to be
finalised especially the question of how to have an objective measure of
patient quality of life.
But the effect on drugs companies has already been far-reaching. The
economics can be simple if a new product is only a marginal improvement on
an existing one. A comparison is made of the cost of the drug and any
differences in how long the average patient has to spend in hospital.
If however, a 'breakthrough' treatment is being submitted for approval -
often with a high price ' the drugs company has to work hard to demonstrate
conclusively that it makes economic sense.
Therefore, the bulk of the economics workload is falling on companies which
invent breakthrough drugs. These are the biggest research-based companies,
mostly US, UK and Swiss.
Glaxo of the UK, for example, already has 50 employees in the area. Anglo'US
company SmithKline Beecham has less than 10 but is recruiting rapidly.
Not surprisingly, such companies have sought to make the best use of the
investment outside Australia as well as inside. The economists work is used
in marketing where their efforts may help persuade governments and
regulatory bodies to allow a high price to be charged - provided an economic
benefit is felt elsewhere.
At Swiss company Sandoz, for example, health economics is part of the
marketing operation. It began with studies that showed that transplanting
kidneys was cheaper in the long term than dialysis. Sandoz makes Sandimmun,
an immunosuppressant used in transplant operations to cut the chances of a
new kidney being rejected.
Sales are growing rapidly, the drug is in already in the world's top 20
sellers, and the company regards its pharmacoeconomics programme as a
success. Sandoz is extending its pharmacoeconomics programme to studies on
skin disease. This could help sales of its fungal treatment Lamisil which
had sales of about SFr50m in 1992, but stockbroker James Capel forecasts
that by 1996 it will be the company's second biggest product with sales of
SFr600m a year.
Economists can also become involved at a much earlier stage of the drugs
industry development chain. At Glaxo, for example, they advise research and
development departments on the likely economic effects of proposed new
products. A decision can be made earlier over whether it is worthwhile to
continue research on a product that may not find favour in an increasingly
cost-conscious healthcare environment.
Not all the research comes from or favours the drugs industry. UK government
funded research by independent academics on the costs of treating depression
and blood cholesterol have not unconditionally pleased SmithKline Beecham,
whose new anti-depressive Seroxat promises to be one of its biggest
successes of the 1990s, and Merck, whose Mevacor and Zocor cholesterol
lowering drugs have combined sales of about Dollars 2bn a year.
The role of pharmacoeconomics in the drugs industry seems set to increase.
This kind of work and the Australian experiment have attracted the attention
of governments and other healthcare buyers around the world. Canada has
already issued draft guidelines on how to do pharmacoeconomic studies of
treatment regimes, and US healthcare organisations now demand to know the
comparative costs of competing treatments.
Budget-conscious politicians and private sector healthcare buyers will find
it hard to resist using such analyses when negotiating drug selling-prices
with the pharmaceuticals industry.
