FT  27 JUL 94 / Survey of Tunisia (10): Fields no longer marginal - Oil and
gas exploration
Hydrocarbon exploration in Tunisia will reach a new high in 1994, with 38
exploration agreements in force and 20 exploration wells expected to be
drilled. Uncharitable observers say the surge in exploration is a desperate
bid to resurrect the industry after a 10.5 per cent fall in 1993 followed a
decade of gradual decline in oil production.
Increased domestic energy consumption, combined with falling output from
Tunisia's largest oilfields, pushed exports down by 22 per cent to Dollars
23m below oil imports in 1993, forcing Tunisia into a deficit on its oil
account for the first time in 20 years. A predicted rise in oil consumption
from 3.516m metric tonnes in 1993 to 3.684m tonnes this year indicates that
Tunisia will maintain a deficit in 1994. The decline in production is
expected to slow, with an official estimate showing a 2.2 per cent drop to
4.545m tonnes in 1994.
Gloom, however, is largely unwarranted. A shrewd government policy of
enabling the production of marginal or previously unmarketable reserves and
fiscal encouragement to explore for further fields will compensate for the
decline of Tunisia's original large oil producers. High levels of
exploration activity demonstrate international confidence that there are
discoveries waiting to be made in Tunisia. And, starting from 1995, a
hydrocarbons surplus seems assured with the coming on stream of gas from
Miskar in the Gulf of Gabes.
The Miskar field was discovered over 20 years ago but despite proven
reserves of 33bn cu metres has remained untapped. It was only with the
development of a guaranteed domestic market for gas, under- pinned by the
transfer to gas-based electricity production and confirmed by a purchase
agreement with the Tunisian government covering the lifetime of the field,
that it became viable for development.
British Gas is now investing Dollars 650m to set up four production
platforms offshore, a 120km pipeline and the Hannibal processing plant,
outside Sfax, which will remove nitrogen, carbon dioxide and hydrogen
sulphide and then pass the clean gas to power stations at Tunis, Sousse and
Gabes.
It is thought British Gas could start production as early as April 1995,
with four wells open by the end of May, compared with a contractual date of
September 1995. Peak production of 160m-180m cu ft a day (or 1.5m tonnes of
oil equivalent a year) should be reached in a year and maintained for five
to six years, while compression apparatus may be used at the offshore
platforms from 1998 to keep output at capacity. The field's estimated life
is 18 to 20 years.
Tunisia has a lot to gain from Miskar. Gas production, primarily for the
domestic energy market, will release a greater volume of oil for export. It
will allow Tunisia to transfer more Algerian gas which it has used for
domestic electricity generation, increasing its tariff income on the gas
pumped through the Transmed pipeline from Algeria to Italy. A scheduled
doubling in gas volume through Transmed in 1995 will further increase tariff
revenues.
The fixed tariff on the Algerian gas and the agreed price for gas from
Miskar enable Tunisia to profit from spot trades in the fluctuating
international gas market. And, of course, it is hoped that the British Gas
project will increase employment in Sfax and develop the domestic skills
base in gas production.
British Gas, too, is expected to profit from a deal with a lifetime purchase
guarantee, albeit at a price linked to oil.
However, considering the size of investment for a comparatively small
production volume, margins appear precariously narrow. However, the building
of a processing plant designed to outlive the Miskar field by as much as 15
years indicates confidence at British Gas that its future in Tunisia will
run to more than Miskar.
That confidence is shared by a number of British Gas competitors. Despite a
squeeze on funds in the last few years following the drop in oil prices,
investment in exploration in Tunisia has almost doubled from Dollars 61m in
1988 to a predicted Dollars 120m in 1994.
The reason for the high level of exploratory interest, according to Mr
Kesraoui, chief executive of Etap, the state manager of the oil and gas
sector, is the favourable environment for developing marginal fields.
As well as the advantages of moderate labour costs and low transport
requirements in a small country like Tunisia, Mr Kesraoui points to the
fiscal and legislative regime which enables companies to produce profitably
from small finds. The profits-related tax regime, the lowering of royalty
and corporation tax rates and the establishment of capital uplifts on
certain exploration expenditures have significantly improved the tax burden
for international explorers.
Not that the oil and gas industries in Tunisia are without any complaints.
Government pressure to provide jobs and the demands of the employment codes
require foreign companies to show tact and diplomacy in navigating the
labour market. Industry observers calculate that Tunisian expectations for
labour requirements on the British Gas Hannibal processing plant, for
example, may be as much as five times the actual need.
The tax regime, as well, is subject to criticism. Companies are taxed by
field for their activities in Tunisia, as opposed to on a global basis.
Thus, exploration and seismic analysis costs cannot be offset against
production profits on fields discovered before 1990.
Despite these gripes, the industry shows a healthier complexion than a
decade ago. For the 12-year period following the discovery at Ashtart in
1974, there were no significant finds of new oil reserves. However, a
discovery at the Ezzaouia field near Zarzis in 1986 was followed by Maamoura
in 1988, and Sidi el Kilani in 1989, encouraging an adventurous mood among
explorers.
Dr Cameron Davies, of Oil Management Services, a hydrocarbon consultant,
points out that finds in Tunisia's limestone reservoir 'helped to redirect
the thinking of exploration geologists towards unusual reservoirs in chalks,
karstified carbonates and hightly fractured limestones.'
That new thinking and the fiscal regime have led to the opening and
development of a number of small fields. The Belli field discovered in 1991
produces 16,000 barrels of oil a day, Sidi el Kilani averages 10,000 b/d and
the Cercena field discovered in 1992 started production in June with 4,000
b/d. These sites are small in comparison with the volume of gas coming on
line from Miskar. But encouraging marginal fields in the oil sector is the
pragmatic way of regenerating the industry as the old mammoths wither.
