FT  04 FEB 94 / Time-out for the Tories
If the coming weekend is like most of the others to which we have become
accustomed the Sunday papers will call for Mr John Major's head. Come to
think of it, the axeman's cry is frequently heard on weekdays as well. It is
misplaced. A new prime minister would not solve Britain's problems; nor
would any known candidate necessarily reunite the Tories. What is required
is a new government.
First elected in 1979, this Conservative administration has worn itself out.
The party's authority will return one day but it needs a period away from
the distractions of office. A few years of relief from care and
responsibility - all those loyal worthies to put in charge of all those
quangos - would give it time to reconnect its thinking with the concerns of
the electorate. When they are ex-ministers some of the brighter members of
the cabinet may come to understand that focusing on the outstanding element
of the 1980s mix - the efficacy of the market allied to the cult of the
individual - is not a sufficient foundation for governance in the present
decade or the forthcoming new century. This broadening of thought is
impossible while the Tories, who have lost their reputation, remain
nominally in power.
On a previous occasion I observed that the factions we see today might be
compared with the Christian Democrats and liberals of continental European
politics. Such a pair is in open coalition in Germany; in Britain the two
traditions are found within the one party. Some of our economic liberals
have souped themselves up with an inhalation of little England nationalism.
This internal Tory coalition has ceased to function with the smoothness
necessary for competent government.
Attempts to keep its various components in balance are always difficult, and
cannot succeed while the government's majority is so small. If an
administration is to be strong, and successful, one faction must appear to
prevail, as the liberal nationalists did while the then Mrs Margaret
Thatcher was prime minister. The Christian Democrats had their day under
Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath. Whoever is in the driving seat, the
opposing faction must never be pushed too far, as Lady Thatcher almost
always recognised and Mr Heath rarely did.
If the latter approach is not possible a workmanlike understanding be-tween
the two tendencies must be reached. Mr Macmillan, as he was known while in
Downing Street, kept everyone guessing. In the end he destroyed himself.
What we have at present is a daily attempt to create a compromise that will
get the government through the night. The result is a series of panicky
decisions and policy reversals, not to mention regular relaunches and
repositionings of the overall strategy. Such confusion is debilitating for a
party in power, although in opposition it might be classed as honest debate.
This week, for example, the government has been obliged to retract clauses
that would centralise control over the police and subject the running of
magistrates' courts to private-sector management theory. It is in
difficulties elsewhere, as with its plans to prevent undergraduates from
using student union funds in the experimental and idealistic manner that is
expected of the young, and in further attempts to wipe local government off
the map.
In ordinary circumstances such a list of setbacks would constitute welcome
evidence that the democratic process was working as we idealists believe it
should. Government proposes; parliament, assisted by public opinion, amends.
The result is better legislation. These are not, however, ordinary
circumstances. The legislative programme is in difficulties because, as a
senior member of the cabinet put it this week, the government is attempting
to reach those parts of the body politic that Lady Thatcher herself never
dared to approach. The latter privatised the easy targets. The ministry that
has succeeded her is unwilling or unable to switch off a machine it only
half understands. It has become the sorcerer's apprentice of privatisation.
What it cannot sell - schools, say, or hospitals or police authorities - it
attempts to insulate from local democratic control. Self-perpetuating
boards, well hidden from disturbing influences such as the voters, take
over. The command lines lead back to Whitehall.
It is not done very well. When the prime minister was in a particularly deep
hole last summer the cabinet decided to restrict the 1993-94 programme of
new bills to what was politically uncontroversial and likely to be popular.
Those responsible for getting the business through - the chief whip, Mr
Richard Ryder, the leader of the House of Commons, Mr Tony Newton, and the
leader of the Lords, Lord Wakeham - wanted even less. They argued for a
quiet life, a period of consolidation. This made political sense, since the
government's best hope lies in keeping very still while a rising economy
floats it back to acceptability. The actual programme chosen - with law and
order, education and deregulation to the fore - was a compromise. It is
clear from the squalls in the House of Lords that even as such it was too
much for parliament to swallow without gagging.
You cannot conclude from the above exposition that Labour has the answers.
It doesn't. It might produce some mild constitutional change but, in terms
of a fresh philosophy or even specific ideas the people's party has little
to offer. Instead of using its present term of opposition as the Tories
would, namely to refresh itself, it has become cataleptic. Its sole merit as
a potential party of government is that it has not been discredited by
appearing to rot after too long a period in office. This is not good enough.
It looks as if it is preparing to ask us to vote for it in 1996 on the
single argument that the Tories have been in for 17 years and that it is
only fair for Buggins's crew to be given a chance. Labour should be careful.
Many voters will gag at that too.
In short, we cannot be certain that we will see the back of either Mr Major
or his government, even after the next election. Disenchantment today does
not mean relief tomorrow. We know what Labour's selling point will be. The
Tories, broken-down, discredited and exhausted, might yet top it, if the
vote comes on the crest of a boom, following a tax cut, and after a campaign
that exposes the emptiness of the alternative.
