FT  01 JUL 94 / Berlusconi and president clash over RAI
Italy's president Oscar Luigi Scalfaro has openly challenged the
six-week-old government of Mr Silvio Berlusconi over a cabinet decision that
forced the resignation yesterday of the senior management of RAI, the state
broadcasting corporation.
On Wednesday, the cabinet renewed a decree giving continued financial
backing to RAI, but inserted a clause making clear that it wanted a rapid
management change.
Mr Scalfaro is refusing to sign the decree, apparently on the formality that
the board was properly appointed by the speakers of the two houses of
parliament and could stay in office until the end of the year.
After a day of political tension, a compromise was being hammered out that
obliged the government to rewrite the decree to enable the president to sign
it. The nature of the compromise was still unclear last night.
The resignation of the five-man board was the latest step in a political
battle in which the opposition has accused Mr Berlusconi, the prime
minister, of trying to impose government control on public broadcasting. Mr
Gianni Locatelli, RAI director-general, announced separately that he had
also resigned.
The battle between the government and the president caused nervousness in
the financial markets. Shares on the Milan bourse fell nearly 2 per cent and
the lira came close to the threshold of L1,000 against the D-Mark.
The controversy touches issues well beyond the fate of debt-ridden RAI. It
involves the new right-wing government's control over the principal media
outlets.
The opposition parties, apparently backed by the president, are concerned
that, with Mr Berlusconi's Fininvest controlling 80 per cent of commercial
television, there is a risk that the new government may enjoy an information
monopoly. Mr Berlusconi has been angered by what he regards as the bias of
the three state-run television networks against his government.
Mr Scalfaro is understood to have been pressed by all the opposition parties
to refuse his signature on the ground that too much media power was being
placed under direct government control.
There are few precedents for a president's declining to sign a cabinet
decree. In March 1993 Mr Scalfaro delayed signing a measure to provide
amnesty for people involved in the corruption scandals. His delayed
signature nearly brought the immediate end of the Amato government and was a
significant factor in its eventual collapse.
Constitutional lawyers argued that it would be difficult for the president
not to sign. With the board handing in its resignation yesterday, that might
mean RAI being taken to a bankruptcy tribunal.
RAI last year lost L522bn (Dollars 326m) but since the new management was
brought in, costs have been cut.
Yesterday, the opposition was not denying the need to reform the RAI. But
they said the government was proceeding in a heavy-handed way and failing to
take account of the role of Fininvest.
