FT  31 AUG 94 / Business and the Environment: Dam busters go into battle -
Environmentalists are trying to encourage salmon back to rivers in the US
Legend has it that 50 years ago, during the great salmon runs in the New
England state of Maine, a fisherman could stand knee-deep in a river, hold a
bucket and wait for the fish to jump in. These days, he would wait a long
time. Migrating salmon are rare in New England, and the situation is not
much better in the Pacific North-west.
According to the National Wildlife Federation, an environmental group,
migrating salmon populations in the Columbia and Snake rivers, for example,
have been reduced to 5 per cent of previous levels. To maintain populations,
the federation has adopted extreme measures such as capturing salmon, taking
them upstream by road to spawn, then bringing the offspring back down the
road again.
Environmentalists place the blame for the reduced stocks on dams, which
block the passage of the fish. 'We have a Dollars 200m (Pounds 130m)
programme in place to restore salmon fishing to at least sport fishing
levels over the next few years, and that effort is being seriously hampered
by dams,' says David Conrad, water resources specialist for the federation.
Concern over the environmental impact of dams is growing in the US, and
opponents have already won an important victory. Two dams on the Elwah river
in Washington state are about to become the first in the US to be pulled
down for environmental reasons.
Opposition is also building in other parts of the country. In Maine,
environmentalists are pressing the federal government not to re-license the
Edwards dam on the Kennebec River. In Michigan, environmentalists are
pushing at least two hydro-electric dams to be decommissioned.
In the 1960s and 1970s, ecologists promoted hydro-electric power as a clean
energy source that could save the earth from the ravages of coal and
oil-based electricity. In response, thousands of dams were erected around
the country.
Environmentalists find the campaign to reverse the impact of hydro-electric
dams no easy task. 'The Elwah dams took an act of Congress to decommission,'
says Ronald Wilson, attorney with the Sierra Club Legal Defence Fund, set up
by the Sierra Club environmental group. 'That can't happen every time we
want a dam taken out. We're going to have to find other legal routes to
getting dams decommissioned.'
Environmentalists hope they can convince the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC), which is in charge of dam licensing, to refuse permits on
ecological grounds.
As hydro-electric dams are destroyed, the government will have to find
alternative sources of energy. 'We have to remember that hydro-electric is
clean energy,' says Linda Church-Ciocci, executive director of the National
Hydropower Association. 'If we use more of other forms of energy, we'll have
a hard time meeting new emissions standards.'
There are other obstacles to tearing down dams. One is cost. The dismantling
of the Elwah river dams alone will cost Dollars 100m. Another barrier is the
ecological chaos that can be caused by dismantling a dam.
The mounds of silt and other deposits which build up behind dams could
threaten the environment if it is all released at once. Normally, the river
flow would flush the sediment downstream. Since the Elwah dams are likely to
be looked on as a model of dam removal, the government must proceed with
caution. To guard against disaster, engineers will probably use a
combination of methods to control the release of sediment. Vegetation will
be planted to keep some of the silt and sand in place. The old dam site may
be dredged and gravel, which salmon need to lay their eggs, may be
redeposited upstream.
Environmentalists believe fish stocks will begin to recuperate within a few
years on the Elwah. However, it may take 10 to 30 years for full restoration
of populations. The sediment will probably take this time to redistribute
and vegetation also needs time to grow.
However many problems the removal of the Elwah dams presents, ecologists say
they are nothing compared with the challenges other dams would pose. The
Elwah is set within the Olympic National Park and the sediment deposited
behind the dam is relatively pollution-free. Other sites, which operate
downstream from manufacturing companies, hold years of toxic waste in mounds
of sediment, which would wreak havoc if the dams were dismantled.
Regulators are now trying to work with dam owners, who accept there is an
environmental problem, to improve conditions for the wildlife. Temperatures
fluctuate greatly around dams, as the water builds up before release.
Temperature control devices improve the salmon's chances of survival as many
fish die because the water is too hot or too cold. Also, screens on turbines
help by preventing fish from being chopped up, and more fish ladders allow
greater numbers of fish to pass through.
It appears that the tide is turning on hydro-electric power. Hydro-electric
supporters complain it is extremely difficult to obtain permission for new
projects. Some 150 dams will see their licences expire over the next few
years, and with public pressure mounting, the federal government is likely
to consider environmental impact before renewing the licences. It may be
some time before fishermen can fill their buckets with salmon again, but
environmentalists are optimistic that in rivers where the dams are removed,
the fish will start jumping.
