FT  14 FEB 94 / Widening of dam aid probe resisted
Senior members of the Commons foreign affairs committee are resisting
attempts to widen inquiries into links between arms sales and British aid
for a Malaysian dam project.
The committee, which has a Conservative majority, is investigating
allegations that Pounds 234m aid for the Pergau dam was illegally tied to
Malaysian purchases of British arms worth Pounds 1bn.
Conservative members of the committee agreed to an inquiry after it emerged
that aid was linked to defence sales during initial discussions of the dam
project in Malaysia.
However, some Conservatives are unhappy about Labour attempts to extend the
inquiry to include similar allegations relating to projects in Indonesia,
Thailand and elsewhere.
One accused Labour of trying to turn the investigation into 'another Scott'
 -a reference to the inquiry into arms sales to Iraq being carried out by
Lord Justice Scott.
'I am sure that the opposition would like to extract political mileage from
it, but I don't think that is going to be the wish of the committee,' he
said.
'There is not going to be a cover-up or anything like that, but the
difficulty is going to be where to draw the line on this. We could spend the
whole of next year on it, and we have already got a very heavy workload of
other matters.'
The committee has agreed to accept evidence at its next meeting on Wednesday
from the World Development Movement, a third world pressure group which
claims to have identified a relationship between the aid programme and arms
sales.
The movement has made repeated allegations about the sale of Hawk training
aircraft to Indonesia, which are alleged to have been used to attack
civilians in East Timor, a former Portuguese colony controlled from Jakarta.
However, the committee may decide to take no further action on the
allegations, or to delay an inquiry until it has completed several other
investigations.
In addition to Pergau, the committee is currently inquiring into relations
between Hong Kong and China, and is due to embark later this year on a major
investigation of arms sales by the former Soviet Union.
