FT  27 SEP 94 / India seeks to limit spread of plague
Indian health authorities were yesterday struggling to control the spread of
pneumonic plague after signs of further outbreaks following the flight of
some 300,000-500,000 people from the western city of Surat.
The number of new patients admitted to hospital in Surat fell yesterday to
about 40, the lowest daily figure since the outbreak started, but the
disease was blamed for two deaths in villages about 40km away. There were
also reports of people with plague-like symptoms in hospital in other parts
of northern and western India - including Ahmedabad, Bombay and in New
Delhi, 1,200 km from Surat.
Health officials in Bombay, New Delhi and elsewhere have been put on alert
following the outbreak, which has left at least 43 people dead and about 400
others desperately ill. Other countries are also monitoring the plague,
including Arab states, which were yesterday holding a meeting of health
officials of members of the Gulf Co-operation Council to co-ordinate a
response.
The meeting followed a decision by the United Arab Emirates to carry out
medical checks on all travellers arriving from India.
Meanwhile, India has received offers of medicine from the World Health
Organisation, Unicef, the US, Russia and elsewhere.
Pneumonic plague is a deadly variant of the bubonic plague which decimated
Europe in the 14th century. Unlike bubonic plague, it is spread easily by
airborne infection but can be effectively treated as long as the remedy -
the antibiotic tetracycline - is given early enough.
In Surat, 800 paramilitary personnel were yesterday searching the city for
plague victims.
They also stood guard at the main hospital to prevent patients from fleeing,
following the escape of about 100 victims at the weekend, who ran away in
the belief they would receive better care at home.
There is considerable confusion about the precise number of victims because
some people who died early in the outbreak with plague-like symptoms have
since been found to have died of other causes. Also, an unknown number of
people died outside hospital and have been cremated or buried by their
families.
Municipal workers were yesterday clearing piles of rubbish, including the
carcasses of animals left behind by a recent flood, which many residents
believe caused the disease. Others have connected the outbreak to an attack
of bubonic plague which erupted last month in central Maharashtra in a
district hit last year by a devastating earthquake. But health officials say
the origins of the outbreaks, the first in 30 years, are not clear.
The outbreak has disrupted business in Surat, a city of 2m known for
textiles, chemicals and diamond polishing.
