FT  29 DEC 94 / Goldman Sachs falls to fifth place in underwriting table
A difficult 1994 for Goldman Sachs will end on a suitably downbeat note this
week with the publication of annual rankings showing that the investment
bank slipped from second to fifth place among Wall Street firms underwriting
debt securities.
According to the preliminary results released by the financial information
company Securities Data, Goldman was the fifth largest underwriter of debt
securities this year, with a total of about Dollars 53bn (Pounds 34bn). In
1993, Goldman ranked second with Dollars 108bn.
The sharp drop in underwriting business contrasted with some of the firms
ranked above Goldman, which saw much smaller declines in volume. Merrill
Lynch again ranked first with Dollars 102bn (compared with Dollars 145bn in
1993), Lehman Brothers moved up one position to second with Dollars 70.4bn
(Dollars 103bn), and CS First Boston jumped three places to third with
Dollars 70bn (Dollars 82bn).
The slide in its underwriting position is just the latest setback for
Goldman, which has been hit hard by the contraction in US capital markets.
Its earnings are reported to have dropped 80 per cent to about Dollars 500m
in fiscal 1994, a bigger decline than recorded by most of its main
competitors.
Goldman has suffered from a larger-than-usual number of retirements among
its partners, who provide the bulk of the privately owned firm's capital.
The departure of many top executives was linked to the poor earnings
performance and to an erosion of Goldman's famously close-knit corporate
culture. In recent weeks, the firm has announced plans for a series of big
lay-offs among staff in an attempt to cut costs and improve its results.
While analysts say the big fall in earnings at Goldman was primarily
attributable to rising costs and losses on bond market trading, they are not
so sure why the firm's underwriting business declined so sharply. One
possible explanation may be found in a survey of senior US corporate
executives by Financial World magazine, which found that although Goldman
still ranked as the most highly-respected securities firm on Wall Street, it
was also rated as the firm where service had declined the most.
All news has not been bad for Goldman. It has scored some notable successes
in other areas, notably in the underwriting of non-US securities. Last
month, it won the much-prized position of global co-ordinator in the
privatisation of Deutsche Telekom.
