FT  27 JUL 94 / Storm of protest over Jerusalem clauses
Israel's latest manoeuvres on Jerusalem, the most sensitive issue in
Arab-Israeli peace talks, has ignited a storm of Palestinian and Arab
protest against the historic Israeli-Jordanian peace declaration signed in
Washington.
Palestinians attacked the agreement's recognition of King Hussein's special
role over Jerusalem, which they see as their future capital, reflecting a
decades-long rivalry between King Hussein and Mr Yassir Arafat, the chairman
of the Palestine Liberation Organisation. King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, who
also lays claim to special jurisdictional rights over the holy city is also
likely to have been angered by the accord.
The declaration says Israel respects Jordan's 'present special role' in
administering Moslem holy shrines in Jerusalem including the 1,300 year-old
Dome of the Rock and the Al Aqsa mosque on the Temple Mount, Islam's third
holiest site after Mecca and Medina in Saudi Arabia. The agreement also
grants King Hussein, a direct descendant of the prophet Mohammed, a 'high
priority' in future negotiations over the permanent status of the disputed
city, expected to begin in 1995 or 1996.
Angry Palestinians said Israel was attempting to de-politicise the issue of
Jerusalem by turning it into a religious matter and had no right as an
occupying power to cede any Palestinian rights to Jordan. The Palestinians
want Israeli-occupied Arab East Jerusalem, including the old city, to become
their capital. Israel however sees all Jerusalem as its 'eternal and
non-divisible capital'.
The PLO said yesterday the agreement 'predetermines the fate of Jerusalem
and limits it only to a role in the Islamic holy places and ignores
Jerusalem as a political, Palestinian, Arab, Christian and Islamic issue and
ignores the fact that it is an occupied city.'
Since Israel captured the old city and the West Bank from Jordan in the 1967
Arab-Israeli War King Hussein has continued to act as custodian of
Jerusalem's Islamic sites and has paid for their upkeep. Last year the King
paid Dollars 8m for the restoration of the golden cupola of the octagonal
Dome of the Rock.
The King's strategy has been to safeguard his family's role and block any
competing claims from the Arab world. Israel is much happier with the King
having a religious role over Jerusalem than with the PLO's political claims
and has consistently denied PLO officials the right to visit Jerusalem or
establish any institutions in the city.
Last week Mr Arafat attacked Israel's invitation of King Hussein, who has
often been at loggerheads with the PLO chairman, to pray at the Al Aqsa
mosque.
Islamic fundamentalists in Gaza in a rare display of unity with the PLO also
attacked the agreement.
