FT  04 AUG 94 / India's opposition takes 'to the streets' over stock market
row: Investor fears grow after reports that finance minister Singh is
willing to quit
The opposition benches in both houses of India's parliament were empty
yesterday after party leaders carried out a decision to take politics 'to
the streets'. Outside parliament, negotiations went on late into the night,
adding to uncertainty about the future of Mr PV Narasimha Rao's government.
Investors around the world phoned newspapers in the capital to ask whether
Mr Manmohan Singh, the finance minister, was likely to resign to take
responsibility for the government's handling of the 1992 stock exchange
scandal in which money was illegally siphoned out of banks into the stock
market.
Mr Narasimha Rao's Congress (I) party and the opposition are in dispute over
the government's 'Action Taken Report' on the scandal inquiry. The
opposition say Mr Narasimha Rao used the report to shield senior ministers
from criticism by a joint parliamentary committee.
Concern about Mr Singh's future arose after the minister, regarded as the
architect of India's economic reform programme, was reported in the
newspapers to have replied in a meeting to the accusation by a party
colleague that he was responsible for the trouble the party and government
was in.
'I had offered to resign earlier,' Mr Singh was reported to have said. 'If
anybody thinks I am blocking the investigations, I am prepared to quit
again.'
Mr Singh resigned last December after which he defended himself and his
ministry in a two-day parliamentary debate. 'Mr Rao did not accept his
resignation then. He is unlikely to do it now,' said a Congress(I) MP.
Yesterday members of the opposition National Front-Left Front alliance
demonstrated outside parliament, telling people who had gathered why they
were boycotting the rest of the monsoon session and had resigned from
parliament's 45 committees.
Members of the right-wing Hindu Bharatiya Janata party, India's largest
opposition party, did not join the demonstration, though they have boycotted
parliament.
Sworn enemies in the opposition have united against the Congress(I) party.
They feel the government has deliberately ignored the recommendations of the
parliamentary committee's report into the scandal, despite the fact that
Congress(I) MPs, who were a majority on the committee, had unanimously
accepted the findings after 18 months of deliberation.
'The government has made a mockery of our findings,' said a senior MP of the
Congress(I) party and a member of the committee. 'Though we cannot openly
join cause with the opposition, the government's 'Action Taken' report
denotes that the executive - never mind that it is my own party - has
decided that there is no need to taken any action at all.'
In addition to insisting on the withdrawal of the 'Action Taken' report, the
opposition has demanded that the government accept the recommendations of
the committee and take action against the ministers criticised in the
report. These include Mr Singh, Mr B Shankaranand, health minister, and Mr
Rameshwar Thakur, formerly minister of state for finance, who was moved to
the rural development ministry after the scandal erupted.
Other committee recommendations the opposition demands should be accepted
include action against the foreign banks implicated in the scandal -
Standard Chartered, ANZ Grindlays, Bank of America, and Citibank.
The opposition has also demanded action against the Reserve Bank, India's
central bank, and against its former governor, Mr R Venkitaramanan, and
other bureaucrats, bank officials, and brokers involved in the scandal.
Parliament will still be able to transact business in spite of the
opposition boycott. The only likely constitutional hitch will arise when
President's (direct) Rule is due to be extended in the troubled state of
Jammu and Kashmir before September 3 when a two-thirds majority in the lower
house will be required.
Ten Indian states go to the polls in November and the opposition parties,
hard-pressed to find issues on which to attack the relatively stable
government of Mr Narasimha Rao, are planning to make official corruption an
issue.
