FT  10 SEP 94 / Cairo women worlds apart from UN ideologues
In the gloom of 'Jimmy's' beauty parlour in the well- heeled Cairo suburb of
Heliopolis, the United Nations prescriptions for the 'em- powerment of
women', which are being forged in the city's nearby conference halls, seem a
world away, writes Bronwen Maddox in Cairo.
The walls of the parlour's cubicles for manicures and pedicures, decked out
like underwater grottoes with sea shells, are scattered with soft-focus
portraits of weddings and of intertwined hands wearing huge engagement
rings.
Much of the opposition which has surfaced in recent weeks to the proposed
policies of the UN Conference on Population and Development has been
provoked by the perceived threat to traditional patterns of families and
marriage.
One elegant woman leaving Jimmy's with coral-coloured nails to match her
black and coral dress said the women's groups she had seen on television
reports about the conference had seemed 'very feminist, very American.
'Egyptian men - and women - have very traditional ideas of the woman's place
in the family and I don't think that will change,' she said.
Dr Nafis Sadik, executive director of the UN Population Fund, who is
chairing the conference, has stressed that the UN policy document does not
threaten traditional notions of the family.
That message has been reinforced by the Egyptian government, which wants to
maintain public support for its family planning programme to combat
overcrowding and poverty.
This programme has seen the use of contraceptives rise from 28 per cent to
50 per cent in just over a decade. That has cut the annual growth in
population from 2.8 per cent in 1980 to 2.2 per cent, although without
further falls Egypt's population of 56m could still double by early next
century.
Outside the conference halls, however, it is easy to see how the UN
proposals to increase women's educational opportunities, encourage them to
marry later, and give them equal opportunities at work, seem uncomfortably
foreign and militant.
In particular, the UN exhortations that women should have equal rights at
work are met with scepticism by many Cairo women.
The kind of discrimination at work which Dr Sadik has been inveighing
against is evident two doors up from Jimmy's, at Chez Samir, a renowned
hairdressing salon.
Washing and switching on the hairdryers is left to the quiet teenage girls,
but it is made clear that the business of hair styling is the preserve of
five men.
They approach it like engineering, constructing a scaffolding of rollers,
pins, steel grips and thick hairspray on top of client's head to get the
greatest height possible.
Judging from the reaction of customers and staff, Dr Sadik's fears that the
enduring public memory of the conference will be the much-publicised row
over abortion policy, rather than the central questions of contraception and
women's rights, are justified.
'I am not against the conference, you understand,' says Miron, a Cairo
dentist in her late 20s.
'But there has been so much fuss about abortion, I wonder if the conference
has looked at the right questions.'
