FT  25 JUN 94 / International Company News: Low crude prices bring profits
warning from Elf
Elf Aquitaine, the French oil group privatised earlier this year, yesterday
warned that first-half recurring operating profits would fall by about 20
per cent, compared with the same period in 1993, and that net profits would
fall by a greater proportion.
In the first half of 1993, Elf achieved recurring operating profits of
FFr5.6bn (Dollars 1bn) and recurring net profits of FFr2.1bn. Yesterday, Elf
shares fell by FFr14 to FFr390, compared with a price of FFr385 at which
they were offered to the public in February.
Mr Philippe Jaffre, chairman, said the group's exploration and production
activities had been hit by low crude oil prices during the first few months
of the year. Although the price of Brent crude has recovered to more than
Dollars 17 a barrel, the average price for the year to date of just under
Dollars 15 a barrel compares with an average of Dollars 18.30 for the first
half of last year.
Mr Jaffre said the impact of this factor had been lessened by reductions in
exploration expenditures and through cost-cutting measures. However,
industry analysts added that Elf was particularly sensitive to oil price
movements.
'Elf is a much bigger producer than most other European oil groups, such as
Total,' said Mr Mark Flannery, oil and gas analyst at BZW. He said the rise
in the oil price over the past few months should prompt a strong recovery in
profits in Elf's exploration and production businesses.
First-half profits at Elf have been affected by weak demand in the refining
and marketing sector in France and other principal European markets. In
addition, operating income in this sector was reduced by the costs of
restructuring the company's Minol service station network in eastern
Germany.
The decline in profits will be amplified at the net level because of an
increase in financial charges, according to Mr Jaffre.
The Elf chairman said measures were being implemented to reduce the group's
debts, which amounted to FFr52.5bn at the end of last year. He said he hoped
to realise about FFr5bn from the sale of assets this year as part of his
strategy of reducing borrowings at the group.
Elf sounded a positive note with respect to its chemicals operations.
According to the company, restructuring measures had reduced production
costs while economic recovery in Europe had led to improved sales volumes.
As a consequence, Elf said there had been a 'noticeable recovery of
results', in the first half of the year.
Lex, Page 24
