FT  19 APR 94 / Survey of Estonia (16): Grim legacy has surprise benefits -
Soviet planners' efforts to exploit shale have boosted energy supplies
On a snowy winter day, the neat wooden houses of Kivioli village seem
picturesque - until you sniff the acrid air and remember the ecological
horror visited on the once fertile lowlands of north-eastern Estonia.
By the laws of market economics and in the light of environmental common
sense, the layer of shale which underlies the entire region should have been
left where modern man found it - a few metres below the ground. The
commercial and human cost of extracting the black, stony mess created by
algae 450m years ago is surely far greater than the value of the oil,
bitumen and other chemicals which the shale contains.
But Soviet planners did not see things that way, and their determination to
extract, process and exploit almost anything at almost any price has had a
happy side-effect.
Where most of the former Soviet republics depend on Russia for their energy,
and are therefore acutely vulnerable to political and economic pressure from
Moscow, Estonia can satisfy all its electricity needs - and 65 per cent of
its total energy requirements - from domestic sources. At Kivioli and two
other quarries, plus six deeper mines, 14m tonnes of shale is extracted a
year.
'If we were starting from scratch, nobody would mine shale on this scale.
But since we have inherited the machinery and plant, it makes sense to
continue,' says Mr Leonid Talko, director of the open-cast works at Kivioli.
His excavators have already covered an area of 6 kms by 2 kms, and mining is
expected to continue for another 15 years; Estonia's entire shale reserves
could last for another century.
The sharp-smelling air is caused not by the mining itself so much as the
coking plant next door. In addition to extracting oil, it produces bitumen,
formalins, and a host of industrial chemicals as well as turning out - in a
unique use of shale - consumer products such as shampoo and detergents.
While the mountains of stone thrown up by mining can be reforested with
success, the tips of waste left by coking are disastrous. Their deadly
cocktail of phenols and benzofurans will, if left untreated, seep steadily
into Estonia's ground water.
With oil accounting for about 20 per cent of the shale by volume, that means
that Mr Talko is being paid a meagre Dollars 20 per tonne of petroleum
equivalent. Electricity is sold to the consumer at less than 2 US cents per
kilowatt-hour.
If the necessary grid were constructed, Estonia could make a handsome profit
by exporting power to Sweden and Finland. In Soviet times, the republic was
at one point sending 60 per cent of its electricity output to Russia and
Latvia; now recession in those countries has reduced that business to a
fraction.
Estonia's energy planners aim to take maximum advantage of the republic's
self-sufficiency in power while minimising dependence on Russia in liquid
fuels and gas.
In January, Estonian companies which buy fuel oil from Russia reported that
they were finding it harder and harder to get supplies; and the national
power utility, Eesti Energia, acknowledged that only 30 per cent of its
tanks were full.
To balance the effects of this, the authorities are battling to reverse the
profligate energy consumption habits of the Soviet period - when gas
entering Estonia was not even metered and homes and factories were poorly
insulated.
The cost to consumers of imported gas and fuel oil has been raised sharply,
while the use of peat and wood-burning plants for urban heating systems has
been encouraged.
At Kivioli, Mr Talko - a Ukrainian with a brisk, competent manner - is the
first to acknowledge that proper husbandry of Estonia's energy resources
will not be accomplished overnight. He points with a shudder to the flimsy
window frames of his office, a poor defence against the icy winds outside,
and asks: 'How is anyone supposed to heat a room like this?'
