FT  24 MAY 94 / Plea against working on Sunday fails
British workers have no protection under European law against being forced
to work on Sundays, the Employment Appeals Tribunal ruled yesterday.
Dismissing the appeal of a shopworker sacked for refusing to work on a
Sunday, Mr Justice Mummery, president of the tribunal, said there was no
mention in European law of a right to say 'no' to Sunday work.
The decision will stand as a precedent on the rights of Sunday workers
unless overturned by the Court of Appeal.
The judge refused Mrs Louise Steadman, 30, from Nottingham, leave to appeal,
but said she could apply directly to the Court of Appeal for leave.
Her case was supported by Keep Sunday Special, the lobby group campaigning
against de-regulation of Sunday trading laws in England and Wales. Last
night it said it was uncertain whether it could afford a further appeal.
Mrs Steadman had worked for Hogg Robinson Travel for only 22 months when she
was dismissed for refusing to work on Sundays which she wanted to devote to
family, social and religious activities.
She was not protected from unfair dismissal by UK employment laws because
she had not been continuously employed by Hogg Robinson for two years.
If she had been, she would almost certainly have won her claim for unfair
dismissal on the basis that she was being asked to do something unlawful
under present Sunday trading laws, the lobby group said.
Mr Paul Diamond, the group's legal adviser, argued that the two-year
qualification for employment protection rights was contrary to European law.
He said the European Court of Justice should be able to decide the rights of
Sunday workers as it had last year for retailers such as the DIY chain B&amp;Q,
irrespective of whether they had worked for an employer continuously for two
years.
The European Court gives direct effect to fundamental human rights
guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights, he said.
Mrs Steadman was relying on rights under the convention protecting family
life and religious freedom and on the 1961 European Social Charter which
protects Sunday working. The lobby group said if the European Court ruled in
favour of Mrs Steadman it would have significant implications for UK
employment rights.
The Sunday trading bill is currently going through parliament.
