FT  28 MAY 94 / International Company News: Paris scents a takeover by LVMH
The future of Van Cleef &amp; Arpels, the prestigious Paris jeweller, has been
clouded by uncertainty following reports that Chanel, the famous French
fashion house, may challenge LVMH, the powerful luxury goods group, by
bidding for the business.
Chanel, which like Van Cleef is one of the few prominent luxury houses still
in private hands, yesterday issued a denial following a report in Les Echos,
the French financial daily that estimated Van Cleef's value at between
FFr1.5bn (Dollars 260m) and FFr2bn.
However, Mr Alain Wertheimer, the secretive Swiss businessman who
masterminded Chanel's success in the 1980s, has recently been diversifying
away from fashion notably by buying a vineyard. Chanel, which has for years
been renowned for costume jewellery, last year opened its first 'real'
jeweller's in Paris.
By contrast, Mr Bernard Arnault, chairman of LVMH, has made no secret of his
hopes of expanding into jewellery. LVMH is the world's largest luxury goods
group with a clutch of prestigious brands including Christian Dior perfume
and Louis Vuitton luggage. Jewellery is one of the few gaps in its
portfolio.
Mr Arnault is also on the hunt for acquisitions after significantly reducing
LVMH's debt by unraveling a cross-shareholding agreement with Guinness, the
UK drinks group. He is said by analysts to have considered bids for both Van
Cleef and Tiffany, the New York-based jewellery group: but to have opted for
the Paris-based business.
Van Cleef was founded in 1906 and is still controlled by the founding Arpels
family. It has recently been affected by the downturn in the luxury goods
market. Van Cleef has seen net profits fall to FFr25m in 1993 from FFr50m in
1990, with sales declining to FFr207m from FFr305m.
The acquisition of Van Cleef represents a rare opportunity for Mr Arnault to
buy a prominent name in jewellery. However, it would also bring him into
direct competition with Cartier, the French subsidiary of South Africa's
Richemont group, which is a formidable force in the jewellery field.
LVMH is also expected to try to acquire Van Cleef's fragrances from Elf
Sanofi, the French pharmaceuticals company. Sanofi plans to sell some
fragrance brands to finance its proposed acquisition of part of Eastman
Kodak's pharmaceutical interests.
Sanofi said yesterday that it had not yet decided whether to sell the Van
Cleef perfumes, which made sales of around FFr430m last year.
