FT  17 MAR 94 / Accountancy Column: Celebrations for the Father of
bookkeeping: The anniversary of a text by a 15th-century monk has sparked
debate over the origins of double-entry
You might have thought that with half a millennium during which to work,
accounting historians would by now have got their facts straight about the
development of double-entry bookkeeping. If so, you would be wrong.
Five hundred years after the publication of what is generally acknowledged
to be the first textbook of modern accountancy, the academics researching
the topic still seem to be as divided in their interpretations as they are
in their (surprisingly large) number.
Most would at least agree to a common definition of double-entry
bookkeeping: for every debit there is a corresponding, balancing credit. It
is a sacred principle still worshipped today, the basis of ledger-keeping  -
manual and electronic  - used daily by millions of number crunchers around
the world.
That is about as far as the consensus goes. Few could debate that a weighty
book was published in Venice in 1494 called Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria,
Proportioni et Proportionalita, and attributed to Friar Luca Pacioli, a
Franciscan monk turned teacher, which describes the so-called 'Venetian
method' of accounting.
But was he the author? Was his work original? Was he truly the first to
codify double-entry bookkeeping? More important, does it all matter anyway?
In the past few weeks, intense argument has been aired on these and other
related topics.
Pacioli has certainly triggered a great bout of self-reflection. Some
individuals and professional bodies have been so eager to unpop the
champagne corks of celebration that they have not waited for November, which
was the month of publication 500 years ago.
Last month, the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales  -
eager to get in first  - dressed up a hapless soul in a habit to publicise
its 'Figures in proportion' exhibition on Pacioli. In characteristically
more didactic fashion, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland
held a two-day 'Festival of Accounting' conference earlier this month.
In April, the Italians gather in Venice to discuss and dine sumptuously in
memoriam of the monk.
It has been left to the enterprising Americans to arrange a four-day
re-creation of Pacioli's 'historic' trek from his birthplace of Sansepolcro
to Urbino. The trek takes place this summer, at the conclusion of a seminar,
'The Pathway of Pacioli', and has been organised by Dave Tinius and Bill
Weis, two Seattle-based academics who have done more than anyone to nurture
festivities over nearly a decade.
Yet these signs of homage are in stark contrast to the dark ages of just a
few years ago. Copies of Pacioli's Summa were changing hands for extremely
modest sums. He was barely recognised or memorialised in his own home town.
The Italians had little time for him, in contrast to some of his
contemporaries such as Leonardo da Vinci, his friend and collaborator.
Pacioli was certainly an unconventional monk. In spite of taking monastic
orders, his friendship with Giuliano della Rovere, who conveniently became
Pope Julius II, led to a papal bull in 1508 waiving Pacioli's obligation to
obey the Franciscan vow to live 'in obedience, without property, and in
chastity'.
He seems to have taken full advantage of all three exemptions, being accused
of self-love by Erasmus, living comfortably and incurring the wrath of his
fellow monks at death by leaving much of his money to his family and not his
monastery.
For Frans Volmar of the University of Limburg in the Netherlands, Pacioli
was 'the perfect accountant'. He sees him as a crusader against the
heathenism of his times, a leading proponent of the Franciscan beliefs that
mathematics and the arts could revive Christianity.
He says that while the Summa was not original in its thoughts, it was a
detailed description of the best accounting practices, which met the
definition of a conceptual framework as used today by the US Financial
Accounting Standards Board.
He argues that among the points Pacioli highlights are the importance of
orderly bookkeeping and internal controls, fairness, consistency, full
disclosure, relevance, prudence, materiality and the role of profit
generation as an objective.
Volmar even sees in the text discussions on more advanced accounting issues
such as the treatment of banking transactions, joint ventures, branches,
bills of exchange, extraordinary items and foreign currency translation.
Some academics stress that Pacioli was a great populariser, writing, for
example, in the Tuscan and Venetian dialects rather than the Latin which was
all but ubiquitous in scholarly circles at the time. It was this that helped
form the basis of innumerable copycat accounting texts elsewhere in Europe
and beyond from the early 16th century onwards.
A more cynical commentator might suggest that Pacioli was also the father of
modern creative accountancy. As his text on inventories advises: 'Giving to
each entry an average price from your own personal knowledge, rather higher
than low; that is, should they appear to you as worth 20, put them down at
24. By this means you will obtain better profit.'
Others are certainly less convinced than Volmar about the Pacioli's legacy.
Among the accusations are that he did not invent double-entry bookkeeping
but merely codified it; that he may not have written the Summa himself; and
that his text is flawed.
As early as 1550, he was being accused of plagiarising from the work Piero
della Francesca, his first teacher. The father of modern Pacioli iconoclasm
is Basil Yamey, emeritus professor at the London School of Economics. He has
suggested a series of inadequate or confusing points in Pacioli's text that
cast doubt on the usefulness of the text as a means of instruction in
double-entry.
These views are shared by Richard Macve from the University of Wales, who
also highlights vital omissions, contradictions and obscurities which he
says make Pacioli's treatise like a computer software manual 'which always
seems to omit the crucial instruction'.
He stresses that Pacioli's experience of commerce is second-hand, and that
he fails to describe state-of-the-art accounting already long in place in
Venice, covering issues such as depreciation and contingency reserves.
Other scholars have traced rudimentary double-entry back at least as far as
the 13th century, while some suggest it may have its origins in regions and
eras as diverse as ancient Greece or Rome, Arabia, India, Iran, Peru and
Spain.
The more fundamental question is whether double-entry bookkeeping matters
anyway. Accountants have a vested interest in suggesting its importance as
the lubricant if not the fuel powering the development of modern capitalism.
They even have an unexpected ally in Goethe, who called it 'one of the most
beautiful inventions of the human spirit'.
But while it may have been mathematically elegant, it may not have been
mercantile-relevant. Yamey and Macve  - to the dissent of many of their
colleagues  - suggest that double-entry did not become widely adopted in
Europe or the US until the 19th century.
They suggest that while it may in modern time have helped provide
co-ordination and control in large commercial organisations, it was not in
any way vital for the development of entrepreneurial capitalism.
Nevertheless, whether for good or bad, accountants would probably have been
far less populous in the world without Pacioli. That is his legacy, and the
charge on which he should perhaps be tried.
