FT  04 JUN 94 / London Stock Exchange: Shares close strongly in higher
trading volume - Market Report
A turbulent trading session yesterday saw UK equities extend the recovery of
the previous day but only after moving through successive ranges totalling
more than 50 points on the FT-SE 100 Index. The driving force came from the
gilt-edged market where long-dated British government bonds ended with gains
of around 1 1/2 points, also after a volatile performance as Frankfurt
returned from Thursday's holiday closure.
By the close, the FT-SE 100 Index was 17 points ahead at 2,997.8. After an
uncertain start, the Footsie showed a gain of 23.6 at mid-session, standing
at 3,004.4. This successful recapture of the 3,000 mark came just as a
leading Swiss investment house cut its Footsie year-end forecast from 3,500
to 3,000, according to market traders; if so, the timing was unfortunate,
for the market quickly turned tail, running back to 2,968.4 to show a net
fall of 12.2.
The setback reflected an uncertain start to trading in New York where
Federal bonds at first reacted sharply to a fall in May unemployment which
appeared to threaten action from the Federal Reserve. But US bonds, and Wall
Street, soon turned higher and the UK gilts followed suit. Firmness in
sterling helped the mood in the UK markets.
Further selective buying by the institutions was indicated yesterday by Seaq
volume of 725.6m shares, nearly 18.5 per cent on Thursday's total. Traders
said that the big funds have become more willing to buy equities at current
levels, although they are still alarmed by the instability of the government
bond market. It was clear that UK share prices remain at the mercy of
developments in bond markets.
After falling heavily earlier this week, the FT-SE 100 Index closed last
night with a gain of 31.14 points over the four day market week. But the
extended three week equity account which also closed last night has seen a
fall of nearly 4 per cent in the Footsie as investors have reacted to fears
that the downward cycle in European interest rates may be nearing its end,
while the US authorities are under presure to raise rates again.
With the UK seen as further into recovery than other European economies, the
stock market's hopes for a base rate cut have vanished, to be replaced by
fears that rates will be forced higher before the year-end.
Next week brings a relatively light calendar of economic news on both sides
of the Atlantic and some market strategists believe that this will offer UK
share prices the opportunity to extend their recovery.
Across the broader range of the market, recovery has been less significant.
The FT-SE Mid 250 Index gained only 1 point to 3,557.3 yesterday, leaving a
loss of 15 points on the week and around 4.4 per cent over the three week
account.
Yesterday's rally was somewhat uneven, with share gains more often
reflecting bargain-hunting following losses earlier in the week than longer
term investment views. Financial stocks, with fortunes closely linked to the
performance of securities markets, advanced sharply.
Strong gains in short-dated government bonds again suggested that recent
selling has been overdone and that investors hope that the widely-predicted
rise in UK interest rates will be postponed for as long as possible.
Consumer stocks, which have been badly hurt in the market shakeout,
attracted support. Food retailers, pharmaceuticals, and leisure stocks were
all higher.
