FT  21 JUN 94 / International Company News: Domos seeks partners for Mexico
telecoms venture
Grupo Domos, the private Mexican company, plans to invest Dollars 4.3bn over
five years in Mexico's telecommunications sector in partnership with one or
more international telephone carriers. The group last week agreed to
purchase 49 per cent of Cuba's national telephone monopoly.
Domos will create a subsidiary in alliance with an international carrier and
domestic investors, according to Mr Pedro Sepulveda, chief executive. He
said Domos was in talks with four international carriers, one of which was
Bell South of the US.
The Domos subsidiary intends to build a long-distance telephone network in
Mexico, if granted a licence by the government. This would account for the
bulk of the Dollars 4.3bn investment. The company also plans to start a
basic wireless telephone system, and invest in mobile telecommunications,
value-added telephone services, and subscription television.
Mexico will open up its lucrative long-distance telephone market - currently
controlled by Telefonos de Mexico, the national telephone carrier - to
competition from August 1996. So far Banamex with MCI, Iusacell with Bell
Atlantic, and Grupo Alfa have indicated they will apply for long-distance
licences.
Grupo Financiero Serfin is in talks with Domos. Serfin, Mexico's third
largest bank, last week agreed to merge with Inverlat, the fourth largest.
Mr Javier Garza Calderon, the owner of Domos, is a shareholder and director
of Serfin.
Mr Sepulveda said an announcement on which foreign partner Domos had chosen
could be made in the next 10 days. Bell South already works with Domos in
wireless telephony in Mexico, and has shown interest in participating with
it in long-distance in Mexico, Domos chairman Mr Calderon Garza told Mexican
news service Infosel.
Mr Garza Calderon is a member of the wealthy Garza family in Monterrey, and
narrowly lost out in his bid to acquire Telmex from the government nearly
four years ago. Domos is believed to be well capitalised and, after recently
selling its stake in a cellular business to Motorola, has plenty of cash.
Last week Domos agreed to pay some Dollars 1.5bn over several years for 49
per cent of Emtel-Cuba, an investment which includes the cost of expanding
and modernising the island's dilapidated telephone network. Domos is looking
for a foreign partner in Cuba to provide telecommunications technology.
In the 1980s, Mr Garza Calderon's father unsuccessfully sought to seize
control of Grupo Visa, one of Mexico's largest conglomerates, from his
cousin, Eugenio Garza Laguera, in a family squabble that turned into a
bitter takeover battle. The father subsequently sold his stake in Visa to
the Garza Laguera family.
