FT  02 AUG 94 / Tourists return to more peaceful Egypt
Three months free of Islamic militant attacks on tourist targets has
encouraged a recovery in Egypt's tourist industry, with Cairo hotels
enjoying their highest occupancy rates in more than two years.
Latest tourism ministry figures show a 4.5 per cent rise in visitors in May
against the same month last year, the first overall rise since militant
groups began attacks on tourist buses, cruise boats and other tourist
targets in late 1992. Hoteliers say the recovery has strengthened since
then.
The last attacks against tourist targets came in March, when a few trains
were raked with gunfire as they passed through Assiut, a heartland of
militant activity in southern Egypt. A German tourist died from injuries
after gunmen fired at a Nile cruiser passing by Assiut.
Since April the government has repeatedly claimed its crackdown has
succeeded in breaking the main militant groups, the Gamaa al-Islamiyya and
Jihad, and prevented them operating outside their traditional strongholds in
Upper Egypt. Mr Hassan al-Alfie, interior minister, said last week: 'We have
managed to encircle them and put an end to the acts of violence.'
Mr Tony Baldry, parliamentary under-secretary at the Foreign Office, said
during a recent visit to Egypt that he had 'every impression this was a
situation which has been contained, understood, and dealt with'.
The lull in violence has encouraged tourism in Cairo, where five-star hotels
report occupancy rates of between 85-90 per cent against an average of
little over 50 per cent this time last year. 'There's been an
extraordinarily good improvement,' said Mr Richard Bousfield, marketing
director at the Cairo Semiramis Intercontinental.
The bulk of Cairo's summer visitors are Gulf Arabs. Hoteliers and tour
operators in Europe say it remains too early to forecast whether European,
American and other tourists will return in large numbers during the winter
season, which begins in October.
However, some hotels say provisional tour bookings for next season are
already twice what they were a year ago.
'Bookings are looking good; they're up for August and early September, and I
sense already that European tour operators are beginning to respond,' said
Mr Armin Shrocker, manager of the Nile Hilton hotel.
Egypt attracted a record 3.2m tourists in 1991-92 before the militant
attacks, garnering hard-currency earnings calculated by the government at
about Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.9bn). It says the anti-tourism violence,
designed by the Gamaa al-Islamiyya militant group to attack the government
by harming the economy, cost Dollars 900m in lost revenues last year,
hitting employment and investment in what had been Egypt's fastest-growing
industry.
However, diplomats and other commentators are cautious about forecasting an
end to militant violence. Moreover, the Egyptian government faces a
considerable security test in early September, when Cairo will attract
around 20,000 participants, including prime ministers, to the United Nations
International Conference on Population and Development.
On Sunday the Gamaa al-Islamiyya broke a silence of more than two and a half
months by issuing a faxed statement declaring it intended to step up
violence in the Upper Egyptian town of Mallawi, 270km south of Cairo, where
it claimed its members had ambushed and wounded two policemen.
