FT  22 MAR 94 / Mr Punch plans comeback with aid of Tidy sum
Stories about the death of Punch, a battered remnant of the traditional
British sense of humour, have been greatly exaggerated it seems. Two years
after United Newspapers quietly interred the 150-year-old satirical magazine
because of its mounting losses, Punch is showing signs of life.
Mr Gary Smith, chief executive of Winchester, the merchandising company
which owns the worldwide rights to the cartoon series Love Is . . . and the
cartoonist Mr Bill Tidy, who drew for Punch for three decades, are believed
to be in advanced negotiations with United.
Mr Tidy has been trying to find financial backing to buy and relaunch the
magazine for some time.
Its assets include not only the title but also a library containing bound
volumes of every issue of the magazine, more than 2,000 original cartoons
and the lunch table where the very famous were encouraged to carve their
names. Many of the cartoons are still in demand for use in other
publications.
Mr Smith said yesterday: 'We never comment on market rumours.'
Such a purchase would fit Winchester's ambitions to accumulate rights to
characters such as Mr Punch that are suitable for merchandising.
Mr Tidy is interested in ensuring that such a prominent shop window for the
cartoonist's art does not perish.
Winchester recently completed a flotation which raised Pounds 1.5m so the
company is in a position to buy the Punch assets, although it is believed to
have other expansion plans including producing a film called Rainbow.
United has made no secret of its intention to sell the Punch title although
the library still earns some money in reproduction fees. No contracts have
yet been signed with Winchester and Mr Tidy, although a deal is believed to
be close.
Punch closed on April 8 1992 after a decision that funding the magazine's
Pounds 1m-a-year losses was no longer funny.
The magazine's recent history has been one of sad decline. From a peak
circulation of about 175,000 in the 1940s it fell below 100,000 in 1976 and
reached an average of only 33,000 in 1991.
Punch suffered from the reputation of being a dentists' waiting-room
publication and from growing competition from sharper-edged publications
such as Private Eye. The British sense of humour may also have changed.
Mr Smith and Mr Tidy look as if they may manage to revive Mr Punch. But
making the comeback permanent will still be a considerable challenge to
their sense of humour.
