FT  19 OCT 94 / Survey of North American Business Locations (4): Business
looks southwards - Canada / The pros and cons of a move north of the 49th
parallel
The climate for investment in Canada has improved markedly in recent years.
The irony is that many businesses, once established north of the 49th
parallel, prefer to look southward to the US for new opportunities.
Much of the impetus has come from the 1989 US-Canada free trade pact and
this year's North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), which also includes
Mexico.
Free trade has broadened Canadian-based companies' horizons. At the same
time, the twin shocks of free trade and the 1990-92 recession have brought
about a sharp improvement in productivity. Trade unions and government
regulators have become more flexible as domestic industry has been exposed
to stiffer foreign competition.
The economic upswing is now well under way, with real growth expected to
reach around 4 per cent this year, one of the highest among OECD countries.
This year's climb in interest rates could dampen growth slightly in 1995,
but economists forecast that output will expand by at least another 3 per
cent.
Despite the growth in overall business activity, property prices and office
rentals in most cities have yet to recover fully from the recession.
Inflation is virtually non-existent, although it is likely to accelerate to
about 3 per cent next year.
The federal government and the 10 provinces - even the three governed by the
interventionist New Democratic Party - eagerly court foreign investors.
Regulators are making life easier for business by gradually lightening their
touch on such industries as telecommunications, power generation, transport
and energy. Growing competition among telephone companies has cut the cost
of long-distance calls by as much as 60 per cent over the past seven years.
The climate in Ontario, which generates some two-fifths of Canada's total
economic activity, could brighten further after provincial elections due to
be held next year. Barring a dramatic reversal in its low popularity
ratings, Ontario's present NDP government is likely to be replaced by a more
business-friendly Liberal or Conservative administration.
Owen Krassweller, international tax director in Ernst &amp; Young's Toronto
office, adds that many overseas companies looking for a North American base
feel more comfortable with the lifestyle and business culture in Canada than
in the US. 'Rightly or wrongly, Canadians are perceived as being more open,
honest and easier to deal with than Americans,' he says.
Mr Krassweller says the conventional wisdom that corporate taxes are lower
in the US than Canada is 'probably a misconception'. He estimates that
combined federal and state taxes in New York state are 'not much different'
north of the border. Furthermore, US employers bear the full brunt of the
cost of health care for their employees, while the Canadian provinces fund
their services from general tax revenues (including in several cases, a
payroll health tax).
Even the threat of Quebec breaking away from the rest of the country is not
necessarily a deterrent to setting up in Canada. 'Regardless of the
political outcome, the people will still be there, and there will still be
economic activity,' says Peter Jones, president of the Canadian subsidiary
of Salomon Brothers, the US investment bank, which is in the process of
expanding its Toronto-based operations.
Salomon is by no means alone. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the
brightening business climate has drawn a substantial number of foreign
companies to Canada - either to set up new businesses or to expand existing
ones.
However, with the notable exception of North American and Japanese
carmakers, most of the investments have been in service sectors.
The list of US retailers that have moved into Canada is long. Wal-Mart paid
about CDollars 300m earlier this year for 122 stores owned by FW Woolworth.
Home Depot, a big Atlanta hardware chain, has set up a joint venture with a
subsidiary of Molson, the diversified Canadian brewer.
Looser regulation of the telecommunications industry has attracted several
foreign telephone companies, notably US-based Sprint, MCI and AT&amp;T. The
latter owns 20 per cent of Unitel, which pioneered competition in the
long-distance market against the consortium of provincial monopolies.
On the other side of the balance sheet, Canada also has some definite
liabilities - and not only frigid winters.
Personal taxes are substantially higher in Canada than in the US. The top
marginal tax rate is around 51-53 per cent in most provinces, except Alberta
where it is 46 per cent.
House prices in Toronto and Vancouver are higher than in most US cities.
Mortgage payments are not tax-deductible and many household goods - ranging
from petrol to cigarettes - are considerably more expensive in Canada.
Mr Jones says that these differences favour hiring people locally or buying
a Canadian business: 'It's expensive to transfer someone from a US location
to a Canadian location.' He estimates that a US executive's salary must be
roughly doubled to maintain the same after-tax income in Canada.
Geography and demographics are a daunting obstacle to any business planning
to operate in more than one region. With a total of only 29m inhabitants,
Canada - which is sometimes described as a 'clothes line of a country' -
stretches across five-and-a-half time zones. The four Atlantic provinces are
separated from the rest of the country by French-speaking Quebec.
The provinces' wide powers, which in some cases overlap with the federal
government, can make life difficult for business. Different rules and
standards, including different tax regimes, apply in each province.
Some progress has recently been made in bringing down non-tariff trade
barriers between the provinces, such as procurement preferences and
professional licensing requirements. But they remain an irritant.
Provincial government policies can vary widely. At one extreme, Alberta's
Conservative administration is closing hospitals and schools in pursuit of
its target of a balanced budget by 1997. At the other, Ontario has expanded
the rights of trade unions and tightened 'employment equity' rules for the
hiring of minority groups.
Quebec's agenda is likely to be dominated by the new government's drive to
win the independence referendum which it has promised to hold in 1995.
With all these regional wrinkles, it's hardly surprising that many
businesses, both domestic and foreign, prefer to expand into the US rather
than tackle other parts of Canada. Free trade has made that strategy even
more attractive.
