FT  26 AUG 94 / Commodities and Agriculture: Fishmeal plants gobble up
Peru's marine wealth - The crisis threatened by overcapacity and
inefficiency
Peru's fishmeal industry, already the world's number one exporter in 1993,
is set for even more spectacular figures this year. The catch in the first
six months was almost half as large again as last year's and, with new
plants coming on stream along the coast, quality is on the increase as well
as quantity.
'It's an extraordinary year for fishing,' says Mr Dante Matellini, the
retired admiral who presides over Pescaperu, the world's largest fishmeal
producer. Pescaperu was created in the early 1970s when the then left-wing
military government nationalised the bulk of the privately-owned plants.
With favourable climatic conditions and fish stocks fully recovered after
the 1991-92 ravages of the warm current known as 'El Nino' (The Child), Mr
Matellini has more to keep him busy than simply producing and selling
fishmeal. He is also charged with the privatisation of the state's assets:
some 20 fishmeal factories and four fishoil refineries.
Pescaperu's sale was originally announced almost two years ago. Now new
chief, Mr Matellini, has redrawn the strategy to sell the plants as
separate, legally-constituted companies rather than as simple assets. The
plants are valued at between Dollars 5m and Dollars 10m apiece, but all
require substantial investment and upgrading.
Privatisation has proved delicate as well as slow. Workers made redundant
under a rationalisation scheme have demonstrated vociferously in Lima's
streets. Now the fishing lobby, the SNP, is also objecting to the sale.
'Pescaperu is a seven-headed dragon,' says Mr Lucas de Tramontana, the SNP's
vice-president and a major shareholder in Pesquera Austral, the second
largest private fishmeal producer. 'We believe not more than half-a-dozen of
its plants should be sold.' An official proposal to that effect has been put
before the privatisers.
The SNP's objection is that Peru's existing plant capacity vastly exceeds
the fish available for processing. In a 'normal' year, hundreds of small
Peruvian fishermen land about 6.5m tonnes of 'industrial' fish, primarily
anchovy and sardine, caught within 30 miles of the shore by traditional,
low-tech methods.
Last year, more than 8.4m tonnes of fish were extracted and, by the time the
twice-yearly fishing ban came into force on 1 August, that total had already
been matched. But, working at capacity, Peru's hungry processing plants can
gobble up around 20,000 tonnes of raw fish an hour.
By early July, Pescaperu had exported 450,000 tonnes of fishmeal, worth
Dollars 144m - about a third of the 1994 national total so far. Each year,
however, its share dwindles as private producers bring new, high-technology
plants on stream to turn out 'special' quality fishmeal.
One such is the Dollars 22m installation belonging to Sindicato Pesquero
(Sipesa), near the port of Matarani on Peru's southern coast, where fish
stocks are now proving more reliable. Sipesa is far and away the country's
leading private company, with 1993 exports worth Dollars 75m. This year's
shipments could be 50 per cent higher.
Pesquera Austral, in the number two slot and investing heavily, has recently
brought two new special quality plants on line, both south of Lima. It has
launched a Dollars 30m Euronote issue to help finance restructuring and
expansion.
In all, the SNP's general manager, Mr Richard Diaz, can reckon up some
Dollars 400m in fresh private sector investments planned and already under
way for fleet and plant modernisation.
But, with all the entrepreneurial activity, Peru's anchovy and sardine
stocks are being stretched to their limits - some suspect they may already
be over-fished. The last time Peruvian fishermen caught quantities similar
to this year's was in record-breaking 1971. That free-for-all decimated
stocks and plunged the fishmeal industry into crisis for years.
The UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation is working with Peru's fisheries
ministry and maritime institute (Imarpe) to make a better evaluation of the
resource. Mr Diaz says 'preliminary information from the study indicates
there may have been errors in calculating the biomass in previous years. Or
else the 'biological' fishing ban has allowed stocks to build up.'
Nevertheless, the anchovy and sardine caught off the Peruvian coast are
finite. Apart from improving the conversion ratio of raw material to
finished product, fishmeal producers may soon have no alternative but to
move into deeper waters where virtually untapped stocks of horse and jack
mackerel abound.
Investment in deep-sea trawlers, of course, is expensive and, according to
the SNP, Peru's very private fishing sector (no Peruvian fishing company is
yet publicly traded) carries a heavy burden of debt.
One option for the forward-looking company is a joint venture backed by
foreign capital. Peru's Sotomayor group, 40 per cent owned by American
Proteins of Atlanta, has embarked on a tuna-fishing venture in association
with JIDO, the Japanese investment and development organisation. The first
of a projected four-ship fleet is already operating off the Peruvian coast
and selling tuna to Japan for sashimi.
A Dutch company, Van der Zwan, meanwhile, has bought back seven Dutch-built
trawlers originally supplied to now-liquidated Flopesca, the former
state-owned high seas fishing fleet. In a joint venture with a local company
based in Peru's northern port of Paita, a couple of the reconditioned
trawlers are to produce frozen fish, mainly hake, for export to Europe.
A further, obvious option for Peruvian companies that see the writing on the
wall is to launch a public share offering. Both Sipesa and Sotomayor say
they are considering it.
