FT  13 DEC 94 / International Company News: Williams Companies buys rival
Williams Companies, a US natural gas and telecoms group, has announced an
agreed cash and stock takeover of Transco Energy, a rival gas company. The
deal values Transco at Dollars 677m.
The acquisition, which will be made with part of the cash Williams expects
to raise on the completion of the Dollars 2.5bn sale of its telephone
business, signals that consolidation in the US natural gas transmission and
marketing businesses is well under way.
Shares in Williams slumped 10 per cent to Dollars 24 1/8 , down Dollars 2
3/4 , on fears that the deal would add substantially to its debt levels.
Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's, the US rating agencies, said they were
considering a downgrade of Williams's Triple B ratings in the light of
Transco's Dollars 2.3bn of debt. S&amp;P, however, indicated it expected the
company to retain an investment-grade rating.
The substantial premium offered by Williams drove Transco's shares up by
Dollars 3 1/2 to Dollars 16 1/8 in early trading.
Together, Williams and Transco would control one of the US's biggest natural
gas distribution businesses. Transco, with after-tax profits of Dollars 65m
on sales of Dollars 2.9bn last year, runs two interstate gas pipeline
systems totalling 16,600 miles and covering the mid-west and east coast.
Williams' interests include three pipeline companies covering 18,900 miles
and serving north-western and central US states. It is also one of the
biggest gatherers and processors of natural gas through its Williams Field
Services. Some 90 per cent of its Dollars 2.4bn of revenues and 78 per cent
of its Dollars 411m operating income came from the natural gas business,
with the rest from its WilTel telephone operations. The deal will give
Williams the second-biggest gas pipeline system in the US, behind Enron.
The fall in Williams' share price yesterday in part reflected general
disappointment about its decision to use part of the proceeds from the
previously-announced sale of WilTel to LDDS. The profitability of gas
transmission in the US is expected to come under greater pressure, following
last year's deregulation to allow utility companies to buy and store their
own natural gas.
The company had earlier indicated it planned to use Dollars 800m of the cash
to buy back its own shares, and would invest much of the rest in operations
with better profit prospects than the pipeline business.
