FT  14 SEP 94 / Building orders continue recovery
The recovery in UK construction orders has continued during the summer but
the value of contracts has fallen from earlier in the year, figures
published yesterday by the Department of the Environment show.
The biggest year-on-year gains have been for private housing and private
industrial construction, suggesting that companies which have survived the
recession may be starting to invest again.
Construction companies have warned, however, that margins for general
construction remain deeply depressed in spite of a rise in orders - although
few companies are now taking lossmaking work simply to boost cashflow.
The contracting arms of Amec, John Laing, Wimpey, Costain and Taylor Woodrow
have between them earned operating profits of just Pounds 10m on turnover of
more than Pounds 1.7bn in the first half of this year.
According to the Department of the Environment the value of orders at
constant 1990 prices won by contractors in the three months to the end of
July was 7 per cent higher than in the corresponding period last year.
Orders, however, were 3 per cent lower than in the previous three months.
Private industrial orders were 30 per cent higher than in May, June and July
last year although they were 12 per cent lower than in the previous three
months.
Private housing orders were 2 per cent higher than in the previous three
months but 23 per cent higher than in the corresponding period last year.
The surge in housebuilding has increased sales and prices, and led to
temporary shortages of some building materials, including bricks and aerated
concrete blocks.
The continuing low profitability of general construction is in spite of a 3
per cent rise in UK construction output in the first half of this year
compared with the first six months of last year.
Mr Colin Parsons, chairman of Taylor Woodrow, yesterday warned that margins
were unlikely to rise much in the next 12 months. The company yesterday
announced a doubling of half-year profits to Pounds 22m, due mainly to a big
improvement in housebuilding profits.
The environment department said yesterday that private commercial orders had
declined by 11 per cent compared with the previous three months, and fallen
by 4 per cent compared with the corresponding period last year.
Infrastructure orders were unchanged on the previous three months, but 6 per
cent higher than last year.
Taylor Woodrow results, Page 22
