FT  09 JUN 94 / Old enemies make tricky friends: Nato's relationship with
Russia is proving unexpectedly difficult for the west to define
A senior aide to Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, former president of the Soviet Union,
once made a prophetic warning to the west: 'We will do something terrible to
you. We will take away your enemy.'
Those words will haunt the foreign ministers of Nato's 16 members as they
convene today in Istanbul, to be joined tomorrow by their counterparts from
the former Warsaw Pact. The stakes are high. If Nato and Russia can bridge
their substantial differences over new security arrangements in Europe and
beyond, this could pave the way for a breakthrough in the broader
relationship between Russia and the west. It could be sealed perhaps with a
triumphant appearance for Russia's President Boris Yeltsin at the Group of
Seven summit in Naples next month. Ideally, Russia would like the group to
be rechristened the Group of Eight, but the best it can hope for is
participation in the group's political - not economic - discussions.
In the face of Russia's aspirations, alliance members will be trying to
balance their attempts at accommodating Mr Yeltsin with the need to reassure
Moscow's former 'satellites', the Poles, Czechs and Hungarians, that Russia
would not have a veto over policy.
These would be hard tasks for the alliance even if members were clear about
their common purpose. But as the Russians are keenly aware, Nato now lacks
the consolidating influence of a good, old-fashioned enemy. Bereft of a
communist foe, the alliance has been grooming itself to act as an
all-purpose multinational taskforce, ready to move on the instructions of
other international bodies, such as the United Nations or the 53-nation
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Yet the experience of
Bosnia - where Nato polices the sea and air, while the UN operates on the
ground - has shown how acutely uncomfortable the alliance feels about acting
as servant rather than master.
Such uncertainty is haunting Nato at a time when Russia's leadership has
presented it with a foreign policy stance both ambitious and shrewdly
judged. While some of Russia's ideas sound far-fetched to western ears, Nato
defence ministers were nevertheless dazed by the skill of the diplomatic
assault mounted in Brussels two weeks ago by General Pavel Grachev.
They had a rough idea of what he was going to say. First, he would signal
adherence to the Partnership for Peace, a military co-operation programme
designed by Nato that involves joint exercises and the possibility (for some
countries, at least) of eventual full membership. He would also demand a
special relationship between Nato and Russia.
The ministers had their answer ready: no to a formal treaty separate from
PFP; yes to a political statement that would stroke the Muscovite ego by
acknowledging Russia's importance, and yes to a dialogue at Nato's
discretion.
Gen Grachev lightened a tense atmosphere by telling the waiting ministers
that, of course, Russia would join PFP. But the next day, he put forward a
list of proposals so tough and far-reaching that few listeners immediately
understood them. These included:
the creation of a Eurasian security order whose apex would be formed not by
Nato, but by the CSCE;
the subordination to the CSCE of all other security organisations: Nato, the
Western European Union and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
which comprises 12 ex-Soviet republics; if the CSCE provided political and
diplomatic leadership, then its 'military arm' might be provided by the
North Atlantic Co-operation Council, which consists of Nato, the former
Warsaw Pact and the former Soviet republics;
an 'effective mechanism of consultation' between Russia and Nato 'on the
whole range of European and world security issues, which could function both
in emergencies and on a regular basis' - in other words, whenever Russia
wanted.
To cap it all, Gen Grachev produced eight pages of 'parameters' which would
govern Russia's participation in PFP and which, on inspection, look like the
preconditions which Nato had vowed never to consider.
While consideration of Russia's parameters can itself be viewed as a
concession by Nato, the alliance does not have the slightest intention of
submitting itself to the CSCE or to an effective Russian veto over its
actions. In any case, the CSCE has neither the financial nor the
administrative resources to become the policeman of Eurasia.
When the Russians arrive tomorrow, however, it should become clearer to what
extent compromise hinges on the unrealistic institutional changes outlined
by Gen Grachev. Like the general's verbal pronouncements, the points are an
artful 'mixture of the constructive, the negotiable and the outrageous',
according to a Nato official. There are imaginative ideas about military
co-operation; requests for a dialogue on nuclear safety and
non-proliferation; and fresh demands for Nato to become the junior branch of
the CSCE.
But discernible through the high-flown Russian rhetoric is a more realistic
agenda, reflecting the 'bottom-line' aspirations of both sides. Moscow wants
freedom of action in the steadily reintegrating CIS; Nato wants the same
freedom plus legal and diplomatic imprimatur in as wide an area as possible.
Neither side is happy to give the other carte blanche, and each would
ideally like to retain some say over the behaviour of the other. But the two
sides' aspirations are not so contradictory as to rule out the possibility
of compromise; and if such a compromise on freedom of action is to be
struck, then some body with roughly the same membership as the CSCE would be
needed to regulate it.
The initial Nato reaction to Russian proposals for a triad based on the CSCE
(or something like it), Nato and the CIS will almost certainly be a chorus
of denunciation. But as Russian strategists are aware, each member of the
chorus will be singing a somewhat different tune.
Some of the strongest opposition to any real upgrading of the CSCE will come
from the US, which is already unhappy about the loss of sovereignty it
suffers when working through the United Nations and has no stomach for
involvement with another unwieldy institution.
But Germany has shown greater sympathy for a limited increase in the CSCE's
remit. Days before Gen Grachev arrived in Brussels, the German government
floated proposals - designed in part to satisfy Russian concerns - that
would increase the CSCE's authority to intervene in conflicts, if necessary
without the consent of the warring parties.
By putting forward the CIS as one of the pillars of a new security
arrangement, Moscow is effectively asking for western recognition of its
influence in the three republics of trans-Caucasia and the five of Central
Asia. If, in return for such acknowledgement, Russia is prepared to
guarantee restraint in its behaviour on its western borders, it would be a
tempting deal for Germany, which is acutely worried about the security of
its central European neighbours.
For most other Nato countries, hesitation over endorsing Russian tactics in
the CIS - which have included intervention in the supposedly 'internal'
conflicts of its neighbours - is tempered by the thought that almost
anything is preferable to chaos.
However, one alliance member is definitely not prepared to cede all
influence over the southern republics of the CIS to Russia - and that is
Turkey. There is undisguised dismay among the hosts today at the prospect of
tolerating Russian hegemony over parts of the world which until recently
were viewed as ripe for incorporation into the cultural and economic orbit
of Turkey.
Russian tactics in the republics to its south have included frequent
recourse to the imperialist principle of divide-and-rule - supporting one
side and then the other, and occasionally both simultaneously - in the
internecine conflicts of places like Georgia and Tajikistan. Unless the Nato
ministers are careful, they could find the 'divide-and-rule' principle being
turned on them.
