FT  02 DEC 94 / US Court ponders congressional term limits: The
constitutional implications of the move to end cosy Washington incumbencies
It is rarely easy to read the mind and balance of the US Supreme Court. For
90 minutes in a packed court room on Tuesday morning the nine justices were
even more inscrutable as they engaged in oral arguments over what is
probably the most important constitutional case they have agreed to take on
in their current session, and one of the hottest political issues in the
country.
At stake is whether individual states may limit the number of terms their
members of Congress may serve in Washington. The case before the bench
follows an Arkansas referendum in 1992 which voted 60-40 per cent in favour
of ceilings of three two-year terms for members of the House and two
six-year periods for senators.
Term limits are at the top of the conservative populist agenda. Starting
with Colorado in 1990, variations on them have been approved by 22 states,
but no federal law exists and no member of Congress has yet reached the
allotted span. The Republican mid-term election manifesto - the 'Contract
with America' - commits the party to propose a constitutional amendment
making them mandatory. The Clinton administration opposes them.
In agreeing to hear the Arkansas case, the Supreme Court, in effect, took
pre-emptive action. Its final ruling, probably next June, may be based more
on written briefs than oral arguments but, on Tuesday, four lawyers, two
from each side, appeared in front of the bench to make their cases and be
questioned by the justices: in practice they rarely completed more than
three consecutive sentences before finding themselves on the receiving end.
The questioning revealed very little of how the Court might eventually
divide. Every justice except Clarence Thomas spoke. The newest member,
Stephen Breyer, held his fire until towards the end before letting loose a
volley of well-rounded questions. If Antonin Scalia, quick as a cat with his
wit, and John Paul Stevens were the most voluble in their interjections, the
other five, including Chief Justice William Rehnquist, were hardly less
reticent.
A principal duty of the US solicitor general - now the urbane Drew Days - is
to argue cases before the Court and some private lawyers, such as Mr Joel
Klein, currently deputy White House legal counsel, have made careers in this
most daunting of legal environments. This has not been the experience of J
Winston Bryant, the Arkansas attorney general, appearing for term limits. He
seemed a little over-awed by the occasion and the sharp interrogation to
which he was subject.
Much of this centred not on the perceived modern evils of entrenched
incumbent politicians. Instead it focused on what the Founding Fathers -
principally Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, John Adams and Alexander
Hamilton - meant at the constitutional convention of 1787 and subsequently
when they established simple criteria of citizenship, age and residency for
elected officials.
The question most exercising the justices was whether this precluded states
from setting other qualifications. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg
half-suggested that state prerogatives may be limited, in the words of the
constitution, to providing the 'time, place and manner' necessary for fair
elections.
But Justice Breyer, noting one Californian legal precedent, said that if
party membership or a minimum period as a registered independent could be
considered a legitimate qualification for a congressional candidate, then it
logically could follow that term limits were also acceptable.
The term limit lawyers insisted Jefferson envisaged a 'voluntary rotation'
of members of congress. But the other side invoked Madison and Hamilton as
implicitly rejecting term limits because it infringed, in Madison's words,
'the indisputable right of the people to return whom they thought proper'.
The irony of this most important case is that the fault which term limits
are designed to redress - the cosy existence in Washington of incumbent
politicians - has been in good measure remedied by the last two elections.
When the next Congress convenes in January, only about half its membership
will have served six years.
No wonder those that remain, including many Republicans in the Senate, doubt
it is necessary to go further. The Court could settle the matter either way.
