FT  04 MAY 94 / The by-election that everyone forgot: Despite Labour's
unassailable position, Rotherham has a tale to tell
Rotherham is the by-election that everyone forgot.
When five Labour MPs gathered in All Saints Square beneath the church in the
heart of Rotherham to support the Labour party candidate, Mr Denis MacShane,
in a photocall, a total of six people turned out - and that included me.
The early morning shoppers walked blithely by. The pigeons declined to
scatter and went on foraging and pecking among the flagstones.
Mrs Winifred Sanders, one of the little band of onlookers, said to her
husband: 'Ronnie, which is our man?'
'The one with the rose.'
'They've all got roses.'
'I meant rosettes. The one in the middle with the glasses.'
'Eeeh, I don't know him at all.'
Mr Sanders, 67, was made redundant as a galvaniser in a steelworks 10 years
ago. 'I tried to get other jobs, but there is no work here,' he says.
Asked how he will vote on Thursday, he says: 'I'll be voting for the Labour
party. We should have a local man. A man who understands our needs.'
Mr MacShane, 45, is defending a majority of 17,561 out of a constituency of
61,000. The by-election was caused by the early death of Mr Jimmy Boyce, a
local man.
Mr MacShane's position is unassailable. The only discernible issue is the
fact that he is an outsider, imposed by the party in London.
Mr MacShane is a former journalist who currently works in Geneva. He says
he's the first candidate to be selected under the one-member-one-vote
system. 'Eighty per cent of the local party voted for me,' he says.
He describes accusations from Mr David Wildgoose, the Liberal Democrat
candidate, that he is a carpetbagger as an 'unpleasant touch of xenophobia'.
Mr Wildgoose admits that he has made great play of being the only local
Rotherham candidate.
'The interesting thing is that I am drawing support from the Labour party
more than from the Tories. The people of Rotherham are sick and tired of
being taken for granted as cannon fodder for the Labour party,' he says.
As the Conservative candidate Mr Nick Gibb, 34, is also a London-based
politician, the question of outsiders has come to dominate the campaign.
Mr Wildgoose may fare little better in the local elections where he is also
a candidate on Thursday. The Labour party holds 63 of the 66 council seats.
The Conservatives have the other three.
A third of the seats are being contested on Thursday. The redoubtable Sir
Jack Layden, leader of the Labour group on the council, says: 'I don't know
if you are rich, but bet your house and anything else you may own I will
still be leading the council on Friday.'
The dominance of the Labour party and the issue of non-local candidates have
tended to obscure the fact that Rotherham does have a real tale to tell.
Like many other northern cities and towns, it has gone into decline as
traditional manufacturing industries have faltered. But the first-time
visitor would never guess that Rotherham has been subject to a severe
shake-out. The town is green and bedecked with flowers. It is not dissimilar
to any town in southern England. The pedestrianised centre is lined with
building societies and banks where the shops used to be. Charity shops stand
in prime sites - a sure sign of recession.
But Rotherham's industries were on its periphery. It was heavily dependent
on coal mining and steel. It had 12 pits in 1980. Now it has one. The
rundown of the coal and steel industries has meant a loss of 25,000 mostly
male jobs. High technology industry and services have failed to replace
them.
Male unemployment is 21 per cent, almost double the national average. The
drop in employment has brought in its wake social collapse, with an
associated high level of crime.
The town has had its successes in attracting new companies. The Swindon
Laboratories and a British Steel technical centre employ hundreds of people.
But the gains have been in productivity, not job creation.
Thousands of jobs have been created but many of these have been in service
industries and for women and thus proportionately poorly paid.
Mr Gibb, an accountant in London, makes a spirited attempt to defend the
Conservative record. He cites regional selective assistance, the development
area status and the enterprise grants which have come Rotherham's way.
Labour's answer to places like Rotherham is to spend more money on housing
and projects such as the high-speed rail link in order to create jobs in
steel and construction.
In the end the significance of the Rotherham by-election may well be how
well the Conservative vote holds up. It has never been below 8,500.
At the last general election the turnout was 71.7 per cent, with Labour
polling 27,933, or 63.9 per cent, the Conservatives 10,372 or 23.7 per cent
and the Liberal Democrats 5,375 or 12.3 per cent.
