FT  29 JAN 94 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Tunnel of sighs
There are times when I feel sorry for John Major and his doomed government.
Compared with the age of the universe, the duration of these pulses of
sorrow for Major and his government is usually as brief as the neural twitch
that would flash through the brain of a vole if you showed it a Picasso.
But I am prey to them occasionally. I had one this week, a tiny spasm of
sympathy for Major and his government over the way they are being lambasted
for arrangements pertaining to the Channel Tunnel, which, in case you are
out of touch with developments in the world of macro-engineering, has cost
stupendous sums of money and opens shortly, providing a high-speed
connection between England and France: the first connection, via land,
between England and continental Europe since the last ice age, when polar
bears strolled unchallenged between Normandy and Kent.
Critics are vilifying Major's government on two fronts. First, opposition
MPs are furious that the rail connection between Folkestone and London will
be so much slower than the one between Paris and Calais.
A Labour MP claimed this week that, thanks to the brilliance of French
boffins, trains would hurtle between Paris and the Normandy coast at
1,918mph, slow to 90mph while traversing the tunnel, and then skid to a real
crawl - perhaps 14mph - for the journey to London. It was a scandal, he
said: testimony to the impoverishment of Britain's scientific and industrial
preparedness.
Second, there is venomous anger in Kent about the 68-mile route of the
London-Folkestone rail link. Malcontents claim that the route will be
environmentally damaging and untasteful, and house-owners in Kent villages
are squealing about blight and financial ruin.
In my experience, people who live in Kent are a selfish and common sort, so
they can shut up. As for claims that the opening of the tunnel will draw
attention to the technological gulf between Britain and France - so what?
British cheese-makers have caught up with French cheese-makers; in just such
a way, Britain's train-makers will eventually move alongside, perhaps
overhaul, their French rivals.
I have studied the history of macro-engineering, and am aware, more than
most, that the benefits of great projects take a while to be appreciated;
that the glow of pride in human feats they inspire is often at its rosiest a
long time after they have been built and paid for. Often hundreds or
thousands of years.
At the start, there are always niggles and arguments.
Take the Via Appia, originally built to join Rome and Capua but later
extended to the port city of Brindisi. It was started by Appius Claudius in
312 BC, and was still in excellent condition eight centuries later. The road
was famous for the precision of its paving-stones, which were jointed
together, without any use of cement, into a mosaic of stone stretching to
the horizon.
I happen to know, from obscure and ancient writings which I purchased
recently from a waiter on the Orient-Express, that the final cost of the Via
Appia, expressed in modern money, left little change from Dollars 15bn; that
enemies of Appius Claudius claimed, even before work started, that the use
of paving-stones, no matter how cleverly cut and brilliantly polished, was
obsolete technology; that large stretches of the route were for years
plagued by planning blight and advertising hoardings; and that home-owners
on the outskirts of Brindisi, worried that the Via Appia Extension would
slash through their parks and gardens, rioted often, until slain by units of
the Fourth Legion.
Similarly, there was uproar over the projected cost of the Roman aqueducts
in north Africa, especially in the regions now known as Libya and Tunisia.
The aqueducts' construction only got going when local merchants suggested
pouring uncasked olive oil on to the water in the aqueducts, thus reducing,
quite significantly, the per-cask transportation cost shouldered by their
industry. (They separated and recasked it at the other end.)
Like all great projects, the Channel Tunnel will one day be honoured in the
Macro-Engineering Hall of Fame alongside the Pharos of Alexandria, the
pyramids of the pharaohs and the Great Wall of China.
Unfortunately for John Major, this will not happen in time to save his
electoral neck.
