FT  22 JAN 94 / No place for pregnant fathers: Even new man is superfluous
at a birth. Nigel Spivey finds women know best
Once there was feminism. Feminism spawned new man: such a different animal
from his predecessors that he had to be called 'partner' rather than
'husband'. New man was a thoughtful type, whose thoughts were attuned to the
more refined vibrations of feminine sensibility.
It was new man who could rustle up a quiche, or a foot massage; new man who
vacuumed up the mosaic of crushed foods from a toddlers' get-together; and
it was, almost as a matter of logical progression, new man who became a
stalwart of the maternity ward. So it is that what was exceptional 30 years
ago - a proto-father assisting at the labour - has become a normal social
obligation.
As one who had fully steeled himself to meet this obligation (having
mastered, after all, the many pitfalls of shortcrust pastry), I have
something to report. New man, go home. Yes, when it comes to the crunch of
childbirth there is no place for a man, not even a new one.
It is women's business: it is (as they say) women's 'space'. The authors of
the old British Medical Association booklets will be happily nodding at
this. They told us so. Stick to boiling kettles or pacing along the hospital
corridors with bouquets and champagne: that is what the men were ordained to
do, once upon a time.
But I have some bad news for the BMA, too. Their empire of obstetrics is
being seriously challenged by the same women who have rebuffed new man. The
practice of delivering babies from mothers in supine positions; the use of
forceps, and local anaesthetics; Caesarean sections, and other surgical
interventions, such as episiotomies - all these medical techniques have been
questioned or discarded by the exponents of natural birth.
Natural birth is not an entirely new philosophy. Its pioneer more than two
decade ago was Michel Odent, from whose clinic at Pithiviers in central
France emanated many of the non-medical strategies for women to give birth
'actively', that is, to give birth whilst moving about, or exercising, or
even swimming, without recourse to pain-killers (the body, according to
Odent, releases its own), and without ever being treated or manipulated as a
'patient' in a hospital bed.
If not novel, though, natural birth is still a dynamic philosophy. Thus as
feminism gives way to post-feminism, or even neo-feminism, and women find
that there are some ancient female preserves from which they would rather
not be emancipated, so the definition of what counts as 'natural' insofar as
men are concerned is also shifting.
Those new men with an eye on the barometer of changing intellectual climates
will perhaps have anticipated the eventual exclusion of men from the rituals
of a natural birth. If our sophisticated lives are still subject to certain
primal patterns and necessities, and if today's women should be practising
how to squat and crouch like their Neolithic grandmothers, then men, too,
should be obedient to the same olden protocols which kept childbirth amid an
extended sorority.
As Sheila Kitzinger, one of the leading gurus of natural birth, has pointed
out, the evidence from virtually all known primitive societies is that men
do not take part in the delivery of children. The menfolk of the Amazonian
tribes may go through some symbolically empathetic pain or drunkenness at
the time of labour, but they are not in attendance. The natural state of
affairs is for women to assist women.
The American psychologist Robert Bly implicitly signalled this change of
attitude more widely when he urged new men to put aside their recipe books
and go howling among the giant red-woods.
Iron John, Bly's mythical paradigm for what a man should be, would never
have traipsed along to an ante-natal clinic, to join in those frankly rather
undemanding exercises which pregnant women perform. Bly's 'inner warrior' is
not thereby acting with callous indifference - merely accepting that this is
a territory that women know best.
As indeed they do, which is why I have been happily marginalised from the
comprehensive preparations of the semi-official sisterhood currently
gathered about my wife. There is enough of the new man left in me to want to
be present at the nativity itself, but only for surplus moral support. I
shall be of no real use on the occasion, and that is how it should be.
