FT  14 NOV 94 / Reynolds gains time in crisis for coalition
The threat of an immediate collapse of the Dublin government and the
consequent derailing of the Northern Ireland peace process receded last
night.
But the crisis may have only been postponed, not averted, with many Labour
MPs adamant that the party should pull out of the government coalition in
the row over the controversial appointment of Mr Harry Whelehan, the
attorney-general, as president of the High Court.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, promised a full explanation in
parliament on Tuesday for the appointment and an emergency meeting of Labour
MPs decided to delay further action until then.
This means that today's meeting between Mr Dick Spring, the Labour leader
and foreign minister, and Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland
secretary, will go ahead. At this meeting the Dublin and London governments
will review progress on the joint framework document for a durable
settlement for Northern Ireland.
Mr Spring said yesterday, after the six-hour meeting with his parliamentary
party, that he would await Mr Reynolds' explanation but in the meantime all
Labour ministers would boycott cabinet meetings.
Mr Reynolds, in a statement yesterday, warned of the damage that could be
inflicted on the peace initiative by an early election.
This same view was expressed by Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader. In a
statement on Saturday he said: 'The peace process is still at a delicate and
sensitive stage. I hope that the present strains between the government
parties can be resolved satisfactorily and that party political and other
difficulties can be put aside.'
Sinn Fein in particular is anxious to avoid an early election, not simply
for the delay to peace talks it would cause, but for the chances that the
party might have to deal with a new prime minister, perhaps less
accommodating to republican sentiment than Mr Reynolds and his Fianna Fail
party, traditionally the party of constitutional republicanism.
The peace process has already been shaken by the murder of a Newry postal
worker on Thursday. In a move to distance itself from the Newry incident,
the IRA issued a further statement saying the use of all weapons had been
banned since its ceasefire announcement at the beginning of September.
In spite of the Newry incident, the improved security climate in Northern
Ireland was underlined by the attendance at yesterday's Belfast remembrance
day service of the Duchess of Kent, the first member of the Royal family to
take part in more than 25 years.
The trigger for Labour's threat to quit the Irish government was Mr Reynolds
decision to appoint Mr Whelehan as High Court president. Mr Whelehan, a
leading conservative lawyer, has on several occasions been embroiled in
controversy as attorney-general, including the famous X-case - the
14-year-old rape victim who was stopped from having an abortion in England.
But observers point to the sharp deterioration in relations between Mr
Reynolds and Mr Spring which a senior government official said had reached
an 'irretrievable breakdown'.
