FT  24 NOV 94 / Joker in the pack of Norway's fishermen: The country's
seamen are not universally anti-EU
When Jens Petter Sollie, a young campaigner for Norwegian membership of the
European Union, yesterday clambered aboard the MS Joker, a trawler tied up
in the remote fishing port of Svolvaer, he discreetly slipped off his 'Ja'
lapel badge and braced himself for a salty blast of invective against
Brussels.
Norway's fishermen have a formidable reputation as the most implacable
opponents of the EU in a country famous for its deep Euro-scepticism -
especially in the Lofoten Islands, a craggy, snow-blown archipelago of
jagged mountains whose Arctic fjords are kept open in the long winter by the
warming currents of the Gulf Stream.
But Mr Sollie, campaign organiser for Norway's European Movement in the
county of Nordland, was in for a pleasant surprise. Skipper Arvid Sandoe and
his four-man crew offered a friendly welcome. They dropped a few well chosen
insults against Mr Jan Henry Olsen, the pro-EU fisheries minister. ('He's
only fishing for votes,' said one). But two of the five men admitted they
would be voting Yes in next Monday's referendum on EU membership.
Mr Sandoe said he had already cast a No vote through a postal ballot, but
confessed he had been hesitant. 'I still feel a little uncertain about it,'
he said, offering no objection whatever to the decision of his son Baard, a
crew member, to vote Yes on the basis that for Norway as a whole, membership
was positive.
The Joker, its home port further south in Trondelag, may have been no more
than a seagoing statistical freak. But, taken with outspoken support for EU
membership expressed this week by a group of fish farmers and processors, it
suggests that the ranks of Norway's fishing communities are not so rigidly
anti-EU as has often been portrayed.
Certainly the vast majority of Norway's 25,000 fishing vessel owners and
crew are expected by both No and Yes camps to vote against membership. The
fear that Norway's jealous husbandry of its fish resources may be undone by
joining the EU's common fisheries policy - and its stocks of herring and cod
plundered by southern raiders from Spain and Portugal - runs deep.
Their opposition is a keystone of the nationwide No campaign, especially in
the north where opinion against the EU is running high. For although small
in numbers, the fishermen have a political punch far weightier than their
numerical strength - as have the country's highly-subsidised, anti-EU
farmers. Without strong fishing and farming, the popular policy of
sustaining stable population numbers in the remote regions could begin to
unravel.
The trenchant opposition to the EU of Norges Fiskerlag (the national
fishermen's organisation) is therefore of strong political significance. Mr
Olsen's accession deal with Brussels on fish gave only marginal concessions
in Norwegian waters to foreign fishermen. It confirmed Oslo's complete
control over its fish resources until 1998 - allowing Norway to continue
tough conservation rules which have seen fish stocks and fishing quotas in
Norwegian waters rise significantly.
But Mr Steinar Jonassen, who runs the Nordland branch of Norges Fiskerlag,
says his members are worried about what will happen after 1998 - and
especially after 2002 when the EU fisheries policies are up for review and
Spain and Portugal are due to be fully integrated. 'Even though the minister
says he has Brussels' commitment that the EU will base policy on Norwegian
practices we don't feel we have good enough guarantees for that,' he says.
Lately, however, voice has been given to concerns in the fish farming and
processing industry that a greater threat lies in staying outside the EU. A
newly formed National Organisation of Fish Farmers and the Fishing Industry,
representing 650 concerns employing 11,000 people, declared its support for
membership this week, saying it would be 'decisive for growth in the
Norwegian fishing industry and increased activity along the Norwegian
coast.'
It argued that the removal of EU duties and tariffs on Norwegian products
would give a boost to the local processing industry, which has, for example,
lagged far behind that in neighbouring Denmark. The new organisation said
fish farmers, who account for less than one quarter of Norway's NKr20bn
(Pounds 1.9bn) annual fish exports, could double their exports to NKr7bn
over the coming years, but only if they had access to EU markets.
As Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, the Prime Minister, marshals her forces for a
last push to overturn months of No supremacy, she is encouraged by such
public statements to think that in the last few days, many Norwegians may
finally conclude that the potential benefits of EU membership outweigh some
of the more traditional fears about joining.
On Svolvaer's windswept quayside, Jens Petter Sollie was careful not to
deceive himself that his visit on board the Joker meant he could win over
the fishermen. But it did encourage him to think that a nationwide No on
Monday was not a foregone conclusion. 'If we can win a 35 per cent Yes in
the north, then over the country as a whole, it will be a Yes,' he said.
