FT  09 JUN 94 / Personal View: Channel shoppers' storm in pint pot
UK brewers are at odds with the government. The issue is the difference
between UK and French excise levels - and the brewers are crying 'foul'.
They complain that the disparity between the two countries' duty levels is
leading to a flood of beer imports from France into the UK which is damaging
the brewing industry. They want to see UK duty halved. But have they and the
Brewers and Licensed Retailers' Association got it right?
New evidence continues to emerge to cast doubt on the extent of their
claims. While UK consumers are clearly exploiting lower French beer prices,
lack of official data has created controversy about the impact of the single
market.
No-one disputes that duty on beer in the UK is among the highest in Europe -
nearly 30p a pint, compared with 4p in France, while the recommended EU
level is 8p. In 1992, the UK industry and the Brewers' Society (now the
BLRA), predicted that the new 'personal import allowance' of 110 litres of
beer - introduced in January 1993 to comply with EU requirements - would
encourage cross-Channel shoppers to enjoy the lower beer prices on the
Continent.
The BLRA carried out its own survey during 1993 and in its findings,
published in February, claimed that personal imports in 1993 were around
1.9m hectolitres of beer, or 330m pints. This would equal around 15 per cent
of the UK take-home trade.
The survey was swiftly endorsed by leading brewers. Although undoubtedly
extensive and based on observation at ports as well as consumer research,
important primary evidence suggests personal imports were probably no more
than half this level. The difference matters, because if the industry is to
convince government it must approach the problem with defensible data.
The UK government has produced figures for receipts from beer duty in 1993
showing there was actually an increase, from Pounds 2.39bn in 1992 to Pounds
2.41bn. UK consumption of beer per head is 100 litres a year, well above the
EU average of 82 litres but below the most recent 'high' of 120 litres. And
the underlying trend is long-term decline, due to factors such as the growth
of alternative drinks and demographic shifts. The view that an increase in
consumption would compensate for a duty reduction is unrealistic. Denmark
reduced beer duty by more than 30 per cent from 1991-1993, yet the market
has remained flat.
According to Stats MR, a retail audit company, UK take-home beer market
volumes grew by about 2 per cent in 1993. Yet, according to the BLRA survey,
this sector ought to have declined, perhaps by at least 5 per cent. Nor is
there evidence that on-premises beer sales fell by more than 4 per cent.
In France, a sharp rise in sales, to reflect a supposedly dramatic increase
in personal imports to the UK, would have been expected. Yet, according to
data from the Association des Brasseurs de France (the French equivalent of
the BLRA), beer consumption actually fell from 23m hectolitres to 22.6m in
1993. These figures include all beer sold in France and therefore cover beer
purchased in the Calais hypermarkets by cross-Channel shoppers.
The decline of the French market in 1993 clearly does not credibly
accommodate the 1.9m hectolitres of UK personal imports. Total beer sales in
1993 in continental EU and Efta countries were down around 3 per cent. It is
unlikely that domestic demand in France was down by more than 5 per cent.
This suggests personal imports from France into the UK in 1993 were actually
around 800,000 hectolitres, perhaps 1m at most, depending on the 1992 level.
Senior sources within the French brewing industry endorse both this view of
their domestic market development in 1993 and the level of cross-channel
shopping.
Cross-channel passenger loadings lend further circumstantial evidence.
According to the ferry operators, there were 3m vehicle journeys in 1993, or
1.5m return trips. Even the lower estimate for personal imports still equals
around 60 litres per return trip, while the BLRA survey would imply that
every vehicle took a full allowance. Total passenger journeys were much
higher, at 8.5m return trips, but this would include coach loads of school
children, and foot passengers unable to transport more than a fraction of
their allowance - 110 litres is, after all, a lot of beer.
The current situation is, of course, a damaging short-term problem. The new
allowances are open to abuse, but Customs and Excise are alert to the
problem. If the UK brewing industry, supported by defensible data, were to
call for a more measured approach to reducing duty to recommended EU levels,
it is more likely to be heeded.
The author is director, Plato Logic, a management consultancy specialising
in the drinks industry
