FT  30 APR 94 / Lopez daughter named as VW spy case suspect
The daughter of the prime suspect in the VW/General Motors industrial
espionage investigation was the original source of some of the new potential
evidence turned up recently by German state prosecutors, it emerged
yesterday.
A diskette containing data on cost-reduction planning at GM, the existence
of which was made public by the German authorities this week, was compiled
by Ms Begounia Lopez, daughter of the US group's former purchasing director,
Mr Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua.
Mr Lopez has told his current employer, Volkswagen, that his daughter, now
22, gathered the information for a student thesis while on a work-study
placement with GM shortly before his abrupt departure for VW in March, 1993.
Ms Lopez is known to have been temporarily employed in the Chevrolet
marketing department during the relevant period.
Officials close to the affair said that after a 'complaint' from GM lawyers
Ms Lopez was now being treated formally by investigators as a suspect along
with her father and three of his closest associates. All former GM
employees, they followed him to VW within days of his leaving the US.
Mr Lopez's lawyers last night dismissed the suspicions as groundless. They
claimed the diskette found in Ms Lopez's room contained material she
gathered while studying at the independent General Motors Institute. The
institute was not part of the GM group.
The US group has consistently claimed that it was a victim of a systematic
intelligence-gathering campaign instigated by Mr Lopez in preparation for
his defection.
Details of a secret sub-compact car, supposedly restricted to top-level GM
management, were found in a Wiesbaden house last summer shortly after it was
vacated by two of Mr Lopez's close, but junior associates.
Meanwhile, it also emerged that a US Justice Department official interviewed
Mr Klaus Liesen, chairman of the VW supervisory board in London on Thursday.
The interview suggests the US grand jury probe into suspected wire and mail
fraud by the VW group, Mr Lopez and others, is being focused more on
Germany.
