FT  11 JUL 94 / FT Guide to the Week
11
MONDAY
Mid-East peace phase two
Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organisation, buoyed by the completion
of the first phase of their peace process, begin talks in Cairo on the
second phase - the extension of Palestinian self-rule from Gaza and Jericho
across the West Bank.
Two working groups will meet concurrently. The first will discuss the
transfer of power to the Palestinians in the education, health, social
welfare, tourism and direct taxation. A second group considers the sensitive
issue of Israel's failure to honour its commitment to release up to 6,000
Palestinian prisoners.
Germany presents plans for its six-month presidency of the European Union to
finance ministers in Brussels. The agenda includes: a planned deregulation
committee to study whether EU and national laws are stifling job-creation;
macroeconomic guidelines for progress toward a single currency; and
proposals for closer contacts with employment ministers to discuss labour
market reform.
Nigeria's plans for democracy:
The country's constitutional conference re-starts in Abuja, after a two-week
adjournment to finish fitting out the delegates' accommodation. In the
interim, Moshood Abiola (above), the deposed winner of last year's
presidential poll, has been arrested and charged with treason, and junior
oil workers have gone on strike against military rule. On Tuesday, senior
oil staff are due to join them. The strike could spread to other unions.
Abiola's appeal for bail comes to court on Thursday.
Osaka District Court is due to rule on an appeal by central government,
Kumamoto Prefecture and Chisso Corp, a chemicals group, against a Y2bn
(Dollars 20m) compensation order awarded to a sufferer from mercury
poisoning allegedly caused by Chisso.
Alitalia strike: Staff at the Italian state airline plan a 24-hour strike in
protest at restructuring plans aimed at turning round the loss-making
national carrier.
Kazakh tax: A conference on creating an investor-friendly taxation system
for the oil-rich central Asian republic of Kazakhstan begins at the
Confederation of British Industry in London.
World Population Day has been declared by the United Nations, to highlight
demographic problems. The UN's approach to family planning has been attacked
by the Vatican as 'biological colonialism'.
12
TUESDAY
Auch Clinton ist Berliner
President Clinton will be treading in the footsteps of John F. Kennedy, with
a big set-piece speech in Berlin.
His audience is eagerly awaiting a repetition of President Kennedy's famous
grammatical gaffe - 'ich bin ein Berliner' - which actually means 'I am a
(Berlin) doughnut'.
If President Clinton corrects the phrase to 'ich bin Berliner', it might
mean what he wants it to mean.
German troops and the UN: The German constitutional court in Karlsruhe is
due to pronounce on the divisive issue of whether German soldiers should in
future be allowed to serve on missions outside the Nato area.
The court is expected to announce a qualified yes, with the proviso that all
future missions, including blue-helmet exercises for the United Nations,
should be individually approved by parliament.
Grim tally at Credit Lyonnais:
The French National Assembly publishes the report of its inquiry into
mismanagement at the state-owned Credit Lyonnais bank which recorded a
FFr6.9bn (Dollars 1.2bn) loss last year.
According to leaked accounts, the report criticises both the former bank
president, Jean-Yves Haberer, for piling up bad loans, including more than
FFr40bn in doubtful property loans that have now been hived off into a
separate state-backed company, and the French Treasury for not stepping in
earlier.
Taiwan aid meeting: The foreign ministers of seven central American
countries are meeting in Taipei to discuss development projects in their
respective countries, for which Taiwan may consider providing funding or
technical assistance.
Hosted by Taiwan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, this will be the third
annual meeting of the Central American Commission, whose members are
Nicaragua, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Belize, Costa Rica and Panama.
All confer diplomatic recognition on Taiwan rather than on the People's
Republic. In return, Taipei offers loans for development projects and small
and medium-sized businesses and other forms of support.
UK training: Britain's 82 Training and Enterprise Councils hold their annual
meeting at Birmingham International Conference Centre (to Thursday).
The councils are responsible for delivering government-funded training
programmes and fostering economic development. The guest speaker is Prince
Charles.
FT Surveys: France and World Automotive Components.
13
WEDNESDAY
Murder law faces overhaul
The Law Commission, the British government's law reform body, issues a
consultation paper about the future of the 16th century 'year and a day'
rule. Under the rule, an assailant cannot be charged with murder or
manslaughter if the victim dies more than a year and a day after the
assault. Barbara Mills QC, director of public prosecutions, has called for
the rule to be abolished. She disclosed that six people had escaped possible
prosecution for murder in recent years as a result of it.
Spanish economy: June's consumer price index, published today, is expected
to show a 0.1 per cent fall in headline and underlying inflation to give
year-on-year rates of 4.8 per cent and 4.5 per cent respectively. The Bank
of Spain, which holds its 10-day repurchase tender of central bank
certificates today, is likely to keep its benchmark intervention rate
unchanged at 7.5 per cent.
UK economy: A spate of data today will focus attention on the pace of
economic recovery.
The figures are expected to show that seasonally adjusted unemployment
continued falling in June by some 20,000 a month - although analysts point
out that this does not appear to be matched by rises in the employment
total.
Meanwhile, May's average earnings data and June's retail price index are
expected to indicate that inflationary pressures remain subdued in the
economy, in spite of a steady industrial improvement.
An experiment in faith: More than 400 international delegates, comprising
world class scientists, philosophers, and theologians, gather for the third
annual CS Lewis Symposium at Queens' College, Cambridge. Today they will
discuss 'Ways of Knowing', in the course of a conference to explore the
relevance of Christian faith to modern science (until July 23). Simon
Barrington Ward, CS Lewis' former colleague and chaplain, will attend.
Buxton Festival: The opera festival begins today in the Derbyshire spa town
in England's Peak District (to July 31).
FT Survey: Argentina.
14
THURSDAY
UK in talks on Falklands oil
British and Argentine negotiators meet in Buenos Aires for two days of talks
to seek a formula that would allow development of Falkland Islands offshore
oil reserves. Argentina claims the islands and threatens to obstruct the
UK's unilateral exploitation of oil reserves. The Falklands' 2,000
inhabitants reject Argentina's participation, fearful that it will use this
as a precedent to advance its claims to the islands.
India's public sector employees have called a one-day national strike to
protest against privatisation.
UK defence spending: Big cuts in support services are expected to be
announced by Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary. Up to 24,000 jobs may be
lost or privatised, with the RAF support service likely to be sharply
affected. Several procurement decisions are also due.
French National Day: The annual Bastille Day parade down the Champs-Elysees
takes place in Paris. For the first time foreign soldiers, from the
four-nation Eurocorps, have been invited to take part, among them 190
regular German troops.
Golf: The 123rd Open Championship begins at Turnberry, near Ayr, Scotland
(to July 17).
FT Survey: Merseyside.
Holidays: France (Bastille Day).
15
FRIDAY
Delors' successor sought
German chancellor Helmut Kohl has called a summit of European Union heads of
government to find a successor to Jacques Delors as president of the
Commission. The decision follows the vetoing of Belgian prime minister
Jean-Luc Dehaene by British prime minister John Major.
The German cabinet is supposed to approve the draft budget for 1995, with
spending control and likely further restrictions on unemployment benefits,
in an effort to keep the federal government borrowing requirement below
DM70bn (Dollars 46bn) a year. Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, will spend
all week negotiating final reductions.
Middle Europe redivivus: Prime ministers and foreign ministers of the
Central European Initiative, which is composed of 10 nations from the
territory of the former Habsburg Empire, begin a two-day meeting in Trieste,
the old Empire's main port.
UK infrastructure: The A14 trunk road between the A1 and the M1, the only
east-west link south of the M62 built to motorway standard, opens
officially. The road improves travel between east-coast ports and the
Midlands and the north of England.
London Proms: The 100th series of Henry Wood Promenade Concerts begins at
the Albert Hall in London (to September 10).
Holidays: France.
16-18
WEEKEND
N Korea mourns its leader
A week of mourning for Kim Il-sung, the North Korean leader who died of a
heart attack on Friday, culminates with his funeral in Pyongyang on Sunday.
Only after the funeral can dates be set for further meetings between North
Korean and US officials and for a possible unprecedented summit meeting
between the leaders of North and South Korea.
In Taipei, polls to choose provincial local government for Taiwan/Fujian
open on Saturday.
Colombo votes: The ruling United National Party begins its election campaign
with a public rally in the central Kandy hills of Sri Lanka.
Mid-East shuttle: Warren Christopher, US Secretary of State, begins his
third Middle East shuttle this year on Sunday. The intention is to revive
the stalled peace talks between Israel and Syria about the giving up of the
Israeli-occupied Golan Heights in return for full peace.
Mr Christopher's visit comes in the wake of warnings by Israeli leaders that
the next three months represent a 'make-or break' period for a peace
agreement with Damascus.
Football: The final of the World Cup is played in Los Angeles on Sunday.
Edited by Patrick Stiles and Martin Mulligan. Fax: (+44) (0)71 873 3194.
