FT  27 JUL 94 / World Bank laments its Tanzania role: Hans Georgeson and
Michael Holman on an internal study that admits to uncritical support for
Nyerere
World Bank loans exceeding Dollars 1bn to Tanzania over nearly three decades
following its independence helped sustain a 'poorly thought out socialist
experiment', according to a confidential internal report drawn up by the
agency.
The two-volume analysis of relations between the World Bank and Tanzania
between 1961 and 1987 is highly critical of the support for former President
Julius Nyerere's socialist programme, launched in 1967.
The report, obtained by the Financial Times, is still confidential,
according to World Bank officials yesterday, though they said this may be
reviewed in the light of the bank's new disclosure of information policy.
Mr Nyerere nationalised the country's industries, and some 14m peasants and
their families were compulsorily re-grouped in 'ujamaa', or collective,
villages in an effort to make water, health and education more accessible.
But the badly planned exercise disrupted agricultural production.
Since independence in 1961, the bank and other donors have provided more
than Dollars 15bn in aid. The largest single contributor has been the bank,
with loans to date totalling Dollars 2.1bn, while Sweden, Denmark and Norway
have together provided Dollars 3bn.
The hitherto unpublished report, although compiled in 1990, five years after
Mr Nyerere retired, throws new light on the donors' share of responsibility
for Tanzania's economic decline.
Many of the issues raised, including problems of aid co-ordination,
effective utilisation of assistance, and donor reluctance to disclose policy
failures, continue to characterise current efforts to tackle Africa's
development crisis. The document suggests that what it sees as Mr Nyerere's
well meaning but impractical socialist vision was indulged by senior bank
officials. Mr Robert McNamara, the former US defence secretary, was bank
president from 1968 to 1981, most of the period covered by the report.
The report criticises what it calls a 'stance of uncritical support for
government policies', adding: 'Even where risks were noted, the board (of
directors) consistently reiterated that it was the bank's role to be at the
forefront of social innovation and change, supporting new approaches to
development even at the risk of failure.
'The bank's practice of choosing to accept and not to influence the
development path led to considerable difficulty when the bank then sought to
restablish some influence in the 80s.'
The report adds: 'The bank accepted Tanzania's road to socialism enunciated
in 1967 as a fait accompli,' adding that 'since 1967 and at least until
1980,' the bank viewed Tanzania 'as coming close to being a model developing
country'.
But 'misgivings of successive missions concerning the effectiveness of the
planning mechanism, the workability of industrial policies and the viability
of an array of industrial projects initiated in the late 1960s and early
1970s did not evoke sober Bank reaction'.
Initial gains in literacy, primary school enrolment and life expectancy in
the post-independence era seemed to have validated Mr Nyerere's approach.
But by the mid-1970s several things were becoming clear: Tanzania was living
beyond its means; aid projects were seldom self-sustaining and donors were
having to maintain as well as fund projects such as roads; the
state-dominated industrial sector was increasingly inefficient; and
agricultural production was falling.
As the report points out, 'Tanzania's unprecendented access to concessionary
flows of external capital has allowed it. . . to maintain a high rate of
largely ill conceived and uneconomical industrial investment. The cushioning
effect of this access to funds, at least until the late 1970s, reduced the
government's receptivity to external advice for badly needed reforms in the
country's economic planning and management system, policy framework, and
institutional arrangements.
'It was not until 1981 that the bank acknowledged that the situation was
getting out of hand. . . This belated recognition. . . of the existence of a
chronically ailing economy casts doubt on the transparency of the bank's
decision making process.'
The report continues: 'No effort was made to dissuade the leadership from
embarking on ambitious industrialisation programmes when fundamental
preconditions for such an undertaking identified by the bank earlier were
lacking.
'The bank remained an apathetic observer and an impotent bystander of
unfolding developments as Tanzania became the testing ground for an
allegedly 'unique' socialist experiment and one that was poorly thought out
at that.'
None of the donors challenged the conventional wisdom, though by the
mid-1970s it was apparent Mr Nyerere's vision was turning out to be an
egalitarian folly.
The report highlights a problem still common among development agencies  -
government, multilateral and voluntary - in Africa today: reluctance to
speak frankly about recipient government shortcomings. 'The bank was not
prepared to question openly the underlying conflict between the ideological
intentions and what was realistically feasible', it comments.
'No attempt was made to communicate to the political leadership at the
highest level privately the true dimensions of the situation - at least not
until the late 1970s,' says the report.
By the mid-1980s Tanzania's honeymoon with the donors was ending and overall
aid levels have been falling over five years, reflecting recession in
developed economies, aid fatigue and dissatisfaction with Tanzania's
performance.
With Tanzanians' per capita incomes more than halved since 1980, the
government of President Ali Hassan Mwinyi is trying to redress the legacy
with mixed results. Institutionalised corruption, permeating the top
echelons of government, is threatening to undermine fragile macro-economic
stability. Western diplomats estimate up to 10 per cent of aid disappears in
this way.
Many donors are still cautious in their comments, but a Scandinavian
official acknowledges its aid programme 'supported Tanzania through a period
when, in retrospect, we probably shouldn't have'.
