FT  01 JAN 94 / Slovaks mark a first year of misery
As Slovaks prepared this week to celebrate their first year of independence
they found little to cheer about in Bratislava, the capital, where revellers
danced through the night 12 months ago.
The economy remains deeply in recession, inflation is above 25 per cent and
unemployment is 14 per cent and rising. Political infighting threatens to
bring down the government whose paper-thin parliamentary majority could be
overturned at any time on any vote. Demands for autonomy by ethnic
Hungarians, who represent around 12 per cent of the country's population,
are raising fears of ethnic tensions and friction with Hungary, historic
ruler of the Slovak lands.
According to a recent poll, 60 per cent of Slovaks would oppose breaking up
the former Czechoslovak federation if they could vote today though, like
their Czech neighbours, they were never asked to vote on independence. The
split was engineered chiefly by Mr Vladimir Meciar, the Slovak prime
minister, and by Mr Vaclav Klaus, his Czech counterpart. The latter seized
on the opportunity for a quick divorce that would leave the Czech Republic
free to pursue its own accelerated drive towards a free-market economy.
The only party to campaign unambiguously for Slovak independence at the June
1992 general election was the Slovak National party (SNS), but it won less
than 10 per cent of the vote. Other parties mostly hoped to win greater
economic and political autonomy within a reformed Czechoslovak federation,
and none were prepared for the consequences of independence.
Democracy has suffered as a result in both countries, as evidenced by
growing disillusionment with politicians in Slovakia and widespread cynicism
in the Czech Republic over corruption among the business and political
elite.
Dissatisfaction is greatest in Slovakia, where Mr Meciar's Movement for a
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) won 74 of the 150 parliamentary seats a year and
a half ago, but now barely commands 16 per cent of support in opinion polls
 -the same as the left wing Party of the Democratic Left (SDL), successor to
the former Communist party. But the SNS, the HZDS's partner in the recently
formed coalition, is also faring badly with 14 parliamentary seats but only
7 per cent support in the polls.
The coalition, formed in November after months of haggling over government
posts, promised political stability but it is already falling apart at the
seams. The 1994 budget only just scraped through parliament in December with
a margin of three votes, two of which were cast in error by members of the
opposition, while some coalition deputies abstained. In theory, the 66 seats
of the HZDS and the 14 seats of the SNS assure the government of a clear
majority but the HZDS has since lost another deputy, its ninth defection
since the start of the year, and the SNS has split into two factions.
This makes early elections this year increasingly likely, unless Mr Meciar
agrees to demands by president Michal Kovac for a broad coalition - a
solution made more difficult by dislike of Mr Meciar by most of his rivals.
Mr Meciar will resist any moves to replace him and only parliament can call
elections. 'A solution (to the crisis) is in the hands of parliament and the
HZDS,' says a senior official from the president's office.
