FT  03 MAY 94 / Yemen clashes fuel war fears
Yemen's quarrelling political leaders yesterday exchanged heated
recriminations following last week's battle near Sana'a which, officials
say, left 79 dead and 119 wounded.
Reports of further clashes between rival northern and southern military
units throughout the country have added to the growing tension, fuelling
fears of a civil war.
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, the northern leader, yesterday accused his
southern rival, vice-president Ali Salem al-Biedh, of 'secessionism' and
vowed to use military force against him if necessary. 'This is a decisive
battle and we will have to fight it if we are forced to defend unity . . .
and confront secessionists,' General Saleh said, addressing southern
soldiers who surrendered after last week's battle.
Referring to the battle at Amran, about 50km north-west of Sana'a, Mr Biedh
said: 'This means the launching of an all-out civil war', and Gen Saleh was
'personally and fully responsible for all that happened and is happening'.
Mr Biedh repeated his charges over the weekend in telephone conversations
with key Arab leaders, including Egypt's president Hosni Mubarak, Saudi
Arabia's King Fahd and Libya's Colonel Qaddaffi.
Gen Saleh, who himself sent a personal envoy to King Fahd on Friday, has
frequently accused Saudi Arabia and other 'outside forces' of supporting Mr
Biedh and his Yemen Socialist party.
'Yemen's ruling presidential council echoed those charges on Friday, saying
that Mr Biedh and the socialists wanted the Arab League and other Arab
countries to interfere as an excuse to deploy more military forces along the
former border between north and south Yemen.
As the war of words escalates, observers fear further armed clashes,
especially along the old border where rival troops already stand on alert.
But flash points are more likely at southern military bases in the north and
northern ones in the south.
Mr Yaseen Said Noman, a YSP leader, said there had been attempts to
exterminate southern military units in the north which were aggravating the
situation. Gen Saleh returned the accusation on Sunday, claiming the YSP had
deployed troops against northern army units in the south. Gen Saleh warned
that if the northern units were attacked the YSP 'would pay dearly'.
