FT  19 JUL 94 / International Company News: Black businessmen plan SA
listing
A group of black South African businessmen has announced plans to establish
a new R7bn (Dollars 1.91bn) company and list it on the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange next month. If successful, the company will become by far the
largest black-owned and run commercial enterprise in South Africa.
The new company will be built around Methold, to be renamed New Africa
Investments Limited (Nail), a holding company under the control of Dr Nthato
Motlana, a medical doctor by training who until recently served as President
Nelson Mandela's personal physician, and several other prominent black
businessmen. Methold's main investment is a 10 per cent controlling stake in
Metropolitan Life, South Africa's fifth biggest life insurance company.
Nail will be 51 per cent owned by Corporate Africa, an investment vehicle
controlled by Dr Motlana and his partners.
Other leading shareholders will include Afrikaner-controlled insurance giant
Sankorp, the original owner of Metropolitan Life, with 20 per cent and trade
union federation NACTU with 9 per cent. There will be no public share
offering.
Prior to the listing, Methold will acquire a further 20 per cent of
Metropolitan. This will increase its stake to 30 per cent, the largest part
of the new company.
Methold will also acquire 100 per cent of Prosper Africa, another company
under the control of Dr Motlana, which has a controlling interest in The
Sowetan, South Africa's largest daily paper, and a 7 per cent effective
stake in MTN, one of the country's two main cellular phone providers.
To finance the transaction almost R500m has been raised from black business,
pension funds, provident funds and foreign and domestic institutions
including Morgan Stanley, the US merchant bank.
Dr Motlana will become executive chairman of the new group , which he hopes
will lay the foundation for a significant black presence in the South
African economy.
Other board members will include Mr Enos Mabuza, a former 'homeland' leader
turned businessman, Mr Jonty Sandler, a white businessman who has been
working with Dr Motlana for some time, and Mr Sam Motsuenyane, the founder
of the National African Federated Chambers of Commerce.
