FT  22 DEC 94 / Brussels to ease curbs on cable TV networks
The European Commission yesterday announced plans to liberalise cable
television networks across the Union, clearing the way for new electronic
services such as home shopping and interactive education.
Brussels intends to force through the legislation - which aims to give
service providers free access to cable infrastructures by January 1 1996 -
using special powers allowing it to circumvent the Council of Ministers. The
move reflects the Commission's determination to speed the liberalisation of
the EU's telecommunications sector. It fears monopolistic structures are
damaging competitiveness.
Cable infrastructures are widespread in Germany, Belgium, Denmark, the
Netherlands and, to an extent, France but have only been fully liberalised
in the UK. In most of these states, existing national regulations restrict
the use of cable networks to traditional television broadcasting.
The Commission's proposals will lift these curbs, allowing other interactive
services such as home catalogue browsing, banking, interactive video games
and on-line databases to develop. The proposals will not extend to
traditional voice telephone services; under a previous Commission rule these
will not be liberalised until January 1 1998, although individual member
states are free to push ahead on their own.
Yesterday, Mr Karel Van Miert, commissioner responsible for competition,
said the draft law would allow service providers to shop around for better
deals.
'At the moment they have to rent lines from the telecoms operator. Sometimes
the prices they offer are 10 per cent higher than in countries where there
is competition, such as the US,' he said. 'Service providers suffer from a
tremendous handicap because they often have to go to a monopoly supply of
these services.' The European Cable Communications Association welcomed the
move. 'This marks a breakthrough for cable and multimedia in Europe. The
directive offers new perspectives for the cable industry,' it said.
Although the Council of Ministers will not vote formally on the draft
directive, it will be consulted, as will the European parliament. At the
last telecoms council meeting, strong backing for plans to force through
cable network deregulation came from France, the UK, and Germany.
Denmark and Belgium, plus those member states where cable infrastructures
have yet to develop, are not in favour. They are worried the Commission's
plans will set a precedent for other monopolistic networks.
