FT  11 MAY 94 / UK Company News: Scottish Widows gloom over HK
Scottish Widows, one of Britain's leading institutional investors, has
decided to reduce its investment in the Hong Kong market because it believes
property valuations are overblown.
Mr Robin Garrow, director in charge of global asset allocation, made a
particularly glum assessment of the Hong Kong stock market following a visit
there in April.
'In terms of investment policy my main conclusion was to confirm a negative
view of Hong Kong,' Mr Garrow wrote in a recent briefing note. 'This has all
the hallmarks of a classic bubble.'
He also noted that fund managers, perhaps wrongly, approach investment in
south-east Asia on a country basis and not on an individual stock basis.
Hong Kong forms about 38 per cent of the FT-A Pacific Basin Ex-Japan Index
and many fund managers feel they must hold a weighting roughly equal to that
even when they are uncertain about the colony's prospects.
'This is understandable if not laudable for stock markets but, I believe,
regrettable for fund managers. Why should we feel constrained to keeping
Hong Kong, for example, as a proportionately high holding in the area?' Mr
Garrow wrote.
Scottish Widows, with roughly Pounds 20bn in assets, has about Pounds 600m
in east Asia, excluding Japan, with only 15 per cent of that in Hong Kong.
In citing his reasons for reducing exposure, Mr Garrow said that analysts
attending a recent Bank Credit conference believed that profits of property
companies accounted for 65 per cent of the whole of the Hong Kong stock
market and that some companies may be producing paper profits by counting
the future value of properties still under development.
Also, he noted, one company he visited in Shenzhen which described itself as
a conglomerate turned out to be largely involved in property development.
Meanwhile, Mr Tom Crombie, investment director at Scottish Equitable, said
he had also significantly pared investment in Hong Kong since the beginning
of the year to about 20 per cent of Pacific Basin holdings outside Japan,
and would consider cutting further.
'A property bubble of hair-raising proportions has just taken place,' Mr
Crombie said, noting that a house on the Peak in Hong Kong has just sold for
Pounds 10,000 per sq ft - about 250 times more expensive than the top
residential neighbourhood in London.
Mr Crombie said investors counting on a shortage of space to keep up
property prices were mistaken. 'If you go up in a helicopter you can see
that there is plenty of land in Hong Kong and that there is even more over
the border.'
