FT  06 MAY 94 / Survey of The Channel Tunnel (21): A different perspective -
Northern England views Humber ports as more important
There is marked ambivalence about the Channel Tunnel in northern England. At
best it is seen as an additional and complementary piece of infrastructure
for industry and commerce, but not as a substitute because it will be
inconvenient for much existing trade - and too small.
Mr Peter Lee, one of a long line of Sheffield steelmakers and this year's
chairman of the Yorkshire and Humberside CBI regional council, says the
Channel Tunnel is 'very exciting', but is not as important to the north as
the Humber estuary.
'The Channel Tunnel will actually handle only about one-tenth of the freight
which passes through the Humber ports and their volume is growing by more
than that every year,' he told the regional CBI's annual dinner last month.
Mr Lee sees Humberside - which the CBI wants retained as a single economic
unit, not split into two in local government reorganisation - as a 'vital
component' in northern Europe's east-west corridor.
Goods move along this corridor between North America, Ireland, north-west
England and Yorkshire and Humberside, while industry in the conurbations
clustered around the M62 - the main transport artery - has increasingly been
growing stronger because of it, driving the northern England economy.
Manchester Airport - which is now challenging Copenhagen for seventh place
in the European size league - is another central element in the existing
infrastructure. Mr Jim McInstry, shortly before retiring as chief executive
of Blackburn chamber of commerce, said its proposed second runway is more
important to the regional economy than the Channel Tunnel. Many northern
business leaders share his view.
In all the arguments about the Tunnel's potential, however, it is important
not to compare apples with pears. The critical factors are which goods are
being shifted and how far they are going.
The old argument about road versus rail is that rail carries things from
point to point, while road carries them where people want them to go. Rail
is fine for bulk items assembled or broken up at nodal points which are far
apart, but road is best for single loads where delivery distances are under
400 miles.
The growth of the Humber ports has been partly on the back of road haulage.
The UK motorway network puts the bulk of Britain from the Midlands
northwards within half a day's tachograph limits.
A similar argument applies across the North Sea at the Humber's main trading
port of Rotterdam, with the Ruhr little more than three hours distant.
Last year, the Humber's ports and river wharves shifted more than 60m tonnes
of cargo. This was more than the Thames and made the Humber Britain's
busiest estuary. While only about a quarter of this was the sort of unitised
freight the Tunnel will carry, 15m tonnes will be Tunnel's eventual maximum
 -and that not for several years.
Nevertheless, regional Britain is largely ready for the Tunnel in terminals,
of which 11 have been constructed or are planned. The north has four ready:
Liverpool docks, Trafford Park and Guide Bridge - one each side of Greater
Manchester - and Doncaster in South Yorkshire. Another is planned for
Wakefield in West Yorkshire.
These promise to get freight to Brussels or Paris in 15 hours, Stuttgart in
28, Bordeaux in 29, Milan in 36, Vienna in 38 and Madrid in 65 hours.
However, these times are from terminal to terminal, not from door to door.
This is where road hauliers believe they will always score, say, shifting
single loads regularly by Humber ferry between Bradford to Wuppertal between
6pm one day and 11am the next. New high-speed ferries and a floating ro-ro
landing stage in the Humber have started operating this year to develop the
market faster.
They believe the Tunnel stands to score on regular shipments of such things
as large numbers of engineering components, or long distance regular bulk
shipments of high value added goods such as whisky, or perishable products
such as chilled convenience food.
It should also do well out of the only fully inter-modal regional terminal,
which is in Liverpool docks. This already shifts containers straight off
ships to trains. The Tunnel should make trade between southern Europe and
North America - and intra-European trade with Ireland north and south -
easier, with England forming a railway land-bridge between Liverpool and the
Tunnel.
Mersey Docks and Harbour Company already runs a railway land-bridge
operation from the terminal, via Harwich in East Anglia and Zeebrugge in
Belgium. It expects the terminal's throughput to rise from its present
35,000 units a year to 60,000 by the end of 1996 because of the Tunnel.
There remains one difficult problem for all the northern terminals, however
 -the state of Britain's railway lines. The west coast main line, which will
serve the terminals in Manchester, Merseyside and Lanarkshire is in urgent
need of modernisation, with no sign yet of how and when the work will be
done.
The government hopes it will be through its private sector initiative in
partnership with civil engineering and construction companies, but this is
years away - and there are no offers yet from the private sector.
