FT  05 OCT 94 / IRA beatings may delay peace talks
The continuing use of punishment beatings in republican areas of Belfast -
thought to be the work of the provisional IRA - could delay the start of
talks between London and Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing.
A British official yesterday warned: 'All military activity may have
stopped, strictly speaking, but the violence in republican areas is
continuing. We have to consider whether this is terrorism by another name.'
London has promised to start a dialogue on how to admit Sinn Fein to
political talks on Northern Ireland's future within three months of a
permanent end to IRA violence.
The emergence of a possible new obstacle to the peace process coincided
yesterday with mixed signals on the prospects for financial aid for the
province to help smooth the path to a durable settlement.
Mr Dick Spring, the Irish foreign minister, said the European Union should
decide by Christmas on whether to make new aid grants focusing on urban
renewal and infrastructure.
The 'peace grants' would be in addition to EU funds already committed to the
province, he said after he and Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary,
briefed EU foreign ministers on recent developments.
Specific sums were not mentioned yesterday but Mr Spring said he expected
December's summit in Essen of EU leaders to agree a substantial package.
Part of the new money could eventually go towards dismantling the 'peace
walls' separating the two northern communities, senior officials said. But
Mr Hurd made it clear that could only happen 'if people want it to happen'.
The EU has allocated Ecu1.23bn (Pounds 960m) in aid to northern Ireland for
1994-99, and raised its annual contribution to the International Fund for
Ireland from Ecu15m to Ecu20m.
US officials have been trying to lower the level of expectations. A senior
administration official said: 'I don't think any large assistance package of
direct aid is on the cards. We just don't have that kind of budget
flexibility.'
Dr John Alderdice, leader of the non-sectarian Alliance party, also drew
this conclusion from his talks with US officials this week.
The White House is examining less direct forms of aid, such as enhancing the
role of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation and accelerating
spending from the International Fund for Ireland - to which the US
contributes.
The continuing violence will be another obstacle for Mr Gerry Adams, the
Sinn Fein president, as he tries to increase pressure on London to start
talks on his return from the US later this week.
A further three beatings came to light this week, taking the total number of
beatings in republican ares to 10 since the IRA ceasefire on August 31. In
the same period last year there was only one punishment beating.
The provisional IRA has not admitted it is responsible for the beatings but
the Royal Ulster Constabulary is convinced that it is.
Wishful thinking, Page 23
