FT  26 SEP 94 / Survey of Using Computers in Business (11): Sabotage
incidents most costly - National survey
Not surprisingly, companies are reluctant to talk about their security
problems. It is acutely embarrassing and makes them vulnerable to further
breaches.
This reluctance is reflected in the National Computing Centre (NCC) survey
published in July. Of the 850 UK companies who replied to the survey, only
74 were prepared to talk further about specific security breaches. The NCC
interviewed 25 companies which generated 31 case studies. These studies,
together with seven further NCC studies are published in the survey.
The NCC notes that the majority of the incidents dealt with viruses (16),
theft of equipment (11) and unauthorised access (8). A few sabotage
incidents were also reported.
The incidents of virus infection' range from the relatively trivial to the
very serious. One small company encountered problems from someone
accidentally introducing the so-called 'Michelangelo' virus via a golf
program. It cost about Pounds 2,000 to put right and caused no real
problems.
A large food and drink company quoted in the survey was faced with a more
serious virus problem following 34 redundancies in its information systems
department. A virus called Form, which destroys data, was accidentally
introduced into a local area network of 40 personal computers:
'A PC user took a blank disk from a box and formatted it on her PC. She then
copied a file to the disk and took it to another PC to make use of the laser
printing facilities. Unknown to the user, the 'blank' disk had been infected
with a version of Form then replaced in the box.'
The incident cost the company Pounds 50,000 in time and effort to put right
and it has since introduced vetting procedures on all incoming disks.
Sabotage incidents of this type  - although rare  - are the most costly. It
cost a large company in the information technology sector an estimated
Pounds 33,000 to recover from damage done by a disgruntled student. The
student managed to 'hack' into the company network using a dial-up modem and
an unauthorised account number. Files were deleted and derogatory messages
were sent through the electronic mail system.
The student was later charged and convicted under the Computer Misuse Act,
receiving a six-month suspended sentence.
Even relatively trivial incidents can mean significant costs in the long
term. A government department notes that, although it cost only Pounds 500
to get rid of a virus in its network of 250 PCs, there is an overhead
associated with monitoring for further incidents:
'There is a continuous background cost of perhaps Pounds 6,000 a year to
provide basic facilities to enable detection of this type of event.'
The British Standards Institute has published a Code of Practice for
Information Security Management based on the best practice and experiences
of a wide range of companies. The NCC includes an analysis of this in the
1994 survey together with recommendations as to how it can be improved. The
NCC can be contacted on 061 228 6333.
