FT  09 MAR 94 / Banco Latino 'a victim for political reasons'
The former president of Venezuela's Banco Latino, taken over by the
government in January, says the bank was victimised for political reasons
and was in no worse shape than other banks the government has chosen to
save.
Mr Gustavo Gomez Lopez said the decision to intervene at the bank was made
by the country's previous government under President Ramon Velasquez 'more
for political than technical reasons'.
Latino, Venezuela's second biggest bank, was seen by Mr Velasquez' interim
government as having aided the political and personal fortunes of
ex-president Carlos Andres Perez, he added.
Mr Perez, forced to leave the presidency last year to face corruption
charges, had a long and close association with important shareholders of the
bank.
Mr Gomez, speaking by phone from an undisclosed location outside Venezuela,
said: 'The government intervened in my bank and I am now seen as a criminal.
But in the case of other Venezuelan banks suffering from liquidity problems,
the government is providing them with financial aid and is not prosecuting
anyone.
He admitted Banco Latino was in trouble, but 'it was no more problematic
than other Venezuelan banks. When I took over I raised capital and tried to
change the bank from what it had been.'
Mr Gomez, 43, resigned as president of Banco Latino in December after 18
years at the bank and 14 months as chief executive. He left Venezuela soon
after, he said, because friends warned him he would be a target of
persecution. 'I didn't want to be held in a police cellar incommunicado.
I'll return to Venezuela when the (political) climate changes'.
Last week, a criminal court judge in Caracas issued arrest warrants against
Mr Gomez and 82 others suspected of being involved in the downfall of the
bank. Latino's failure set off a crisis in Venezuela's financial system and
triggered a wave of frantic dollar purchases in January and February. Mr
Gomez, who said he is not guilty of any wrongdoing, is charged with illegal
appropriation, fraud, conspiracy and approving false financial statements.
