FT  08 FEB 94 / Technology: Orphan quickly finds a home - Why a Japanese
drug company chose a tiny market
Pharmaceutical companies have, in recent years, been concentrating on
developing compounds for large markets. The cost of developing a drug with a
potential market of Dollars 100m (Pounds 67m) is not much less than a
Dollars 1bn one. As a result, most research and development directors have
decided to concentrate on the big therapeutic categories where the rewards
are likely to be greatest.
The drawback is that the large categories tend to be highly competitive and
most require huge clinical trials. This takes time - an important
consideration given that the patent-life is limited - and money.
Fujisawa, Japan's fifth-largest drugs group, adopted an unusual approach for
its latest compound, Prograf. It deliberately developed the drug, the first
new immuno-suppressant launched in 10 years, for use in liver transplants
only - a relatively tiny area. There are only about 20 liver transplants a
year in Japan.
The move appears strange because Prograf is crucial to Fujisawa's future.
Eventually, however, the potential market for the drug is huge. The main
competitor is Sandimmun, a drug marketed by Sandoz of Switzerland with
annual sales of about SFr1.3bn (Pounds 600m).
Hitoshi Oyashu, managing director of Fujisawa's R&amp;D division, says the main
reason for starting with a limited indication was to obtain 'orphan' status.
A recent Japanese law gives priority for orphan drugs treating diseases
affecting no more than 50,000 people.
In theory, orphan drugs are given:
Priority during the ministry of health's review of the drug's safety and
efficacy.
Exclusive marketing rights for 10 years against six years for other drugs.
Government R&amp;D subsidies.
Tax exemptions on development costs.
Even in the US, the review procedure was markedly accelerated by choosing
such a limited indication. The compound was filed for use in liver
transplants during September last year and declared approvable by an FDA
advisory committee within two months. The company expects final approval
this month - an astonishingly quick process. There are about 3,000 liver
transplants in the US each year, according to James Capel, UK stockbrokers,
in Japan.
The second great advantage of such a narrow indication according to Oyashu
was that Prograf was granted a substantial price premium to existing
therapies.
In May 1992, the Japanese ministry of health and welfare created a system of
fixing new drug prices. The only drugs allowed significant premiums to
existing therapies would be those based on a new concept, showing advantages
in safety and usefulness, and making a 'striking' contribution compared with
conventional treatments. Prograf is the only drug to have fulfilled those
criteria since the rules were introduced.
In the meantime, the company is using the wedge of the liver transplant
indication to gain approval for kidney transplants, and eventually other
auto-immune diseases such as eye disorders, Paget's disease and arthritis.
The company hopes to have approval for kidney transplants in Japan during
the second quarter of this year. In the US, it hopes the drug is approved by
the fourth quarter of 1996.
Industry consultants say the market for Prograf is already much larger than
might be imagined. Once a drug is approved, doctors prescribe it for other
indications even though it might not be strictly licensed for them. That
helps with later marketing. Another advantage is that once the drug is in
use, regulatory authorities become less concerned about safety, leaving the
company free to prove efficacy. This speeds up subsequent approvals.
However, the R&amp;D director of one of Japan's big groups says the advantage of
high pricing only lasts when the indication is narrow.
