FT  26 OCT 94 / Survey of Technology in the Office (20): Tenants look for
office flexibility - Increasing use of technology has presented problems to
developers
Developers came late to the world of high technology. Despite increasingly
frantic urgings from tenants and architects, they have only recently started
producing buildings which can cope with the computer age.
Now, however, they face a barrage of complaints that the pendulum has swung
too far. Many modern office blocks are too sophisticated, say the engineers
that face the task of running them. They also burn a large hole in tenants'
pockets.
Ironically, a groundswell of disdain remains about the poor standards of
most buildings to cope with office technology. Many high-tech companies
complain that they still find it hard to track down suitable premises. Even
non-technical ones groan at the difficulties of fairly simple internal
reorganisation of desks and equipment.
A computer on every desk was considered a Star Wars dream until the mid-80s.
But the 'Big Bang' financial revolution changed all that. Large groups went
wild in the scramble for a share of deregulated markets. Everyone expected
to to win a big slice, which meant grabbing more office space.
This coincided with a switch to computer-based dealing in securities,
currencies and a host of other markets. Big dealing floors became the norm
in new City blocks. But even the most mundane office was filling up with new
technology as equipment prices fell. By the end of the decade, Star Wars was
no longer a dream.
This sea-change in working methods transformed designs of certain buildings.
It was well known that electronics produce heat - but hate high
temperatures. Computer rooms had been sealed and air-conditioned for years.
Now that became the norm for a good deal of general office space, fitted
with false ceilings for ducting, sealed windows to keep in
expensively-cooled air and huge plant rooms on the roof.
Electronics also need miles of cables, and raised floors became the rage. At
one time designers were proposing enough space for a service engineer to
walk through without disturbing the drones above.
But all this costs money. Central London rents doubled during the boom -
partly to pay for the new services. Running costs also soared. Then came the
slump, and profit-strapped tenants began to worry about these high
occupation costs.
By then, however, developers had got into their stride and were offering
more and more sophisticated buildings. Air-conditioning became the norm,
even in buildings well outside the city centres, where it was justifiable to
seal buildings against pollution and noise.
Engineers and surveyors also started to question whether all this expensive
sophistication was really necessary. Peter Hill of the Building Research
Establishment Energy Conservation Support Unit (Brecsu) examined how office
equipment was used in 74 British companies. He found that manufacturers
vastly over-estimated the power demands - and therefore heat output. Staff
also tended to use equipment such as PCs in very different ways, so power
consumption ranged widely from 50 to 250 watts per person.
Developers ensure they can offer speculative buildings to the widest group
of potential tenants, so they made sure power could be provided at the top
of this range. Air-conditioning designed to cope with this higher figure
was, therefore, consistently running below capacity for the average tenant.
Users found themselves paying too much for the original system then extra
for running it inefficiently.
Efforts are now being made to adjust buildings closer to tenant needs by
bringing occupiers into the planning process. The British Council for
Offices, a group of agents and developers, has also produced guidance notes
that will avoid pitfalls.
The potential for savings shows up in a scheme being handled by cost
consultants AYH Partnership, which reduced the power loading for one
proposed London building from 25 to 15 Watts per sq metre. That will cut
future maintenance and running costs by 80,000 a year.
Over-specified buildings will be more appreciated as power consumption rises
to around 300 watts/person by the end of the decade. But this could be a
brief respite, as the move to 'green' PCs will cut that back to 200W in the
following 10 years, according to Brecsu.
Many high-tech businesses, however, are more concerned that buildings fall
below the specifications they need. Quality Software Products, the
recently-floated publisher of accountancy packages, was disappointed to be
forced out of its Leatherhead offices. The company had spent a great deal of
time and money altering the building to cope with computer equipment, but
needed space to grow.
Finding a suitable replacement was not easy, says QSP, although it
eventually tracked one down one at Leatherhead's Regent Park which had been
designed well enough to take the endless cabling, specialised lighting,
security systems and the Lan and Wan technology required.
This was at least an advance on the 1980s when the task proved impossible in
Gateshead, the company's birthplace. QSP had to build its own headquarters
because developers had nothing suitable to offer. Things have not improved
much today, as most of the suitable buildings are concentrated in the
south-east.
One of the main problems is finding a building flexible enough to take the
constant changes demanded by modern businesses, says Richard Hannam of QSP.
'You literally need to be able to shift walls over a weekend as teams are
moved around,' he says.
Cabling is also a big problem for the modern office. Within the first year
of occupation the average business moves half the work positions, according
to Stephen Hill of Oscar Faber Information and Communications. That
continues with an average 'churn' of 30 per cent a year.
More than half these moves require recabling, costing up to 400 per staff
member. Designers are now trying to solve this problem with the introduction
of structured wiring schemes under which a wide variety of power, data and
other cabling can be merged. These schemes pay for themselves within two or
three years by cutting the cost of churns to 20 per person, says Mr Hill.
Companies will need to take a much closer look in future at whether this
kind of scientific approach to fittings has gone into offices they are
seeking. High specifications may appear a godsend for those desperate to
find buildings geared to high technology, but they must be appropriate to
future needs.
The main criterion should be flexibility to change - either up or down the
technology ladder. Whether developers can come up with the goods is another
matter.
