FT  14 DEC 94 / N Caucasus republics nurture old enmities
The North Caucasian republics remain trapped in a net of historical
grievances and unfulfilled national ambitions, which 70 years of Soviet
rule, followed by its sudden loosening, have complicated rather than solved.
The 5m people, divided into half a dozen republics and into scores of ethnic
and linguistic groups, ranging from a few thousand to some hundred
thousands, have bitter experience in common, together with a pervasive
tradition of powerlessness. But this has not been a unifying force and even
now divides as much as unites.
The area's importance is twofold. First, the republics are constitutionally
Russian and thus must decide their future with Russia. The independence
ambitions of Chechnya in particular are a threat to state integrity and thus
to the strength of the Russian leadership and its support from liberal
parties now opposed to the use of force. Second, the area is largely Moslem
and thus arouses strong Russian fears of 'extremism' and provides a focus
for at least latent sympathy of many millions of Moslems in Russia and in
Azerbaijan and central Asia.
The North Caucasian republics strung out between the Black and Caspian seas,
along the Caucasus mountain range, which divides Russia from Georgia,
Armenia and Azerbaijan are (from west to east): the Adygeya republic,
separated from the others by Russian territory and with an ethnic Russian
majority; the Karachai-Cherkesk republic, in which the two main groups which
make up the republic's name coexist uneasily; Kabardino-Balkaria, which has
the same problem; North Ossetia, the only largely Christian state, whose
sister southern republic is formally within Georgia; Ingushetia, which split
from its ethnic cousin, Chechnya, three years ago and still has a clear
border with it; Chechnya, the centre of the conflict; and Dagestan, the
largest and most ethnically complex, with more than 30 groups in delicate
counterbalance.
For centuries at the edge of competing empires, the Northern Caucasus was
absorbed into Tsarist Russia in a series of brutal campaigns up to the
mid-1860s. They were seen as a barrier between Russia and its hegemony over
Georgia and Armenia which had come under Russia's sway in the early 1800s.
Where these southern people were seen by the Russians at least for a time as
cultivated, 'the people of the Northern Caucasus were seen as out-and-out
savages', according to Suzanne Goldenberg, author of a recent history of the
region.
The cruelty of their imperial suppression is one defining factor; the
degradation of the Soviet period is an even fresher one. Chopped into
various and frequently altered administrative regions in the twenties,
subjected (especially the Chechens) to vicious purges in the thirties,
deported and murdered for suspected Nazi collaboration in the forties
(again, especially the Chechens), the North Caucasian peoples emerged into
the post-war period with too heavy a historical burden to be dissolved by
the strokes of a pen in Moscow.
They now suffer disproportionately from the economic dislocation which
afflicts all Russia. They bear the added burden of open ethnic tension
between and within them and the inspiring but fearful example of Chechnya's
drive for independence.
On the fringes of the talks between Russian and Chechen negotiators
yesterday was a delegation from the Confederation of Caucasian Peoples, an
ad hoc group formed in 1989 with the aim of uniting the different republics.
Mr Ali Aliev, the speaker of the confederation's 'parliament', and himself
from Dagestan said that 'our position is that we defend the rights of the
little peoples of the Caucasus. Now in Russia there is a war party. Our task
is not to allow that party to win. For, if there is a war it would not be a
Russian-Chechen war, it would be Russian-Caucasian war'.
This may be over-dramatic. The splits in the North Caucasus, especially
between the North Ossetians and the others are deep. All except the Chechens
have come to some accommodation with the fact of Russian authority. But in
all of these states there are many young men with arms who might respond to
a call to rebel. The squashing of Chechnya, if it is to take place, would
ignite old fires across the Caucasus.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
CHECHNYA                          INGUSHETIA
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
STATUS: Unilaterally declared     STATUS: republic of Russian Federation
independance from Russia in       with territorial claims against North
1991; now under invasion by       Ossetia and under a state of emergency
Russian troops                    regularly renewed by the Russian
                                  parliament
CAPITAL: Grozny                   CAPITAL: Nazran
POPULATION AND NATIONALITIES:     POPULATION: roughly 250,00
Chechen-Ingush republic, which    NATIONALITIES: mainly Ingush
broke apart after the Chechen     RELIGION: Sunni Muslim
independance declaration, had
1.3m people in 1989, 55%
Chechen, 12% Ingush, 22%
Russian
RELIGION: Sunni Muslim (Sufi)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
NORTH OSSETIA                     DAGESTAN
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
STATUS: republic of Russian       STATUS: republic of Russian Federation
Federation                        CAPITAL: Makhachakala
CAPITAL: Vladikavkaz              POPULATION: 1.8m
POPULATION: 632,400               NATIONALITIES: 33, some very small,
NATIONALITIES: Ossetians 53%,     the main ones being Avars 27% (14
Russians 30%, Ingush 5% in 1989   tribal group), Dargins 16%, Kumyks 13%
with Ossetian refugees flowing    Lezgins 11%, Russians 9%, Laks 5%
in from South Ossetia
RELIGION: largely Orthodox        RELIGION: Sunni Muslim (Sufi)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
