FT  01 DEC 94 / Tapie gains a breathing space: Court orders attempt to
rescue populist politician's companies
Mr Bernard Tapie, the French populist politician and tycoon, yesterday won a
reprieve in his struggle to secure his financial and political future. A
Paris commercial court ruled that his remaining business interests should be
placed in receivership rather than be wound up.
The ruling, which freezes Mr Tapie's assets for six months and allows a
court-appointed administrator to try to rescue his businesses, removes the
prospect of imminent bankruptcy for the left-wing French deputy and European
MP.
Under French law, bankruptcy would have rendered him ineligible for elected
public office for five years, dashing his political career.
Mr Tapie has set his sights on becoming mayor of Marseilles in elections due
in the middle of next year. He has also indicated that he might run in the
presidential elections next spring following the strong showing of his
Radical Energy list in last June's European elections.
The pro-European list, which called for radical measures to reduce
unemployment, won 12 per cent of the vote.
Mr Tapie welcomed the court's decision. 'I am very satisfied because my
companies and their employees will survive,' he said. He accused his
creditors of seeking to end his political career.
Yesterday's ruling was the most important of a series of legal disputes
which have dogged the flamboyant French deputy. He faces a spate of suits
from creditors, in particular Credit Lyonnais, the loss-making state-owned
bank which funded his rapid business expansion in the 1980s and which is now
attempting to recoup loans estimated at FFr1.2bn (Dollars 225m).
The ruling was greeted with some surprise in France, where Mr Tapie divides
observers between admiration for his charisma and anti-establishment
credentials and resentment concerning his rise to prominence, partly through
the financing of his businesses by state institutions.
It comes as a blow to Credit Lyonnais which believes that some of the
businesses should be placed into liquidation.
Mr Tapie's legal battles are far from over, however. The Paris Tribunal de
Commerce called for a hearing on December 14 to determine whether to uphold
his claim that Credit Lyonnais is partly responsible for the management of
his companies.
Yesterday, a separate court rejected Mr Tapie's appeal against a fine of
FFr1m for giving false information about the state of one of his companies.
The future of Mr Tapie's indebted and loss-making businesses is also
insecure. Should the court administrators fail to rescue or find buyers for
the various businesses they will be liquidated.
Financiere Immobiliere Bernard Tapie, which owns his 17th century mansion
and his FFr74m luxury yacht are seen as vulnerable. The other businesses
placed in receivership include Groupe Bernard Tapie, which controls three
weighing-machine businesses and a chain of health food stores.
Mr Bernard Tapie (right): ruling removes the imminent prospect of
bankruptcy, which would have dashed his political ambitions
