FT  20 SEP 94 / Arts: The Royal Philharmonic woos a youthful audience to the
Albert Hall
The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra has formed a partnership with the Royal
Albert Hall which makes the RPO the 'house' orchestra of the hall,
performing there ten times in the 1995-96 season with the expectation of 40
appearances during 1997-98.
Next season's concerts are certain to go ahead but the greater commitment,
with the RPO playing roughly once a week between October and May, depends
upon raising Pounds 500,000, which will mainly be spent on marketing the
link and building up an audience.
The RPO hopes that the Arts Council and Westminster City Council will
contribute towards the investment needed. The plan is that the seats in the
Arena, where the Promenaders stand during the BBC's summer Proms, will be
priced at just Pounds 4 to attract a similarly youthful audience. If public
money is not forthcoming the RPO and the RAH will look for a corporate
sponsor.
A 'home' at the Royal Albert Hall will mark a remarkable resurgence for the
RPO, which was threatened with the loss of all its subsidy a year ago when
the Arts Council, unsuccessfully, attempted to stop funding two leading
orchestras. In the event the RPO received a grant of only Pounds 300,000
from the Council for 1994-95, less than 5 per cent of its turnover.
The RPO has since signed a sponsorship deal with Classic fm; embarked on a
major recording contract with Tring Records; and forged a residency in
Nottingham. The RPO would bring classical music to the RAH on a regular
basis outside the summer Prom season, nicely fulfilling the ambition of
Patrick Deuchar, chief executive of the Hall, to present a more structured
programme.
The orchestra would provide a range of music but concentrate on choral and
the great romantic classics, which suit the size of a hall with 5,000 seats,
of which 3,500 are available to the public.
The RPO link with the RAH fits neatly into Arts Council policy of marrying
orchestras to halls. The LSO resides at the Barbican and the LPO and the
Philharmonia are house orchestras at the South Bank.
