FT  02 MAR 94 / Ex-DTI legal adviser faces Scott today
The legal position of the government in the arms-for-Iraq affair will come
under fresh scrutiny today when Mr Gerald Hosker QC gives evidence to the
Scott inquiry.
Mr Hosker was chief legal adviser to the Department of Trade and Industry
from 1987 to 1992, a crucial period which has the Matrix Churchill case at
its core.
He was then promoted to Treasury solicitor, where he has acted as chief
legal adviser to all government law officers and assisted Sir Nicholas
Lyell, the attorney-general.
He was a government legal adviser in the period when Customs prosecuted
three executives of the Matrix Churchill machine-tool company for exporting
arms-related machinery to Iraq, and when ministers signed public-interest
immunity certificates seeking to withhold from the courts information that
those executives were working for British intelligence and with the
knowledge of ministers.
Mr Hosker comes before Lord Justice Scott two days after Mr Michael
Heseltine told the inquiry of his fears that attempts to withhold Whitehall
documents from the Matrix Churchill trial would fuel suspicions of a
cover-up.
Two weeks ago Mr Hosker's assistant, Mr Andrew Leithead, admitted to the
inquiry that government lawyers had doctored official papers crucial to the
acquittal of the Matrix Churchill executives.
Sir Nicholas Lyell, the attorney-general, is not scheduled to give evidence
to the Scott inquiry until March 24, so it falls to Mr Hosker to try to
convince Lord Justice Scott that the Matrix Churchill prosecution
represented, in Sir Nicholas's words, a 'careful application of
well-established procedures designed to ensure the proper balancing by the
court of competing public interests and thus the administration of justice'.
Ministers giving evidence to the inquiry have been unable to strike a common
position on what they considered their role and duty to be in signing PII
certificates.
Mr Heseltine told the inquiry that he had signed the certificate extremely
reluctantly after being told by Sir Nicholas that it was his duty. But
following the Matrix Churchill trial the minister said he had been advised
'there was not a duty in every case to claim PII'.
Other ministers who signed PII certificates - Mr Malcolm Rifkind, Mr Tristan
Garel-Jones, Mr Peter Lilley and Mr Kenneth Clarke - said they did so
because they considered it their duty.
Even Mr Clarke, who told the Scott inquiry he felt some degree of discretion
in signing PII certificates as a minister, signed his unflinchingly during
the Matrix Churchill trial.
Mr Clarke's justification for non-disclosure was not challenged by the
Matrix Churchill defence counsel. What remains more controversial is the
decision by Mr Rifkind and Mr Garel-Jones to use in their PIIs the phrase
'injurious to the public interest' to describe documents which were of
relevance to the defence.
Editorial comment, Page 23
