FT  27 JAN 94 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): A flight path to
good pricing - How Airtours uses data on its competitors to maximise
profitability
The staff of the late bookings section of Airtours, the UK's second biggest
holiday company, are looking pleased. They have just managed to raise the
price of Caribbean holidays by Pounds 50.
Poring over banks of screens at Airtours' headquarters in rural Helmshore,
Lancashire, the 10-strong Airtours team bears more than a passing
resemblance to a group of City of London dealers. Their average age is 22
and they arrive at work at 7am.
What they are doing, however, is not trading currencies or selling bonds. On
the basis of up-to-the-minute information about their competitors in the
UK's Pounds 4.9bn air holiday market, they are seeking to adjust their own
prices to maximise profitability.
Travel agents, whether multiple chains or independent shops, look up
destinations on screen. The prices they see are set and communicated to them
by the tour operators, which arrange flights and accommodation. Thomson, the
biggest travel group, and Owners Abroad, the number three, change their
holiday prices every night. Airtours changes its prices several times a day.
Along with the rest of the holiday industry, Airtours makes much of its
cost-cutting campaigns. But like all companies, it strives to charge
whatever the market can bear, pushing prices up when demand is strongest.
Late bookings indeed play a central role in determining a holiday company's
profitability. The companies begin selling summer holidays in the August of
the summer before, when they publish the first edition of their brochures.
In January, they publish a second edition, with either higher or lower
prices, depending on how sales are going and what competing companies are
doing.
It is in the last eight weeks before departure that price competition
becomes most intense. David Crossland, Airtours' chairman, says a third of
holidays are sold during this period. There is also a winter late-booking
period, when holidaymakers make last-minute purchases of skiing holidays and
trips to the Caribbean.
Apart from trying to get the highest price possible, the late booking team
tries to ensure that all the company's airline seats are filled.
Tour operators pay for most of their accommodation in holiday resorts only
if they use it, although they do guarantee to fill a certain proportion of
beds. If bookings are disappointing, they do not end up owing hoteliers
large sums of money.
Airline seats are another matter. Airtours flies some of its customers on
its own aircraft. The rest go in seats chartered from other companies. The
seats have to be paid for whether they are filled or not. Flights that
depart with empty seats represent a loss to the tour operator.
The Airtours late bookings team's first task of the morning is to look at
the prices competitors have set overnight. They do this by using the
computer information available to travel agents. Airtours owns the Going
Places travel agents' chain which sells holidays organised by other
operators as well. This gives Airtours access to other operators' prices.
Crossland says Airtours is working on a system which will enable it to use
Going Places' sales to assess how well competing operators' holidays are
selling, as well as the prices being achieved.
Andrew Crossland, the 27-year-old head of the late bookings team and the
chairman's son, says Airtours will not necessarily do the same if a
competitor drops prices on holidays to a particular destination.
The competitor's price reduction could be temporary: the company might be
attempting to fill a particular aircraft or ensure it can sell its
guaranteed beds. On other occasions, the price drop might signal an attempt
to take market share from rivals like Airtours. 'The trick is to know when
to follow the market,' Andrew Crossland says.
The team says it gets to know the psychology of rival price setters, as well
as of customers. When the British weather is miserable, for example, prices
of sunshine resort holidays tend to be firmer.
