FT  05 MAY 94 / Markets Report: Banks support dollar
Central banks yesterday intervened repeatedly, in concert and on a large
scale, to support the dollar, writes Philip Gawith.
In what dealers described as the heaviest bout of intervention in several
years, as many as 17 central banks were seen selling D-Marks and yen to buy
dollars.
The heavy support for the US currency, coupled with the comments of senior
officials, provided a clear indication that G7 governments are unhappy with
the recent weakness of the dollar.
The US currency finished in London at DM1.662, up from a day's low of
DM1.6339 and Tuesday's close of DM1.6461. Against the yen, the dollar ended
at Y102.205, off an intraday low of Y100.75 and up from the previous close
of Y101.315. In New York the dollar closed at DM1.6545 and Y101.845.
Elsewhere, the Bundesbank sanctioned a 6 basis-point fall in the German repo
rate to 5.41 per cent. In Belgium the key central rate was shaved by 10
basis points to 5.50 per cent.
Central bank support for the dollar came in two parts yesterday. The first
salvo was delivered by Mr Hans Tietmeyer, president of the Bundesbank. Early
in the morning a comment from a speech he gave later in the day was released
to the press. 'A too strong appreciation (in the D-Mark), for example
against the dollar, is not in the interests of the German economy,' a
spokesman quoted Mr Tietmeyer as saying.
The dollar rose on these comments, which caught the market unawares. With
hindsight, Mr Tietmeyer's comments were clearly setting the stage for the
intervention that followed. Intervention is normally most effective when the
currency is already moving in the central bank's direction and Mr
Tietmeyer's comments helped the dollar off early lows.
The extent of the intervention was difficult to quantify, but one market
source put it at 'several billion dollars'. One bank reported seeing 10
rounds of intervention by the Fed alone. Most European central banks, as
well as the Bank of Japan, the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada, were
also seen in the market.
The first bout of intervention came around midday in Europe when the Fed
bought dollars at about Y101.50. It soon followed up by buying dollars
around DM1.6570. Other central banks had, meanwhile, also started to buy the
dollar.
Mr David Cocker, currency analyst at Chemical Bank, commented: 'It was
pretty heavy. We have not seen anything like it for several years.'
Mr Brian Martin, senior economist at Citibank, said the intervention, taken
with Mr Tietmeyer's comments, was probably explained by concerns about
growth. With European economies still fairly depressed, German economic
recovery is dependent on a good export performance. A strong D-Mark makes
this more difficult.
Another explanation for the intervention is that dollar weakness was souring
the US Treasury market, thus complicating the funding of the US budget
deficit. Mr Cocker, however, disputed this view, arguing that dollar
weakness flows from bond market weakness, not vice versa.
He believes bond market jitters are the result of market uncertainty about
Fed intentions. 'The market has to believe you have reached a plateau in US
rates,' he said.
Mr Martin was sceptical about whether the central bank intervention would
work. 'In the short term, the markets may be reluctant to test the central
bank's resolve, but I do not see that much upside for the dollar.' Others
felt that the intervention would serve to break the market's belief that the
Fed is interested in a weaker dollar to boost exports.
Certainly the broad range of political support for the dollar will give
pause for thought. Commenting on the round of intervention, Mr Lloyd
Bentsen, the US Treasury secretary, said: 'This administration sees no
advantage in an undervalued currency . . . these operations reflect our view
that recent movements in exchange markets have gone beyond what is justified
by economic fundamentals.'
This message was echoed by Mr Edmond Alphandery, the French economy
minister, and Mr Tietmeyer.
Intervention was a mixed blessing for sterling, which lost nearly a cent
against the dollar, closing at Dollars 1.4988 from Dollars 1.5085, but
gained against the D-Mark, finishing at DM2.491 from DM2.483.
In the money markets, the Bank of England provided assistance of Pounds
648m, compared to a shortage of Pounds 650m. Sterling interest rate futures
lost more ground owing to pessimism about the outlook for another interest
rate cut. The June contract closed 3 basis points lower at 94.56. Losses in
the longer contracts were greater.
The D-Mark declined against most currencies, although it was stronger
against the Spanish peseta and the Italian lira. Against the French franc it
finished at FFr3.424 from FFr3.426.
German call money eased to 5.45/55 per cent from 5.65/75 per cent after the
repo, while Euromark futures were slightly higher across the board.
