FT  27 MAY 94 / Survey of Relocation in the UK (16): Culture shock that paid
off - The British Council's move to Manchester
The British Council has not yet stopped counting the benefits - many of them
unexpected - of its relocation from London to Manchester in 1992.
The council is Britain's principal agency for cultural relations overseas.
It has charitable status, a royal charter and a funding link to the UK
Treasury. Most people would expect it to do the bulk of its headquarters
work, like other such British institutions, in London.
But the council's main strength is its global network of about 6,000 people.
They staff the real front offices. Where the British head office and
back-office staff work is now irrelevant as the UK becomes ever smaller
through improving physical and electronic communications.
In any event, London posed problems. At one stage, council staff were
scattered through 10 office buildings. Support services were a problem. A
large, in-house maintenance staff was needed. A fleet of cars and vans was
required to move people, paper and packages through the London traffic. A
corps of messengers had to be employed. There was a perpetual problem with
junior staff: like many London organisations, the council found it hard to
retain them in a competitive labour market.
On top of all this, there were the 'London' problems of high overheads and
operating costs - and the effect on productivity of unreliable public
transport failing to get everyone to work on time every day.
Nevertheless, within the council's own ranks there was initial dismay that
it should contemplate a move from the capital. As Mr Brian Humphreys, the
council's resources manager, puts it: 'The first reaction in London was of
disbelief, followed by resistance, then acceptance, then co-operation, then
surprise.'
The choice of where to go narrowed to Glasgow, Leeds and Manchester. There
was not much to choose between the three cities in terms of quality of life
and the accommodation on offer; but Manchester was the only one with an
international gateway airport designated as a hub - and that 'gave
Manchester the edge,' Mr Humphreys says.
Although the building which the council took is a 10-minute walk from
Manchester Town Hall, it is only a 20-minute drive from Manchester Airport.
The site itself was developed by British Gas and was once a depot in the
shadow of a railway viaduct. With the land reclaimed and landscaped, the
development has made a notable contribution to environmental regeneration by
removing a substantial source of potential blight.
It has also linked well to other developments - such as GMEX, the Greater
Manchester Exhibition and Conference Centre converted from a derelict
railway station - to assist the expansion of Manchester city centre. The
arrangement of the 116,000 sq ft of offices is the work of Business Design
Group, a consultancy in working environments with 200 staff throughout
Europe.
But the relocation of the British Council was not just a transplantation.
The move offered the chance of a radical restructuring of the organisation
and its operating procedures. With increasing competition for government
contracts from universities, the Crown Agents or small or individual
overseas aid administrators, it wanted to reduce unit costs.
It decided not to move its big services and maintenance department, but to
split its functions and use contractors. Competitive tendering enabled it to
pick and choose separate contractors for catering, building maintenance,
security and cleaning. In addition, there are two 'implants' providing
services - Thomas Cook for the council's Pounds 10m of travel of each year
and Rank Xerox for reprographic work.
Another decision was to have no messengers and dispense with the fleet of
vehicles and drivers. Instead, more use is being made of information
technology, with a terminal per desk, and video-conferencing facilities with
London and the council's Hong Kong offices. Similar links will follow to
other overseas bureaux.
The Treasury allocated Pounds 15m for the move. There was an overall project
manager, plus one for personnel, one for the building, one for information
technology, one for the move, and one - Mr Humphreys - to get everyone into
the building and get it running.
The British Council started the move in March 1992 and completed it with a
big push for most relocating staff during a single October weekend. 'People
arrived on the Monday to find telephones working,' Mr Humphreys says. 'I
doubt whether we lost more than a few hours of downtime.'
About 250 staff moved permanently and 50 commute weekly between the
south-east and north-west. Some 300 were recruited locally and there are now
100 temporary employees.
Mr Humphreys adds: 'We have been quite embarrassed by the high quality of
the local staff when compared with what we had known in London. Their
commitment has proved high and greater than what we were used to.'
Another surprise was that interaction does not stop at the end of the
working day. Staff used to rush for trains, tubes and buses as they
scattered all over the south-east, commuting homeward. Now the council's bar
is a gathering place for between 50 and 60 people every night.
'Some people worried about the loss of London's anonymity and did not want
to be bumping into each other all the time. But here, the spirit of
community is so much greater. Many young people have been able to buy good
property within five or six miles of the office and can drive to work, where
the parking is free,' Mr Humphreys says.
Yet there must be some drawbacks? 'We underestimated the stress,' Mr
Humphreys confesses. 'The greatest stress comes from moving house and coping
with a changing organisation, the switch to more IT, the minimisation of
support staff and the big training programme.
'You need to provide a lot of money and time for stress relief and
counselling. A counsellor still comes in at least one day a week.
'Against this, there are lots of delightful things, like easy drives to
work, free parking, a nursery to look after your kids, and a fitness room.
There is a good social side, and a good working environment. And because of
who we are there is always a high quality of art on display.'
The approach worked well enough for the British Council to win last year's
Du Pont Office of the Year award. The council is now building on
pre-existing contacts with local universities and Manchester Business School
and aims to play an active role in regional economic development. 'We are
integrating with the whole community,' Mr Humphreys says.
