FT  09 MAY 94 / Equity Markets: Other markets
FRANKFURT
Speculation about the outlook for interest rates is growing ahead of the
Bundesbank council's fortnightly meeting, brought forward to Wednesday
because of Thursday's Ascension Day holiday which will leave many European
markets closed. James Capel says that the recent strength of the D-Mark and
cuts in the repo rate already totalling 29 basis points since the last
discount rate reduction on April 14, point to a further decline in the
discount rate, perhaps of 50 basis points, and possibly this week.
Veba reports first-quarter figures tomorrow, with NatWest Securities
forecasting net profits up to DM253m from DM202m.
ZURICH
Full-year figures for 1993 are expected this week from Winterthur and Zurich
Insurance. UBS expects Winterthur to report a 27.5 per cent jump in net
profits to SFr315m and Zurich to post a 15 per cent rise to SFr565m. The
investment bank expects double-figure earnings growth from the leading
insurers in coming years.
Roche holds its annual news conference on 1993 results tomorrow. Roche
certificates have been under pressure since the group announced results
almost three weeks ago and there was further weakness last week after it
announced a Dollars 5.3bn bid for Syntex, the US drugs group. However,
analysts have noted that the drop in the price would have been even bigger
without the continued support of Mr Martin Ebner's BZ Bank.
AMSTERDAM
First-quarter figures are due on Wednesday from Aegon and Royal Dutch.
Unilever reports first-quarter results on Friday. Hoare Govett estimates
Aegon's operating income will rise by 8 per cent and expects a further
profits increase in all insurance lines. The broker expects Royal Dutch's
net profits will dip to Pounds 900m from Pounds 971m in the same 1993 period
while slightly higher sales and margins should boost Unilever's earnings per
share to Fl 2.88 from Fl 2.86.
TOKYO
A brief lessening in the strength of the yen may encourage some
institutional investors wanting to begin allocating this year's funds in the
stock market.
However, with the currency factor remaining uncertain and the start of the
earnings season starting next week, many investors may remain on the
sidelines.
