FT  26 OCT 94 / Arts: Reflections on the sleaze factor - Television
Not many months ago it was suggested in this column that Between The Lines
on BBC1 might be the best police series to appear on British television
since Z Cars. How quickly things change. Today, Between The Lines is not
only not the best police series, it is not even second best: ITV's Cracker
is clearly superior, and even The Bill, also on ITV, is better.
That 'even' is probably not quite fair, since The Bill has always been
excellent, but as a half-hour programme with three episodes a week you would
not normally expect it to bear comparison with a series such as Between The
Lines which is made in limited runs, on bigger budgets, with episodes
lasting 55 minutes.
Yet The Bill is, at present (excluding its 10th-anniversary double-length
special which, as so often in these cases, was an inferior episode) doing
considerably better than Between The Lines. Whatever happened?
It is probable that Between The Lines was not planned from the outset as a
long-running series in the way that, say, The Sweeney was, but when the
first batch was so well received it must have seemed almost imperative to
make more. The BBC is not so flush with good middlebrow drama that it can
afford to ignore a success like that.
For some reason, however, it was decided for this new series to remove the
central characters from the police corruption squad in which they had been
working and bring them out into the private sector. This has proved
disastrous. Previously we had tight, intricate plots which cleverly explored
the way in which bureaucracies operate and also vividly illustrated the
'sleaze factor' that has become such a feature of British public life.
Now the scripts have become slack, banal and familiar. Tony Clark takes a
job in, for instance, Tunisia, so that we get expenses-paid foreign trips
just like all those other series, or he takes a job in hotel security and,
ho hum, there is the statutory chase through a busy kitchen. How are the
mighty fallen.
At the peak of its achievement Between The Lines had a modicum of home-life
interest which added a lot to the formula because Mo (Siobhan Redmond)
proved to be a lesbian, Tony (Neil Pearson) suffered from something
approaching satyriasis, and Harry (Tom Georgeson, who so often steals these
programmes with his fag-puffing sergeant) went home to a wife who was dying.
None of this affected the meat of the scripts, until Tony's great affair
with the Francesca Annis character, and since she was in government security
that was legitimate. But now home life is being used in what looks like an
attempt to make up for lack of interest in the job, and it feels a bit
desperate.
Of course, there is no law saying that a series about police personnel
cannot be centrally interested in the private lives of its characters -
think of Juliet Bravo. But it is best to set out in that direction from the
start, as Cracker did. In the first episode of Z Cars in January 1962 in a
conversation about a murdered colleague, Sergeant John Watt, talking to
Inspector Charlie Barlow about the likelihood of the killer being suitably
punished, referred bitterly to the police psychiatrist as a 'trick cyclist'.
Three decades later the trick cyclist has become the hero, albeit a deeply
flawed hero, of the latest police series.
Here home life is just as important to the scripts as police work, sometimes
more so. Furthermore, it is the relationships and conversations in the
private life of our hero, Fitz, so splendidly embodied by Robbie Coltrane,
which provide much of the entertainment.
Fitz is a rogue and a bastard, but a witty rogue and a cunning bastard. It
is impossible not to laugh when you watch him in next Monday's episode, in
front of the bathroom mirror, rehearsing the argument he will use on his
poor wife, Judith (Barbara Flynn, appealing and fanciable as ever), then
promptly going downstairs and repeating it word for word, even though you
recognise how self-serving and manipulative he is being.
In Britain in 1994 television police series serve much the same function as
cinema westerns did in the US in the 1940s and 1950s. Though popular because
they offer the audience such a familiar formula, they allow within that
formula immense scope for writers and directors to deal with almost anything
they wish.
As with westerns, police series can reflect changes in the nation's
perception of its own image. In The Bill last week there was a startlingly
grim and honest admission from a high-ranking officer: 'The war on drugs is
already lost . . . all we can do is go on pushing people through the
revolving doors . . .'
Above all, series of this kind provide a place for dealing with changes in
public morality in a way that many viewers seem to feel is less forbidding
than that found in so many current affairs programmes.
Unsurprisingly, British television is not alone in this. NYPD Blue on
Channel 4 proves that much the same thing happens in the US and Le Cop II on
BBC2 last week gave an idea of what you might see in France. If we accept
that these productions provide more or less accurate reflections of the
mores in the countries concerned, the eye-opening fact is that Britain, for
all its supposed moral turpitude, is not as far down the road as those other
countries.
Both productions highlighted a relativism which is frightening for anyone
who believes that maintenance of the rule of law is the foundation of any
civilised society. In these dramas the police are better than the bad guys,
but only just.
In Le Cop II the rascally old pair of buddies in the Montmartre district are
presented as superior to their go-getting modern replacements because they
take smaller kickbacks. In NYPD Blue you would often have difficulty
slipping a razor blade between the morals of the police and those of the
crooks.
It is scant comfort, perhaps, but judging from these police dramas, Britain
has not yet slipped so far down the vortex as some other countries . . . or
are we just better at covering it up?
