FT  01 JUL 94 / IMF tells Ciller's Turkey to get back to basics: A deal
being worked out puts the central bank out of bounds to politicians
There are two queues in Turkey's state-owned Ziraat Bank. On one side savers
are lined up in the hope of participating in the government's latest super
bond issue. On the other civil servants and state pensioners wait patiently
to draw their monthly cheques.
It may look like taking from Peter to pay Paul but under the standby
agreement being negotiated with the International Monetary Fund, Turkey will
have little choice but to resort to large-scale domestic borrowing to
finance itself this year.
For behind the bald numbers contained in the letter of intent with the Fund
lies a direct political challenge to the government of Mrs Tansu Ciller. No
longer will the Treasury be able to go to the central bank to print money to
cover the budget gap, the main factor behind the 50 per cent collapse of the
lira in the first half of 1994. After the borrowing binge last year which
pushed Turkey's external debt to Dollars 67bn, the Fund calls for strict
limits on new credits, although in today's uncertainty, there is little
likelihood of Turkey returning to the markets in the short run.
The main anchor will be a floor on official reserves, which will discipline
the government to adopt a more realistic exchange rate policy while forcing
the central bank to use interest rates rather than interventions to support
the lira.
Economists say that for a country which last year lost control of the reins,
the programme marks a return to orthodoxy. And for all the credit Mrs Ciller
is rightly claiming for biting the bullet, her opponents are quick to point
out that the programme constitutes a reversal of the policies she has
pursued since coming to power last June.
The agreement - with the release of the first tranche of a standby facility
likely in early July - envisages radical cuts in the public deficit,
underpinned by a monetary squeeze, to bring down inflation to 20 per cent by
mid-1995, compared with an annual rate of 117 per cent in May.
By restricting central bank credit, the Fund is tying the hands of the
politicians and at the same strengthening the autonomy of the central bank
to pursue its real priority - maintaining exchange rate stability.
Deputy bank governor Mr Bilsel Alisbah says it has taken a crisis to take
steps to strengthen the central bank, which he hopes will no longer 'be used
as an institution to which the Treasury has free access'.
The programme, based broadly on the austerity package announced by the prime
minister on April 5, envisages a 50 per cent cut in the public sector
borrowing requirement to 9 per cent of gross national product through
increased taxes, spending cuts, speedier privatisation and state enterprise
closures. Growth of GNP is expected to be zero in the current year and 3 per
cent in 1995.
On the monetary side, financial liberalisation has made it difficult to
track monetary aggregates. As a result the Fund has focused on the asset
side of the central bank's balance sheet.
The Fund's performance targets include a limit of TL305,000bn (Pounds 6.2bn)
by the year end for the central bank's net domestic assets - implying zero
growth in its domestic lending. The programme also calls for a rebuilding of
central bank reserves from the level of around Dollars 3.4bn today to
Dollars 4bn by the end of 1994 and up to Dollars 6bn by the end of 1995.
Economists point out that the two are intimately related. In the first
quarter, central bank reserves went down by Dollars 3bn, exactly the same
amount that was extended by the central bank to the Treasury in short-term
advances. With the sort of monetary belt-tightening envisaged, economists
believe the reserve targets should be achievable.
The programme leaves the government little option but to return to domestic
debt markets, in essence what is happening. The high interest rates, with
the super bond selling at a compounded rate of 406 per cent, are expected to
force savers to make a portfolio shift from dollars back to lira. The lira
has already strengthened, now at around TL31,000 compared with a low of
TL41,000 in mid-April. However the central bank is likely to curb any sharp
correction which might undermine exports.
Ankara is already feeling the effects, as bureaucrats swelter in offices
deprived of air conditioning - all part of the austerity drive. Squeezing
the finances of the powerful state industries may prove more difficult. In
the past, state companies have in part financed themselves by not paying tax
to the central government or not contributing to the social security system.
In effect this practice understated the size of the deficit of the public
sector enterprises, which was running at about 8 per cent of GNP in 1993.
Under the programme, the Fund is set to scrutinise the performance of seven
of the biggest public state enterprises.
The political fall-out is harder to predict. But it is clear that in being
aimed at agencies such as the Soils Products Office TMO, which acts as the
grain board and accounts for as much as 40 per cent of the public sector
deficit, the monetary squeeze will have a direct impact on the farm sector,
a key constituency for Mrs Ciller's True Path party DYP.
