COALITION CAMPAIGNS FOR $750-MILLION PARKS BOND MEASURE; 
ENVIRONMENT: L.A. COUNTY OFFICIALS WORRY THAT THE PROPOSAL COULD TURN VOTERS 
AGAINST BOND MEASURES FOR JAILS AND HOSPITALS. 
In a sunny office overlooking the Malibu coast, a serious-faced young woman 
named Esther Feldman is quietly helping hatch a political game plan she hopes 
will result in Los Angeles County voters passing what is apparently the biggest 
bond measure in county history. 
For up to 14 hours a day, Feldman, 28, confers with environmentalists and city 
managers, businessmen and labor activists, earnestly pitching the need for $750 
million in bonds to improve beaches, parks, wildlife habitats and museums as a 
tonic for the woes of urbanization. 
"This county is so appallingly behind in terms of providing adequate park and 
recreation and open-space opportunities for its residents," she said, sitting 
in her office high on a Malibu ridgetop, the gleaming Pacific beyond the 
window. 
"The faster this county grows -- and it hasn't shown any signs of slowing down 
-- the more extreme the needs get," said Feldman, who is public outreach 
director for the Malibu-based Mountains Recreation and Conservation Authority, 
a state and local government agency that provides recreation and ranger 
services for parks in Los Angeles and Ventura counties. 
"Unless we act now, we aren't going to have a chance to act," she said. 
But some county officials have raised questions about the massive park bond 
measure, which promoters are trying to persuade county supervisors to place on 
the November ballot. Officials are concerned that the bonds may drive the 
county's debt too high and jeopardize the chances for passage of other bond 
measures on the same ballot, including those for hospitals and jails. 
If approved by voters, the bond revenue would be split among the county's 86 
cities and county-maintained beaches, museums, botanical gardens and the Santa 
Monica Mountains Conservancy, which buys parklands in the mountains surrounding 
the San Fernando Valley. 
The conservancy would receive $120 million, which could be used to buy more 
land in the Santa Monicas, as well as help complete the proposed "Rim of the 
Valley" trail system, Feldman said. 
Another $120 million would be earmarked for the cities, with the money parceled 
out on a per-capita basis. Los Angeles, with 3.4 million people, would get 
nearly $53 million, for example, while tiny Hidden Hills, with just 1,950 
residents, would draw $30,000. 
In addition, $50 million would be set aside for county beaches and $40 million 
to preserve historic structures, construct hiking and biking trails and plant 
trees in urban areas. 
Joel Segal, a spokesman for County Chief Administrator Richard Dixon, said the 
measure would be the largest general obligation bond issue in county history 
"to the best of my knowledge." The next largest was a $225-million flood 
control issue in the late 1950s, he said. 
The general obligation bonds would be secured by county property tax revenue 
and paid off over about 20 years. According to Feldman, they would cost the 
average property taxpayer an extra $27 in the first year and about half that in 
successive years. 
To promote the bonds, Feldman and other organizers are fashioning an 
odd-bedfellows coalition whose members range from Sierra Club members to 
inner-city activists who believe the bonds promise relief for urban parks 
overrun by gangs and drug dealers. 
Another leader in the bond campaign, Lynn Alvarez, said the bonds could ease 
conflict in many heavily Latino neighborhoods over what sports can be played in 
parks. Although most parks are now set up only for softball and baseball, bond 
revenue could be used to build soccer fields, making them more attractive to 
Latinos, she said. 
Alvarez, an immigration lawyer who heads a group called People for Parks, said 
the measure could help revive the 200 "dead parks" -- rundown parks that have 
essentially been taken over by gangs and drug dealers -- throughout the county. 
Bond backers launched their campaign about a year ago after commissioning a 
$15,000 opinion poll to test voter support for the measure. The poll, paid for 
with public funds by the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy and two smaller 
park agencies, found that 76% of the county's registered voters would vote for 
the bonds, Feldman said. 
Joseph Edmiston, executive director of the conservancy, said strategists 
originally intended to include Ventura County in the measure but dropped the 
idea, fearing conservative Ventura voters would oppose it, lessening the chance 
it would win the necessary two-thirds majority to pass. 
Much of the day-to-day organizing of the bond campaign is being done by 
Feldman, a one-time UC extension agriculture teacher who served as assistant 
campaign manager for Proposition 70, a statewide park bond issue that was 
approved by voters in 1988 and raised $776 million. 
She and other supporters have contacted scores of city officials, surveying 
them to find out what park projects need funding. More recently, promoters have 
been contacting county supervisors, whom they want to place the bonds on the 
November ballot. 
Unless more funds are made available to local government soon, Feldman said, 
skyrocketing land costs may make it impossible to acquire sufficient park and 
recreation areas. 
Feldman said that despite the success of Proposition 70 and other statewide 
bond issues, Los Angeles County -- with about one-third of California's 
population -- traditionally has been shortchanged on revenue it receives. For 
instance, of the $776 million generated by Proposition 70, the county received 
only $120 million, she said. 
But Dixon has questioned the bond issue and at least one supervisor -- Peter 
Schabarum -- opposes it. Supervisors Kenneth Hahn and Ed Edelman support the 
measure, while Supervisors Mike Antonovich and Deane Dana are undecided, their 
spokesmen said. 
In a memo to supervisors Aug. 22, Dixon said the measure's presence on the 
November ballot would "cause it to compete with other issues critical" to the 
county. He cited a proposed half-cent sales tax increase for county jail 
construction and operation. Antonovich and Dana have similar concerns, 
spokesmen said. 
Dixon also pointed out that park bond proceeds could be used only to buy or 
build new facilities, not to maintain existing ones. 
"Given that we cannot afford to adequately operate various recreational 
facilities we already have, it makes little sense to significantly expand 
development further beyond that point which we cannot already afford to 
maintain," he wrote. 
However, in a later memo, Dixon said he still was considering whether the 
county should support the bonds, which he noted were backed by a "broad-based, 
well-organized effort which appears to be gaining support." 
Feldman said there is no evidence that voters reject bond issues simply because 
other bond measures are on the same ballot. In 1988, voters statewide rejected 
just one of 14 bond measures on the ballot, she said. 
She acknowledged that general obligation bonds can be spent only to build new 
projects, but argued that replacing old, worn-out facilities that are costly to 
keep up would reduce overall maintenance costs over time. 
In a statement, Schabarum said he opposes the park bond measure because it is 
only one of five property- or sales-tax increases that are under discussion and 
may wind up on the county ballot. The supervisor said that besides raising 
property taxes, he was very concerned about increasing the county's bond debts. 
Feldman responded that the county is in good financial health and can easily 
afford the park bonds. She said annual debt payments are 1.89% of the county 
budget, well below the 5% limit recommended by Standard and Poor's, a 
nationwide credit-rating agency. 
