CHARITIES HOPE PROGRAM PROMPTS RESTAURANTS TO DONATE LEFTOVERS 
San Fernando Valley restaurants are not yet standing in line to give their 
leftover food to charities, despite a new law that removes liability for the 
businesses should someone become ill from the food. 
But industry observers predict that enthusiasm for putting leftovers to use 
will increase later this month with the advent of a program called Second 
Helpings. 
Under Second Helpings, the California Restaurant Assn. will act as a matchmaker 
for restaurants and charities, leaving them to iron out details of their 
exchange. 
"In general, what we've heard from our members is this is a good idea -- a way 
to be able to do something to help out without having a major burden put on 
them," said Stanley Kyker, executive vice president of the California 
Restaurant Assn. 
The so-called "Good Samaritan law," which took effect Jan. 1, was sponsored by 
the restaurant association because large quantities of restaurant food were 
being thrown away. This was partly because of concerns about liability and the 
county's strict interpretation of state health regulations. 
Any restaurants and charities can negotiate to distribute leftovers on their 
own. But except for the handful that had previous arrangements, none of several 
contacted had plans to do so. 
When a proposal for Second Helpings was mailed statewide last year to all 2,900 
members of the restaurant association, who represent 9,000 food service 
businesses, the results were disappointing, said Alberta Hultman, assistant 
executive vice president. Only about 100 agreed to participate, she said. Of 
these, about a dozen were in Los Angeles County and only two were in the 
Valley. 
Since then, one of the two Valley establishments, Polar Palace Frozen Yogurt in 
Van Nuys, has gone out of business. The other, the Calabasas Inn, plans to 
donate raw food such as bags of rice, coffee and fruit, which would be useful 
only to charities that have cooking facilities. 
"We don't have food left over that often, so it's not something we could 
promise on a regular basis," said Wally Hollenstein, owner of the 150-seat 
Calabasas Inn. "Besides, I'm not so much in favor of sending the poor what you 
have left. . . . They deserve fresh food too." 
Kyker said he was surprised by the small response, but a second brochure now 
being developed aims at educating restaurant owners and managers about the need 
for the program. As added incentive, the restaurant association is letting its 
members know they can claim tax deductions for the value of the donated food. 
Kyker said Valley restaurants may join if they see the program working smoothly 
for other Los Angeles-area restaurants. The restaurant association would not 
release a complete list of the restaurants that tentatively signed up after the 
statewide mailing. Hultman said most are family-style restaurants, not 
fast-food or gourmet establishments. 
Key Connection 
"The key will be getting that connection between the agency and the restaurant 
operator so that it is convenient for the restaurateur," Kyker said. "If it 
becomes too much of a burden for them so that it costs more, they aren't going 
to want to continue, and others won't want to join them." 
Some representatives of Valley charities were pessimistic about the likelihood 
of widespread participation. 
"The thing is that in the Valley, there's always been a strong feeling that 
there's not a homeless problem out here," said Vernon Windell, program 
coordinator for the Cornerstone, a Van Nuys mental health counseling center for 
the homeless. "Restaurateurs, if they see the problem, they see it as a problem 
for them -- people poking in their dumpsters, stiffing them on the bill." 
But, Hultman said, she thinks that all restaurateurs became more aware of the 
destitute after Proposition 95, the Hunger and Homelessness Funding Initiative 
on November's ballot, drew a 45% yes vote. Among other things, the proposition 
proposed fining restaurants for state Health Code violations, then using the 
fines to pay for food, shelter and job training for the homeless. 
More Awareness 
"I think they are much more aware of the issue, that we as individuals have to 
respond," Hultman said, "and that we have to let people know what we're doing." 
The amount of excess food in Los Angeles restaurants has not been measured, but 
people's digging in restaurant dumpsters is testimony that edible food is 
wasted, said Michael Vasquez, director of the Hollywood Project for the 
homeless. 
Before the August closure of Hollywood's well-known Tick Tock restaurant, 
Vasquez said, he and his staff were allowed to come to the back door with 
plastic containers at 9 p.m., when the kitchen closed. 
"We would get enough from the Tick Tock in one evening to feed about 50 
people," he said. "There would be whole turkey dinners, good quality soup and 
steamed vegetables. All of it still hot, coming right out of the kitchen. I sit 
back and imagine: When we got that much from just one restaurant, how many 
restaurants are throwing away at least that much?" 
A telephone survey of major Valley charities -- including the Salvation Army, 
the San Fernando Valley Community Mental Health Center and Valley Shelter -- 
showed that most rarely receive restaurant leftovers. 
Among the exceptions are Better Valley Services, a nonprofit housing agency in 
Van Nuys, where homeless people sometimes feast on steaks and other delicacies 
originally prepared for film crews by Movieland Caterers of Sepulveda. 
A few miles away in Granada Hills, Robert Maxwell, the supervisor of the Index 
Street Group Home, stops at a Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise most Saturdays 
to pick up buckets of unsold chicken for the boys under his care. Other group 
homes have similar arrangements with the fast-food chicken chain. 
Fifteen other charities, including the Union Rescue Mission, participate in a 
leftover food program of the Los Angeles Unified School District. Under that 
program, unserved school lunches began being passed on to the needy in 
December, 1987, when three charities, the first to join, signed waivers saying 
the school would not be held responsible if someone became ill from the food. 
Valley restaurant managers defended their records, saying they occasionally 
give certificates for free dinners to favorite churches or charities. None 
contacted were aware of the new law, and none wanted to rush into a commitment 
with Second Helpings. In fact, many insisted that they do not have much 
leftover food anyway. 
Little to Offer 
"Nothing really is made up ahead of time, so there really isn't that much left 
over," said Pat Rosate, manager of the White Horse Inn in Northridge. 
"This restaurant is a buffet, so we mostly use our own leftover food," said 
John Alevras, manager of a Taste of Scandinavia Smorgasbord on Ventura 
Boulevard in Woodland Hills. 
But Hultman of the restaurant association said that while a restaurant's goal 
is to not generate much waste, "there are always those daily specials that are 
not that popular with the customers. . . . We want there to be no waste at 
all." 
A few charities also said they feared that handling leftovers would be 
cumbersome, particularly because the Second Helpings program gives them 
responsibility for picking up the food. 
"Unfortunately we don't have vehicles to go out and pick something up, so 
usually the staff uses their own vehicles," said Darcy Scott, executive 
director of Better Valley Services. "If they had something left over in the 
middle of the day so that we could put it out like a buffet, sure, that would 
be great. But if they called in the middle of night, it would be awkward." 
Charities involved with the school district struggle with this problem, too. 
Some have solved it in part by not depending on the school food, using it only 
as a supplement to their regular meals, said Beth Louargand, a deputy 
administrator with the district. 
Kyker said the restaurant association hopes to provide some transportation 
services through Food Partnership, a nonprofit organization that carries mostly 
non-perishable food donations to the Los Angeles Regional Food Bank. But, he 
said, even if Food Partnership agrees to help, he would not be able to promise 
delivery to all charities. 
Welcome Relief 
For the few Valley restaurants that have been willing to donate leftovers 
despite liability risks, the new law is welcome relief. 
The owner of Movieland Caterers, Allan Stearns, said Better Valley Services and 
other charities with which the catering firm works assured him that he would 
not be held responsible if someone were to get sick after eating his food, "but 
we were always concerned about it." 
Anticipating the law, Collins Foods International, which owns 118 Kentucky 
Fried Chicken restaurants in Southern California, started offering local 
charities leftover chicken four months ago. Previously, an estimated 1,500 
pieces a week were being wasted because the company is barred from selling 
cooked chicken that is more than 90 minutes old. 
"People are going to get it out of the trash bins anyway, so it seems better to 
give it to them outright than see them out there digging for it," said Gregory 
Reheis, director of administration for the Kentucky Fried Chicken branch of 
Collins Foods. 
County Criticized 
In the past, charities and some restaurant owners have criticized the Los 
Angeles County Department of Health for its strict interpretation of state laws 
governing transfer of cooked food, which included stringent standards for 
packaging, temperature control and record-keeping. They cited other 
metropolitan areas in the state where county officials are more lenient and 
food donations are more common. 
But Arthur Tilzer, the department's director for consumer protection, said the 
county's stance has been prudent, not stingy. He blamed restaurants, not county 
rules, for the lack of a coordinated leftover food giveaway program. 
"I don't think there was really that much of a demand from the industry to 
participate in a redistribution program," he said. 
Under the new Good Samaritan law, state health regulations are circumvented 
when the charity agrees to take the food and along with it the responsibility 
for making sure it is safe to eat. 
Tilzer said the county is working closely with Second Helpings to establish 
food handling guidelines and will conduct spot checks of restaurants and 
charities to make sure the food is being properly stored. 
