YOUR COINS: RARITY, QUALITY ARE CRUCIAL FACTORS IN PAPER 
Question: My wife and I have been collecting $2 notes (saddlebag notes) because 
of their large size, circa 1880 to 1917. We've tried to buy them in very fine 
or better condition. We've been paying approximately $100 each. Is this a good 
investment in paper money, or should we look for something else to invest in? 
-- E.E. 
Answer: You've chosen a very interesting area of numismatics. Many people 
collect paper bills for their intricate engravings and historical significance. 
By narrowing it down to $2 bills, you've become a specialist in one area of the 
paper money field, which, like the coin field, is almost limitless. Also, as 
with coins, condition and rarity are major factors in determining the value of 
a particular bill. 
There is nothing wrong in collecting bills the way you have -- except, perhaps, 
as an investment. If your bills are to serve as an investment, then it's 
necessary to apply the same principles that you would to other numismatic 
items: Buy rarity and quality. Bills graded "very fine or better" probably do 
not qualify. 
Right now, the paper market is going up in rare and quality material in all 
denominations from 1867 to 1900. Bills graded crisp uncirculated to gem 
uncirculated are particularly desirable. Notes graded very fine to extra fine 
are not good investments unless they are rare. 
You may be paying a bit of a premium for your bills, which is OK if they're 
pleasing and have good eye appeal. If you're satisfied collecting at this 
level, then, as they say, enjoy. But if you'd rather go for more 
investment-quality pieces, you may be able to trade up and have more to show 
for it financially in the long run. 
There are several good basic paper money reference books. These include Paper 
Money of the United States by Robert Friedberg, the Standard Catalogue of 
United States Paper Money by Krause and Lemke, and the handy little Official 
1990 Blackbook Price Guide of United States Paper Money by Marc Hudgeons. 
Coin News 
The ever-popular Panda, a low-mintage bullion coin from China, is available for 
the first time in palladium. The 1989 palladium proof Panda (pictured) has a 
worldwide mintage of 3,000. Also being released for the third year is the 1989 
platinum proof Panda, also with a mintage of 3,000. Both palladium and platinum 
Pandas feature Beijing's Temple of Heaven on the obverse. For information on 
these and other Panda issues, contact PandaAmerica, 23326 Hawthorne Blvd., 
Suite 150, Torrance 90505; (800) 472-6327. 
The impressive catalogue for the Thomas S. Chalkley Collection on the Estate of 
Austin Ryer sale is now available. Many rarities are featured, including the 
finest proof Buffalo nickel ever graded, a 1937 Proof-69. There's also an 
interesting document section and outstanding half cents and large cents. The 
six-session auction will be held Sunday through next Wednesday at Superior 
Galleries, 9478 W. Olympic Blvd., Beverly Hills 90212-4299; (800) 421-0754. 
Coin Calendar 
Friday, Saturday and Sunday -- Four collector groups are combining to present 
the Golden State Coin Show at the Pasadena Center, 300 E. Green St., from noon 
to 7 p.m. Friday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday, and 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Sunday. 
There are two auctions, one by Bowers and Merena, continuing today and ending 
Friday; another Saturday by Ponterio and Associates. A meeting of the 
International Primitive Money Society will be held at 3 p.m. Saturday in Room 
314 of the Pasadena Center. Featured is a display of Wife Buying Money. 
