ASSEMBLY COMMITTEE ASSIGNMENTS 
Committee assignments for members of the state Assembly were announced 
Wednesday by Speaker Willie Brown. Here are the assignments of assembly members 
who represent Los Angeles County districts: 
Lucille Roybal-Allard (D-Los Angeles): Health, Labor and Employment; 
Transportation; Utilities and Commerce. 
Charles Bader (R-Pomona): Education; Environmental Safety and Toxic Materials; 
Finance and Insurance; Revenue and Taxation. 
Tom Bane (D-Tarzana): Rules (chairman); Elections, Reapportionment and 
Constitutional Amendments; Finance and Insurance; Housing and Community 
Development. 
Dennis Brown (R-Signal Hill): Finance and Insurance; Transportation; Ways and 
Means. 
Charles M. Calderon (D-Alhambra): Environmental Safety and Toxic Materials; 
Housing and Community Development; Natural Resources. 
Dave Elder (D-Long Beach): Public Employees, Retirement and Social Security 
(chairman); Development and New Technologies; Revenue and Taxation. 
Robert Epple (D-Norwalk): Aging and Long Term Care; Finance and Insurance; 
Labor and Employment; Public Employees, Retirement and Social Security; 
Utilities and Commerce. 
Gerald N. Felando (R-San Pedro): Governmental Organization; Health; Judiciary; 
Ways and Means. 
Richard E. Floyd (D-Hawthorne): Governmental Organization (chairman); Finance 
and Insurance; Human Services; Labor and Employment. 
Terry B. Friedman (D-Tarzana): Education; Judiciary; Public Safety; Ways and 
Means. 
Tom Hayden (D-Santa Monica): Labor and Employment (chairman); Education; 
Environmental afety and Toxic Materials; Revenue and Taxation. 
Frank Hill (R-Whittier): Governmental Organization; Health; Utilities and 
Commerce; Ways and Means. 
Teresa P. Hughes (D-Los Angeles): Education (chairwoman); Housing and Community 
Development; Local Government; Public Employees, Retirement and Social 
Security. 
Richard Katz (D-Sepulveda): Transportation (chairman); Environmental Safety and 
Toxic Materials; Finance and Insurance; Water, Parks and Wildlife. 
Marian W. La Follette (R-Northridge): Education; Human Services; Natural 
Resources; Water, Parks and Wildlife. 
William H. Lancaster (R-Covina): Finance and Insurance; Housing and Community 
Development; Local Government; Transportation. 
Burt Margolin (D-Los Angeles): Finance and Insurance; Health; Natural 
Resources; Rules; Ways and Means. 
Gwen Moore (D-Los Angeles): Utilities and Commerce (chairwoman); Finance and 
Insurance; Health; Local Government. 
Richard L. Mountjoy (R-Monrovia): Elections, Reapportionment and Constitutional 
Amendments; Governmental Organization; Housing and Community Development; Labor 
and Employment. 
Willard Murray (D-Compton): Governmental Organization; Labor and Employment; 
Local Government; Utilities and Commerce. 
Pat Nolan (R-Glendale): Finance and Insurance; Rules; Utilities and Commerce; 
Ways and Means. 
Richard Polanco (D-Los Angeles): Elections, Reapportionment and Constitutional 
Amendments; Governmental Organization; Health; Rules; Ways and Means. 
Mike Roos (D-Los Angeles): Agriculture; Public Safety; Transportation; Ways and 
Means. 
Sally Tanner (D-El Monte): Environmental Safety and Toxic Materials 
(chairwoman); Governmental Organization; Labor and Employment; Natural 
Resources. 
Maxine Waters (D-Los Angeles): Elections, Reapportionment and Constitutional 
Amendments; Judiciary; Natural Resources; Ways and Means. 
Cathie Wright (R-Simi Valley): Environmental Safety and Toxic Materials; 
Finance and Insurance; Rules; Utilities and Commerce; Ways and Means. 
Phillip D. Wyman (R-Tehachapi): Economic Development and New Technologies; 
Education; Labor and Employment; Water, Parks and Wildlife. 
