SCRIPPS, MIRAMAR BAN SEEKS TO PHASE IN HOMES 
Councilwoman Linda Bernhardt, moving to address the overflow traffic and 
crowded schools that are the pre-eminent concern of many District 5 residents, 
won San Diego City Council support Tuesday to consider a building moratorium 
that would cover all of Scripps Ranch and Miramar Ranch North. 
In a unanimous vote, the council directed city staff members to prepare an 
ordinance that would allow a moratorium, which theoretically could stop 
construction of much of the 3,360-home Miramar Ranch North project, 376 homes 
in the so-called "county island" that is now part of Scripps Ranch and other 
small Scripps Ranch developments. The ordinance is due back to the council in 
two weeks. 
"I am dead serious when I talk about forcing developers in the Miramar Ranch 
North and Scripps Miramar Ranch planning areas to sit down and work as a team 
to come to some kind of resolution about the facilities and some kind of 
phasing plan" for development, Bernhardt said. 
Although the council agreed to consider the notion, Bernhardt's action 
attracted no words of support among her colleagues and may amount to little 
more than saber rattling, given doubts expressed by some of them about a 
blanket moratorium. Council members Judy McCarty and Ron Roberts expressed 
concerns about the approach. 
Bernhardt handily defeated two-term incumbent Councilman Ed Struiksma last 
November after running a campaign that emphasized controlling growth along the 
Interstate 15 corridor and providing residents there the parks, schools and 
roads many say are lacking. 
Bernhardt's proposal grew from a resolution approved Jan. 2 by the Scripps 
Miramar Ranch Planning Group, demanding that the city stop issuing building 
permits for two residential projects in the "county island" because residents 
of the 676 new homes soon to be built there would tax the area's overburdened 
roads, schools and water supply. 
The council last April rescinded a development agreement for the adjacent 
Miramar Ranch North project, whose developers would have provided some of those 
facilities as well as a crucial section of the South Poway Parkway (Alternate 
8A) that is slated to route as many as 25,000 cars daily from Poway to I-15. 
With the project in limbo, the council should use its police powers to halt the 
county island developments being planned by the Donald L. Bren Co. and Brennan 
Katkov Development Corp., the planning group contends. 
Also, the two developers are completing the widening and realigning of 
now-closed Pomerado Road, so Poway will begin pressuring the City Council to 
rescind its commitment to keep the road closed until South Poway Parkway is 
built, said Jon Clark, chairman of the planning group's county island 
subcommittee. 
But attorney Paul Peterson, representing the two developers, said they already 
have been issued 488 of the planned 676 development permits and cannot legally 
be stopped from building the homes. He said, however, that the developers might 
agree not to build all the homes this year. 
Assistant City Manager Jack McGrory maintained that roads and water supply for 
the area are adequate. The city has no control over provision of schools. 
Bernhardt agreed that the two developments cannot be halted, but proposed the 
building ban on an additional 376 homes in the county island, Miramar Ranch 
North and in-fill development in Scripps Ranch. 
