BILZERIAN PLEADS NOT GUILTY TO FRAUD CHARGES 
Takeover speculator and Singer Co. Chairman Paul A. Bilzerian, indicted last 
month on 12 counts of fraud, pleaded not guilty Thursday and said that he hopes 
to clear his name and resume hunting for companies to buy. 
"My role going forward was to have been, and should still be, to look for 
further acquisitions," Bilzerian told reporters. 
The 38-year-old financier, known for his bulging mustache and casual open-shirt 
dress, wore a dark business suit and tie to his arraignment in Manhattan 
federal court. 
His lawyer, Arthur Mathews, told reporters, "Mr. Bilzerian is innocent. It's 
unfortunate these charges were brought. It's burdensome to defend them, but 
they will be defended and he will be vindicated." 
Singer Not Involved 
After Bilzerian entered his plea, he was ordered to entrust his passport to 
Mathews. He was freed on a $500,000 personal recognizance bond pending trial, 
scheduled for May 1 before U.S. District Judge Robert J. Ward. The trial is 
expected to last six to eight weeks. 
Bilzerian was indicted Dec. 21 by a federal grand jury on a dozen felony counts 
linked to four failed takeover situations in 1985 and '86. The charges are part 
of a network of securities fraud prosecutions tracing indirectly back to the 
Ivan F. Boesky insider trading scandal that broke more than two years ago. 
None of the charges relate to Bilzerian's takeover of Singer, a defense 
contractor he acquired a year ago for $1.06 billion after a protracted 
struggle. 
That takeover marked Bilzerian's first major acquisition, and he has since been 
selling off parts of the company. Bilzerian told reporters Thursday that his 
indictment is "really not having any impact on Singer." 
A former real estate speculator who resides in Tampa, Fla., Bilzerian is one of 
the most prominent figures to be implicated thus far in an expanding federal 
crackdown on securities trading abuse. 
He was accused in the indictment of a pattern of violations that helped him 
amass millions of dollars in wealth through hostile takeover maneuvering aided 
in part by Jefferies &amp; Co., a Los Angeles brokerage that allegedly bought 
stock on Bilzerian's behalf under a secret, illegal arrangement. 
The companies allegedly targeted by Bilzerian were Hammermill Paper Co., H. H. 
Robertson Co., Cluett Peabody &amp; Co. and Armco Inc. 
Evidence for the indictment was partly supplied by Boyd L. Jefferies, founder 
of the Jefferies brokerage, who himself was implicated in securities fraud in 
early 1987 by Boesky, the now-imprisoned inside trader who turned state's 
evidence in exchange for lenient treatment. 
