STATE STILL HOPES TINY WASPS WILL BEST WHITEFLIES; 
BIOLOGY: DESPITE MIXED RESULTS SO FAR, EXPERTS HAVE FAITH THAT WASPS IMPORTED 
FROM ISRAEL AND ITALY WILL BE ABLE TO ERADICATE THE PESTS. EXPERIMENTS ARE 
CONTINUING AT UC RIVERSIDE. 
Despite an ambiguous showing in an Encino park, state agricultural experts have 
not lost faith in the tiny Israeli wasp they want to use as a weapon in the war 
against the ash whitefly. 
Over the last two months, researchers pitted the wasps against whiteflies in 
the Balboa Sports Center in Encino, yielding inconclusive results. But in a 
more closely monitored test in Riverside, researchers said, the wasps 
reproduced and fed on the whiteflies, which damage fruit and shade trees and 
shrubbery. 
The whiteflies have spread throughout California, and a state official said 
Wednesday that wide release of the wasps, which are harmless to humans, could 
begin this spring. 
Ash whiteflies weaken and eventually defoliate trees by sucking vital juices 
from their leaves. The insects also exude a sticky substance that can damage 
patio furniture and automobile paint. 
"We're more than encouraged," said Kathy Brunetti, program supervisor for the 
California Department of Food and Agriculture. "We're convinced that 
bio-control will be our weapon against the whitefly." 
Bio-control refers to the use of natural predators to kill an undesirable 
insect, instead of chemical methods. To combat the whitefly, the state has 
begun breeding tiny Encarsia wasps, imported from Israel, in Riverside. "We are 
anticipating right now to have a large-scale release sometime this spring," 
Brunetti said. 
Since it was discovered about two years ago in a Van Nuys fruit stand, the ash 
whitefly has invaded trees from the Mexican border to Sacramento. The insect, 
normally found in Europe and the Middle East, has spread quickly because it has 
no natural enemies in California. 
"I think of it as the Pilgrim Fathers' Syndrome," Brunetti said. "The Pilgrims 
came here and left their enemies behind in Europe. Now we're going back there 
to bring their enemies over here." 
She said a spring release of the wasps in Southern California will probably be 
followed by a late summer release in the northern portion of the state. 
With funding and staff help from government agencies and grower associations, 
Tom Bellows, an entomologist at UC Riverside, has been trying to determine 
whether the imported wasps will reproduce in Southern California's climate and 
attack the whitefly. In November, Bellows released about 60 of the parasitic 
wasps in the Balboa Sports Center. 
But when he checked the experiment early this month, he could not tell whether 
the wasps had multiplied and fed on whiteflies. He said the trees that might 
have provided such evidence had lost their leaves because of cold weather. 
However, a similar test closer to his laboratory provided more promising 
results. 
"We put 123 wasps in Riverside," Bellows said. "Seven or eight weeks later, we 
found evidence that reproduction had occurred, and the wasps were successfully 
established. We found 97 dead whiteflies that had been killed by the wasps. 
That's very encouraging for that size of an experiment." 
He said similar experiments are under way in San Bernardino, San Diego and 
Orange counties, and include the use of wasps imported from Italy. Bellows said 
he plans to test still other wasps and a breed of beetle to find the most 
effective whitefly predator. 
The imported wasps lay eggs within immature whiteflies, and the developing 
wasps consume their hosts from within, researchers said. 
On Jan. 16, state Assemblyman Terry B. Friedman (D-Los Angeles) introduced a 
bill that would provide $2 million for control of the whitefly over the next 
five years, using only natural predators. "We don't think there will be any 
opposition at all," said Karin Caves, a spokesman for the legislator. 
