LITTLE RED (CHINESE) SCHOOLHOUSE; 
TO OPEN MINDS CHINESE CLUES TO THE DILEMMA OF CONTEMPORARY EDUCATION BY HOWARD 
GARDNER (BASIC BOOKS: $21.95; 326 PP.) 
Aproper dilemma needs two horns; and, it would appear from Howard Gardner's 
provocative new book, the dilemma of contemporary education is no exception. 
The horns, in this case, are freedom and discipline. The question before the 
house is how to incorporate both into one's educational scheme without 
slighting either. 
Alfred North Whitehead, as Gardner points out, put the matter well, nicely 
articulating the ideal and at the same time implying the great stress involved 
in trying to maintain the two values in balance. "It should be the aim of an 
ideally constructed education," declared Whitehead, "that the discipline should 
be the voluntary issue of free choice and that the freedom should gain an 
enrichment of possibility as the issue of discipline. The two principles, 
freedom and discipline, are not antagonists but should be so adjusted in the 
child's life that they correspond to a natural sway, to and fro, of the 
developing personality." The magisterial Whitehead sonorously labeled this 
to-and-fro-ness "the rhythmic claims of freedom and discipline." 
While Gardner readily admits to being a dyed-in-the-wool liberal, a child of 
Rousseau and Dewey, he fears that we in the West may be missing the beat in the 
rhythmic- claims department, having opted to play the single drum of freedom 
over and over. Anyone who has attempted to teach almost anything to almost any 
class in the last 15 years will recognize that he is understating the problem. 
I still recall the numbing disbelief I felt on a day in the mid-'70s upon 
realizing that in a class of 20-odd liberal-arts collegians, no one could 
identify Charlemagne. Hadn't a clue. Had never heard of him, her, it. They had 
freedom, all right -- freedom to know nothing. 
In China, Gardner finds a model wholly different from the progressive one he 
has grown comfortable with in American schools. There, even students in the 
lower grades achieve astounding (by Western standards) degrees of proficiency 
in such skills as draftsmanship and harmony. But Gardner finds that the cost of 
the achievement is great, indeed. Creative play, trial-and-error, finding one's 
own solution -- such values are virtually unknown in the Red East. 
Though Gardner rightly assumes that all this lock-step learning was not 
invented by the Communists and must go back essentially to more ancient models, 
he is amazingly incurious about a raft of cultural questions. He appears, for 
instance, to assume that the stupefying proficiency of Chinese children has its 
origins in school. Actually, had he bothered to examine the drawings of 
preschool children he would have found them to be even more spectacularly 
proficient than their Western counterparts of the same age, as anyone who has 
attended American nursery schools with Asian-born children can readily attest. 
The best explanation I have heard of this phenomenon is chopsticks, the early 
mastery of which Oriental nations themselves believe encourages their 
extraordinary eye-hand coordination. The concentration that the manipulation of 
a pair of chopsticks requires of a tiny child (who must use them to eat) may 
well upgrade other proficiencies -- such as harmonics. Whatever the 
explanation, how could a scientist not ask himself radical questions about 
causality when faced with such an unusual cultural phenomenon? 
Given his lack of curiosity, we cannot expect Gardner to understand Chinese 
civilization from the inside out, to make himself sufficiently Chinese to 
figure out what is really going on. Instead, we are given a sort of travelogue 
of his experiences in China, skin-deep impressions of a man who can never let 
go of his own identity long enough to truly comprehend another's. 
Even more surprising, Gardner shows little comprehension of the Western 
tradition that he continually invokes. He seems to think that there is a direct 
line from Socrates through the Enlightenment to contemporary America; though 
there is much invocation of the "Greco-Roman" and modern agnostic strands in 
our heritage, the Judeo-Christian font is never cited. 
In the end, Gardner fails to notice that the profound difference between us and 
the Chinese is not one of communist versus democrat or ancient versus modern 
but one of religious intuition. Our ideas of freedom and individual vocation 
spring from neither Athens nor the philosophes but from the humanly singular 
tradition that began with Abraham setting out from his city for the unknown. 
This is the inception of our tradition -- the tradition of the New, the only 
tradition that welcomes Surprise. 
But Gardner is never less than earnest and genial, and while his accounts, both 
of his own upbringing (in a German-Jewish immigrant household in Scranton) and 
of his encounters with the Chinese, lack the high drama and flash of insight 
expected in great stories of cultural exchange, his book abounds with discrete 
illuminations. 
He calls for American educators to recognize not intelligence but intelligences 
-- "multiple cognitive capacities," many of which are not accounted for by 
conventional IQ tests. (He names seven such capacities: linguistic, 
logical-mathematical, spatial, musical, bodily kinesthetic, interpersonal and 
intrapersonal.) 
He points out that our testing children for creativity often turns up nothing 
more than cocktail-party inventiveness, rather than the capacity to fashion -- 
"often over significant periods of time -- products or projects that actually 
change the ways in which other individuals apprehend the world." Chinese 
education, he notes, is basically concerned with performance, ours with 
understanding. He argues for the reinstitution of apprenticeships. And he calls 
for an admixture of Chinese discipline -- in very watered-down measures -- to 
our current progressive models. 
He goes off the rails entirely, I think, when toward the end of the book, he 
unveils an idea he calls "individual-centered learning," a fantasy in which the 
school's sophisticated testing of its students for a wide variety of strengths 
and weaknesses would result in the development of completely individualized 
curricula -- one per child. Where, I wonder, do educational theorists hang out? 
Surely not in any schools in the real world. 
Gardner's misperceptions of the nature of the gulf between him and his Chinese 
hosts are echoed here in his misperception of the extent of the gulf between a 
Harvard professor's daydreams and the lives of the American poor, who tend to 
come from households that have nothing remotely like either the discipline of 
China or that of Gardner's childhood home (nor the freedom of such a home's 
expectations) and who desperately need schooling in both structure and 
creativity -- but mediated to their situation, and at a cost society can 
afford. 
This is the real, four-horned dilemma of contemporary education, one that we as 
a nation will fail to solve at our peril. 
