TIME BEGINS TO RUN OUT FOR KILLER'S LEGAL APPEALS OF DEATH SENTENCE; 
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT: AUTHORITIES SAY HIS CHANCE OF WINNING A REPRIEVE ARE SLIM. 
AFTER 11 YEARS OF LEGAL MANEUVERING, HIS IS THE MOST ADVANCED DEATH PENALTY 
CASE IN THE STATE. 
The arduous bid by Robert Alton Harris to escape the executioner has lasted 
nearly 11 years, one of the longest series of appeals since California 
reinstated capital punishment in 1977. His pleas now have been rejected four 
times by both the U.S. and California supreme courts. 
But while his legal battle is still not over, time is clearly running out for 
the 37-year-old convicted killer, whose case is the most advanced, 
procedurally, of those of the 273 inmates on San Quentin's Death Row. 
Legal authorities say Harris' chance of winning a reprieve are slim. At this 
late stage of the process, experts say, the courts ordinarily will not 
intercede to block an execution unless there is important new evidence or a 
change in the law that could affect a case. 
"Issue after issue after issue has been decided against Harris and one expects 
that the likelihood is not great that a court will intervene now," UC Berkeley 
law professor Phillip E. Johnson said. "There comes a time when a case must be 
decided and a penalty imposed. . . . Judges are well aware that it breeds 
public cynicism to keep cases going on forever." 
Even before Tuesday's action by the federal high court, Harris' lawyers had 
filed a separate attack on his death sentence before the state Supreme Court. 
Harris has admitted the slayings of which he was accused, and his conviction 
itself is not at issue. 
If the state high court turns down Harris' latest plea for life, his lawyers 
can continue the fight right up to the time of execution with emergency appeals 
to federal district and appeals courts and, ultimately, the U.S. Supreme Court. 
His execution date -- to be set by a state trial court in San Diego -- would 
remain in effect unless some court issued a stay. 
His last hope would rest with a petition for clemency from Gov. George 
Deukmejian. However, few legal observers expect a reprieve for Harris from the 
governor, a supporter of the death penalty. And, because Harris is a 
twice-convicted felon, an act of clemency would also need approval from the 
state Supreme Court, as provided in the state Constitution. 
Harris contends now in his appeal to the state Supreme Court that his 11-year 
incarceration on Death Row violates the constitutional prohibition against 
cruel and unusual punishment. He argues, as a result, that he is entitled to a 
new penalty trial. 
In a petition for a writ of habeas corpus, his lawyers, Charles M. Sevilla and 
Michael J. McCabe of San Diego, say the delay was not his fault. The long legal 
journey is attributable to the "exceedingly poor draftsmanship" of the state 
death-penalty law, the complex constitutional questions involved, overcrowded 
court dockets and the time required by judges to thoroughly consider what are 
literally matters of life or death, the attorneys say. 
"If the state and federal justice systems cannot conclude that a conviction 
and/or penalty is properly obtained within a decade, then something is wrong," 
Sevilla and McCabe say. 
State prosecutors have not yet been asked by the court to respond to this 
latest Harris appeal. But officials say there is nothing significantly new in 
his current appeal. And on the issue of delay, the state can argue that Harris 
has not been harmed but indeed has benefited from the years his case has been 
in the courts. 
"It's ironic that somebody who has been trying to delay the process (with 
appeals) is complaining that it's taking too long to execute him," state Deputy 
Atty. Gen. Louis R. Hanoian says. "If the people of the State of California had 
had their druthers, he would have died back in 1983 or thereabouts." 
Harris is also raising other claims, saying he is entitled either to a new 
penalty trial or outright reduction of his sentence to life in prison. Among 
other things, Harris' lawyers argue that: 
* A psychologist, called as a witness for the prosecution to support its 
request for the death penalty, wrongly testified that Harris was a sociopath 
who was incapable of feeling remorse and could never be rehabilitated. Since 
then, the accepted scientific definition of sociopathy has changed, rendering 
the psychologist's assessment invalid. And Harris has made a change for the 
better, becoming a model prisoner who is liked and respected by other inmates 
and even some prison guards, the petition says. 
* Newly discovered evidence shows that Harris had been adversely affected by 
several mental disorders -- post-traumatic stress disorder, attention-deficit 
disorder, organic brain damage and fetal alcohol effect. Harris suffered 
"shocking and unconscionable" physical and psychological abuse as a child from 
"horribly abusive, alcoholic parents," the petition says. His childhood would 
score a "9.0 on a Richter scale for traumatic stress." Such evidence should 
have been presented to a jury as mitigating factors supporting a sentence of 
life in prison rather than death, the petition contends. 
* Harris should have another chance to show that he was the victim of 
discrimination because of his sex. While scores of men have been sentenced to 
death in California since the reinstatement of capital punishment in 1977, only 
one woman has been sentenced to the death penalty. 
Somewhat surprisingly, Harris' case moved relatively fast at its early stages 
before the state Supreme Court, which, under then-Chief Justice Rose Elizabeth 
Bird, had been widely criticized for its reluctance to uphold capital 
sentences. 
Harris was convicted and sentenced to death in March, 1979. Less than two years 
later -- in February, 1981 -- the state Supreme Court, in its mandatory review 
of the case, upheld the capital verdict against Harris. 
Further appeals to both the federal and state high courts were rejected. But in 
1982, the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco blocked Harris' 
execution, ruling that capital sentences must be reviewed to make sure they are 
not disproportionate to punishments imposed in other, similar crimes. 
The next year, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed that ruling, saying such 
"proportionality" review was not required by the U.S. Constitution. Harris went 
back to the lower courts to pursue other issues. 
It then took five years for the federal appeals court in San Francisco to 
reject Harris' arguments, sending the appeal back once again to the high court 
in Washington to be turned down Tuesday. 
