FRITTERING AWAY OUR COMMON GOALS; 
LEGISLATURE: CALIFORNIA'S LAWMAKERS PASS TOO MANY FRIVOLOUS OR PATHETICALLY 
NARROW BILLS. LACK OF STRATEGIC PLANNING IS THE PROBLEM. 
In Southern California, a savings and loan institution collapsed and thousands 
of people lost their life savings. In Northern California, a freeway overpass 
collapsed and dozens of people lost their lives. A variety of factors 
contributed to these disasters, but the lack of strategic planning in the 
California Legislature may also have played a part. 
Simply stated, strategic planning involves three tasks: choosing goals, 
determining priorities and following a course of action that leads toward the 
goals. How well is the Legislature performing these tasks? 
Choosing goals is relatively easy, as they must reflect the electorate. No 
legislator who wants to be reelected would actively oppose education, health 
care, police and fire protection, a clean environment, or the opportunity to 
prosper; no politician would be likely to support a tax increase without 
abundant justification. We hold these values, in California as elsewhere, to be 
self-evident. 
But the second task of strategic planning, determining priorities, seems to 
represent a problem for the Legislature. In the state budget, as in most 
household budgets, there is never enough money for everything. Depending on 
personal philosophy and party affiliation -- not to mention campaign 
contributions -- legislators differ significantly in how they believe competing 
interests should be reconciled. It is a complex task, given the diversity of 
California, to balance the concerns of groups and individuals with the good of 
the state as a whole. But it is precisely this that we pay our state lawmakers 
to do, in a forum that encourages them to share their views. 
The Legislature has a monumental amount of information at its disposal to 
assist in establishing priorities. More than 1,000 reports were sent to each 
house during the 1987-88 session. The legislative counsel prepares opinions and 
analyses of proposed bills, the legislative analyst advises on their fiscal 
impact, and each house has its own office of research. As bills pass through 
committees, testimony is given by experts from within and without state 
government. 
Rather than use this information to set priorities, the Legislature often seems 
to disregard both expert opinion and the dictates of common sense. Lawmakers 
introduce bills piecemeal, apparently in reaction to pressure from potential 
supporters or recent crises, and without regard to how each bill may affect the 
achievement of other goals. 
While problems were brewing with Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan, the Legislature, 
at the behest of the savings industry and its state overseers, exempted 
directors of federal savings and loan associations from liability for monetary 
damages to the S&amp;Ls or their stockholders. Clearly this law protects the 
few at the risk of the many. On the subject of freeways, they increased the 
fine for littering from $500 to $1,000, requiring an enormous expenditure for 
changing signs. Yet the warnings about the deterioration of the state's 
infrastructure, sounded in a 1984 report to the Assembly committee on policy 
research management, appear to have gone largely unheeded. 
Then there are the laws for which counties must pay, to the point that Northern 
California's Butte County has threatened to file bankruptcy unless the state 
provides financial aid to carry out the mandated programs. It is questionable 
whether legislators would give these programs priority if the money came out of 
the state budget, yet laws that render counties insolvent won't lead the state 
to its goals. 
The Legislature cannot succeed at the third task of strategic planning, 
following an appropriate course of action, when it has failed to establish 
priorities. But it should not be too much to ask that they avoid obvious dead 
ends. Many of each session's bills are of little value, and the $7,000 
estimated cost for introducing each one could be better used for other 
purposes. For example, the 1989 session produced a law requiring the director 
of food and agriculture to review a federal timetable, an action that might 
simply have been requested; another established legal standards for light 
eggnog; a third requires the governor to issue an annual proclamation of Dec. 7 
as Pearl Harbor Day. Last year, both the Senate and the Assembly considered a 
bill adopting the banana slug as the official state mollusk. 
California's future is being forged, in many cases irrevocably, by the 
decisions of today. To the extent that the Legislature is leading the state 
anywhere, it appears to be away from our commonly agreed goals rather than 
toward them. 
