SNEAKS '89; 
HOLLYWOOD, 1989 . . . THE BAD AND THE BEAUTIFUL; 
ADVENTURES IN THE SCREEN TRADE BRING DEJA VU, WEBS OF INTRIGUE AND VERY HIGH 
HOPES (OURS AND THEIRS) 
What follows on the next several pages of Calendar is Hollywood at its best -- 
and worst. 
Of the nearly 450 titles compiled here (down about 100 from last year's 
listing, due to a drop in film production) some may be critical darlings and 
some may be blockbusters. Most will be stinkers. 
But we as filmgoers hope there will be enough in this compendium of productions 
that will be worth the price of our time and money. Or, at the very least, the 
cost of a video rental. 
As you read, you might find yourself thinking that you've read this plot 
before. 
Be forewarned: Certain words -- like murder, revenge and kidnaping -- pop up 
with regularity. And not just in movies with no-name casts, made by small, 
no-name companies; the studios also are promising story lines having to do with 
murder, revenge and kidnaping. 
The story lines often are replete with webs to entrap heroes. We discovered all 
kinds of them as we sorted through publicist-supplied plot lines. There were 
webs of intrigue, webs of deceit, webs of horror. And even webs of revenge. 
Along with sound-alike plots, some of the movies may have titles that you swear 
you've heard before. You have. 
(In the case of "Lawrence of Arabia," it will soon have a special reissue -- 25 
years later -- with never-before seen footage.) 
A number of our titles are returnees from last year and a smattering are making 
their third appearance on our annual listing. They were produced and have since 
been languishing, sometimes due to a web of red tape involving 
distribution-ownership woes. Some never got made. As we were told solemnly by 
the rep for one small production company (with a single, low-budget film for 
our list), "We'd like to think that we are going to release the film, but 
there's no guarantee. Look at 'Heaven's Gate' . . . You just never know if a 
film is going to be released until you screen it and see what you have." 
As with each year's compilation, we went through our own adventures. 
All Universal Studios would say about a Steven Spielberg-directed project was 
that it was . . . "An Untitled Love Story Directed by Steven Spielberg." 
But isn't he supposedly going to film "Always," a love story based on the '40s 
Spencer Tracy film, "A Guy Named Joe"? A call to Spielberg's Amblin 
Entertainment brought a response in the affirmative. But, we were told, 
unaccountably, the project should not be identified as "Always"/"A Guy Named 
Joe." 
The studio also wouldn't tell us the plot to a planned Jetsons movie -- which 
is based on the animated TV series! 
One super-budgeted, super-star, super-silly fantasy sent a single photo that 
was so dark, one of the stars faded into the background. 
One company, producing another sequel, sent pictures from its last sequel. 
Then there were the super-secretive productions that didn't want to send any 
photos. In the beginning, the folks at Warner Bros. were so nervous over their 
big-bat-budget "Batman" -- especially in regard to the controversial casting of 
Michael Keaton as the Batguy -- that we weren't going to get any art. Then came 
a possibility that we might get shots of Keaton as Bruce Wayne, alter ego of 
the Caped Crusader. Finally, at the last minute, in flew a picture of Keaton in 
Batgarb. (See our cover.) 
For our annual advisory, note that the listings are all subject to change. 
That includes stars, film makers, titles and plots. Some movies' scripts have 
yet to be written. 
Release dates, especially, could vary widely. Distributors are always looking 
to achieve the best effect. 
The wherever and whenever can vary. As one small distributor told us, "Our 
movie may play somewhere like Georgia, then go to video. It depends." 
 Christine Ziaya assisted in compiling the films. 
OPENING 
January and February 
"All's Fair" -- If you can't join 'em, beat 'em. A young woman executive 
squares off against her male colleagues in a weekend of "war games." But first 
she enlists a team of disgruntled wives. Those in the comedy's trenches include 
George Segal, Sally Kellerman, Robert Carradine, Lou Ferrigno, Jane Kaczmarek, 
Jennifer Edwards, John Kapelos. (Moviestore) 
"Bernadette" -- Drama about the 15-year-old French schoolgirl who saw a vision 
of the Virgin Mary on a riverbank near the town of Lourdes 130 years ago. Jean 
Delannoy co-scripts/directs Sydney Penny, Roland Lesaffre, Michele Simonnet and 
Bernard Dheran. Jennifer Jones won a best-actress Oscar when she played the 
role in 1943's "Song of Bernadette." (Cannon) 
"Bert Rigby, You're a Fool!" -- Singing-dancing Robert Lindsay is an English 
miner who seeks fame and fortune in a traveling amateur contest and then -- 
natch! -- in Hollywood. Carl Reiner writes/directs. With Robbie Coltrane, Anne 
Bancroft, Corbin Bernsen, Cathryn Bradshaw. (Warners) 
"Bill &amp; Ted's Excellent Adventure" -- Time-travel comedy. Totally 
outrageous dudes Keanu Reeves and Alex Winter would rather be rock stars than 
students. When one is threatened with military school, cosmic benefactor George 
Carlin intercedes. He allows them to travel through time to gather, firsthand, 
information for their history project. Stephen Herek ("Critters") directs. 
(Orion) 
"Blood Red" -- There are dramatic repercussions when the son of an Italian wine 
grower refuses to leave his land when threatened by the hirelings of a giant 
corporation. Set in the 19th Century. Peter Masterson directs Eric Roberts, 
Gian-Carlo Giannini, Dennis Hopper, Burt Young. (Hemdale) 
"Brenda Starr" -- Shelved for a long, long time (legal dispute), this 
comedy-adventure stars Brooke Shields as the plucky reporter from the comics. 
Delivered tongue-in-cheek, her exploits come about when she "comes to life" and 
captures the heart of her illustrator and her boyfriend in the comics. With a 
pre-James Bond Timothy Dalton. Robert Ellis Miller directs. (New World) 
"The 'burbs" -- Black comedy. Tom Hanks' plans to spend a peaceful vacation at 
home are shattered -- and then some -- when his once-quiet suburban 
neighborhood is turned upside-down by reactions to the very weird new family on 
the block. Joe Dante directs. Co-stars Carrie Fisher, Henry Gibson, Bruce Dern, 
Corey Feldman, Rick Ducommun. (Universal) 
"Buy and Cell" -- Comedy about insider trading -- from behind prison bars! 
Robert Boris writes/directs. Stars Robert Carradine, Michael Winslow ("Police 
Adademy's" human sound effect), Imogene Coca, Ben Vereen, Randall (Tex) Cobb, 
Rowdy Roddy Piper and Malcom McDowell. (Trans World) 
"Cameron's Closet" -- Supernatural thriller involves 10-year-old Scott Curtis 
and his closet -- not to mention a decapitation, a detective, a shrink and some 
peculiar psychic powers. With special effects by Carlo Rambaldi (who created 
the E.T. of "E.T."). Armand Mastroianni directs. Horror novelist Gary Brandner 
("The Howling") scripts from his book. (SVS) 
"Chief Zabu" -- Misadventures of small businessmen attempting to do big 
business with an emerging nation in the shadow of nuclear politics. Howard 
Zucker and Neil Cohen co-direct Zack Norman, Allen Garfield, Allan Arbus, Ed 
Lauter. (Intl. Film) 
"Chocolate" -- The simple, orderly lives of a French town administrator, his 
young, beautiful wife, their daughter and a young black servant are altered by 
the arrival of newcomers when a plane is forced to make an emergency landing in 
the Cameroons. France's Claire Denis (former assistant to Wim Wenders and Jim 
Jarmusch) directs. (Orion Classics) 
"Cohen and Tate" -- No, it's not a law firm, but kind of a terrifying road 
picture in which Roy Scheider and Adam Baldwin ("Full Metal Jacket") abduct 
young Harley Cross and embark on a not-so-pleasant trip across the Southwest. 
Eric Red (he wrote "The Hitcher") writes/directs. (Hemdale) 
"Cousins" -- The Americanization of the 1975 French hit "Cousin, Cousine," a 
romp about the changing lives and loves (and infidelities and blood ties) of 
the Kozinski and Costello families. With Ted Danson and Isabella Rossellini as 
cousins and Sean Young and William Petersen as their respective mates. With: 
Norma Aleandro, Lloyd Bridges, Keith Coogan. Joel Schumacher ("Lost Boys") 
directs. (Paramount) 
"Criminal Law" -- When an alleged serial murderer is set free by the court 
system, a successful young criminal lawyer who believes the man to be guilty 
decides to become a one-man prosecutor/executioner. He doesn't count on 
becoming a target in the psycho-drama that follows. Gary Oldman and Kevin Bacon 
star. Tess Harper and Joe Don Baker co-star. Martin Campbell directs. (Hemdale) 
"Cruel Embrace" -- France's Marion Hansel scripts/directs/produces a drama 
about the tragic life of a mildly retarded young man. Conceived during a brutal 
rape, his is a life of constant rejection. His mother locks him in an attic 
during his early years and later sends him to a home for the feeble-minded, but 
eventually they reunite. Stars Marianne Basler and Thierry Fremont. (European 
Classics) 
"Cyborg" -- Jean Claude Van Damme (late of "Bloodsport") is an 
anti-hero-for-hire in a futuristic world gone amok -- the result of a deadly 
plague. He'll rediscover his humanity when he escorts a cyborg (played by Dale 
Haddon) who carries the data necessary to end the plague across the ravaged 
countryside. Albert Pyun ("Sword and the Sorcerer") directs. (Cannon) 
"Dias Dificiles" ("Difficult Days") -- Drama about the personal and political 
conflicts following the kidnaping of one of the heads of a powerful industrial 
group. Alejandro Pelayo directs Alejandro Parodi, Blanca Guerra, Fernando 
Balzaretti. (Azteca) 
"The Discarnates" ("Ijintachi tono Natsu") -- Japan's Nobuhiko Obayashi directs 
a ghostly love story about a TV script writer (Morio Kazama) whose life takes a 
turn for the bizarre when he meets and becomes involved with a mysterious young 
woman (Yuko Natori). (Shockiku) Opens Friday. 
"Dream a Little Dream" -- Another romantic comedy about a switch of bodies! 
Eccentric 70-year-old Prof. Jason Robards persuades wife Piper Laurie to join 
him in a spiritual experiment. It misfires -- when they awaken, he's 18 again 
(and Corey Feldman), she's 17 (Meredith Salenger) and -- more important -- she 
doesn't know about her past life. Now, he's got five days to rekindle their 
romance. Marc Rocco directs/co-scripts. With Harry Dean Stanton, Corey Haim, 
Billy McNamara. (Vestron) 
"Evil Clutch" -- Horror-suspenser. The arrival of a young couple awakens 
dormant forces of evil, forces that have allowed an unusual woman to rule over 
a village for centuries. Andreas Marfori writes/directs. (Troma) 
"The Experts" -- Comedy in which John Travolta and Arye Gross think they're in 
small-town Nebraska, where they've recently relocated to open a nightclub. Ah, 
but they've really been abducted to the Soviet Union -- where they're 
unwittingly serving as experts on all things cool in America for a town 
inhabited by KGB operatives. Got that, comrades? SCTV's Dave Thomas directs. 
With Kelly Preston, Deborah Foreman, James Keach (who produces), Charles Martin 
Smith. (Paramount) 
"Farewell to the King" -- John Milius writes/directs the saga of a Special 
Forces commando (Nigel Havers) who is dropped behind Japanese lines in Borneo, 
where he discovers a tribal paradise ruled by an American deserter (Nick 
Nolte). Should the "king" of the natives involve his men in the struggle 
against the Japanese? Based on a true incident that inspired the novel (once 
the rage in Europe) by Pierre Schoendoerffer. With James Fox and Marius Weyers. 
(Orion) 
"A Few Days With Me" -- Dark comedy about a well-to-do young man, released from 
a mental institution, who finds love and treachery in the provinces of France. 
France's Claude Sautet -- known for psychologically trenchant tragicomedies, 
and perhaps the most acclaimed of the post-New Wave film makers -- directs 
Daniel Auteuil and Sandrine Bonnaire. (Galaxy) 
"The Fly II" -- It's bzzzzzzzaaaack! Chris Walas directs the horror sequel 
involving the son (Eric Stoltz) of the late scientist Seth Brundle (played in 
"Fly I" by Jeff Goldblum) and his raging battles between mind, body and mutated 
genes. With Daphne Zuniga, Lee Richardson, Harley Cross, John Getz. (Fox) 
"Glitch" -- Comedy about Hollywood, seen through the eyes of a pair of 
down-on-their-luck goof-offs who become involved with a bungled burglary, 
crazed ninjas, hit men, mistaken identities and a poolside audition for 
bikini-clad hopefuls. Nico Mastorakis writes/directs/produces. With Julia 
Nickson, Ted Lange, Dick Gautier, Will Egan, Steve Donmeyer. (Academy Ent.) 
"The Gold-Rimmed Glasses" -- Drama about guilty passion -- between a restless 
high school student and a girl torn by religious uncertainties -- set against a 
backdrop of war and destruction. From the novel by Giorgio Bassani. Italy's 
Giuliano Montaldo directs Philippe Noiret and Rupert Everett. (European 
Classics) 
"Hawkens Breed" -- Saddle up! Western with Peter Fonda as a loner whose life 
changes the moment he sees a beautiful Shawnee woman bathing in a mountain 
stream. B-meister Charles B. Pierce ("Winterhawk," "Gray Eagle") directs. With 
Serene Hedin, Jack Elam, Bill Thurman, Chuck Pierce Jr., Sue Ann Langdon. 
(Vidmark) 
"Her Alibi" -- Cliffhanging comedy about a hunky mystery writer (hunky Tom 
Selleck) who provides an alibi for a stunning beauty (Paulina Porizkova) who he 
believes has been unjustly accused of murder. When a series of "accidents" 
befall him, he gets to wondering: Did she or didn't she? Bruce Beresford 
directs. (Warners) 
"Hitting Home" -- Thriller about a young woman who teams with her estranged 
husband to punish the hit-run driver who has killed their only child. Robin 
Spry co-produces/directs Kerrie Keane, Daniel Pilon, Saul Rubinek, Alan Thicke, 
Colleen Dewhurst. (New Star) 
"A Hollywood Ambition in the Making" -- Docudrama (with some actual interview 
footage) about young people who've come to Hollywood to "make it." Sebastian 
Shelley co-produces/directs. Dixie Ent. (Distributor pending) 
"Hoy Como Ayer" ("Today Like Yesterday") -- A young actor is plunged into an 
identity crisis after he immerses himself in the life of his newest character 
-- real-life Cuban composer/orchestra leader/singer Benny More. (The late More 
entertained pre-Castro audiences.) Constante Diego and Sergio Vejar direct. 
(Azteca) 
"If We Knew Then" -- All the drama's not on the slopes when four women, on a 
ski vacation, exchange their intimate thoughts about life, men and each other. 
Frank Harris directs Jane Wald (who produced/scripted), Deanna Lund, Liz 
Torres, Kari Michaelsen, Linden Chiles. (Intl. Film) 
"The Iron Triangle" -- The first Vietnam film to be told from the Viet Cong's 
point of view: VC guerrilla Liem Whatley and American infantry captain Beau 
Bridges discover that their similarities outweigh their differences during 
heavy fighting in South Vietnam's "iron triangle" region. With Oscar-winner 
Haing S. Ngor as a North Vietnamese officer. Eric Weston directs. (Scotti 
Bros.) 
* "Jacknife" -- Romantic drama in which Vietnam buddies Robert De Niro and Ed 
Harris reunite 15 years later when De Niro falls in love with Harris' sister, 
Kathy Baker. Their already strained relationship deteriorates when the two men 
face bitter truths about their past. David Jones ("Betrayal," "84 Charing Cross 
Road") directs. Stephen Metcalfe scripts from his play "Strange Snow." 
(Cineplex Odeon) 
"Kinjite" -- Psychological thriller dealing with "Forbidden Subjects." That's 
the Japanese translation of "Kinjite." Which means L.A. cop Charles Bronson has 
his work cut out for him when he investigates a case involving a pimp who's 
kidnaped the daughter of an L.A.-based Japanese businessman. Another problem: 
Bronson's own daughter was raped by a Japanese. Vet action man (and longtime 
Bronson collaborator) J. Lee Thompson directs. With Perry Lopez, Peggy Lipton, 
James Pax, Sy Richardson, Juan Fernandez. (Cannon) 
* "Lawrence of Arabia" -- Reissue of David Lean's 1962 blockbuster that won 
seven Oscars and made Peter O'Toole a star. Newly restored -- with footage that 
has never previously been seen -- the desert saga of adventurer T.E. Lawrence, 
scripted by Robert Bolt, also boasts enhanced color and new Dolby six-track 
Spectral Recording sound (the better to accommodate Maurice Jarre's stirring 
music). Robert A. Harris and Jim Painten handled the restoration, under Lean's 
direction. With: Omar Sharif, Alec Guinness, Anthony Quinn, Jack Hawkins, Jose 
Ferrer, Anthony Quayle, Claude Rains, Arthur Kennedy. (Columbia) 
* "Letters From a Dead Man" -- Sci-fi from the Soviet Union about a 
post-apocalyptic world that has been reduced to a dust-blown wasteland, and a 
determined survivor-scientist who keeps hope alive by writing letters to his 
dead son. Konstantin Lopoushansky directs. (New Yorker) 
"Lords of the Deep" -- Sci-fi thrills about an attack -- from down below (!) -- 
on America's first self-contained undersea laboratory. Life jackets! Mary Ann 
Fisher directs Priscilla Barnes, Bradford Dillman, Daryl Haney (who also 
co-writes). (Concorde) 
"Lucky Stiffs" -- Black comedy about a 300-pounder (Joe Alaskey) who's invited 
to a family Christmas dinner by gorgeous Donna Dixon. He's thrilled -- since 
he's got marriage on his mind. But, her wacky family has got other plans. See, 
he's gonna be the dinner! A black comedy (previously known as "Mr. Christmas 
Dinner") directed by Anthony Perkins. Pat Proft ("The Naked Gun") scripts. (New 
Line) 
"Manifesto" -- Freely adapted from Emile Zola's story "For a Night of Love," 
this is writer/director Dusan Makavejev's black comedy in which a cast of 
characters is drawn into the attempted assassination of a Middle European king. 
Made in the film maker's Yugoslavian homeland, and set in the '20s, the plot 
finds police and revolutionaries alike enmeshed in a revolt that is more sexual 
than political. With Camilla Soeberg, Alfred Molina, Simon Callow, Lindsay 
Duncan, Eric Stoltz. (Cannon) 
"Mariana, Mariana" -- A reunion of childhood friends Carlos and Rosales leads 
to memories -- and flashbacks about Mariana, the mother of another friend, who 
stirred a secret passion within the young Carlos. Stars Pedro Armendariz, Saby 
Kamalich, Aaron Hernan. (Azteca) 
"Merchants of War" -- Action-adventure with a CIA operative who takes on a 
vicious, Angola-based terrorist group -- twice! -- once for his country, and 
then to rescue his best friend. Stars Asher Brauner and Jesse Vint. Brauner 
co-scripts. Peter M. Mackenzie directs. (Triax) 
"Midnight Cop" -- A cynical police commissioner and a femme cop team to solve a 
series of gruesome murders in Berlin's drug and prostitution ganglands. Armin 
Mueller-Stahl and Julia Kent play love-hate partners. With Michael York as the 
D.A., Frank Stallone as a sleazy "New York-style" drug pusher, "foxy knockout" 
Morgan Fairchild as Stallone's babe. (Vidmark) 
"The Mighty Quinn" -- Suspenser with Denzel Washington as the police chief of a 
small Caribbean island in search of boyhood friend Robert Townsend, who's 
suspected of murdering a prominent businessman. The lawman encounters conflicts 
with superiors -- and the white Establishment. Carl Schenkel (HBO's "The 
Hitchhiker") directs. Hampton Fancher ("Blade Runner") scripts from the A.H.Z. 
Carr novel. With Mimi (Mrs. Tom Cruise) Rogers, James Fox, Sheryl Lee Ralph, M. 
Emmet Walsh, Art Evans, Esther Rolle. (MGM/UA) 
"Murphy's Fault" -- Romantic comedy about a Hollywood hyphenate -- he's a 
writer-night watchman -- who falls in love, sells his first story and embarks 
on a series of misadventures. Robert J. Smawley writes/directs. With Patrick 
Dollaghan and Anne Curry. (Triax) 
"976-Evil" -- Robert Englund -- a.k.a. Freddy Krueger of that nightmarish Elm 
Street -- makes his directing debut. When a teen begins making calls to one of 
those 976-numbers, he finds himself in a devilish situation. Horrors! (CineTel) 
"Options" -- A Hollywood agent tries to attain the rights to the life story of 
a famed princess in this romantic comedy. Tracking Princess Nicole (Joanna 
Pacula) of Sweden entails a journey across the plains of the Serengeti Valley 
to Mt. Kilimanjaro -- not to mention squaring off against her kidnapers! Camilo 
Vila directs. With Matt Salinger, John Kani, Danny Keogh. (Vestron) 
"Out of the Dark" -- A telephone sex-service in gritty L.A. is the backdrop for 
this murder mystery exec produced by Paul Bartel and directed by Michael 
Schroeder (they teamed for "Mortuary Academy"). Stars Cameron Dye, Karen Black, 
Bud Cort -- plus the late Divine. In this one, the female impersonator pulls a 
switch -- and plays a male detective. (CineTel) 
"Paperhouse" -- A lonely young girl (newcomer Charlotte Burke) reconciles the 
harsh realities of her world -- strained relationships with her parents, 
confusion about boys, fear of death and of growing up -- via a secret fantasy 
life. Her drawings come to life in her dreams. Bernard Rose directs. Tim Bevan 
and Sarah Radclyffe ("My Beautiful Laundrette," "Wish You Were Here") produce. 
With Glenne Headly (the "mark" in "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels"), Ben Cross, 
Elliott Spiers. (Vestron) 
"Parents" -- Gosh, Mr. and Mrs. Laemle (Randy Quaid and Mary Beth Hurt) seem 
like such super-neat 1950s parents. So how come their son (Bryan Madorsky) 
suspects them of (yeeccch!) cannibalism? A horrific black comedy -- the first 
direction by actor Bob Balaban. With Sandy Dennis. (Vestron) 
"Physical Evidence" -- Murder, suspense and double-dealing. Down-and-out ex-cop 
Burt Reynolds -- who's been accused of murder -- is defended by attorney 
Theresa Russell, who plans to make her name with his case. Meanwhile, D.A. Ned 
Beatty is confident of a conviction. Through it all, the question persists: Who 
dunit? Martin Ransohoff ("Jagged Edge") produces; Michael Crichton ("Coma") 
directs. (Columbia) 
"The Plumber" -- A plumber, called to a government office to fix a flooded 
toilet, is mistaken for a financial expert and is appointed minister of 
finance. Israel's Miki Behagen directs this satire from Films Around the World 
Inc. (Distributor pending) 
"Powwow Highway" -- Two young American Indians discover the mystical powers of 
their heritage during a comedic trek across the U.S. Stars A Martinez and Gary 
Farmer. Jonathan Wacks (who produced the quirky "Repo Man") directs. (Warners) 
"Purgatory" -- While vacationing in "an exotic country," two young women are 
mistakenly arrested for drug smuggling and condemned to a life sentence in a 
hellish prison. Along comes a U.S. agent who decides to take matters into his 
own hands. Ami Artzi directs. With Tanya Roberts, Julie Pop, Rufus Swart. (New 
Star Ent.) 
"Rawney" -- Bob Hoskins makes his directorial debut, and also co-writes/stars, 
in a World War II drama of a young soldier (Dexton Fletcher) who goes AWOL and 
joins a Gypsy band. Zoe Wanamaker co-stars. A HandMade production. (Distributor 
pending) 
"Rorret" -- Let's hope this idea doesn't catch on: A murderous movie theater 
owner selects his victims from the audiences that attend his screenings of 
horror films. Italy's Fulvio Wetzl directs/produces. (New Yorker) 
"See You in the Morning" -- Alan J. Pakula produces/directs/writes this comedy 
drama about two families caught up in the confusion of divorce (Jeff Bridges 
and Farrah Fawcett) and remarriage (Bridges and Alice Krige). With Drew 
Barrymore and Lukas Haas as Bridges' "new" children. And Linda Lavin as the 
mutual friend who gets Bridges and Krige together. (Warners) 
"Space Mutiny" -- Futuristic action/adventure with a colony of space travelers 
-- and the evil crew member who attempts to lead them to mutiny. With Reb 
Brown, John Phillip Law and James Ryan. (Action Intl.) 
"Stripped to Kill Part II" -- Murder-mystery, set to bumps and grinds, as a 
detective sets out to stop a serial killer from doing away with exotic dancers. 
If you liked the original, consider: Now we journey into the mind of the 
murderer! Katt Shea Ruben co-writes/directs again. Roger Corman exec produces. 
(Concorde) 
"Tap" -- Nick Castle ("The Last Star-fighter"), son of legendary choreographer 
Nick Castle Sr. (he worked with hoofers including Shirley Temple, Eddie Cantor, 
Hope &amp; Crosby), directs the dramatic story of ex-con/tap dancer Gregory 
Hines, who returns home to face the woman and the dance community he walked out 
on. With Sammy Davis Jr. (Tri-Star) 
"The Terror Within" -- Sci-fi set in the aftermath of a deadly plague finds a 
team of scientists ensconced 500 feet beneath the Mojave desert working toward 
the rebuilding of the future. They think the worst is over. They're wrong! 
Thierry Notz directs George Kennedy, Andrew Stevens, Starr Andreeff, Terri 
Treas. Roger Corman exec produces. (Concorde) 
"Three Fugitives" -- Silliness. Nick Nolte and Martin Short are a mismatched 
duo who reluctantly become partners when Short's half-baked plan for a robbery 
goes awry. Complicating their flight from the law: Short's adorable little 
daughter takes a liking to the gruff Nolte. This marks writer/director Francis 
Veber's Hollywood debut -- and the Americanization of Veber's French hit "Les 
Fugitif" (never seen in this country). (Touchstone) 
"Time Guardian" -- Tom Burlinson (a.k.a. Jim Craig -- "The Man From Snowy 
River") squares off against the mutated descendants of humans with armored 
exo-skeletons. The showdown takes place in the far future, in an Australian 
city that's spent centuries cruising the "Time Stream." Brian Hannant directs. 
With Nikki Coghill, Dean Stockwell, Carrie Fisher. (Hemdale) 
"The Toxic Avenger Part II" -- Action/sci-fi/comedy. A chemical manufacturing 
conglomerate plans to take over the world. Fear not! It's the Toxic Avenger (of 
New Jersey) to the rescue -- in a plot which takes him to Tokyo. (Watch out, 
Godzilla!) Michael Herz and Lloyd Kaufman direct. (Troma) 
"True Believer" -- James Woods is a brilliant but cynical lawyer, Robert Downey 
Jr. an idealistic law school grad. It's Downey who persuades Woods to take the 
case of a young Asian immigrant involved in gang murder. Joseph Ruben ("The 
Stepfather") directs. With Margaret Colin, Kurtwood Smith (the nastiest 
"RoboCop" villain) and Yuji Okumoto. (Columbia) 
"Trust Me" -- Everyone knows that the value of art goes up when an artist dies. 
Pity the young painter who wanders into Adam Ant's L.A. art gallery. . . . The 
black comedy co-stars Talia Balsam, Joyce Van Patten and Barbara Bain. 
(Cinecom) 
"Twister" -- A young man's encounter with his girlfriend's eccentric family 
goes comedically awry when a Kansas tornado leaves them stranded inside the 
estate of her soda-pop-magnate father, Harry Dean Stanton. Michael Almereyda 
writes/directs. With Suzy Amis, Dylan McDermott, Crispin Glover, Lois Chiles, 
Charlaine Woodard. (Vestron) 
"Under the Sun of Satan" -- The Cannes best-film winner tells the dramatic 
story of Father Donissan (Gerard Depardieu), a near-fanatical priest. In the 
same town is a beautiful 15-year-old girl (Sandrine Bonnaire), who is as 
devoted to sin as Donissan is to the Good Book. In a sense, she is his 
psychological twin -- and spiritual opposite. And opposites attract. Maurice 
Pialat directs from George Bernanos' novel. (Alive) Opens Friday. 
"Unsettled Land" -- Dramatic saga of the young pioneers who left their 
families, their cultures and traditions, in the period just after World War I, 
to settle in Israel. Uri Barbash directs Kelly McGillis and John Shea. 
(Hemdale) 
"Voices of Sarafina" -- Documentary which makes personal the lives of the young 
black cast currently performing in the Broadway musical "Sarafina!" The show 
dramatizes the 1976 uprising in which 15,000 schoolchildren took to the streets 
of Soweto to protest the white government's latest intimidation tactic -- the 
imposition of Afrikaans as the official language of South Africa. Nigel Novle 
directs. (New Yorker) 
"We Think the World of You" -- Drama -- with some dark comedy -- about an 
unusual love triangle involving Alan Bates, Gary Oldman and a dog named Evie. 
Bates carries a torch for Oldman. But Oldman -- who's married -- is thrown into 
jail for a year for theft. During this time, Bates adopts Evie and when Oldman 
is released from prison, Bates has a new-found four-legged love. Colin Gregg 
directs. (Cinecom) Opens Friday. 
"Who's Harry Crumb?" -- John Candy is an inept detective whose disguises fool 
no one, but somehow, he keeps bumbling his way into solving crimes. A comedy 
(of course) directed by Paul Flaherty. With Jeffrey Jones and Annie Potts. 
(Tri-Star) 
"The Wicked Stepmother" -- Bette Davis is a mysterious, mesmerizing 
octogenarian with a potent power over elderly widowers in this supernatural 
comedy by genre-meister Larry Cohen (the "It's Alive" series), who 
directs/writes/exec produces. Also Colleen Camp, Lionel Stander, David Rasche, 
Tom Bosley and Barbara Carrera. Stints by Richard Moll, Seymour Cassel, Evelyn 
Keyes. (MGM/UA) 
"Wonderland" -- Two gay teen-agers (Emile Charles, Tony Forsyth) run off 
together and wind up witnessing a brutal murder in a gay nightclub. Now, the 
machete-wielding killer's after them! Philip Saville directs. (Vestron) 
Opening 
March through Mid-May 
* "The Adventures of Baron Munchausen" -- The zany Terry Gilliam, director of 
"Brazil," continues his controversial style. (He was nearly booted off this $40 
million-plus pic early into production, reports had it.) The Baron (John 
Neville) embarks on an epic/fantastic journey -- with a child stowaway (Sarah 
Polley) -- to save a city in distress. With Eric Idle, Oliver Reed, Jonathan 
Pryce, Valentina Cortese, Christopher Lambert. And -- in a cameo as the Moon 
King -- Robin Williams. (Columbia) 
"The Adventures of Milo and Otis" -- The animated saga of Milo the kitten and 
Otis the pug-nosed dog, narrated by Dudley Moore. Oh the excitement! One day, 
mischievous Milo finds himself being perilously swept down a rushing river. 
Otis strikes out to save his buddy. Various cats and dogs co-star. Japan's 
Masanori Hata directs. (Columbia) 
"American Eagle" -- A couple of Vietnam vets try to rescue women kidnaped by a 
vindictive member of their platoon. Stars Asher Brauner, Robert Lyons, Vernon 
Wells ("Road Warrior's" mohawked menace), Kai Baker. Robert J. Smawley directs. 
(Triax) 
"American Ninja 3" -- Chop-socky action. Sean, a young martial arts combatant, 
prepares for a tournament on a tiny Caribbean island. What makes this 
competition especially difficult are the bitter memories he harbors toward 
Cobra, a terrorist who killed his father a decade ago. Cedric Sundstrom directs 
Steve James (of "American Ninja" 1 &amp; 2). (Cannon) 
"Another Chance" -- "St. Elsewhere" heartthrob Bruce Greenwood portrays a 
legendary womanizer who is given another crack at life in order to mend his 
ways and achieve redemption. Nice work if you can get it. Jesse Vint 
writes/directs the romantic comedy. (Moviestore) 
"Assassination With Cause" -- Political intrigue and action, with Steve 
Railsback as a down-but-not-quite-out State Department security adviser working 
in Mexico City. It's his job to ensure a safe trip for a visiting senator (Sam 
Melville). When violence breaks out, Railsback teams with girlfriend Elpidio 
Carrillo's brother to find the cog in the security works. Jon Hess directs. 
L.A. Film Group. (Distributor pending) 
"Baby Bump" -- It was known as "The Immaculate Conception of Baby Bump," but 
they probably couldn't find any marquees that could accommodate it. Comedy 
based on the long-running Groundlings revue, "Just Like the Pom Pom Girls," 
about how a determined mother (Anita Morris) will make any sacrifice to keep 
custody of her daughter. The daughter happens to be a test-tube baby, whose 
father's identity is not known. William Schreiner directs. (New Line) 
"Bank Job" -- Exec producer John Badham oversees the directorial debut of 
"Stakeout" writer Jim Kouf. Frank Salazar (Corbin Bernsen) has devised the 
"perfect heist" -- but he gets arrested en route. With Hoyt Axton, Ruben 
Blades, Fred Gwynne, Ed O'Neill, Lou Diamond Phillips. (Touchstone) 
"Banned" -- Comic travails of a jazz-rock guitarist who's suddenly taken over 
by the spirit of a dead -- and homicidal! -- punk rocker. Roberta Findlay 
directs. From Reeltime. (Distributor pending) 
"Big Man on Campus" -- Once known as "The Hunchback of UCLA," outside pressures 
(they filmed at USC!) necessitated a title change for this comedy. A forlorn 
hunchback (Allan Katz), living a sequestered existence in the campus bell 
tower, reveals himself and is promptly relocated to the Psychology Department. 
Jeremy Kagan directs. With Corey Parker, Melora Hardin, Tom Skerritt, Jessica 
Harper, Cindy Williams. (Vestron) 
"Big Wilderness" -- Don Coscarelli ("Phantasm") writes/directs the action story 
of six people who attend a tough mountain survival school and learn the secret 
to enduring the wilderness. Stars Lance Henriksen, Mark Rolston, Steve Antin, 
"Young Gun" Dermot Mulroney. Starway Intl. (Distributor pending) 
"Boris &amp; Natasha" -- Comedy inspired by the "Rocky and Bullwinkle" 
characters, with Charles Martin Smith directing. The two spies defect and 
become true-blue Americans. A fish-out-of-water story, this fish being a Red 
herring. (Arrgggggh!) SCTV vet Dave Thomas is Boris, Sally Kellerman is 
Natasha. (MCEG) 
"The Bounty Hunter" -- Robert Ginty's a bounty hunter probing the death of an 
American Indian. Bo Hopkins, the sleazy sheriff of the small town where the 
death occurred, also happens to be teamed with corrupt real estate investors 
who'd like to rip off Indian land. Hmmmm. Ginty also directs. (Action Intl.) 
"Buried Alive" -- Horrors! Robert Vaughn is a charismatic administrator at a 
correctional school for girls with a dwindling student body. When a new teacher 
joins the faculty, she gets more than she bargained for -- including a scary 
trip to the basement with a deranged Donald Pleasence. Inspired by tales of 
(guess who?) Edgar Allan Poe. Gerard Kikoine directs. (Cannon) 
"Catch Me If You Can" -- Matt Lattanzi (Olivia Newton-John's hubby) toplines a 
youth action/romantic comedy in which high school students try and save their 
school by wagering on illegal car races. Stephen Sommers writes/directs. With 
Loryn Locklin, M. Emmet Walsh, Geoffrey Lewis. (MCEG) 
"Chances Are" -- "Dirty Dancing" director Emile Ardolino follows up that big 
$-maker with a romantic comedy of two lifetimes. Robert Downey Jr. drops back 
to Earth 25 years after his death smack dab into a love triangle with his widow 
(Cybill Shepherd), his best friend (Ryan O'Neal) and the daughter he never had 
a chance to know (Mary Stuart Masterson). (Tri-Star) 
"Chronicle of a Death Foretold" -- Murder-mystery set in South America, 
involving passion and family honor, based on the celebrated novel by Gabriel 
Garcia Marquez. Italy's Francesco Rosi directs Rupert Everett, Ornella Muti and 
Anthony Delon. (Island) 
"Cold Feet" -- Comic fable set in the New West, with Sally Kirkland, Keith 
Carradine and Tom Waits as a bank-robbing trio out to bilk one another. Winding 
up in Dead Rock, Mont., they're dealt with by the townspeople in a number of 
unusual ways. "Echo Park's" Robert Dornhelm directs. (Avenue) 
"Communion" -- A "sci-faction" saga. Based on Whitley Streiber's best-seller in 
which he recounts two real-life (if you believe Streiber) encounters with 
advanced alien beings. Stars Christopher Walken and Lindsay Crouse. Philippe 
Mora ("The Howling II") directs/co-produces with Streiber (who adapted). Music 
by Eric Clapton. Communion Inc. (Distributor pending) 
"Cookie" -- A prickly ex-con father and his spunky teen daughter manage to 
outsmart both the mob and the law. Will they live to tell about it? Susan 
Seidelman directs Peter Falk, Emily Lloyd and Dianne Wiest. Also with Brenda 
Vaccaro, Jerry Lewis, Michael V. Gazzo. (Warners) 
"Crash and Burn" -- Action! Death! Destruction! Ancillary rights! An ill-fated 
experiment in robot genetics (huh?) goes haywire and unleashes rogue killers 
that prey upon innocent folk. Directed by Daniel Stork. (Full Moon) 
"Crazy Horse" -- Daniel Stern and "Valley Girl's" Deborah Foreman in a tricky 
romantic comedy about lost love, love on the rocks, love on the rebound and 
other metaphorical lovey-dovey situations. Director Stephen Withrow. SC Ent. 
(Creswin) 
"Crusoe" -- Caleb Deschanel ("The Black Stallion") directs a dramatic retelling 
of the Daniel Defoe classic, starring Aidan Quinn as the desert island 
adventurer. (Island) 
"Daddy's Little Girl" -- Tony Danza is a single dad attempting to survive his 
teen-age daughter's transformation from wallflower to knockout. With Ami Dolenz 
(daughter of Monkee Micky Dolenz), Catherine Hicks, Wallace Shawn. Direction by 
Stan Dragoti. (Columbia) 
"Dead Calm" -- "Mad Max's" George Miller produces a suspense thriller based on 
the novel by Charles Williams. A married couple, just getting over a personal 
tragedy, encounters a stranger while cruising the Pacific. Philip Noyce 
directs. Stars Sam Neill, Nicole Kidman, Billy Zane. (Warners) 
"Death on Safari" -- Agatha Christie's classic mystery "10 Little Indians' " 
gets yet another reworking -- with Donald Pleasence, Brenda Vaccaro, Frank 
Stallone and Herbert Lom among the guests at a African hunting lodge. As each 
day passes, the maids have fewer rooms to worry about. Directed by Alan 
Birkinshaw. (Cannon) 
"Distant Voices, Still Lives" -- British director Terence Davies' somewhat 
autobiographical depiction of a man's life -- and the events that shaped it 
(childhood, marriage, death of an abusive father). (Alive) 
"Dream Demon" -- Harley Cokliss directs the horrors about a fragile young woman 
who's hounded by the press as she prepares to wed a prominent British officer. 
When a flamboyant American woman befriends her, the two become trapped in a 
labyrinth of terror. With Kathleen Wilhoite, Jemma Redgrave (yes, another 
Redgrave daughter), Nickolas Grace. (Spectrafilm) 
"The Dream Team" -- Michael Keaton, Christopher Lloyd, Peter Boyle and Stephen 
Furst get zany, as New Jersey psychiatric hospital nut cases who're treated to 
a field trip to Yankee Stadium. Then they get separated from the therapist. Now 
they've got to brave the really crazy streets of New York. "Private Benjamin's" 
Howard Zieff directs. (Universal) 
"Drowning by Numbers" -- Dark comedy about three generations of women who do in 
their hubbies by drowning them. Life jacket, anyone? Peter Greenaway ("The 
Draughtsman's Contract") directs Joan Plowright, Juliet Stevenson, Joely 
Richardson, Bernard Hills. (Galaxy) 
"Drugstore Cowboy" -- Matt Dillon and sultry Kelly Lynch in a drama about four 
'70s-era drug addicts trying to kick their habits. James Fogle, an inmate at 
Walla Walla State Penitentiary in Washington, wrote the unpublished novel on 
which this is based. Gus Van Sant directs/co-writes with Dan Yost. (Avenue) 
"Earth Girls Are Easy" -- Comedy in which three furry fellows from outer space 
make a navigational blunder and end up in Valerie Dale's (Geena Davis) pool. 
The E.T.s are more than willing to show the "Earth girls" a good time. From 
"Absolute Beginners" director Julien Temple. With Charlie Rocket, Julie Brown, 
Jeff Goldblum, Jim Carrey, Damon Wayans, Mike McKean, June Ellis. (Vestron) 
"84 Charlie Mopic" -- Action-drama about Vietnam, told through the eyes and 
camera lens of a military cameraman who chronicles three days in the lives of a 
small reconnaissance unit lost in the Central Highlands of SE Asia in 1968. 
Viet vet Patrick S. Duncan (HBO's "Vietnam War Stories") writes/directs. (New 
Century/Vista) 
"Far Out Man!" -- A comedic family affair, with Tommy Chong directing/starring 
with real-life wife Shelby, son Paris and daughters Rae Dawn and Robbi. Tommy 
plays a leftover '60s hippy who decides to drop back in on the family he hasn't 
seen for 14 years. The return to society also finds him coming up with an 
inventive way to make some bread: Would you believe "Hippyland"? Also stars Rae 
Dawn's real-life beau (and co-star in "Soul Man"), C. Thomas Howell. Bring your 
lovebeads! (CineTel) 
"Fellini's Intervista" -- Another Federico Fellini-directed valentine to his 
Italian homeland -- and his film-making past -- starring the great one himself. 
Of course, Marcello Mastroianni and Anita Ekberg are also on hand! A Blum Group 
production. (Distributor pending) 
"Fletch Lives" -- Chevy Chase reprises as chameleonic reporter I.M. Fletcher. 
This comedy adventure sends him to the plantations of Louisiana, where he 
attempts to blend in with the likes of Juliane Phillips, Hal Holbrook and 
Cleavon Little. "Fletch" director Michael Ritchie returns. (Universal) 
"Fortress of Amerikkka" -- Action/adventure. The title is a tip-off to what 
this is all about, as a war machine attempts to take over the cccountry. Eric 
Louzil wwwrites/dddirects. (Troma) 
"Fright Night Part 2" -- Peter Vincent, vampire hunter (and former TV horror 
film host) returns -- with Roddy McDowall again starring. He's teamed with 
Charley (William Ragsdale), the teen-turned-vampire in the 1985 original. (Not 
to worry: a little therapy's gone a long way with Charley.) The horror (with 
tongues-in-neck humor) is conjured up by a gang of oddballs led by femme fatale 
Julie Carmen. Tommy Lee Wallace ("Halloween III") directs/co-scripts. (New 
Century Vista) 
"Getting It Right" -- Romantic comedy directed by Randal Kleiser (late of "Big 
Top Pee-Wee"), based on Elizabeth Jane Howard's best-seller about a 31-year-old 
man who knows nary a thing about sex, love and women. He's about to get the 
lesson! With Lynn Redgrave, Helena Bonham Carter, Sir John Gielgud, Peter Cook. 
(MCEG) 
"Hang Tough" -- A teen-age boy does just what the title says -- when he takes a 
stand against the toughest kid in town. As a result, he wins the heart of the 
gal he loves -- and gets a little respect. Daryl Duke directs. W.D. Richter and 
John Herzfeld co-script. (Moviestore) 
"Happy Together" -- Romantic comedy with "In the Mood's" Patrick Dempsey as an 
uptight playwright who heads to college in sunny S. Cal. to loosen up. A 
computer glitch pairs him with Helen Slater as a flaky actress. Mel Damski 
directs. Apollo Pictures. (Distributor pending) 
"The Haunted" -- Who ya gonna call? When a fellow inherits a family mansion -- 
which comes complete with a ghostly presence -- he asks parapsychologists to 
flush out the evil presence. Kevin S. Tenney writes/directs. (Imperial Ent.) 
"The Heart of Dixie" -- Ally Sheedy, Virginia Madsen and Phoebe Cates are 
Alabama coeds circa 1957, courtesy of Anne Rivers Siddons' novel "Heartbreak 
Hotel." A coming-of-age drama about young women torn between the Old South and 
the rock 'n' roll/civil rights rebellion. Martin Davidson ("Eddie and the 
Cruisers") directs. With Don Michael Paul and Treat Williams. (Orion) 
"Heathers" -- Winona Ryder and Christian Slater in a dark comedy of bad 
manners, Angst, alienation, ambition and all the other high school happenings. 
Michael Lehmann directs. (New World) 
"High Hopes" -- Contemporary British comedy dealing with a group of idealists, 
yuppies and mismatched entrepreneurs who wage war between the classes. It broke 
'em up at the last New York Film Festival. Directed by Mike Leigh. Stars Philip 
Davis and Ruth Sheen. (Skouras) 
"Himmo, King of Jerusalem" -- It's 1948, Jerusalem is under siege, and a pretty 
young nurse (Alona Kimhi) has been summoned to an abandoned monastery that now 
serves as a hospital for wounded soldiers. There, the charismatic Himmo (Ofer 
Shikartsi), a badly wounded patient, captures her affections. A drama directed 
by Amos Gutman (winner of Israel's version of the Oscar). Rearguard Production. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Hit List" -- Lance Henriksen is a shoe salesman by day and a rub-out man for 
mob boss Rip Torn by night. He mistakes a house occupied by the Jan-Michael 
Vincent family for one of his targets and ends up snatching a boy. Now 
Jan-Michael wants his son back. William Lustig ("Maniac") directs. (CineTel) 
"Homer and Eddie" -- Jim Belushi is Homer, Whoopi Goldberg is Eddie, in a drama 
from "Runaway Train's" Andrei Konchalovsky. Homer and Eddie are mentally 
deficient: He's a "gentle giant," she's prone to occasional violence. They grow 
close as they travel cross-country. (Cineplex Odeon) 
"Horror Show" -- Scare show about a cop (Lance Henriksen again) who apprehends 
a diabolical murderer (Brion James) but can't quite shake the vision of the 
grisly murder scene. Soon, illusion and reality become hazy as he must protect 
his family from the supernatural powers of the executed murderer. Sean 
Cunningham ("Friday the 13th") produces; James Isaac directs. (MGM/UA) 
"How I Got Into College" -- Comedy from producer Michael Shamberg ("A Fish 
Called Wanda") and director Savage Steve Holland ("Better Off Dead") about some 
of the more bizarre aspects of college recruitment procedures. Anthony Edwards 
stars, with Corey Parker, Lara Flynn Boyle, Finn Carter, Chris Rydell, Phil 
Hartman and Nora Dunn. (Fox) 
"I, Madman" -- Thriller about a young actress who works in an antique bookshop 
(to pay the rent, natch) and the storybook villains who come to life in her 
mind . . . or is this her imagination? With Jenny Wright, Clayton Rohner and 
Randy Cook. Tibor Takacs directs. (Trans World) 
"In the Spirit" -- Comedy/suspense from director Sandra Seacat about two 
unlikely women -- a health store owner (Marlo Thomas) and the wife of a 
Hollywood studio exec (Elaine May) -- who must discover why someone is trying 
to kill them. Co-stars Jeannie Berlin (May's daughter), Olympia Dukakis, Peter 
Falk, Melanie Griffith. Scripted by Berlin and Laurie Jones. A Running River 
Production. (Distributor pending) 
"K-9" -- Jim Belushi and canine actor Jerry Lee (a newcomer) are the toughest 
cop team in town. "One's just a little smarter than the other," barks the press 
kit. Produced by Lawrence Gordon ("Die Hard") and brother Charles. Rod Daniel 
directs. (Universal) 
"King of the Children" -- Lao Gan is a young countryside worker who earns this 
title when he becomes a junior high teacher in a remote mountainous region in 
Northern China. Lacking education -- and proper textbooks -- Lao uses the 
dictionary to teach his students the rudiments of writing. Directed by Chen 
Kaige of China. (Orion Classics) 
"Kung Fu Master" -- Romantic comedy about a 40-ish woman who's fallen for the 
14-year-old master of a kung-fu video game. The pair, along with her daughter, 
journey to an exotic island. Agnes Varda writes/directs. (Heritage Ent.) 
"La Boheme" -- Adaptation of Puccini's classic opera about Bohemian 
turn-of-the-century Paris and the tragic love affair between the poor young 
Mimi and a struggling artist. Luigi Comencini directs the French-Italian 
production starring Barbara Hendricks. (New Yorker) 
"La Lectrice" ("The Reader") -- Comedy -- with dramatic overtures -- about a 
woman (Miou-Miou) who reads aloud to people for a living. Sometimes she 
imagines that her clients (and hers is a select and eccentric clientele) are 
living out the words. France's official Academy Award entry. (Orion Classics) 
"L.A. Bounty" -- Platinum she-ro Sybil Danning co-produces/stars as a bounty 
hunter in this action flick with Henry Darrow and Wings Hauser, who plays a 
vicious drug king who kidnaps (or does he?) a mayoral candidate. He also 
happens to have killed a former partner of Danning's. Which means she's gonna 
be really mad by the time they square off -- in a fight to the death! Worth 
Keeter directs. (Noble Ent.) 
* "Lean on Me" -- True story of educator Joe Clark ("Street Smart's" Morgan 
Freeman), whose provocative use of bullhorns and baseball bats helped to 
transform Paterson, N.J.'s, Eastside High into a less violent place. John G. 
Avildsen (the "Karate Kid" movies) directs. With Robert Guillaume, Beverly 
Todd, Lynne Thigpen. (Warners) 
"Les Anne Sandwiches" ("The Sandwich Years") -- Bittersweet French comedy. A 
young boy, orphaned by the war, flees his foster home and is taken in by an 
aging junk merchant. Directed by Pierre Boutron. Stars Vojtek Pszoniak, Thomas 
Langmann. (Galaxy) 
"Let It Ride" -- Richard Dreyfuss, David Johansen and Allen Garfield in a 
comedy named after the motto of compulsive gambler Dreyfuss. His big dream in 
life is to hit the big jackpot -- and b-i-n-g-o! Joe Pytka directs. Also with 
Jennifer Tilly, Michelle Phillips, Mary Woronov, Robbie Coltrane, Richard 
Edson, Cynthia Nixon, Teri Garr. (Paramount) 
* "Leviathan" -- No, it's not a 26.2-mile race run in blue jeans but a 
scientific thriller set two miles below the ocean's surface. "RoboCop" Peter 
Weller and "Rambo II" director George Cosmatos team for a story of how nature 
strikes back when big business runs headlong into a genetics experiment. 
(Pssst: The experiment produces an ominous presence.) With Richard Crenna, 
Amanda Pays (a.k.a. Mrs. Corbin Bernsen), "Ghostbuster" Ernie Hudson, Hector 
Elizondo, Daniel Stern, Lisa Eilbacher, Michael Carmine. (MGM/UA) 
"Limit Up" -- They're hyping this as "a quintessential '80s comedy." Nancy 
Allen is a strong-willed trader at the Chicago Board of Trade who sells her 
soul to a very unusual devil in order to corner the market in . . . soybeans! 
Directed by Richard Martini. Also stars Danitra Vance, Brad Hall, Dean 
Stockwell and Ray Charles (!). (MCEG) 
"Loose Cannons" -- Dan Aykroyd and Gene Hackman play cop and hard-boiled cop, 
respectively. A dark comedy follows. They investigate a series of murders and 
ultimately stumble upon an outrageous subplot. Robert Clark (he did "Porky's" 
and "A Christmas Story") directs. Aaron Spelling exec produces. (Tri-Star) 
"Love or Money" -- Romantic comedy about the trials and tribulations of "having 
it all" in the '80s. Todd Hallowell directs Timothy Daly, Michael Garin, Kevin 
McCarthy, David Doyle and Shelley Fabares. (Hemdale) 
"Major League" -- Sydney Pollack co-exec produces a comedy about a group of 
misfit Cleveland baseball players who've always dreamed of the big leagues and 
actually get their wish. Stars Tom Berenger, Charlie Sheen and Corbin Bernsen. 
"The Sting" scenarist David S. Ward writes/directs. (Paramount) 
"Millenium" -- Science fiction with Kris Kristofferson, Cheryl Ladd and Daniel 
J. Travanti, adapted by John Varley from his book of the same name. 
Kristofferson is a government investigator who discovers a string of unusual 
clues at the site of a airline disaster. Ladd's a mysterious woman from the 
future. Michael Anderson directs. (Fox) 
"Miracle Mile" -- A man at a diner takes a phone call that threatens the world 
with annihilation. Is it real or a hoax? Anthony Edwards and the woman he's 
just met (Mare Winningham) may have but 24 hours together before a nuclear 
strike. Steve De Jarnatt directs the surreal thriller. (Hemdale) 
* "Miss Firecracker" -- Armed with newly dyed flaming red hair and carnal 
knowledge of half the town of Yazoo City, Miss., Carnelle Scott (Holly Hunter) 
sets out to win the same contest that her prim, proper, Southern Belle cousin 
(Mary Steenburgen) won years earlier. Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Beth 
Henley scripts. Thomas Schlamme directs. With Tim Robbins, Alfre Woodard, Scott 
Glenn. (Corsair) 
"The Most Dangerous Woman Alive" -- She's a beautiful woman who's raped by her 
commander at Officer Candidate School. He's acquitted -- the jury includes some 
of his comrades -- and rapes her again. Revenge time! Christian Marnham 
directs. (Film Ventures) 
"Murmur of the Heart" -- Reissue of Louis Malle's classic, a sophisticated 1971 
comedy about a 15-year-old boy (Benoit Ferreux) with a pubescent attraction to 
his mother (Lea Massari). (Orion Classics) 
"My Mom's a Werewolf" -- A lonely housewife with a workaholic hubby and 
frenzied teen-age daughter falls prey to the advances of a mysterious pet shop 
owner with "wolfish" ways. Directed by Michael Fischa. Stars Susan Blakely, 
John Saxon, Katrina Caspary, John Schuck, Ruth Buzzi, Marcia Wallace, Marilyn 
McCoo (!). (Crown) 
* "New York Stories" -- Anthology of three "mini-films" set in NYC, directed by 
Woody Allen, Francis Coppola and Martin Scorsese. Allen stars in and writes 
his. Scorsese's is produced by his wife, Barbara DaFina and written by Richard 
Price ("Color of Money") with Nick Nolte and Rosanna Arquette. Coppola's stars 
his daughter Sofia -- who teamed with Dad to write the script. (Touchstone) 
"Night Angel" -- Check this one out: She-devil Lilith has her picture published 
on the cover of Siren, a high fashion mag, in order to seduce mankind! A 
supernatural thriller . . . obviously! Dominique Othenin-Girard directs. Stars 
Karen Black, Debra Feuer, Linden Ashby, Helen Martin. (Paragon Arts) 
"Nightlife" -- There's this fellow who works at his uncle's mortuary who's 
incessantly being harassed by thugs. A comic thriller, in which the thugs 
continue their vicious assault on the poor guy -- even after they're dead! 
David Acomba directs; starring Scott Grimes, Cheryl Pollak, John Astin. 
(Spectrafilm) 
"One for Sorrow, Two for Joy" -- Press materials use the term "Capra-esque" to 
describe this story of a strong-willed New England boatyard owner (Arthur 
Kennedy) who employs many of the town folk. When the yard faces closure, he 
must deal with an inner-struggle. John Coles directs. With Vincent Phillip 
D'Onofrio, Kevin J. O'Connor, Beau Bridges, Michael Lewis, Kate Reid, Will 
Patton, Mary-Louise Parker. (Avenue) 
"One Man Force" -- Big John Matuszak is a narcotics detective who does things 
his way. That means he's going to eventually get the guys who did in his 
partner. Dale Trevillion writes/directs/produces. With Ronny Cox, Charles 
Napier, Sharon Farrell, Sam Jones, Chance Boyer, Richard Lynch. (Shapiro 
Glickenhaus) 
"Out Cold" -- Teri Garr, John Lithgow and Randy Quaid explore love, death and . 
. . refrigeration? They were school buddies, pals in the army and partners in 
business, so what could come between them? She does. Director Malcolm Mowbray. 
(Hemdale) 
"Paint It Black" (working title) -- "Roxanne" shy (but hunky) guy Rick 
Rossovich stars in a suspense thriller directed by Tim Hunter ("River's Edge"). 
Set in the art world, Rossovich is a handsome, brilliant but undiscovered 
artist who signs exclusively with the posh Marion Easton Gallery. But Ms. 
Easton ("Anna's" Sally Kirkland) has her eyes on more than his palette. With 
Julie Carmen, Doug Savant, Jason Bernard, Peter Frechette, Moniqui Van De Ven, 
Martin Landau. (Vestron) 
"Pale Blood" -- High-tech vampire thriller/love story, set on L.A.'s trendy 
Melrose Avenue, where a mysterious visitor teams with a young woman to hunt a 
vampire-like killer. Hong Kong-born VV Hsu directs George Chakiris, Wings 
Hauser, Pamela Ludwig. (Noble Ent.) 
"Party Nerds" -- Teen comedy, in which once-teen idol Troy Donahue portrays a 
snooty college president who gets his comeuppance at a wild campus party. 
"Hollywood Chainsaw Hooker's" Linnea Quigley joins the party. 
Director/screenwriter Richard Gabai. RGE production. (Distributor pending) 
"Penn &amp; Teller Get Killed" -- Hyper-hip magicians Penn and the laconic 
Teller co-write/star in this comedy, which blurs the fine line between the real 
and imagined. When Penn jokes on a talk show that life would be more thrilling 
if someone tried to kill him, he gets his wish. Arthur Penn produces/directs. 
(Warners) 
"Personal Choice" -- Bitter, hard-drinking astronaut Martin Sheen is a role 
model for young Christian Slater, whose own growing-up travails are clouded by 
his intense desire to become an astronaut. David Saperstein (who wrote the 
novel "Cocoon") writes/directs. Also: F. Murray Abraham, Robert Foxworth, 
Sharon Stone, Olivia d'Abo. (Moviestore) 
"Pet Sematary" -- Stephen King adapts his own creepy novel. A young doctor 
packs up the family and heads to a small town in Maine, where they discover the 
chilling secret of a very unusual graveyard. "Siesta's" Mary Lambert directs. 
Stars Dale Midkiff, once-Munster Fred Gwynne, Denise Crosby. (Paramount) 
"Phantom of the Mall" -- Teen-aged Eric's (Derek Rydell) house is burned down 
to make room for a shopping mall. Everyone thinks Eric perished, but, no! He's 
transformed into the phantom of . . . you know. And he wants revenge on the 
arsonists. Richard Friedman directs. With Morgan Fairchild, Kari Whitman, Rob 
Estes, Kimber Sissons, Johnathan Goldsmith, Gregory Scott Cummins. (Fries) 
"The Phantom of the Opera" -- Robert Englund (Freddy of Elm Street legend) 
takes a sympathetic turn as the title character of Gaston Leroux's masterpiece 
of love and terror. You know the story: a mutilated and vengeful composer 
wreaks terror -- and kidnaps a (yet-to-be-cast) beauty. John Hough directs. 
(Cannon) 
"Pharaoh's Court" -- Musical-comedy, set in World War II Spain, about a 
well-to-do family who indulge their artistically inclined (and someone inept) 
son in staging a musical. When it's learned that the boy has plagiarized parts 
from musicians employed by the Franco regime, chaos ensues. Director Jose Luis 
Garcia Sanchez. (Galaxy) 
"Pin" -- He's a life-sized anatomical doll and he's been the only companion to 
a young brother and sister who've grown up in a cold household. When their 
no-goodnik parents suffer a tragic demise, the boy's identity and the doll's 
begin to meld. Sandor Stern writes/directs. (New World) 
"Police Academy 6: City Under Siege" -- Citizen's arrest! This time out, the 
gang in blue (sans Steve Guttenberg, who took a powder) takes on a master 
criminal who has unleashed a crime wave that not only endangers the lives of 
innocent people, but -- more important -- threatens real estate values! Peter 
Bonerz (remember Bob Newhart's dentist pal on his old TV show?) directs. Stars 
George Gaynes, Bubba Smith, Michael Winslow, David Graf, Marion Ramsey, Leslie 
Easterbrook, G.W. Bailey, Lance Kinsey, George Robertson, Bruce Mahler, Matt 
McCoy. (Warners) 
"Puppetmaster" -- A gifted group of psychics unearth the evil puppets of 
Puppetmaster Andre Toulon, who lived several decades earlier. One power-hungry 
psychic -- in an attempt to attain the little tykes' powers -- unleashes the 
malice of the dolls in one horrifying night. Directed by David Schmoeller. 
Stars Paul LeMat, Jimmie F. Skaggs, Irene Miracle, Robin Frates, William 
Hickey. (Full Moon) 
"The Rachel Papers" -- Unconventional comedy about a young man (Dexter 
Fletcher) who sees the girl of his dreams -- and the film's title (Ione Skye). 
The way he sees it, if he can win her love, his life will be perfect. Wish him 
luck! Damian Harris directs. (MGM/UA) 
"The Rainbow" -- Ken Russell directs/produces/co-scripts this prequel to "Women 
in Love," the D.H. Lawrence classic that Russell masterfully directed in 1970. 
A rebellious Ursula (Sammi Davis) is chastised by her folks but continues to 
defy conventional values and explore the sensuality of life itself. Probably 
won't be rated G. With Paul McGann, Amanda Donohoe, David Hemmings, Glenda 
Jackson, Christopher Gable. (Vestron) 
"The Rescuers" -- Reissue of Disney's fetching 1977 animated pic about plucky 
mice Bernard and Bianca and their rescue of a kidnaped orphan. Based on the 
popular children's novels of Margery Sharp, it features the voices of Bob 
Newhart, Eva Gabor and Geraldine Page. (Disney) 
"The Return of Swamp Thing" -- DC Comics' famed character -- a research 
scientist-turned-oozy hero -- returns to the screen to again face his 
arch-nemesis, the evil Dr. Arcane (Louis Jourdan). And to meet Heather 
Locklear, for a Beauty and the Beast scenario. Dick Durlock reprises as Swamp 
Thing. Jim Wynorski directs. Lightyear Prods. (Distributor pending) 
"River of Death" -- Robert Vaughn's a hideous Nazi doctor (were there any other 
kind in the Reich?) who conducts heinous experiments in order to create a virus 
that will eliminate weak and non-white peoples. Cut to 20 years hence . . . and 
the virus is everywhere. It's up to some Israeli commandos, an ex-Nazi (!) and 
various other good guys to set things right. Action man Steve Carver ("Lone 
Wolf McQuade") directs. With Michael Dudikoff, Donald Pleasence, Herbert Lom. 
(Cannon) 
"Rockula" -- Sometime in the 16th Century, Ralph and Mona were a couple of 
vampires who were madly in love but were separated on Halloween. Now Ralph only 
gets the chance to catch her when they're reincarnated every 27th Halloween. 
He's now 300 years old -- and still trying! Luca Bercovici directs. Stars Dean 
Cameron, Tawny Fere, Susan Tyrrell, plus Bo Diddley, Thomas Dolby and Toni 
Basil. (Cannon) 
* "Rooftops" -- Taylor Hackford exec-produces and Robert Wise directs an 
action-romance with music and dance about the rough-and-tumble world of New 
York's Lower East Side and a group of rejected kids who create their own living 
space atop abandoned tenement buildings. With Jason Gedrick, Troy Beyer, Eddie 
Velez, Tisha Campbell, Alexis Cruz, Allen Payne. Sound track by the Eurythmics' 
Dave Stewart. (New Century/Vista) 
"Sand and Blood" -- Drama set in the south of France, about a young bullfighter 
torn between ambition of his aggressive coach and the doctor who makes him 
examine the brutality of his trade. Jeanne Lebrune directs the French 
production. (New Yorker) 
"Say Anything" -- James L. Brooks ("Terms of Endearment," "Broadcast News") 
exec-produces a love story starring John Cusack and Ione Skye. A young woman 
taking her first shaky steps on the road to romance learns that her adored 
father is not who he seems. Cameron Crowe directs/scripts. With John Mahoney. 
(Fox) 
"Scandal" -- John Hurt, Joanne Whalley, Ian McKellen and Bridget Fonda (Peter's 
kid) in a replay of the real-life English scandal of the early '60s. When Her 
Majesty's minister of war is unwittingly engaged in a sexual liaison with "call 
girl" Christine Keeler (Whalley), all royalty breaks loose. Directed by Michael 
Caton-Jones. (Miramax) 
"Scenes From the Class Struggle in Beverly Hills" -- "Eating Raoul's" Paul 
Bartel directs/co-stars in a rollicking look at Bel-Air royalty. It's about two 
mischievous chauffeur-housemen who loosen the inhibitions of their wealthy, 
idle, attractive and available female employers. Featured: Jacqueline Bisset, 
Ray Sharkey, Mary Woronov, Robert Beltran, Wallace Shawn, Ed Begley Jr., 
Arnetia Walker and (a moonlighting) Paul Mazursky. (Cinecom) 
"Second Sight" -- "Night Court's" John Larroquette and "Perfect Stranger" 
Bronson Pinchot are psychic detectives who take on a peculiar case: They must 
rescue a woman and her boss (the Cardinal of Boston, no less) who've been 
abducted by a gang. Joel Zwick (TV's "Bosom Buddies," "Laverne and Shirley") 
makes his feature film directorial debut; Bess Armstrong and Stuart Pankin 
co-star. (Warners) 
"Shadowzone" -- How careless experimentation brings the "Shadow-zone" and its 
horrific inhabitants into our dimension. Glen Hobart writes/directs. (Full 
Moon) 
"The Siege of Firebase Gloria" -- "Full Metal Jacket's" surly-mouthed drill 
sergeant R. Lee Ermey and tough B-movie guy Wings Hauser in a story about a 
sergeant who must lead his reconnaissance troop though Viet Cong territory to 
Firebase Gloria, an American outpost. Directed by Brian Trenchard-Smith. 
(Fries) 
"Sing" -- "Footloose" collaborators Craig Zadan (producer) and Dean Pitchford 
(songs) reunite for more song/dance/drama. There's also a love story interwoven 
in the song-and-dance-filled competition at a Brooklyn school. Ice cream heir 
Richard Baskin directs. Stars Lorraine Bracco, Peter Dobson, Jessica Steen, 
Louise Lasser, Patti LaBelle. (Tri-Star) 
"Skin Deep" -- Comedy from director/screenwriter Blake Edwards, with John 
Ritter as a hard-drinking author who finds his marriage failing due to 
irresponsibility and compulsive womanizing. Also stars Vincent Gardenia 
("Moonstruck's" philandering father), Alyson Reed, Chelsea Field, Julianne 
Phillips. (Fox) 
"Skinheads" -- Chuck Connors and Barbara Bain in action-adventure involving a 
college student and his buddies who fight for their lives when chased into the 
High Sierras by gang of white supremacists. (Look for Geraldo to book these 
guys on his next show!) Greydon Clark ("Black Shampoo," "Wacko") directs. 
(Amazing) 
"Slave, a True Story" -- Based on the real-life story of a young woman who was 
abducted while hitchhiking in 1977 and was held captive, tortured and raped for 
seven years. (Her captor, arrested in 1984, is now in Folsom Prison.) From a 
script by Clair Noto. Heritage Ent. (Distributor pending) 
* "Slaves of New York" -- "A Room With a View's" James Ivory directs Tama 
Janowitz's adaptation of her trendy novel about the bizarre world of New York's 
underground art scene. Stars Bernadette Peters, Chris Sarandon, Mary Beth Hurt, 
Madeleine Potter. (Tri-Star) 
"Soigne Ta Droit" ("Keep Up Your Right!") -- According to the distributor, this 
is Jean-Luc Godard's "meditation on film as life at 24 frames per second." In 
Dolby, no less! Go figure. Michel Galabru stars. (Galaxy) 
"A Soldier's Tale" -- Shortly after the Allied invasion of France, a British 
soldier stumbles upon a young French girl living in a Normandy farmhouse. He 
falls in love with her and tries to save her from the Resistance, which has 
marked her for death for allegedly being an informer. Produced/directed by 
Larry Parr. Stars Bagriel Byrne, Marianne Basler, "Beverly Hills Cop's" Judge 
Reinhold. (Atlantic) 
"Soursweet" -- Drama from Mike Newell, director of "Dance With a Stranger," 
which spins the story of a young family from Hong Kong and their assimilation 
into London's Chinatown. Matters are complicated when they inadvertently 
involve themselves in local Asian gang warfare. (Skouras) 
"Speed Zone" -- Frenetic comedy with a "Cannonball Run"-ring -- as a wild car 
race from our nation's capital heads for the Santa Monica Pier. Jim Drake 
directs a plethora of celebs, including Brooke Shields, John Candy, Joe 
Flaherty, Lee Van Cleef, Shari Belafonte, Matt Frewer (he's "Max Headroom"), 
the Smothers Bros., Peter Boyle, Dean Martin, Eugene Levy, Jamie Farr, Michael 
Spinks, Carl Lewis, John Schneider. Whew! (Orion) 
"Summer Job" -- Stop us if you've heard this one: Comedy about a group of 
fun-loving inexperienced kids who happen to work at a fancy summer resort. Paul 
Madden directs. (SVS) 
"Summer Vacation" -- Sci-fi about four children in the summer of 1999. When one 
of them commits suicide, they all are struck by an eerie, deeply moving process 
by which their identities become confused, reversed and even replaced. A 
Japanese production directed by Shusuke Kaneko. (New Yorker) 
"A Switch in Time" -- A model, her photog and a young physicist are teleported 
back in time and are forced to utilize 20th-Century know-how to battle the 
Roman Legions. Paul Donovan produces/writes/directs. Simcom Intl. (Distributor 
pending) 
"Tattoo Chase" -- A young ne'er-do-well will inherit $80 million from his 
eccentric father if he can locate an unusual clue -- a tattoo that happens to 
be on one of Dad's old flames! Jeff Gold writes/directs. (Triax) 
"Teen Witch" -- Comedy about a teen-age girl who discovers that she's got some 
special powers. So what does she do with 'em? Imagine being the most popular 
girl in the world. Dorian Walker ("Making the Grade") directs Robyn Lively, 
"Poltergeist's" pint-sized medium Zelda Rubinstein and Dan Gauthier. (Trans 
World) 
"Troop Beverly Hills" -- Shelley Long is a recent divorcee who becomes a scout 
leader in order to have a bond with her daughter. If only the troop wasn't 
spoiled, bored and terribly wealthy brats. With Craig T. Nelson, Betty Thomas, 
Mary Gross. Jeff Kanew ("Tough Guys") directs. (Columbia) 
"Trueblood" -- Mistakenly sought for the murder of a cop, Ray Trueblood (Jeff 
Fahey) is forced to abandon his younger brother and flee to New York. A decade 
later, Ray returns to save his brother (Chad Lowe) from a gang life style. But 
. . . the cops still want him. Frank Kerr writes/directs. With sexy Sherilyn 
Fenn ("Two Moon Junction"), Billy Drago (Frank Nitti in "The Untouchables"), 
James Tolkan. (Fries) 
"Under the Boardwalk" -- This one's kind of a rad, beachside "West Side Story." 
Andy's a Midwest farm boy who visits the beach and falls for surfing champ 
Gitch. They become entangled in a war between the Vals, which Nick heads, and 
the Lowks, headed by Andy's cousin Reef. Nick falls for Allie (you still with 
us?), who is the tough and unforgiving Reef's sister. Eat my surfboard, dude! 
Fritz Kiersch directs. (New World) 
"Vampire's Kiss" -- Nicolas Cage has looks, charm, money and success, but all 
he really wants is love. Then along comes the woman of his dreams. Bela Lugosi 
would love her. With Maria Conchita Alonso, Jennifer Beals, Elizabeth Ashley. 
Robert Bierman directs. (Hemdale) 
"Warlock" -- "A Room With a View's" charming suitor Julian Sands ain't so 
fetching here, cast as an evil warlock catapulted from 1691 to the present. 
He's here to reunite the three parts of the Grand Grimoire (the devil's Bible) 
and transform the world into the devil's image. Richard E. Grant ("Withnail 
&amp; I") plays an intrepid witch hunter who pursues Sands through time. 
Directed by Steve Miner ("II" and "III" of "Friday the 13th"). Also: Lori 
Singer and Mary Woronov. (New World) 
"Warm Summer Rain" -- Romantic drama, a la "Last Tango in Paris" -- but from a 
woman's point of view, about a lonely and desperate Los Angeles secretary 
(Kelly Lynch) who runs away to the Mojave Desert in an effort to escape 
reality. There she meets an equally desperate man (Barry Tubb). They team for 
some hubba-hubba. Joe Gayton writes/directs. (Trans World) 
"White Hot" -- Robby Benson and Tawny Kitaen are young, beautiful professionals 
until Robby loses his Wall Street job. So Robby starts to lie to Tawny about 
his "temporary gig" while he is actually dealing coke. They get sucked into 
violence, betrayal and other bad things. Benson also directs. With Danny 
Aiello, Cher's failed suitor in "Moonstruck." (Triax) 
"Winter People" -- "First Blood's" Ted Kotcheff directs Kurt Russell and Kelly 
McGillis in a Depression-era drama about love in the mountains. McGillis is the 
unwed mother of a 2-year-old; she falls for the rugged Russell, himself a 
widowed stranger with a young daughter. Their rural bliss is jeopardized by her 
son's father. Based on the John Ehle novel. (Columbia) 
* "Wired" -- Based on Bob Woodward's best-selling account of the rise -- and 
tragic fall -- of John Belushi, this adaptation from producers Ed Pressman and 
Charles Meeker finds Belushi (Michael Chiklis) returning to Earth accompanied 
by a guardian angel (Ray Sharkey). That's the device that allows him to relive 
many of the special moments of his life, including rising to stardom on 
"Saturday Night Live," and his assorted drug antics. Larry Peerce (who last 
chronicled a rock star's romantic travails in "Hard to Hold") directs. With 
Lucinda Jenney (as Judy Belushi), Gary Groomes (Dan Aykroyd), Patti 
D'Arbanville (Cathy Smith). F/M Entertainment. (Distributor pending) 
* "The Witches" -- Anjelica Huston stars in this adaptation of the Roald Dahl 
novel about witches who plan on turning all of England's children into mice. It 
remains for an American boy and his grandmother to discover the scheme and 
intervene. "Muppet" mogul Jim Henson exec produces. Nicolas Roeg directs. With 
Mai Zetterling and Jasen Fisher. (Warners) 
* "Untitled Hugh Hudson" -- An L.A. teen (Beastie Boy Adam Horovitz) from a 
broken home is linked to a crime he had nothing to do with. While he fumes 
inside an adolescent psychiatric care facility, he warms up to a gifted 
therapist (Donald Sutherland). Hugh Hudson ("Greystoke") directs. (Orion) 
"Untitled Kevin Costner" -- "Bull Durham's" hard-hitting, hard-loving Costner 
tries for another box-office triple in this adaptation of W.P. Kinsella's novel 
"Shoeless Joe." Burt Lancaster, James Earl Jones, Amy Madigan and Ray Liotta 
also star in this biopic of the ace ballplayer who fell from grace in the Black 
Sox scandal. "In the Mood's" Phil Alden Robinson writes/directs. (Universal) 
Opening 
Mid-May Through August 
* "The Abyss" -- Horror from beneath the sea, as a team of divers working on a 
manned underwater oil-drilling habitat confront a mystery/monster 2,000 feet 
below the Atlantic. Ed Harris, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio and Michael Biehn 
star. From the "Aliens" team of producer Gale Anne Hurd and director/writer 
James Cameron. (Fox) 
"Alienator" -- Sci-fi/action. Teagan Clive, female body-builder and bodyguard 
to rock star David Lee Roth, is this bounty hunter from outer space. Her quarry 
on this gig is an escaped alien prisoner. Fred Olen Ray directs. Paul Garson 
("Cyclone") scripts. Also John Philip Law and Leo V. Gordon. American 
Independent. (Distributor pending) 
"America's Red Army -- Delta Force II" -- A terrorist plot unites our Delta 
Force and its Red Army counterpart, Spetsnaz. Heroic Chuck Norris stars. 
Brother Aaron Norris directs. (Cannon) 
"Any Man's Death" -- Action-adventure. A journalist journeys to Namibia in 
search of a missing colleague. What he finds is a moral dilemma: He can assist 
in bringing to justice a monstrous soul -- a reclusive German biochemist. Or he 
can help the scientific genius escape certain death and continue research that 
will save thousands of lives. Tom Clegg directs John Savage, William Hickey, 
Mia Sara, Ernest Borgnine, Michael Lerner. (Film Ventures) 
* "Backtrack" -- On a lonely stretch of highway, Jodie Foster inadvertently 
witnesses a brutal mob killing. Now she's living on the edge -- stalked by the 
police, the mob and hit man Dennis Hopper, who also directs. With Fred Ward, 
Vincent Price, Charlie Sheen, Dean Stockwell. (Vestron) 
* "Batman" -- Gotham City is under siege by a series of macabre deaths. Turns 
out the fiendish Joker's to blame. This is a case for Batman! But wait -- can 
comedy king Michael Keaton play a serious Batman in what's said to be a serious 
Batfilm? (Inquiring Batfans are skeptical.) Also stars Jack Nicholson as the 
grinning fiend. With Kim Basinger, Billy Dee Williams, Pat Hingle, Jack 
Palance, Jerry Hall and a monster budget. Tim Burton ("Beetlejuice") directs. 
Sam Hamm -- who's now writing Batman comics -- scripts. (Warners) 
"The Bear" ("L'Ours") -- Another unique offering from France's Jean-Jacques 
Annaud ("Quest for Fire"), this depicts the life of a bear cub in the Canadian 
Rockies from the cub's point of view, as he's taken under the paw of a more 
seasoned grizzly. Family melodrama. It was France's top-grossing title after 
only six weeks' release. (Tri-Star) 
"Beyond the Rising Moon" -- Sci-fi/romance. A beautiful, genetically engineered 
superbeing and a space jockey fall in love as they flee the giant business 
conglomerate that created her. Philip Cook directs Tracey Davis and Hans 
Bachmann. From Films Around the World Inc. (Distributor pending) 
* "Black Rain" -- In his first role since winning his Oscar for "Wall Street," 
Michael Douglas is a NYC police detective who travels deep into the Japanese 
underworld after he teams with an Osaka detective to capture a killer. Ridley 
Scott ("Blade Runner") directs. With Ken Takakura (Japan's leading star), Andy 
Garcia, Kate Capshaw and Yusaku Matsuda. (Paramount) 
"Bloodstone" -- Romantic adventure. A vacationing American couple is kidnaped 
in India and gets involved with a band of marauding cutthroats -- and the theft 
of a priceless 13th-Century ruby. Dwight Little ("Halloween IV") directs. 
Produced by Nico Mastorakis/Omega Ent. (Distributor pending) 
"Blue Steel" -- Rookie cop Jamie Lee Curtis falls in love with "the perfect 
man" (Ron Silver) -- only to learn he's a psychotic killer. As she stalks him, 
what was once passion becomes a game of deadly wits. Edward R. Pressman and 
Oliver Stone co-produce; Kathryn Bigelow directs/co-scripts. With Clancy Brown, 
Elizabeth Pena, Louise Fletcher. (Vestron) 
"The Borrower" -- Sci-fi thrills, as an outlaw alien -- who's crash-landed on 
Earth -- goes in search of replacement body parts. Rae Dawn Chong and Anthony 
Vargas star. (Atlantic) 
"Breaking In" -- Burt Reynolds -- with assistance from the Makeup Dept. -- is 
an aging burglar, Casey Siemaszko his young protege. They team for lighthearted 
larceny under the direction of Bill Forsyth ("Local Hero," "Housekeeping") with 
script by John Sayles. (Goldwyn) 
* "Casualties of War" -- Sean Penn and Michael J. Fox go to war. The former's a 
battle-hardened sergeant, the latter's a new member of his squad. A brutal 
incident in 'Nam leads to a bitter battle of conscience. Brian De Palma directs 
with Art Linson producing (they teamed for "The Untouchables"). David Rabe 
scripts from Daniel Lang's book. (Columbia) 
"Cheetah and Friends" -- Live-action family film set in the rugged outlands of 
Africa. American children and their Masai friend try to rescue their pet 
cheetah, Spots, from cheetah-napers -- so that they can see Spots returned to 
her natural environment. Jeff Blyth directs. (Disney) 
"Cold Comfort" -- Psychodrama about a traveling salesman, an insanely jealous 
and reculsive father and his alluring but terrified daughter. Vic Sarin 
directs. (Simcom) 
"Dead Bang" -- L.A. homicide detective Don Johnson uncovers a frightening 
conspiracy when he travels halfway across the country to track a cop-killer. An 
actioner directed by John Frankenheimer. With William Forsythe, Bob Balaban, 
Tim Reid. (Warners) 
* "Dead Poet's Society" -- Character-drama with Robin Williams as a charismatic 
English teacher at a strict boy's preparatory school. Peter Weir ("Mosquito 
Coast") directs. (Touchstone) 
"Death House" -- Action-gangster-horror, with monsters and comic relief (!). An 
epidemic rages through a prison where the government's been doing medical 
testing on Death Row. John Saxon is the government agent responsible -- and the 
director (his debut). With Dennis Cole, Anthony Franciosa, Tane McClure 
(daughter of Doug). (Distributor pending) 
"Do the Right Thing" -- Comedy-drama explores the reality of race relations 
between blacks and Italians on the hottest day of the year in an already tense 
Brooklyn neighborhood. Spike Lee writes/produces/directs/stars as a pizza 
delivery boy. With Danny Aiello, Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee. (Universal) 
"Eddie and the Cruisers II" -- Michael Pare returns as enigmatic rocker Eddie 
Wilson. This drama -- with music -- will pick up the saga 25 years later. 
Director pending. (Scotti Bros.) 
* "Erik the Viking" -- Monty Python's Terry Jones writes/directs the zany saga 
of a Viking who believes there must be more to life than rape and pillage. His 
quest to end the Age of Ragnarok -- the legendary sword-and-ax age -- and 
"bring back the sun" takes him to the very Edge of the World and beyond. Among 
the perilous dangers: the terrifying Dragon of the North Sea -- a monster so 
large it will not fit on the screen. Stars Tim Robbins, Mickey Rooney, Eartha 
Kitt, John Cleese. (Orion) 
"Eternity" -- Love story (previously known as "The Avatar") that spans the 
Middle Ages to the present, with Jon Voight attempting to prove to the woman he 
loves that they've loved before. Ah, but there's this brooding fellow who's 
long been determined to destroy that love! Voight co/produces with director 
Steven Paul. With the brooding Armand Assante, Eileen Davidson, Lainie Kazan. 
Paul Ent. (Distributor pending) 
"Fast Food" -- Jim Varney is Wrangler Bob, local hamburger tycoon who tangles 
with a couple of would-be fast food entrepreneurs. Seems they've come up with 
this "secret sauce" that is also a love potion! Uh, please pass the secret 
sauce. . . . With Clark Brandon, Tracy Griffith, Michael J. Pollard, Kevin 
McCarthy, Randal Patrick, Traci Lords. (Fries) 
"Fate" -- Stuart Paul writes/directs/stars in a romantic comedy about a couple 
brought together by a mystical force. With Cheryl Lynn, Kaye Ballard, Susannah 
York. Paul Ent. (Distributor pending) 
"For Better or For Worse" -- Kim Cattrall's an undercover secret agent whose 
honeymoon with her unsuspecting husband (Robert Hays) is upset by high-speed 
chases, gun battles and "the fight of a lifetime." Gene Quintano 
co-writes/directs. With Doris Roberts and Christopher Lee. (Trans World) 
"Four Adventures of Reinette and Mirabelle" -- France's Eric Rohmer directs a 
four-act comedy-drama tracing the relationship of two girls on the threshold of 
adulthood from their meeting in the country to their lives in Paris. (New 
Yorker) 
"Future Force" -- Futuristic action/adventure. David Carradine is a mercenary 
bounty hunter -- with a robotic arm -- who finds the tables turned when he's 
unjustly accused of a crime. (Action Intl.) 
* "Ghostbusters II" -- Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Sigourney Weaver, Harold Ramis 
and Rick Moranis reappear. Ivan Reitman produces/directs. This time out, the 
ghostly shenanigans involve one Vigo the Carpathian. The warlock's spirit 
"resides" in a self-portrait hanging in the Museum of Modern Art. Ah, just when 
you thought it was safe to go. . . . (Columbia) 
"Grandmother's House" -- An orphaned brother and sister sent to live at their 
grandparents' isolated farm encounter deception, shattered dreams and a 
shocking revelation of long-ago incest. Plus, there's this murderous madwoman! 
Peter Rader directs. Omega Ent. (Distributor pending) 
* "Great Balls of Fire" -- Period musical, circa mid-'50s, about audacious 
rocker Jerry Lee Lewis. A blond, piano-thumping Dennis Quaid stars. Based on 
the book co-written by Myra Lewis, his former child bride (at age 13) and 
cousin, this one depicts Lewis' relationship with cuz Jimmy Lee Swaggart, 
chronicles the musical exuberance of an era, and -- of course -- examines the 
marriage that made worldwide headlines and nearly destroyed Jerry Lee's career. 
James McBride (who teamed with Quaid for "The Big Easy") directs/co-writes. 
Winona Ryder and Alec Baldwin co-star. (Orion) 
"Hard Rain" -- Tom Selleck takes a dramatic turn starring as an innocent victim 
of circumstance who's framed and unjustly sent to prison. When he is finally 
freed, he sets out to clear his name -- and see justice realized. And to resume 
a normal life with the wife. Peter Yates directs. (Touchstone) 
"Headhunter" -- A pair of Miami detectives think they're after a serial killer 
of the human variety. Then along comes proof-positive that their murderer is a 
legendary African demon. With Kay Lenz, Wayne Crawford, Steve Kanaly. Francis 
Schaeffer directs. Gibralter Releasing. (Distributor pending) 
"Honey, I Shrunk the Kids" -- Family pic about a group of kids who are zapped 
by their physicist dad's (Rick Moranis) electromagnetic shrinking machine. 
Faster than you can say "The Incredible Shrinking Man," they're only a 
quarter-inch tall -- and trapped in a landscape (the backyard) where pebbles 
loom as high as mountains and puddles may as well be oceans. With Jared Rushton 
(Tom Hanks' kid-pal in "Big") as one of the little 'uns. Joe Johnston directs. 
(Touchstone) 
* "Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade" -- Steven Spielberg directs; George 
Lucas exec-produces/co-writes. More derring-do with archeologist Indy (Harrison 
Ford, natch), this time teamed with his dad, Dr. Henry Jones (Sean Connery). 
With Denholm Elliott, Allison Doody and ("Indy I" returnee) John Rhys-Davies. 
And battles against Nazis. And lots and lots of special effects. (Paramount) 
"The Karate Kid Part III" -- John G. Avildsen (again) directs; Robert Mark 
Kamen (again) scripts and Ralph Macchio and Noriyuki (Pat) Morita (again) 
reprise their roles as perpetual karate kid and mentor, respectively. Well, 
they do have a rift: Due to differences in training philosophy, one goes one 
way, one the other. Look for the big match to bring them together again. 
(Columbia) 
"Kickboxer" -- A young American kickboxer travels to Thailand to avenge the 
murder of his mother and save his kidnaped sister. That means squaring off 
against a vicious Thai kickboxer with underworld connections. Charismatic 
Claude Van Damme ("Bloodsport") stars. David Worth directs. Kings Road Ent. 
(Distributor pending) 
"The Lemon Sisters" -- Comedy about lifelong friendship in the rapidly-changing 
environment of Atlantic City. Diane Keaton (who co-produces), Carol Kane and 
Kathryn Grody have an oddball singing act. When a gig ends, due to the closure 
of a fading neighborhood joint, the girls decide to buy their own place. How to 
get the money? Joyce Chopra ("Smooth Talk") directs. With Elliott Gould, Aidan 
Quinn, Ruben Blades. (Miramax) 
"L'Ete en Ponte Douce" -- Director Gerard Krawczyk's has called his second film 
(following "I Hate Actors") a contemporary hybrid of "A Streetcar Named Desire" 
and "Baby Doll." A melodrama, it's set in a small French town and involves "a 
born loser," his promiscuous girlfriend and his slightly mentally disabled 
brother. (Galaxy) 
* "Lethal Weapon 2" -- More action-adventure with L.A. police detectives Martin 
Riggs (Mel Gibson) and Roger Murtaugh (Danny Glover), this time battling 
international drug-smugglers who've hit the streets and harbors of L.A. 
Action-meister Joel Silver produces with (returning) director Richard Donner. 
(Warners) 
* "License to Kill" -- The 16th Bond adventure finds 007 (Timothy Dalton) 
embroiled in a personal mission of vengeance against ruthless Latin American 
drug lord Franz Sanches (Robert Dalvi). With Carey Lowell and Talisa Soto as 
the requisite Bond beauties. And Wayne Newton (!) as a bad guy. Plus Desmond 
Llewelyn, Robert Brown and Caroline Bliss reprising their roles as the secret 
service team Q, M and Miss Moneypenny. John Glen -- another 007 regular (this 
marks his fifth one) -- directs. (MGM/UA) 
"Little Monsters" -- Always blamed for messy mishaps, 12-year-old Fred Savage 
(of TV's "Wonder Years") claims there's a monster under his bed. His mom pulls 
one of those It's-only-your-imagination numbers. But there really is a 
creature, Maurice (Howie Mandel), and he's about to indoctrinate Fred into the 
world of mischievous monsters who wreak havoc on unsuspecting sleeping 
children. Richard Greenberg directs. With Daniel Stern, Margaret Whitton and 
Fred's little brother, Ben Savage. (Vestron) 
"Living Dreams" -- A comedic gang of Cuban expatriates "train" on the weekends, 
under the leadership of the owner of a sleazy Miami nightclub, to invade their 
beloved homeland. Alan Greenberg writes/directs. Films Around the World Inc. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Lobster Man From Mars" -- Dubbed "the only comedy that combines seafood and 
science fiction," the show-biz spoof stars Tony Curtis as a studio chief who 
desperately needs a flop -- so he can ward off the IRS. Unfortunately, the 
Martians prove to be a hit. Stanley Sheff directs. With Patrick MacNee, Billy 
Barty, Deborah Foreman, Anthony Hickox. Electric Pictures. (Distributor 
pending) 
"Loser Takes All" -- Unassuming accountant Robert Lindsay falls in love with 
beautiful young student Molly Ringwald. Their honeymoon in Monte Carlo is 
near-perfect -- until he wins a fortune with a surefire gambling system. 
Suddenly, he's not the same man he used to be. . . . Co-starring John Gielgud. 
(Miramax) 
"Martians!!!" -- Zany sci-fi about five battle-hungry aliens who, on Halloween 
night, inadvertently intercept a radio broadcast of the 50th anniversary of 
Orson Welles' "War of the Worlds." Next thing, they're landing in Big Bean, 
Ill., prepared to join their brethren in conquering the planet. With Doug Barr, 
formerly Lee Majors' sidekick in TV's "The Fall Guy." Patrick Read Johnson 
directs/co-writes. (Smart Egg) 
"Martians Go Home" -- More zany sci-fi, involving Earthlings Randy Quaid, 
Margaret Colin and Anita Morris and "1 billion green Martians." Seems the 
obnoxious little green folk have been drawn to Earth (by a strange force that 
we'll never reveal) and now must take up residence. David Odell directs. Edward 
R. Pressman exec-produces. (Distributor pending) 
* "Men Don't Leave" -- Comedy-drama with Jessica Lange coping in the big city 
with her two children following the untimely death of her husband. Paul 
Brickman writes/directs/produces his first pic since "Risky Business." With 
Arliss Howard, Kathy Bates, Joan Cusack, Chris O'Donnell, Charlie Korsmo. 
(Warners) 
"Midnight" -- Comedy with Lynn Redgrave as Midnight, TV's craziest hostess -- 
she rises out of a coffin with a Bloody Mary in hand. A feud with studio chief 
Tony Curtis leads to some real-life horrors -- and corpses. Norman Thaddeus 
Vane directs. With Frank Gorshin. (SVS) 
"Moontrap" -- More space adventures for "Star Trek's" Walter Koenig, in a story 
about a prehistoric human -- with origins on the moon -- found aboard a 
derelict spacecraft. Robert Dyke writes/directs. With Bruce Campbell, Leigh 
Lombardi. (Shapiro Glickenhaus) 
"No Holds Barred" -- Action/comedy starring Hulk Hogan as a modern-day 
superhero who's motivated to overcome an evil network exec (and the TV mogul's 
ultra-wicked and very large tough guy). Thomas J. Wright (he directed action 
sequences in "Rocky II" and "Beverly Hills Cop") directs. Vince McMahon, head 
of TitanSports (parent of the World Wrestling Federation), exec produces. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Out on Bail" -- Action/adventure boasting "a spectacular use of firearms and 
explosives." After being duped into killing a civil rights activist, Robert 
Ginty and his girlfriend battle deputies, mountain men and deputized citizens. 
How can they convince the frenzied mob that the real bad guys are the mayor and 
sheriff?! Gordon Hessler ("Rage of Honor," "Pray for Death") directs. With the 
acting talents of former Playboy Playmate of the Year Kathy Shower. (Trans 
World) 
* "Peter Pan" -- Reissue of the 1953 animated favorite about the boy who won't 
grow up. Journey with the Darling children -- Wendy, John and little Michael -- 
to Peter's home in Never-Never Land. Re-meet the Lost Boys, Captain Hook, 
Tinker Bell, Princess Tiger-Lily, et al. (Disney) 
"Pink Cadillac" -- Squinty-eyed Clint Eastwood is a professional bounty hunter 
who's inadvertently teamed with Bernadette Peters, wife of the fugitive he's 
pursuing. Buddy Van Horn ("Any Which Way You Can," "The Dead Pool") directs. 
(Warners) 
"The Punisher" -- Marvel Comics' hot (and deadly) one-man vigilante squad 
(Dolph Lundgren) pits himself against both the Mafia and Japan's Yakuza -- led 
by Lady Tanaka (Kim Miyori) -- to avenge his family's death. Mark Goldblatt 
("Dead Heat") directs. With Lou Gossett Jr. and Jeroen Crabbe (the bad apple in 
"The Living Daylights"). (New World) 
"Ransom" -- Against the glamorous backdrops of the French Riviera and 
Yugoslavia's Adriatic coast, sons and daughter of members of a U.S. WWII bomber 
squad search for the former commandant of an infamous German concentration camp 
who was responsible for their parents' brutal torture and murders. Ika 
Panajotovic produces/directs. (Noble Ent.) 
"Renegades" -- "Young Guns" Kiefer Sutherland and Lou Diamond Phillips join 
forces (Sutherland's an unconventional undercover cop, Phillips a Lakota 
Indian) to track down and seek revenge against a savage murderer who's stolen a 
tribal relic. Jack Sholder ("The Hidden") directs. (Universal) 
"The Return of the Musketeers" -- One for all, and all for another adventure! 
Director Richard Lester again teams with Richard Chamberlain, Michael York and 
Oliver Reed -- plus "new" musketeer C. Thomas Howell. Produced by returnee 
Pierre Spengler. (Universal) 
"Road House" -- Hunky Patrick Swayze is Dalton -- a professional (and much 
in-demand) bouncer who's been shot, stabbed and has had 30 bones broken. But, 
hey, he's also got a philosophy degree from NYU, Japanese wind chimes and a new 
560 Mercedes-Benz. In other words, he's one H-E-A-V-Y dude, with New Age 
credentials. Rowdy Herrington ("Jack's Back") directs. Joel Silver produces. 
With Ben Gazzara, Sam Elliott, Kelly Lynch, Kathleen Wilhoite, Kevin Tighe. 
(MGM/UA) 
"Robotjox" -- Special pilots -- known as Robo-Jockeys -- face off in 
gladiator-style combat in 120-foot fighting robots many years after a nuclear 
holocaust has ravaged the Earth. Stuart Gordon ("Re-Animator") directs. (Trans 
World) 
"The Salute of the Jugger" -- Futuristic action/adventure in which a team of 
"Juggers" travel from town to town challenging the best team. The sport -- 
reminiscent of football -- finds players fighting to place a dog's skull on a 
stake. Quick -- someone call the SPCA! David Peoples (he co-wrote "Blade 
Runner") scripts/directs. Stars Rutger Hauer and Joan Chen. Kings Road. 
(Distributor pending) 
* "Sea of Love" -- Al Pacino -- absent from the screen since the 1985 
"Revolution" -- is a veteran NYPD detective torn between professional judgment 
and his infatuation with (very sexy) Ellen Barkin, the prime suspect in a 
bizarre murder case. Harold Becker (the current "The Boost") directs. With John 
Goodman. (Universal) 
"See No Evil, Hear No Evil" -- Richard Pryor and Gene Wilder -- together again. 
In this action/comedy, the buddies -- one deaf, one blind (!) -- chase killers 
to clear themselves of a murder charge. Arthur Hiller ("Silver Streak") 
directs. (Tri-Star) 
"SnakeEater" -- Action! Lorenzo Lamas stars as the best of the SnakeEaters -- 
an elite group of deadly Marines who work behind enemy lines (natch) on the 
most dangerous missions (double natch). He's also a suspended cop -- who must 
battle for his life while avenging his father's murder. Image Organization. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Sons of Steel" -- "Action-packed cinematic epic, with fabulous imagery and a 
powerful sound track." That's how PR folk describe this one, set against the 
backdrop of an out-of-control world, in which an unlikely hero emerges to block 
"a diabolical scheme." Gary L. Keady writes/directs. Image. (Distributor 
pending) 
"Spider-Man" -- The first big-screen adventure for Stan Lee's famed hero (of 
Marvel Comics' legend). Bitten by a radioactive spider, shy, studious Peter 
Parker miraculously acquires the bug's disproportionate strength and human 
agility. Now he can cling to walls and leap across rooftops. What better way to 
counter his arch villain's web of murder and intrigue! Go, Spidey! Albert Pyun 
("Sword and the Sorcerer") directs. Casting is under way. (Cannon) 
"S.P.O.O.K.S." -- Madcap adventure set deep in the heart of the Moressan jungle 
where a group of international spies implement the most ingenious, devious 
stock-exchange conspiracy in history. Except, they didn't count on encountering 
ace CIA Minuteman Brian Kerwin. Or the plane crash. Or the car accident. Or the 
wrong explosives. Or. . . . Anthony Thomas directs. Co-stars Alice Krige, 
Robert Loggia, Diane Ladd, David Warner. (Vestron) 
* "Star Trek V: The Final Frontier" -- This time we've got an Old West setting 
-- complete with horses (well, OK, they're blue), shootouts and saloons! How'd 
they do it? How 'bout a storyline set on Nimbus 3, a border planet/neutral zone 
where Klingons, Romulans and Federation folk hang out. Once garden-like, Nimbus 
3 has become an ecological disaster -- which is why there's insurrection among 
the workers. Hmmmm. There's also a mysterious alien hombre named Cybok who 
gives the Enterprise crew trouble. When he steals their ship, they're in hot 
pursuit, going where no man . . . well, you know. William Shatner directs and 
stars along with the usual suspects. Plus Laurence Luckinbill and David Warner. 
(Paramount) 
"Staying the Same" -- Dramatic comedy about three young brothers who think that 
their futures are solidly linked to the family business -- until the day their 
father sells it. It's a decision that affects not only the brothers but the 
entire town. Lee Grant directs Tim Quill, Dermot Mulroney, Sean Astin, Stockard 
Channing. (Hemdale) 
"Street Story" -- Two brothers are torn apart by the decay and drugs of the 
South Bronx. Joseph B. Vasquez produces/directs Angelo Lopez and Lydia Ramirez. 
Films Around the World Inc. (Distributor pending) 
"Teach Me Tonight" -- Romantic comedy in which a beautiful, ambitious young 
schoolteacher at a private school finds herself in love with her brightest 
student. Jim Pasternak writes/directs. Not yet cast. (Crown) 
"Terror Night" -- Former rock impresario/movie theater owner Nick Marino 
produces/directs this horror story. At the dilapidated estate of a long-missing 
Hollywood star, strange events befall half a dozen young people who just happen 
to be fooling around on the estate that night. Wouldn't you know it, they're 
strangely similar to murderous events that happened in his movies! With John 
Ireland, Alan Hale, Staci Greason, William C. Butler and guest shots by Aldo 
Ray and Dan Haggerty. (Distributor pending) 
"To Die For" -- The Prince of Darkness mixes it up with a mortal woman. 
Convinced that she's found Mr. Right, she's willing to become a vampire (and 
spend eternity with him) -- and he loves her too much to damn her. Deran 
Sarafian directs. With Brendan Hughes, Sydney Walsh, Amanda Wyss, Steve Bond, 
Scott Jacoby. Image. (Distributor pending) 
"Trapped" -- Three convicts and their women prisoners race against time -- and 
terror -- while making their way through a underground labyrinth that has 
become "home" to "something" living in the dark passages. With Cameron 
Mitchell, Alex Kubik, Elizabeth Kent. Films Around the World Inc. (Distributor 
pending) 
"Turner and Hooch" -- Tom Hanks is Turner, a by-the-book detective whose 
well-ordered world is shaken when he's teamed with new partner Hooch on a 
murder case. Sloppy, hairy and disheveled -- Hooch also happens to be a dog! 
With Mare Winningham. Henry Winkler directs. (Touchstone) 
"UHF" -- Weird Al Yankovic is George, a daydreamer who's made manager of a 
downtrodden UHF TV station on the edge of town. See George turn it into the No. 
1 station (with the help of fantasy sequences and music video and movie 
parodies). Weird Al co-writes. Jay Levey directs. With Victoria Jackson, Kevin 
McCarthy, Anthony Geary, Gedde Watanabe, Billy Barty. (Orion) 
"Uncle Buck" -- John Candy is a ne'er-do-well bachelor who's left in charge of 
his nephew and two nieces, ages 6 to 15. OK, now who's going to keep an eye on 
Uncle Buck? John Hughes co-produces/writes/directs. (He and Candy did "Planes, 
Trains and Automobiles.") With Amy Madigan. (Universal) 
"Warlords" -- David Carradine and Dawn Wildsmith in a futuristic action flick 
that pits them against an ominous mutant uprising. Prolific director Fred Olen 
Ray calls it "sort of a post-nuclear version of 'The Searchers.' " American 
Independent. (Distributor pending) 
"War Party" -- Action drama. A group of modern-day Indians are chased across 
North America by the law. The chase follows the re-enactment of a 100-year-old 
battle that gets out of hand and leads to death. Franc Roddam ("Lords of 
Discipline") directs Kevin Dillon, Billy Wirth, Tim Sampson, M. Emmet Walsh. 
(Hemdale) 
"Whisper" -- Vanity is a lady ninja -- "the deadliest sound you'll ever hear" 
-- in this actioner based on the character from the comics. Director pending. 
(Atlantic) 
"Worth Winning" -- This romantic comedy stars Mark Harmon as a popular Philly 
TV weatherman who, on a bet, gets engaged to three different women. But they 
discover his deceit and exact revenge. Meanwhile, he's fallen in love with one! 
Will Mackenzie directs. With Madeleine Stowe, Lesley Ann Warren, Maria Holvoe, 
Mark Blum, Andrea Martin. (Fox) 
"Untitled Kirk Cameron/Jami Gertz" -- Douglas Day Stewart (he penned "An 
Officer and a Gentleman") writes/directs this romantic drama, set against the 
backdrop of a small college underdog debating team. Roy Scheider is the coach 
who pulls out all stops to triumph over a major college at the season's 
championships. With Amanda Peterson and Tim Quill. (Columbia) 
* "Untitled Ron Howard/Steve Martin" -- Comedy about the stages of parenthood 
within a large unconventional American family. Dr. Spock, anyone? Howard 
directs Martin, Tom Hulce, Rick Moranis, Jason Robards, Martha Plimpton, Mary 
Steenburgen, Dianne Wiest. (Universal) 
* "Untitled Rob Reiner" -- Romantic comedy directed/co-written by Reiner about 
a pair of high school sweethearts who meet at a reunion and rekindle the old 
flame. With Billy Crystal, Meg Ryan, Carrie Fisher, Bruno Kirby. (Columbia) 
Opening 
September-December 
"Aftershock" -- Psychosexual thriller in which a young girl refuses to 
ackowledge her past until it returns to horrify her. Katt Shea Ruben ("Stripped 
to Kill" and sequel) directs/writes. No cast set yet. (Crown) 
"The Amityville Curse" -- Horrors! A group of long-time friends moves to 
Amityville (site of many a sequel) and settles down to renovate the old 
mansion. And guess what happens! Cast/director pending. First Films. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Angel Town" -- A French martial arts expert is a godsend to an L.A. family 
constantly at odds with the neighborhood gang. Eric Karson ("The Octagon") 
directs. Olivier Gruner stars. (Imperial Ent.) 
* "Back to the Future II" -- Steven Spielberg's super-secretive Amblin Ent. is 
being super-secretive about the plot to their fantasy follow-up. But we can 
tell you that this time cute l'il Michael J. (Fox) will really journey to the 
future. Christopher Lloyd and Lea Thompson will once again be his 
time-traveling pals. Another returnee: director Robert Zemeckis. (Universal) 
"Best of the Best" -- Eric Roberts is a karate expert who must deal with 
personal problems while training for an international competition. Robert 
Hadler directs. (SVS) 
* "Blaze" -- Paul Newman is legendary Louisiana Gov. Earl Long, whose loudly 
publicized affair with voluptuous stripper Blaze Starr rocked the Southern 
political machine in the late '50s. Ron Shelton ("Bull Durham") writes/directs 
with a boom-boom. The hot role of Blaze has yet to be cast. (Many have asked, 
but none have been summoned.) (Touchstone) 
"Boardwalk" -- Coming-of-age story set in Atlantic City on the eve of World War 
II, with Sally Kellerman as the nightclub singer who impacts a young man's 
life. Based on the novel by Robert Kotlowitz. Director/rest of cast pending. 
(MCEG) 
* "Born on the 4th of July" -- Oliver Stone directs/co-produces/co-writes. 
Based on Vietnam vet Ron Kovic's book. Tom Cruise portrays vet/activist Kovic, 
who detailed his SE Asian stint and subsequent return to the U.S. as a 
paraplegic. Also: Willem Dafoe and Kyra Sedgwick. (Universal) 
"Brothers in Arms" -- Action thriller. An undercover cop, whose parents were 
slain by the mob when he was 11 years old, gets revenge by pitting two mob 
families against each other. John Eyres directs. William Smith stars. (North 
American Releasing) 
"Burgerville" -- Zaniness -- and bad puns. David and Jerry Zucker, two of the 
three guys (with Jim Abrahams) responsible for "Airplane!" and "The Naked Gun," 
script this one -- about the "the stupidest town in America." Cast/director 
pending. (Fox) 
"Chattahoochee" -- Drama with "Sid &amp; Nancy's" Gary Oldman, Dennis Hopper, 
Ned Beatty and M. Emmet Walsh. Based on a true story from the mid-'50s, about a 
shy man (Oldman) whose simple faith in God helped him in his 8-year battle on 
behalf of those unjustly imprisoned in Southern state institutions. British TV 
director Mick Jackson (the BBC's "The Double Helix") directs. (Hemdale) 
"Circe &amp; Bravo" -- Political thriller has Faye Dunaway exec 
producing/starring as our nation's First Lady (code name "Circe"). When she 
discovers her hubby's secret plan to secure an extra term in office by 
fabricating a national security threat, she's placed under arrest. Bravo (who's 
still to be cast) is the young Secret Service agent assigned to watch her. Her 
sexuality turns him into her ally. Director not yet set. Nova Intl. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Class of 1999" -- Mark Lester produces/directs the sci-fi/thriller sequel to 
his "Class of 1984," with Malcolm McDowell and Stacy Keach starring. 
"Blackboard Jungle" was never like this! Created to quell gang violence, three 
disciplinary robot teachers short-out and start massacring students. Now it's 
up to the gangs to unite -- and defend themselves and the school. With Bradley 
Gregg, Traci Lin, Patrick Kilpatrick, Pam Grier, John P. Ryan. (Vestron) 
"Confidence" -- Bryan Brown co-produces/stars. A small-time con man strolls 
into a country town intending to relieve some folks of their money -- but then 
he develops an affection for the community. Michael Jenkins directs. (New 
Century/Vista) 
"Courage Mountain" (tentative title) -- A group of children displaced by the 
war must traverse the Alps. Charlie Sheen and Leslie Caron assist in the 
perilous journey. Chris Leitch ("Teen Wolf 2") directs. (Trans World) 
"Dad" -- Jack Lemmon in an adaptation of the William Wharton novel of a 
middle-aged man who tries to take care of his aged father when his mother 
suffers a heart attack. "Family Ties" creator Gary David Goldberg 
writes/directs/produces. (Universal) 
"Dark Angel" -- Dolph Lundgren is an undercover cop whose obsessive search for 
bad guys leads to an intergalactic drug dealer possessing both Herculean 
strength (good thing Dolph's in great shape!) and weapons of unparalleled 
power. Craig Baxley ("Action Jackson") directs. A Vision Presentation. 
(Distributor pending) 
* "Defenseless" -- Barbara Hershey is an attorney who finds herself in a 
predicament when her lover/client is found murdered. When she decides to 
represent the accused murderer -- who happens to be the murder victim's wife 
and her ex-best friend -- she begins to unravel the darker side of the 
seemingly perfect family. Martin Campbell (of the yet to be released "Criminal 
Law") directs. (New Visions) 
"Demon Sword" -- Russ Tamblyn, Lyle Waggoner, Jim Mitchum (Bob's boy) and Blake 
Bahner in a sword-and-sorcery spoof centering on a quest for a mystical blade. 
Fred Olen Ray directs. American Independent Prod. (Distributor pending) 
* "A Dry White Season" -- Drama starring Marlon Brando (back from his lengthy 
hiatus) and Donald Sutherland, based on the novel by South African writer Andre 
Brink. Written/directed by Euzhan Palcy, it's the story of a white school 
teacher (Sutherland) whose life and beliefs are threatened when he questions 
the death of a young boy who dies while in police custody. Brando is 
Sutherland's lawyer and Susan Sarandon is a reporter who aids Sutherland's 
case. Also: Janet Suzman, Zakes Mokae, "Das Boot's" Jurgen Prochnow. (MGM/UA) 
"Dune Surfer" -- Action/adventure about this dude who travels to the Kalahari 
to ride the ultimate wave -- a red Kalahari dune. When his old VW breaks down 
near an isolated farm, the owner takes him in, not knowing that the surfer will 
soon generate waves in his wife's water bed. Heinrich Dahms directs. (Film 
Ventures) 
"El Secreto" ("The Secret") -- On a trip to Colombia, a Venezuelan businessman 
is unwittingly turned into a gold smuggler. When busted at the border, he 
becomes a secret agent for the police. Luis Armando Roche directs Orlando 
Urdaneta and Daniel Alvarado in this action/comedy. Films Around the World Inc. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Ernest III" -- By golly, Vern, he's been to camp and saved Christmas and now 
Ernest -- a.k.a. Jim Varney -- threatens to return in an all-new silly 
adventure. No one else is yet attached -- including film makers -- but we could 
swear, based on the previous pics' healthy box office, that this one will get 
made. KnowwhatImeanVern? (Touchstone) 
"The Fabulous Baker Boys" -- Sydney Pollack co-produces this "lighthearted 
drama" starring Jeff and Beau Bridges as piano-playing brothers who hire a 
gorgeous singer (Michelle Pfeiffer) in an attempt to resurrect their small-time 
lounge act. Steven Kloves writes/directs. (Fox) 
"Far From Home" -- A 15-year-old girl (Drew Barrymore) and her father ("Max 
Headroom's" Matt Frewer) run out of gas in the blistering noonday heat near a 
remote, desolate and dangerous town. After they take shelter in a nearby 
trailer, she takes a fancy to a couple of yokels. The ensuing relationships 
become a lethal whirlwind. Meiert Avis directs. With Anthony Rapp, Richard 
Masur, Andras Jones. (Vestron) 
"The Fascination" -- Serge Bourguignon ("Sundays &amp; Cybele") directs this 
love story starring Chad McQueen (Steve's son) as a young American photog in 
Paris who becomes smitten with a Japanese girl (Shiori Sakura). Blum Group. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Fatal Charm" -- Romantic thriller about a woman who develops an odd 
fascination for a man who has been accused and convicted of multiple 
rape/murders. To date, only Mary Frann has been cast. Peter Medak ("The 
Changeling") directs. (MCEG) 
* "Fat Man and Little Boy" -- Roland Joffe ("The Killing Fields") directs, Paul 
Newman stars. Set in 1943, this is a retelling of the making of the atom bomb. 
(The title refers to the code names for the bombs that were dropped on Japan.) 
Newman is Gen. Leslie Groves, the man who selects physicist J. Robert 
Oppenheimer (Dwight Schultz) to orchestrate the Manhattan Project. With Bonnie 
Bedelia, John Cusack, Laura Dern, Natasha Richardson. (Paramount) 
"Forced March" -- Drama with Chris Sarandon as a successful American TV star 
who decides to try a "serious" film role -- that of a real-life Hungarian hero. 
In what becomes a film within a film, Sarandon -- the son of Holocaust 
survivors -- comes to terms with the modern-day legacy of the Holocaust. 
Co-stars Rene Soutendijk and Josef Sommer. Rick King ("Hard Choices") directs. 
A-Pix production. (Distributor pending) 
"Freedom or Death" -- Action/thriller about an ex-CIA 
operative-turned-mercenary who employs six beautiful (but deadly!) women to 
free a revolutionary leader being held by a tyrannical government. The 
mercenary and his lethal sexpots fight their way through the jungle where one 
final double-cross awaits them. Peter Rader directs a (shapely) cast yet to be 
announced. (Omega Ent.) 
"Ghosts Can't Do It" -- Sexy comedy/fantasy. John Derek directs Mrs. Derek (Bo, 
who produces). Set against the exotic backgounds of Sri Lanka and Hong Kong, 
story finds a deceased fellow "dying" to make love to his beautiful and 
very-much-alive wife. How's he gonna manage it? We'll give you a hint: Who do 
voodoo? Also: Anthony Quinn, Leo Damian and George Grizzard. (Trans World) 
"Glengarry Glen Ross" -- Adaptation of David Mamet's Pulitzer-winning play 
about cutthroat competitiveness in today's business world. Veteran 
producer/agent Jerry Tokofsky produces. Director/cast pending. Zupnik 
Enterprises. (Distributor pending) 
"Glory" -- Historical drama, based on fact, with Matthew Broderick as the white 
leader of the first black regiment to do battle during the Civil War. Ed Zwick 
("About Last Night") directs. Freddie Fields produces. (Tri-Star) 
* "The Gods Must Be Crazy: II" -- Jamie Uys returns to write/direct the 
long-awaited sequel. N!Xau, the befuddled (and beguiling) African bushman of 
the original, encounters "civilized" folk when he mixes with a high-powered 
female lawyer from New York, a game preserve ecologist, a pair of bumbling bad 
guys and two of his own children, who have somehow gotten lost looking for an 
elephant. (Columbia) 
"Goin' to the Chapel" -- Romantic comedy about the pitfalls of marrying for 
money -- and then actually falling in love! Jerry Tokofsky produces. Director 
and cast not yet determined. Zupnik Enterprises. (Distributor pending) 
"Graverobbers" -- Beautiful small-town waitress Nora Edwards is swept off her 
feet by dashing undertaker Henry Cox, so she hurriedly marries him. She soon 
learns that there is more to his line of work than burials . . . dig? A comedy 
directed by Straw Weisman. Films Around the World Inc. (Distributor pending) 
"Halloween 5" -- Yet to be written, but we're willing to bet our trick-or-treat 
stash that it'll be ready by Oct. 31. (Galaxy) 
"Hearts of Fire" -- Love triangle -- with a rock sound track -- and Bob Dylan 
(as a retired rocker) and Rupert Everett (a David Bowie-ish singing star) vying 
for the attention of the single-named Fiona (cast as a rising star). Originally 
set for release in the summer of 1987, this was the last film directed by the 
late Richard Marquand ("The Empire Strikes Back"). Its saga includes having 
jumped from one studio to another, having a close call with video, finally 
resurfacing theatrically. (Warners) 
"Hero for Hire" -- Action/adventure with Kris Kristofferson as an explorer in 
search of the Fountain of Youth. His problems begin when he finds it. (There's 
a moral dilemma too.) Jim Wynorski ("The Return of Swamp Thing") 
co-writes/directs. Motion Picture Corp. of America. (Distributor pending) 
"Heroes Stand Alone" -- David Carradine in a story centering on six high school 
seniors in rural Texas, circa 1960. They're privy to a terrible political 
secret that will affect the biggest election in county history, and they must 
decide how to deal with it. Julie Corman produces. Carl Franklin directs. 
(Concorde) 
"Hider in the House" -- Gary Busey has illegally settled into the attic of the 
house of his dreams. This thriller gets thrilling when the rightful owners of 
the house move in and Busey becomes smitten by the new woman of the house, 
played by Mimi Rogers. Matthew Patrick directs. (Vestron) 
"Hot and Cold" -- Insurance clerks Andrew McCarthy and Jonathan Silverman are 
"treated" to a weekend at the posh Long Island home of their boss -- only to 
find him dead upon their arrival. But hey, they're not going to let this little 
setback spoil their weekend! They'll figure out ways to make the guy appear to 
be "alive" to the rest of the guests! Ted Kotcheff directs. With Catherine Mary 
Stewart. (Fox) 
* "I Love You to Death" -- Director Lawrence Kasdan and Kevin Kline reteam 
(following "The Big Chill" and "Silverado") for a psychological tale of a woman 
so tormented by her husband's philandering that she makes several attempts on 
his life. Incredibly, while serving time for one of those attempts, the two 
become close and actually fall in love once again. Actually based on a very 
true, very bizarre case. Stars Tracey Ullman. (Tri-Star) 
* "Immediate Family" -- For a childless couple in this humorous, poignant 
story, a young pregnant girl may provide the key to their happiness. James 
Woods, Glenn Close, Mary Stuart Masterson and Kevin Dillon star. Sarah 
Pillsbury and Midge Sanford ("River's Edge") produce. Jonathan Kaplan ("The 
Accused") directs. (Tri-Star) 
* "In Country" -- Bruce Willis and Emily Lloyd ("Wish You Were Here") in a 
drama based on Bobbie Ann Mason's novel of a family's struggle to heal the 
wounds caused by the Vietnam War. Norman Jewison ("Moonstruck") 
produces/directs. With Joan Allen, Kevin Anderson ("Orphans"), Judith Ivey. 
(Warners) 
"The Jetsons" -- Based on the animated TV series. (Universal) 
* "Johnny Handsome" -- An operation gives a disfigured convict a new face -- 
and the chance for a new life. Set in the steamy underbelly of New Orleans. 
Mickey Rourke stars. Walter Hill ("48 HRS") directs. With Ellen Barkin, 
Elizabeth McGovern, Forest ("Bird") Whitaker, Lance Henriksen, Scott Wilson, 
Morgan Freeman. (Tri-Star) 
"Killing Spree" -- Slasher/horror. A newlywed wrongly believes that his wife is 
out bedding neighbors and friends. Instead of seeing a marriage counselor, he 
turns murderer. His new problem: They won't stay dead! Tim Ritter directs. 
Around the World. (Distributor pending) 
"Late Knight" -- This is what's called a high-concept comedy: Howie Mandel 
directs/stars as King Arthur's court jester who amazingly appears in modern day 
NYC and becomes the hit of late-night TV. (MCEG) 
* "Letters" (working title) -- Martin Ritt reteams with scenarists Irving 
Ravetch and Harriet Frank Jr. ("Norma Rae") for a romantic drama. Jane Fonda's 
a recently widowed factory worker who makes friends with kindly co-worker 
Robert De Niro, only to learn that he's illiterate. She offers to teach him to 
read, thus kindling a growing relationship. Also: Swoosie Kurtz, Martha 
Plimpton, Harley Cross, Jamey Sheridan, Zohra Lampert, Feodor Chaliapin (the 
scene-stealing grandfather from "Moonstruck"). (MGM/UA) 
* "The Little Mermaid" -- The first animated fairytale from the Disney folks 
since "Sleeping Beauty" in 1959. It's the story of the mermaid Ariel, who dares 
to fall in love with an earthly Prince. (Despite the objections of her father, 
Triton the Sea King.) An evil sea witch helps her to attain human form (legs), 
the better to be with her True Love. Ah, but she'll have to pay a dear price! 
John Musker and Ron Clements ("The Great Mouse Detective") co-write/co-direct. 
With the voices of Jodi Benson, Kenneth Mars, Pat Carroll, Christopher Barnes 
and Buddy Hackett -- plus seven songs from Howard Ashman, Alan Menken ("Little 
Shop of Horrors"). (Disney) 
"Little Saigon" -- When a 15-year-old Amerasian girl sends a Christmas card to 
the father she's never known, he's compelled to find her. Robert Ginty 
stars/directs. Also: Haing S. Ngor and Kieu Chinh. (Trans World) 
* "Lord of the Flies" -- Another adaptation of William Golding's classic novel 
(the first film was British, made in 1963), about schoolboys stranded on a 
desert island after a nuclear holocaust who turn savage. Harry Hook, who wrote 
and directed "Kitchen Toto," directs Jay Presson Allen's "Americanized" script. 
(British schoolboys have become American cadets.) Cast of newcomers. (Columbia) 
"Love Hurts" -- Bud Yorkin produces/directs a bittersweet comedy of family, 
marriage and friends. Recently divorced ladies' man Jeff Daniels finds things 
to be a bit off-kilter when he arrives at his parents' house on the eve of his 
sister's wedding. For instance, his ex-wife is camped out with the kids in the 
living room, his dad's dead drunk in the kitchen, and the bride is a blithering 
pregnant wreck! Also: Judith Ivey, John Mahoney, Cloris Leachman, Cynthia 
Sikes, Amy Wright. (Vestron) 
"Manson: In His Own Words" -- Drama/thriller about the man who orchestrated the 
Tate and LaBianca slayings in August of 1969. Based on his own book. Skip 
Steloff exec-produces. Cast not set. Heritage Ent. (Distributor pending) 
"Massacre at Noon" -- Yugoslavian/American-made action adventure chronicling 
the true story of the execution of Serbs in 1941 in the town of Kraljevo. When 
Hitler hears of the resistance, he orders that his men take "100 Serbian lives 
for every German soldier killed." Branimir-Tori writes/directs. (Noble Ent.) 
"Meatballs IV" -- A free-spirited counselor named Brewsky takes a gang of 
inner-city misfits and shows them karate, thus enbling them to handle the local 
bullies more effectively. Andre Link and John Dunning produce. No director or 
cast. (Moviestore) 
"Meet the Applegates" -- Satire with Ed Begley Jr. and Stockard Channing as the 
heads of the seemingly quintessential suburban family. But all is not what it 
seems . . . since the Applegates are actually highly developed creatures from 
the Amazon. You've heard of Killer Bees, haven't you? Michael Lehmann 
("Heathers") co-scripts/directs. Also stars Dabney Coleman (as Aunt Bea!). (New 
World) 
* "Miami Blues" -- Fred Ward's a very stubborn homicide detective in pursuit of 
ex-con Alec Baldwin, a psychopathic killer who "reforms" after he teams with 
hooker Jennifer Jason Leigh. But just as they're living the American Dream, 
along comes Ward. Quirky Jonathan Demme co-produces this black comedy. George 
Armitage ("Vigilante Force") writes/directs. (Orion) 
"Midnight Matinee" -- Mystery thriller set in the idyllic West Coast town of 
Hallston. Pity the poor locals: An upcoming film festival -- spotlighting 
vintage suspense pics from the turn-of-the-century -- will have an horrific 
effect on them. Richard Martin directs/writes. Summit Ent. (Distributor 
pending) 
"Monstrosity" -- Horror and comedy (!) follow the Cole Gang, a vicious group 
that violently preys on the citizens of Hollywood. After the gruesome 
rape/murder of a young woman, her fiance and friends construct a "monstrosity" 
to kill the gang, one by one. Andy Milligan directs. Films Around the World 
Inc. (Distributor pending) 
* "Mountains of the Moon" -- Epic drama, directed by Bob Rafelson ("Black 
Widow"), based on celebrated explorers Richard Burton and John Hanning Speke as 
they venture into unchartered Africa in search of the source of the Nile. Stars 
British newcomers Patrick Bergin and Iain Glen. With Omar Sharif, Fiona Shaw, 
Richard E. Grant, Peter Vaughan. (Tri-Star) 
* "Music Box" -- Costa-Gavras directs this drama, with Jessica Lange a criminal 
attorney defending her father (East German actor Armin Mueller-Stahl) who is 
accused of murder. Irwin Winkler produces. (Tri-Star) 
"My Rich Cousin" -- Comedy about a spunky and beautiful 17-year-old tomboy who 
is reluctantly sent off to spend a summer with her Beverly Hills cousins. She 
surprises everyone by holding her own with the rich girls. Director/cast 
pending. (Crown) 
* "Next of Kin" -- Action/revenger has Patrick Swayze as a Chicago cop who 
enlists the aid of his Appalachian kinfolk to apprehend the gangsters who 
murdered his brother. With Liam Neeson ("The Good Mother's" steamy scene 
stealer), Adam Baldwin, Helen Hunt and Danny Aiello. John Irvin ("Raw Deal") 
directs. (Warners) 
"The Nightbreed" -- British horror novelist/sometimes director Clive Barker 
("Hellraiser") will direct/write this thriller based on his book "Cabal." And, 
get this, horror-meister David Cronenberg ("Dead Ringers") will star as a 
psychiatrist caught up in a series of horrific murders! (Fox) 
"Night Game" (tentative title) -- Roy Scheider is ex-Lt. Mike Seaver, a man 
intent on stopping a serial killer before he strikes again. The title refers to 
the big climax, which takes place at a baseball game at Houston's Astrodome. 
Peter Masterson directs. Karen Young co-stars. (Trans World) 
"Ninja Academy" -- Comedy with a band of inept misfits who hope to better 
themselves at the famous Ninja Academy. When the academy founder is kidnaped, 
they must use their newly learned lethal skills to rescue him. No director or 
cast set. Art &amp; Commerce Ent. (Distributor pending) 
* "Old Gringo" -- Jane Fonda, Gregory Peck and Jimmy Smits star in the 
long-awaited epic based on Carlos Fuentes' novel "Gringo Viejo." (It was set 
originally for release at Christmas 1988.) In the heat of the Mexican 
revolution, a prim American governess (Fonda), American journalist Ambrose 
Bierce (Peck) and an explosive young general in Pancho Villa's army (Smits) 
fall into a dangerous love affair. Luis Puenzo directs. (Columbia) 
"One Point of View" -- Dyan Cannon writes/directs/stars as a woman whose 
dead-end and dubious exploits land her in the manic circus of a rehab center. 
Amidst a bizarre and deeply touching group of misfits, she begins to find faith 
in her personal convictions. Also: John Heard, George Coe, Rebecca Schaeffer, 
Dennis Berkely, Michael Madsen, Billie Bird, Madge Sinclair, Paul Lieber, 
Viveka Davis, Renee Taylor, Lola Madsen. (Distributor pending) 
"The Pit and the Pendulum" -- Stuart Gordon ("From Beyond") directs this Edgar 
Allan Poe standard, set just after the Spanish Inquisition, and involving a 
vile man who believes himself to be his own late father, a vicious torturer. 
His methods include the aforementioned pit -- and pendulum. Won't mean a thing 
if it ain't got that swing! From Albert Band, ex-Empire Films mogul. 
(Bandcompany) 
"Prime Suspect" -- A pretty young thing is murdered by brutal killer Frank 
Stallone. The only witness has a nervous breakdown, is institutionalized and 
escapes -- to track down Stallone and exact revenge. (SVS) 
"Rebel Waves" -- Wacky futuristic comedy in which rock 'n' roll is illegal and 
a twisted evangelist resides in the White House. When two penniless brothers 
defy repressive authorities and dig for precious treasure, they unearth some 
damning evidence that restores freedom to the public. Francis Schaeffer 
directs. Stars Zach Galligan ("Gremlins"), John Rhys-Davies, Elizabeth Keifer, 
Wayne Crawford, June Chadwick. Gibraltar Releasing. (Distributor pending) 
"Relentless" -- Judd Nelson is a serial killer and Robert Loggia and Leo Rossi, 
a veteran L.A. detective and NYC cop, respectively, team to track him down. 
Directed by William Lustig ("Hit List"). (CineTel) 
* "Revenge" -- "Top Gun's" Tony Scott directs an adventure drama with Kevin 
Costner, Anthony Quinn and Madeleine Stowe ("Stakeout") in a deadly love 
triangle. Costner (who also exec-produces) is a newly retired Navy pilot who's 
invited down to Quinn's estate and falls for Quinn's wife (Stowe) in a most 
dangerous way. (Columbia) 
"Robbie Zenith" -- This one's being tabbed a hip parody of horror films -- from 
the creators of "Bachelor Party," "Police Academy" and "Poltergeist." With a 
script by Pat Proft, Neal Israel, Jeffrey Barron and "Texas Chainsaw 
Massacre's" Tobe Hooper. Director not yet set. (MCEG) 
"Rude Awakening" -- Comedy with Eric Roberts and Cheech Marin returning to NYC 
after two decades of living in a Central American utopia. They're stunned to 
see their former radical pals now yuppified. How to bring back those days of 
Peace &amp; Love? They try some of the methods used in the "olden" days -- 
sit-ins, social upheaval, that kind of thing. Aaron Russo produces. Director 
not yet set. With Julie Hagerty, Robert Carradine, Buck Henry, Louise Lasser, 
Cindy Williams, Andrea Martin, Cliff DeYoung. (Orion) 
"Shirley Valentine" -- Housewife/mother Pauline Collins rediscovers her sense 
of adventure when she accompanies her friend on a two-week vacation to Greece. 
There she meets Greek islander Tom Conti -- and falls in love with life. 
Produced/directed by "Educating Rita's" Lewis Gilbert, who reteams with "Rita" 
screenwriter Willy Russell. (Paramount) 
"The Silk Road" ("Dun-Huang") -- Costly Chinese-Japanese co-production (the 
producers claim a $34-million budget, which translates to a whole lotta yen) 
that utilized over 100,000 extras for an epic story of love and war set in 
11th-Century China. About the ill-fated love of a young scholar and the 
princess who cannot be his. Japan's Koichi Sato directs/co-writes. Blum Group. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Sorority" -- Poster girl/eternal deb Cornelia Guest stars with Tab Hunter in 
this "Animal House"-ish comedy with a female bent. Hip coed Guest leaves a 
snooty sorority for a run-down house facing financial doom. But after launching 
a 976 phone-sex biz, it's the hottest house on campus. From Aussie director 
Lyndall Hobbs (made her American debut with "Back to the Beach"). (Spectrafilm) 
* "Steel Magnolias" -- Sally Field, Dolly Parton, Shirley MacLaine, Daryl 
Hannah, Olympia Dukakis and Julia Roberts are strong Southern women in Robert 
Harling's adaptation of his Off-Broadway play. Set largely in a beauty salon, 
it chronicles the ways they impact one another's lives over the course of two 
years. Herbert Ross directs. (Tri-Star) 
"Stiff" -- A famous TV reporter and celebrity chef conspire to cover-up the 
death of a senator. Chased by political henchmen, detectives and crooks, 
they're trying desperately to sneak the corpse from North Carolina to 
Washington, D.C. Er, this is a comedy! Sam Irvin directs/co-produces/co-writes. 
No cast yet. (Spectrafilm) 
"Sundown" -- Offbeat comedy involving "retired" vampires who import a scientist 
to their small Southwestern town. They're hoping to stop the killing -- and 
requisite blood-sucking. Then comes a power struggle. See, there's this other 
vampire faction. Anthony Hickox directs/co-writes. Stars David Carradine, 
Maxwell Caulfield, Jim Metzler, Morgan Brittany, M. Emmet Walsh, Deborah 
Foreman, Bruce Campbell, John Ireland, Marion Eaton. (Vestron) 
"Teenage Exorcist" -- The late John Carradine and Cameron Mitchell in a Fred 
Olen Ray-directed comedy, in which a bunch of teens find themselves in an old 
mansion that's possessed. Where's Linda Blair when you need her?! American 
Independent Prod. (Distributor pending) 
"The Terror Within" -- Post-apocalyptic sci-fi, as scientists trapped in an 
underground lab face a terrifying enemy. George Kennedy and Andrew Stevens 
star. Thierry Notz directs. Roger Corman exec produces. (Concorde) 
* "The Threepenny Opera" -- It's the Bertolt Brecht/Kurt Weill musical/comedy 
set during Queen Victoria's 1837 London coronation. Macheath (Raul Julia), the 
bandit known as Mack the Knife, has secretly married the daughter of Mr. 
Peachum (Richard Harris). Mack very quickly finds himself framed for a series 
of crimes that Peachum hopes will send him straight to the gallows. Cannon 
Films topper Menahem Golan directs. With Julia Migenes, ex-Who screamer Roger 
Daltrey, Julie Walters, Rachel Robertson. (Cannon) 
"Time Trackers" -- Ned Beatty, Kathleen Beller and TV gabman Wil Shriner in a 
sci-fi actioner exec-produced by Roger Corman. About a time-traveling young 
team -- from the future -- in pursuit of an evil scientist bent on destruction. 
(Is there any other kind?!) They stop in NYC briefly. Then, it's on to the 12th 
Century. Written/directed by Howard R. Cohen. (Concorde) 
"Tips" -- Romantic, comedic look at L.A.'s creative underside centering on 
starving artist Jonathan Gries, who's content with his solitary, Bohemian life 
style -- until it's disrupted by lovely actress Lisa Zane. Paul Parco directs. 
With Barney Martin and appearances by Robert Culp, Isabel (Mrs. Jefferson) 
Sanford, Phyllis Diller, Paul Bartel and ex-porn star-turned-metal queen Wendy 
O. Williams. (Paragon Arts) 
"The Treasure Hunters" -- Action/adventure, a la "Romancing the Stone" (they 
hope!), as a group of treasure seekers attempt to recover a treasure hidden on 
a jungle island. Director and cast not set. (Action Intl.) 
"Tripwire" -- A federal agent tries to find his son (kidnaped, what else?) who 
is being brainwashed by a master criminal. Director Spiro Razatos. Cast not 
set. (CineTel) 
"Upworld" -- Action comedy with once-Brat Packer Anthony Michael Hall as a 
former undercover cop who teams with a gnome named Gnorm to retrieve a magical 
energy source that's been stolen by a dishonest cop. Stan Winston -- known for 
his special effects -- directs. (Vestron) 
* "Valmont" -- Milos Forman ("Amadeus") directs/co-scripts (with Jean-Claude 
Carriere) his version of "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," as opposed to the current 
Stephen Frears version ("Dangerous Liaisons"). It's the story of handsome young 
18th-Century aristocrats who play unscrupulous games of love, indifferent to 
each others feelings, until they meet their match. Stars Meg Tilly, Colin 
Firth, Annette Benning. (Orion) 
* "The War of the Roses" -- James L. Brooks produces; Danny DeVito directs; 
Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner star in this dark comedy based on Warren 
Adler's novel. The Roses wish to become unmarried, but neither is willing to 
vacate the house, which soon becomes an emotional -- and physical -- 
battlefield. (Fox) 
* "The White Crow" -- Robert Duvall portrays Adolf Eichmann, who has finally 
been tracked down and brought to Israel to stand trial for his participation in 
the Holocaust. Upon learning of this, NYC university prof/writer Hilda Baum 
(Glenn Close) travels to Israel for a shattering confrontation that will change 
her life. Irvin Kershner ("Empire Strikes Back") directs/co-produces. Nova 
Intl. (Distributor pending) 
"White Thunder" (tentative title) -- Ski documentary -- and dare-deviltry -- 
produced and written by Warren Miller (a specialist at this kind of thing). 
This one tracks cliff-jumping skiers from the French Alps to the great peaks of 
the Soviet Union. Don Brolin directs. (I.E.G.) 
"Wild Orchid" -- The creative team and star of the steamy "9 1/2 Weeks" regroup 
-- for an emotional/erotic thriller that, we're told, "walks the line between 
fear and and excitement, control and abandon . . . cynicism and romance." Phew! 
Zalman King directs/co-scripts with wife Patricia Louisiana Knop. Mark Damon 
exec produces. Mickey Rourke is a wealthy entrepreneur torn between two women 
-- one an innocent, the other a woman of the world. A Vision Presentation. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Women on Wheels" -- She-Wolf, a tough motorcycle Amazon woman, leads her sexy 
"Women on Wheels" gang in a plot to reverse this world order of male supremacy 
in this action comedy. When they clash with the BourneLosers, a vicious male 
biker gang, the leather hits the fan. Sam Raimi ("The Evil Dead") co 
exec-produces/co-writes; David O'Malley directs. Stars Paul LeMat, Eileen 
Davidson, Robert Miano, Joe Shea, Stevie Sterling, Mike Leinert, Mark Holton, 
Jami Richards, Barry Livingston (Ernie on "My Three Sons"). (Image) 
* "Young Einstein" -- Aussie star Yahoo Serious stars/directs/ 
co-produces/co-writes this farce -- currently a monster hit in his homeland -- 
which reveals the real, down-under lowdown on one of the most eccentric 
individuals of the 20th Century -- Albert Einstein. With Yahoo as Al, natch. 
(Warners) 
"Untitled John Mackenzie" -- The director of "The Fourth Protocol" tackles the 
story of a team of L.A. detectives, headed by no-nonsense Brian Dennehy. They 
discover that a local case has political overtones. When the guys are 
suspended, they're forced to cross legal boundaries in order to defend the U.S. 
Jere Cunningham exec-produces/co-writes. With Jeff Fahey, Joe Pantoliano ("The 
Goonies") and Bill Paxton (the crazy Marine in "Aliens"). (Orion) 
"Untitled Wes Craven" -- The director of "A Nightmare on Elm Street" is 
horrified again. (Universal) 
"Untitled Steven Spielberg" -- Love story (previously known as "Always") 
starring Richard Dreyfuss, based on the 1943 Spencer Tracy film "A Guy Named 
Joe." That's the one that found guardian angel (literally) Tracy watching over 
the WW II flyer who's romancing Tracy's former girl. (Universal) 
"Untitled Mark Twain Project" -- Sci-fi/fantasy, loosely based on Mark Twain's 
"A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court," follows a 20th-Century inventor 
who, by his own handiwork, is transported to the Middle Ages. Larry Brezner 
("Good Morning, Vietnam) produces. (Orion) 
To Be Announced 
"Apartment Zero" -- Psychological suspenser, which touches on themes sexual, 
moral and political, about the decidedly odd relationship that develops between 
a repressed Colin Firth and his boarder, an animalistic Hart Bochner. Set in 
Buenos Aires. English-Argentinian Martin Donovan directs/co-produces/scripts. 
Summit Co. Ltd. (Distributor pending) 
"The Artisan" -- Klaus Maria Brandauer stars/makes his directorial debut in a 
drama based on true events. Brandauer is a man with intentions to assassinate 
Hitler; Brian Dennehy is a German chief of police. Soehnlein/Borman production. 
(Hemdale) 
"The Awakening" -- A reluctant vampire becomes the Equalizer. The tale begins 
during the Revolutionary War, when a Tory surgeon (Kevin Kindlin) who performs 
blood-letting is suspected of being a vampire/sorcerer. Hung by the Patriots, 
he "returns" 200 years later to feast on the blood of society's undesirables. 
(A political statement?) John Russo writes/directs. Stars Michael J. Pollard, 
Moon Zappa, Tom Savini. Thinker Prods. (Distributor pending) 
"Big Bad John" -- The new Charlie Daniels version of the Jimmy Dean standard is 
used in this film. But Dean stars as a retired sheriff hired to track down an 
accused kidnaper (Doug English) named John. Dean chases him through the bayous 
of Louisiana, through Texas, finally to a coal mine in Colorado. Veteran 
Western director Burt Kennedy ("Support Your Local Sheriff," "The War Wagon") 
helms. With Jack Elam, Ned Beatty, Bo Hopkins, Romy Windsor. Red River Film Co. 
(Distributor pending) 
* "The Big Picture" -- Christopher Guest (one of the crazies behind "This Is 
Spinal Tap") directs/co-scripts the dark comedic adventures of a young film 
maker (Kevin Bacon) in Hollywood. With Emily Longstreth, J.T. Walsh, Jennifer 
Jason Leigh, Michael McKean (another "Spinal Tap" collaborator, he co-scripted 
this) and Jason Gould -- son of Elliott Gould and Babs Streisand. (Columbia) 
"Black Snow" -- The brother of a murdered Texas oil man investigates the death 
-- only to learn that his sibling had a secret dark side, including dealings 
with cocaine. Randy Brooks, Peter Sherayko, Jane Badler star. (Watch out, 
Badler's not to be trusted.) Director Frank Patterson. Houston Cinema Group. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Blind Fear" -- Gothic suspense thriller with ex-Charlie's Angel Shelley Hack 
as a New England hotel phone operator who's got one, um, final night to go 
before the hotel closes for the winter. She is beautiful. She is blind. And -- 
can you believe it -- she is not alone! Tom Berry directs. Lance Ent./Allegro 
Films. (Distributor pending) 
"Blind Fury" -- Rutger Hauer is a sightless Samurai armed only with his sword, 
his cane and a keen sense of humor. Based on Japanese Samurai stories. Directed 
by Phillip Noyce ("Heatwave"). (Tri-Star) 
"Blood Salvage" -- John Saxon and Ray Walston star in a horror/comedy involving 
a Georgia junkman who murders innocent tourist types and places their various 
body parts on the black market. His top three items? Eyes, livers and kidneys! 
Tucker Johnston co-writes/directs. Blood Salvage Inc. (Distributor pending) 
"Bloodhounds of Broadway" -- Madonna sings some standards -- and plays a 
good-hearted brunette -- in this series of vignettes from Damon Runyon stories. 
Also starring: Matt Dillon, Mary Stuart Masterson, Randy Quaid, Rutger Hauer, 
Esai Morales, Jennifer Gray. Howard Brookner directs. (Distributor pending) 
"Burndown" -- Mystery thriller shot in South Africa. Cathy Moriarty (the hot 
wife in "Raging Bull") is a newspaper reporter who teams with the police to 
thwart a rapist/murderer. James Allan directs. With Peter Firth. (Cinetrust) 
"Cage" -- Contemporary action/adventure with a hard-edged scenario in which an 
illicit underworld sport called "cage fighting" pits man-against-man. A fight 
to the death with only one rule: no weapons allowed. Stars Mighty Lou Ferrigno, 
Reb Brown, James Shigeta, Marilyn Tokuda. Lang Elliott produces/directs. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Cat Chaser" -- In pursuit of peace and quiet, Peter Weller buys a beachside 
motel. Then along comes Kelly McGillis, who's being followed by bad guys. The 
serenity is shattered, Elmore Leonard-style. (This is based on the mystery 
novelist's hard-edged book of the same name.) Abel Ferrara ("Fear City") 
directs. (Vestron) 
"China O'Brien" -- U.S. martial-arts champ Cynthia Rothrock (she's starred in 
several Hong Kong-made action pics) is a cop who leaves the big city -- and her 
violent profession -- behind her. So she heads for her hometown, where her 
dad's the sheriff. Then comes violence -- and revenge. Robert Clouse ("Enter 
the Dragon") directs. Golden Harvest Prods. (Distributor pending) 
"Cold Front" -- American cop Martin Sheen and Royal Canadian Mounted Police cop 
Michael Ontkean stumble across a plot to hide international terrorists in 
Vancouver -- with the cooperation of the CIA, the KGB and the RCMP! What to do? 
. . . Allan Goldstein (whose "The Outside Chance of Maximilian Glick" took 
awards at Toronto and Vancouver film festivals) directs. With Kim Coates and 
Beverly D'Angelo. Beacon Group Prod. (Distributor pending) 
"Daddy Wanted" -- "Fast Times at Ridgemont High's" Amy Heckerling directs a 
romantic comedy in which an unmarried and very pregnant Kirstie Alley hails a 
cab driven by John Travolta (who offers advice on Lamaze breathing). After baby 
makes two, Alley's bound and determined to live up to her promise, "I'll find a 
daddy for you." Anyone in the mood to hail a cab? Co-stars Olympia Dukakis, 
George Segal, Abe ("Fish") Vigoda. (Tri-Star) 
"Deadlock" -- "Sophisticated" action thriller with: terrorists, a new missile 
design, a shoot-out, a world renowned scientist, a kidnaping, and more! All of 
which is produced/directed by James Dodson and stars Steffen Gregory Foster, 
Jeremy Slate, James Hong, Ken Abraham, Maureen McVeery. Cinemasque/Radiance 
Prod. (Distributor pending) 
"Deadly Innocents" -- Mary Crosby (recall, she shot J.R.) has a man-hating 
alter ego that lures men to their doom. After being confined to a sanitarium, 
she escapes (after knocking off a male nurse). Watch out! Directed by John D. 
Patterson and Hugh Parks. Also: Andrew Stevens and Amanda Wyss. Quest 
Studios/Orlando Partners-I Prods. (Distributor pending) 
"Devil's Odds" -- Action/adventure purporting to be the first film to shoot in 
the last uncharted river in Africa. Four urbane adults on a leisurely rafting 
trip down the Zambezi River come across a dangerous tour guide. Michael 
Schroeder directs. Silver Lions production. (Distributor pending) 
"Empire of Ash II" -- Futuristic post-apocalyptic actioner. See, surviving 
souls of the great virus seek fresh blood at all times and must be terminated. 
Lloyd Simandl and Michael Mazo direct. Stars Melanie Kilgour and Sandy 
MacKenzie. North American Pictures. (Distributor pending) 
"Empire of Ash III" -- The year is 2050 and we're a vaste wasteland, devastated 
by a global lethal virus. Characters like the Warlord Baalca, High Priest 
Lucas, Grand Shepard and New Mothers run around, saving each other and stuff. 
Lloyd Simandl and Michael Mazo (see "Empire of Ash II," above) again direct. 
Stars William Smith, Scott Andersen, Melanie Kilgour, Ken Farmer. North 
American Pictures. (Distributor pending) 
* "Family Business" -- Sidney Lumet directs this star-powered drama of a 
grandfather (Sean Connery), a father (Dustin Hoffman) and son (Matthew 
Broderick) who band together to commit a robbery that promises to be low risk 
with high returns. Vincent Patrick adapts his own novel. (Tri-Star) 
"The Favorite" -- F. Murray Abraham stars as an Ottoman Empire sultan in this 
true saga of Aimee Dubu de Rivery. Newcomer Amber O'Shea plays the abducted 
young French girl who's sold as a slave in Algiers to serve the Sultan in the 
18th Century. Director Jack Smight. Also: Barbara Carrera, Ron Dortch, Andrea 
Parisy. Ascona production. (Distributor pending) 
"The Game" -- An elite group of rich, powerful, ruthless thrill seekers convene 
once a year for a bit of sport. As they plot their moves on a gameboard, 
they're betting on the lives of innocent victims. Cole McKay directs. TBJ 
Films/Cato Film. (Distributor pending) 
"The Gate II" -- The survivor of the original shocker returns to the blackened 
shell of a house (site of the horrors let loose in "I"). While looking for help 
"from another world," he and three schoolmates unwittingly unleash terrifying 
forces. But of course! Tibor Takacs directs. (Vision p.d.g.) 
"Homeboy" -- Though it's been knocking them out in Europe (especially France), 
this Mickey Rourke/Christopher Walken drama hasn't yet been slated for U.S. 
release. Rourke is Homeboy, an aspiring boxer who gets into the fight game 
thanks to a favor he did for the mob. Once you're in. . . . Director Michael 
Seresin. Red Ruby Productions. (Distributor pending) 
"How to Get Ahead in Advertising" -- Richard E. Grant and sultry Rachel Ward 
star in a comedy/drama about an ad man who gives up the job, the wife and his 
buddies because he just needs a break. (Warners) 
"In Dubious Battle" -- Drama based on John Steinbeck's novel, about the 
formation and impact of unions in 1930s Northern California. Cast and crew 
pending. Zupnik Ent. (Distributor pending) 
"The Inheritor" -- Supernatural mystery. A young woman must return to her rural 
hometown to identify the body of her twin sister. There she meets her sister's 
ex-lover, a famed author. And the mystery deepens. . . . Brian Savegar directs 
Dan ("Grizzly Adams") Haggerty, Lisa McGuire, Barnaby Spring. Films Around the 
World, Inc. (Distributor pending) 
"Laser Mission" -- Brandon Lee, son of Bruce, is a young CIA special agent. His 
assignment: to recover the missing Prof. Brown, whose power-laser can destroy 
entire cities! The action-adventure has complications of the romantic kind in 
the form of Brown's stunning daughter. Directed by B.J. Davis. Stars Debi 
Monahan, Ernest Borgnine, Werner Pochath. (Interfilm) 
* "Last Exit to Brooklyn" -- Hubert Selby's controversial 1964 novel involving 
the denizens of New York's underbelly finally comes to the screen, with Berdt 
Eichinger ("The NeverEnding Story") producing and Ulrich Eidel ("Christiane 
F.," the 1981 German pic about a teen-age junkie) directing. The drama stars 
Jennifer Jason Leigh, Alexis Arquette, Burt Young, Jerry Orbach, Ricki Lake. 
From Germany's Constantin Film. (Distributor pending) 
"Lives of a Cat" -- German-made actioner about a pair of lovers whose personal 
interest in each other goes no further than the bedroom. But with him being a 
bank robber, and her being the wife of a bank manager, it's only "natural" that 
they team "professionally." Dominik Graf directs. (Interfilm) 
"Loverboy" -- Madcap comedy with Patrick Dempsey ("Can't Buy Me Love") taking 
on a pizza delivery job for some extra college cash. Faster than you can say 
"Hold the anchovies," he's "catering" to a number of Beverly Hills wives. 
"Crossing Delancey's" Joan Micklin Silver directs. Also: Kate Jackson, Carrie 
Fisher, Barbara Carrera, Kirstie Alley. (Tri-Star) 
"Medium Rare" -- Burt Young, Lainie Kazan and Brad Dourif in an irreverent look 
at Hollywood's seamier side. Young's a schlock movie producer who triggers a 
series of bizarre events while trying to protect his wife's cinematic 
reputation. Director/screenwriter Paul Madden. Limelight production. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Never Cry Devil" -- Drama -- with occult overtones -- about a high schooler 
(Derek Rydall) with personal problems whose animosity toward a teacher (with 
homosexual inclinations for him) backfires when he finds himself accused of his 
girlfriend's murder. Rupert Hitzig directs. With Elliott Gould, Allen Garfield, 
Michael J. Pollard, Richard Roundtree. From Premiere Pictures Corp. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Nudity Required" -- Maxi-statuesque Julie Newmar and Troy Donahue in an action 
comedy/adventure about fast living/loving in Hollywood. (Don't we know!) 
Directed by John Bowen. Andrea &amp; Co. (Distributor pending) 
* "The Package" -- Gene Hackman, Veronica Hamel, Tommy Lee Jones and John Heard 
in a political-conspiracy thriller set against the backdrop of glasnost. 
Hackman's a hard-working military career man pitted against forces beyond his 
control. Andrew Davis ("Code of Silence") directs. (Orion) 
"Paris by Night" -- Thriller with Charlotte Rampling as a British politician 
who ventures to the City of Light for a conference and bumps into a figure from 
her past. The liaison that follows will cause her to behave in dangerous -- and 
deadly -- ways. David Hare directs; Michael Gambon co-stars. (Cineplex Odeon) 
"Puccini" -- The life story of composer Giacomo Puccini, lover of fast cars, 
faster boats and the fastest women. With performances of his famous operas 
including "La Boheme" and "Madame Butterfly." Written by Terrence McNally. 
Director/cast pending. Zupnik Ent. (Distributor pending) 
"Red Scorpion" -- This Dolph Lundgren actioner finds the big guy cast as a 
super-elite killer, dispatched to eliminate an African leader. But once in the 
field, ol' Dolph experiences a change of heart. Joe Zito ("Missing in Action") 
directs. Also: M. Emmet Walsh, Al White, T.P. McKenna, Carmen Argenziano, Alex 
Colon, Brion James. Scorpion Film. (Distributor pending) 
"Return From the River Kwai" -- World War II actioner based on the book of the 
same title by Joan and Clay Blair Jr., not a sequel to the David Lean classic. 
Andrew McLaglen directs Timothy Bottoms, Chris Penn, Denholm Elliott, Edward 
Fox. (Tri-Star) 
"The Rolls-Royce Boys" -- Action comedy with a "Red Heat"-ish scenario. An 
Italian Interpol officer travels to L.A. and teams with a local cop to track 
the Mafia! Director Nick Kimaz; stars Joe Hoke, Gassan John Stephan, Julie 
Nine, Snowden Bishop. Pioneer production. (Distributor pending) 
* "Romero" -- About the life -- and death -- of Archbishop Oscar Romero, 
prominent spokesman for human rights in civil war-torn El Salvador until his 
assassination in 1980. (The assassination followed a sermon in which he advised 
Salvadoran soldiers to disobey their commanders' orders to oppress those who 
fought the government.) Raul Julia stars. John Duigan ("The Year My Voice 
Broke") directs. Father Elwood Kieser, who helmed the long-running TV series 
"Insight," produces for Paulist Pictures. (Distributor pending) 
"Shadows on the Wall" -- A modern-day reporter attempts to unravel the mystery 
surrounding a notorious murder/suicide involving a Western hero from the silent 
screen. Patrick C. Poole produces/writes/directs. Stars Wilford Brimley, Gary 
Swanson, Lou Michaels. (Intl. Film) 
"Shag" -- A weekend of dance, good-looking guys and adventure at Myrtle Beach, 
S.C., circa 1963, changes the lives of four girlfriends. Stars Phoebe Cates, 
Bridget Fonda, Annabeth Gish, Page Hannah, Tyrone Power Jr., Scott Coffey. 
Zelda Barron directs. Palace Prods. (Distributor pending) 
"Slipstream" -- Mark Hamill -- a.k.a. Luke Skywalker -- goes against type, 
playing a bad guy in this sci-fier directed by Steven Lisberger ("Tron") and 
produced by Gary Kurtz ("Star Wars"). Two law officers and a bounty hunter 
pursue a young fugitive. Fugitive and bounty hunter ultimately attempt to elude 
the so-called law officers by taking off from the slipstream (that's a river of 
wind) in a small, solar-powered craft. (Distributor pending) 
"Sonny Boy" -- Very weird goings-on. A youth is kidnaped as a baby, raised in a 
beastly manner -- by "couple" David Carradine (in drag) and Paul L. Smith -- 
and later turns to violence. Then one day Sonny Boy (Michael Griffin) chances 
to be in front of a mirror, as he washes away blood after a bloody spree. 
Looking up, he pulls away his long, unkept hair and sees this sweet face 
staring back. Could it be there's a sweet soul here, also? Robert Carroll 
directs. With Brad Dourif and Conrad Janis. (Trans World) 
"The Stepfather II" -- Terry O'Quinn, who portrayed the vicious chameleon-like 
mass murderer of the original, is back. (No matter that he was killed off in 
the original. You know these crazy film makers.) This time he's in a new 
neighborhood, where he torments a new family. Jeff Burr ("The Offspring") 
directs. Part II Prods. (Distributor pending) 
"Strapless" -- Quirky love story. Blair Brown is a young American doctor living 
in England who meets and falls in love with one prince of a guy (Bruno Ganz). 
Then again, he may not be as peachy as he seems. David Hare writes/directs. 
(Distributor pending) 
"Tennessee Waltz" -- Thriller with Julian Sands as a British attorney whose 
business trip to Nashville becomes a deadly nightmare. Nicolas Gessner directs. 
With Stacey Dash, Ned Beatty, Ed Lauter, Denise Crosby, Rod Steiger and -- as 
himself -- Johnny Cash. Condor Prods. (Distributor pending) 
"Valentino Returns" -- Coming-of-age romance, set in '50s small-town 
California. A young man (Barry Tubb) has just bought his first Caddy. Shiny and 
pink, it's a symbol of his manhood (how better to pick up girls). But . . . 
it's gonna get him into trouble! Meanwhile, dad Frederic Forrest is having 
problems with mom Veronica Cartwright. Which means they've all got to somehow 
eventually repair their tangled lives and damaged egos. Peter Hoffman directs. 
(Vidmark) 
"Why Me?" -- Romantic comedy stars French heartthrob Christopher Lambert as a 
charming jewel thief who pilfers the most valuable ruby in the world -- and 
then must somehow return it! Irwin Yablans exec produces; Gene Quintano 
directs. With Christopher Lloyd and Kim Greist. Epic Prod. (Distributor 
pending) 
"Young Toscanini" -- Elizabeth Taylor is a 19th-Century Russian soprano. C. 
Thomas Howell is the legendary (and hot-tempered) conductor Arturo Toscanini. 
The story finds him in Rio for his conducting debut, at age 18. Franco 
Zeffirelli directs. (Distributor pending) 
* "Untitled Woody Allen '89" -- Wow -- a comedy from Woody Allen! Set in NYC, 
of course. But wait -- this one's said to run a wide gamut, from very funny to 
very serious. And Woody gets verrrry serious. Woody's in this one, with Carolyn 
Aaron, Alan Alda, Claire Bloom, favorite leading lady Mia Farrow, Joanna 
Gleason, Daryl Hannah, Steven Hill, Martin Landau, Sam Waterston, Sean Young. 
(Orion) 
DISTRIBUTION AND PRODUCTION COMPANIES 
Academy Entertainment 
Action International 
Alive Films 
Amazing Movies 
Atlantic Releasing 
Avenue Entertainment 
Azteca Films 
Bandcompany Films 
Cannon Films 
Cinecom International 
Cineplex Odeon Films 
CineTel Films 
Cinetrust 
Columbia Pictures 
Concorde, distribution arm of Concorde/New Horizons 
Corsair Pictures 
Cresswin Films Distributors, Inc. 
Crown International Pictures 
Disney Pictures: released by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution 
European Classics 
Film Ventures International 
Fries Entertainment 
Full Moon, a distribution arm of Bandcompany 
Galaxy International 
Samuel Goldwyn Co. 
Hemdale Releasing 
Heritage Entertainment 
I.E.G. 
Image Entertainment 
Imperial Entertainment 
Interfilm 
International Film 
Island Pictures 
Management Company Entertainment Group 
MGM/UA Distribution Co. 
Miramax Films 
Moviestore Entertainment 
New Century/Vista, distribution arm of New Visions Pictures 
New Line Cinema 
New Star Entertainment 
New World Pictures 
New Yorker Films 
Noble Entertainment 
Omega Entertainment 
Orion Classics 
Orion Pictures 
Paragon Arts International 
Paramount Pictures 
Scotti Bros. Pictures 
Shapiro Glickenhaus Entertainment 
Shockiku Co. 
Simcom International 
Skouras Pictures 
Smart Egg Releasing 
Spectrafilm 
SVS Films 
Touchstone Pictures: released by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution 
Trans World Entertainment 
Triax Entertainment 
Tri-Star Pictures 
Troma Inc. 
20th Century Fox 
Universal Pictures 
Vestron Pictures 
Vidmark Entertainment 
Vision p.d.g. 
Walt Disney Pictures: released by Buena Vista Pictures Distribution 
Warner Bros. 
About Our Star System . . . 
Certain titles in our previews receive a * designation to indicate that the 
cast, the directors or producers, or the themes might be of unusual interest to 
filmgoers. 
