SYRIA'S ASSAD, MOSCOW'S STALKING HORSE IN MIDEAST, WON'T EASILY TURN TOWARD 
PEACE 
Syria is in the process of moving from pre-eminent Soviet asset in the Middle 
East to primary liability. This is not because of what Syria is now doing in 
the region, but because of what Moscow is now doing in the world. 
Syrian President Hafez Assad, arguably the most brilliant political tactician 
in the Middle East in a generation, has for years been the Soviets' single best 
investment in the region. He has pursued a bold vision of Syria's interests 
that leaves no place for peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. This 
de facto rejectionist policy has brought him the leadership of the Arab world 
for nearly two decades. 
By his insistence on maintaining the Arab struggle against Israel, Assad has 
served his own interests exceedingly well. His policy has justified a claim to 
major supplies of advanced Soviet weaponry. To pursue the "Arab confrontation," 
he has successfully demanded large sums of oil money from the Persian Gulf 
states that fear Syria's power and feel guilty and politically exposed if they 
do not pay something more concrete than lip service to "the cause." He has 
arrogated to Syria the right, as the leading confrontation state, to direct the 
politics of the Palestinian movement against Israel. He has intimidated most 
Arab states into lending Syria support in a variety of ways simply because they 
have been afraid to cross him; Syria has not shrunk from occasional "reminders" 
-- unattributed acts of violence or even assassination of officials -- against 
hostile or unresponsive regimes. He has for years been able to block broader 
Arab moves toward moderation at Arab summits where consensus has ruled. And 
Assad has seen his praetorian role in Lebanon as an extension of his need to 
control the politics of all states that border on Israel. Jordan has not been 
exempt from such pressures; King Hussein has always understood his own limits 
in directly opposing Syrian interests. 
In short, continuous confrontation has bought Assad a great deal of influence, 
authority, money, arms, power and even grudging respect in the Arab world. 
Above all, he has been able to legitimize his minority regime of Alawites who 
constitute less than 15% of the Syrian population in a largely Sunni Muslim 
country. Despite serious economic problems and periodic setbacks and many 
conflicts with Israel, Assad has been able to command virtually unquestioned 
domestic leadership since 1970. 
Why should Assad want to change all this? What does peace hold out for him? For 
nearly two decades the answer has been: very little. True peace would require 
Assad to give up most of the advantages that he derives from confrontation. 
Above all, he would slip from the leadership of the Arab nationalist struggle 
down to a modest second place in a peace camp dominated by rival Egypt. But 
only a genuine peace, as distinct from mere non-belligerence, offers the 
prospect of Israel's returning the Golan Heights. 
Alliance with a state like Syria has been ideal for the Soviet Union since the 
early '70s. For several decades Moscow has found its interests best served 
through the maintenance of a state of controlled tension in the region: While 
not wanting war, Moscow has found that such tension played to its own strong 
suit as arms purveyor to radical states, and also keptthe United States at a 
disadvantage in the Arab world, where Washington was perceived as 
single-mindedly and exclusively concerned with Israel's security. Assad could 
therefore be counted on to masterfully accomplish what the Soviets also wanted 
in the region: the weakening of moderates and the blocking of U.S. initiatives 
toward a Pax Americana. All that Moscow needed to do was supply the military 
wherewithal to enable Assad to do his thing. This alliance was not, of course, 
free of friction. But on the whole it was a valuable investment. 
Today Moscow's agenda has changed. Mikhail Gorbachev's sweeping revolution at 
home, involving a total redefinition of the character of Russian national 
power, has established domestic and international priorities that leave little 
room for regional conflicts of dubious value and considerable risk. The 
"zero-sum quality" of Soviet calculations toward competition with the United 
States in the Third World is sharply diminishing. I believe that Gorbachev has 
turned a sharp strategic corner in which, for the first time, he now views 
Soviet interests as being fulfilled by a peaceful settlement of the 
Arab-Israeli problem. He does see this settlement as involving some kind of 
eventual Palestinian state -- but then so does most of the world, including our 
European allies. 
If the Soviet strategic priority has shifted dramatically, then Assad's 
long-brilliant blocking game no longer serves the Soviet purpose; indeed, it 
becomes Moscow's No. 1 headache. 
Assad is his own man -- shrewd, pragmatic, careful and clear in his own 
priorities. He does not want a peaceful settlement on any terms remotely 
acceptable to Israel. He does not want an independent Palestinian state, which 
would lie under the shadow of Israel and Jordan. He wants a PLO subservient to 
his interests. He wants to maintain Syria as a formidable military force on 
terms of rough parity with Israel that can never be ignored in Israeli 
calculations. 
These goals do not seem to complement Gorbachev's priorities today as he moves 
toward normalization with Israel and places heavy pressure on the PLO to 
moderate and seek accommodation with Israel. He will find Assad's erstwhile 
brilliance now working against broader Soviet interests. 
If Syria could ever be compelled to join a peaceful settlement -- always 
questionable -- the time may now be arriving. Syrian isolation, its desperate 
economic situation, the reemergence of its bitter rival Iraq after the gulf 
war, the return of Egypt to the Arab fold after more than a decade of Camp 
David disgrace -- all these elements pose major new problems to traditional 
Syrian policies. But the shift in Soviet policy is likely to be the straw that 
breaks the Syrian camel's back. 
Assad, as shrewd as he is, cannot fail to observe these signs in the firmament 
of Middle East politics. We see him displaying more moderation, improving ties 
with key moderates like Egypt and Morocco. But Assad will not easily abandon 
his vision for Syria. No longer able to explicitly block peace from the 
outside, he may well now be playing a subtler game, seeking to move within the 
framework of negotiations where he will set conditions for a comprehensive 
settlement that cannot be met. 
Whatever the case, Moscow has its work cut out for itself. If Gorbachev can 
ever actually "deliver" Assad, he will have more than earned his way to a 
central position at the peace table. 
