EAST BLOC'S RETURN TO HARD-LINE RULE FEARED; 
U.S. POLICY: HUGE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF THE NEWLY LIBERATED NATIONS 
COULD PUSH SOME AWAY FROM FREEDOM, ANALYSTS AND POLICY MAKERS SAY. 
Government analysts and Bush Administration policy makers are increasingly 
worried that the huge social and economic problems of the freshly liberated 
East Bloc nations could push some of them away from freedom and into the grip 
of new authoritarian regimes. 
Senior Administration officials still ardently support the East Bloc reformers, 
but they say the process of democratization is so fragile it could fall victim 
to political fragmentation, aggravated by serious economic strains. 
The result, they say, could be a blighting of hopes for liberalization and a 
return to autocratic -- though probably non-Communist -- governments in at 
least some of the former Soviet satellites. 
"We've seen tremendous positive change in Eastern Europe, but now we're 
beginning to focus on the problems," a senior Administration official said 
Friday. "There are political instabilities. There are enormous economic 
problems. In short, there are tough times ahead." 
U.S. analysts view Poland as especially vulnerable -- partly because its 
economy already is far worse off than those of the other, more-advanced East 
European countries such as East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, and partly 
because it has the most sweeping reform plan. 
"In Poland, we see a wave of strikes barely two weeks after the introduction of 
a truly amazing economic program," an official said. "If anything goes 
massively wrong, it is likely to be in Poland." 
If Warsaw's sweeping package of reforms does not produce some improvement soon, 
government sources said, the Solidarity-backed government could falter and 
eventually lose power to the military, which historically in Poland has taken 
things into its own hands during times of major governmental crisis. 
Such a move could thrust Poland back into the hands of an authoritarian regime 
for the foreseeable future, one senior official said. "You might see a 
situation like the one in Argentina," said one well-placed East European 
expert. 
While Poland is considered most critical, Administration officials and senior 
government analysts also cite difficulties in other East European countries. 
The current unrest in Romania is "troubling," one official said. He called the 
situation in East Germany "unclear and confusing." 
The Administration may soon consider new aid packages for countries such as 
Czechoslovakia and Romania, where the fall of the old Communist regimes came 
too late to be included in the assistance approved by Congress last summer for 
Poland and Hungary. 
As the Administration views the East European situation, the newly liberated 
governments can be divided into two major categories: Economically healthy 
countries -- Czechoslovakia, East Germany and Hungary -- and countries beset by 
potentially crippling problems -- Poland, Romania and Bulgaria. 
Here is a country-by-country rundown of Washington's assessment of the 
situation in Eastern Europe: 
* Czechoslovakia: At the "top of the list" of potential success stories among 
the East Bloc states. The Communist Party has been discredited and is in full 
retreat. The country has the necessary historical and cultural conditions to 
make its reforms work, and it lacks the bitter ethnic and nationalistic 
divisions that haunt some other countries in the region. It also has a highly 
skilled work force. 
* Hungary: No. 2 on most lists, Hungary began its reforms long before other 
East European countries. It has a motivated work force and an emerging 
political system. The question: Will the previous Communist rule be replaced 
with a coherent government after the spring elections? 
* East Germany: With a reasonably skilled labor force and a rich uncle (West 
Germany) next door to help with financing, East Germany has bright prospects -- 
if it can get its act together politically. Right now, the Communist Party 
still is fighting to stay alive in the face of determined opposition. 
* Poland: Warsaw has put together the most sweeping program for economic 
reform, but its economy also is in the worst shape. The big question is how far 
the Solidarity-backed government can push its austerity program without 
splitting the party and losing support. 
* Bulgaria: So far, everything is moving in the right direction. But it will 
take longer -- possibly a year -- for the Bulgarians to rout the Communists 
from their government and perhaps even longer for them to begin getting their 
economy back into shape. 
* Romania: A country without long-time democratic traditions, Romania needs 
prompt elections, but it may not be able to achieve that goal. Human rights is 
likely to be a major issue for several more months, possibly years. 
As they assess the clouded future of Eastern Europe and grope for ways to 
bolster prospects for democratic governments and market-oriented economies, 
Administration officials continue to marvel at the Soviet Union's decision to 
take a hands-off attitude when the anti-Communist upheavals began. 
Officials said the United States has no evidence that the Soviet Union has been 
actively involved in the reform effort in any country besides Czechoslovakia. 
And even there, Moscow's role was indirect: Soviet officials merely signaled 
that Moscow now regarded its 1968 invasion as a mistake. 
Even in Romania, where Moscow had no love for the late dictator, Nicolae 
Ceaucescu, the Soviets were restrained in advance of his overthrow. 
"The last thing the Soviets wanted was to get involved in a resistance movement 
that might fail," one U.S. official said. 
