RENT BOARD IS DIVIDED ON FILLING VACANT SEAT; 
SANTA MONICA: AN ATTEMPT TO NAME A NEW MEMBER IS SET FOR TONIGHT. A STALEMATE 
MAY HAMPER BOARD BUSINESS. 
The Santa Monica Rent Control Board will try again tonight to fill a vacant 
seat after the board members split their votes on all seven candidates 
nominated at a special meeting Monday night. 
With the board evenly divided -- Chairwoman Susan Packer Davis and board member 
Wayne Bauer on one side and board members Dolores Press and Eileen Lipson on 
the other -- and neither side apparently willing to budge, a new member may not 
be selected until the November municipal election, when three other seats are 
up for election. 
The seat became vacant when Julie Lopez Dad resigned Dec. 31. The City Charter 
requires that the five-member board appoint a replacement within 30 days of a 
resignation. However, the charter is silent on a procedure if the board fails 
to reach agreement on a candidate within the required time. 
Anthony Trendacosta, the board's general counsel, is expected to present the 
board with a list of options tonight if no candidate receives three votes. 
It is unclear what options Trendacosta will present to the board, but one 
possible alternative would be to leave the seat vacant until the November 
election. 
Davis, Bauer and Lipson are up for reelection. Dad's seat also would be up for 
election even if the board appoints someone to fill it. 
"It's murky," Davis said of the effort to fill the seat vacated by Dad. "I 
don't see any hope for getting three votes for any candidate, frankly. Anyone 
we supported, they wouldn't support." 
If the seat is left unfilled until November, board business could be hampered 
until then because of the prospect of 2-2 votes on other major issues. Dad 
often sided with Davis and Bauer, on what were frequently 3-2 votes. 
"Policy decisions could be split right down the middle, major regulations could 
be split right down the middle and administrative decisions could be split 
right down the middle," Bauer said. "I think the only thing we may agree on are 
(rent dispute) decisions." 
"I think that's a distinct possibility," Press said. "Although I think 
philosophically we are all on the same wavelength and we share the same 
progressive principles." 
The deadlock centers around the board's controversial incentive housing 
program, which could also became the central issue in the November election. 
Supporters of the program -- which was adopted on a 3-2 vote in October -- say 
it is the only viable way to stop some landlords from evicting tenants under 
the state Ellis Act and going out of the rental business. The program allows 
landlords to raise the rents significantly on some units if they set aside an 
equal number of units at lower rents for poor people. 
Press and Lipson voted against the program. The city's largest landlord group, 
Action, and the city's largest tenant group, Santa Monica for Renters' Rights 
(SMRR), also opposed the program. 
Davis said she opposed the three candidates nominated by Press and Lipson 
because she believes none of them strongly supported the board's recently 
approved incentive housing program. 
"I stated publicly that I would not support anyone who wouldn't support the 
incentive housing program wholeheartedly," Davis said. 
The three candidates supported by Press and Lipson were William Bradley (Brad) 
Jones, 34, a high school English teacher and co-chairman of SMRR; Marilyn 
Spivey, a 42-year-old trial attorney, and Lacy D. Goode, 61, a stock clerk with 
the Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District. 
Neither Press nor Lipson said at Monday's meeting why they opposed the four 
candidates nominated by Davis and Bauer. But in an interview Tuesday, Press 
said she would not support any candidate who blindly supported the program. 
"I was not prepared to make a commitment to someone who did not look at it 
objectively," she said. 
The four candidates supported by Davis and Bauer were Anthony J. Russo, a 
53-year-old retired scientist; Lisa Monk Borrino, 34, a tenants' rights 
attorney; Ellen Goldin, a 37-year-old consultant and community activist, and 
Fred Silberberg, 29, a family law attorney. 
Davis and Bauer charged that SMRR, credited with bringing rent control to Santa 
Monica 10 years ago by getting a slate of its candidate elected to the City 
Council, was behind the deadlock. 
"Rather than have an incumbent in the November election who supported the 
program, SMRR would rather we not appoint anyone until the election," Bauer 
said. "SMRR has become more interested in winning office than in getting a 
responsible housing program." 
SMRR officials deny the accusation. 
"I don't think it is so much a question of SMRR wanting an incumbent who 
supports the program, but Wayne and Susan attacking SMRR," said Davis, the SMRR 
co-chairman and a candidate for the board. "Unfortunately, Mr. Bauer feels that 
anybody who doesn't agree with him 100% is against low-income and affordable 
housing." 
