ART; 
FOR BARRY LE VA, IT'S QUITE LOGICAL TO STUDY SEEMINGLY RANDOM ACTS 
A photographer asked artist Barry Le Va recently if he would perch on a white 
cube in one of the installations in his retrospective exhibit at the Newport 
Harbor Art Museum. Le Va obligingly sat down, and the cube began to give way 
with a dry, cracking sound. 
"They must have cast it much thinner than the others," he murmured as he 
examined the piece, made of plaster-like hydrastone. 
The piece would need to be fixed, of course, but the accident was hardly a 
tragedy. Although some viewers admire his art simply because of the way it 
looks -- the rambunctious disarray of "scatter pieces" from the 1960s, the 
austere, puzzlelike quality of later works -- Le Va has no interest in making 
it seductive to the eye. 
For this installation, "Stare Down (Abscessed Imprint)" from 1988, he 
deliberately left the plaster "absolutely unfinished," Le Va said. He used 
mahogany to make a mazelike piece that hangs on the wall -- not because of the 
sensuous character of the wood but "because there's less warpage and less 
grain," so the wall fixture can be read as "a continuous line." 
Slotlike components of the piece that hold huge aluminum balls in suspension 
are made of lowly fiberboard. Le Va even deglamorizes the balls by rubbing 
graphite on them to remove the shine of the metal. 
"I try not to embellish them," he said of his installations. "I try to keep 
them bland. The materials are based on the most immediate way the work can be 
done." 
For Le Va, making art is an intensely cerebral matter. 
During the past 2 decades, his chief concern has been to investigate the logic 
behind seemingly random activities. Both his installations of three-dimensional 
objects dispersed on gallery floors and walls and the complex drawings he makes 
for these pieces (considered full-fledged works in their own right) require the 
viewer to re-create mentally specific sequences of events. 
The quirky intellectual motivation behind Le Va's art has its roots in his 
teen-age fascination with architecture and mathematics. 
"When I visualize something in my mind, I visualize where things are locating 
themselves in space," he said. "I tend to look at drawing as if I'm looking 
down at something, never as a frontal view." 
For "Stare Down," he explained that the portion of the piece that hangs on the 
wall is supposed to be understood as if seen from above -- as if the wall were 
the floor. The resulting disorientation is a major part of what Le Va is after. 
Growing up in Long Beach in the 1950s, Le Va's early interest in art was 
sparked by magazine illustrations of Abstract Expressionist paintings, which 
appealed to him mostly because of their huge scale. After dropping out of 
several universities, he finally enrolled at the Otis Art Institute in Los 
Angeles in 1963 to study painting. But his restlessness was not appeased. 
"The more I got involved with painting," he said, "the more it was 
dissatisfying to me. Because no matter what I did, it was going toward a fixed 
end result." 
During this discouraging period, Le Va spent his time looking at art, reading 
widely and listening to the avant-garde jazz of John Coltrane and Ornette 
Coleman. As Art in America writer Stephen Ellis has pointed out, Coleman and Le 
Va have both used methods of improvisation involving rigorous, self-imposed 
rules to discover "patterns at the edge of disorder." 
"I was really interested in getting rid of every influence and trying to make 
art on my own set of terms," Le Va said of his years at Otis. "I wanted art 
that really questioned the underlying structures of art. 
"One day I was looking around at the process that led to (the three-dimensional 
pieces he was making at the time) -- the remnants sitting in the studio, the 
overturned chairs, all of that. And that seemed to hold much more potential for 
me in terms of art making. 
"Everything seemed to be logical in terms of the cause-and-effect activity I 
was going through. If a can was overturned here, it was overturned because 
maybe I needed to pour something and the can was left on its side. It may have 
rolled to that position because of the force with which it was laid down or 
because the floor was warped, or something like that. "(The materials I used) 
one day would overlap with the materials of another day and another day. 
"That's more or less (the notion) I've proceeded with ever since. . . . It's 
not that I set out deliberately not to make an object. It's just that I'm 
interested in how things locate themselves in space through time -- whatever 
logic it takes for things to exist in space." 
Le Va says the logic underlining his work can be based on geometric patterns, 
mathematical formulas or even purely arbitrary events, like kicking an object 
across the floor. 
One early (1967-68) installation re-created in the Newport Harbor show, "Black 
Felt With Flour Dusted and Glass Dropped" is a seemingly wildly anarchic 
scattering of felt pieces on the floor -- large, irregular swaths, medium-size 
squares and tiny snippets -- punctuated by layered sheets of broken glass and a 
tidy rectangular area covered with a thin layer of flour. 
It is up to the viewer to figure out the sequence in which Le Va accomplished 
the events (scattering, dropping, "dusting") that resulted in the surprisingly 
organized clutter visible in the piece. But in the absence of detailed 
explanations (Le Va's "clues" are limited to the titles he gives his pieces), 
how are viewers supposed to follow the complex logic of each piece? Does the 
artist even care whether viewers understand his work? 
He chewed on the question, answering it in a ruminative, somewhat 
self-contradictory way. 
"(Viewers) have to work," Le Va said. "I think art is something that has to be 
seen over and over and over again. You read a book the first time, you read it 
again and again, and the third time you have a whole different kind of 
understanding of the book than when you first read it. 
"I've always maintained that for some of these (works), you have to spend as 
much time with the work as it did for me to make it, which is at least 3 or 4 
days. So maybe somebody has to sit in that space for 3 or 4 days. But nobody is 
going to do it, and (the art) isn't about that kind of (activity) anyway." 
Then again, Le Va said he doesn't necessarily spend much time with other 
artists' exhibits. 
"I (may) walk out in 2 seconds because I immediately kind of think I know what 
they're about and I'm not interested beyond that," he said. "I think we all do 
it. The artists probably do it more than the public does. . . . Because (we've) 
seen so much, you know." 
And finally, Le Va admitted, "I may see the audience totally irrelevant to me 
while I'm making the work. Because I'm more after something I can learn from. 
The audience's acceptance or rejection of it doesn't matter too much." 
Le Va paused for a moment. "But I'm happy when they like it, sure," he added 
with a smile. "Ultimately, the real judges -- to me -- are the peers I respect. 
My own generation (of artists)." 
His generation of conceptually attuned sculptors and draftsmen -- Le Va was 
born in 1941 -- includes such major American figures as Richard Serra, Vito 
Acconci, Mel Bochner, Richard Tuttle, Bruce Nauman and Eva Hesse. But Le Va 
declined to specify the artists he most admired. 
One important quality he shares with them is a disinclination to make work that 
overtly appeals to an art-market sensibility. 
"I don't think it's about appeasing or amusing anybody," Le Va said of his art. 
"I think at the moment there is a lot of work that seems to be only on an 
amusement level. Amusement does not interest me at all." 
 "Barry Le Va: 1966-1988" remains on view through April 2 at the Newport Harbor 
Art Museum, 850 San Clemente Drive, Newport Beach. Gallery hours: 10 a.m. to 5 
p.m. Tuesday through Friday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday and noon to 6 p.m. 
Sunday. Admission: $3 general, $2 for students and seniors, $1 for children 
younger than 17. Information: (714) 759-1122. 
