TRAVEL VIDEOS: FROM AFRICAN PLAINS TO THE JUNGLE OF COSTA RICA 
This month we'll study a couple of new -- and excellent -- videos, one dealing 
with Africa, the other with Costa Rica. And while both deal with wildlife 
conservation, the Costa Rica video involves other subjects as well. 
"Africa" (two videos), Eco Ventures, 45 minutes each (1988). These two 
remarkable videos, produced by Megan Epler Wood and narrated by George 
Plimpton, will be of special interest to African safari planners and 
ecology-minded armchair travelers. Each video combines spectacular scenery with 
a detailed study of the animals found in parks along the Tanzania-Kenya border. 
The first tape opens with stunning views of the vast, 10,000-square-mile 
Serengeti Plain and a map showing the path of migration that the hundreds of 
thousands of zebra, wildebeest and gazelles make on their annual search for 
grasslands and water. According to the narration, it's an ecological cycle that 
has continued for 10 million years. 
The camera follows the trek and shows how the animals surmount the incredible 
hardships of their long journey, including the constant threat of predators -- 
hyenas, wild dogs and lions. 
You get contrasting, touching scenes of the family-oriented zebra grooming each 
other and the birth of a soon-doomed wildebeest. 
The sound and sight of the thundering herd as it struggles across the swiftly 
flowing Mara River are a video highlight that Plimpton calls "one of the 
greatest wildlife spectacles on earth." 
Later, Wood captures some poignant and amusing scenes of the six-ton elephants 
splashing and playing as they cool off in the mud holes of Amboseli National 
Park at the foot of Mt. Kilimanjaro. Elephant teen-agers are shown 
trunk-wrestling, and at an elephant family gathering, viewers watch seniors 
embracing each other as if greeting old friends. Other animals shown in the 
park include flamingoes, cape buffalo, wart hogs and ostriches. 
The video concludes with a discussion between Plimpton and Russell Train, 
chairman of the World Wildlife Fund/The Conservation Foundation, on the threat 
from poachers to this one-great concentration of elephants. 
The second tape opens with film clips of an Osa and Martin Johnson safari of 
the 1920s, then concentrates on following the social structure and daily life 
of a pride of lions. 
Viewers follow the female as she stalks her prey, while the male spends his day 
lying around surveying his realm, and the cubs wrestle and explore. The pride 
survives in spite of the fact that, according to Plimpton, the female is a poor 
huntress, missing five out of six tries. There also are brief scenes of some of 
the other cats in the Masai Mara Game Reserve, including leopards and cheetahs. 
Later, producer Wood opens with early film from the movie "King Kong," 
comparing it with the gentle mountain gorillas found in the Virunga Mountains 
of Rwanda, where the late anthropologist Dian Fossey lived and died studying 
them. 
The gorillas, which usually live at an altitude of 8,000 to 10,000 feet, don't 
survive in captivity. Viewers will see the females flirting with the males, and 
the majestic silverback males protecting their territory. 
Mountain gorillas are vegetarians, and scenes show them munching on the 
greenery and lolling in the sun, a favorite activity, while young ones stumble 
and frolic as they leave their mother to explore. 
Plimpton and Train conclude this segment with a discussion on preserving the 
mountain gorilla and the part that tourism plays in making the world aware of 
the nened for conservation. 
The tapes are available from Eco Ventures, 2021 L. Street N.W., Suite 250, 
Washington, D.C. 20036. Call toll-free (800) 862-8900. Price: $29.95, or two 
for $49.95. 
"Costa Rica" (Megaview Productions International), 1988, 34 minutes. This is 
one of the few videos on Costa Rica, and it's remarkably good. For those who 
have been there, for those planning a trip or for those just curious, it's a 
worthwhile addition to a travel video collection. 
Against a montage of quick scenes showing some of the beauty and appeal of this 
Central American country -- lush green forests, rivers, volcanoes, gambling 
casinos and fishing -- the narrator gives viewers a bit of history as well as 
vital statistics on the high literacy rate, climate, number of bird species 
(850), national parks (26), which airlines fly there and an overview of the 
type of its hotels, facilities and restaurants. 
The major part of the video, however, takes viewers on a series of tours that 
cover the most popular tourist attractions. 
These include a tour of the capital, San Jose, showing scenes of the shopping 
district, central market place, national museum, national theater and 
restaurants. Side trips from San Jose include a visit to Sarchi and its ox-cart 
factory, where the colorful native souvenirs, as well as other crafts, are made 
and sold, and a visit to the enchanting Orosi Valley on the tumultuous 
Reventazon River for scenes of an exciting river rafting trip. This is followed 
by a tour to Tiquicia, "Tico" country, to a typical adobe farm-ranch restaurant 
to enjoy scenes of native food and entertainment. 
Irazu volcano, topping 11,000 feet and from which you can see both the 
Caribbean and Pacific Ocean, is another tour destination, as is a visit to the 
rim of the awesome, still-active Poas volcano. At Cartago, at the foot of 
Irazu, viewers also see the Basilica de Los Angeles, where the La Negrita (the 
Black Virgin) statue is enshrined and to whom miracles have been attributed. 
A video highlight is the ride on the jungle train that connects Limon to San 
Jose, passing through coffee and banana plantations and small villages of the 
interior. 
Other tours include a jungle adventure launch ride along the Colorado River and 
canals, with a stop at a lodge in the town of Colorado, and trips to the 
Monteverde Cloud Forest and the Carara Biological Reserve to view some of the 
many examples of the colorful and unusual plants, birds and animals being 
protected in Costa Rica. 
Nature lovers also will be rewarded with film and narration on the leatherback 
turtles seen laying their eggs on the beach. A final stop is at Lake Arenal, 
where fishermen are seen big-game fishing. 
Although the production was filmed in cooperation with the Swiss Travel 
Service, a tour company of Costa Rica, there are no blatant commercial plugs 
and no tie-ins with hotels or other tourist facilities. 
Tapes are available from Megaview Productions, 255 N. El Cielo Road, Suite 155, 
Palm Springs, Calif. 92262, (619) 366-8464. Price: $25. 
