WOMAN IN BARRY'S ARREST TESTIFIES; 
EX-MODEL WHO LURED MAYOR TO HOTEL TALKS TO GRAND JURY 
The one-time model who helped lure Mayor Marion Barry to a Washington hotel and 
allegedly provided him with cocaine in a "sting" operation appeared today 
before a federal grand jury investigating Barry's activities. 
Rasheeda Moore, who reportedly lives in Burbank, Calif., with her husband and 
three children, was brought by police and FBI agents to U.S. District Court for 
secret testimony behind closed doors. 
Moore, who sources said called Barry to the hotel room where he was arrested 
Thursday night, spent about 2 1/2 hours in the grand jury room after entering 
the courthouse under tight security. She said nothing as she entered or left 
the building through the back door. 
Moore, 38, presumably gave the grand jury details about how she invited Barry 
to Room 727 of the downtown Vista International Hotel, allegedly sold him crack 
cocaine and then watched him smoke it. 
"You set me up!" an angry Barry reportedly said to Moore when police and FBI 
agents burst into the hotel room and arrested him. Secret cameras had filmed 
the liaison, the FBI said. 
Her testimony to the grand jury could lead to filing of other criminal charges 
against Barry in addition to the misdemeanor charge that Barry already faces 
for possession of crack, a potent and highly addictive smokeable form of 
cocaine. 
Barry's defense lawyer has said he would plead not guilty to the charge, which 
carries a maximum one-year prison term and a $100,000 fine, and that he will 
demand a jury trial. 
Moore is in the protective custody of the FBI. 
Also today, Barry's press secretary said that he "sounded fine" when she spoke 
to him by telephone at the Hanley-Hazelden drug and alcohol treatment facility 
in West Palm Beach, Fla., that he entered on Monday. 
Spokeswoman Lurma Rackley said she did not know how long Barry would be in the 
drug and alcohol treatment center where she said "he's being treated for 
alcoholism." 
The center normally has a monthlong program for treatment. It has often treated 
celebrities, including Kitty Dukakis, wife of Massachusetts Gov. Michael S. 
Dukakis, for diet pill addiction in 1982. 
