WALL STREET / JOHN CRUDELE: WHY STOCK GURUS AREN'T PUTTING MONEY IN STOCKS 
If actions really speak louder than words, then what Wall Street gurus do with 
their own money is a lot more important than any advice that they might scream 
into clients' ears. 
Last week, I called about a dozen financial advisers, economists and stock 
market professionals and asked them a simple question: How are you investing 
your own money right now? 
One said he didn't have control over his investment portfolios, so the question 
didn't apply. One didn't want to comment because he wasn't practicing what he 
was preaching; he wasn't allowed by his company's rules to follow the advice 
that he was giving clients. Another said he doesn't talk about his own 
investments because he's superstitious. 
But the rest were willing to talk. And if there was a common thread through 
their remarks, it was that they didn't trust the overall stock market now any 
more than the average investor does. 
Those who were investing in stocks were doing so either because they planned to 
hold their shares for a long time or because they thought that they could 
outsmart the market. Here are some of their comments. 
"I am working extremes," said David Leibowitz, a special situations analyst for 
American Securities Corp. "I am buying shorter-term municipal obligations." 
That is Leibowitz's conservative investment. 
But, with as much as 60% of his own money, Leibowitz said he's dabbling in 
special situation stocks -- his specialty. He's buying, for instance, stocks of 
companies whose asset values he believes are not adequately reflected in the 
current price of their stocks. 
All of Leibowitz's investments are in smaller companies. "That's where I am 
finding the greatest value right now. When the market does turn, these stocks 
will give me a greater bang." 
More from Leibowitz in a moment. But first, let's take the emotional pulse of 
the folks who spend their lives giving out advice. 
Nearly 47% of newsletter writers were optimistic about the stock market's 
chances earlier in January. But now, according to Investors Intelligence -- a 
New Rochelle, N.Y., company that conducts weekly surveys -- only 39% of the 
newsletter writers are bullish. 
That survey gets about as close as you can to determining how influential 
market pundits are thinking these days. Yet even with the drop in optimism, the 
newsletter writers are still a lot more upbeat about stocks in their public 
comments than the average investor, who obviously has been frightened away from 
the equities market because of increasing volatility. 
According to the Investment Company Institute in Washington, the assets in 
money market mutual funds have been growing much faster than the assets in 
stock mutual funds since early 1989. And, for the week ended Jan. 18, the money 
market funds recorded their sixth-biggest increase in assets ever. That could 
have been because the Dow Jones industrial average fell 71 points on Jan. 12. 
But my little unscientific survey shows that the Wall Street pros I contacted 
-- when it comes to handling their own money -- are acting a lot like the 
average investor who has been opting for the safe haven of money market 
investments over riskier stocks. The pros are either forsaking the stock market 
altogether or, like Leibowitz, being very particular about the shares they buy. 
Leibowitz said, for instance, that he's also looking carefully for stocks that 
have been trading at low price-earnings ratios and low price-sales ratios. And 
his conservativism also has Leibowitz looking for investments -- such as master 
limited partnerships -- with yields that compare favorably to bonds. 
Others aren't as aggressive with their own money. 
"For the money I have under my own management, I have 80% in cash," said Robert 
Nurock, a well-known market analyst and publisher of the Astute Investor 
newsletter in Paoli, Pa. "The other 20% is exposed to secondary and emerging 
growth stocks." 
Nurock not only thinks that the stock market is in a vulnerable position right 
now, but he's also worried about the economy. The economy's problem, Nurock 
said, revolves around interest rates: They are too high for companies with less 
than an investment-grade credit rating. 
And the weakening economy is making the stock market vulnerable to a 
correction, Nurock said. "Stocks are highly sensitive to disappointing earnings 
or even rumors of disappointing earnings," he added. He thinks that there is a 
risk of "significant declines" in stock prices. 
Edward Nicoski, the market analyst at Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood, a 
Minneapolis-based brokerage firm, feels pretty much as Nurock does. "I have a 
lot of cash. But I have been dabbling in some secondary names," including a few 
health-care stocks, Nicoski said. 
Nicoski, who relies on technical analysis of the market, believes that stock 
prices peaked in the middle of last year, even though blue chip issues 
represented by the Dow were still at record levels Jan. 2. "The Dow is not 
telling the true story," he said. 
Nicoski, also worried about a recession, believes that the stock market could 
go into a slump that would last for months. 
Sung Won Sohn, chief economist of Norwest Corp., is also being very 
conservative these days. He has 70% of his money in the bond market and only 
20% of it in the stock market. The rest is in cash. 
"I'm expecting an economic recession sometime this year," said the 
Minneapolis-based economist. That could lead to a plunge in stock prices, he 
said. 
But once stocks become cheaper -- maybe sometime later this year -- Sohn 
believes that it would be wise to invest in the market again. At that point, 
the mix in Sohn's personal portfolio will change to 55% stocks, 30% bonds and 
15% cash. 
Some pros, of course, can't resist the urge to invest in stocks any more than a 
journalist can resist checking out a fire. But even these pros said they had 
special reasons for sticking with stocks. 
"I'm mostly in equities," said Monte Gordon, research director for Dreyfus 
Corp., the investment company. Only 15% of Gordon's money is in tax-exempt 
bonds. 
Gordon said he can take the ups and downs in stocks. "I'm a long-term buyer. I 
trade very little. When I buy something, I buy for two to three years," he 
said. Gordon added that he doesn't sell a stock because of what the market is 
doing. He sells it based on what that particular company is doing. 
Liam Dalton, a New York-based money manager whose clients include very wealthy 
individuals and celebrities, said he's worried about the stock market and so is 
"trying to be nimble." 
"Until the market calms down, I'm not committing any long-term capital," Dalton 
said. That doesn't mean that he has given up on stocks altogether. In fact, he 
has about 80% of his investment capital in the market and is recommending that 
clients do the same. 
But Dalton is not letting moss grow on any of his stock certificates. He's 
weaving and dodging in and out of the market, content with making profitable 
trades. 
Finally there is David Hale, chief economist at Chicago's Kemper Financial 
Service Inc. He's 100% into stocks. Stocks that will benefit from the changes 
in Eastern Europe. Natural gas stocks. Down-and-out bank stocks. 
"I don't waste time on bonds. Bonds are basically passive," said Hale, the most 
gung-ho of the bunch that I contacted. At age 37, he feels that he's too young 
to be a passive investor. 
The Man Who Doubts Recession Forecasts 
Edward Yardeni, Prudential-Bache Securities economist, starts his speeches 
these days by telling the audience that the United States will never have 
another recession. 
Yardeni admits that it's a way to grab an audience's attention. But he also 
believes his incredibly optimistic forecast. 
Why? Yardeni said we won't have another recession because the country can't 
afford it. The nation's extravagant borrowing habits -- on the government, 
corporate and individual levels -- could quickly turn a minor recession into a 
depression. And so the government will avoid a recession at all costs. 
"If we have a recession, it can turn into something meaner and uglier, also 
known as a depression," Yardeni said. 
Many experts aren't as optimistic as Yardeni on the government's ability to 
steer the economy away from a recession. They would say if a recession is 
coming, the best that the Federal Reserve Board could do is shorten it by 
dramatically reducing interest rates. 
Yardeni, on the other hand, believes that the Fed can -- and must -- avoid a 
recession. 
"There are a lot of bad loans in the economy today," even without the pressure 
of a recession, he said. "If the economy fell into a recession, either by 
accident or policy design, the number of bad loans could increase dramatically. 
"I think the economy will keep growing," he added. "If we do have a recession, 
I would (then) join the worriers who fear that there could be a real estate 
crash, which would hurt people's confidence and cause them to cut back on their 
spending -- which would make the recession worse." 
Were the UAL Rumors Purposefully Planted? 
Was Business Week duped by some wily traders into running a false takeover 
rumor involving UAL Corp.? 
Wall Street speculators and traders have been hurt badly by UAL stock in the 
past six months. So no one was surprised when, on Jan. 19, a seemingly credible 
takeover rumor about the airline company appeared in the conservative business 
magazine. The issue carried a Jan. 29 cover date but was available as early as 
the 18th. 
After all, options on UAL's stock that were expiring that day would be 
worthless unless the stock suddenly reached $165 a share. So it was not so 
surprising that UAL's shares rose $6.75 a share to precisely $165. The value of 
the options was saved. 
Too bad the rumor -- about Marvin Davis making a new $250-a-share offer for UAL 
-- was apparently false. 
Caveat investor. UAL has other options expiring Feb. 16. So watch out for 
rumors around that time. 
Business Week sticks by the story. 
