SISTERLY SHOW OFFERS TASTE OF JAPAN 
When state Sen. John Seymour was mayor of Anaheim from 1978 to 1982, his 
political counterpart in Mito, Japan, gave him the perfect accessory for 
political battle: a full-size replica of samurai armor complete with 
fierce-looking helmet and faceplate. 
The armor, along with dozens of pieces of Japanese art and memorabilia, is on 
public display in the Anaheim Museum's "Mito: Anaheim's Sister City," an 
eclectic mix of upscale souvenirs and bona fide treasures given to members of 
Anaheim's Sister City Committee by Mito delegates since the two cities became 
linked 12 years ago. 
Coordinated by Herbert E. Pruett, museum director, and June Lowry, Anaheim 
Sister City Committee president, the exhibit continues through April 16. 
Located 60 miles northeast of Tokyo, Mito has a lengthy history, to say the 
least: Archeological findings in the area date to the Stone Age. Its rulers 
included members of the Yamato Clan in about AD 500 and the Tokugawa Clan in 
the early 1600s. Mito City was established formally in 1889, suffered heavy 
damages in a World War II air raid in 1945 and today has a population of more 
than 200,000. 
The Anaheim/Mito relationship started to develop in the '70s when a member of 
the Mito City Council had a brother who lived in Anaheim. Correspondence 
between the communities revealed that they were similar in size and that each 
ranked education as a priority. The link became official in December of 1976. 
Among the results of sister cityhood: an annual exchange of delegates that 
Lowry says "let's us get to know each other on a one-to-one basis . . . and 
understand not only each other's culture but why we think and react in 
different ways." 
The opening of "Mito: Anaheim's Sister City" in November dovetailed with the 
arrival of the 1988 delegation from Mito, which included Mayor Kazunobu Sagawa, 
businessman/philanthropist Yuichi Hataya and local citizens. Hataya, chairman 
of Mito's Sister City program, donated $50,000 to the Anaheim Museum in October 
and has pledged an additional $50,000 to be paid over the next 5 years. 
The strong Japanese tradition of gift giving is also shown in the exhibit 
itself -- items range from a luxurious wedding kimono and a delicate hakata 
doll to handmade ceramic plates and ceremonial lanterns. 
The samurai armor is one of the most impressive pieces in the show; it is 
composed of hundreds of tiny, decorated metal plates laid over heavy amber and 
orange brocade. Broad, armored epaulets protect the shoulders. The faceplate 
sports an evil grimace and (in case the wearer is lacking his own) a dark, 
sinister-looking mustache. 
"The samurai is a warrior, similar to the knights of medieval times," Lowry 
explained. "They fight for the shogun, who you might compare to a lord. In 
Mito, you can still see one of the original shogun summer palaces." The armor 
featured in the exhibit, made as a collectible item, is typical of the kind 
worn by samurai during the feudal period, Lorsy said. 
Displayed against a stark black wall in the gallery is the traditional wedding 
kimono, with shimmering red, green and yellow flowers on a quilted, emerald 
satin background. A large hanayome ningyo, or bridal doll, depicts the complete 
nuptial outfit topped off by the white, boxlike tauno kakushi headpiece, which, 
according to Japanese custom, serves as a hiding place for a woman's jealousy 
during the ceremony. 
Dolls enjoy an elevated status in Japan, and those displayed at the Mito show 
constitute something of a primer in Japanese art and culture. They include the 
contemporary clay hakata child-doll (a style designated in 1976 by the Japanese 
government as a national art); several colorful "paddle board" or "flat" dolls, 
commonly carried in parades or celebrations, and a graceful porcelain-faced 
geisha. 
"The geisha is different from what most people think," Lowry said. "She is a 
hostess and entertainer, not . . . a prostitute. A geisha would typically 
entertain at a dinner, dancing or singing or playing musical instruments, but 
that's as far as it goes. It's a great honor to be a geisha and requires years 
of special training." 
Traditional Japanese theater is also represented. A ceremonial kite and a silk 
wall hanging depict costumed Kabuki actors in scenes from traditional noh 
plays, and a couple of chubby-cheeked noh masks smile smugly on a back wall. 
"Only men may become Kabuki," Lowry said. "It's a highly prestigious position, 
and in order to become well-known, you actually have to apprentice to another 
successful actor. An established Kabuki will portray the same characters for 
years, and when he retires he hands down that role to a selected person." 
Other items in the show include a delicate ceremonial tea set, decorative fans, 
miniature samurai helmets, hand-carved wood statuettes and a tiny lacquerware 
reproduction of a gyusha, an ox-drawn cart used during the Heian Period (AD 785 
to 1185) to carry members of the royal family. 
 "Mito: Anaheim's Sister City" continues through April 16 at the Anaheim 
Museum, 241 S. Anaheim Blvd. Hours: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Wednesdays through 
Fridays, noon to 4 p.m. Saturdays and Sundays. Admission is free, but a $1.50 
donation from adults is suggested. Information: (714) 778-3301. 
