MANNING COMPLAINS ABOUT LAG ON HIGH-RISE SPRINKLERS 
The head of the Los Angeles Fire Department, citing a $25-million series of 
fires that roared through a Westwood neighborhood last month, complained 
Thursday that the city has been slow to reduce fire hazards in about 120 older 
high-rise residential buildings. 
In a letter to the City Council, Fire Chief Donald Manning said plans to 
require the installation of sprinklers in high-rises have been discussed for 18 
months, with no resolution. 
"At this point in the process, it would be difficult for me to conceal my 
disappointment," Manning stated in the letter, which was sent to Councilman 
Richard Alatorre, chairman of the Police, Fire and Public Safety Committee. 
The letter, dated Jan. 3, was made public Thursday at a Board of Fire 
Commissioners meeting. 
In the letter, Manning asserted that the most recent version of a proposed 
sprinkler ordinance "contains exemptions . . . that are viewed by this 
department as effectively neutralizing the fire and life safety impact of the 
ordinance." 
Those exemptions would allow building owners to avoid the sprinkler 
requirements if they could show that their building contained a substantial 
amount of asbestos, according to a Fire Department spokesman. 
Asbestos once was commonly used as insulation, but in recent years, tiny 
asbestos particles have been shown to pose health risks. As a result, residents 
of the high-rises have expressed concern that installation of sprinklers in 
asbestos-insulated buildings would cause asbestos fibers to be released into 
the air. 
The Fire Department decision to go public with its complaints drew a quick, 
wounded response from Alatorre's office. 
"We're stunned, shocked and disappointed," said Bonnie Rath, who works on the 
public safety committee for Alatorre. 
She said Alatorre had been working with the Fire Department to resolve the 
matter. 
"At no point did we attempt to undercut them," Rath said. "Releasing this to 
the press undercuts us." 
Since 1974, according to city ordinance, any buildings more than 75 feet high 
must have sprinklers. Owners of older commercial high-rises already have been 
required to retrofit their structures. 
Fire officials said there are still 120 older condominiums, apartment houses 
and hotels not covered by city ordinance. 
Beginning in July, 1988, discussions aimed at writing an ordinance to cover 
these buildings began with the Fire Department, the Department of Building and 
Safety, and Alatorre. 
Rath said the sprinkler ordinance is scheduled to come up for debate Monday. 
One Fire Department source said the department is hopeful it will still be 
successful in modifying the ordinance. 
According to Rath, Alatorre is trying to balance fire safety against the 
dangers of exposing people to asbestos or forcing them to vacate apartments for 
months at a time while sprinklers are installed. But fire officials said the 
asbestos issue has been blown out of proportion, and that sprinklers can be 
installed without forcing people out of their homes. 
Craig Drummond, the department's deputy chief for operations, estimated that 
the 14-story Wilshire Terrace condominium project that caught fire on Dec. 23 
would have suffered only one-tenth of the damage it sustained if sprinklers had 
been installed on each floor. The Wilshire Terrace cooperative the year before 
had discussed the possibility of installing a $1-million sprinkler system, but 
no action was taken. 
The building caught fire around 3:30 a.m., ignited by an explosive blaze at a 
construction project next door. The flames engulfed the entire east side of the 
building, destroying 22 of the apartments. Nearly 150 people were evacuated. 
There were no deaths or serious injuries. 
Federal and local arson experts have conducted what one firefighter 
characterized as a "foot-by-foot" inspection of the construction site and sent 
off pieces of evidence for laboratory analysis. But fire officials said 
Thursday that they still did not know what caused the initial blaze. 
