HONECKER RELEASED FROM MONTHLONG HOUSE ARREST 
Erich Honecker, the deposed Communist leader of East Germany, has been released 
from house arrest, the chief of the national criminal police reported Thursday. 
Honecker, 77 and ailing, had been confined to his home since Dec. 5 while the 
new government investigated charges against him of corruption and abuse of 
power. 
Helmut Nettweg, chief of the criminal police, said Thursday that the decision 
to place Honecker under house arrest "had no legal basis." He said he does not 
know whether Honecker, who was ousted Oct. 18, is still the subject of an 
investigation. 
Meanwhile, Uwe Hempel, a Defense Ministry spokesman, told reporters that the 
period of compulsory military service will be reduced from 18 months to 12. 
Also, he said, military personnel will now be permitted to travel to the West 
like other East German citizens. 
In time, Hempel said, the reduction in military service will mean a sharp 
decline in the armed forces' strength, by 25,000 to 30,000. The East German 
military's present strength is estimated at 120,000 servicemen and women. 
The Defense Ministry announcement came after reports that soldiers were 
striking for better conditions and complaining that they could be better 
employed in industry. 
Also Thursday, six East German opposition groups agreed to form an alliance in 
preparation for national elections scheduled for May. 
The official East German news agency ADN quoted Steffen Reiche, a leader of the 
Social Democratic Party, as saying that his party will enter into a coalition 
with New Forum, the largest of the pro-democracy forces, along with Democracy 
Now, Democratic Awakening, the Initiative for Peace and Human Rights, and the 
United Left. 
The new coalition will be known as Election Alliance 90. The news agency said 
the coalition has no intention of becoming a party and that it will campaign as 
an "interest group." 
As the result of Honecker's being released from house arrest, he will be forced 
to move from his luxurious home in the compound at Wandlitz, which under the 
old regime was reserved for members of the Politburo. The new leadership plans 
to turn the place into a sanitarium for the handicapped. 
Wolfgang Meyer, a government spokesman, told reporters that Honecker "has been 
offered an apartment in Berlin." 
