$20-MILLION LAWSUIT FILED OVER 'LOOK WHO'S TALKING' 
Writer-director Amy Heckerling took her inspiration for her hit movie "Look 
Who's Talking" from a 20-minute student film and other materials supplied her 
four years before "Look Who's Talking" was released last fall, according to a 
$20-million lawsuit filed against her and Tri-Star Pictures Tuesday. 
The suit accuses Tri-Star, which is distributing "Look Who's Talking," of 
conspiring with Heckerling to infringe Jeanne Meyers and Rita Stern's 
copyright. The suit also names Heckerling's associate, actress Twink Caplan. 
Caplan is alleged in the suit to have acted as Heckerling's liaison with them 
during their early contacts. 
The suit, filed in Los Angeles Federal Court, says that Meyers and Stern 
approached Heckerling in late 1985 or early 1986 about adapting a short film 
that Meyers had herself adapted from Damon Knight's short story, "Special 
Delivery," for an American Film Institute project in 1984. Meyers and Stern 
claim in the suit that Heckerling asked to see the film and other story 
materials and that she kept in touch -- through Caplan -- for several months 
before writing them to say she was not interested in pursuing the project. 
A few months later, in January, 1987, Meyers and Stern say in the filing, they 
optioned "Special Delivery" to Tri-Star Pictures with the understanding that 
attempts would be made to develop it as a TV movie. 
"Special Delivery" is described in the suit as a science-fiction story about "a 
married couple who learn that the wife's unborn child has full, adult 
consciousness, a genius intellect, and the extraordinary ability to communicate 
with its parents and others in an audible manner although still in the womb." 
With Heckerling's film, which has taken in $125 million in ticket sales, only 
the audience hears the fetus' thoughts. 
Heckerling, a graduate of AFI, could not be reached Tuesday for comment. 
Caplan, in a statement released through her publicist, said Meyers and Stern 
had sent a tape of "Special Delivery" to them, but it was not in a format they 
could conveniently see. Caplan said that neither she nor Heckerling ever saw 
the short film or a script. 
In an interview with The Times in October, Heckerling said she conceived the 
idea for "Look Who's Talking" shortly after her 4-year-old daughter, Mollie, 
was born. Heckerling said she and her husband, writer-director Neal Israel, 
kept putting thoughts into the baby's mouth while wondering what she was 
thinking. 
In their suit, Meyers and Stern list numerous similarities between their 
material and the film, saying that in both works, the lead character is a 
pregnant Jewish-American career woman with a male fetus who talks to the 
audience in a comedic voice-over. The plaintiffs' story and the film both open 
with the graphic act of fertilization and follow the talking fetus through its 
gestation. Both stories end with the arrival of the baby's sister. 
The suit, which accuses the defendants of copyright infringement, unfair 
competition, theft of trade secrets and breach of contract, was filed by the 
Santa Monica law firm of James P. Tierney. 
Meyers and Stern are seeking compensatory damages of $10 million and punitive 
damages of $10 million. 
