ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
LOOKING FOR A FEW GOOD MESS COOKS 
The weapons were high-speed mixers, Cuisinarts and spatulas. The mission was to 
whip up the most exotic haute cuisine this side of Wolfgang Puck. The 
location:Tustin Marine Corps Air Station. 
A Marine mess hall?The address on the press release wasn't a mistake. On 
Thursday, 42 cooks from Marine bases at Tustin, El Toro and Camp Pendleton were 
applying the crowning touches to culinary creations that would tickle the 
palate of any five-star restaurant regular. 
It was the eighth annual Culinary Arts Exhibition, a competition among Marine 
cooks to prove to themselves and anyone willing to take a bite that the corps 
has enlisted more than a few good cooks. 
It's no secret that military cooking has taken more than its share of criticism 
over the years. And those in the mess hall who plan, prepare and plop those 
hearty -- some say mysterious -- entrees onto hundreds of trays each day are 
more than a little miffed by the lack of respect. 
"Day in and day out, mess cooks don't get the respect they should," complained 
Sgt. Paul Washington, the head baker at El Toro Marine Corps Air Station. "Most 
of the guys who eat in the mess think the only thing we can do is cook chicken 
three different ways or fry a jelly doughnut. C'mon, we're artists. . . ." 
To prove it, Washington was ankle deep in spent tubes of decorative icing which 
he had used on his creation, a "Day in the Park" -- a lavish, white pound cake 
more 3 feet long and 2 feet wide covered with shaved coconut dyed green to look 
like grass. He built a teeter-totter, park bench and drinking fountain using 
edible gum paste. 
The master touch was the pond in Washington's park:a clear Pyrex bowl sunk in 
the cake and filled with water and two goldfish. Even the cake below the bowl 
was dyed blue. 
"Tell me we can't cook," Washington remarked, smiling at the cake, which was 
large enough to serve about 300. 
At the cavernous kitchen at the Tustin base, competing cooks -- some huddled in 
teams and others working alone -- looked as serious as Superbowl combatants. 
Some formed elaborate ice sculptures, including the Statue of Liberty and 
Batman, while others fashioned whales out of watermelons. 
The exhibition was started eight years ago by the Tustin Chamber of Commerce, 
anxious to show its appreciation to the Marines for helping cook pancakes 
during the city's annual Tiller Days celebration. The chamber still pays for 
the trophies, as well as most of the food used in the contest. 
Winning isn't everything, the cooks say. But it has to be mighty important, 
judging by Staff Sgt. Phillip Johnson's entree in the seafood category. Johnson 
and his partner, Cpl. Clarence Green, created an entire tropical island scene. 
The ocean was various shades of blue gelatin dotted with snails, oysters and 
smelt. Cucumbers garnished with green peppers served as palm trees and coconuts 
cut in two were beach huts. Mounds of mashed potatoes formed the mountainous 
backdrop, and Johnson even fashioned cooking pots out of radishes filled with 
dry ice that appeared to be smoking. 
Top-flight food, as military fare goes, is nothing new to the Tustin air 
station. In May, the 42-member mess hall staff was honored as the best in the 
Marine Corps nationwide. 
But as any restaurateur will attest, for every satisfied customer, there's one 
who walks out grumbling. 
"Those cooks can win all kinds of awards, but unless they find a way to keep 
those French fries warm, they won't win many fans on base," one Marine said 
Thursday as he left the mess hall. STEVEN R. CHURMMARINE CUISINEGROCERY LIST 
FOR MARINE CORPS CULINARY CONTESTMEATS AND POULTRY 45 pounds of turkey 13 
pounds of ham 20 Cornish game hens 7 whole chickens 1 rack of lamb 1 pork roast 
1 pig's headSEAFOOD 16 whole crabs 12 lobsters 1 whole sea bass 2 6-pound 
salmons 30 pounds of medium-sized shrimp 15 pounds of jumbo-sized shrimp 5 
dozen clams 3 dozen oysters 2 dozen mussels 1 dozen smelt 1 dozen snails 1 
whole squidSource: The Tustin Marine Corps Air Corps StationBAKED GOODS 150 
pounds of powdered sugar 90 pounds of white cake mix 50 pounds of shortening 15 
dozen eggsOTHER $600 in assorted fruits and vegetables.THE CAKE Recipe for a 
4-foot long, 3-foot-wide pound cake shaped like Batman and Gotham City.The 
cake: 40 pounds of white cake mix 6 dozen eggs Mix and bake at 450 degrees for 
about 40 minutes.The icing: 32 pounds of powdered sugar 12 pounds of 
shortening. Assorted food colors Preparation time for baking and decorating by 
two cooks about 12 to 16 hours.Serves: 400. 
