MISSING SKIER RESCUED AFTER SUB-FREEZING NIGHT IN SNOW 
A skier from Orange who got lost near a San Gabriel Mountains resort was found 
in good condition Sunday after spending the night in a remote, snowy gulch with 
nothing but his clothing and a piece of bark to protect him from sub-freezing 
temperatures, authorities said. 
Steve Ensminger, 23, was "cold and hungry" but otherwise "perfectly OK" when he 
was rescued by a helicopter crew about 10:30 a.m. Sunday, Los Angeles County 
sheriff's deputies said. 
"He's alive, he's in great shape, he's not even hypothermic," said a relieved 
Steve Cramer, manager of the Mountain High ski area near Wrightwood. "He's a 
very lucky man." 
Ensminger became separated from friends while skiing with them Saturday 
afternoon. When he failed to return to the base of the mountain at the end of 
the day, members of the local ski patrol began looking for him and, when they 
were unable to locate him, called in search and rescue teams from the Antelope 
Valley sheriff's station. 
Three helicopters and 34 rescuers from surrounding jurisdictions aided the 
search. But no trace of Ensminger could be found until Sunday morning, when 
rescuers found ski tracks on the back side of the mountain that ended at the 
site of an avalanche. 
At first, rescuers feared that Ensminger might have been swept up in a wave of 
sliding snow. In fact, he had skied through the area before the avalanche 
occurred, and a helicopter crew spotted him about 10:45 a.m. in Bear Gulch, 
about five miles from the ski area, Sheriff's Deputy Bob Nimtz said. 
Rescuers rappelled down the mountain, and Ensminger was airlifted to safety. He 
was examined by paramedics but did not require medical treatment, Nimtz said. 
Ensminger told rescuers that he took a wrong turn on the mountain Saturday 
afternoon and became disoriented, then tried to find a way out and stopped when 
it got dark, Nimtz said. 
"The kid was smart," said Sheriff's Deputy Ronald Thomason from the Antelope 
Valley station. "He dug out a little depression in the snow with a piece of 
tree bark and got under a bush, out of the wind." 
With the wind-chill factor, temperatures in the area dropped to 35 degrees 
below zero Saturday night, Thomason said. 
