DISNEY AND DALI'S 'DESTINO': A TALE OF TWO VISIONARIES 
Of all the strange liaisons produced by Hollywood, the coupling of Salvador 
Dali and Walt Disney was perhaps the strangest. While the brainchild of that 
union was never given the green light, it refuses to die; every two or three 
years, the project is retrieved from oblivion and revived as a possibility. 
To Disney, "Destino" was "just a simple love story -- boy meets girl." But to 
Dali -- who died last week at 84 -- it was "a magical exposition on the problem 
of life in the labyrinth of time," in which limp watches fell from heaven, 
monstrous telephones sprouted legs, sculptures sprang to life and a trickle of 
ants became a swarm of bicycle riders. 
The project was initiated in 1946 when Disney -- who owned the rights to a 
Mexican love ballad by the same title -- commissioned the famed surrealist 
painter to do a story treatment based on his interpretation of the song. 
Planned as a combination of animation, live action and special effects, the end 
product was to have been one segment (about six minutes long) of a "package" 
film along the lines of "The Three Caballeros" or "Make Mine Music," combining 
disparate elements. 
Dali was not the first one assigned to "Destino"; a series of drawings in the 
familiar Disney style were scrapped before he was hired. "The name of the song 
probably appealed more to Salvador Dali than the music," said former studio 
artist John Hench, who assisted him in the preparation of a storyboard. "He had 
a thing for destiny." 
Hench, now senior vice president of Walt Disney Imagineering, remembered Dali 
last week as "a kind of renaissance man," who, unlike his public image, was 
perfectly sane. "Dali said, 'The difference between me and a crazy person is: A 
crazy person dwells in a kind of fantasy -- he's in another room from reality. 
When I walk in that room, I know where I am; I leave the door open. A real 
crazy person can't get out -- the door is locked.' " 
Hench recalled that Dali was given complete freedom at Disney: "Walt came in 
and looked at the work from time to time; he saw the storyboard in progress and 
decided to let Dali go ahead and see what would happen. Walt was kind of 
entranced by the whole thing. They had a rapport right from the beginning that 
was unusual. They got along remarkably, without much conversation -- there was 
a sympathy there." 
In addition to working on the storyboard, Hench had the task of, as he said, 
"trying to keep the project in some kind of shape we could handle. Dali would 
usually do a key position and then I'd fill in the in-betweens, trying to segue 
from one area to another. He had a concept he was going to stick to in a broad 
sense, but he shared a lot with Walt in his inventive ability. Walt always came 
in with a lot more situations than perhaps a story could hold and Dali was a 
great deal the same way. Every morning he had new ideas. I'm sure we could 
never have fit all of them in the original time allotted." 
The plot, as complicated as it became, could not accommodate the fruit of 
Dali's unfettered imagination. "He was so prolific with ideas I don't think 
even Luis Bunuel could use them all," said Hench. "We'd go see some really 
mediocre Western at this little theater in Monterey. Dali would be absolutely 
entranced, and then afterward he'd tell me what the picture meant; he'd redo 
the story. The inevitable stampede of the bulls would be somebody's libido, the 
short little man would be the alter ego of the protagonist . . . he built 
fabulous stories out of these really banal pictures." 
 -- -- 
"Destino" borrowed liberally from the proliferation of images seen in Dali's 
canvases. The heroine of the piece, a young girl drawn to resemble the shadow 
of a bell in a church tower, was lifted from a painting he had done a decade 
earlier, "Suburbs of the Paranoiac-Critical Town." The idea of the sculpture 
coming to life was originally conceived for Ingrid Bergman while he was 
designing the dream scenes for Hitchcock's "Spellbound"; it was vetoed by the 
actress, whom Dali wanted to cover with ants. One new idea for the Disney 
scenario involved a group of baseball players, whose actions were choreographed 
to resemble a ballet. 
Dali traveled to the studio every day for a period of two months, later going 
to Monterey to finish the art work. "He came in the morning just like a regular 
worker," Hench said. "He didn't punch a clock, of course, but I don't think 
he'd have minded punching in. He liked ritual." Dali was paid a substantial 
sum, though Disney never revealed how much. 
 -- -- 
At one point in their labors, Dali and Hench decided that Disney deserved to 
see what they were up to, and made a 15-second test on color film -- the sole 
realization of the project beyond the storyboard stage. The sequence -- which 
was screened at the County Museum of Art a few years ago -- showed two 
grotesquely distorted faces mounted on the backs of turtles, moving toward each 
other on a bleak landscape; as they came together, the space between the 
profiles took on the shape of a ballerina. Her head was a baseball on the 
horizon. 
"Destino" was abandoned through no fault of Dali's, simply a change of mind on 
the part of his employer. "Walt thought the market for package films was gone," 
said Hench. "He was an enormously intuitive man; he could look into the future 
and project a trend. He understood the package concept as communicating a 
certain kind of thing and he figured the public needed something else." 
Dali, who often said his own destiny was "to save painting from the nihilism of 
modern art," enjoyed little success in his ventures into film. "L 'Age d'Or," 
on which he collaborated with Bunuel, was received with stink-bombs when it 
opened. The dream sequences for "Spellbound" were severely cut; "The Marx 
Brothers on Horseback Salad," a scenario that grew out of a friendship with 
Harpo Marx, was never realized. 
Dali and Disney remained friends over the years. On a subsequent trip to 
Hollywood, Dali rode the producer's miniature train but was frightened by its 
realistic precision. Disney visited the painter many times at his home in Port 
Lligat on the Spanish Costa Brava, once with a proposal to team up on an 
animated "Don Quixote." It never reached the drawing board. They also discussed 
"El Cid," for which Dali developed a story concept, but nothing came of it. 
A few years after "Destino" was laid to rest, the storyboard sketches 
disappeared in a theft. "The whole portfolio was stolen. I don't know how many 
hands it passed through, but whoever stole them was discriminating -- he kept 
the best ones," said Hench. Eventually they were purchased by an art dealer in 
New York, who tried to get Dali to autograph them. The dealer could not 
distinguish between Dali's work and Hench's, and many of the latter's sketches 
were authenticated as the work of the master. The material that remained was 
returned to the studio, but many of the treasures -- including the art for the 
film test -- were never seen again. 
 -- -- 
The art that survived the theft is preserved today in the studio archives. A 
number of paintings, including a portrait of Jupiter that hung in Disney's 
office until his death, are now in storage. The works have never been 
appraised. 
Ten years ago, studio publicist Bob Moore decided it would be nice to revive 
"Destino" and brought the idea to a marketing meeting; the project was casually 
discussed and tabled once more. But the idea is still resuscitated every few 
years, and may eventually see the light of day -- possibly as a segment in a 
new version of "Fantasia" being contemplated by Roy Disney. 
"The film is so short it would have to be incorporated with something else, and 
nobody can make the decision as to what to package it with," said Moore, now 
retired. "Destino" could be reactivated at some point in the future, he added, 
"but the film was so far ahead of its time in 1946 I don't think people would 
have understood it then, and I don't know that they would understand it now." 
