WARNINGS TO SCANDINAVIAN LINE TAKEN SERIOUSLY; 
BOMB THREATS SPARK AIR SECURITY ALERT 
Three bomb threats -- at least one apparently linked to Stockholm's role in the 
opening of a U.S.-PLO dialogue -- prompted Scandinavian Airlines System to 
mount one of its tightest security operations ever on Monday, disrupting the 
airline's flights worldwide. 
An English-speaking caller telephoned the airline and said an internal flight 
from Gothenburg in western Sweden would be sabotaged on Monday morning, the 
airline reported. 
It was the third threat SAS has made public. 
Although there were delays on all SAS flights Monday because of security 
checks, no signs of sabotage were found. 
"But we are taking all the threats seriously, and security is stringent at all 
our airports," airline spokesman John Herbert said. 
On Saturday, the airline said it had received a letter saying an SAS plane on a 
domestic route would be attacked because of Sweden's mediating role that led to 
the United States opening direct talks with the Palestine Liberation 
Organization. 
That threat was followed by a tip-off from Interpol, the international police 
organization, that an unidentified group may be planning to attack one of its 
planes, causing SAS to alert its staff around the world. 
Herbert said Swedish secret police had not been able to specify who had made 
the threat, which came from Budapest. 
Herbert said there was no information suggesting that either threat was linked 
to last month's crash of a Pan Am Boeing 747 in Scotland that killed all 259 on 
board and at least 11 people on the ground. 
He said the extra security had already caused severe delays and would mean 
extra costs for the airline, in which the governments of Sweden, Norway and 
Denmark share a 50% stake. 
As a result of security measures following the threats, some charter flights 
have been delayed by up to 13 hours. Scheduled flights have suffered much 
shorter delays. 
Swedish newspapers speculated that an Iranian fundamentalist group was planning 
an attack as revenge for Sweden's recent involvement in the negotiations with 
the PLO. 
Herbert said he had no such information. 
"Right now we have no idea who is behind this. But Interpol has advised us to 
consider the latest threat seriously," he added. 
Sweden in early December arranged a meeting between PLO leader Yasser Arafat 
and a group of prominent American Jews, and soon afterward the PLO made clear 
its implicit recognition of Israel and renunciation of terrorism. 
Sweden was instrumental in coaxing Arafat to clarify the PLO stand at a news 
conference in Geneva, a move that persuaded Washington to open talks for the 
first time in 13 years. 
A spokesman for the West German state attorney's office in Frankfurt, where Pan 
Am flight 103 originated with a smaller plane Dec. 21, said Monday that 
investigators have found that freight, including four bags of U.S. military 
mail, was loaded on the plane without security checks. 
The spokesman said the freight was loaded on the Pan Am 727 that flew the first 
leg of Flight 103 from Frankfurt and transferred to the ill-fated Boeing 747 in 
London, again without a security check. 
He added, however, that the mail bags were "constantly guarded by U.S. military 
personnel." 
The West German weekly Bunte said Monday that a document box from Manufacturers 
Hanover Trust also was loaded in Frankfurt and transferred in London without 
being checked. 
The German spokesman said investigators are still examining the possibility 
that a bomb was loaded on Flight 103 in Frankfurt but so far have found "no hot 
trail." 
Two months ago, police discovered an arms cache of the Popular Front for the 
Liberation of Palestine-General Command in Frankfurt that included the 
Czech-made plastic explosive Semtex and an altitude detonator. Semtex or a 
plastic explosive like it is suspected of causing the Pan Am crash. 
