RAVELING APOLOGIZES AFTER A SORRY GAME; 
LOSS TO ARIZONA STATE IS SIXTH IN ROW FOR USC, STILL WINLESS IN PAC-10 
George Raveling, USC's basketball coach, issued an apology after the Trojans 
played poorly in a 67-62 loss to Arizona State Saturday at the Sports Arena. 
"The only thing I can think to say to you (the media) is I'm sorry you had to 
sit through it," Raveling said. "Your employers ought to give you 
hazardous-duty pay. It was that kind of day." 
Although the Trojans are the only winless team in the Pacific 10, having lost 
their first six conference games, Raveling isn't discouraged. 
"They might let me go at the end of the season, but I sure as hell ain't going 
to worry about it," Raveling said. "I'm going to coach to the best of my 
abilities, and whatever happens happens. 
"Let me tell you, I'm 51 years old and there's a lot of damn things Raveling 
can do well in life besides coach basketball. Why should I worry about it? And 
I think I can do a better job because I'm not feeling insecure. 
"I'm smart enough to know that there are people who are upset. But the worst 
thing I can do is to get into a mind-set where I'm running scared. Then that 
gets into the kids." 
Raveling signed a 5-year contract 3 years ago. Although his record at USC is 
23-50 and he has had two last-place Pac-10 finishes, he said he has not felt 
pressure from school officials. 
"I don't know what more I could ask from (Athletic Director Mike) McGee and 
(President James) Zumberge, except an on-campus facility. They've been 
supportive," he said. 
Arizona State Coach Steve Patterson understands what Raveling is going through. 
"I'm sorry for George," Patterson said. "I know his team is struggling right 
now. Yet, we're a struggling team, too." 
USC is 7-10 overall and 0-6 in the Pac-10, and Arizona State is 8-8 and 3-5. 
After being humiliated in a 28-point loss to No. 9 Arizona Thursday night, USC 
had a shot against injury-plagued Arizona State. After losing guard Tarence 
Wheeler to a knee injury two weeks ago, the Sun Devils had only nine healthy 
players. 
But that was all they needed to beat USC, which was plagued by mental mistakes. 
The Trojans were beaten on the same play three times, giving up easy layups on 
length-of-the-court passes to Arizona State guard Matt Anderson. 
"It's the first time we've used the play this year," said Anderson, who had a 
team-high 17 points off the bench. "USC was pressuring us on the inbounds pass, 
and it was the logical thing to do." 
The Trojans didn't do the logical thing very often down the stretch. 
After USC forward Chris Moore, who had a team-high 15 points, hit a short 
jumper to tie it at 60-60, the Trojans, who had 18 turnovers, played giveaway. 
Sophomore point guard Duane Cooper, walking the ball up the court against no 
pressure, was called for a 10-second violation, costing USC a chance to go 
ahead. 
Although Arizona State failed to capitalize on Cooper's mistake, the Trojans 
gave it away again on their next possession. 
USC forward Calvin Banks threw away a pass intended for Cooper, and Arizona 
State guard Ron Waller intercepted it and was fouled by Banks as he drove for a 
layup. Waller sank a free throw to give the Sun Devils a 61-60 lead with 1:17 
remaining. 
"Down the stretch, the last 6 or 7 minutes, we made some inexcusable mistakes," 
Raveling said. "They weren't mistakes of commission, but of omission. When 
you're told what to do, I don't know what else I can tell them." 
The Trojans went ahead again when Alan Pollard sank a layup with 57 seconds 
remaining for a 62-61 lead. 
But center Mark Becker put Arizona State ahead to stay when he tipped in a 
missed shot by teammate Alex Austin with 44 seconds left. 
After Moore missed a layup, Sun Devil forward Trent Edwards sank two free 
throws with 25 seconds remaining after being fouled by Pollard. 
Trailing, 65-62, the Trojans called back-to-back timeouts to set up a play, but 
Andy Olivarez missed a three-point shot with 16 seconds left. 
Trojan Notes 
After scoring just 4 points in Thursday night's 97-69 loss to Arizona, USC 
guard Anthony Pendleton failed to score against Arizona State. Pendleton, the 
Trojans' leading scorer this season, took just two shots in 14 minutes. . . . 
USC shot 43.3% from the field, hitting 24 of 60 shots, and shot 52% at the free 
throw line, making 13 of 25. . . . USC plays at Washington next Thursday. 
