FOOD BRIEFS: A FRANK NEW MEDIUM FOR ADS 
There has been a revolutionary breakthrough in the frankfurter world, according 
to a meat industry publication. A Chicago-based firm has announced that it has 
developed frankfurter casings that can carry messages, logos or labeling 
claims. Now link lovers can enjoy advertising or promotion, as well as mustard, 
on their frankfurters. 
Late last month, Viskase Corp. made available the versatile enclosures to meat 
processors after receiving the required federal approval, Lean Trimmings 
reports. The newsletter, published by the Western States Meat Assn., stated 
that only the length of the frankfurter limits the messages or words that can 
be printed on the tubes. 
Advertising-weary consumers can imagine that food companies will rush to get 
their brand names emblazoned on the franks. But there is also tremendous 
marketing potential for restaurants, street vendors and sports teams, the 
newsletter stated. Self-promoters can even order personalized frankfurters: a 
natural for the various hotel, airline and casino outposts of the Donald Trump 
empire, for instance. 
A Viskase official said that "the (frankfurter) itself can be used as a 
communications medium. For the first time, selling messages can be communicated 
to the consumer outside the package -- on the grill, on the plate and in the 
bun." 
The casings are being marketed to meat companies as E-Z Mark Nojax, a cellulose 
enclosure that will transfer any message to the link, according to the trade 
journal. 
The newsletter speculates that manufacturers may specifically target children 
with the messages in order to "establish brand preference early" in life. 
Attention McDonald's -- Next Tuesday the Campbell Soup Co. will celebrate the 
biggest milestone in its history: production of the 20 billionth can of tomato 
soup. To mark the occasion, the firm plans a soup-sipping celebration in 
Minneapolis, which leads the nation in soup consumption. 
The first can of the distinctive red and white labeled tomato soup was sold in 
1897, long before the late Andy Warhol recognized the unique design in his 
famous painting. 
Campbell, in complimenting its own achievement, said that the product's success 
was due to its "special brand of comfort and warmth." 
Getting Fat Out -- The California Milk Advisory Board hopes to be as lucky with 
its new product as Campbell was with tomato soup. The trade group will 
introduce "Extra Light" milk Monday in supermarkets throughout the state. 
The dairy product is meant to appeal to the health-conscious with its 1% milk 
fat content. The formulation contains 50% less fat than what is now called 
low-fat milk. However, nonfat milk, at 0.1% fat, remains the leanest dairy 
beverage available. 
Extra Light is being marketed by the board as the "milk of the 1990s." The 
South San Francisco-based group says it is the first new formulation of milk in 
25 years. 
The development follows by about one year a recommendation from the California 
Medical Assn. that the state force dairies to reduce fat levels in milk as a 
means of reducing saturated fat levels in the diet. The group proposed that 
low-fat milk contain only 1% fat and that whole milk be reduced to 2% milk fat 
from its current 3.5% level. 
Quick Cooking's Future -- As many as 75% of the nation's households are 
equipped with microwave ovens and the food industry is spending more on 
research to specially design products for the process, according to an industry 
trade group. 
The Institute of Food Technologists estimates that computers will be 
incorporated into microwaves, allowing the ovens to be programmed with 
extensive cookbook-type information. 
For instance, such a feature would automatically set the oven to the 
appropriate power levels and cooking times for a particular food. One such 
computerized cookbook would be able to determine a product's weight and the 
amount of moisture in the food and cook accordingly. 
The combination microwave-convection oven will also become more commonplace, 
according to the Chicago-based institute. These appliances offer the best of 
both worlds in being able to cook foods rapidly and crisp or brown the exterior 
as well. 
Manufacturers are also in the process of redesigning product labels 
specifically for the microwave. Even those items that prove difficult to 
microwave -- such as meat with internal bones -- will carry directions for 
proper preparation and heating. 
Oddly enough, while speed is certainly the primary convenience of the 
microwave, it still requires almost as much energy to prepare a single meal in 
these fast cookers as it does to prepare a similar meal on the stove, according 
to the group. 
One example of industry efforts to make microwave labeling more user friendly 
is a recent project by the Glass Packaging Institute. The Washington-based 
group announced in 1989 that it has created a new symbol indicating those 
products packed in glass that are microwaveable as they are. 
The design resembles a jar being penetrated in its center by a microwave. The 
impetus for the new logo was the success of Kraft's Cheez Whiz in a 
microwaveable glass. The institute's polling also indicated that glass is the 
preferred cooking vessel material for the microwave. 
Eating Green -- Federal researchers have found that diets high in green 
vegetables may lower an individual's risk of cancer. The association is 
particularly true of the dark green varieties such as kale and spinach, a 
report from the U.S. Department of Agriculture stated. 
The agency's Agricultural Research Center in Beltsville, Md., discovered the 
link during work on determining which foods should be incorporated into cancer 
prevention studies. 
"The greener the vegetable is, the higher its level of chlorophyll, which also 
means higher levels of carotenoids," said Frederick Khachik, a USDA researcher. 
People with elevated blood levels of carotenoids -- such as beta carotene -- 
have been found to have lower rates of cancer than the general population. 
The survey analyzed the carotenoid levels in six vegetables common to the 
United States and another nine found in the Cook Islands of the South Pacific. 
The results showed that kale grown in this country had the highest 
concentrations of carotenoids, or more than twice the levels found in Chinese 
cabbage from the Cook Islands or domestic spinach. Two other U.S. produced 
items -- broccoli and green beans -- were also found to have the beneficial 
compounds but not in amounts as high as kale. 
Researchers also reported that most carotenoids found in food are heat stable 
and not reduced in the various cooking processes. 
"Numerous studies have demonstrated that a high concentration of some of these 
carotenoids in human (blood) are correlated with lower incidence of certain 
forms of cancer and therefore may be beneficial in prevention of cancer," the 
USDA report stated. 
The researchers' recommendation: "Eat your greens." 
