EMPIRE LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
TITUS HELPS LOARA BEAT LOS ALAMITOS, KEEP HOPES ALIVE 
Loara High School made it look pretty easy for the first quarter Thursday night 
against Los Alamitos. But the Saxons made it look awfully tough the rest of the 
way before finally keeping at least their statistical shot at an Empire League 
girls' basketball title alive with a 59-51 victory at home. 
Loara is 9-10 overall and 2-3 in league play. Los Alamitos drops to 4-13, 0-5. 
The two teams, currently in the bottom half of the league standings, feature 
the county's top young centers in Loara junior Traci Titus and Los Alamitos 
sophomore Allison Arredondo. 
Titus used her quickness and experience to get the better of their match-up 
Thursday. She was seven of 12 shooting for 15 points and had eight rebounds and 
four blocked shots. 
It was Titus' quickness on defense and her more-experienced supporting cast 
that helped turn the game in Loara's favor. Los Alamitos starts no seniors. 
Titus continually picked off or deflected post passes to Arredondo to finish 
with eight steals. She limited Arredondo to three first-half points, but 
Arredondo is not the county's second leading scorer (at 25 points per game) for 
nothing. 
She used her own exceptional mobility and agility to score 19 second-half 
points and finish with 23. Many of her points came when Titus was out of the 
lineup with foul trouble or for a rest. But Titus was able to score over 
Arredondo. 
"She was tough," Arredondo said of Titus. "When you play somebody as good as 
you are or better than you, you're going to get better. I'm not deathly afraid 
of anybody. I accept the challenge and I want the challenge because I know I'll 
get better." 
Loara opened up a 15-0 lead, holding Los Alamitos scoreless for the first 10 
minutes before Cindy Yamasaki hit one of her four three-pointers. 
Loara led by as much as 20-3 late in the second quarter, and the game began to 
look like a blowout until Los Alamitos went on a 12-1 run to trail 21-15 at the 
half. 
"We make games close," Loara Coach Gary Blate said. "We turned over the ball 
too many times and the three-point shot, that will get you back in a game." 
Los Alamitos' Yamasaki sisters, Cindy and Tritia, accounted for seven of the 12 
points in the run. Cindy Yamasaki's three-pointer with about four minutes to 
play in the third quarter cut the lead to 25-21, but that was as close as Los 
Alamitos would get. 
Jennifer Leonard got hot from outside for the Saxons, along with Kristen 
Thibodeau, who scored 13 second-half points. 
"We played a great second half, but we are a young, inexperienced team and 
things like this will happen," Los Alamitos Coach Al Gragnano said. 
One bright spot for Los Alamitos was freshman Cindy Yamasaki. In her second 
game back after fracturing her wrist in late December, she had 18 points. 
In other Empire League games: 
Esperanza 50, Katella 31 -- Jennifer Harney, Kim Kordik and Andrea Warmus 
combined for 44 points to lead Esperanza (14-3, 5-0) at Esperanza. Harney had 
17, including three three-pointers, and Kordik had 16 with 12 rebounds. Warmus 
added 11 points, 10 coming in the final quarter when Esperanza outscored 
Katella, 22-6, to break open a close game. Karen Jensen had 14 points for 
Katella, which trailed, 28-25, at the end of three quarters. 
Cypress 66, El Dorado 54 -- Stacie Kosaka had 23 points and Sheryl Murakoshi 22 
to lead Cypress (11-8, 4-1) in a game at El Dorado. Frances Oda had seven 
assists and six steals for Cypress. 
