NOT SO FAST, SACRAMENTO 
The unanimous decision of the California Court of Appeal on indigent 
health-care funding is a victory for responsible government as well as for the 
poor. 
State legislators, driven by budget pressures, removed thousands of medically 
indigent adults from the rolls of Medi-Cal in 1982 and dumped their medical 
problems on the already-strapped county health departments of the state. Now 
the court has ordered rectification of that unjust action and correction of the 
financial disruption it caused. 
The Court of Appeal found that the Legislature had violated the Gann 
constitutional spending limit, which requires that the state fully fund any 
mandate or program shifted to other government entities. That provision of the 
Gann initiative was essential in guarding against just this sort of maneuver to 
evade the budget limits. 
It is calculated that the state was paying about $1 billion to provide health 
services to the affected indigent population through Medi-Cal. Instead of 
continuing that level of funding when the responsibility was forced on the 
counties, the state provided only $520 million the first year, an amount that 
has dwindled in subsequent years even as the case loads have risen. 
"The state will be obligated to rectify this tremendous under-funding of 
medical care for literally hundreds of thousands of people in California," Lois 
Salisbury said. She is an attorney with Public Advocates Inc., of San 
Francisco, which participated in the case. 
For Los Angeles County, the county most impacted by poverty in the state, this 
could bring $150 million to $200 million annually in additional state funding, 
according to Robert Gates, head of the county Department of Health Services. 
But all counties will benefit. 
"This is a decision that has tremendous fiscal ramifications for the state," 
Asher Rubin, the deputy state attorney general who defended the state in the 
litigation, commented. Yes, indeed. But a correction is long overdue. 
The finding confirms what critics long have been saying: that the state 
government is under-funded. Nothing illustrates better the folly of inadequate 
funding of public services than medical programs for the indigent. The denial 
and reduction of services that resulted from the funding cuts made over the 
last eight years produced no real savings. On the contrary, the denial of 
primary care and prevention programs only serves to postpone appropriate 
services until costly interventions are required. 
