AMNESTY SEEKERS RELIEVED TO FIND TEST EASIER THAN EXPECTED 
Blanca Quintero has lived nervously in this country for 15 years. 
Afraid that she was "not smart enough" to become a legal resident, the Mexican 
native avoided the government for years and lived quietly and anonymously with 
her two children. 
Quintero, who has worked as a housekeeper for five years for John Gavin, former 
U.S. ambassador to Mexico, said, "I was afraid to go out because I thought the 
police were going to get me and send me back to Mexico." 
But Wednesday, Quintero said she was "set free" -- and it was much easier than 
she expected. 
She was one of 15 amnesty applicants to earn permanent residency by passing a 
15-question exam, administered by the Immigration and Naturalization Service at 
its Wilshire Boulevard office for phase two of its amnesty program. 
More than 800,000 immigrants applied for amnesty in the Los Angeles area under 
the first phase of the program from May, 1987, to May, 1988. In the second 
phase, these applicants must demonstrate a knowledge of English, civics and 
U.S. history in order to obtain permanent residency status. 
INS officials said they expect 300,000 of the applicants to follow Quintero's 
lead by taking the multiple-choice exam at one of the 16 INS offices throughout 
the area. 
Others may choose to prove their English proficiency by taking INS-approved 
classes at one of 300 schools in the area and thus would not have to take the 
test. Applicants younger than 16, or 65 years and older, are exempt, officials 
said. 
Harold Ezell, INS Western regional commissioner, said his staff is negotiating 
with religious and community groups in hopes that they will become licensed to 
administer the test. 
"It is going to be tough to find enough space for everyone to take the test, so 
we are hoping to get Catholic charities, local schools and other groups 
involved to help out," Ezell said. 
Appointment Needed 
To take the test, immigrants must fill out an appointment card, available at 
all INS offices, and the agency will notify applicants of the time and date of 
their exam through the mail. Applicants have 18 months from the time of earning 
their temporary residency card to complete the second phase of the program. 
The test, to be given on Thursday nights starting Jan. 19, will be administered 
by videotape to groups of immigrants. Applicants must sign a statement at the 
top of the test that says they have studied at least 40 hours of English and 
U.S. history, and then they have to answer nine of the 15 questions correctly 
to pass. 
"If they fail the test the first time, they can take it as many times as they 
need to pass, free of charge," Ezell said. 
Most Pass It 
But if the applicants who took the test Wednesday are any indication, passing 
is not going to be a problem. Fifteen of the 16 test takers passed -- five with 
perfect scores. 
"It was so easy," said Quintero, who has taken night classes for the last year. 
"They asked questions that you hear every day, like, 'Who was the first 
President of the United States?' and 'Who can declare war in this country?' " 
Maria Lafarga and her husband, who both got perfect scores on the test, agreed. 
"I can't believe how easy it was. I was so nervous when I came in here," said 
Lafarga, who hopes to work as a supermarket cashier. "I feel like a new 
person." 
WHERE TO TAKE TEST 
These are the centers in Los Angeles County where amnesty applicants can take 
the written exam. Applicants need an appointment before taking the test. 
300 N. Los Angeles St., Los Angeles 
1671 Wilshire Blvd., Los Angeles 
1241 S. Soto St., Los Angeles 
16921 Parthenia St., Sepulveda 
11307 Vanowen St., North Hollywood 
6022 Santa Fe Ave., Huntington Park 
9660 Flair Drive, El Monte 
960 E. Holt Blvd., Pomona 
555 W. Redondo Beach Blvd., Gardena 
9858 Artesia Blvd., Bellflower 
For more information call the immigration service hot line: 1-800-448-4994. 
