STEP BY STEP; 
REMARRIAGES ARE CREATING COMPLEX FAMILIES WITH PROBLEMS 'THE BRADY BUNCH' NEVER 
FACED 
It was Brandy Van Zitter's elementary school graduation, a seemingly 
commonplace family celebration. Since she became part of a stepfamily, however, 
it took 2 1/2 years of putting hurt feelings aside and learning to cooperate 
before getting two biological parents, two stepparents, and a variety of aunts, 
uncles and cousins in the same room at the same time. 
The turning point wasn't lost on the youngster. 
"It used to be lonely, having parties without one of my parents. Graduation 
made me feel good, because my parents could be on good terms, not like before, 
when they used to argue a lot," said Brandy, 12. With sister Kelly, 10, she 
shuttles between the Corona home of her mother and stepfather, Louise and Roy 
Van Broekhuizen, and the Cerritos residence of her father and stepmother, Peter 
and Ceci Van Zitter. 
Like growing numbers of American youngsters, Brandy and Kelly are navigating 
stepfamily life. Some experts believe as many as one-third of all children born 
in the 1980s may live with a stepparent before reaching age 18. 
But determining just how many of today's children are stepchildren is 
problematic because there are no statistics on "unofficial" stepfamilies, where 
a child's biological parent lives with a new partner without marriage. However, 
surveying married couples, demographer Paul C. Glick of Arizona State 
University found that 8.78 million children under age 18, or nearly 1-in-5, 
live in stepfamilies. 
Once, social scientists believed these remarried families resembled nuclear 
families. However, as researchers and clinicians shed light on today's 
stepfamilies, what emerges is a highly complex family forum, with members 
sometimes struggling for years to forge relationships and negotiate between 
households. 
"I was surprised at how long it takes (stepfamilies) to work things out. In 
most stepfamilies, there are enduring differences in parent-child relationships 
and how children relate to stepparents," says James H. Bray, associate 
professor at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, who for nearly seven years 
has conducted a longitudinal stepfamily study. 
Although many describe being part of a stepfamily as a rewarding experience, 
most agree it rarely resembles "The Brady Bunch." 
Consider the obstacles. In first marriages, adults have time to gradually come 
to know each other, resolve differences, prepare for the birth of each child, 
and develop family routines and philosophies. 
In contrast, "in a remarriage with children, you are bringing two cultures 
together," says clinical psychologist Patricia Papernow, a stepfamily 
specialist in Cambridge, Mass. "All of a sudden you are slammed together. 
Everything is up for grabs, from how you celebrate Christmas to the size of the 
kids' allowances, how much television viewing is appropriate and whether it's 
OK to leave wet towels on the bathroom floor. 
"These seemingly small details are the threads holding our daily lives 
together, and it feels as though our lives are unraveling." 
Mental health professionals believe many of these difficulties are avoidable. 
Through increased education, therapists and researchers maintain, stepfamily 
relationships can improve greatly. 
Here are seven problem areas stepfamilies may wish to be aware of, which 
emerged from interviews with experts and stepfamilies nationwide: 
One big happy family: Whether through divorce or death, therapists note, 
stepfamilies are born out of loss. Adults dream of blissful marital happiness, 
a magical "blending" of two families, with members instantly loving one 
another. Children, on the other hand, fantasize about reuniting biological 
parents or returning to the days of sharing a close relationship with a single 
parent. 
Rather than forcing constant togetherness, experts report, many of the most 
successful stepfamilies preserve individuality. 
"If you find a family that's 'blended,' someone got creamed," says psychologist 
Papernow, who thinks family members need time apart, even if the breaks are 
small. Couples should spend some time away from children; biological parents 
need one-to-one time with each child; stepparents need individual time with 
each stepchild; and stepsiblings need activities without parental involvement. 
Shaping up the kids: A prevalent myth, therapists agree, is that the new couple 
should provide a united front and act as instant parents to each other's 
children. Actually, this may be the worst approach, because "it takes many 
children a long time to accept stepparents as active parents," said Bray of the 
Baylor College of Medicine. 
"My research indicates the most important thing stepparents can do, from the 
beginning, is function like an aunt or baby-sitter. Discipline should be left 
to the biological parent," said Bray. 
In this stage, Papernow advises, Mom or Dad should sit down with the kids and 
explain, "You know my rules, and when I am not here, it is up to your 
stepdad/mom to see that you follow my rules." 
If a child balks at a stepparent and claims, "You aren't my (biological) dad, I 
don't have to listen to you," the stepparent should reply, "You are absolutely 
right, I am not your parent. But I am the adult in the house and you do have to 
follow house rules." 
In a few years, Bray said, once the relationship is developed, the stepparent 
can become more involved in active parenting and discipline. 
Stepmothers: Cinderella aside, most stepmothers want to be good moms. However, 
"it is difficult for men to understand that women don't naturally take to this 
role," said Los Angeles marriage and family therapist Carol Samuels, who with 
husband Gary Hinte is co-president of the Los Angeles chapter of the Stepfamily 
Assn. of America. 
In our culture, experts note, stepmothers are expected to play a major role in 
raising someone else's children, a difficult task. 
"Your (biological) children can be misbehaving in the identical fashion, but 
it's far more annoying when your stepkids do it," says Judy McMahon of Anaheim, 
mother of Scott, 17, and Melanie, 14, and stepmother to husband Larry's 
children, Bridget, 10, and Brianne, 7. 
Commonly, men expect new wives to assume all the work of caring for children. 
For many women, research indicates, this is a major source of marital 
dissatisfaction, leading to divorce. 
"The stepmother feels he married her to (make her) a slave," Samuels says. 
Since no one can be forced to love another, experts point out, stepmothers 
shouldn't be pressured to show affection for children. In addition, "if neither 
child nor the stepmother wants to be close, that is OK," as long as children 
and adults are able to be civil and cooperative, Papernow says. 
The marriage: Faced with financial difficulties of expanding a family, warfare 
between two sets of children, and scheduling of school conferences, soccer 
games, and Brownie meetings, most newlyweds report constant stress. 
"When we got married, we said we would never let the sun set on our anger," 
said Ginger Davis of Silver Springs, Md., who has been part of a stepfamily 
involving five children for 13 years. "We gave that up after about two months 
of staying up all night talking things out. 
"Our relationship took major bumps and setbacks each time one of the kids came 
to live with us," Samuels said of her two stepchildren, now grown. "My stepson 
is a very good kid, but when he moved in, the demands he put on his father's 
time started killing our relationship. There was always some pressing topic. I 
remember waking up at 6 a.m., listening to them having a long conversation 
about computers, in our bedroom." 
Although the tendency is to devote all time and attention to children, Bray's 
study indicates one of the most important things couples can do is take time to 
form a close marital bond. 
"Without a solid marital relationship, it is much harder to agree about kids," 
he says. 
Couples need time alone, "even if all they have time for is sharing a pizza in 
front of 'L.A. Law,' " Papernow says. 
When their children were younger, Samuels and husband Gary Hinte needed more 
time off for a real vacation. "It took two or three days to stop arguing about 
the kids and just loosen up," she recalls. 
Household routines: When clinical psychologist Emily Visher and psychiatrist 
husband John married 30 years ago, each had four children. Based on personal 
experience, as well as that of countless stepfamily clients, the Vishers 
developed strategies for at-home survival for themselves and their eight 
children ranging in age from 5 through 16. 
Remarriage, Emily Visher notes, begins with two distinct housekeeping styles. 
One family may be used to doing dishes together, while the other takes turns. 
In one household, kids were allowed to drop backpacks on the living room floor; 
in the other, spilling popcorn on the rust-colored carpet was regarded as a 
major sin. 
"In the beginning, the fewer things you change, the better," says Visher. 
"Choose a few rules that are most important to you, such as the children must 
knock before entering your bedroom, and the dishwasher must be emptied each 
day, and let the rest go." Visher and her husband co-founded the Stepfamily 
Assn. of America. 
If children are beyond toddlerhood, the family should meet, draw up a list of 
tasks and request volunteers. The chart, posted on the refrigerator, can change 
weekly or monthly. 
Cooperative behavior should be rewarded, Visher says. The child completing the 
most chores is entitled to a treat, such as going to a movie, playing a game 
with a parent or having a friend spend the night. 
Celebrations: Comparing formal rituals, Visher says, is an excellent way for 
families to become acquainted. 
"You should never reject what people have done before (remarriage)," she says. 
Her stepchildren continue to spend Christmas Eve and morning at their mother's 
and Christmas night with their father, opening gifts after dinner. 
"At the same time, it is important for the stepfamily to add new customs, such 
as cutting their own tree or baking cookies together, because it is the 
building of traditions that makes people feel part of a group," Visher added. 
Making arrangements with the other household may be difficult. However, Visher 
admonishes, "the adults, (keeping children's wishes in mind), need to do the 
negotiating, never forcing children to choose." 
Helping the children: In forming stepfamilies, "children often have a great 
number of losses parents don't consider, such as a house, school, friends and 
familiarity," Papernow says. 
Imagine the feelings of Bridget McMahon of Anaheim, who for three years enjoyed 
a close relationship with her single father and functioned as "the lady of the 
house." When her father remarried two years ago, Dad's three-bedroom home had 
to accommodate a boy. 
Bridget, then 8, gave up her room to share the largest bedroom with sister 
Brianne, 5, and stepsister Melanie, 12. 
"From Bridget's perspective, not only did everything change, but she and I were 
supposed to kiss each other goodnight every night," says stepmother Judy 
McMahon. 
Children in stepfamilies also face loyalty binds, feeling "if I care about my 
stepmom, I am betraying my mother," Papernow says, noting that children need 
help with this conflict. 
"While it is fair to ask a child to be civil to stepparents, it is not fair to 
expect children to love them," Papernow adds. 
Upon becoming a stepmother three years ago, Ceci Van Zitter took Brandy and 
Kelly aside and explained, "I know your love for your mom is very, very special 
and it should be, and I don't want to take away any of your love for her." 
"I understood," Van Zitter said, "because my own father remarried, and no 
matter how good my stepmother was to me, I could never feel the same way I felt 
for my mom." 
Papernow, whose former husband is dating, tells her 6-year-old daughter: "I 
know Daddy has a new girlfriend. I hope you will get to know her and perhaps 
you will develop a separate relationship. But you don't have to worry, I will 
always be your mommy." 
Children's feelings of divided loyalty also can be eased by Papernow's edict: 
"You may not bad-mouth your ex-spouse to your child, ever." 
The latter is more easily said than done, since divorced couples commonly 
harbor feelings of anger and jealousy and find it wrenching to share children. 
For help, Brandy and Kelly's father and stepmother turned to a support group 
offered through the Stepfamily Assn. of America. Their mother and stepfather 
attended meetings for remarried families organized through their church. 
In some ways the two households are dissimilar. At Mom's, where financial 
resources are more limited, the girls spend a great deal of time at home with 
parents and are expected to attend church every week. Life at Dad's includes 
movies, horseback riding and vacations, with a more relaxed attitude about 
worship. 
In both households, the family configurations change. Their stepfather's 
children live out of state. Roy Van Broekhuizen's daughter, Angela, 7, visits 
regularly, and son, David, 18, will join the Corona household for the summer. 
When stepmother Ceci Van Zitter gives birth in February, Brandy and Kelly will 
have a new sibling, another family adjustment. 
At this point, things are going quite well between the two families. 
"It still isn't easy," said the girls' mother, Louise Van Broekhuizen. 
"However, we came to the point where we realized we all love our kids and we 
all want to see them loved and well adjusted. We just can't be fighting out our 
differences." 
Depending on the stepfamily, Papernow believes it takes four to seven years to 
solidify relationships and for both families to be able to "do business 
together." 
But eventually many families do enjoy success and enduring relationships. The 
Vishers report joyous reunions with eight children and 10 grandchildren. Upon 
the birth of a baby recently, one of the Visher's children called a 
stepsibling, seeking advice on how to care for the infant. 
The highs and lows of stepparenting are reflected by Ginger Davis, who, upon 
remarriage, combined her two children with her husband's three, with ages 
ranging from 2 to 18 years. 
"I've worked hard at this and it has been very rewarding. However, if -- heaven 
forbid -- my husband dropped dead tomorrow, I wouldn't so much as have a cup of 
coffee with a man unless I knew his children were grown." 
WHOM TO CONTACT 
For information, support groups and a self-help program for stepfamilies, 
contact: Carol Samuels of the Los Angeles Chapter of the Stepfamily Assn. of 
America. (213) 935-7529. 
