ELEPHANT'S UNDERWATER COUSIN TO BE PROTECTED; 
IVORY COAST PLANS RESERVE FOR MANATEE 
Plans are under way to create the first reserve in Africa for the manatee, the 
1-ton, 10-foot-long underwater cousin of the elephant. 
The manatees live in lagoons, rivers and coastal areas from Senegal to Angola. 
The reserve, on an inlet of the Bandama River near Abidjan, could be 
established as soon as March, according to Gbande Die, director of the adjacent 
Azagny National Park. 
"This will be the first protected zone for manatees in Africa," Die said in an 
interview. 
No one knows precisely how many manatees, also known as sea cows, there are in 
Abidjan, whose oceanfront lagoons make ideal habitats, but officials say the 
population is dwindling and estimate their numbers in the hundreds rather than 
thousands. 
"When we ask the peasants, they tell us they used to see lots of manatees and 
now they don't," Die said. 
The reserve will allow scientists to study manatees, which are found in 
Florida, the West Indies, the Amazon basin and West Africa, and whose behavior 
is little known. 
The experts will also determine how best to protect the animals, which are 
hunted for their beef-like flesh. 
Manatees are mammals and had a common ancestor with the elephant 75 million 
years ago. They have been a protected species since this former French colony 
became independent in 1960, but that has not stopped fishermen from poaching 
them. 
"It's hard to enforce because the law is just a piece of paper," Die said. "And 
it's not just manatees, it's virtually all wild animals in Ivory Coast that 
suffer." 
Much of the impetus for creating the reserve and protecting manatees arises 
from work here by James Powell, 34, an American naturalist from Wildlife 
Conservation International, an arm of the New York Zoological Society. 
"We should be as concerned about the manatees as we are about the rhinoceros," 
Powell said recently. "Manatees are big, impressive and unique. There is 
nothing else like them." 
He said that manatees, whose night-time squeals are believed to have sparked 
mermaid myths and who are associated in West Africa with a spirit called "Mamie 
Wata," are timid and gentle. 
The West African manatee, which has a wide muzzle and a long, bulbous trunk 
with two side flippers, looks a bit like a toothless walrus or a sea lion. 
"They are extremely strong but they don't seem to have an aggressive bone in 
their bodies," said Powell, who has trapped 18 manatees to fit them with radio 
transmitters so he can track their movements. He was able to work with them 
without tranquilizing them. 
He said that visitors have flocked to see a baby manatee he raised in a pen 
near a popular beach resort, but the animal died several months ago. 
He doubted that the dark-gray manatees, which are almost impossible to see in 
the murky lagoons, could become a tourist attraction, as they have in Florida. 
But Powell thinks man and manatee could learn to live side by side. 
"They have an important role in the estuarine environment," he said. "They are 
the only large herbivores, so they eat off the unwanted vegetation." 
He also said that if hunting were regulated manatees could provide an important 
source of protein. 
Powell and officials of Ivory Coast's Ministry of Water and Forests said the 
key to saving the manatee is learning more about them and educating fishermen 
about the perils of poaching. 
Kouadio Akoi, an Education Ministry officer who works with Powell, said that it 
is hard to persuade people to give up a source of food but that it can be done. 
"The fishermen tell us, 'First you say don't kill the tortoise, then you say 
don't kill the manatee -- what are we going to eat?' "But the disappearance of 
an animal would be a loss to everybody. We have a heritage we have to leave to 
our children." 
