CONGRESSMEN'S AGENDAS FOCUS ON NATIONAL ISSUES; 
LEGISLATION: CLEAN AIR, IMMIGRATION REFORM, VIDEOCASSETTE COPYRIGHT PROTECTION 
AND AIDS TESTING ARE OF INTEREST TO SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA. 
Among other items on his sweeping 1990 legislative agenda, Rep. Henry A. Waxman 
(D-Los Angeles) aspires to overhaul the Clean Air Act and place stricter limits 
on agricultural pesticide residue on fruits and vegetables. He also hopes to 
require food manufacturers to provide detailed labeling of products and 
scientific support for health claims. 
Rep. Howard L. Berman (D-Panorama City), meanwhile, is seeking immigration 
reform that would increase the number of visas for family members of permanent 
U.S. residents. He is also sponsoring a bill to ban "black boxes," which are 
used to make unauthorized copies of videocassettes. 
Among his modest legislative goals, Rep. Elton Gallegly (R-Simi Valley) 
continues to carry a measure that would empower federal courts to impose the 
death sentence for the killing of federal law enforcement officers. The same 
proposal failed to move in the last session of Congress. 
These six measures are a sampling of the 54 diverse bills that the five San 
Fernando Valley-area members introduced this year and hope to see enacted in 
1990. The proposals generally deal with national issues rather than local 
concerns. 
Nonetheless, some of the laws -- such as the Clean Air Act, immigration reform, 
videocassette copyright protection and Waxman's efforts to provide early 
confidential AIDS testing and counseling -- are of particular interest to 
Southern Californians. 
"Obviously, these health issues have impact on my constituents as they have on 
people throughout the country," said Waxman, whose 24th District includes 
Universal City and parts of North Hollywood and Los Feliz as well as the 
Beverly-Fairfax area, Hollywood and Hancock Park. 
The initiatives carried in the 101st Congress by Waxman, Berman, Gallegly and 
by Reps. Anthony C. Beilenson (D-Los Angeles) and Carlos J. Moorhead 
(R-Glendale) reflect the lawmakers' legislative priorities as well as their 
place in the Capitol Hill hierarchy. 
Waxman expects to pass some of his far-reaching bills, although struggles 
remain over important specifics; Berman may see provisions of his immigration 
bill incorporated into a broad reform package and would like to move other 
proposals, and Beilenson hopes that his politically risky measures in favor of 
a tax increase and public campaign financing will at least inspire discussion. 
Moorhead and Gallegly, as members of the Republican minority, face uphill 
battles over their narrower legislative priorities. 
The Valley members' initiatives are among 4,842 measures introduced by House 
members in 1989, the first year of the two-year session. Overall, 93 bills and 
resolutions have been enacted, which is typical of an institution that tends to 
creep along until adjournment approaches and then engages in a lawmaking 
frenzy. 
Even then, most proposals fail to negotiate the legislative labyrinth. Success 
often comes by folding the provisions of a bill into a broader measure that 
appears headed for passage, persuading senior colleagues to sponsor an 
initiative or influencing behind-the-scenes negotiations and policy committee 
actions. For Republicans such as Moorhead, this may mean getting a Democrat to 
adopt their ideas. 
And it often takes more than one session of Congress to get something done. 
Thus, many of the Valley-area lawmakers' proposals are carried over from 
previous sessions when they failed to go anywhere. 
For the third time, for instance, Beilenson is sponsoring a bill to increase 
the federal gasoline tax by 50 cents a gallon over a five-year period to reduce 
the federal deficit and another to publicly finance congressional general 
election campaigns. For the fourth time, he has reintroduced a measure to 
double the safety standard for automobile bumpers. 
"They're the sort of thing he likes to leave there so people will talk about 
it," said a legislative aide to Beilenson. 
After two unsuccessful attempts to expand patent protection for industrial 
designs of such items as luggage, telephones and automobile parts, Moorhead 
says that new-found backing by key colleagues and the Bush Administration may 
portend passage. 
"I think we will get it through eventually," Moorhead said last week. "I 
wouldn't guarantee this Congress. We're building more and more support for it 
all the time." 
Waxman, a legislative power as chairman of the influential health and 
environment subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is 
carrying numerous major bills and plans to introduce others. 
In addition to the Clean Air, food labeling, pesticide and AIDS measures, he is 
pushing bills to establish standards and routine inspections of fish to detect 
chemical contamination; toughen the Food and Drug Administration's oversight of 
medical devices; increase the number of community residential programs for the 
mentally retarded and authorize Medicaid to pay for home health care for the 
poor elderly rather than restricting coverage to nursing home costs. 
Waxman said last week that he also plans to sponsor a bill to further restrict 
cigarette promotion and advertising and sale to minors. Stiff opposition from 
the powerful tobacco lobby is expected. 
This is not unusual. On many of his initiatives, Waxman is opposed by the Bush 
Administration as well as by private industry. 
A senior agriculture official testified in May that Waxman's bill to change the 
standard for cancer-causing carcinogenic pesticide residue on food from a 
balancing of health and economic concerns to strictly health considerations 
would have a disastrous impact on food prices and the food supply. The measure 
is one of several introduced in the wake of widespread fears prompted by use of 
the chemical Alar on apples. 
Waxman, in turn, adamantly opposes a pesticide-control bill by the White House 
that would tighten registration requirements and stiffen sanctions against 
violators but would also prevent states from imposing more stringent pesticide 
restrictions. Environmentalists in California are seeking to place a tough 
environmental initiative on the 1990 ballot that would phase out all 
agricultural chemicals known to cause cancer or reproductive injury by 1996. 
Waxman's subcommittee chairmanship has allowed him to assemble a large and 
respected staff, hold frequent hearings and aggressively pursue a liberal 
agenda that includes protecting consumers and fighting for benefits for the 
poor, elderly and infirm. 
He possesses "an instinct for the legislative process that is second to none, a 
thorough knowledge of the rules and willingness to exploit every one and a 
temperament that is all but unflappable," said the 1988 edition of "The 
American Almanac of Politics." 
Berman, an ally of Waxman's, has established clout on the House Judiciary 
Committee, particularly on immigration and copyright issues. As a member of the 
Foreign Affairs Committee, he also has become a player on some international 
matters. 
This year, Berman passed a far-reaching bill that prohibits all arms sales, 
whether publicly known or covert, to countries placed on a so-called "terrorist 
list" by the secretary of state unless the President provides Congress with 
prior notice and detailed justification. Berman introduced the measure in 
response to the Iran arms sales scandal. 
In an effort to prevent the spread of ballistic missiles, he also has sponsored 
a bill to require the President to impose sanctions against companies that 
export missile technology in violation of U.S. export-control laws. Under the 
measure, which overwhelmingly passed the House this year, foreign companies 
that sell this technology to countries such as Libya or Iraq would face the 
prospect of being cut off from U.S. Department of Defense contracts. 
On immigration, as Congress moves to revise the 24-year-old U.S. visa-allotment 
system, Berman is pushing for expansion of visas in general and is championing 
the reunification of family members of those who have become permanent U.S. 
residents. Berman maintains this should remain the cornerstone of national 
immigration policy. 
Others, however, have sought to shift the overall emphasis toward immigrants' 
education and employment skills. This is intended to open the doors for more 
Western Europeans, who have been largely shut out by the current system's bias 
toward regions with more recent immigrants, who thus have more immediate 
relatives in the United States. These regions include parts of Asia and Latin 
America. 
Berman is also carrying a bill that he has previously introduced twice. The 
measure, sought by the American Civil Liberties Union, would remove the 
President's authority to prohibit U.S. citizens from spending money in 
countries against which the United States has an economic embargo -- which 
effectively prohibits travel to places such as Cuba, Vietnam and North Korea. 
Berman passed a provision of his original bill last year that eliminated the 
ban on exporting and importing informational materials, such as films, 
newspapers and books, to and from embargoed countries. 
Beilenson's significant legislative roles are, by their very nature, low 
profile. 
He sits on the important but largely anonymous House Rules Committee, which 
controls the flow of legislation and determines the limits of debate on the 
House floor. He is chairman of the House Permanent Select Committee on 
Intelligence, which provides oversight and approves the budgets for the CIA and 
other intelligence agencies. 
Beilenson tends to be less of a force on other legislation. His tax and 
consumer bills have languished. His proposals to publicly finance congressional 
campaigns have earned him renown as an advocate but have not led to any reform 
yet. 
Nevertheless, such efforts have contributed to Beilenson's reputation as an 
independent-minded lawmaker willing to take politically unpalatable positions 
that are certain to wind up in election opponents' brochures. 
Beilenson did win passage last year of a long-sought measure prohibiting the 
import of ivory and other pachyderm parts as part of international efforts to 
save the threatened African elephant. Under the measure, Congress can earmark 
as much as $5 million a year for elephant conservation projects; $300,000 was 
appropriated last year. Beilenson plans to ask for $5 million again in the 1990 
fiscal year, an aide said, but funding remains uncertain. 
Gallegly, a two-term Republican, has yet to make a legislative mark. None of 
the handful of bills he sponsored in his three years has passed. 
This year, he picked up additional bipartisan support for his measure to 
authorize the death penalty for killers of police, judges and other law 
enforcement officials. Similar bills had previously stalled in committees but 
Gallegly maintained his was more narrowly drawn. 
He also sponsored a bill to deny federal student financial aid to individuals 
convicted of desecrating the American flag. It remains in the House Committee 
on Education and Labor. 
"He concentrated more of his attention to constituent service and building 
relationships with other members and familiarizing himself with the process," 
John Frith, Gallegly's spokesman, said of the former Simi Valley mayor's first 
term. 
Now, Frith said, Gallegly's staff is exploring a series of legislative 
initiatives that may be introduced next year. 
These include a resolution putting Congress on record as opposing any 
consideration of legalizing drugs and bills to ban the manufacture, sale and 
importation of drug paraphernalia; to shift American troops no longer needed in 
Europe to Immigration and Naturalization border patrols and to give the 
President a line-item budget veto but allow Congress to override a presidential 
veto with a majority vote. 
Moorhead, dean of the California Republican delegation, has introduced a 
measure to require customs agents to check the vehicle identification number of 
exported automobiles. He said this would cut down on car thefts that involve 
changing identification numbers and shipping stolen vehicles overseas. 
Another Moorhead measure would permit the INS to use volunteers for clerical 
and secretarial duties at border patrol offices. This idea, which Moorhead said 
was prompted by volunteer programs in Los Angeles law-enforcement agencies, is 
intended to alleviate a manpower shortage by putting more professional agents 
out on patrol. 
Neither bill has gained any apparent legislative momentum. 
In addition to his design patents proposal, Moorhead also has introduced a bill 
to provide a process for patenting products developed through space 
exploration. He said he is optimistic about its prospects. 
Beyond his own bills, Moorhead said, he is often involved in shaping 
legislation as the ranking Republican on Energy and Commerce's subcommittee on 
energy and power and on Judiciary's subcommittee on courts, civil liberties and 
administration of justice. The latter assignment has led to his pre-eminent 
legislative specialty. 
"Much of his legislative work has been done on patent and copyright -- useful 
but scarcely fascinating matters like protecting American patent rights abroad, 
protecting the privacy of electronic mail and extending drug patents to give 
time for regulatory approval," according to "The American Almanac of Politics." 
CONGRESSIONAL BILLS PENDING 
Some legislation introduced in the 101st Congress by Valley Area 
Representatives: 
REP. ANTHONY C. BEILENSON (D-Tarzana) 
CAMPAIGN FINANCING: Bill would publicly and fully finance all general election 
campaigns in the House of Representatives. Prospects: Measure failed to move in 
two previous sessions; partial public campaign financing considered a 
possibility. 
GASOLINE TAX: Bill would phase in a 50 cents-a-gallon increase in the federal 
gasoline tax over five years, raising $150 billion for deficit reduction during 
that time. Prospects: Dim, given President Bush's pledge not to increase taxes. 
REP. HOWARD L. BERMAN (D-Panorama City) 
IMMIGRATION REFORM: Bill would increase visas for family members of permanent 
U.S. residents and for workers. Prospects: Under active consideration; likely 
to be merged with other immigration measures. 
VIDEOCASSETTE COPYRIGHTS: Bill would ban the manufacture and sale of "black 
boxes" that facilitate the unauthorized copying of videocassettes. Prospects: 
Berman seeking hearing early next year in House Judiciary subcommittee. 
REP. ELTON GALLEGLY (R-Simi Valley) 
DEATH PENALTY: Bill would empower federal courts to impose the death penalty 
for killing federal law enforcement officers. Prospects: Bottled up in House 
Judiciary Committee last session; Senate Judiciary Committee passed broader 
capital punishment bill in October. 
REP. CARLOS J. MOORHEAD (R-Glendale) 
DESIGN PATENT: Bill would expand copyright protection for industrial designs of 
such items as telephones, luggage and automotive parts. Prospects: Moorhead has 
unsuccessfully introduced measure in two previous 
sessions but has new-found congressional and Administration support. 
AUTO THEFT: Bill would require customs officers to verify identification 
numbers of vehicles before the cars are exported to make sure they are not 
stolen. Prospects: Uncertain. 
REP. HENRY A. WAXMAN (D-Los Angeles) 
CLEAN AIR: Sweeping bill would revise clean air legislation including urban and 
rural air pollution guidelines, toxic pollutants restrictions and acid rain 
controls. Prospects: Passage of a bill likely but high-stakes battles, 
particularly including over on alternative automobile fuels and acid rain 
provisions, remain. 
FOOD LABELING: Bill would require food labels to specify the amount of fat, 
cholesterol, sodium, protein and calories and manufacturers to provide 
scientific evidence to support health claims. Prospects: Waxman optimistic, but 
disagreements remain. 
PESTICIDE RESIDUE: Bill would change the standard for measuring acceptable 
level of pesticide residue on foods from a balancing of health and economic 
concerns to strictly health considerations. Prospects: Major fight looms, with 
Bush Administration proposing a bill more sympathetic to agriculture and 
chemical industries. 
