CALIFORNIA LAWS 1989 
There's good news for people concerned about the spread of AIDS and widened 
drug use, but there's bad news for new-car dealers and shady travel promoters 
who like to cut corners to make a quick buck. Taking effect on New Year's Day 
were many of the 1,647 bills passed by the Legislature and signed into law by 
Gov. George Deukmejian during 1988. Here's a sampling of the new laws and what 
they do: 
AIDS 
Penalties -- Three additional years will be tacked onto the prison sentences of 
people convicted of certain sex crimes if they knew they were infected with the 
AIDS virus when they committed the crime. (SB 1007 by Sen. John Doolittle, 
R-Rocklin.) 
Confidentiality -- State law is loosened to allow physicians to tell other 
doctors, nurses and health workers if a patient has AIDS or has tested positive 
for the AIDS virus in order to permit them to take steps to protect themselves. 
(SB 2847 by Sen. Gary K. Hart, D-Santa Barbara.) 
Prostitutes -- It will be a felony for a prostitute to continue to work his or 
her trade after knowing he or she has been exposed to the AIDS virus. (SB 1007 
by Sen. John Doolittle, R-Rocklin.) 
Donors -- It will be a felony offense to donate blood, semen, breast milk or 
body organs to another person if the donor knows that he or she is infected 
with the AIDS virus. (SB 1002 by Sen. John Doolittle, R-Rocklin.) 
Cure Claims -- It will be a misdemeanor to advertise any unproven drug or 
device as a cure for AIDS. (AB 2936 by Assemblyman Charles W. Quackenbush, 
R-Saratoga.) 
Notice -- Doctors can inform the spouse, sexual partner or the needle-sharing 
partner of a patient who tests positive for AIDS without the patient's written 
consent after discussing the test results with the patient. (SB 2788 by Sen. 
Ken Maddy, R-Fresno.) 
Tests -- Doctors can test patients for the AIDS virus after obtaining oral 
rather than written consent of the patient and disclose the results in the 
official medical record. (AB 3255 by Assemblyman Bill Jones, R-Fresno.) 
Brochures -- The Department of Health Services will develop and distribute a 
brochure about AIDS to sexual assault victims. (AB 4209 by Assemblywoman 
Lucille Roybal-Allard, D-Los Angeles.) 
CRIME 
Rape -- Allows a rape victim in a court case to have up to two family members 
present in the courtroom for support purposes. (AB 4208 by Assemblywoman 
Lucille Roybal-Allard, D-Los Angeles.) 
Gang Intervention -- A $1-million pilot program is established in Los Angeles 
County to try to persuade elementary schoolchildren, by increasing their 
community involvement, that it's wiser not to join a gang. (AB 3723 by 
Assemblyman Richard Katz, D-Sepulveda.) 
Obscenity -- The legal definition of obscene matter is redefined in conformity 
with a U.S. Supreme Court decision to help make it easier to prosecute 
hard-core pornography peddlers in court. (SB 5 by Sen. Wadie P. Deddeh, D-Chula 
Vista.) 
Toy Guns -- Manufacture, sale or distribution of realistic-looking toy guns is 
outlawed with violations calling for possible $10,000 fines. It was prompted by 
an incident in which Los Angeles television personality David Horowitz was held 
hostage while on the air by a man brandishing a replica of a real pistol. (SB 
1795 by Senate President Pro Tem David A. Roberti, D-Los Angeles.) 
Plastic Guns -- Manufacture, sale or possession of plastic guns not readily 
detectable by metal-screening devices or X-ray machines commonly used at 
airports is prohibited. (AB 4546 by Assemblyman Mike Roos, D-Los Angeles.) 
Weapons -- A criminal penalty of up to one year in state prison is imposed for 
bringing a concealed weapon to a public meeting. (SB 1799 by Sen. Ruben S. 
Ayala, D-Chino.) 
Pregnancy -- Infliction of great bodily injury upon a pregnant woman that 
results in the termination of the pregnancy is classified as a violent felony 
for sentencing purposes. (AB 1724 by Assemblyman Rusty Areias, D-Los Banos.) 
Telephone Numbers -- Defense attorneys in court cases of violent crimes are 
prohibited from giving defendants telephone numbers or addresses of victims or 
witnesses that might lead to harassment. (AB 4346 by Assemblywoman Lucille 
Roybal-Allard, D-Los Angeles.) 
Vandalism -- The maximum fine for vandalism is increased from $10,000 to 
$50,000 for vandalism that causes more than $50,000 in damages. (AB 1086 by 
Assemblyman Bill Jones, R-Fresno.) 
Sheriff -- Minimum educational and law enforcement experience requirements are 
established for candidates who run for sheriff. (SB 1356 by Sen. William 
Campbell, R-Hacienda Heights.) 
HEALTH 
Mental Health -- Counties can authorize an additional 30 days of involuntary 
psychiatric evaluation and treatment for people deemed to be a danger to 
themselves or others. (AB 2678 by Assemblywoman Doris Allen, R-Cypress.) 
Perinatal Care -- A $46-million appropriation will provide expanded perinatal 
care for low-income mothers and their infants during pregnancy and the first 
year of the baby's life. (SB 2579 by Sen. Marian Bergeson, R-Newport Beach.) 
SCHOOLS 
Sex Education Classes -- Instructors will be required to teach their students 
to abstain from sexual intercourse "until they are ready for marriage" and to 
"honor and respect" the institution of monogamous, heterosexual marriage, 
effective July 1, 1989. (SB 2394 by Sen. Newton Russell, R-Glendale.) 
Community Colleges -- A $7.2-million program is implemented to improve the 
community college faculty corps and launch more aggressive recruitment of women 
and minorities. (AB 1725 by Assemblyman John Vasconcellos, D-Santa Clara.) 
Teachers -- It will be a misdemeanor offense to verbally abuse, curse or 
threaten a schoolteacher in a manner that disrupts school activities or incites 
violence. (SB 2449 by Sen. Gary K. Hart, D-Santa Barbara.) 
Strip Searches -- It will be unlawful for a schoolteacher or school employee to 
conduct a strip search or a body cavity search of a pupil. (AB 2496 by 
Assemblyman Terry B. Friedman, D-Tarzana.) 
Dissection -- Students can decline to participate in animal dissection classes 
on moral grounds, provided that they agree to do alternative projects. (AB 2550 
by Assemblywoman Jackie Speier, D-South San Francisco.) 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
Retail Credit -- The 18% limit on the interest rate that retail department 
stores can charge their customers is removed for a three-year trial period to 
determine if deregulation leads to increased competition that will benefit 
consumers. Bank credit cards such as Visa and MasterCard are not affected. (SB 
2592 by Sen. Ralph C. Dills, D-Gardena.) 
Automobiles -- Deceptive advertising practices by automobile dealers, such as 
offering free gifts if the gifts increase the sales price of a vehicle, are 
outlawed. (AB 4020 by Assemblyman Byron D. Sher, D-Palo Alto.) 
Travel Promoters -- In an effort to protect consumers against possible vacation 
fraud, travel promoters are required to register with the state in order to do 
business in California. (AB 3941 by Assemblyman Rusty Areias, D-Los Banos.) 
Contracts -- Spanish-language translations of consumer contracts are required 
before signature when the contracts are negotiated primarily in Spanish. (AB 
1592 by Assemblyman Richard Polanco, D-Los Angeles.) 
Restrooms -- Service stations opened after Jan. 1, 1990, near freeways and 
major highways will be required to have clean restrooms available to customers. 
(AB 259 by Assemblyman Terry B. Friedman, D-Tarzana.) 
Lemon Law -- The so-called state lemon law that allows new-car buyers to 
legally challenge dealers if they are unhappy with the performance of their 
vehicles is extended to cover the vehicular portion of mobile homes. (AB 4513 
by Assemblywoman Sally Tanner, D-El Monte.) 
Tanning Salons -- Patrons of suntanning salons 
must be warned of possible adverse health hazards such as eye damage and skin 
cancer that can result from repeated exposure. (AB 2139 by Assemblyman William 
J. Filante, R-Greenbrae.) 
Automobile Leases -- Dealers must use easy-to-read type size describing lease 
terms and costs in their television advertisements. (AB 3135 by Assemblywoman 
Delaine Eastin, D-Union City.) 
Senior Citizens -- Civil penalties for unfair business practices are increased 
from $2,500 to $5,000 when senior citizens or disabled people are the victims. 
(SB 1157 by Sen. Ed Davis, R-Valencia.) 
DRUGS 
Wiretapping -- Law enforcement officers are authorized to use court-approved 
electronic surveillance methods to catch suspected major drug traffickers. (SB 
1499 by Sen. Robert Presley, D-Riverside.) 
Drug Dealer Assets -- The state's legal ability to seize assets of drug dealers 
is strengthened to allow their automobiles, boats and airplanes to be 
confiscated and sold and the proceeds given to law enforcement to continue to 
fight the war against drugs. (AB 4162 by Assemblyman Richard Katz, 
D-Sepulveda.) 
Drug Sales to Minors -- Criminal penalties are increased for people convicted 
of selling drugs to minors on or near school property. (SB 2698 by Sen. Ed 
Davis, R-Valencia.) 
Beepers -- Electronic signaling devices known as beepers sometimes used in 
illegal drug trafficking are banned from school campuses and school-sponsored 
activities unless they can be proven to be required for medical emergency 
purposes. (AB 2800 by Assemblyman Gerald R. Eaves, D-Rialto.) 
VETERANS 
Cal-Vet Loans -- The deadline for World War II veterans to apply for Cal-Vet 
home and farm loans is extended to Jan. 1, 1993. In addition, World War II 
Merchant Marine veterans become eligible for the loans for the first time. (SB 
2785 by Sen. Milton Marks, D-San Francisco.) 
License Plates -- Recipients of the Purple Heart medal for being wounded in 
wartime military action can apply for special automobile license plates upon 
payment of increased fees, effective July 1, 1989. (AB 3639 by Assemblyman 
Robert J. Campbell, D-Richmond.) 
License Plates -- World War II Pearl Harbor Day survivors who were there during 
the Japanese attack also can apply for special commemorative automobile license 
plates upon payment of additional fees, starting July 1, 1989. The governor let 
this bill become law without his signature. (SB 2148 by Sen. Don Rogers, 
R-Bakersfield.) 
CHILDREN 
Child Support -- A parent who is two months behind in child support payments 
can be required to place a deposit with the district attorney to ensure that 
future support payments are made. (SB 906 by Sen. Bill Lockyer, D-Hayward.) 
Child Support -- A parent who is behind in child support payments because he or 
she is unemployed will be required to submit a list of job applications to the 
appropriate enforcement agency. (AB 2025 by Assemblyman Tom Bates, D-Oakland.) 
Custody -- No parent shall be awarded custody or unsupervised visitation of a 
child if he or she has been convicted of criminal offenses against a child, 
unless the court finds that there is no significant risk to the child. (SB 1803 
by Sen. Bill Lockyer, D-Hayward.) 
Pornography -- Display of explicit pornographic materials in coin-operated 
vending machines located in areas frequented by children is prohibited. (AB 
2093 by Assemblyman Gil Ferguson, R-Newport Beach.) 
Graffiti -- Minors are prohibited from purchasing any size aerosol container of 
spray paint unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, instructor or employer. 
(AB 2992 by Assemblyman Richard Katz, D-Sepulveda.) 
Graffiti -- A pilot program will be set up in Los Angeles County under which 
Youth Authority wards will be used to remove graffiti from public buildings. 
(SB 2465 by Sen. Diane Watson, D-Los Angeles.) 
Tobacco -- Selling tobacco products to minors can be prosecuted either as a 
misdemeanor or through a civil action punishable by fines of up to $1,000. 
People under 18 who purchase tobacco also can be punished by $50 fines or a 
sentence of 25 hours of community service. (SB 1960 by Sen. Nicholas C. Petris, 
D-Oakland.) 
DRUNK DRIVING 
Penalties -- The crime of driving under the influence of alcohol with three 
prior convictions is increased from a misdemeanor to a felony offense. (AB 3134 
by Assemblyman Elihu M. Harris, D-Oakland.) 
Driver's Licenses -- Courts are authorized to suspend for one year the driver's 
license of anyone between 16 and 21 who is convicted of any alcohol- or 
drug-related offense. People between 13 and 16 who are convicted face a 
one-year delay in obtaining a license when they are old enough to drive. (SB 
1300 by Sen. William Campbell, R-Hacienda Heights.) 
ALCOHOL 
Youth Parties -- Law enforcement officers can seize alcoholic beverages in 
plain view at social gatherings open to the public where people under 21 years 
of age are consuming alcoholic beverages and there is no parent or guardian 
present. (SB 2272 by Sen. Henry J. Mello, D-Watsonville.) 
Beer Tastings -- Breweries are allowed to conduct beer tastings on their 
premises or in other locations for charitable events sponsored by nonprofit 
organizations. (AB 2377 by Assemblyman Stan Statham, R-Oak Run.) 
Wine Coolers -- Empty wine cooler bottles and cans will be included in the 
state's beverage container recycling program and become eligible for return 
refunds starting Jan. 1, 1990. (AB 612 by Assemblyman Byron D. Sher, D-Palo 
Alto.) 
FISH AND GAME 
Waste Disposal -- Recreational boaters are prohibited from disposing of 
plastics and non-biodegradable materials, such as six-pack holders and 
Styrofoam coffee cups, in state waters. The debris can cause injury and death 
to marine animals and birds. (AB 2766 by Assemblyman Dan Hauser, D-Arcata.) 
TRANSPORTATION 
Stop the Rocks -- Dump trucks must be modified to prevent rocks and litter from 
escaping and causing broken automobile windshields, including tailgate seals 
and mud flaps on tires. Tarpaulin load covers also will be required starting 
Sept. 1, 1990. (AB 3220 by Assemblyman Richard Katz, D-Sepulveda.) 
Hazardous Materials -- Trucks carrying highly toxic materials must follow 
California Highway Patrol-approved routes and have relief drivers, escorts and 
on-board emergency equipment to cope with possible accidents. (AB 2705 by 
Assemblyman Richard Katz, D-Sepulveda.) 
Ride Sharing -- Private employers who institute 
employee ride sharing and van pooling will 
become eligible for state tax deductions. (SB 1904 by Sen. Becky Morgan, R-Los 
Altos Hills.) 
Ride Sharing -- State agencies are required to set a 50% goal for their 
employees to participate in ride-sharing programs. (SB 2723 by Sen. John 
Seymour, R-Anaheim.) 
Truck Inspections -- The CHP is authorized to conduct more surprise truck 
safety inspections. (SB 2876 by Sen. John Seymour, R-Anaheim.) 
Vehicle Fees -- The Department of Motor Vehicles is authorized to develop a 
pilot program under which motorists can use credit cards to pay licensing and 
registration fees starting sometime in mid-year. (AB 4264 by former Assemblyman 
William P. Duplissea, R-San Carlos.) 
Rail Service -- The state will study the feasibility of implementing high-speed 
passenger rail service among Los Angeles, Fresno, the San Francisco Bay Area 
and Sacramento. (AB 971 by Assemblyman Jim Costa, D-Fresno.) 
ELECTIONS 
Absentee Voters -- It will be a misdemeanor offense for any candidate or 
representative of a candidate to solicit the vote of an absentee voter while 
the voter is voting. (SB 172 by Sen. Ed Davis, R-Valencia.) 
SENIOR CITIZENS 
Health Insurance -- The state will increase its regulation of the advertising 
and sale of individual and group long-term health care insurance policies now 
offered to senior citizens by commercials featuring television personalities. 
(SB 170 by Sen. Henry J. Mello, D-Watsonville, and SB 2760 by Sen. Alan 
Robbins, D-Van Nuys.) 
Property Protection -- Residential care facilities for the elderly will have to 
establish theft and loss policies for the protection of residents' personal 
property. (AB 3624 by Assemblyman Thomas M. Hannigan, D-Fairfield.) 
COURTS 
Small Claims Court -- The $1,500 limit on small claims court actions is raised 
to $2,000 this year and $2,500 in 1991 with certain exceptions. (AB 1913 by 
Assemblyman Elihu Harris, D-Oakland.) 
Lawyers -- A State Bar disciplinary court is created with professional judges 
instead of volunteer attorneys hearing complaints filed against lawyers. (SB 
1498 by Sen. Robert Presley, D-Riverside). 
INSURANCE 
Auto Insurance -- A 5% limit on automobile insurance underwriting profits is 
imposed and excess profits have to be refunded to the policyholders. (AB 4325 
by Assemblyman Tom Bane, D-Tarzana.) 
Auto Insurance -- Insurers are prohibited from refusing to issue policies based 
solely on the age of the vehicle if the market value exceeds $2,500. (SB 2184 
by Sen. Alan Robbins, D-Van Nuys.) 
Claims -- Potential fines and years of imprisonment for people convicted of 
filing false automobile insurance damage claims are increased. (SB 2344 by Sen. 
Bill Lockyer, D-Hayward.) 
Health Care -- Small businesses will be granted state income tax credits for 
providing employees with health care insurance coverage starting after 1990. 
(SB 2260 by Sen. Barry Keene, D-Benicia.) 
Mammograms -- Health insurance plans are required to pay the cost of mammograms 
used to detect breast cancer in women if they include breast cancer-related 
operations. (AB 1201 by Assemblyman Dominic L. Cortese, D-San Jose.) 
POLLUTION 
AND TOXIC WASTE 
Smog Checks -- A revised major smog check program goes into effect, including a 
provision that calls for stiff increases in the amount that car owners would be 
required to pay for necessary automobile repairs, designed to help achieve a 
25% reduction in vehicle emissions demanded by the federal government, starting 
Jan. 1, 1990. (SB 1997 by Sen. Robert Presley, D-Riverside.) 
Air Quality -- Local air quality agencies are required to take regulatory 
action to bring about a 5% annual reduction in smog. If the agencies fail to do 
so, the state could step in and take over local smog regulation. (AB 2595 by 
Assemblyman Byron D. Sher, D-Palo Alto.) 
Indoor Pollution -- The state Air Resources Board will conduct a study to 
determine how much indoor air pollution Californians are breathing. (AB 3343 by 
Assemblywoman Sally Tanner, D-El Monte.) 
Air Quality -- An additional member representing the cities of Los Angeles 
County is added to the South Coast Air Quality Management District board of 
directors. (SB 2285 by Sen. Robert Presley, D-Riverside.) 
Asbestos -- Employers are required to post warning signs in areas where workers 
may come in contact with asbestos to inform them of the possible cancer risk. 
(AB 3173 by Assemblyman Lloyd G. Connelly, D-Sacramento.) 
Vehicle Fees -- An additional $1 automobile registration fee can be imposed in 
Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino counties to allow the South 
Coast Air Quality Management District to promote increased use of clean-burning 
fuels. (SB 2297 by Sen. Herschel Rosenthal, D-Los Angeles.) 
Water Quality -- Water companies are required to notify local elected officials 
if a public water supply well is closed because it is found to contain 
contaminants in excess of acceptable health standards. (AB 2826 by former 
Assemblyman Wayne Grisham, R-Norwalk.) 
Hazardous Waste -- It will be a crime to knowingly treat, handle, transport or 
store any hazardous waste in a manner that causes risk of fire, explosion, 
serious injury or death. (AB 1983 by Assemblyman Burt Margolin, D-Los Angeles.) 
Disposal -- It will be unlawful to transport hazardous waste out of California 
except to dumping facilities specifically authorized to receive and treat such 
waste. (AB 3188 by Assemblywoman Sally Tanner, D-El Monte.) 
GOVERNMENT 
Witnesses -- It will be a misdemeanor offense for any employer to directly or 
indirectly harass any employee if the harassment is motivated by the fact that 
the employee may become a witness before a legislative committee. (SB 2858 by 
Sen. Barry Keene, D-Benicia.) 
BUSINESS 
Child Care -- Private employers who provide child care services for their 
employees will become eligible for state tax credits. (SB 722 by Sen. Gary K. 
Hart, D-Santa Barbara.) 
Securities -- Criminal penalties and civil liability for the white-collar crime 
of insider trading of securities are increased. (SB 2578 by Sen. Alan Robbins, 
D-Van Nuys.) 
Foreign Corporations -- The state Department of Justice will conduct a study 
and recommend better methods to resolve consumer complaints against foreign 
corporations. (AB 3076 by Assemblyman Larry Stirling, R-San Diego.) 
Technology -- An Office of Competitive Technology is created within the 
Department of Commerce to coordinate research to try to attract more large 
federal contacts for California firms. (AB 4260 by Assemblyman Charles W. 
Quackenbush, R-Saratoga.) 
Swap Meets -- Vendors are required to report all items offered for sale or 
exchange at swap meets on a standard form prescribed by the Department of 
Justice. (SB 93 by Sen. Joseph B. Montoya, D-Whittier.) 
HOUSING 
Rental Repairs -- Landlords who refuse to repair unsafe and rundown rental 
units can be forced to pay court costs, attorney fees and inspection levies, 
and lose state tax benefits, in addition to fines for housing law violations. 
(SB 2799 by Sen. Ed Davis, R-Valencia.) 
Rental Rates -- Owners of some rental housing financed through low-interest 
government loans will have to give at least six months' prior notice to tenants 
before increasing their rents. (AB 4625 by Assemblywoman Marian LaFollotte, 
R-Northridge.) 
Mobile homes -- Mobile home park operators are prohibited from acting as agents 
in the sale of a mobile home as a condition of approval for a buyer to reside 
in the park. (SB 2230 by Sen. William A. Craven, R-San Diego.) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Brown Papers -- Former Democratic Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. is allowed to donate 
his gubernatorial papers to USC instead of the state archives. (AB 1767 by 
Assemblyman Pat Nolan, R-Glendale.) 
Hahn Park -- Los Angeles officials are permitted to rename the Baldwin Hills 
State Recreation Area the Kenneth Hahn Recreation Area in honor of the veteran 
Los Angeles County supervisor. (SB 643 by Sen. Diane Watson, D-Los Angeles.) 
Animal Abuse -- The maximum penalty for animal abuse is increased to a $20,000 
fine or up to one year in prison or both. (AB 4023 by Assemblyman William J. 
Filante, R-Greenbrae.) 
Lottery -- State lottery officials are empowered to pay a claim on a winning 
ticket if the ticket is lost and there is substantial proof that it was once 
held by the claimant. (SB 106 by Sen. Ralph C. Dills, D-Gardena.) 
Helmets -- All riders of all-terrain vehicles, regardless of age, will be 
required to wear safety helmets to prevent possible accidental injuries and 
deaths. (AB 2746 by Assemblywoman Doris Allen, R-Cypress.) 
Taxes -- A taxpayer's bill of rights is established to increase public 
awareness of guidelines governing the collection of taxes by the Franchise Tax 
Board and the state Board of Equalization. (AB 2788 by Assemblyman Elihu M. 
Harris, D-Oakland, and AB 2833 by Assemblyman Richard Katz, D-Sepulveda.) 
Warming Trends -- The state Energy Commission will conduct a study on how 
global warming trends may affect California's energy, water, environment, 
economy and agriculture. (AB 4420 by Assemblyman Byron D. Sher, D-Palo Alto.) 
State Song -- "I Love You, California" is designated an official state song. 
This means another state song could be designated in the future if it also is 
approved by the Legislature and the governor. (AB 1535 by Assemblyman Tim 
Leslie, R-Carmichael.) 
State Dance -- The West Coast swing dance, a jitterbug step made popular in the 
1940s, becomes the official state dance. The square dance also becomes the 
official folk dance. The governor allowed this bill to become law without his 
signature. (SB 2460 by Sen. Quentin S. Kopp, I-San Francisco.) 
Complied by Times staff writer Jerry GillamDR, M. WUERKER 
