DRUG WAR: WRONG FORCES, WRONG FRONT 
In a matter of weeks, the United States switched from fighting the Cold War to 
fighting the drug war. The invasion of Panama ushered in the new era; we will 
pay any price, bear any burden, to combat the drug menace. A Marine patrol has 
already fired on suspected traffickers crossing the Mexican border and the 
Pentagon drafted plans (now on hold) to mount a naval blockade off the coast of 
Colombia. President Bush, who will attend a summit with Andean leaders next 
month in Cartegena, plans to spend $2 billion over the next five years to fight 
drugs in the region. 
None of this is likely to make much difference. Overseas, the war on drugs, 
despite last week's reported surrender by a Colombian cartel, is shaping up as 
a loser. To understand why, we must examine the nature of the U.S. buildup in 
Latin America. 
The war is led by the State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics 
Matters. The bureau controls an interregional air wing of more than 50 
aircraft, including fixed-wing, C-123 cargo transports and Vietnam-era 
helicopters. The aircraft are used to ferry troops, move supplies and, most 
important, spray crops. Today, the State Department unit is dousing coca, 
marijuana and poppy fields in Colombia, Guatemala, Belize, Jamaica and Mexico. 
While the bureau controls the skies, the Drug Enforcement Administration runs 
the ground show. Traditionally assigned to the domestic drug trade, DEA is 
strengthening its presence in Latin America. Today, more than 150 agents work 
in 17 countries. Agency personnel are also more and more involved in 
paramilitary actions in the coca-rich regions of South America, where, armed 
with machine guns and jungle knives, they stage helicopter raids on processing 
labs and clandestine airstrips. 
The Central Intelligence Agency also expands its presence in Latin America, 
with new agents assigned to Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and elsewhere. At CIA 
headquarters in Langley, Va., a Counter-Narcotics Center collates the steady 
stream of data coming in from agents, informants, wiretaps, radar and 
satellites. 
Next, the Pentagon. Even as Defense Secretary Dick Cheney announces major cuts 
in defense spending, the U.S. Southern Command in Panama is preparing to step 
up activities throughout Latin America. Gen. Maxwell Thurman, the commander, 
has already made several trips to Andean nations, canvassing the needs of local 
military and police chiefs. Arms shipments grow. In 1988, Colombia, Peru and 
Bolivia received a total of $3 million in military aid; this year the total 
will be $170 million. 
Even agencies with little history of involvement in Latin America are 
enlisting. The U.S. Customs Service has dispatched agents across the continent 
to assist local forces in sealing borders, controlling highways and training 
dogs to sniff parcels at airports. The Coast Guard has sent mobile training 
teams to instruct local policemen in river interdiction. 
Washington is on full drug-war footing. But its warriors are likely to slip 
when engaging the enemy, their generals committing the same errors as 
predecessors who fought the war against communism in Latin America. 
First, there's the friendly dictator syndrome. Just as Washington frequently 
cozied up to despots like Anastasio Somoza and Francois Duvalier because of 
their opposition to communism, it now embraces similar characters whose only 
redeeming quality is strong opposition to drugs. 
Take Haiti. Gen. Prosper Avril became president in a 1988 military coup; he has 
repeatedly reneged on promises to hold free elections and respect human rights. 
But he has moved aggressively against cocaine traffickers. "The (Avril) 
government . . . has expressed a firm commitment to cutting the flow of illegal 
drugs through Haiti," the State Department said in its 1989 International 
Narcotics Control Strategy Report. "Despite political turmoil, the Haitians 
have maintained drug interdiction efforts and cooperated closely with U.S. 
authorities." "Political turmoil" included disappearances, killings and popular 
clamorings for democracy. 
After Panama, such chumminess is dismaying. For years, Washington overlooked 
Manuel A. Noriega's involvement in drugs because of his usefulness in fighting 
communism. The lesson seems lost; the United States woos other Noriega-like 
figures. 
Washington's emerging weakness for anti-drug strongmen highlights a broader 
flaw in drug policy -- a predilection for military solutions to problems that 
are primarily social and economic in origin. With unemployment soaring, prices 
skyrocketing and governments paralyzed by external debt and corruption, 
destitute peasants have turned to coca as a dependable means of income. Only 
economic development and crop-substitution programs offer a realistic chance of 
getting these farmers off coca. 
So far, the United States has displayed little interest in the economic roots 
of the cocaine problem. U.S. agents spend far more time with generals and 
police chiefs than with agrarian planners and peasant representatives. Just as 
10 years of military intervention in Central America failed to bring peace to 
the region, current reliance on interdiction and law enforcement is unlikely to 
stem the flow of cocaine into the United States. 
Last week's reputed offer by the "Extraditables," a group believed to speak for 
the Medellin cartel -- to end the violence and get out of the narcotics trade 
in exchange for amnesty -- doesn't mean Colombia has won its war against the 
drug lords. President Bush and Colombian President Virgilio Barco are rightly 
skeptical of the feeler. But as recent polls in Colombia show, the people would 
favor exploring such a deal. Any arrangement that might end the bloodshed 
should not be ignored. 
But an agreement between the Colombian government and the cartel does not 
guarantee diminished exports of cocaine to the United States. For every 
Medellin drug lord thinking about retirement, there are dozens of traffickers 
waiting to take his place. The Cali drug cartel also does business in Colombia; 
it may expand, having been spared by the government offensive. As long as 
Americans demand cocaine, South Americans will supply it. 
Latin America's cocaine industry now extends over an area nearly as large as 
the continental United States. It employs millions of people, generates tens of 
billions of dollars. The narcos have huge stockpiles of sophisticated arms and 
maintain private armies that, in some cases, dwarf those of the established 
security forces. Add weak governments that barely control their national 
territories and it's enough to make one nostalgic for the Cold War. 
