BAKE A BIGGER PIE, NOT SMALLER PIECES; 
FOREIGN AID: THE DOLE PROPOSAL IS APPEALING IN IT SIMPLICITY. BUT IT IGNORES 
THE REALITY OF A LONG DECLINE IN AMERICA'S INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE. 
Sen. Bob Dole's proposal to reduce U.S. foreign aid to Israel, Egypt, Pakistan, 
the Philippines and Turkey in order to meet the needs of the world's "new 
democracies" has appealing simplicity. 
Yet in its focus and in its magnitude, the Dole proposal misses the point. 
True, there is an insufficient amount of funds to serve a wide range of avowed 
U.S. foreign-policy interests. But reallocation of existing foreign aid will in 
no way alter this fact. Advancing this chimera will only lull us into a 
complacency that promises to divert us from the task of raising the funds 
necessary to serve our interests abroad. 
In the last decade, some members of Congress, Dole included, contended that the 
essential task of funding the national defense should not be compromised by the 
budget deficit. Yet if containing Soviet expansionism was the priority of the 
1980s, the successor in the '90s is the fostering of nascent democracy. Funding 
changes must reflect the shift in our mission. 
I have no quarrel with Dole's assessment of the paramount importance of 
assisting the democratic revolutions taking place in Eastern Europe. But these 
are not the only important events transpiring around the world. Other areas 
also deserve our resources. 
The fundamental problem with the Dole proposal is that it ignores the reality 
of what has happened to America's international-affairs assistance in recent 
years. Our spending in this critical category has dropped by nearly $7 billion, 
or 25% (not counting inflation), since 1985. Within these dwindling dollar 
amounts, spending on foreign aid (as distinguished from maintenance of 
embassies and so forth) has absorbed the brunt of all cuts, falling from more 
than $19 billion to the current level of less than $15 billion. When inflation 
is taken into account, the reductions are far more severe. 
The effects of these reductions have been devastating. Whole regions of the 
world have been wiped off the U.S. foreign-assistance map since 1985. In these 
few short years, Africa has seen its share of economic-support funding fall by 
more than 75%, from more than $400 million to $90 million. Non-military 
assistance to the Caribbean and to the Andes region, crucial to our 
anti-narcotics efforts, is imperiled. Reducing assistance to any "top five" 
countries would not relieve these shortfalls, nor come close to assisting 
Eastern Europe and Panama. 
Let's remember, too, how the top recipients of foreign assistance came to be 
such. It was neither arbitrary nor capricious. In each case, funding decisions 
were based on an assessment of the country's contribution to U.S. 
foreign-policy interests. Aid to Israel and Egypt, two critical allies in an 
unstable region, has been unchanged since 1985. This means a 13% reduction when 
inflation is taken into account; Dole's proposed 5% cut plus 4% inflation would 
take another 9%. And certainly the Philippines and Pakistan qualify as 
important developing democracies that deserve our help in their efforts to 
survive their own rocky transitions. The senator's arbitrary application of 
percentage reductions in aid to certain countries ignores the different reasons 
why a country came to receive aid. His is a simplistic approach that lacks 
substantive foundation. 
The imperative to increase spending on foreign affairs is obvious and 
incontrovertible. "Reallocation" is an evasion. Once a world leader in 
economic-aid spending, America has embarrassingly fallen behind other developed 
countries in this domain. 
None of this is to say that we can't re-examine our allocations of foreign aid. 
Let's cut military assistance to unthreatened countries whose citizens go 
unfed. Let's increase economic and development aid. Perhaps Sen. Dole will join 
us in re-examining whether 10 years of military aid to El Salvador has served 
U.S. interests and the interests of the Salvadoran people. 
U.S. foreign-affairs expenditures amount to a minuscule 2% or less of total 
federal spending, yet are absolutely vital to the alleviation of the social, 
economic and political dysfunctions that historically have driven so many 
international conflicts. Even the most drastic foreign-affairs cuts will have a 
negligible effect on the overall federal budget deficit. Still, such cuts would 
seriously endanger U.S. foreign-policy interests and global stability. 
It is worth addressing the issue honestly -- in terms of finding resources for 
vital interests -- rather than waiting for the consequences of our neglect to 
require the spending of far greater resources in the future. 
