AST FOUNDER REPEATS SCRIPT WITH AMKLY; 
PERSONAL COMPUTERS: DOES THE WORLD NEED ANOTHER VENDOR? ALBERT C. WONG MADE A 
FORTUNE THE FIRST TIME AROUND AND LOOKS TO DO IT AGAIN. 
Albert C. Wong made a fortune as co-founder of a company that started out 
making accessories for personal computers and later began building the 
computers themselves. 
Now, the soft-spoken, 41-year-old Wong is using $2 million of that fortune to 
found a company that will start out making accessories for personal computers 
and will later begin building the computers themselves. 
Wong says the resemblance between his old company, AST Research, and his new 
one, AMKLY Systems of Irvine, is entirely superficial, since the personal 
computer business has changed enormously in the 10 years since AST was formed. 
"AST was founded at the right time, a period of explosive growth," Wong said. 
"With AMKLY, we have to be a lot more careful in terms of our planning." 
For Wong, careful means focusing on specialized niches. AMKLY's first product 
is a memory expansion device for high-end Compaq personal computers. 
But even so, won't AMKLY be competing with AST once it launches its own 
computer later this year? "I don't look at it that way," Wong said with a 
slightly mischievous grin. 
Wong probably wouldn't mind if his new company stole just a little bit of 
business from his old one. As one of three founding partners at AST, Wong was 
the key design engineer and later oversaw all technical operations for a firm 
that became one of the great success stories of the PC industry. 
"He was responsible for most of the products that made AST what it is," said 
Stewart Alsop, publisher of the PC Letter in Redwood City. 
The rapid growth of AST, however, began to take its toll on the close 
relationship between Wong and the other two partners, Thomas C.K. Yuen and Safi 
U. Qureshey. Wong quit the company abruptedly in November, 1988, stating that 
he and the partners "just didn't get along." He remained on the AST board and 
took advantage of the chance to spend more time with his twin 2-year-olds. 
Last August, Wong said, he decided it was "time to come back to the industry." 
He resigned from the AST board and started up AMKLY. The odd-sounding name is 
composed of the first initials of each of his family members. 
After studying the market, he concluded that a circuit board that boosted the 
memory of PCs -- the same type of product that launched AST -- would be the new 
firm's first project. 
Wong explained that Compaq computers use a proprietary design for the boards 
that hold the rows of chips that make up a computer's internal memory. Buying 
those boards from Compaq is very expensive. AMKLY will offer Compaq customers 
an industry-standard board layout, enabling them to purchase just the number of 
memory units they want from whomever they want and plug them into the board. 
Alsop said Wong's idea is interesting. "It provides a real neat solution for a 
certain group of people, which is exactly what AST did," he said. 
Wong said his new board is "a packaging innovation that allows the user to have 
better control" over how a system is upgraded. And it will cost them as little 
as half as much as the standard Compaq expansion unit. Wong said additional 
enhancement products would be forthcoming, but he declined to elaborate. 
Packaging innovation and user control will also be the guiding principle behind 
AMKLY's personal computers, which Wong expects to launch by the year's end. He 
won't disclose details about price or performance, but says the machines will 
be designed for ease of installation, ease of maintenance and ease of use. 
That's supposed to appeal both to dealers -- who are increasingly sensitive to 
demands for better service -- and to users, who don't want to spend six hours 
taking a machine out a box and setting it up. "I don't want to mass market, and 
I don't want an esoteric product," Wong said, explaining that his machine would 
be aimed at mainstream business users who don't necessarily need the fastest 
machine on the market but put a high premium on simplicity. 
If all goes according plan, AMKLY will have revenue of $20 million to $30 
million within a year, and $100 million to $150 million within five years, Wong 
said. The company now employs just 12 people but expects to be up to 45 within 
a year. It is leasing a 21,000-square-foot facility in the Irvine Spectrum for 
manufacturing and corporate offices. 
The question that remains, of course, is whether the world needs another 
personal computer vendor. Alsop, for one, thinks there's still a lot of room 
for design improvements in IBM-compatible personal computers, and he notes that 
Wong has two of the critical ingredients necessary for success: credibility and 
capital. And for those attributes, he can thank AST. 
