PERSONAL FINANCE / BILL SING: TIME IS RIGHT TO INVEST IN SHORT, INTERMEDIATE 
BONDS 
It's a great time for savers, with short-term interest rates at or above their 
highest levels in years. One of the best ways to take advantage of this is 
through mutual funds that invest in short- and intermediate-term bonds. 
Thanks to their relative convenience, safety and potential for higher returns 
than money market mutual funds and bank savings accounts, these funds have 
grown in number and popularity in recent years. Conservative investors also 
like them because they are less volatile than funds investing in long-term 
bonds. 
These funds generally invest in fixed-income securities, such as U.S. Treasury 
issues or corporate bonds, with maturities of less than 10 years. Many are 
currently yielding 9% or more, topping the averages of 8.63% on money market 
mutual funds, 8.51% on one-year certificates of deposit and 6.24% on bank money 
market deposit accounts. 
If interest rates rise, however, the total return you will earn -- yield plus 
or minus changes in bond values -- can be eroded. That's because the prices of 
already-issued bonds fall when interest rates rise. That happened last year, 
when rising interest rates pushed average total returns on 
short-to-intermediate bond funds down to 6.51%, compared to 7% for money market 
mutual funds, according to Lipper Analytical Services, a Summit, N.J., firm 
that tracks fund performance. 
But such risks are well worth taking, particularly now that short-term interest 
rates have run up so high already. Yields on two-year Treasury notes, for 
example, have hit 9.2%. That tops 9% yields on 30-year Treasuries -- which 
normally yield more than short-term issues. 
If interest rates stay at these levels or fall, total returns may be higher. 
And there is virtually no chance that returns can actually be negative if 
interest rates rise further. 
"The risk-reward relationship is very good," says Donald J. Phillips, editor of 
Mutual Fund Values, a Chicago-based advisory service. 
The funds also offer advantages over investing directly in Treasuries issues. 
Treasury bills, with maturities of between three months and one year, require 
$10,000 minimum investments and are often a hassle to buy and sell before 
maturity. Treasury notes, with maturities of one to 10 years, require minimum 
$5,000 investments for maturities of four years or less. Likewise, buying and 
selling them can be a hassle. 
But funds usually require lower minimum investments and are relatively easy to 
buy and sell. And many fund families offer the ability for you to switch your 
money into other stock or bond funds in that family. That switching feature 
could come in handy, because if interest rates start falling, you might want to 
switch into longer-term funds to lock in high yields and take advantage of 
price rises in long-term bonds. 
How should you go about picking the right fund? 
Several factors are important to consider. Of course, you need to examine 
current yields and long-term performance -- information available over the 
phone, in quarterly or annual reports, or through various investment advisory 
services. 
Just as important are sales charges and expenses. Look for funds with no sales 
charges, or "loads," and with low annual expenses, such as those offered by 
Vanguard Group. High loads and expenses can wipe out much of your return. 
"It gets hard to justify paying loads for short-term funds when money market 
funds are available with no loads," analyst Phillips says. 
Also, funds with higher asset levels tend to enjoy lower expense ratios, says 
Sheldon Jacobs, editor and publisher of No-Load Fund Investor, a 
Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., newsletter. 
Also, you may want to pick a fund in a group such as Fidelity, Vanguard or T. 
Rowe Price that has many other stock and bond funds that you can switch into if 
conditions merit. 
What funds do experts pick? 
Phillips of Mutual Fund Values likes three short-term funds: Vanguard Fixed 
Income -- Short-Term Bond Fund (800-662-7447), with a current 30-day yield of 
9.14%; T. Rowe Price Short-Term Bond Fund (800-638-5660), with a current 30-day 
yield of 8.51%, and Neuberger &amp; Berman Limited Maturity (800-367-0770), 
with a current 30-day yield of 8.67%. 
Among intermediate-term funds, Phillips favors Fidelity Intermediate-Term Bond 
Fund (800-544-6666), with a current 30-day yield of 8.72%, and Babson Bond 
Trust (800-422-2766), with a current 30-day yield of 9.2%. 
Phillips also recommends Strong Income (800-368-3863), a fund that can switch 
from short-term bonds into longer-term issues when it thinks conditions warrant 
such a move. The fund also invests in higher-yielding "junk bonds" and 
high-dividend stocks. Its current 30-day yield is 10.52%. 
If you're in a high tax bracket, consider short- or intermediate-term municipal 
bond funds, which are exempt from federal taxes and possibly state and local 
taxes as well. 
Among intermediate-term muni funds, newsletter editor Jacobs recommends 
Fidelity Limited-Term Muni (800-544-6666), with a current 30-day yield of 
6.33%, and Vanguard Muni -- Intermediate Term (800-662-7447), with a current 
7-day yield of 6.97%. 
Bill Sing welcomes readers' comments and suggestions for columns but regrets 
that he cannot respond individually to letters. Write to Bill Sing, Personal 
Finance, Los Angeles Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles, Calif. 90053. 
