CAST OF 'CHEERS' LEADS WESTWOOD PROTEST AGAINST MEDFLY SPRAYING 
Barflies met Medflies on Tuesday, as the cast of the long-running television 
series "Cheers" led a Westwood protest against continued aerial spraying of the 
controversial pesticide malathion. 
"I have three children and I'm very careful about what I feed them, yet I have 
absolutely no control over this stuff being dropped on our heads," said Rhea 
Perlman, who plays a wise-cracking waitress on the NBC situation comedy, which 
takes place in a mythical Boston tavern. "I feel like it's something the 
citizens of Los Angeles should have a say in." 
In all, some 80 protesters, many wearing breathing masks or carrying signs 
reading "Honk If You Hate Malathion," participated in the noontime rally 
outside the Federal Building. 
It was the latest in a mushrooming series of protests against the state-ordered 
government spraying program that began late last year to eradicate the most 
recent Mediterranean fruit fly infestation that affects 372 square miles in 
Southern California. 
It was also the most star-studded anti-pesticide rally this year, as the six 
cast members made a 45-minute appearance before hustling off in a van to 
Hollywood -- as fellow protesters applauded -- in order to film a new episode 
of "Cheers." 
"We only had them for about half an hour," explained Doretta Zemp, whose 
Coalition Against Malathion organized the protest. "They have a 12 o'clock 
shoot today." 
Zemp then led the remaining demonstrators in a sing-along protest to the tune 
of "Frere Jacques": 
 "Malathion. Malathion. 
 "Fills the air. Fills the air. 
 "Babies sick and crying. 
 "Governor is lying. 
 "Say you care. Save the air." 
The protesters, most garbed in red to "signify danger," proceeded to march into 
Westwood Village to be filmed themselves for the evening news. 
Unlike some demonstrations attended by Hollywood celebrities in which the 
issues may have little impact on their lives, pesticide spraying has a direct 
bearing on members of the environmentally conscious "Cheers" cast, the actors 
said. 
"I've got two babies at home and when I'm told I should cover the playground 
equipment and the sandbox . . . I've got to start thinking -- why?" said John 
Ratzenberger, who portrays Cliff the mailman. "This (demonstration) helps me to 
vent my spleen, certainly. And I'll do whatever it takes for my voice to be 
heard. 
"If I was a steamfitter I'd still be here." 
The show's star, Ted Danson, founder of the American Oceans Campaign 
environmental organization, said common sense tells him that "every time you 
use a pesticide, it ends up getting in the water system." 
Danson acknowledged, however, that he still is trying to learn more about 
malathion. 
"I'm not really here to make a huge statement here today. I'm here to educate 
myself," he said. "(But) something does not feel right. You have to admit it's 
a little strange that you have to run out and cover your pools and your 
sandboxes and tape your windows. 
" . . . Unless we jump up and down and say, 'wait, wait, toxics are not the 
answer,' then no one is going to look for a safer answer," Danson continued. 
"They're going to look for the most expedient, cheapest way for them to 
accomplish their goals. 
"It's kind of human nature." 
