ON VIEW: CALIFORNIANS ON THE D.C. PARTY SCENE 
Jane Weintraub has campaigned for George Bush for more than 20 years, dating 
back to singing for him when he ran for Congress from Texas. Jane and Jerry 
Weintraub also have a summer house near the Bushes' family place at 
Kennebunkport, Me. 
With such close presidential ties, Jane will be in the spotlight today at the 
luncheon Robin Parsky of Pasadena and Grega Daly co-host in the Potomac Room of 
the Ritz Carlton to introduce Jane to Washingtonians. The affair is timed so 
that Almost-First Lady Barbara Bush can stop in after the Salute to the First 
Lady at Kennedy Center. 
Robin is the wife of Gerry Parsky, former U.S. assistant secretary of the 
Treasury, a senior partner in Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher and a business 
partner with former U.S. Secretary of the Treasury William Simon. Grega is the 
wife of Leo A. Daly, whose large architectural firm designed the United 
Airlines terminal at LAX; they live on Embassy Row on Massachusetts Avenue in 
Washington. 
The guest list is indicative of ascending social prowess: Acceptances are in 
from Georgette Mosbacher, wife of the Secretary-designate of Commerce Robert 
Mosbacher; Gayle Wilson, wife of California Sen. Pete Wilson, Penny Korth, 
co-chairman of the Inaugural, and Joan Holt, wife of Bobby Holt, the other 
co-chairman. 
More have come from Alexandre de Borchgrave, Baroness de Portenova (Sandra) 
from Texas and Acapulco; Anne Nitze, Eliska Coolidge and Washington journalist 
Betty Beale. 
Los Angeles will be represented by Gloria Holden, Carole Cook, Teran Davis, 
Iris Dart, Phyliss Hennigan, Abbe Leff and Rosemary Tomich. Also in the coterie 
will be Faye Spanos of Stockton and Willa Dean Lyon (wife of William Lyon, the 
Orange County real estate tycoon). 
Among other Californians on the Washington scene, hosting other parties, will 
be David Murdock, entertaining at a reception for top Bush donors on Friday 
before the Inaugural Ball. Typical of the numerous individual and embassy 
parties concurrent with the big major Inaugural bashes was the one Brad Freeman 
and Steve Dart hosted -- cocktails and dinner -- Wednesday evening at the 
Jockey Club. 
Lydia and Dr. Roscoe Webb of Bel-Air are among Angelenos in Washington for the 
festivities. Roscoe and President-elect Bush are both Yale graduates. 
IT'S OFFICIAL: The American Cinematheque will honor Steven Spielberg at its 
annual gala benefit, the Moving Picture Ball, on April 1. Sydney Pollack, 
chairman of Cinematheque's board of directors, reports that Spielberg was the 
unanimous choice. 
Lorraine and Sid Sheinberg will be honorary chairmen; 1,200 are expected at the 
Century Plaza ballroom. Peter Dekom, Cinematheque president, announces the New 
York Times has given a grant to underwrite costs and that the funds raised -- 
the goal is $350,000 -- will go for operations and planning. Gary Essert, 
founder/artistic director, reminds that Spielberg has directed five of the 10 
all-time top grossing films. 
OVERSOLD: Erlenne Sprague is both elated and sad. More than 175 checks more 
than the 400 capacity have come in for the Colleagues luncheon Feb. 14 honoring 
First Lady Nancy Reagan and benefiting the Children's Institute and its work 
with abused children. Here's the solution: Every nook and cranny around the 
Crystal Room of the Beverly Hills Hotel, including the bar area, will be 
table-set for an additional 100 guests, but the rest of the checks will be 
refunded. Don't despair. There will be other luncheons! 
SALUTE NOLAN: Diane Becket and Beverly Cruse are up to their hemlines in plans 
for the USC Town and Gown fashion luncheon March 2 saluting couturier Nolan 
Miller. He'll present the show, titled "Golden Dynasty," for more than 900 
members of Town and Gown, which has raised more than $7 million for scholarship 
endowment. 
KUDOS: To Caprice Alexandra Crane, daughter of Tina Louise and Les Crane of 
Beverly Hills, who debuted at the International Debutante Ball at the Waldorf 
in New York City. She follows in the footsteps of her mother, who also was 
presented at the Waldorf . . . 
To vascular surgeon Dr. Peter Weinberg of Beverly Hills and La Jolla, who gave 
the Christmas Eve party at his ski lodge in Vail, Colo. honoring Vice 
President-elect Dan and Marilyn Quayle . . . 
To Caroline Leonetti Ahmanson, speaking on "China Revisited" for the Muses, 
California Museum Foundation, this week . . . 
To the renowned hoteliers of the French Riviera, the Societe des Bains de Mer, 
feted this week at the Sunset Marquis Hotel. 
CONGRATULATIONS: Keith Comrie, Los Angeles' chief administrative officer, and 
Sandra McNutt, director of marketing, Arthur Andersen &amp; Co., are receiving 
good wishes after their marriage. The reception was held at the Parkway Grill. 
Former Los Angeles City Atty. Burt Pines performed the ceremony. Harry Hufford, 
administrative officer at Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, was best man, and Betty 
Gay, director of the Los Angeles Central Library, was designated "best woman." 
Among well-wishers congregating were Mayor Tom Bradley, Deputy Mayor Mike and 
Lacey Gage, City Council members Joel Wachs, Joy Picus, John Ferraro, Zev 
Yaroslavsky, Gil Lindsay, Marvin Braude and Mike Woo (with spouses); and Betty 
and Roy Anderson, Shel and Sandy Ausman, Ray and Sandra Remy, Russell and 
Jeanne Smith. 
FIGHTING BLINDNESS: Wonderland was donated to RP International by the 
California Medical Center, 1338 S. Hope, and it's named in honor of singer 
Stevie Wonder. 
Dedicated this week by Mayor Tom Bradley, Wonderland will fight blindness and 
serve the needs of those with retinitis pigmentosa. 
SAVING WATER: Pasadena Garden Club president Veva McKee, Diggers president 
Polly Ellis and Hancock Park Garden Club president Nancy Munger marshaled their 
members this week for a luncheon at the Valley Hunt Club to encourage members 
to plant California native plants to conserve water. 
