WORKER BLOWS WHISTLE ON ASBESTOS IN HOSPITAL 
The incident that forever changed Jerry Snell arrived without warning in a 
cloud of white asbestos dust six years ago. 
It occurred as Snell, a maintenance worker at Metropolitan State Hospital, was 
changing covers on large presses used to iron sheets and pillowcases. 
"I started to uncrate one of the new covers," he recalled recently. "I pulled 
it out, and the white stuff went everywhere." 
As nearby fans blew the asbestos fibers throughout the hospital's laundry, a 
worried Snell called his supervisors, who evacuated the building. 
The hospital was reprimanded by Cal/OSHA for not notifying the worker safety 
agency that asbestos was to be handled by employees. And Snell, imbued with a 
new awareness of asbestos hazards, was transformed into a whistle-blower. 
"That started the crusade," Snell, 42, said of his six-year effort to identify 
asbestos hazards at the Norwalk hospital and to protect maintenance workers 
from them. 
Snell's behind-the-scenes crusade -- waged mostly through conversations with 
other workers and repeated complaints to his union and his supervisors -- may 
have peaked in November, when Cal/OSHA cited the hospital for six violations of 
worker safety law. Acting on complaints by Snell and a second employee, 
investigators found crumbling, dangerous asbestos insulation in equipment rooms 
and crawl spaces of 20 of the facility's 76 buildings. 
Beginning with the 1983 laundry incident, the 1,500-employee psychiatric 
hospital has received a total of 16 citations on five occasions for 
asbestos-related problems, according to state documents. 
That record, say spokesmen for two unions representing about 50 maintenance and 
craft employees at the hospital, has identified Metropolitan as one of a 
handful of state facilities in Southern California whose asbestos problems 
require special union attention. 
Carpenters, plumbers, electricians, sheet-metal and heating-system workers are 
the employees whose jobs regularly place them in false ceilings, attics and 
basements -- the types of non-public places where frayed, brittle asbestos 
insulation has now been found. Hospital officials say there is no evidence that 
asbestos has posed a threat to patients or the public. 
Crumbling asbestos is extremely dangerous because its microscopic fibers can 
flake into the air and can be inhaled, creating a risk of lung cancer or other 
respiratory diseases. 
Several hospital workers said in interviews that they consider the recent 
Cal/OSHA citations strong evidence that hospital administrators are not 
concerned enough about asbestos. 
Three Citations 
"Where will (they) be in 15 years when I get lung cancer?" said maintenance 
worker Ralph Portugal. In August, Portugal said, he and two other workers 
ripped out a ceiling after a supervisor told them it contained no asbestos. But 
Cal/OSHA tests later showed that asbestos was present, and the agency issued 
three citations against the hospital. 
The three workers involved in the job said none of them wore respirators or 
protective clothing. 
Metropolitan administrators said procedures were followed during the August 
incident and defended their worker safety programs in general, saying they are 
extremely sensitive to complaints about possible asbestos exposure. 
"As we run into asbestos, we follow all the procedures. We constantly work with 
the unions. We don't put our employees at risk," William Silva, executive 
director at Metropolitan since 1987, said after the Cal/OSHA citations were 
issued in November. 
Silva said the hospital has identified asbestos hazards since at least 1982, 
when it began a $20-million rehabilitation of its buildings, all of which were 
built between 1916 and 1955. As in many public and private buildings erected 
before the 1980s, asbestos was used routinely as an insulator and fire 
retardant at Metropolitan. 
Hospital administrators have declined to answer specific questions about past 
incidents, saying that some supervisors involved have left the hospital. 
Several maintenance workers who were otherwise critical of the hospital's 
response to asbestos problems, acknowledged in interviews that the hospital has 
become more responsive in the last year or two with a change in some 
supervisors and administrators. Stricter state and federal regulations have 
also increased the awareness of asbestos hazards, they said. 
Even Snell -- a union steward who said he was twice threatened with dismissal 
in 1986 because of asbestos complaints and was twice exiled to the hospital's 
boiler room -- sees improvement. 
"We have problems with current management," Snell said, "but I see light at the 
end of the tunnel. We have a workable relationship." 
That has not always been the case, Snell and several of his co-workers said. 
'The Big Lie' 
Jim Failing, a steward for the Alliance of Trades and Maintenance, a union of 
state crafts workers and laborers, said, "The big lie for 10 years, and I don't 
know how many times I've heard it, was that there is no asbestos problem at 
Metropolitan State Hospital." 
Snell said his own experiences over the years show that supervisors have 
sometimes failed to adequately respond to known asbestos hazards and to dangers 
that could have been identified readily. 
After the 1983 laundry incident, for example, Snell said he told supervisors 
that he often encountered deteriorated asbestos in the hospital's mechanical 
rooms, where it insulated pipes and machinery. 
Hospital administrators responded to Snell's requests for more protective 
clothing and complete asbestos removal by saying that they were following all 
worker-protection laws. Costly asbestos removal, they said in letters to Snell, 
was being addressed by the Department of Mental Health on a statewide basis, 
depending on the severity of the hazard. 
They also said that a September, 1983, hospital test monitored by Cal/OSHA 
showed that maintenance workers performing a variety of jobs in the presence of 
brittle asbestos were not exposed to amounts that exceeded levels where special 
protection of workers is required. 
In 1985, Snell complained through his union about brittle asbestos in the 
boiler room, where he had been assigned for a year. A hospital manager 
acknowledged the problem in a letter to Snell, but the crumbling asbestos was 
not covered with a protective glue-like coating until 14 months later, 
according to Snell and hospital documents. 
In 1986, in what Snell described as an act of "utter frustration," he painted 
red arrows on pipes in a number of buildings to identify asbestos hazards. 
Supervisors cited him for misconduct, Snell said, explaining that the arrows 
were a hazard because they might be confused with those that indicate the flow 
of hot water and steam, causing accidents. 
Closed Crawl Spaces 
Most recently, Snell and Failing called Cal/OSHA last July with complaints 
about asbestos debris in crawl spaces beneath several buildings. The inquiry 
that followed prompted a Cal/OSHA investigator to close off crawl spaces and 
equipment rooms in 20 aging hospital buildings where debris was found. 
"He didn't even have to go under most of those buildings," Snell said. "You 
could just shine a flashlight on it. It's there for anybody to see. That's been 
the frustrating thing." 
Cal/OSHA, responding to those hazards and other safety problems including black 
widow spiders and exposed electrical wiring, cited the hospital in November for 
five "serious" violations of law and one lesser violation. 
Violations are classified as serious if they create a "substantial probability 
that an employee will suffer death or serious physical harm," and if the 
employer through "reasonable diligence" should have known of the problem and 
corrected it, according to Cal/OSHA. 
Crawl spaces in four of the same buildings were among 24 buildings at 
Metropolitan where asbestos hazards were discovered in a 1986 survey by the 
Office of the State Architect, state officials confirmed. They said, however, 
that hazards were rated low two years ago and prompt abatement was not 
required. 
Hospital officials say they have responded promptly to all known hazards. 
Employees are trained to identify asbestos, and a private contractor has been 
hired to remove it when it is friable, or crumbly, said Silva, who has been 
hospital director for a year and a half. 
"Anytime it's identified, it's blocked off until it's abated. We take this 
issue very seriously," Silva said. "When it comes to cost, and you're talking 
about a person's health and welfare, we're not going to quibble about cost." 
Jack Eubanks, Silva's assistant, noted in a recent interview that about 
$230,000 has been spent to remove or encapsulate hazardous asbestos in the 24 
buildings where hazards were identified in the 1986 state survey. 
As for Snell's allegations of harassment and near dismissal, Eubanks would not 
comment other than to say Snell's complaints about asbestos had nothing to do 
with his treatment by supervisors. 
But some workers see things differently. It is Snell, the determined union 
steward, whose name they often mention when describing their own increasing 
sensitivity to asbestos hazards at Metropolitan. 
"The supervisors class him as a troublemaker," maintenance worker Quincel 
Holley said. "But I see him as somebody who's doing something that's right. 
Jerry keeps them on their toes. They think, 'What's he going to do now?' And it 
benefits all of us." 
Generally, Snell is not a hard guy to get along with, said sheet-metal worker 
Jesus Barrios, "but as far as this asbestos thing, he's just been adamant that 
the men should not get in a situation where they endanger their health. He's 
just been very vocal about it." 
Snell, who lives in Norwalk with his wife, an elementary schoolteacher, and two 
teen-age children, said he never sought recognition through his role as a 
whistle-blower. 
But four years in the Navy after his 1964 graduation from Burbank High School 
helped build his resolve to confront problems directly, Snell said. Eight years 
with an aggressive union at the old Firestone tire plant in South Gate in the 
1970s also made him keenly aware of employees' rights, he said. 
"I tried to be a walking conscience for (Firestone) management," he said. 
Snell, who was then in his 20s, acknowledges that he made youthful mistakes at 
Firestone and said he may have developed a reputation as a nit-picker. 
Snell arrived at Metropolitan in 1981 and said he strictly followed orders 
until the laundry incident in February, 1983. After that, he said, he used his 
union experience to sometimes buck superiors when they ordered him onto 
asbestos jobs for which he thought he was not adequately trained or protected. 
"I might do it, but not without a kick and fight," he said. But usually, he 
said, he would file complaints then back away to give supervisors time to 
respond and for their anger to subside. 
To isolate him from other workers, Snell said, supervisors assigned him to a 
solitary watch of the hospital's four large steam-producing boilers in July, 
1984. He served there for 14 months and for 17 months more in 1986 and 1987 
until the boiler room was closed, he said. 
Tour by Managers 
However, Snell's complaints about brittle asbestos in the boiler room prompted 
a 1985 tour of the building by two hospital managers and, in 1986, the material 
was finally sealed off, according to Snell and hospital documents. 
Then he painted the red arrows on asbestos-laden pipes. "The administration at 
that time was refusing to discuss the (asbestos) issue," he said. 
About the same time, he was involved in a confrontation at an employee training 
session, where, he said, he challenged his supervisor's assertion that asbestos 
was not a hazard to hospital maintenance workers. 
He had survived a dismissal hearing just five months earlier, and the meeting 
was being videotaped, so he withheld comment at first, he said. 
"But after a few minutes, they just put down (another dissenter), so I picked 
up and it just turned into a shouting match between myself and the chief 
engineer," Snell said. "The next day they told me I was back down in the boiler 
room by myself." 
A letter formally notifying Snell of his August, 1986, reassignment to the 
boiler room graveyard shift said the move made "the most optimal use of 
engineering staff skills." Snell's union complained, charging harassment, but 
the assignment stuck. 
About the same time, according to a grievance filed by Barrios and 19 other 
crafts employees, the hospital formally notified the workers that they would 
routinely be required to help outside contractors in removing asbestos from the 
facility. 
The workers filed a grievance and won, with top hospital administrators 
agreeing that staff workers would only have to remove or encapsulate "minimal" 
amounts of asbestos when doing repairs. But that decision has sometimes been 
ignored, Barrios said. 
"You say, 'Isn't that asbestos?' And they say, 'No, it's safe. That's not 
asbestos,' " Barrios said. "It seems like management doesn't care if it's a 
danger to the worker as long as the work gets done. . . . They break their own 
rules." 
Difference of Opinion 
In response to such complaints, hospital administrator Eubanks said: "There 
would be a difference of opinion of what is major and what is minor, and that 
may be the crux of (the dispute)." 
It has been Metropolitan's policy since October, 1985, to use only outside 
contractors for large asbestos projects, Eubanks said. Properly equipped 
maintenance workers and craftsmen are sometimes directed to do minor repairs 
involving removal of small amounts of asbestos, as allowed by law, he said. 
Snell and other workers said they saw the hospital's 1986 attempt to begin 
regularly assigning them to asbestos abatement projects as the hospital's first 
open admission of a large asbestos problem. 
"They went from the official position that the stuff doesn't exist to, 'We 
admit we got it and guess who's going to get rid of it for us,' " Snell said. 
Three months later Snell took a leave of absence and filed an unsuccessful 
claim of disability caused by stress on the job. 
By the time he returned in January, 1987, administrative changes had begun to 
affect hospital policy on asbestos, said Snell and other workers. 
Since then, new safety regulations have put workers and supervisors on their 
guard, he said. 
In addition, Snell said, "They started saying to us, 'If you're concerned about 
asbestos, it's incumbent on you to protect yourself.' " Hospital policy, 
according to administrative responses to grievances about asbestos exposure in 
1988, is that workers are responsible for reporting unsafe conditions to their 
supervisors. 
The policy, though acknowledging the asbestos hazard, can be risky to follow, 
because it puts workers in the position of disobeying supervisors and facing 
discipline if the worker and his boss disagree on whether a job can be done 
safely, union officials said. 
Snell's status -- and perhaps his approach to problems -- also seems to have 
changed. 
Statewide Post 
He was named to his union's statewide contract negotiating team this year. Jim 
Tatum, the representative of the International Union of Operating Engineers who 
made the appointment, said Snell is "a very knowledgeable and very 
conscientious employee" who recognized Metropolitan's serious asbestos problem 
long before many others. 
"We are discovering in many of our state facilities that the problem is more 
extensive than we believed at first. It seems like it's just now being 
defined," Tatum said. 
Shop steward Failing, who has worked closely with Snell this year, said his 
colleague is respected partly because he can remain calm during tense 
situations. 
"He's more of a diplomat than I am," Failing said. "He gets on people's nerves 
in a different way than I do. He kind of still retains his sense of humor and 
not his hostility towards the administration. He doesn't show it, so sometimes 
he can communicate pretty good. It's gotten to be an emotional thing with me. 
When I go to work in the morning it's almost like suiting up to go into battle 
instead of going to make a living." 
Snell said that while asbestos problems remain serious, he can now joke with 
management. 
"I say, 'When are you going to reactivate the boiler room and put me back on 
graveyard?' It's nice to be able to joke about that," he said. "I think 
management thinks I'm a pain . . . but now I can walk into about any office any 
time and discuss problems they've refused to discuss in the past." 
With the air of someone who has won an important battle, Snell added: 
"(Supervisors) mean well, I think, but they're so confused about what to do and 
their hands are so tied by financing. I myself wouldn't want the responsibility 
of dealing with this asbestos problem." 
