TV EMPIRE; 
SATELLITES SPREAD THE SCRIPTURES 
The programs are beamed around the clock from a nondescript studio complex in 
an Orange County industrial park. Distributed in the United States through a 
network larger than that controlled by any other Christian evangelist, the 
signals go overseas, too, carrying a stern anti-communist message to Central 
America and encouragement for the government of South Africa. 
To finance this massive, virtually debt-free network, the evangelist raises 
millions -- perhaps as much as $44 million during 1988 -- with telethons that 
bring in almost as much as is raised by Billy Graham. 
All But Unknown 
But this is not Billy Graham, nor is it Pat Robertson or Jimmy Swaggart or any 
of the other big-name evangelists whose broadcasts have become familiar to the 
American public. This is the work of Paul F. Crouch, the son of an Assemblies 
of God missionary who has risen from an impoverished Midwestern childhood to 
put together a Christian broadcasting empire worth, by his account, an 
estimated $500 million. 
And although Crouch and his wife, Jan, are all but unknown to most of the 
American public and are accountable to no denomination or independent governing 
board, their Tustin-based Trinity Broadcasting Network owns more than 100 
television stations, the largest number controlled by a single owner in the 
United States. The network also owns more than 20 stations overseas. 
Unlike other major religious broadcasters, TBN maintains no college, cathedral 
or amusement park. What the network owns, and continues to acquire and build at 
an accelerating rate, are television stations and studios, adding at least 40 
new ones in 1988 alone. While TBN is carried on fewer cable systems than 
Robertson's CBN and the PTL network founded by Jim Bakker, it owns most of its 
stations and pays cash for whatever it buys. 
Great Institutional Dream 
Thanks in large part to Crouch's reputation for fiscal integrity and his 
self-effacing, on-screen personality, TBN reported a 10% increase in donations 
from the network's thousands of small contributors in 1988, a year in which 
most television evangelists saw a decline in contributions, attributed largely 
to scandals involving Bakker and Swaggart. 
Crouch maintains that television is his church and mission. The network does 
support various social welfare projects: a homeless shelter in Anaheim; soup 
kitchens in downtown Los Angeles and at some of his stations, and thousands of 
toys and Bibles distributed to children in the Third World. But these projects, 
Crouch acknowledges, account for only a fraction of TBN's budget and play no 
significant part of his great institutional dream. 
"The purpose of TBN," Crouch said in an interview, "is to turn every available 
dollar into expanding the hardware and the ministry and the media to reach as 
many people and to fulfill the 'Great Commission.' . . . I keep coming back to 
what Jesus said at the end of the Book of Matthew: 'Go into all the world 
preach the Gospel to every living creature.' " 
Crouch said during an October broadcast that his ultimate goal is to 
"dispossess the Devil of the airwaves." 
"Every channel, every satellite, every radio, every television ought to belong 
to God's people," he told viewers. "We should have possessed it many years ago. 
But we let the Devil have it. And, oh, he took it, yes he did. He was glad to 
have it. Satan has been using the airwaves with impunity for many years to 
curse and damn the souls of men and women, boys and girls . . . and we let it 
happen." 
To orchestral music and enthusiastic applause, an attractive, middle-aged 
couple -- silver-haired and dressed like prosperous Southern Californians -- 
sweep down a staircase into what appears to be a spacious living room, the 
walls lined with paintings. 
On one side of the room is a blazing fire in a large fireplace; on the other, a 
large white Bosendorfer piano. As the music and the applause fade, the smiling 
couple move easily, arm-in-arm, to a pair of padded armchairs before a marble 
coffee table. 
This is "Praise the Lord," hosted by Paul and Jan Crouch, the centerpiece of 
the Trinity Broadcasting Network. Their talk show is broadcast live, coast to 
coast, every weeknight for two or three hours at 7 o'clock Pacific Standard 
Time, and rebroadcast twice more during the next 24-hour period. 
Image Change 
In 15 years of polishing his delivery and appearance, Crouch, 54, has developed 
a fondness for double-breasted blazers with elaborate, embroidered crests. The 
clean-shaven face and crew-cut pictured in early newsletters have given way to 
a salt-and-pepper mustache and a full head of hair, held perfectly in place by 
what he calls "my hundred-mile-an-hour hair spray." 
Jan Crouch, 50, with her trademark bouffant hairdo, is her husband's constant 
on-screen companion and the bubbly counterpoint to his sometimes staid manner. 
Prone to tears and fits of giggling, Jan is referred to by her husband as "my 
little spark plug." He says she was cured by God of severe depression 15 years 
ago. 
TBN's 24-hour programming features an eclectic mix of upbeat Christian music 
and videos, soap operas, aerobics, game shows and, most recently, John Jacobs 
and the Power Team. This crew of bulky weightlifters and athletes blow up hot 
water bottles until they explode, snap baseball bats over their thighs, break 
out of handcuffs, rip phone books and break concrete blocks with their 
foreheads -- all in order to demonstrate the power Jesus gives them. 
The message that emanates from TBN is conservative, Christian and evangelical. 
Like other Pentecostals, the Crouches believe in speaking in tongues and faith 
healing, but evangelical figures who may not share those beliefs remain welcome 
on his "Praise" program. Crouch tries to steer clear of doctrinal disputes with 
other religious figures, including those who do not buy time on TBN, and he is 
occasionally sought after as a peacemaker. 
Crouch maintains that he is not political, although on the day Pat Robertson 
announced his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination, Crouch 
voiced his support and asked Robertson what TBN viewers could do to help him 
win. Crouch also often uses his program to attack Marxist and leftist regimes, 
and guests on "Praise" and other TBN shows have vociferously supported U.S. aid 
to the Nicaraguan Contras. 
Although he says he opposes apartheid, Crouch and his guests regularly defend 
the regime of South Africa's P. W. Botha, calling on viewers to pray for the 
nation's president and to oppose U.S. economic sanctions against Pretoria. 
Today the network is the largest holder of Federal Communication 
Commission-issued television licenses in the country, with 14 full-power, 
commercial UHF stations, including two owned by a subsidiary, National Minority 
Television Inc., three full-power educational non-commercial outlets and 
another 125 low-power outlets -- inexpensive stations that cover a small 
geographic area -- on the air, under construction or in prospect within the 
year, according to the ministry. Scores of other independent stations are 
affiliated with TBN. The ministry would not say exactly how many, but in a 
recent newsletter Crouch claimed that "we could have 170 stations on the air by 
the end of 1988!" 
(The major commercial networks, such as NBC, own fewer stations than TBN, but 
because their stations are located in the largest cities and there are scores 
of affiliates, they reach many more potential viewers than any religious 
network.) 
The network is carried on about 580 cable systems, whose operators are offered 
an annual incentive of 25 cents per subscriber. A program exchange with Pat 
Robertson's Christian Broadcasting Network puts Crouch's "Praise" show onto 
7,000 more cable systems. In addition, independent ministers such as Swaggart 
and Schuller, along with Oral Roberts' son, Richard, buy regular blocks of time 
on TBN. 
Number of Viewers Unclear 
Despite its wide reach, it's not clear how many people watch TBN on a regular 
basis. Crouch's only claim is that the network is available to 70% of the homes 
in the United States, a total potential audience TBN estimates at 100 million. 
But because TBN does not subscribe to Arbitron or A. C. Neilson, the two major 
audience monitoring services, there is no accurate way to gauge the number of 
viewers. 
In Central America and the Caribbean, Crouch has been building more outposts 
for his broadcasting empire, which already includes a relay tower in Key West, 
Fla., that enables TBN to beam programming from its Miami affiliate directly 
into Cuba. One of his goals in acquiring stations in Central America, Crouch 
told viewers, is to "surround the Sandinistas with pincers, pincers of love." 
With the encouragement of the South African government, Crouch has already 
built Southern Africa's first Christian television station, in the nominally 
independent black homeland of Ciskei, and has signed an agreement with a second 
homeland, Bophutatswana, to build a station there that will beam into the 
Johannesburg-Pretoria area. He also has met with Botha to pursue plans to 
establish South Africa's first nationwide Christian broadcasting network. 
Crouch's relationship with the South African government is a source of 
controversy. 
Neither Ciskei nor Bophutatswana are recognized by the U.S. government, which 
considers them part of Pretoria's scheme to strip the country's black majority 
of South African citizenship and assign it to barren, poverty-stricken outlying 
areas. 
Crouch was sharply criticized by Randall Robinson, the head of TransAfrica, a 
Washington lobbying organization that focuses on isolating the South African 
government. 
"I don't think you can more grievously and more measurably support apartheid 
than he has," Robinson said. "To lend massive television technology to the 
legitimizing of this forceful warehousing on these remote parcels of land 
amounts to the most important, significant support for the apartheid system 
that one can give, particularly in the United States." 
Paul F. Crouch was born in 1934 on an Iowa farm. His father died in 1941, his 
health broken during service as a missionary in Egypt, where the family, 
including young Paul, lived. In Springfield, Mo., the headquarters of the 
denomination, Crouch's mother worked as a seamstress to support the family. 
"We had no real means of support," he recalled. "The church was not really able 
to care for us. For a while we got I think $20 a month from a kind of 
minister's retirement fund or something, for my mother, and there was a little 
period of time where the state of Missouri actually stepped in and paid a small 
stipend of child support and child care for my sister and me. 
"The difference between, you know, turning lights off and on in the house was 
the difference between whether we had adequate food to eat sometimes," he said, 
"so I've always been very, very careful with finances. It was just absolutely 
ingrained in me from earliest childhood to be scrupulously honest with 
everything that we were entrusted with." 
Introduced to Ham Radio 
As a 15-year-old, Crouch's life was changed when a Linotype operator named 
Lawrence Bake-well, the husband of the woman who was giving him free piano 
lessons, introduced him to the wonders of ham radio. 
Within a few years, Crouch, by then an Assemblies of God seminary student in 
Springfield, went on to form a ham radio club. He built a small campus radio 
station because "before long it really dawned on me that this electronic tool 
called radio and later television would really be the way to get the Gospel 
that we preach out in a mass way." 
After graduating from the seminary and marrying Jan -- the daughter of a 
prominent Assemblies of God minister -- in 1953, Crouch accepted a job as 
associate pastor of a tiny church in Rapid City, S.D. The post paid so little 
that he moonlighted at a local radio station. 
"I earned my living being a disc jockey and then working in the church after 
hours and on weekends," he said. 
The radio work led to the opportunity to build and help run one of the first 
television stations in the area, an NBC affiliate. 
After a few church jobs in the Midwest, Crouch was invited to Burbank to work 
with the Assemblies of God's new motion picture and television division. In 
1973, with $20,000 of his own savings and pledges of support from a few 
supporters, Crouch bought what became KTBN Channel 40, a struggling UHF station 
in Tustin. 
It was at this point, Crouch said, that he had the vision that motivated him 
and shaped what became the Trinity Broadcasting Network. It was the nearest 
thing in his life he can recall to a dramatic, born-again experience. 
"I'd heard the old-timers talk about dreams and visions and seeing things 'in 
the spirit' so-called, but I'd never really had an experience like that," he 
said. "But I did this afternoon. I was conscious (and) awake. . . . It was as 
though the ceiling of my den completely turned into a giant TV screen and I saw 
. . . the outline of the entire North American continent as though I were out 
in outer space, and as I watched, really transfixed by it all, I saw a great 
light emerge right over the center of the North American continent and from 
that light began to issue bright streams of light and I saw it strike major 
geographic parts of the United States -- New York, Miami, the tip of Texas, 
California, the Seattle area. 
"As that stream of light would strike the New York area, for example, a 
secondary light was illuminated and from that secondary light, little thin 
pencil threads of light began to emanate out in little dots of light, until the 
whole map of the North American continent was just covered with this network of 
light. And I said, 'Lord, what does this mean? What am I seeing?' Again in my 
spirit, I don't know if it was an audible voice or not, but I heard one word: 
'Satellite.' " 
In retrospect, Crouch said, "I knew I had heard the voice of God, and I 
absolutely obeyed it and had no second thoughts or qualms." 
From then on, Crouch replicated the KTBN pattern, buying UHF stations in small 
and medium-size markets -- many of which suddenly became affordable when cable 
appeared to be the wave of television's future -- for as much cash up front as 
he could raise. By the early and mid-1980s, TBN's acquisition began to 
accelerate, until the network reached the ownership limits set by the FCC -- 12 
commercial stations. Crouch then turned his attention to establishing 
subsidiary and affiliated companies that added stations. He also started 
acquiring licenses for low-power stations that are exempted from FCC ownership 
limits. 
Although he proudly points to his own organization as a bastion of frugality 
and strict financial accountability, TBN is ineligible for membership in either 
the voluntary Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability or the National 
Religious Broadcasters. The NRB's new membership rules require organizations 
with annual incomes of more than $10,000 to have a majority of board members 
from outside the family. 
All of TBN's corporate structures are dominated by Crouch, his wife, his 
brother and TBN employees. Crouch, who voluntarily gave up his Assemblies of 
God preaching credential in 1973 when he began TBN, is not subject to that 
denomination's discipline. 
"Accountability is the watch-word for the church, for TV ministries, as well as 
industry and government," Crouch told an Oct. 7, 1987, hearing of the 
subcommittee on oversight of the House Ways and Means Committee, noting that 
TBN reports to its supporters and the IRS that the ministry spends less than 8% 
of its total revenues for fund raising. 
TBN's budget for 1987 was about $40 million, Crouch told the committee, with 
just under half the total earmarked for building new stations. The monthly 
satellite bill is $140,000. 
According to material provided to The Times and the IRS by TBN, Crouch is 
listed as president and voting director of all 10 boards that make up the 
network's enterprises, and each board is controlled by Crouch family members 
and employees. 
Relatives on TBN and related payrolls and their salaries, according to the 
ministry, include: 
* Crouch's wife, Jan, ($42,200), who is co-host of "Praise" and is the TBN 
program director, set designer and editor of the 500,000-circulation monthly 
newsletter. 
* Their son, Matthew, ($33,800), who serves as producer-director of "Praise" 
and other TBN shows. 
* Matthew's wife, Laurie, ($10,400), co-host with Matthew of a TBN show. 
* Crouch's brother, Philip A. Crouch, ($36,400), TBN's chief of staff, and 
Philip Crouch's wife, who works in the TBN's public affairs office in Tustin. 
* Also, Crouch's sister and brother-in-law manage TBN's Oklahoma City 
affiliate, and Jan Crouch's sister and brother-in-law manage the Miami station. 
Crouch himself is paid modestly by religious broadcast standards. He took a 
combined salary and housing allowance of $70,542 in 1987, with no deferred 
income or retirement plan, according to documents filed with the IRS. He writes 
no books, makes no records and accepts no commercial speaking engagements. He 
says he receives no clothing allowance and he lives in the same Corona del Mar 
home he bought in 1971 for $44,000, although it might sell for seven or eight 
times that today. 
In addition to a number of trucks, service vehicles, vans and high-tech 
transmitters, TBN's fleet includes two private jets, a 1987 BMW sedan, a 1984 
Cadillac and a 1984 Lincoln, as well as a 1972 Jaguar sedan -- which are made 
ailable to the Crouches for their personal use and for guests on the show. The 
ministry also purchased the home next door to the Crouches for use as an office 
and guest house for more than $300,000. 
Only two of the more than 400 non-family employees on TBN's 1987 $4.8-million 
payroll had salaries above $40,000, according to information provided by TBN to 
the IRS. As with Crouch family members, none of the employees receives any 
pension or retirement benefits, and no loans are made to any director, officer 
or employee. 
"We try to see that employees' needs are met," Crouch said, "but it is just my 
personal philosophy, born of a zeal and a desire to get the Gospel out as far 
as I can with the least amount of expense possible, to keep salaries lean and 
mean and to keep overhead and expenses down, even in the area of buying 
equipment." 
This kind of careful economic management, combined with steadily rising gifts 
from viewers and Crouch's own canny sense of broadcasting, has yielded dramatic 
results. 
Although the worth of TBN was listed for Congress at $75 million, its market 
value is thought to be much higher. At one time, Crouch said, TBN was offered 
$150 million for the Tustin, Phoenix and Miami outlets alone by one of the 
home-shopping television networks. In all, Crouch estimates the market value of 
TBN at $500 million. 
And who has paid for this? TBN says more than 80% of its budget comes from its 
twice-yearly "Praise-a-Thon" appeals, each of which lasts a week. In 1987, 
about $38 million was raised, $2 million more than was raised in 1986, 
according to TBN figures. The network reports that it will get about $44 
million from the two 1988 telethons, making them among the most lucrative 
fund-raising appeals on U.S. television. 
Crouch's long and steady success, says the Rev. Robert Schuller of Garden 
Grove's Crystal Cathedral, can be attributed to the fact that "Paul has avoided 
the temptation to be negative and divisive." 
And, unlike other televangelists who have built broadcasting empires, Crouch is 
not on camera at every opportunity. He and Jan host their own show only two 
nights a week (guest hosts appear the other three nights) and Crouch prefers to 
exercise his control in the board rooms and behind the scenes. 
But some critics charge that Crouch's control of TBN is iron-fisted and 
tailored to his own beliefs. These critics say that some broadcasters who 
differ with Crouch on the finer points of faith are priced off the network or 
not sold time at all. 
"The final court of appeal is Paul's theology," said Walter Martin, author of 
"Kingdom of the Cults" and director of the Christian Research Institute in 
Irvine, a Christian think tank. "One man has the right to keep any program off 
the air if he chooses, and he exercises it regularly," in the process creating 
"a mom-and-pop operation masquerading as a nonprofit corporation." 
Others also complain about the lack of accountability. 
"They have taken millions of dollars from millions of people out there, and 
have used that to further their own interests . . . to acquire properties over 
which they alone preside, with no accountability," said Dave Hunt, author of 
"The Seduction of Christianity" and who said he has been banished from TBN for 
years. "If you take other people's money you should fairly represent them. They 
are using their stations to present a fanatical, fringe element of 
Christianity." 
Crouch responded to Martin's and Hunt's charges in a conciliatory letter to 
them, by saying that "everyone has a 'little heresy' in the opinion of another 
teacher, so why not preach salvation . . . and let the Holy Spirit work it 
out?" 
TRINITY BROADCASTING NETWORK IN WESTERN HEMISPHERE 
COMMERCIAL, FULL-POWER, UHF STATIONS 
1. KTBN-TV, Channel 40, Tustin 
2. KPAZ-TV, Channel 21, Phoenix 
3. WHFT-TV, Channel 45, Miami 
4. KTBO-TV, Channel 14, Oklahoma City 
5. WTBY-TV, Channel 54, Poughkeepsie, N.Y. 
6. KTBW-TV, Channel 20, Tacoma-Seattle, Wash. 
7. WKOI-TV, Channel 43, Richmond, Ind. 
8. KNAT-TV, Channel 23, Albuquerque, N.M. 
9. WLXI-TV, Channel 61, Greensboro-Winston Salem, N.C. 
10. WDLI-TV, Channel 17, Canton/Akron/Cleveland, Ohio 
11. WCLJ-TV, Channel 42, Bloomington, Ind. 
12. KDTX-TV, Channel 58, Dallas 
RADIO 
13. KGHO-AM/FM, Aberdeen, Wash. 
NATIONAL MINORITY TELEVISION, INC. 
Operated by TBN under special Congressional provisions to promote minority 
involvement. 
14. KTDZ-TV, Channel 24, Portland, Ore. 
15. KMLM-TV, Channel 42, Midland-Odessa, Tex. 
COMMUNITY EDUCATIONAL TELEVISION 
16. KITU-TV, Channel 34, Beaumont, Tex., 
17. KLUJ-TV, Channel 44, Harlingen, Tex. 
18. KETH-TV, Channel 14, Houston 
TBN operates an additional 125 low power stations throughout the county. 
FOREIGN OPERATIONS 
TBN is either broadcasting or planning new operations in the following 
countries. 
Grenada 
St. Lucia 
El Salvador 
Guatemala 
Honduras 
Italy 
Taiwan 
Finland 
South Africa 
People's Republic of China 
Source: TBN, Federal Communications Commission 
