STAGE REVIEW; 
2 SHOWS SHARE BILL BUT FAIL TO ADD UP TO MUCH AT WELK RESORT THEATRE 
"George M!," a musical ode to the late showman George Michael Cohan, is the 
kind of musical that the "Yankee Doodle Dandy" himself would have liked -- not 
too deep, but with lots of dancing, singing and vaudevillian shtick gliding on 
the surface like an emotional Ice Capades. 
Does the hero need a few tears to make him even more lovable? Let's have his 
wife leave him, for the "crime" of being a workaholic. In a celebratory scene 
of theater success, he shows his generosity by signing over half of his 
royalties to his father, while the next Mrs. Cohan-to-be stares at him with 
adoring goo-goo eyes. 
If Cohan would have liked the script, he certainly would have loved the songs, 
a winning score culled from the many hits he wrote: "Yankee Doodle Dandy," 
"Over There," "Give My Regards to Broadway," "Mary" and "You're a Grand Old 
Flag." 
But the show itself, which plays at the Lawrence Welk Resort Theatre through 
March 11, teases rather than pleases with intimations of the complex man behind 
the simplicity of his presentation. 
Who was this George M. Cohan, really? Only a brief, careful outline of facts is 
revealed in this tribute. He was born into a vaudevillian family at the turn of 
the century, by the age of 9 stepped into the act of "The Four Cohans," by 23 
had expanded his first vaudeville sketch into a Broadway musical, and, by 26, 
had scored the first of what would turn out to be dozens of Broadway hits that 
later earned him a reputation as the father of American musical comedy theater. 
He did end up outliving his popularity, however. His last four shows, all of 
which he starred in, were failures. And, despite the lingering popularity of 
his songs, few of his musicals are ever revived. 
Just as audiences in Cohan's later years expected more sophistication from the 
impresario than he was able to give, it is hard to imagine the modern audience 
that wouldn't find "George M!," which played Broadway in 1968, lacking. Forget 
psychological complexity. This play not only doesn't have answers, it hasn't 
even figured out there are questions. 
Why was Cohan so driven to create songs and musicals? Because he desperately 
needed to rescue his family's act from being hopelessly mediocre? Where did his 
tremendous confidence come from that allowed him to be bashed by critics year 
after year and still know -- until near the end -- how to give the public what 
they wanted? 
And did he lie about his birthday (July 3 instead of July 4) simply to pass 
himself off as the Yankee Doodle Boy born on Independence Day? Was the source 
of all the patriotism that inspired his flag-waving songs and routines the real 
thing, or were they done for effect because he knew what would sell? 
And where and when was the child born who helped compile and revise this 
material? Poignantly, that daughter, Mary Cohan, must have realized herself 
that she didn't fit into a neat picture frame when she omitted herself from the 
story. 
One thing a consummate showman like Cohan wouldn't have liked is the Welk 
sending in a nearly inaudible understudy as Cohan's first wife at the Sunday 
matinee, with a script in hand, without so much as an apology or a pre-show 
warning of how unprepared the understudy would be. 
With all that pitted against it, the show still nearly redeems itself by 
presenting an opportunity to hear those highly hummable Cohan melodies one more 
time. Donn Simione as Cohan, Sherri Sperling Bannister as Cohan's sister, 
Josie, and Suzan Meier as Broadway star Fay Templeton, all deliver vocally. 
Randy Doney ages gracefully as Cohan's father, Jerry, the older vaudevillian, 
and Cynthia Gray is lovely and appealing as the actress Cohan hired who got 
recast as his wife. 
If Rob Barron's direction isn't deep, his choreography is deft and Simione and 
Bannister, in particular, tap dance in style. The mystery of this production is 
why such rich raw material could not have generated a more satisfying show. 
Performances at 8 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday -- Saturday with matinees at 1:45 
Tuesday -- Thursday and Sunday at 8860 Lawrence Welk Drive, Escondido. 
"Catch Me If You Can," which alternates with "George M!" at the Lawrence Welk 
through Feb. 18, is a mystery of another sort -- a whodunit that aspires to run 
in the tradition of "Sleuth" and "Deathtrap." 
A man's wife disappears on their honeymoon. A priest returns the wife only to 
have the man declare, horrified, that the woman isn't his wife and is only 
posing in the part to kill him and get his insurance money. Can the man get 
Inspector Levine to believe him? Can the woman get the inspector to believe 
her? And will poor Sidney, who delivers sandwiches to this quarrelsome couple, 
end up looking like one of his own Swiss cheeses with a little bit of catsup on 
the side? 
No more hints -- as those who guess the killer correctly during intermission 
are in the running to win a golfing weekend at the Welk. 
There are more holes in the plot than in that very same golf course, but none 
that couldn't be danced over by a nimble-enough cast. 
Unfortunately, the actors here lack chemistry, with the strongest 
characterizations, alas, falling to the bit players. The play cries out for 
larger-than-life star turns, but Harold MacPherson Jr. does the best with a 
dandy Jack Gilford-like interpretation of Sidney the sandwich man, and Fred 
Bailey finishes a strong second with his suspiciously beatific Irish priest. 
The usually exquisite Rosina Widdowson-Reynolds had a chance to smolder here as 
the wife, in Kathleen ("Body Heat") Turner style; instead, she maintains a cool 
aloofness as if she'd rather be someplace else. Nonnie Vishner as Inspector 
Levine could use more Detective Columbo in his homey delivery. As the man who's 
seeking his missing wife, John Shull pours on the anxiety but without a sense 
of inner direction that would make the portrayal memorable. 
All of which makes the lingering question not whodunit, but why couldn't they 
have dunit better? 
Performances at 8 p.m. Monday, Wednesday and Sunday with matinees at 1:45 p.m. 
Monday, Friday and Saturday at 8860 Lawrence Welk Drive, Escondido. 
