NEW HAHN BUILDING AIMS HIGH 
Developer Ernest Hahn said he and his partner Harry Summers will begin 
construction "within two or three months" on what will be the tallest building 
in the Golden Triangle. 
The project will commence despite the area's high office vacancy rate, which is 
likely to increase over the next year with the completion of half a dozen 
office buildings now under construction. 
The value of the planned 17-story, 325,000-square-foot building was estimated 
by Hahn at $80 million. The building will be the last of six buildings in the 
850,000-square-foot Plaza at La Jolla Village complex. No leases have been 
signed for the structure to be situated on La Jolla Village Drive across from 
University Towne Center shopping mall. 
The office space vacancy rate in the mushrooming UTC area is now a high 25%, 
said Ron Miller, a marketing consultant at C. W. Clark/Rancon Real Estate. 
Six buildings totaling more than 800,000 square feet of office space are under 
construction and scheduled to be completed over the next year, Miller said. 
Among those is the 225,000-square-foot Aventine building, scheduled to open by 
the end of 1989. The structure is part of a hotel and restaurant complex at 
Interstate 5 and La Jolla Village Drive. 
Also under way is the 225,000-square-foot La Jolla Executive Center, which is 
scheduled to open by September. A development of Alan I. Kay, the building is 
situated at La Jolla Village Drive and Genesee Avenue. 
Hahn said the high vacancy rates do not worry him because the Plaza at La Jolla 
Village has been able to lease a disproportionately large share of the office 
space in the area. Last year the Plaza accounted for 120,000 square feet of the 
250,000 square feet of offices leased in the area, Hahn said. 
Other developers are diverting their plans to other types of buildings, Miller 
said. The Lomas Santa Fe development firm, for example, is building a 
68,000-square-foot medical office building in its Regent's Square development 
on La Jolla Village Drive. 
The market should be good for the medical offices, since vacancy rates are now 
close to zero at "on-site" medical office buildings next to nearby Scripps 
Memorial, Scripps Clinic and Veterans Administration hospitals, Miller said. 
