SUBURBS' POLITICAL CLOUT STACKS DECK AGAINST CITIES 
Suburban political power has stacked the deck against attempts by urban 
lawmakers to oppose Gov. George Deukmejian's budget proposals to limit and 
reduce medical aid and welfare benefits. 
A clear example of that is Los Angeles County, where the state's biggest 
collection of suburbs -- most with conservative voting histories -- ring an 
urban area, the city of Los Angeles, where large numbers of poor who are 
dependent on aid payments and public hospitals and clinics are concentrated. 
The numerical dominance of suburban lawmakers in the Legislature assumed new 
importance Wednesday as such Democratic urban legislators as Sens. David A. 
Roberti and Diane Watson of Los Angeles prepared to oppose the Republican 
governor's budget proposal. 
They will do so in a long process in which many factors will play a part -- 
disputes between cities and counties; the power of Democratic leaders of the 
Senate and Assembly; the lame duck status of the governor, and even drug 
company lobbyists fighting Administration proposals to reduce Medi-Cal 
prescription drug payments. 
But two political scientists said the impact of suburban power on the budget 
process is a graphic illustration of how California's changing political 
demography -- with new suburbs overpowering old cities -- is affecting state 
policies and legislative politics. 
"This is just one factor in a complex process," said Alan Heslop of the Rose 
Institute, a Claremont-McKenna College political think tank. But he said it is 
an important part in the playing out of the budget debate. 
Bruce Cain, a Caltech political scientist, said, "These suburban legislators 
reflect their constituents on issues." And these voters have been hostile in 
the past to more welfare spending, he said. 
"I reject the idea they are selfish people," said Assemblyman Tom Hayden, 
(D-Santa Monica). "But they are skeptical. They are like K mart shoppers. They 
want to know what will be done with their tax dollars." 
The Los Angeles County legislative delegation, largest in Sacramento, is 
dominated by senators and Assembly members from suburban areas by almost a 2-1 
margin. 
Adding to suburban power is the makeup of the Los Angeles County Board of 
Supervisors, which operates the state-federal-county financed welfare and 
health programs. Three of its five members are conservative suburbanites who 
have little enthusiasm for doing battle in Sacramento for welfare recipients. 
That makes it unlikely that the Sacramento delegation will get sharp prodding 
from the County Hall of Administration in Los Angeles. 
Cain said that population growth in the county from the middle class on up has 
been in the suburbs, and these are the people most likely to vote. Urban 
population growth has been from the poor, for the most part, who tend to vote 
less. 
Although Republican registration is increasing in suburban areas, party lines 
are not always determining factors on such cutting-edge issues as welfare. 
Democratic Assemblyman Richard Katz of Sepulveda represents a prosperous 
middle-class San Fernando Valley district around Cal State Northridge where 
Democrats hold a registration lead of about 20%. 
But they are not especially loyal to a party identified with liberal policies 
such as the Great Society, generous welfare payments and civil rights 
legislation. While Democratic U.S. Sen. Alan Cranston received 53% of the Katz 
district vote in 1986, President Reagan, who rose to fame as a welfare critic, 
overwhelmingly carried the area when he was reelected in 1984. 
Thus Democrat Katz, while a close ally of liberal Assembly Speaker Willie 
Brown, is cautious in discussing the budget. Asked about the health and welfare 
parts of the budget, he said, "I don't know yet." Keenly aware of the concerns 
of his constituents, he said, "I have to find out why Cal State Northridge 
didn't get some of the buildings it was supposed to get." 
Heslop said the growth of conservative suburban political power in the 
Legislature would have been even greater if it had not been for Democratic 
reapportionments of the early 1980s. 
"Nobody can look at the statewide electorate and not be impressed by its 
conservative, anti-tax bias," Heslop said. "The presidential election, the 
gubernatorial election, the last Senate election (Republican Sen. Pete Wilson's 
reelection) put a different cast on the state than the legislative and 
congressional elections." 
Control by Democrats 
He referred to the fact that Democrats maintained control of the Legislature 
and of the congressional delegation, whose districts were also drawn by 
Democrats. 
The political arithmetic is expected to force the liberal Democratic leadership 
in the Senate and Assembly to wage their fight against the Deukmejian cuts in 
subtle, intricate ways. 
For example, Katz noted that Speaker Brown has put a large number of urban 
Democrats on the Assembly Ways and Means Committee, that house's budget-writing 
body. "The committee has enough urban folks so that the urban areas are 
represented," he said. 
And, it takes a two-thirds majority of the 80-member Assembly and 40-member 
Senate to pass a budget, where most bills require only a simple majority. That 
ability to deny a two-thirds edge enhances the power of the outnumbered 
urbanites. 
Force Concessions 
With that leverage, Katz said, liberals could force concessions from Deukmejian 
and legislative Republicans. In exchange for going along with his proposal to 
deny cost-of-living increases for welfare recipients, Katz said, liberals could 
demand strong support from him and the conservative Republican lawmakers for 
repealing the Gann limit on state spending. Deukmejian has already said he is 
willing to discuss it. 
But political scientist Cain said the conservative constituencies of Democrats 
such as Katz limit the ability of liberals such as Speaker Brown to fight 
Deukmejian. Rank-and-file Democratic lawmakers fear too liberal of a 
leadership, he said. 
"They (the leaders) have to deal internally with these divisions (between urban 
and suburban Democrats) because part of the price of staying in power is having 
a homogenous caucus," Cain said. "Underlying (the debate over) these cuts are 
the fundamental values that divide them (Democrats)." 
