IN THE GUTTER WITH TABLOID TV; 
VIDEOTAPE OF LONG BEACH 'STING' HAS A BLIND SPOT: TRUTH 
Stay tuned for "Drug Wars U.S.A." Watch undercover narcs as they kick in the 
doors of America's drug lords . . . watch the dope dealers fight back . . . 
Right after this commercial message. 
It has been called tabloid television, shows that titillate with little 
substance and much sensationalism. Critics scowl, but the ratings prove that 
this is what America likes to watch. It is presumed that there is a wide berth 
of believability between network television news and shows like Geraldo 
Rivera's assault on Al Capone's secret vault. It is also presumed that if "one 
picture is worth a thousand words," you can't argue with what five minutes' 
worth of videotape shows. Last weekend both suppositions were proved wrong. 
We cut now to Long Beach, where a news crew for NBC's "Today Show" had secreted 
a camera and microphone in the car of a black man who claims that Long Beach 
police officers are racists. The NBC cameras were to capture proof of this on 
videotape. 
What we television viewers eventually saw was a confrontation between the 
police critic and a white officer who had stopped the car. We saw the man get 
out of the car, agitated and complaining, and the officer responding; the audio 
was heavily censored, bleeping out the officer's use of obscenities. Next the 
officer appeared to be pushing the man into a plate-glass store window. We 
heard the man screaming over silhouetted images of him apparently being 
manhandled by the officer. 
Was this a news report or tabloid television? Did NBC violate its own policy by 
staging, or coming close to staging, a news event? To the average viewer, the 
tape proves police abuse. Or does it? 
What didn't the tape show? 
Consider this incident from a police officer's point of view: 
Police make traffic stops probably hundreds of times a day throughout 
metropolitan Los Angeles. For most people who are stopped, it's a disquieting 
experience. Most people do not jump out of their cars when stopped by police, 
and most certainly don't become confrontational. 
That wasn't the case in Long Beach. The police critic had his own agenda. He 
got out of the car -- another man stayed in the driver's seat -- walked toward 
the two officers and, in keeping with his script, refused to obey their 
commands. This man, himself a police officer (now on a stress disability 
leave), knew from experience exactly how far to push the officers to evoke a 
dramatic response. He played his role perfectly. 
Most police officers in this situation will be asking themselves: Why is the 
guy doing this? Is he trying to divide our attention? Is he armed? What's the 
driver doing? Is he going to come out firing? 
While these life-threatening concerns are flashing through the officer's mind, 
the responsibility of the moment is to establish control of the situation. 
Talking tough, offensive as it sounds to most people, sometimes has its place. 
Next the videotape showed the storefront glass breaking. The police critic 
maintains that his face was pushed into the window, yet when he was interviewed 
the next day, close-up on camera, there was no evidence of injury to his face. 
The officer, however, cut his hand severely enough to require stitches. What, 
or who, shattered the window? The full videotape may -- or may not -- answer 
that question. 
The police critic's screaming voice was heard over murky pictures that 
supposedly showed the officer doing something to cause the man pain. Actually 
the shadowy images, filmed from across the dark street, only dramatically imply 
mistreatment. Unfortunately, NBC accepted it as factual. 
No, these pictures will need a lot more than a thousand words to explain, in an 
investigation that will dissect exactly what happened and how the officers 
handled it. If misconduct is determined, it is likely that the officer will be 
disciplined -- and probably sued by the police critic. NBC should cooperate and 
provide all the videotape that records the incident, not just the high-drama 
part that was broadcast. This is how a fair investigation is conducted -- with 
all of the available evidence. 
The unsettling thing about this event is that it gives police something else to 
worry about besides surviving the next "routine" traffic stop: Are they being 
set up for ambush by another edition of tabloid TV? 
