SAN DIEGO AT LARGE / ANTHONY PERRY: IS THERE A FUTURE IN DEAD-END PUBLISHING? 
Psssst. Wanna buy a book with profiles of 12 condemned killers, a history of 
capital punishment, and a complete listing of the nation's Death Row inmates? 
If so, call Hare Productions in Carlsbad. They've got 13,000 copies in the 
warehouse. 
It's called "Death Row" ($19.95, 225 pages, fully illustrated). It's the latest 
creation of Glenn Hare, 58, a former San Diego cop turned magazine publisher 
and emergency gear manufacturer. 
"We started working on it at about the time of the Ted Bundy execution," Hare 
said. "I realized there is a public fascination and curiosity about capital 
punishment." 
Hare was on the San Diego force from 1962 to 1966. He left to start a company 
making traction splints; his Dyna Corp. now manufactures 100 paramedic-style 
items (cots, gurneys, extraction devices, etc.). 
From that, he went into publishing. Hare Productions publishes Police magazine 
(circulation 55,000) and Emergency magazine (35,000) and does the printing for 
a dozen more magazines. 
Hare sold 2,000 copies of "Death Row" through an ad in Police. He hopes to sell 
the remaining 13,000 through bookstores and ads on television. 
"I could see an update every three months, telling about new arrivals on Death 
Row, who's been cleared, and who's finally been executed," he said. 
Hare is pro-death penalty. But "Death Penalty" is not a tirade against liberal 
judges and the ACLU. The prose is straightforward. 
Steven Casey, an assistant to San Diego Dist. Atty. Edwin Miller, wrote the 
overview chapter and a profile of Robert Alton Harris, who murdered two Mira 
Mesa teen-agers. 
As a cop, Hare took part in one of San Diego's most celebrated shoot-outs: a 
four-hour downtown gun battle in 1965 with the killer of a jewelry store 
manager. Robert Anderson was captured and sentenced to the gas chamber. 
In 1972, the state Supreme Court used Anderson's case to rule the death penalty 
unconstitutional. He was paroled in 1978. 
"He's walking the streets of Seattle these days," Hare said. 
Flimsy Jail Humor 
It's all true. 
* The flight of inmates from the county's flimsy facility in East County has 
bred its own humor. Fleeing prisoners are said to have issued themselves a writ 
of habeas escapus. 
When Supervisor Susan Golding received a crystal bowl from her colleagues this 
week in appreciation of her year as chairwoman, she found the box packed with 
tiny curlicues of Styrofoam. 
Golding said she figured the fluffy stuff was building materials from the El 
Cajon Jail. 
* Golfers, Replace your Mantras! 
MiraCosta College of Oceanside is offering a course in "Zen and the Golf 
Swing." Golfers will be taught the posture exercises and breathing techniques 
of Zen. 
* Patricia Shaffer, professor of chemistry at the University of San Diego, has 
received a $200,000 grant to study genes in connection with leukemia and 
lymphoma. 
It's not your usual grant: It's the largest grant ever received by a USD 
professor. 
Then again, Shaffer is not your usual professor: She's a Sacred Heart nun (Rome 
'57) as well as a Ph.D in chemistry (UC San Diego, '75). 
He's No Padres Fan 
It started with a joking headline on Times sports editor Dave Distel's column 
on Thursday: "Have a Credit Card Ready and Call Now! 1-800-BUY-PADRES." 
Richard Cole, co-owner of Emslee Products of Cleveland, Ohio, is not laughing. 
His company sells sanitary napkins. Its number is 1-800-BUY PADS. 
"Our phone has been ringing all day," Cole said. "My secretary can't get any 
work done, I'm losing orders, I'm paying 12-cents per minute for every call, 
what in hell are you people doing out there?" 
Cole hopes people will stop phoning. He spent an exasperating day telling 
callers he's not related to Joan Kroc. 
"I told them, 'Listen, I can't sell you a baseball team, but if you need 
sanitary napkins, toilet seat covers or diapers, I'm your man,' " Cole said. "I 
didn't make a single sale!" 
