MCCARTHY'S DRUG PROJECT GREETED WITH SKEPTICISM 
Lt. Gov. Leo T. McCarthy got a skeptical reception Tuesday from some students 
at a Van Nuys school for the physically and emotionally disabled over his 
proposal to raise the state sales tax to fight drug abuse. 
McCarthy asked about 75 junior and senior high school-age students of The HELP 
Group -- a private nonprofit school and therapy center -- their opinions on 
whether after-school recreation and classroom drug prevention programs would 
reduce the number of students who use illegal drugs. 
The school recreation and education programs are two provisions included in an 
initiative McCarthy is sponsoring for the November ballot that seeks to raise 
the 6% state sales tax one-half cent. Supporters of McCarthy's initiative must 
gather 372,000 signatures of registered voters by May to qualify for the 
November ballot. 
The estimated $1.6 billion a year earned by the tax hike would be earmarked for 
more police and prisons, and drug prevention classes beginning in kindergarten 
for every student in the state. 
"Drug abuse is the No. 1 problem in California," McCarthy said. 
Some students expressed doubts over McCarthy's proposals. 
"Whether you have an after-school program or are out on the streets, you're 
going to run into drugs," said one young man. 
Another student suggested that illegal drugs be made legal and then taxed, with 
proceeds going to drug rehabilitation programs. 
"People can get 'crack' anytime they want it anyway," said a young man to 
McCarthy. 
McCarthy asked: "You're saying, no matter what we do, people will use drugs?" 
"Yes," the young man replied. 
Many students said they agreed with McCarthy's assessment during the nearly 
hourlong question and answer session in the school's auditorium. But, they 
explained some of the reasons they believe young people use drugs: boredom, 
peer pressure, emotional problems. 
Other students asked McCarthy why more money isn't going to drug treatment 
programs. About 8% of the proposed sales tax increase would go to such 
programs. 
"It costs more than $650 a day to go to drug treatment, so that only the rich 
people can afford it, not the poor people who are the ones using 'crack,' " 
said one young woman, who cannot be identified because of state laws protecting 
the identity of those who attend schools for the disabled. 
Some students said drug prevention lessons explain the dangers of drug abuse. 
But many youngsters decide to experiment with drugs despite the warnings 
because, said one student, "People think, 'So what if it kills me, my life 
isn't going anywhere right now.' " 
