FIRST PERSON: IN AN AIRPORT TAXI, FEAR AND SUSPICION RIDE ALONG WITH THE DRIVER 
It was late on a Wednesday night and there were two men sitting in my back seat 
in the dark as I drove north on La Brea. I had worried when I picked them up. 
Two young males. Late night. Flagging a cab on the corner of San Vicente and La 
Brea. Factors that normally constitute a red flag in my book. 
The kicker was their destination: round trip to 6th and Alvarado. A drug run 
nine times out of 10. But I had already let them in and we were on our way. I 
needed one more fare to make my night, and, well, sometimes I do get too 
suspicious for my own good. 
I am the night driver of United Independent cab No. 110. I got into the above 
situation about 1 1/2 years ago after driving a cab in Los Angeles for three 
years. Luckily my worst fears did not come true as I drove these passengers to 
the drug-infested area east of Alvarado and back to a motel across the street 
from where I picked them up. 
Like most cab drivers and their families, my wife and I took the news hard 
about Ami Fhima, the 31-year-old cab driver murdered in Inglewood on Saturday 
night after picking up two men at the airport. 
Few cab drivers I know have escaped the terrifying feeling of some stranger 
sitting behind you in the dark. I didn't know Ami Fhima, but I can imagine what 
happened at the taxi stand at the airport where he waited for his fare. I've 
worked the airport frequently and am all too familiar with the system there. 
Just like Ami, I was forced to make a decision one time about two 
suspicious-looking passengers at the airport. 
Every evening before I hit the streets of Los Angeles, I pray: God, keep me 
safe. Bless me with long fares. Allow me to remain kind and understanding. 
And before I turn on the dispatch radio I add a final request: 
God, grant me the peace of mind to deal with whatever comes up. 
Before I drove cab No. 110, I drove another United Independent cab with a 
bulletproof partition separating me from my passengers. But it cut down on most 
conversation. Instead of using it, I try to be discriminating about who I pick 
up. I suppose I lose a hefty portion of profits, but I'd rather remain in 
control than take the chance. Besides, I get plenty of flakes, abusive drunks, 
hotheads and others who slip by my defenses. 
Once a young drunk man whose friend put him in my cab in Marina del Rey took a 
slow roundhouse punch at me (and missed) because I had told him to put his 
hands back from over the seat. 
I was waiting in line one night at the Century Plaza Hotel cab stand, expecting 
the normal polite guest going to a local restaurant. The doorman whistled. Up 
jaunted a young man in a white T-shirt and worn blue jeans with a huge tatoo on 
his forearm. He was going to Cahuenga and Yucca. Jimmy was his name. Without 
much prompting, he told me in his Ohio twang how a young businesswoman drove up 
to his spot on Santa Monica Boulevard, leaned out the window and called him 
over. Jimmy wiggled his finger, showing me exactly how she did it. "You want 
some pocket change," Jimmy quoted her. Four hundred dollars, it turned out, he 
said, including his return fare. 
We drove to an old apartment building off Cahuenga and Yucca. He ducked in for 
a minute. Then we drove back along Santa Monica Boulevard. He told me he 
stashed his belongings near this spot before he jumped in with the woman. 
We stopped about Genessee. "Turn off your lights," he said. I turned off the 
lights. He picked up something in the space between two buildings. It was not 
an overnight bag or knapsack as I expected. He admitted that he'd retrieved his 
"dart" -- a hypodermic needle. 
To be truthful, I don't have a lot of cab stories. I pick people up, and the 
next minute they're gone, vanished into the changing cityscape. I'm the 
chauffeur for the older couple in formal wear leaving the Shubert to return 
across the street to the Century Plaza. I'm the go-between for the feuding 
couple recently separated when she sends his clothes and other belongings back 
to him via yours truly. Much of the time I am the social worker for the widowed 
old ladies of Fairfax Avenue returning from the supermarkets or doctors' 
offices with taxi coupons. (The elderly are provided with $24 in taxi subsidies 
a month.) I am the driver for a lonely prime-time television soap producer who 
hops from one South Bay club to the next on Friday nights as I wait outside 
with the meter running. 
Because I ply the relatively safe areas of town, I'm not too concerned about 
ill-intentioned individuals, although I come in contact with them from time to 
time. Cab driving has brought me face-to-face with my prejudices, which are in 
essence fears, and good for absolutely nothing. Flaky and harmful people cross 
all economic strata and racial lines. Instead of relying on prejudices, I've 
tried to develop and respect instincts for disturbed people and mental cases. 
Sometimes my instincts will be wrong, or what I think are my instincts are 
actually prejudices. Many times I refuse a fare or pass by people on the street 
flagging me down. I'll never know how many of them were decent and honest 
people. But as one of the weekend dispatchers says, "If it don't feel right, 
don't do it." 
A Deep Breath 
No matter what, whenever I get flagged down, I make sure my doors and windows 
are locked, take a deep breath, and check it out. 
The airport is a little different. The city's Department of Transportation and 
the management company it contracts to enforce its rules there both want to let 
us know that they are the bosses. I don't quarrel with their need to manage the 
cabs at the airport. LAX has long been a nasty place to pick up a cab, 
especially for passengers going only a short distance. Cab drivers used to come 
to fists over long fares. In this respect, the DOT has cleaned things up. 
The cab drivers wait in the holding lot about an hour or more until they are 
dispatched to a designated stand among 10 different locations by the baggage 
areas around the U-shaped lower arrival level. The drivers are received at each 
stand by a starter in uniform who is employed by the contracted company, 
Airport Taxi Management. The starter ushers the passengers as they arrive from 
the baggage area into the next cab in line. 
I can imagine Ami Fhima waiting there at the United Airlines stand. I've done 
it myself a hundred times. One time I was waiting there, hoping for a good 
fare, something that would make my long wait worthwhile. But I know I've got to 
swallow the short ones as well. The starter is used to complaints and hip to 
tricks by disgruntled drivers. 
So I was sitting there waiting in my cab and the cab in front pulled off with 
three Japanese men in suits, probably going downtown to the New Otani Hotel or 
the Hilton. And now I was next in line. Two young men approached wearing tennis 
shoes and jogging suits. I noticed they were not carrying any luggage. 
A Gap in Thinking 
The starter handed the dispatch ticket that describes the airport surcharge and 
average rates to one of the men. My eyes met the starter's. He knew what I was 
thinking. Well, sort of. And I knew what he was thinking -- that I'd better not 
make a fuss. Or maybe he was thinking, "good luck." There was a definite gap 
between my thinking and his. 
One gap is the sanctity of the cab driver's right to refuse a fare, no matter 
what the DOT says. Neither the starter, nor ATM, nor the DOT nor their 
commissioners work the streets and have to drive my cab with two strangers in 
the back seat in the dark. 
I don't know exactly what Ami was thinking or how close his experience was to 
mine. But I do know that he had a choice. He could have refused to take those 
two strange men. No cab driver I know wouldn't get suspicious of two men going 
to Inglewood from the airport without luggage. 
Paid the Consequences 
In my case, I refused. The consequences? I was immediately taken out of line 
and required to wait until an Airport Taxi Management supervisor arrived. He 
listened to our stories. And then he wrote me up for refusing to pick up 
passengers. I lost my place in line, which amounted to about three hours of my 
shift shot. And I was required to appear at a hearing. 
At the hearing several weeks later I was admonished by another ATM supervisor 
and told in the manner of a father scolding his son to admit my wrong and the 
matter would be dropped. I held to the cab driver's right of refusal. I was 
told the matter would be handed over to the DOT, but it was lost and forgotten 
forever somewhere in the recesses of the inner sanctum of City Hall. 
I don't have answers for changes at the airport to help protect the cab driver. 
All I can say is that I'm very sad. My heart reaches out for Ami Fhima and his 
family. But also for all the cab drivers who have to make a choice and size up 
people based on feelings, feelings affected by the things some people do to 
others, like what they did to Ami. 
