DR. JOYCE BROTHERS: WILL HUSBAND BE ABUSER TOO? 
DEAR DR. BROTHERS: My husband admitted to me after our marriage that he was a 
victim of sexual abuse by his stepfather. Eventually, his mother divorced this 
man, but the abuse went on for some time before that. We're thinking of having 
children and I'm wondering if I should be concerned that my husband will repeat 
this pattern of abuse. -- K.W. 
DEAR K.W.: We know that a high proportion of troubled adults were abused as 
children, and we also know that, unfortunately, many children who were sexually 
abused become abusers themselves. Studies show that about one-third of those 
who were abused in childhood repeat the pattern. Let us hope that your husband 
is one of the two-thirds who does not. 
Studies indicate that one of the important factors in whether or not the 
pattern is repeated is whether the person has the insight to recognize that the 
abusive parent was wrong to abuse them. Many youngsters deny their abuse or 
claim it wasn't so bad. It's important for them to accept that it was bad, that 
they didn't invite or initiate the abuse and that it wasn't in any way their 
fault. 
Children do better after having been abused if there's one person in their 
lives on whom they can depend -- a relative, teacher, minister or friend who is 
emotionally nurturing. According to Martha Erickson, a psychologist at the 
University of Minnesota, the earlier the maltreatment occurred, the more severe 
the consequences. 
Talk with your husband about his feelings regarding children. If he has any 
doubts, suggest that he work with a therapist. 
DEAR DR. BROTHERS: I used to look forward to going into my office in the 
morning, but now I have a new boss who is a mean pig. He's hostile and unkind 
to almost everyone, but there's nothing I can do about it. I can't afford to 
quit my job so I guess I'll have to live with this. I'd like to figure out some 
way to turn off my anger. -- H.Z. 
DEAR H.Z.: You might try to use this as a kind of test or experiment where you 
take control of your mind and when you're not actually doing specific work in 
your office, try taking mini-vacations in your mind. This is an inexpensive way 
to go on a ski trip, visit the Alps, go scuba diving or do anything that 
pleases you. You'll find that if you change your focus away from your boss, 
you'll relax and much of your tension will disappear. 
If it's any comfort to you, the kind of personality you're describing can be 
expected to face a lot of problems. Your boss is unhappy with himself, which is 
why he behaves as he does. Angry, cynical people are five times as likely to 
die under 50 as are people who are calm and trusting. 
According to Dr. Redford Williams, a professor at Duke University Medical 
Center in Durham, N.C., "toxic personalities," such as that of your boss, can 
be traced to biological differences probably present from birth. These 
individuals are more likely to suffer from premature death from all causes. 
