NHL ROUNDUP; 
HULL SCORES TWO, BUT OILERS WIN, 6-4 
Brett Hull took a shot, two good shots as a matter of fact, but still came up 
short of stopping Edmonton. 
Hull, the NHL's co-leader in goals, scored his 34th and 35th of the season for 
St. Louis, but it wasn't enough to stop the visiting Oilers from winning, 6-4. 
It was Edmonton's fifth victory in six games. 
Edmonton extended its lead over the Kings to seven points. 
The Oilers were led by Jari Kurri, who had a goal and two assists to reach 
1,000 career points, and Esa Tikkanen, who had two goals. 
Kurri became the 25th NHL player to score 1,000 points when he assisted on 
Tikkanen's power-play goal with two minutes remaining. 
The last time Edmonton lost to St. Louis was in December of 1985. 
New Jersey 5, Buffalo 3 -- The Sabres, leading the Adams Division, lost their 
third consecutive game. 
John MacLean scored twice, his 22nd and 23rd goals of the season, for the host 
Devils, who are in a fierce battle for first place in the Patrick Division with 
Washington and Philadelphia. 
New Jersey, 8-3-1 in its last 12 games, tied a club record with 23 shots on 
goal in one period. 
Detroit 4, Vancouver 1 -- Steve Yzerman scored twice in the final period to 
assure the Red Wings of a victory in this struggle of last-place teams. 
Glen Hanlon made 32 saves for Detroit, last in the Norris Division. He lost his 
bid for a shutout when Tony Tanti beat him with a low slap shot with 7:21 
remaining in the third period. 
Yzerman, a 65-goal scorer last season, got his 28th and 29th goals of this 
season, continuing a streak in which he has scored eight goals in seven games. 
The Canucks are 1-4-4 in their last nine games and reached the halfway mark 
with a 12-20-8 record, last in the Smythe Division. 
Calgary 4, Philadelphia 4 -- Paul Ranheim's goal at 12:53 of the third period 
enabled the Flames to move ahead of the Kings into sole possession of second 
place in the Smythe Division, six points behind Edmonton. 
Ranheim, playing on home ice, took a pass from Jamie Macoun inside the 
Philadelphia blue line and sliced in off the left wing. He beat the long reach 
of defenseman Kjell Samuelsson and flipped a backhand shot over goalie Ken 
Wregget. 
Boston 5, Pittsburgh 2 -- The Penguins' Mario Lemieux tied the team record he 
set four years ago when he scored his 26th goal and added an assist, giving him 
a point in 28 consecutive games. It is the fourth-longest streak in league 
history. 
