BIAS AGAINST LESBIANS 
I was very proud to be a part of the lesbian and gay contingent marching in the 
Martin Luther King Jr. parade last weekend. At the same time I was impressed by 
the commitment of those at the parade toward civil rights. 
I was again reminded how individuals who are lesbian and gay do not have the 
same protection under the law as other minorities. 
I found it ironic, at the parade to celebrate civil rights, a lesbian friend of 
mine could not march with our contingent because her employer is harassing her 
because she is a lesbian. Her lawyer advised her not to be at events that would 
identify her as a lesbian. 
When I talk to groups and individuals about the problems of discrimination 
against the lesbian and gay community, I am frequently told, "It doesn't matter 
what you do in the bedroom but why do you have to make such a big deal about it 
and flaunt it." 
Flaunting it frequently means walking with my arm around my significant other 
or being blatant by daring to hold hands with someone of the same sex, or while 
at work talking about my relationship in the same way heterosexuals refer to 
their partners. That is flaunting my being a lesbian. 
For some reason, it is perfectly OK for heterosexuals to engage in these 
behaviors in public and is usually thought to be cute or nice. Hmm, somehow it 
doesn't fit. 
Discrimination still happens in our country. Martin Luther King Jr.'s dream is 
still not a reality. 
Agreed, the discrimination is more subtle than what occurs in South Africa. But 
it occurs against people of color, against people of different religions, and 
of various ethnic backgrounds. It is still legal in this country to 
discriminate against lesbians and gays. The armed forces sanction the 
discrimination; in some states, homosexuals have no right to privacy; and in 
San Diego there is no recourse against discrimination due to one's sexual 
orientation in many employment situations. 
I am outraged that as a citizen of the United States who happens to be a 
lesbian, I do not have equal protection under the Constitution, not special, 
just equal. 
The proposed "Human Dignity Ordinance" in the city of San Diego is just one 
step in working toward equal protection. Until all people of this country are 
free, none of us will be. 
KAREN MARSHALL 
Administrative director 
Lesbian and Gay Men's Community Center 
