ORANGE COUNTY MONORAIL PLAN IS TALK OF THE TOWNS 
These days, they're all trying to hop aboard this train. 
In traffic-choked Orange County, a proposal to build an 18-mile monorail line 
through the heart of the region has normally staid politicos and bureaucrats 
abuzz with anticipation. 
The cities of Fullerton and Huntington Beach have been clamoring in recent 
weeks to join five central Orange County cities that have already started a 
push for the futuristic transportation system. 
The proposal received another big boost last week when a Japanese development 
conglomerate announced that it wants to build a monorail station as part of a 
massive high-rise complex it plans for northern Santa Ana. 
"It's a real significant milestone in putting together this project and making 
it a reality," said Santa Ana Mayor Daniel H. Young, who is helping spearhead 
the effort for a regional monorail network. "We're hoping that developers see 
the value of having a monorail station as part of their project." 
The network would link Disneyland and Anaheim Stadium in the north with the 
MainPlace shopping mall and Civic Center in Santa Ana, then continue south, 
serving several large office developments, John Wayne Airport, and the 
sprawling Irvine Spectrum office and industrial complex. The line could be 
extended to Fullerton, Huntington Beach or other cities that express a strong 
interest. 
Other lines would branch off east and west to feed riders to the main system. 
For instance, the short spur planned at the airport would be expanded into a 
loop meandering through the Irvine business park, while another would link the 
Santa Ana Civic Center with the city's Amtrak station. 
Some officials seem to be leaning toward traditional monorails akin to the type 
at Disneyland, which straddle a single rail and ride on wheels inside the 
undercarriage. Others have suggested that the best system might involve 
"magnetic levitation" trains, which use electromagnets to float the vehicle 
just inches above the tracks and provide propulsion. And some experts say 
traditional steel-wheel trolleys should not be ruled out. 
The backbone of the system would be a line with monorail trains capable of 
traveling about 60 m.p.h. and running along an elevated rail stretching from 
Irvine in the south through various cities to as far north as Fullerton. 
Lower-speed monorail lines would branch off the main system to ferry passengers 
to locations to the east and west. 
Officials say the monorail network -- which they view as a clean, efficient 
method of easing highway congestion -- could be built along existing streets, 
requiring the purchase of little or no private property. 
Despite all the optimism, problems may loom. 
So far, there has been little or no public discussion of the plans. No hearings 
have been held, no workshops convened. Though the idea certainly appeals to 
city leaders eager for a way out of traffic congestion, only time will tell how 
well it plays with residents or businesses in the shadow of a monorail line. 
Before that, however, local officials will have to deal with a bevy of 
questions, most notably how such a grand undertaking, which could cost nearly 
$1 billion, would be financed. 
Young and many other supporters hope that a private firm can be lured to build 
and operate the monorail, while the cities along the route ante up the median 
strips on their streets as the right of way for the elevated rail system. With 
developers building the stations, the line could be realized at virtually no 
cost to taxpayers other than what they throw into the fare box, they predict. 
But some officials suggest that it is unlikely such a rosy scenario will become 
reality. Irvine Mayor Larry Agran, a staunch advocate of a regional monorail 
system, maintains that the project will probably require a hefty dose of public 
financing. 
"I think it would be wonderful if private investment could build this," Agran 
said. "We're going to certainly induce as much private investment as possible. 
But to suggest somehow that this will be handled almost entirely by the private 
sector may be misleading. I'd like to be proven wrong, but I think there will 
have to be substantial public investment." 
There is precedent for such thinking. No public rail system has ever been 
financed, built and operated strictly by the private sector, transit officials 
say. 
"It's been done at airports and amusement parks, but not with a public transit 
system, certainly not in North America," said Brian Pearson, development 
director at the Orange County Transit District. "That is not to say it couldn't 
happen if it was tied in with certain development efforts." 
Other local officials, meanwhile, have privately speculated that Young has 
eagerly pounced on the issue because of its appeal with voters. Much as 
construction of the San Diego trolley helped boost the political stock of Sen. 
Pete Wilson (R-Calif.) when he was mayor of that city, a successful monorail 
could fuel the career of the politician who shepherds it in Orange County. 
But supporters of the effort to lure private investment say such motivations 
may not be such a bad thing. 
"Dan Young is extremely politically astute, and he's grabbed a tiger by the 
tail and gone for a ride," said Harvey Englander, a Newport Beach political 
consultant. "Now he finds a lot of people wanting to join him for the ride. 
"The naysayers ought to jump out of the way. If they want, they can stand on 
the sidelines and say a private approach isn't going to work. They'll be in the 
same position as the people with horses who watched the Model A's roll by." 
Young, meanwhile, remains optimistic, noting that he has received inquiries 
from about 20 transportation firms intrigued by the idea. 
"My philosophy has been, 'You don't know until you ask,' " Young said. "The 
goal is for the private sector to respond to our offer, to take the ball and 
run with it. We want them to design, construct and operate this system. That's 
the goal. And we won't know until we get responses whether it's realistic." 
Even officials in Irvine acknowledge that the effort to seek a privately built 
system is worth a try. As now envisioned, the coalition of cities would ask for 
proposals from private firms as early as April. 
"I think the private sector is going to see the wisdom of this project and get 
on the bandwagon," said Paul Brady Jr., Irvine city manager. "The public sector 
cannot do it by itself." 
If public money does end up coming into the picture, Irvine is the only city 
that has a good prospect of accumulating a sizable bankroll any time soon. City 
officials managed to get funding for a monorail line included in a state rail 
bond measure on the June ballot. If the proposition passes, $125 million in 
matching funds would flow into Irvine's city coffers. 
"I don't know what the other cities have going for them, but I seriously doubt 
they have readily available resources that are only six months away," Agran 
said. 
With that money in hand, Irvine would probably be the first city to put the 
line in place and, as such, be in a position to dictate what type of technology 
is used. Agran's hope is that an Irvine system could demonstrate the 
effectiveness of a monorail in Orange County, spurring state and federal 
officials to provide more funds so the line could be extended. 
But it could also create a problem. Other cities could be put in a position of 
either following Irvine's lead or creating a patchwork regional transportation 
system combining varying types of rail systems that might not even be capable 
of operating on the same track. 
Monorail boosters like Young say all the gloomy predictions are ridiculous, 
arguing that the effort to build a monorail line can be coordinated so the 
various cities are happy with the results. 
"The goal is to have a regional system that is compatible," said Young, who 
helped fuel the effort by calling officials from the cities together for a 
meeting last November. "I'm trying to head off any problems by pulling us all 
together now. We want to make sure this system is compatible from one city to 
the next." 
All this talk of monorails was sparked by a 1988 proposal to build a short 
monorail line to ferry passengers from the terminal at John Wayne Airport to an 
office complex planned nearby on MacArthur Boulevard by McDonnell Douglas 
Realty Co. Construction has been delayed because Irvine officials have yet to 
approve plans for the office complex, which is expected to get a final review 
in February or March. 
When Irvine managed to squeeze a spot on the June rail bond measure, the 
prospects for a regional system grew. At last November's meeting, county 
officials and representatives of Santa Ana, Irvine, Orange, Costa Mesa and 
Anaheim agreed to work toward issuing a joint request for proposals from 
private firms that might be willing to build and operate the system. 
O.C. MONORAIL: A PROPOSAL FOR THE FUTURE 
The backbone of the monorail system proposed in Orange County would be trains 
capable of about 60 m.p.h. running along a raised rail stretching from Irvine 
in the south through various cities to as far north as Fullerton. Lower-speed 
monorail lines would branch off the main system to ferry passengers to 
locations to the east and west. 
As envisioned, the monorail network would link Disneyland and Anaheim Stadium 
in the north with the MainPlace/Santa Ana mall and the Civic Center in Santa 
Ana, several large office developments, John Wayne Airport and the sprawling 
Irvine Spectrum office and industrial complex. It would also link up in Anaheim 
with a high-speed "super train" planned to run from the city's train station to 
Las Vegas. 
The line could also be extended to Fullerton, Huntington Beach or other cities 
that express a strong interest. 
