MOVIE REVIEW; 
'COMMON THREADS' CONVEYS TRAGEDY OF AIDS 
"Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt" confronts us with the reality of AIDS 
with such simplicity and directness that it is hard to imagine how the enormous 
tragedy of this disease could be expressed with greater impact. 
What film makers Jeffrey Friedman and Robert Epstein (who directed the 
Oscar-winning "The Times of Harvey Milk") have done is to interview five people 
who have lost loved ones to AIDS and to interweave their words with clips from 
TV news programs to chart both the relentless progress of the disease during 
the last decade and the inadequacy of the government's response to it. 
As narrator Dustin Hoffman calmly ticks off increasingly grim statistics, the 
film takes the full measure of homophobia in our society. Yet one of its key 
accomplishments is to make clear how foolish and dangerous it is to regard AIDS 
as "the gay disease." 
Tragedy has made everyone interviewed a figure of eloquence and candor. Sara 
Lewinstein speaks with humor and affection of the extraordinary relationship 
she had with Dr. Tom Waddell, a champion athlete who helped found the Gay Games 
in San Francisco. Although both were gay, they had a child. Soon after, Waddell 
was found to have AIDS. Sallie Perryman deeply loved her husband despite his 
drug addiction, which he struggled for years to overcome, only to succumb to 
AIDS. Another strong woman, Suzi Mandell, had to face the loss of her 
11-year-old son, a hemophiliac who contracted the disease through his need for 
massive blood transfusions. 
Writer Vito Russo ("The Celluloid Closet") speaks with anger of the loss of his 
lover, Jeffrey Sevcik, and of the time it takes for the FDA to test and release 
possible life-saving drugs. Navy Cmdr. Tracy Torrey speaks of marrying and 
raising a family before accepting his homosexuality, only to lose his lover, 
landscape architect David Campbell, to AIDS. 
Torrey is clearly in the final stages of AIDS himself, and, as the film cuts 
from one interview subject to another, we realize that despite appearances of 
good health, many of them may either have AIDS or have tested HIV positive. 
Further disclosures make an already troubling film seem all the more 
devastating. 
Linking these five people -- and giving them a measure of consolation -- is 
their participation in the AIDS Memorial Quilt. Indeed, Torrey's last act, 
before his own death from AIDS, was to make a panel for himself as well as one 
for Campbell. 
"Common Threads," which has an understated score by Bobby McFerrin 
incorporating humming voices, culminates with the ceremonial unfolding of the 
vast quilt on the Mall in Washington. "Common Threads" (Times-rated Mature) 
thus leaves us with an image that is beautiful -- but also one that conveys 
heartbreakingly the overwhelming loss of human life. Proceeds from the film's 
open-end run Sundays at 11 a.m. at the Music Hall in Beverly Hills will benefit 
the NAMES Project Foundation, which raises funds and encourages support for 
people with AIDS and their loved ones. 
