FOOTLOOSE IN THE NETHERLANDS: LEIDEN PRESERVES THE WORLD OF THE GOLDEN AGE 
Such devotion to the ideals of freedom of conscience, religious tolerance and 
the separation of church and state that the Pilgrims took to Plymouth Rock in 
1620 almost surely owe more to their 11-year stay in this lovely Dutch town 
than to the repressive England they had fled. 
Indeed, the tolerant burghers and thriving textile business of Leiden also 
provided a haven to Belgian, French and other Europeans fleeing the 
Catholic-Reformist conflicts of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648). 
To the Pilgrims' 1609 request for refuge, the town responded that it "refuses 
no honest people free entry . . . and the applicants' arrival here would be 
pleasing and welcome." Leiden further refused the British ambassador's request 
that the Pilgrims be extradited. 
A half-hour train ride from Amsterdam (you may also skate the connecting canals 
in winter), Leiden has the Netherlands' oldest and most prestigious university, 
the University of Leiden, founded in 1575 by William of Orange; the 
university's 1590 botanical gardens that imported the first tulips from Turkey 
five years later, and a marvelous setting at the confluence of the old and new 
Rhine rivers. 
All of the 17th-Century canals and streets of Leiden are still in place, and a 
restored windmill, such as Rembrandt's father ran (the painter was born a few 
steps away), still spins at town center. 
Getting here: Fly KLM nonstop to Amsterdam, or British Airways, SAS, Air France 
or Northwest with changes. Take a train (every 15 minutes) from the airport 
(Schiphol) to Leiden in 20 minutes. 
How long/how much? Two days for the town's considerable sights. It's a great 
and restful base for visiting Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht, Delft and the 
flower and cheese markets of Keukenhof and Alkmaar, all a short train ride 
away. Good accommodations are moderate, dining the same. 
A few fast facts: The Dutch guilder, or florin, recently traded at 51 cents. 
Best times for a visit are from the end of April until late fall, with winter 
an invigorating experience. 
Getting settled in: The Hotel Mayflower (Beestenmarkt 2; $76 B&amp;B double) is 
a small, fresh and modern place tucked into an old canal house on a busy 
mid-town square a short walk from the train station. The lobby and breakfast 
room are as bright as can be, with contemporary furniture and lots of plants. 
Antique furniture sits tastefully in otherwise modern rooms with color TV; it's 
a charming mix. 
Hotel Restaurant De Doelen (Rapenburg 2; $41 to $77 B&amp;B double) began as a 
patrician town house in 1435, and retains beamed bedrooms, an old stairwell, 
regal entryway and other historic touches. Room No. 9 has a gorgeous tiled 
fireplace with sailing ship on the mantel and four comfortable chairs around a 
table. There's a real feeling of the Netherlands' Golden Age. 
The dining room has high ceiling and chandeliers opening to a vine-strewn patio 
at the rear. A four-course French menu is about $30. 
Nieuw Minerva (Boommarkt 23; $61-$74 B&amp;B double during high season) was 
once eight canal houses dating from 1600; now it's a very gezellig hotel, which 
means it's cozy, warm, comfortable and decidedly homey, including a communal 
carpet-covered table in the lobby -- a Dutch tradition. Bedrooms are adequate 
but lack charm. Breakfasts and all other meals are served in the hotel 
restaurant. 
Regional food and drink: Dutch food is like the people: hearty, straightforward 
and easy to know. Perhaps the best example is hutspot met klapstuk, a robust 
stew of meat, potatoes, onions, carrots and whatever other vegetables are lying 
around the kitchen. It's very near the national dish, and our word "hodgepodge" 
derives from the mixture. 
Erwtensoep, a green pea soup loaded with other fresh green vegetables, spicy 
sausage and perhaps small chunks of pig's feet, takes second place on the Dutch 
table hierarchy. Herring runs a close third; it's best eaten raw after dipping 
in chopped raw onions, and followed with brown bread, butter and a frosty beer. 
Hutspot is particularly good in Leiden, with some locals claiming they invented 
it, and also friese pof, a small loaf of raisin bread topped with sugar and 
cinnamon. It's served between meals with rich Dutch coffee. 
Little need be said about the Netherlands' great beers, but you might try the 
jenever, a Dutch gin often served with cold seafood hors d'oeuvres such as 
herring or smoked eel. 
Good dining: Malle Jan (Nieuwsteeg 11) is a romantic bistro-type place with old 
posters, klunky furniture, an open kitchen and solid French menu served at 
tables on two levels. We were thoroughly pleased with the escargot, a fine 
house pate, braised grouse with cranberries, and entrecote de veau lyonnaise, a 
heavenly piece of veal with onions. 
Grand Cafe in den Leidschen Salon (Steenstraat 2) appears to be an old home 
with large windows facing a busy square and canal with windmill. The menu is 
solid Dutch, drawing business types at lunch for the fish soup, salads, 
omelets, casseroles and uitsmijters, the last a hardy sandwich topped with a 
fried egg. Dine on the terrace during summer. 
Annie's Verjaardag (Hoogstraat 1) means the lady's birthday; it's a 
14th-Century vaulted cellar turned into a brasserie at water level, where the 
old and new Rhine meet. Tables inside always have candles burning, the menu 
running a gamut from French to Greek to Dutch. 
Going first-class: Restaurant De Beukenhof (Terweeweg 2, Oegstgeest) hangs its 
Michelin star in a centuries-old inn a few minutes' drive from Leiden. Five 
dining rooms, each more beautiful than the last as you walk through, form a 
beautiful setting. Summer sees tables moved into the flowery garden, one set 
beneath a 300-year-old beech tree. 
We started with toasts of chilled jenever, followed by carpaccio of duck and a 
salad of sliced goose liver, then moved on to a sea brill fillet and turbot 
with lobster sauce, ending with a melange of Dutch and French cheeses. 
All this was helped along by a white Burgundian Rully of surprising stature, 
and a 1978 Chateauneuf du Pape, both from a magnificent cellar. 
On your own: Start with a visit to the Stedelijk Museum with its collection of 
Old Masters displayed comfortably with artifacts and prints of the town's early 
days, including 17th-Century looms, in a handsome building that first served as 
a textile exchange. 
Now take a turn through the university, paying particular attention to the 
"sweating room," where students awaited results of oral exams, the door 
emblazoned with Dante's lines: "Abandon all hope/ all who enter here." And 
don't miss Leiden's many hofjes, former almshouses usually gathered around a 
charming garden or courtyard. 
One of the most colorful pastimes we've enjoyed recently is a visit to the 
Monday and Tuesday morning Groenoordhallen market, where buyers from all of the 
Netherlands and Belgium come to buy beef. Their bargaining process, wherein 
buyer and seller slap hands vigorously in spirited bidding, is sealed with cold 
cash, the only exchange acceptable. Arrive early, wear sturdy shoes for the 
muck and plan on having a farm breakfast later in the hall's La Vache 
restaurant or Bistro Le Cochon de Lait. 
For more information: Call the Netherlands Board of Tourism at (415) 543-6772, 
or write to 90 New Montgomery St., Suite 305, San Francisco 94105, for a 
brochure on Leiden with city plan and sights, another on touring the 
Netherlands by rail and a map of the country. 
