ALL CHARGES IN BROWN KIDNAP CASE DISMISSED; 
COURTS: THE CHARGES NEVER SHOULD HAVE COME TO TRIAL, THE JUDGE TELLS STUNNED 
ATTORNEYS ON BOTH SIDES IN THE RELIGIOUS DEPROGRAMMING ATTEMPT ON GINGER BROWN. 
In an abrupt conclusion to the Ginger Brown kidnaping trial, Superior Court 
Judge David B. Moon Jr. on Friday dismissed the kidnaping and other charges 
against all five defendants, including the woman's parents, Earle and Dorothy 
Brown. 
"Back in June, when I reviewed the entire file, I said to myself, 'Why is this 
case, at least to the Browns, in our criminal courts?' " Moon said Friday 
morning, surprising attorneys for both sides, who had gathered to argue whether 
charges that led to a hung jury on Thursday should be retried. 
Instead, Moon told them he didn't see any reason to try the case further. "This 
judge finds that no jury of 12 persons is ever going to unanimously agree on 
guilty verdicts," he said. 
"The chances of a prosecution on the remaining counts is virtually 
non-existent. Perhaps a jury might reach a unanimous not-guilty verdict, but 
this judge isn't going to let the people's courtroom, of which we have precious 
few, be used to titillate the public's fascination with unusual religious 
groups. We have other pressing business to transact in our trial courts. 
"Our Constitution admonishes me to conduct a fair trial; it authorizes me to 
protect the rights of criminally accused, and it expects me to curb excessive 
government action. 
"Accordingly, I conclude that further prosecution of these defendants on 
outstanding charges would serve no legal purpose." 
The five defendants hugged, cried and smiled; the defense attorneys grinned and 
shook their heads, and the district attorney's office shrugged it off. 
"In a sense, everybody in this case did his or her job," said Steven J. Casey, 
special assistant to Dist. Atty. Edwin Miller. "We're obliged to uphold the 
law. Nobody in a free community is going to tolerate a society where anyone can 
be Big Brother and rip someone off the streets when they disagree with them 
philosophically. 
"The court's job is to give the defendants and the victim a fair trial," Casey 
said. "Ultimately, it's the community's job to speak out on this case -- and 
essentially the whole sorry story of alienated families -- and the jury has 
done that. 
"Perhaps their failure to reach a decision tells a great deal about the deep 
ambivalence we have as a society, between family duty and personal freedom." 
Charged with kidnaping, false imprisonment and battery were the elder Browns; 
one of their four daughters, Holly, 25; Los Angeles deprogrammer Clifford 
Daniels, 35, and Hank Erler, 23, in whose mother's Escondido home the 
unsuccessful five-day deprogramming attempt occurred in May, 1988. 
The jury Wednesday acquitted Erler of most of the charges facing him, and 
pronounced not-guilty verdicts on false-imprisonment and battery against the 
two Brown women. But Thursday, jurors said they were hopelessly deadlocked on 
the remaining charges, including kidnaping, against the three Browns and 
Daniels. 
The five defendants never denied abducting and holding Ginger Brown for five 
days to try to get her to disavow her allegiance to a group known as Great 
Among the Nations. But they argued that they were baited to do it by Ginger 
Brown and the group's leader, Benjamin Altschul, so the daughter could later 
sue the defendants for monetary damages to help bankroll the small group. 
The 17-member, Coronado-based Great Among the Nations describes itself as a 
fundamental Christian Bible study and evangelism ministry, although parents of 
current and former members say it is a cult whose members are insidiously 
influenced to finance the comfortable life style of its leader. 
Ginger Brown was freed on the fifth day of the deprogramming effort and 
returned to her group. She was the prosecution's star witness against her 
parents and the others. 
Brown, who was 22 at the time, testified that she was bruised and battered 
during the deprogramming attempt. The defense argued that most of her injuries 
were self-inflicted so she could improve her case. 
Brown said Friday that she accepts Moon's ruling. "I laid out my case to the 
court, the jury and the judge. It was up to them. It's time to go on with my 
life and my ministery," she said. 
Jurors said afterward that the very issue of whether Ginger Brown actually 
baited the kidnaping and consented to it was the key to their deliberations, 
and those who voted for acquittal said they didn't believe Ginger Brown's 
story. 
"The only thing we agreed on was that nobody believed Ginger told the truth," 
juror Jim Lambert said. "There were so many inconsistencies, we just didn't 
believe her." 
He added: "We all agreed we were dealing with a cult." But he said some jurors 
"seemed to have chips on their shoulders because of their problems with their 
own parents" and weren't ready to wholly support the elder Browns, either. 
Jurors noted that all four women on the jury voted across the board to acquit 
all the defendants on all the charges, but most said sympathy for the parents 
wasn't an issue. 
"We believed the Browns had evidence (their daughter was in jeopardy), even 
though we didn't have that evidence ourselves," said Paula DeMong, the 
presiding juror. "We saw it as a group that wouldn't allow Ginger to see her 
family. No one felt that the motives of Great Among the Nations were 
particularly honest." 
DeMong said that, if she didn't believe Ginger Brown had consented to the 
kidnaping, "I would have voted to convict them -- with great sadness." 
Some jurors said they were struck by Ginger Brown's emotionless, matter-of-fact 
testimony against her parents. 
"She seemed so odd. It made the jury curious, that she wasn't experiencing 
normal emotions, which we felt added weight to the brainwashing," DeMong said. 
She said jurors were bothered after viewing a videotape of Ginger Brown, taken 
by fellow group members after her release, that showed her laughing and joking 
about the experience. 
Ginger Brown said she was not bothered by their criticism. "There has been such 
slander against our group for the past two years that I'm beginning to get 
thick-skinned," she said. 
Friday's proceedings started with Deputy Dist. Atty. Gary Rempel telling Moon 
he was ready to retry the defendants on the hung counts and to continue his 
prosecution of them on several yet untried charges of conspiracy -- charges 
that were held in abeyance until the first charges were tried and resolved. 
But Moon brought the discussion to a quick culmination, telling defense 
attorneys not to even bother to argue that charges should be dropped. 
Then, in a 20-minute lecture in which he criticized both the defense and 
prosecution for some of their trial tactics and missed opportunities, Moon said 
he was dropping the remaining charges and was ready for everyone to go home. 
Moon said he found fault with the case from the outset, but claimed he lacked 
the judicial discretion to unilaterally dismiss the major counts against the 
defendants -- especially after Earle Brown took the stand in his own defense 
and "virtually admitted every element of the crime and implicated each of his 
co-defendants," despite "deficiencies in the prosecution's prima facie case." 
Had the defendants asked that the judge rule on the case instead of putting the 
facts in the hands of a jury, Moon said, he might have ended the proceedings 
shortly after they started, back in November. But instead, he said, he had to 
let the jury process run its course. 
"This prosecution will never, and I mean never ever, be stronger than it was at 
the conclusion of the defense case," Moon said. "To put it succinctly, if the 
district attorney couldn't get a conviction from this evidence, they will never 
get a conviction. 
"This jury heard a functional equivalent of a judicial, in-court confession. It 
was not misled by having religion put on trial. But it did hear a rather tragic 
story of a daughter's alienation from her family. 
"Perhaps it was this last human -- but relevant -- portion of the case that had 
the jury considering jury nullification," Moon said, referring to the jury's 
dilemma of hearing hard evidence suggesting a technical violation of the law, 
but not wanting to apply the law against the Browns. 
The district attorney's office agreed later that it had a hard case to try. 
"You've identified a very thorny issue, which some would argue is fatal to this 
kind of prosecution," Casey said. "This isn't a difficult case because of the 
facts. It isn't difficult because of the law. It's difficult because of the 
people. This is not a robbery case. It's a 'Father Knows Best' case. 
"You have a family of people we (prosecutors) have characterized as good and 
decent and nice people who felt themselves driven to a desperate act, out of 
love. Unfortunately," said Casey, "that act is illegal." 
Casey said prosecutors aren't second-guessing their decision to pursue the 
case, despite Moon's remarks from the bench. 
"They admitted forcibly taking an adult woman who was violating no law off the 
street and holding her against her will. 
"The judge observed in his comments that Earle Brown admitted virtually every 
allegation -- he copped out on the witness stand -- and still the jury didn't 
convict because of what the judge called the equities and we call sympathy. 
Perhaps from a legal standpoint that's disappointing and from a human 
standpoint it's heartening." 
For his part, Rempel, the prosecutor, said he found the judge's dismissal 
acceptable. "What we have are two people in the business of law who are 
disagreeing on the application of the law. It's a philosophical, not emotional, 
argument." 
Then, turning to Daniels, he said: "Congratulations. You're lucky." 
Daniels said he was "deeply humbled" by Moon's ruling. "I'm so relieved I can 
barely stand up," Daniels said. "I'll be celebrating for a long, long time." 
One of the defense attorneys, Charles Duff, credited Moon for acting 
"courageously" but added, "He must have realized that public opinion was on our 
side. He finally became aware the people in this county didn't want this 
prosecution." 
Another defense attorney, Herb Weston, said of the dismissal, "Not bad, for a 
defenseless case." 
Earle Brown's attorney, Saul Wright, said that, although he was delighted by 
the resolution, "I'm sorry it took us this long. This case should never have 
gotten this far." 
To a one, the five defense attorneys said they were astonished by Moon's 
decision, especially given the judge's rulings, which they said had 
consistently gone against their case -- including his fundamental ruling that 
the Browns could not be defended on the basis that they were motivated by a 
sense for Ginger Brown's welfare. 
"If he was for us all the time," said Weston, "he sure didn't show it." 
Added attorney John Patterson, "For once, the judge was right." 
Among the options available to the court were to drop the charges against all 
but Daniels, who was considered by most jurors as the most likely to face a 
conviction because of his professional role in the snatching. 
Moon said Daniels "has successfully hidden behind the Brown family shield." But 
he said that, since the prosecution chose to include Daniels among the five 
co-defendants, it shouldn't have "a second chance" to prosecute him alone. 
"I do not condone any of Mr. Daniels' actions. In my view, they were outside 
the law," Moon said. But he then wondered aloud whether kidnaping laws can be 
applied to these sorts of cases. 
"It may be argued that the prosecution of these deprogramming kidnaping cases 
deter abductions (of relatives) and deter vigilantes. Perhaps our society will 
always struggle with this phenomenon," Moon said. But he suggested that new 
laws be written to specifically address the abduction of family members for 
deprogramming purposes. 
Altschul said Friday that "everybody is relieved that we can go on to do our 
business." 
"However, there's a great need, a great desire on Ginger's part, to have her 
family come over to our side and become good Christians, to shake hands and ask 
for an excuse. Mr. Brown should stop excluding Ginger as a daughter because she 
doesn't go to his church," Altschul said. 
"He needs not to be a member, but to look at the fact that we are a church, not 
a cult, and there will be no harm to learn more about us. It's time for him to 
do that. He needs to accept his daughter and what she's doing." 
Ginger Brown said she is looking to her father to apologize to her. "There was 
a definite wrongdoing against me," she said. "The next step would be for my dad 
to apologize to me, my church and especially my pastor. That would be a start." 
But Earle Brown said he was still "really concerned about Ginger and her 
well-being -- and for other parents with children in this situation." He said 
he stood ready to reconcile with his daughter, but was not ready to apologize 
for his actions. "I don't know what there is to apologize for," he said. 
To that, Rempel remarked: "When the Browns get home, they'll realize they may 
have traded their daughter for a surrogate son (Daniels), and paid $20,000 to 
do it. Is that a bargain?" 
Ginger Brown's $2.5-million lawsuit against her parents and the others involved 
in the deprogramming attempt remains filed in court. 
Casey said the district attorney's office had not yet decided whether to appeal 
Moon's dismissals. 
Times staff writer Alan Abrahamson contributed to this story. 
