TIMES BOARD OF ECONOMISTS / DAVID M. GORDON: A WISH LIST FOR THE NEW CONGRESS 
So now we begin another four years of a Republican Administration in 
Washington. And another two years of a Democrat-controlled Congress. Will life 
go on as usual? Or will the Democrats in Congress finally challenge the 
economic policies that, over the past eight years, have produced mountainous 
debt, financial fragility and economic polarization? 
Two years ago, at the beginning of the 100th Congress, I outlined in this 
column a checklist of eight critical issues the Democrats needed to confront to 
make a difference on the economy. I promised to "keep my ratings as the 100th 
congressional season unfolds." 
On a scale from 1 to 10, I would charitably give the Democrats a score of 2. 
They dilly-dallied, hemmed and hawed, shuffled their feet and hid their heads. 
They failed to launch major new initiatives on any of the eight issues I 
listed. 
Rather than reevaluate the last two years, however, I thou ght it might make 
more sense to update my list. Here are five issues, in alphabetical order, that 
are rarely discussed but on which we desperately need new initiatives. (This is 
only a partial agenda; some of the most neglected problems on a much longer 
list.) 
1. The Fed. I'm beginning to sound like a broken record on this one: Real 
interest rates remain very high by historical standards while debt burdens grow 
heavier and heavier. But the Federal Reserve Board, catering primarily to the 
interests of the financial community, is repeatedly allowed to win at the game 
of chicken, consistently refusing to moderate interest rates until and only 
after something is done about the federal deficit. 
Many liberal economists agree that we need a much better balanced mix between 
monetary policy and fiscal policy. But they continually refuse to raise 
questions about the political arrangements under which monetary policy is 
determined. Many European economies feature much closer coordination of fiscal 
and monetary policy than the United States. Here we deny ourselves the 
opportunity to achieve that kind of coordination. 
Restraining interest rates requires challenging the political independence of 
the Fed. Congress has the constitutional right to mandate the specific content 
of monetary policy and to establish the conditions of the Fed's relationship to 
the rest of the government. The issue for the new Congress is not whether to 
constrain the political independence of the Fed, but how. 
2. Junk speculation. Speculative fever continues to grip the financial 
community. The mania for leveraged buyouts shows little sign of abating. 
Instead of investing to improve the nation's productivity, junk hunters are 
investing to deepen our indebtedness. 
Since the freedom to choose your investments is considered one of the most 
sacred rights in capitalist economies, it's not easy to control these kinds of 
speculative epidemics. But there are some direct steps that Congress should 
pursue sooner than later: Lower real interest rates would help tip the scales 
away from speculative investments and back toward real productive investments. 
We could impose a sharp tax on gains from short-term transactions on securities 
and other related paper investments -- say on those paper assets held for less 
than six months or a year. And we could begin to limit tax deductibility on 
corporate interest payments incurred from leveraging equity purchases with 
ever-increasing debt. 
It's probably too late to undo much of the damage already done in the feverish 
'80s. But we should at least move quickly to prevent even more havoc with our 
corporate balance sheets and productive futures. 
3. Labor law reform. Labor unions are in crisis. While there is much to 
criticize about the sluggishness of trade union leadership, a vital labor 
movement remains an urgent priority for working people in this country -- and 
for nearly everyone else. Many studies continue to find, for example, that 
unions contribute to, rather than impede, rapid growth in productivity. 
And yet, the obstacles to workers' joining or forming labor unions are 
considerable. Surveys suggest that something like one-third of non-unionized 
workers, representing roughly 25 million to 30 million employees, would prefer 
to be represented by a union. The Labor Law Reform Act of 1978 proposed some 
sensible and reasonable reforms that would have at least partly reduced some of 
the barriers to unionization, but it was defeated as a result of vigorous 
opposition and lobbying by business groups, particularly by the Business 
Roundtable. 
Something like the 1978 proposals should be back on the floor of the Congress. 
We need a vigorous labor movement, and that requires labor law reform. 
4. The minimum wage. Politicians continue to succumb to the remarkable belief 
that low wages are good for the American economy. Quite to the contrary, we 
need desperately to promote more rapid wage growth. Families are being squeezed 
by declining real wages. And it is reasonable to argue, as I have suggested in 
earlier columns, that wage growth helps promote productivity growth by creating 
demand for products, stimulating more efficient use of available resources and 
providing workers with a real stake in the performance of the economy. 
One of the most immediate and practicable public policy tools for having at 
least some influence on wages, especially at the lowest tiers, is the statutory 
level of the minimum wage. The minimum wage has not been touched since 1980, 
remaining firmly lodged at $3.35 an hour, with its real purchasing power 
declining by more than one-third over that period. It looked as if the 
Democrats might finally summon enough courage to mandate a significant increase 
in the minimum wage toward the end of the last congressional session, but they 
backed off just before taking the plunge. This should be one of the first 
priorities of the new legislative session. 
5. "X" policy. Back in 1982-83, it appeared that the Democrats might be moving 
toward serious proposals for "industrial policy." But the term itself was 
quickly tainted and industrial policy proponents faded into the woodwork. 
We should forget about the labels. Let's call it "X" policy. What we need, 
whatever we call it, is a concerted and coherent set of government policies to 
improve the performance of U.S. industry and to smooth the transition of 
workers and firms from one industry to another. Almost all of our major trading 
competitors, which have been collectively slashing our tires in international 
competition, engage in such policies. We must join them. And soon. 
That's my checklist for the new Senate and House. I'll keep you posted. Based 
on our luck with the preceding Congress, I'm not going to hold my breath. 
