CLOSING THE DOORS OF SHARE OUR SELVES 
Who can I turn to when Share Our Selves isn't there? 
For at least seven years, I've come to this organization for food, gas, rent 
for O'Neill Park (when I lived in my car) and motel rent when I was car-less 
and homeless with a young son. 
When my young granddaughter got spinal meningitis, it was SOS that paid for the 
expensive antibiotic follow-up medicine. She is 3 and healthy now. My son and I 
received dental care. 
The groceries were a constant. Every week you knew you'd get the cheese, beans 
and powdered milk to keep young bones and teeth growing right as a supplement 
the times the food stamps ran out. 
But more than nutrition, medical and dental care was the heart care. When I 
needed a home for battered women, I was given a shoulder to cry on and directed 
to a motel until I could find a shelter. If I'd returned to the battering 
partner, I could have died. I owe SOS my life. 
When I lost custody of my son, I became an alcoholic bag lady rummaging in 
dumpsters and sleeping in parks. I didn't want to live and tried suicide. I 
came to SOS again for help. I was directed to Casa de Cerra, an alcohol 
rehabilitation home. 
I found my self-respect and self-esteem return enough to reclaim my son. He's 
11 now and I'm 52. We are struggling to find an apartment. Our HUD certificate 
is two months away, then we can leave grandmother's and he and I will re-enter 
the mainstream of society. I'm going to school to become a computer operator. 
We're almost out of the woods, but, ironically, the place that helped me the 
most will no longer be in existence after Jan. 15. It's incredible that an 
organization that has helped so many could close its doors. 
"Not in my neighborhood," the neighbors say. Did they say that to Jesus Christ 
when he helped the poor, lame, suffering people? Surely He aggravated some of 
the people who didn't want to be reminded that some of us are sicker than 
others. 
I've recovered and won't need even food help much longer, but some people never 
had a chance to go to high school and learn to read and write as I was 
privileged to do. Some people are not just economically disadvantaged. Some 
people have lost faith and have broken spirits. Alcohol and drugs dull and mask 
the pain of mere existence. 
Human beings sure don't live by bread alone. They also need kind words and love 
until they can love themselves again. Thank you, SOS. 
DIANA CAMPBELL 
Huntington Beach 
