RESTAURANT REVIEW; 
FARE FOR '50S REVIVALISTS AT THE PASADENA ELKS LODGE 
What is this grand building? Why does it make me think of the Rose Bowl? And 
can I eat here? 
The answer is simple. It's the Pasadena Elks Lodge, and it was designed by 
Myron Hunt, the Rose Bowl's own architect. It has another New Year's Day 
connection, too, as a matter of fact. This corner of Colorado and Orange Grove 
is where the TV crews covering the Rose Parade set up. 
And sure, you can eat at the Elks Lodge -- most days, anyway, when the Elks 
aren't meeting. I wouldn't bring you all the way out here for nothing. 
The restaurant, a few steps down to your right after you enter from the parking 
lot, is a true time capsule that '50s revivalists might study in some detail. 
The elegant verticality motif, for instance: tall, skinny, unframed mirrors 
spotted at artfully varied heights, and wall lamps with narrow shades a couple 
of feet long, technically known as haloed downlights. Or the tamed Art Deco 
motif: On the wall behind the long bar are geometrical clusters of booze 
bottles with amber backlighting. 
It's a rather comfortable room too. There are hanging cork baffles over the bar 
so the noise level is low, and the whole place is warm and cozy. And 
reasonable. Bud on draft is 75 cents for a 12-ounce glass. One imagines Andy 
Rooney could be happy here. 
The food is time capsule stuff too. Breaded veal cutlet, for gosh sakes. And 
tomato imperial, a large tomato hollowed out and filled with tuna salad (not 
bad tuna salad, by the way) served on a vast quantity of iceberg lettuce. 
In short, plain Midwestern cooking with all its vices and virtues, the vices 
being mostly a matter of blandness and heaviness. The vegetables, moreover, are 
always cooked to death. These are the vegetables many of us were forbidden to 
leave the table until we'd eaten. As grown-ups we are entitled to leave them on 
our plates. 
What would I recommend? The sandwiches seem good. The steak sandwich comes with 
a pretty thick genuine steak, and you can't go wrong with the open-face turkey 
sandwich (a rather elegant touch: the cranberry jelly comes in a glass cup 
rather than paper). The burgers are not the thick, smoky, back-yard barbecue 
sort but more like Mom's thrifty Saturday lunch burgers, with thin patties and 
American cheese, perhaps of some nostalgia value. 
Other than that, I'd always go for the specials of the day. While the regular 
menu choices at dinner include a mushy loin-cut Alaska halibut steak, the 
specials might be something rather nice, such as pork steak in very crisp 
breading (with a bland but oddly distracting milk sauce pooled on top), or very 
tender pot roast in plain beef gravy. 
On Fridays and Saturdays you can always get prime rib, regular or a huge 
bone-in cut of a size suitable for braining a dinosaur. Possibly the best thing 
I've had is the garlicky corned beef with cabbage, which is always available on 
Thursdays. Watch out for that horseradish sauce. 
The best dessert I've encountered was the coconut cream pie. Note: The "hot 
fudge" on the hot fudge sundae is actually the cold-spreadable sort. 
And if you run into Andy Rooney, say hello. 
