NEXT PANCHEN LAMA SOUGHT; 
DEATH OF AN ALLY BRINGS CHINA NEW PROBLEMS IN TIBET 
The sudden death of the Panchen Lama, the second-highest-ranking Tibetan 
religious leader, confronts China with a new crisis as it continues to try to 
defuse pro-independence sentiment in Tibet. 
Even the anchorman on the national television news seemed to recognize its 
implications when he called the 50-year-old Panchen Lama's death of a heart 
attack Saturday a "heavy loss" for China. 
The late spiritual and political leader was the most effective spokesman for 
China's current policy in Tibet, which stresses a limited revival of religious 
freedom together with emphasis that the region must remain under Chinese 
control. 
Successor Must Be Discovered 
The deceased leader's successor, by Tibetan tradition, will be a baby boy born 
within the next few years who must be discovered by religious elders as his 
predecessor's "reincarnation" and then sent to a monastery for training before 
finally being installed formally as the next Panchen Lama. Thus, for nearly two 
decades, until that child approaches adulthood, it will be impossible for a 
successor to play the same role as the late leader. 
The exiled Dalai Lama, Tibet's highest-ranking religious leader, has long 
espoused Tibetan independence, although he modified that stance last year by 
saying that he could accept Chinese control of Tibet's foreign relations. 
Over the centuries, Tibet has sometimes been independent and sometimes a part 
of the Chinese empire. 
Supporters of the Dalai Lama, led by strongly nationalistic monks, have staged 
a series of pro-independence protests in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa over the 
past 16 months. Three of these demonstrations ended with police firing into 
crowds of protesters. Chinese authorities fear that further protests may break 
out in the weeks ahead. 
Rioting Erupted Last Year 
The annual Monlam festival, which begins next month, ended in anti-Chinese 
rioting last year. March is the 30th anniversary of the 1959 Tibetan uprising 
that resulted in the Dalai Lama's fleeing to exile in India. Violence could 
occur in connection with either anniversary. It is rumored among foreigners in 
Lhasa that Tibetans have stolen a quantity of weapons from Chinese security 
forces and that these might be used in connection with pro-independence 
protests. 
The late Panchen Lama was not widely adored like the Dalai Lama, but he was 
respected by most Tibetans as an important religious figure. After spending 
nearly a decade imprisoned or under house arrest during the 1966-76 Cultural 
Revolution, he reemerged as an advocate of both religious and economic 
development in Tibet. He was able to argue with some effectiveness that 
Tibetans should devote their energy to activity in these fields rather than a 
struggle for independence. 
The Panchen Lama was an acceptable leader both to Beijing and the Tibetan 
people, a diplomat in Beijing said. 
"He will be very hard to replace," the diplomat commented. "I know of no one of 
comparable stature who can take his place." 
The late Panchen Lama was the 10th in a line that is believed by Tibetans to 
have been reincarnations of the Amitabha Buddha, or Buddha of Infinite Light. 
In a dispatch from the Tibetan city of Xigaze, where the Panchen Lama died only 
a few days after presiding over a major religious ceremony, the official New 
China News Agency indicated that the tradition of discovering a reincarnated 
successor will be carried on. 
Prayers for 'Early Incarnation' 
After reporting that top political authorities of Tibet paid their last 
respects Sunday to the dead leader, the news agency added that monks at the 
Tashilhunpo Monastery chanted prayers "praising the Panchen Lama for his 
outstanding achievements and wishing him an early incarnation." 
Several other official statements of praise and grief also were released 
Sunday. 
The Panchen Lama was "a great patriot, noted statesman, devoted friend of the 
Chinese Communist Party and outstanding leader of Tibetan Buddhism in China," 
according to an official obituary issued by the Standing Committee of the 
National People's Congress and summarized by the news agency. The Panchen Lama 
was a vice chairman of the congress. 
The State Council, China's equivalent of a Cabinet, released a message of 
condolence expressing "extremely deep grief over his death." 
