NORTHERN INDIA, LAND OF 'HEAT AND DUST,' BUNDLES UP IN AN UNUSUALLY COLD WINTER 
The shoeshine boy waited like a hawk, his eyes fixed on a large family eating 
lunch on paper plates in a park. 
Jagdish Rajkumar, a scrawny teen-ager, was not interested in the food. 
The moment the family finished the food and threw away the paper plates, 
Rajkumar darted over and tucked the plates into a bag and resumed his business, 
calling out "Get your shoes polished for two rupees (13 cents)." 
Rajkumar is one the millions of poor people across northern India who are 
collecting rags, scraps of paper, bits of straw and anything else that burns in 
an effort to keep warm during an unusually cold Indian winter. 
Especially prized is cow dung, which makes excellent fuel when dried and patted 
into cakes. 
In recent days, 24 people in northern India have died because of the cold, 
according to official reports. Newspapers put the death toll at 100. 
This winter is mild by international standards but exceptionally chilly in a 
region better known for its torrid summer heat. 
"It is cold if you take into consideration a lesser-discussed meteorological 
phenomenon," said G. S. Mondal of the New Delhi's Weather Office. He explained 
that a temperature of 42 degrees Fahrenheit, combined with a 19-m.p.h. wind, 
made it feel like it was just above freezing, and that has "a tremendous 
biological impact on us." 
New Delhi's normal winter temperatures range from 46 to 50, but even a few 
degrees make a big difference to people with little or no shelter. 
"In between my business I collect as much paper as I can to keep us warm at 
night," said Rajkumar, who earns about $1 a day. He said he gives about 33 
cents to police so they'll look the other way when he scavenges for paper in 
the park at Connaught Place, New Delhi's central shopping district. 
"I have old parents and three sisters at home. We all sleep in one room with a 
fire or we will freeze to death," he said. 
Wood is too expensive for many. 
About two pounds of wood costs 7 cents, and it lasts only for minutes, "so what 
we do is pick up everything and anything that burns" the shoeshine boy said. 
Even tourists from other climates are finding the India of "Heat and Dust," the 
book and screenplay by Ruth Prawer Jhabwala, has turned cold. 
Richard and Mary Thomson of Mill Valley, Calif., said they dreamed of the 
"golden rays of tropical Indian sun" when they planned their vacation in the 
subcontinent. 
"We never thought we would be using this in India," Thomson said, pointing at 
his sweater, his first purchase in an Indian bazaar. 
"I had expected India to be much warmer. It is cold, but I am enjoying it," 
said Eric Eubank, 19, of Frederick, Md., a philosophy student at St. Andrews 
Presbyterian College in Laurinburg, N.C. "When you think of India, you think of 
the heat and not cold." 
"In our country it is cold, too, but there we have centrally heated homes and 
offices. Here there is none," said Nanna Rosenstock of Copenhagen. "We manage 
here, but we wonder what the poor among the Indians do." 
Hundreds of people succumb to cold weather in India every year because they do 
not have adequate clothing, shelter and food. Some of those fortunate enough to 
have homes die of carbon monoxide from unventilated fires. 
Beggars, migrant laborers and other poorest of the poor are the hardest hit 
because they have no shelter. They normally sleep in parks, on sidewalks or 
under bridges. 
As nightfall approaches, some head to railway stations and government-run 
shelters. Others bribe guards at government buildings to let them to spend the 
night in the corridors. 
