AFTER 5-PLUS YEARS OF DELAY, MURDER CASE TO BE HEARD 
The Thomas Maniscalco case is about biker culture and murder -- three people 
shot down in their home in a middle-class Westminster neighborhood on Memorial 
Day weekend in 1980. 
But in the five-plus years since Maniscalco's arrest, murder often has been a 
secondary issue in his case. Instead, the radical lawyer who helped found the 
Hessian motorcycle gang has pitted himself against the justice system, 
challenging the grand jury process, his judges, his prosecutors, and even his 
jailers. 
The case has also been plagued by problems no one could foresee -- including a 
major foul-up in a court reporter's transcript and even a judge's suicide. 
Today, however, the focus finally shifts back to the house on Navajo Road where 
two men and a young woman were found shot to death. Twelve jurors and six 
alternates will hear Deputy Dist. Atty. Richard M. King's opening statement 
about a tale of drugs and counterfeit money among the bikers, who lived 
incongruously in a neighborhood of working-class families and weekend 
barbecues. 
Maniscalco, prosecutors contend, may have been a lawyer by day, but at other 
times he was heavily involved in the trafficking of drugs and counterfeit money 
-- $500,000 in fake $50 and $100 bills. Maniscalco, now 44, was the leader of a 
group of younger people from the drug culture to whom he opened up his home, 
they say. 
Internal problems in the group, they theorize, led to the execution-style 
murder of Richard (Rabbit) Rizzone, 36, who had been Maniscalco's best friend 
and had lived with him at times. The other two victims, they say, were simply 
unfortunate enough to be in the house with Rizzone. One of them was a 
19-year-old girl, killed after she was raped and then forced to lead the 
killers through the house to find Rizzone's keys. 
Maniscalco has denied killing the three. 
Maniscalco and Rizzone had grown up in New York together, had moved to 
California together, and were part of the group that founded the Hessians 
during the Vietnam War years. 
When Rizzone was arrested on drug charges in 1978, he listed Maniscalco's name 
in the "next of kin" box. 
"I wouldn't kill Rabbit; Rabbit was my friend," Maniscalco said in a jailhouse 
interview several years ago. 
But prosecutors claim that the friendship of Maniscalco and Rizzone had waned. 
Maniscalco had told friends that Rizzone had taken for himself more than 
$30,000 in counterfeit money and also stolen drugs from him, they contend. 
One of the men living at Maniscalco's house, Robert Robbins, later testified 
that Maniscalco first tried to kill Rizzone by brushing poison on counterfeit 
bills he sent him, so that Rizzone eventually would ingest the poison off his 
finger. 
When that failed, Maniscalco and confederates Phil Warren, Daniel Duffy and 
Robbins went to Rizzone's home to kill him, Robbins said. Warren did the actual 
killing, Robbins testified. He alleges it was also Warren who raped the young 
woman, Rena Miley, before killing her. And, he said, it was Warren who killed 
Thomas Monahan, 28, a friend of Rizzone who stayed with him sometimes and who 
came to the house right after Rizzone was shot. But it was Maniscalco who was 
in charge, Robbins said. 
Robbins said Maniscalco ordered him to take Rizzone's Harley Davidson 
motorcycle with him when Robbins and Warren left for Michigan the next day. 
Prosecutors contend that Maniscalco planned to have Robbins killed, so that 
when the motorcycle was traced back to Rizzone, police would blame Robbins for 
the triple slaying in Westminster. 
Maniscalco's lawyer, Joanne Harrold, has her own theories about what happened. 
She points out that another key witness against Maniscalco -- a biker named 
Bruce Van Arsdell -- ended up in Michigan with Warren and Robbins. The three of 
them, she contends, killed the people in the Westminster house and planned all 
along to make Maniscalco their fall guy. 
Maniscalco and Duffy, who now face a death penalty if convicted, were arrested 
in March, 1984, after Van Arsdell agreed to talk to investigators. He had been 
living with Maniscalco at the time of the shootings and has key evidence about 
the lawyer's activities unrelated to his law practice. 
Warren may have been a victim of his own fears of being arrested. He was 
questioned by police in Moore, Okla., on July 30, 1982, when he tried to use a 
phony name on a driver's license application. The surprised officers were 
forced to shoot him to death after he tried to kill both of them with a knife. 
Robbins, who is under protection from the authorities, without question is the 
star witness. Prosecutor King will have to rely on many witnesses who either 
were engaged in criminal activities or are now in jail convicted of crimes. But 
his witness list also includes law enforcement authorities from five police 
departments, the FBI, the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, and 
the U.S. Secret Service. 
King has declined to comment on the facts of the case. 
"I'm just delighted that finally the community is going to have its day in 
court," King said. 
King's office has been seething for years over the trial delays, almost all 
caused by the defense. 
"The defense has everything to gain and nothing to lose from delaying the 
trial," said Deputy Dist. Atty. Brent F. Romney, who has handled most of the 
pretrial motions. "Especially with the penalty their client could face." 
The first major problem was that charges were dismissed for tactical reasons so 
that Maniscalco could be indicted after a grand jury hearing. But the grand 
jury transcript was so riddled with errors it was unusable, and prosecutors had 
to seek a "superseding" grand jury indictment. It took more than a year and two 
trips to the state Supreme Court to resolve the issue. 
The next issue to stall the case was Maniscalco's objections to Superior Court 
Judge Theodore E. Millard as the trial judge. Millard was a former prosecutor 
who had been peripherally involved with one of Maniscalco's former clients, who 
was also a potential witness in his case. 
After more than a year of court hearings, Millard decided in 1988 to excuse 
himself from the case, so that it wouldn't be delayed further. He was replaced 
by Judge James R. Franks II. But because of a serious illness, Judge Franks had 
to relinquish the case -- after he had already begun jury selection -- to Judge 
Kathleen E. O'Leary last summer. When Judge Franks committed suicide in August, 
the case was further delayed because he had been scheduled to finish up one 
stage of jury selection. 
O'Leary ordered several hearings to run into the night -- from 8 a.m. to 7:30 
p.m. -- to prevent further delays in the trial. 
All of the judges on the case have faced a near avalanche of defense motions, 
many of which were not relevant to the case, prosecutors have claimed. 
Maniscalco's attorney Harrold and her co-counsel, Andrew Roth, also asked for 
sanctions against prosecutors, claiming they had deliberately withheld evidence 
to hamper the defense. O'Leary denied the sanctions. 
The arguments were bitter at the least. 
"Ms. Harrold is lying," prosecutor King said at one hearing in O'Leary's court. 
"If Ms. Harrold were Pinocchio, her nose would grow so long it would go out the 
door and all the way down the hallway." 
Harrold seethed. But she has made biting comments of her own. "Prosecutors have 
resisted and interfered with discovery (providing the defense with information, 
required by law) repeatedly," she wrote in court papers. She called the 
Maniscalco case "a classic example" of an ongoing district attorney practice of 
not providing defense lawyers with evidence to which they are entitled. 
Last week, the defense bristled again. Maniscalco had been ordered to court 
from the Orange County Jail on Thursday by mistake. On Friday, when Maniscalco 
was supposed to be in court, Harrold did not show up and Judge O'Leary had to 
wait into the noon hour for co-counsel Roth to appear instead at a final 
hearing. Prosecutors had asked for the court session to expand the dates on the 
papers charging Maniscalco with the murders, to include the Friday before 
Memorial Day. 
"This is bizarre," Roth complained. "Five and a half years (go by) and they 
just now decide what day they want to say the murders occurred." 
Deputy D.A. Romney emphasizes that many of the defense motions were meritorious 
enough to resolve in court. But, he added, "far too many of them were frivolous 
in my opinion, and that's had a lot to do with why this case has taken so long 
to get to trial." 
Harrold blames prosecutors for the delays. In addition to the dispute over 
discovery, she criticizes King and Romney for trying to make it a drug and 
counterfeit case. 
"I thought I was defending a murder case," she said. "But Rick King is going to 
throw in everything he can to muddy up the waters." 
In his court papers, King contends that the counterfeit and drug evidence is 
important to show Maniscalco's motive for wanting Rizzone dead. 
Maniscalco has not been idle during his 5 1/2 years in jail. He has gained 
notoriety as a jailhouse lawyer and has been a leader in a move to improve jail 
conditions. Many claim, however, that Maniscalco has manufactured many of the 
complaints he has made about jail deputies beating inmates. Now his lawyers say 
his trial could be affected by his need for medical attention. He suffers from 
back pains and needs dental work. 
Testimony in the case will not begin until Wednesday. One person who will no 
doubt follow the Maniscalco case carefully from the Orange County Jail will be 
Duffy. His trial on the same charges is scheduled to follow Maniscalco's. 
"The witnesses are the same," one lawyer involved said. "If Maniscalco hangs, 
Duffy knows it will be bleak for him." 
