TROJANS LOSE TRACK OF TIME IN LOSS; 
USC: NOBODY ASKS OFFICIALS TO STOP THE CLOCK AFTER OREGON TAKES 66-65 LEAD WITH 
FOUR SECONDS LEFT IN THE GAME. 
USC's basketball team should devote part of its workouts next week to 
practicing how to call time out. 
This is how it's done: You extend one hand and put the other hand on top to 
form a "T." 
Got that, guys? 
The Trojans' inability to call a timeout after Oregon guard Terrell Brandon 
made an eight-foot jumper with four seconds left cost them a 66-65 loss to the 
Ducks Saturday at the Sports Arena. 
USC didn't have a clue on the final play of the game. 
Although the Trojans had one timeout remaining, it was wasted after Brandon 
made the game-winner. Forward Ronnie Coleman inbounded the ball to center Chris 
Munk under the Oregon basket, but the buzzer sounded before the Trojans called 
time. 
"I think it's sad that we didn't understand that all five players in a 
situation like that should be going to the official to call timeout," USC Coach 
George Raveling said. "I learned that in eighth grade in CYO ball. I would 
suggest that you certainly don't have to coach that at this level. 
"I can remember my CYO coach telling me you always run to the official's face 
and call timeout. We should have five guys calling timeout. But we're a little 
gun-shy. We're like a guy in a rough neighborhood and a guy comes up behind him 
and puts his hand on his shoulder ready to say hello and he jumps and puts his 
hands up because he thinks it's a holdup. 
"But I'm not sure it would have made a significant difference. It would have 
given us one more shot. I think it might have given us a last-ditch chance to 
pull off a miraculous win." 
The Trojans' best option would have been to call time and set up a desperation 
shot by guard Harold Miner, who scored 20 points. That certainly would have 
been a higher percentage play that Munk dribbling out the clock to end the 
game. 
Munk and Coleman said they were confused because of the din from the Oregon 
fans in the crowd of 1,478. 
"There was a lot of noise in there, but I should have known better," Munk said. 
"I should have called a timeout regardless of whether the buzzer went off or 
not. It should have been an instant reaction on my part. 
"I'm not making any excuses. I should have called a timeout regardless of 
whether time ran out or not. I should have called it anyway, even if there was 
.1 seconds on the clock I should have called it." 
Coleman said: "I should have called a timeout at the end, but I didn't. I 
thought time had run out because there was so much noise in there I really 
couldn't hear whether (the buzzer) sounded or not." 
USC guard Rodney Chatman, who was at the other end of the court, said he tried 
to verbally call timeout, but referee Bob Garibaldi, positioned under the 
Oregon basket, said he didn't see anyone signal for a timeout. 
"I'm looking at Munk and Coleman and they didn't say a thing to me," Garibaldi 
said. "Afterward Raveling said to me that someone, I think Robert Pack (it was 
actually Chatman) called a timeout to one of the other officials at the other 
end. I went up and asked both of them and they both said 'no.' " 
Enraged, Raveling went after the officials at the end of the game. 
"Chatman is the only one who called timeout at the end," Raveling said. "He was 
near our foul circle. I can't blame the officials, even if I went after them in 
all of my emotion." 
Was Oregon Coach Don Monson surprised that USC didn't use its final timeout? 
"I'm not too sure they didn't call it," Monson said. "I just don't know if the 
officials saw it or not. Apparently they didn't. I don't fault their kids at 
all. I think they were trying to get a timeout. At least, that's what my kids 
said. 
"You can make a little bit more of that. The most they'd have had (to get off a 
shot) was three seconds and the ball's clear down in the back court. What can 
you do? Miracles happen but you've got to be realistic. The game was won or 
lost with Terrell's shot. The rest of it is speculation." 
Trailing 64-63, USC took a 65-64 lead when Calvin Banks tipped in a missed free 
throw by Miner with 1:16 remaining. The Ducks called a timeout with 58 seconds 
left to set up a play, but Brandon missed a jumper and Miner rebounded with 43 
seconds remaining. 
Oregon got another chance when Pack missed the front end of a one-and-one with 
31 seconds left. The Ducks ran the same play they did on their previous 
possession and this time Brandon made the shot. 
"They had designed a play for me to go one-on-one to take Pack who was guarding 
me," Brandon said. "And I buried the shot." 
And he buried USC (6-10, 1-8), again mired in last place in the Pac-10. 
But Raveling hasn't given up hope. 
"Whatever people's opinions, I'm going to try and stay positive and see if we 
can't turn this thing around," Raveling said. "I took an article out of the 
Boston Globe on the Steelers. They got beat, 51-0, in the first game and 41-10 
in the second and then they just kind of gradually worked their way back in and 
before you knew it they were back in the playoffs. I gave the kids that article 
to read because they have to understand that (the Steelers) had bad things 
written about them too and they came back. We have to find a way to turn this 
thing around." 
A good starting point to turning around the season might be working on learning 
how to call time. 
Trojan Notes 
Kevin Mixon scored 20 points, hitting eight of 14 shots, including four 
three-point shots, to help Oregon (10-8, 5-4) win its first road game in seven 
tries. . . . After making 31 consecutive free throws, USC center Chris Munk 
missed one in the first half. 
