STANDOFF IN PANAMA: CONTEST OF TWO WILLS; 
SURRENDER: A GENTLE BUT STUBBORN MAN OF THE CLOTH BETTERS THE MAN OF THE GUN, 
THE 'MAXIMUM LEADER.' 
For 11 days, dozens of officials and diplomats from the United States, the 
Vatican and Panama conferred around the clock while their advisers pored over 
constitutions, canon law, extradition treaties and legal precedents -- all in 
an effort to end the agonizing standoff with deposed Panamanian strongman 
Manuel A. Noriega. 
But the crisis in Panama City ultimately became a contest of wills between two 
men -- a self-proclaimed "maximum leader" and a gentle but stubborn 
Spanish-born priest. And in the end, the man of the cloth bettered the man of 
the gun. 
Senior officials credit Archbishop Jose Sebastian Laboa, the papal nuncio who 
once headed a Vatican tribunal that investigates miracles, with maneuvering 
Noriega through a series of turning points that persuaded him to leave the 
Vatican embassy and surrender to U.S. forces. 
"I believe that Father Laboa was the most instrumental person in making this 
happen," Maj. Gen. Marc Cisneros, the commander of the U.S. Army South and the 
lead American negotiator in Panama, told a news conference in Panama on 
Thursday. 
A senior State Department official in Washington added: "Once the Vatican made 
clear it would not grant him asylum but would not turn him over to us, we knew 
it all depended on Laboa. He somehow had to convince Noriega to voluntarily 
give up. 
"Getting Noriega to leave of his own free will was a horrendous obstacle," the 
official said. "There were many (in the U.S. government) who said he wouldn't 
be able to do it. They were convinced that Noriega would rather come out with 
guns blazing or even take people inside the nunciature hostage in exchange for 
his own freedom. 
"But this time Laboa worked his own miracle." 
Laboa personally made the decision to grant Noriega refuge in the palm-fringed 
Vatican mission on Christmas Eve, mainly to neutralize Noriega's threat to wage 
a prolonged guerrilla war from the northern Panamanian jungles. 
But the 66-year-old priest from the rugged, mountainous Basque region of Spain 
also turned out to be more effective than American forces in getting Noriega 
out. 
He did it by playing his own game of psychological warfare -- a one-man version 
of the good-cop, bad-cop routine -- according to a European envoy who was in 
the embassy daily. 
During the first part of Noriega's stay, Laboa applied crude pressure and 
veiled threats, according to the envoy and U.S. officials. 
Noriega was denied the right to use the telephone, either to take incoming 
calls from his U.S. lawyers or to contact his family, which had taken refuge in 
the Cuban Embassy. 
He was kept incommunicado, denied access to newspapers or radio. And the 
television set in the Spartan, white room on the second floor of the 
three-story mansion where he was lodged was broken. 
Uzi Is Locked Up 
He was denied the right to wear a uniform, and the Israeli-made Uzi submachine 
gun he brought with him was locked in a safe. He was dressed instead in plain 
T-shirts and trousers, and the sole adornment in his room was a crucifix. 
As part of the strategy, Laboa, along with another priest from the embassy, 
stood outside Noriega's room and discussed his dismal prospects in voices loud 
enough for him to hear, the European diplomat said. 
The conversation included a reference to Anastasio Somoza, the deposed 
Nicaraguan dictator who was assassinated shortly after his forced exile in 
1979, the diplomat said. 
"The heat was applied literally," a State Department official said. "Even his 
air conditioning was turned off. It had to be a humbling experience that 
demonstrated in stark terms how vulnerable he was." 
Noriega quickly became "downcast and moody," according to Marcos G. McGrath, 
the Roman Catholic archbishop of Panama. 
It was during this period that Laboa applied the first concrete pressure on 
Noriega, in the form of two letters. 
The first was signed by Laboa and relayed to the U.S. Army, authorizing 
American forces to raid the embassy if the nuncio felt threatened by Noriega or 
his supporters who also had holed up inside the mission. 
Laboa then orchestrated a campaign to convince Pope John Paul II -- in a letter 
from Panama's bishops -- that the grounds for asylum should be refused. 
That letter was sent shortly after Laboa told Noriega that the Vatican would 
probably not grant asylum to the former dictator as a political or diplomatic 
refugee, the official said. 
Letter From Bishops 
"The letter from Panama's Catholic bishops, which urged the Vatican not to 
recognize Noriega as a political or diplomatic refugee because of the criminal 
charges against him, helped sway the Vatican," McGrath said. 
Noriega was indicted on drug charges by U.S. grand jurors in February, 1988. 
After winning assurances from the Bush Administration that the 12-count 
indictment against Noriega would not call for the death penalty, the Vatican 
notified all parties that it would not allow the dictator to stay in the 
embassy for a prolonged period and that it hoped for swift resolution of the 
crisis. 
On the fourth day of his refuge, Noriega became even more isolated. Most of the 
30 supporters, who had been sleeping on cots provided by the U.S. Army in the 
embassy employees' dining hall, walked out of the mission and were detained. 
The only others left inside were Noriega's former chief of intelligence, the 
head of his personal bodyguard unit, the director of immigration and his wife 
-- and four Spanish Basque separatists and a Cuban who had also taken refuge in 
the Vatican embassy from the fighting. 
"It apparently worked," said the State Department official. "Noriega became 
despondent as he realized he was being abandoned." 
As the standoff continued, the European diplomat said, Laboa abandoned the 
initial strategy and carefully began "building an aura of trust" with the 
isolated strongman. 
"In the last five days, he (found) that he could get to Noriega by treating him 
well," the diplomat said. 
But it was not enough to get Noriega to accept Laboa's appeals to leave. 
The second turning point was making Noriega realize that the option of seeking 
refuge in a third country was out, leaving only prosecution in either Panama or 
the United States as the only choices confronting him. 
Laboa repeatedly told the deposed leader that no other country was prepared to 
take him. Spain and the Dominican Republic publicly announced that they would 
not grant him safe haven. 
But, U.S. officials said, Noriega refused to believe that even Cuba would turn 
him away. Noriega's wife and two children had been granted refuge in the Cuban 
mission. 
Then, at some point during the final 48 hours, Laboa, who is also dean of 
Panama's diplomatic corps, presented Noriega with a message from the Cuban 
Embassy. 
The message made clear that Havana would not take him, even in the unlikely 
event that the United States would allow him free passage, according to 
Panamanian and U.S. sources. 
U.S. officials believe that Laboa solicited the note, directly or indirectly, 
from his Cuban counterparts. 
"My impression is that this message finally convinced Noriega of his total 
isolation," another European diplomat said. 
Added the State Department official, "At this point, he was even less welcome 
than the shah when he left Iran" -- a reference to the wandering exile of Shah 
Mohammed Reza Pahlavi through Morocco, the Bahamas, Mexico, the United States 
and Egypt until his death in 1980. 
But just in case Noriega missed the point, the nuncio laid out one last option: 
that the Vatican embassy would haul down its flag and move to new quarters -- 
leaving Noriega alone and exposed. 
Throughout this period, Laboa, an extrovert who likes to joke, engaged Noriega 
in frequent daily conversations to build up his trust. 
The deposed dictator apparently was not fully aware that Laboa, who never 
masked the church's hostility toward him during his military rule and 
frequently gave asylum to Noriega's opponents, had in fact become his principal 
opponent. 
The final turning point came Wednesday, when Laboa bluntly informed Noriega 
that "his asylum would expire at noon Thursday," according to a senior 
Administration source. 
That threat opened up the possibility of either American troops or Panamanian 
officials taking him into custody. 
"Noriega finally had to make a choice," a Pentagon official said. 
Laboa also knew that Grupo Direct, an organization of young Panamanian 
professionals, was set to demonstrate Wednesday outside the nunciature. 
He encouraged the move as a tactic that would pressure Noriega more effectively 
than the barbed wire, blaring music and deployment of elite Delta force 
commandos around the nunciature. 
"It was the final squeeze," said the State Department official. "It was a 
brilliant touch. It was the most effective way of making prosecution in the 
United States look almost inviting. The chanting of thousands of angry people 
haunted him all day." 
Added the European diplomat: "The nuncio explained to Noriega that . . . if he 
had stayed in Panama (for trial), he would have been lynched by a mob. 
"The only place he could have guaranteed safety was in the United States and he 
could always hope for a mistrial." 
The ordeal ended as suddenly -- and secretly -- as it had begun. 
The papal nunciature relayed word to Gen. Cisneros, U.S. commander south, on 
Wednesday afternoon that the "end was near," according to the State Department 
official. 
While the Vatican slept, the persuasive Spaniard personally negotiated the 
final steps. 
Noriega, the nunciature told the Americans, had some final requests. He wanted 
the right to wear a uniform and to be met by an officer of general rank, no 
advance publicity, and some time to make calls to his family. Cisneros agreed 
and a uniform was provided. 
Laboa insisted that Noriega have a final meal before his long flight to 
captivity in Miami. In turn, the former dictator asked for a souvenir from the 
nunciature -- a Bible -- to take with him. 
At 8:48 p.m., Noriega -- accompanied by Laboa and two other priests -- finally 
walked out of the gate. Three minutes later, he was detained by U.S. troops. 
"There was a man of God, the nuncio, a priest, and a man of power, General 
Manuel Noriega," Vatican spokesman Joaquin Navarro mused in obvious elation 
Thursday. "In the end, the man of God won." 
Freed reported from Panama City and Wright reported from Washington. Times 
staff writers Richard Boudreaux in Panama City, William D. Montalbano in Rome 
and Art Pine in Washington contributed to this report. 
TRICKY LEGAL GROUND -- U.S. attorneys were cautious in making arrest. A4 
ANGER IN MIAMI -- Panamanians outside courthouse hostile to Noriega. A4 
THE RISE AND FALL OF MANUEL NORIEGA 
Key events related to Gen. Manuel A. Noriega's rule of Panama and his 
overthrow: 
1981 
Gen. Omar Torrijos, Noriega's mentor and predecessor as Panama's strongman, 
dies in plane crash. 
1982 
March -- Three of Torrijos' colonels, Ruben Dario Paredes, Roberto Diaz Herrera 
and Noriega, cut a deal to resolve power struggle. Paredes takes over as armed 
forces chief and agrees to retire in 1983, leaving Noriega to take over with 
Diaz Her-rara as second in command. Noriegapromises to deliver 1984 
presidential election to Paredes. 
1983 
August -- Noriega takes over as military chief. Panamanian legislature passes 
law creating Panama Defense Forces with control over National Guard, police, 
Panama Canal matters and other areas. Noriega reneges on Paredes deal and 
installs his own president in 1984 election. 
1987 
June -- Diaz Herrera, retiring as second in command, accuses Noriega of 
drug-related activities, rigging 1984 election and murdering Dr. Hugo 
Spadafora, former vice minister of health who accused Noriega of drug 
trafficking. Protest movement demands investigation; street protests are 
brutally crushed. 
1988 
Feb. 4 -- Federal grand jury in Miami indicts Noriega on drug-running charges. 
Grand jury in Tampa returns similar indictments. 
Feb. 25 -- President Eric Delvalle, who was installed by Noriega, announces 
that he has fired his patron. 
Feb. 26 -- Noriega-dominated National Assembly ousts Delvalle, who goes into 
hiding. Washington continues to recognize him as head of state. Education 
Minister Manuel Solis Palma is named minister in charge of presidency. Noriega 
opponents call general strike. Government closes opposition news media. 
March 3 -- U.S. courts block withdrawal of Panama funds from U.S. banks. 
March 11 -- President Reagan imposes sanctions, including eliminating trade 
preferences for Panama and withholding Panama Canal fees. 
March 14 -- Public employees riot after government is unable to pay wages. 
March 16 -- Military coup against Noriega fails; demonstrations erupt in 
capital. 
March 28 -- Troops disperse thousands of anti-government marchers and storm 
Marriott Hotel, beating and arresting opposition activists and journalists. 
Several are injured, dozens arrested. 
April 9 -- United States tightens economic sanctions, prohibiting U.S. firms 
from making payments to Panamanian government. Some $56 million in Panamanian 
funds in American banks are frozen. United States tries to negotiate Noriega's 
departure without success. 
May 9 -- Panamanian banks impose severe restrictions, including a freeze on 
savings accounts. 
Aug. 21 -- U.S. accuses Panama of 240 incidents of harassment of U.S. military 
personnel in 1988. 
1989 
May 7-9 -- Presidential election pits Noriega candidate against opposition 
candidate Guillermo Endara. Noriega's victory claim is countered by rioters as 
well as international observers who say ballots were rigged. 
May 10 -- Government nullifies election before final results are released, 
citing fraud and international interference. Endara and his two running mates 
are beaten and a bodyguard killed by civilian thugs as soldiers look on. Police 
break up opposition demonstration with gunfire and tear gas. 
May 11 -- President Bush orders 2,000 U.S. troops to Panama, joining more than 
10,000 already there. 
Sept. 1 -- Provisional President Francisco Rodriguez takes office, but Noriega 
remains de facto leader. 
Oct. 3 -- Attempted U.S.-backed military coup against Noriega fails; ringleader 
is reportedly summarily executed by Noriega himself. 
Dec. 15 -- Noriega says Panama is in a "state of war" with U.S. 
Dec. 16 -- Panamanian soldiers kill U.S. Marine lieutenant, saying he and three 
others fired at Noriega's military headquarters, wounding three people. U.S. 
denies charge. 
Dec. 18 -- U.S. Army officer wounds Panamanian police corporal because he 
thought the man was about to draw a weapon, according to U.S. military. 
Dec. 19 -- Bush orders U.S. troops into combat in Panama City on mission to 
seize Noriega to face federal drug charges in the United States. White House 
says mission is also intended to protect American lives, restore democracy and 
preserve integrity of the Canal. 
Dec. 24 -- Noriega seeks refuge at Vatican embassy. Bush Administration demands 
that he be turned over to face drug charges; intense negotiations involving 
Vatican, U.S. and new Panamanian government ensue. 
1990 
Jan. 3 -- Noriega leaves Vatican embassy and surrenders to U.S. 
Jan. 4 -- Plane carrying Noriega arrives in Florida. 
Source: Associated Press 
