CITY COUNCIL REJECTS BAN ON ALCOHOL; 
RECREATION: AMID HARSH CRITICISM OF EACH OTHER, MEMBERS UNANIMOUSLY AGREED THAT 
THE INITIAL PLAN TO END DRINKING AT PARKS AND BEACHES WAS ILL-CONCEIVED. 
The San Diego City Council on Tuesday unanimously rejected the idea of banning 
alcohol consumption at all city parks and beaches, saying an initial effort at 
a blanket restriction was ill-conceived and a mistake. 
The council said it will work toward a compromise to balance the rights of 
law-abiding citizens who enjoy a few drinks at the beach without bothering 
others, while protecting residents who feel under siege by a minority of 
drinkers who become drunk, abusive and noisy and at times commit crimes. 
But before the council voted to send the matter back to its Public Facilities 
and Recreation Committee -- which ignited an uproar last month when it 
unanimously approved the outright ban without notifying the public -- there was 
a spirited debate among several council members, who questioned one another's 
motives. 
Councilman Bob Filner, chairman of the committee that recommended the ban, 
apologized for the haste and acknowledged that more work is needed and that the 
restriction on alcohol was only one part of an overall plan. He noted that the 
committee had scheduled a meeting for today to refine the package, and he 
accused Mayor Maureen O'Connor of "grandstanding" by usurping the committee and 
scheduling Tuesday's hearing before the entire council. 
The mayor, who opposed the ban, defended her actions, saying the committee's 
vote caught everyone by surprise and that citizens had deluged her office with 
complaints. 
"The people who opposed it weren't notified," O'Connor said. "This has caused 
so much confusion" that the entire council was needed to provide direction. 
Without mentioning Filner by name, Councilman John Hartley, a member of the 
committee, said he was disappointed that O'Connor had tried to "embarrass 
somebody" and accused her of being "irresponsible." 
"I'm upset at the circus quality (of the hearing that is) designed to put 
someone on the spot or embarrass somebody," Hartley said. 
But the harshest rhetoric was yet to come. 
After listening to many opponents of the ban, including the Old Mission Beach 
Athletic Club, which presented the council with 7,000 signatures it said were 
gathered mainly in Mission Beach and Pacific Beach, Councilman Bruce Henderson 
stunned some of his colleagues. 
Henderson, who represents those communities, said that even though he voted for 
the ban as a committee member, he was really against it. 
"It was a cry of desperation," he said, explaining his vote. He said he voted 
for the ban because he knew there would be an outcry, and the public would then 
force the council to find a solution. 
After sitting through 2 1/2 hours of debate and hearing from dozens of citizens 
and community groups, an angry Councilman Wes Pratt responded to Henderson. 
While agreeing that a ban "might be overkill," Pratt said that what he really 
had a problem with "is a council member" whose intent was to make a political 
statement and "jerk" people around. 
"Mr. Henderson," the usually mild-mannered Pratt said, "if Custer had retreated 
as fast as you did on this issue, he would have made it, he'd be alive." Pratt 
said it was "inexcusable" and "irresponsible" to force people to take time off 
from their jobs to attend the council meeting when it wasn't necessary, and 
that everyone on the council knows the real problem is a lack of police 
enforcement. 
Councilwoman Judy McCarty, who serves on the committee with Henderson, jumped 
in and defended him. 
She said Henderson made it clear last month that he was supporting the ban 
because alternatives -- such as arresting and jailing people who break existing 
nighttime booze bans or are rowdy -- are unrealistic because people charged 
with misdemeanors are routinely rejected at the county's overcrowded jails. 
But Pratt was unmollified. 
"You manipulated the people to deal with a particular problem," he said, his 
voice rising. 
New Councilwoman Linda Bernhardt then said she "echoed a lot of what Mr. Pratt 
has to say," adding that, during her short stint on the council, "sometimes . . 
. it's very embarrassing to say I'm a member of this council." 
Manipulated or not, nearly a full house showed up at the council chambers for 
the debate on the issue. Several people living near La Jolla Shores or in 
Mission Beach blamed alcohol use for many of their neighborhoods' problems, 
from noise and rowdiness to petty crime and public drunkenness. They called for 
support of a booze ban. 
Bob Moore, a Mission Beach resident, said drunks and overuse of alcohol have 
driven families away from the beach, particularly in the past few years. "A 
California sunset without alcohol is still a beautiful sunset," he said. 
At least on this day, however, the ban's supporters were outnumbered by foes. 
Both organized groups that sponsor traditional beach-side events and 
individuals complained that they were being penalized for the behavior of a 
relatively small number of people. 
Even former Oakland Raiders defensive end Ben Davidson, who is perhaps now more 
famous for his role in the ubiquitous "Tastes great, less filling" TV beer 
commercials for a light beer, came from his La Mesa home to implore the council 
not to take "a step in the wrong direction." 
Joined in opposition were such seemingly disparate groups as the Old Mission 
Beach Athletic Club, which sponsors the summertime revelry known as the 
Over-the-Line Tournament on Fiesta Island, and the San Diego Symphony, which 
said a ban would impinge on its Summer Pops concerts. 
Other groups that lined up against the ban included sponsors of the annual 
spring Crew Classic on Mission Bay; the Unlimited Hydroplane Race, also held on 
Mission Bay, and the St. Patrick's Day Parade, which afterward holds a festival 
in Balboa Park. 
Charles Fox of the Irish Congress, the parade's sponsor, said a third of his 
group's budget comes from the sale of beer at the festival, which he said has 
never had alcohol-related problems. 
All the groups said that whatever the council does, it should make exemptions 
for organized groups that police their own events. 
Aside from the groups, there were other residents who said they work hard 
during the week, obey the laws, and enjoy drinking a wine cooler or beer at the 
beach without causing an incident or infringing on the rights of others. 
Councilman Ron Roberts said it should be clear to the council that passing 
another law won't solve the problem. 
"We can't deprive many people of legitimate recreational activities that 
include alcohol," he said. Roberts, like others on the council, said that 
what's needed is more enforcement of laws already in existence to curb alcohol 
problems. 
Councilwoman Abbe Wolfsheimer said she is adamant about placing alcohol 
restrictions at popular La Jolla Shores and adjacent Kellogg Park, including 
banning alcohol on the beach and parking lots, closing the parking lots at 10 
p.m., and restricting the size of fires in beach fire rings. 
Filner said his committee will work at creating a comprehensive program to deal 
with beach and park safety. 
"We're wrestling with a whole program to deal with inappropriate behavior at 
the beaches. . . . It was our responsibility to look at the ban," he said. 
"There is no magic answer." 
