TEXACO STOCK OFF 8% IN WAKE OF ICAHN DEAL; 
SPECULATORS PULL OUT AS TAKEOVER SPECTER FADES; ANALYSTS SEE ONLY PLUSES 
The price of Texaco shares tumbled almost 8% Monday, apparently because the 
speculators who had banked for months on a takeover attempt were suddenly 
abandoning the shrunken oil giant. 
There was general agreement among investment analysts that the hit suffered by 
Texaco stock, which fell $4.25 a share in heavy trading, was a short-lived 
reaction to weekend developments which should bode well for the company over 
the longer term. 
The company on Sunday announced a pact with its largest shareholder, Carl C. 
Icahn, that appears to end his feud with Texaco management and to eliminate him 
as a prospective suitor for the company. 
Icahn has been the final vestige of the turmoil that began in November, 1985, 
when a Texas jury slapped Texaco with an $11-billion penalty for its tactics in 
wresting Getty Oil Co. away from the clutches of Pennzoil. 
Trading Heavy 
By agreeing not to buy any more shares and to vote his stock in line with other 
shareholders, Icahn deflated the fond hopes of speculators and led to Monday's 
steep falloff, analysts said. Texaco shares closed at $50.25 a share on trading 
of more than 5 million shares, second-largest volume on the New York Stock 
Exchange. 
"With Icahn effectively stepping aside, it obviously reduces the (speculator) 
potential," said analyst George Gaspar of Robert W. Baird &amp; Co. in 
Milwaukee. Gaspar said, "It could take a few days to shake down" the stock 
speculators. 
Calculating the fair value of Texaco's shares has been a tricky affair for 
several years as the company operated under the cloud of the $11-billion court 
judgment, filed for bankruptcy protection, fought a proxy battle with Icahn and 
finally began selling off billions of dollars in assets. 
A pending $8-per-share special dividend to shareholders, which was part of the 
agreement announced Sunday, and Texaco's string of asset sales prolong still 
further a judgment on what Texaco shares are worth, said analyst Rosario 
Ilacqua of Nikko Securities in New York. 
"You're not going to have a clear reading until they report earnings under this 
new (corporate) configuration," said Ilacqua. "The whole question here is what 
Texaco shares are worth after the special distribution to shareholders." 
The special dividend distribution and a $500-million stock repurchase plan 
would total $2.4 billion, including some $336 million to Icahn as owner of 
16.6% of Texaco's shares. It is subject to shareholder approval at the 
company's annual meeting in May. The two-stage, $8-per-share special dividend 
would probably be distributed in June and September. 
Sold $7 Billion in Assets 
Texaco recently agreed to sell its Canadian subsidiary to Exxon Corp. for about 
$4 billion, bringing to nearly $7 billion the value of holdings it has sold 
over the past several months. 
Disregarding the special dividend, some analysts view Texaco stock to be worth 
about $45 a share. With the prospect of a takeover battle, the stock had been 
trading in the $55 range until Monday. 
"At $50, Texaco is in a no-man's land," said analyst Gaspar. "When it gets to 
$45 it's a good buy. In the mid-50s it's a sell." 
Analyst Joel Fischer, who follows Texaco for Drexel Burnham Lambert, sees it 
rebounding to $52 or $53 a share, reflecting a basic worth of $42 to $45 plus 
the special $8 payout. Fischer has been recommending a long-term investment in 
Texaco "as a going concern." 
"Management is strong, they're getting rid of dead assets, they have 
high-quality earnings," said Fischer. Concurred Ilacqua: "This is going to be a 
better-run company than it was before." 
