GET IT TO THE RIGHT PEOPLE FASTER 
New Federal Drug Administration dosage recommendations for AZT will facilitate 
the treatment of those with AIDS, a welcome development. But continued FDA 
delays on another crucial use of the same anti-viral drug are blocking 
life-extending treatment for thousands of others infected with the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that causes AIDS. That needs an urgent response. 
The new dosage for those with AIDS and AIDS-Related Complex (ARC) is half that 
previously recommended. The change is based on further research that 
demonstrated the efficacy of the reduced dose. This, in turn, opens the 
treatment to those who had to give up the drug because of bad side effects from 
full dosage. With the dosage reduction, cost also is cut in half, a development 
that is helpful at a time of cutbacks in public health spending and the 
increased demand implicit in findings that the drug also is useful in treating 
persons infected with HIV but not yet showing symptoms of AIDS or ARC. 
Unfortunately, implementation of early intervention treatments with AZT of 
asymptomatic persons has been delayed by an absence of FDA recommendations on 
dosage. The delays, according to Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National 
Institute for Allergies and Infectious Diseases, are due to "an accumulation of 
multiple bureaucratic and trivial reasons." The institute itself has yet to 
convene a promised conference on the new procedures. And progress has also been 
slowed by delays in publishing the research findings in the scientific journals 
that guide physicians. Excuses aside, the situation was best summarized by Dr. 
Neil Schram, a leading AIDS expert in Los Angeles, when he said "It is an 
outrage." 
Peer review is essential before research is reported in medical journals. But 
there are shortcuts in sharing this vital information that the FDA could 
facilitate so that there will be no further delay in using AZT in this new way, 
a way that will buy longer lives for those infected with HIV. 
