BUSINESS GROUPS CALL DEFICIT REDUCTION MOST CRITICAL TASK 
For organizations representing business in Washington, the transition from 
President Reagan to President Bush is a change from very good to even better. 
Business almost always found itself on Reagan's side. His campaigns to cut tax 
rates and reduce burdensome federal regulations could have been written in 
corporate board rooms. 
But Reagan's Administration was a tumultuous one. He vetoed 78 pieces of 
legislation in his eight years, and Congress managed to override him nine 
times. 
Now representatives of business organizations are looking forward with pleasure 
to a kinder, gentler era. George Bush, while no less business oriented than 
Reagan, is a two-term veteran of the House of Representatives; of the 13 
Cabinet members he has selected so far, two are former senators and three are 
former House members. 
Business leaders predict that Bush will try to establish a more cooperative 
relationship with the Democratic-controlled House and Senate. And that, they 
hope, will prove more productive -- especially on the all-important issue of 
reducing the federal deficit -- than Reagan's more confrontational style. 
"Bush is a consummate Washington insider," said Joseph P. O'Neil, president of 
the American Retail Federation. "He's more inclined to seek accommodations than 
President Reagan was. On that score, a lot of issues left on the table are 
likely to get settled." 
For example, several business lobbyists suggested, Bush might propose a 
compromise minimum wage increase, lower than the $4.55 an hour unsuccessfully 
sought by the Democrats. That way, Bush could get credit for helping the 
working poor without offending business groups. 
Similarly, Bush proposals on parental leave and child care would force Congress 
to address those issues on his terms and impose less of a burden on business 
than Democratic alternatives that were talked to death in the Senate last fall. 
Prefer Spending Cuts 
Business has no particular legislative wish list of its own. At one time it 
might have hoped that Bush would follow through on a campaign promise and 
propose a tax break for capital gains. But now it understands that Bush does 
not dare propose tinkering with the tax code for fear that Congress would take 
the opportunity to legislate tax increases as well as reductions. 
"Business agenda?" asked Stacy Mobley, vice president for federal relations of 
Du Pont Co. "We're always reacting. This coming year, like all other years, 
we're going to be reacting." Business' fondest hope is that Bush and Congress 
will join forces to reduce the federal deficit. Business organizations regard 
spending cuts as the best approach, although some of them would even tolerate a 
tax increase. 
Sara Ross, assistant vice president for communications of the National Assn. of 
Manufacturers, said NAM hoped that Bush would follow the lead of the National 
Economic Commission, a congressionally mandated blue-ribbon panel that is to 
recommend budget-cutting measures next year. 
"We favor spending cuts," Ross said, "and then a consumption tax increase as a 
last resort." 
O'Neil, of the American Retail Federation, agreed that the budget was the most 
critical issue facing the nation and said a lot of Washington insiders expected 
a tax increase next year. 
"Retailers are against consumption taxes," he said, "but a lot of business 
firms would support a gasoline tax increase as a way to cut the deficit if the 
money is earmarked for that purpose." 
Mobley also rated deficit reduction as Bush's leading problem. "Everything 
hinges on that," Mobley said. "At least a combination of spending cuts and new 
revenues are needed. Bush is going to have to play an active role. I don't 
foresee any stalemate or legislative gridlock." 
Veto Less Likely 
As for a gasoline tax increase, he added: "We're not pushing it, but if you had 
to look at additional revenues, it's broad-based, doesn't adversely affect 
energy-intensive industries and is probably the lesser of all the evils." 
But most business representatives take a hard line against any kind of tax 
increase. "If Bush agrees to a tax increase as the Democrats want him to do, 
he's a one-term President," said John J. Motley, legislative director for the 
National Federation of Independent Business, which represents small retail and 
service firms with an average of eight employees and $500,000 in annual sales. 
And Stephen Moore, a budget analyst for the business-backed Heritage 
Foundation, said Bush should be willing to accept the automatic, indiscriminate 
spending cuts of the Gramm-Rudman law rather than raise taxes. 
On overall relations with Congress, there was a consensus that Bush would be 
far less likely to resort to the veto and more likely to make deals with the 
Democrats. 
"Bush is a product of Washington," Du Pont's Mobley said. "He didn't run 
against Washington. My feeling is that he will be able to work with Congress 
better than Reagan or Jimmy Carter. I think he will seek accommodation." 
Al Bourland, a veteran of 20 years of lobbying for the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce, agreed. 
"He (Bush) is going to put out the olive branch more than Reagan did," Bourland 
said. "I think you'll have less of a philosophical approach -- he's more 
inclined to a political, pragmatic solution." 
But Bourland added that the Democratic majorities in the House and Senate could 
challenge Bush on the theory that he is less popular than Reagan and thus less 
likely to be able to appeal to the public over the heads of the lawmakers. 
In the past, he said, business groups could rely on a Reagan veto or the threat 
of a Reagan veto to influence major legislation as it went through the House 
and Senate. "It was one of the biggest arrows in our quiver," Bourland 
recalled. 
Others, however, think that Bush could undercut his -- and business's -- 
political opponents by going on the offensive on such controversial issues as 
raising the federal minimum wage, unchanged since 1981 at $3.35 an hour. 
Senate Democrats brought up a bill this year to raise that figure to $4.55 an 
hour, but Republicans filibustered it to death -- even though Bush said in a 
campaign statement that he favored some unspecified increase. 
Lobbyist Motley said Bush could propose a $4.25 hourly rate, together with a 
lower figure for young people, and probably get near-unanimous Republican 
support and enough Democrats to assure the bill's enactment. 
"I think you may see this Administration go on the offensive with initiatives 
of their own in two or three areas," Motley said. 
The same technique, business lobbyists agreed, could be employed on other 
social legislation to get bipartisan backing for Bush initiatives on child 
care, unpaid leave for new parents and health insurance for workers not covered 
by company plans. 
And on environmental issues, business expects renewed action now that Senate 
Democrats have selected George J. Mitchell of Maine as their new leader and 
Bush has named William K. Reilly, president of the World Wildlife Fund, as head 
of the Environmental Protection Agency. 
In particular, Congress is likely to try to amend the Clean Air Act, a pet 
issue of Mitchell's. But business groups are confident that Mitchell will have 
to make concessions to their concerns over additional costs if he wants to get 
the legislation through Congress. 
On their major stand against new federal benefits, the business groups expect 
Bush to be on their side, with his veto pen ready if necessary. But there is a 
yearning for a more ecumenical style. 
"Bush is a very pro-business President, and we're grateful for that," said the 
NAM's Ross. "But problems are coming to a head, with a lot of unfinished 
business. We need a consensus approach." 
