WORLD SPORTS SCENE; 
ROMANIA'S IVAN MAY BE HERE AFTER ALL 
After Olympic 1,500-meter champion Paula Ivan accepted an invitation to run the 
mile in the Jan. 19 Sunkist Invitational at the Sports Arena, Romanian track 
and field officials said she couldn't go. But now, since the Romanian 
revolution, those officials are out, and she might be back in. 
It couldn't have come at a better time for meet promoter Al Franken, who is 
counting on Ivan as a major attraction. 
Vladimir Moraru, a former Romanian sportswriter who defected to the United 
States in 1984 and now lives in Glendale, spoke by telephone Wednesday with 
Ivan's coach, Maricica Puica, former Olympic 3,000-meter champion, who said 
that all she needs to bring Ivan to Los Angeles is another invitation. Franken 
was working on that Wednesday through The Athletics Congress, which governs 
track and field in the United States. 
Franken has offered $100,000 to the winners of the men's and women's miles if 
they break the world indoor records. His guarantee is insured by a company in 
Dallas, which charged him premiums of $12,000 for the women's race and $7,000 
for the men's race. But if Ivan doesn't show, he expects a substantial refund 
on the women's premium. 
The government of Nicolae Ceausescu might have done too well in training some 
athletes. Pistol shooters Sorin Babii and Ion Cornelu, both Olympic medalists, 
reportedly lined up on the pro-democracy side during the revolution and helped 
defend an important military target. 
Another athlete who took up arms against Ceausescu's state police, former 
Romanian rugby captain Radu Durbac, died in the fighting. 
Dynamo Bucharest, the Romanian soccer team that was sponsored by the state 
police, has reorganized and changed its name to Unirea Tricolor. 
Nadia Watch: U.S. gymnast Kurt Thomas, once a close friend of Nadia Comaneci, 
said he believes she hasn't contacted her former coach, Bela Karolyi, since 
arriving in the United States because she believes he deceived her when he 
defected in 1981. 
"Nadia wanted to defect with him, but Bela discouraged her by saying he wasn't 
ready, either," Thomas told the Chicago Tribune. "Then Bela didn't show up at 
the airport for the plane (to Romania), and the rest is history. I can 
understand Bela's point. He didn't want to be responsible for taking an 
18-year-old national hero with him." 
Elsewhere on the Bloc, Katarina Witt's coach, Jutta Mueller, threatened to go 
to the West to teach figure skaters unless the East Germans made it possible 
for her to make as much money at home. As a result, the East Germans will allow 
skaters from the West to come to her rink in Karl Marx-Stadt. It won't be long 
before all of East Germany's sports facilities are open to Western athletes in 
exchange for fees. 
Meantime, Witt said she had made a mistake when she defended the former East 
German government in recent interviews. Upon returning home from filming a 
movie in Spain and reading about the corruption in former leader Erich 
Honecker's government, she said on West German television, "I fell from one 
faint into another and simply couldn't believe it." 
She also said that she will consider leaving East Germany if harassment of 
athletes by their former fans doesn't end. 
"It hurts very much when someone says, 'You athletes were the privileged ones. 
I find this terribly unfair, to throw us into a pot with people who really did 
some ugly things. . . . If people (continue to be) malicious, I shall pack my 
bags and leave." 
For 36 years, East Germany staged a formal ceremony to honor its sportsmen and 
sportswomen of the year. The cost in 1988 was $23,500. In December, the 
ceremony consisted of the winners, gymnast Andreas Wacker and swimmer Kristin 
Otto, receiving their awards in a drab television studio during halftime of a 
team handball match. Both wore blue jeans. 
Unlike the old regime, the new leadership in East German sports supports a 
combined East Berlin-West Berlin bid for the Summer Olympics in either 2000 or 
2004. If the Chinese prove incapable of organizing the Asian Games in Beijing 
later this year, bet on Berlin for 2000. 
The International Amateur Athletic Federation, which governs track and field, 
will decide on Jan. 19 whether to strip Ben Johnson of his world record. The 
IAAF voted last summer that it has the right to do so because he admitted using 
anabolic steroids in training for the world record he set in 1987. 
A London newspaper reported last month that boxing promoter Bob Arum is 
organizing a $3.2-million race between Johnson and Carl Lewis on Sept. 25 in 
Barcelona. That's the day Johnson's two-year suspension ends. But Lewis' 
manager, Joe Douglas of the Santa Monica Track Club, denies that Arum is 
involved. 
"I am having discussions with a U.S. boxing promoter, but it is not Arum," he 
said. 
High hurdler Roger Kingdom is Track &amp; Field News' male athlete of the year 
for 1989. The only other American in the top 10 was triple jumper Mike Conley. 
Nominations for the idle threat of the year begin and end here: The 
international soccer federation (FIFA) said that Argentina's Diego Maradona 
might be banned from this year's World Cup in Italy because he alleged that the 
draw to determine the first-round pairings was fixed. 
Defending him is Milan's respected newspaper, Corriere della Sera, which wrote 
that he only said "what many had thought and some had let be understood between 
the lines. It has long been known that the World Cup draws are skillfully 
predetermined, but nobody ever protested. Now that Maradona, Mr. Disagreeable, 
said it openly, it's too easy to attack him." 
Maradona said he will apologize, but not recant. He was suspicious because host 
Italy was drawn into the easiest group, which includes the United States. 
The United States begins training for the World Cup with a camp scheduled for 
Jan. 5-18 in LaJolla. Twenty-eight players were invited. 
Not among them is Ricky Davis, the United States' leading goal scorer in 
international competition. He has not played with the national team since the 
Seoul Olympics because of injuries. 
UCLA midfielder Chris Henderson didn't play with the team last year in World 
Cup qualifying but has been invited to camp. 
Thirty prospects for the 1992 U.S. Olympic soccer team, which actually is an 
under-23 team, will gather from Jan. 5-13 in Ontario. 
U.S. freestyle wrestlers are on the verge of catching the Soviets, who have 
dominated the sport. In seven matches against the Soviets last month in 
Pittsburgh, the Americans won five. That included a victory for John Smith, 24, 
Olympic and two-time world champion at 136.5 pounds, over Sergei Beloglazov, 
33, a two-time Olympic and six-time world champion at 125.5 pounds. 
Besides being younger, Smith had an advantage because they wrestled at his 
weight. A crowd of 9,690 watched. 
In Greco-Roman wrestling, two Americans won World Cup titles in November. One 
was Gogi Parseghian of San Clemente, who emigrated to the United States from 
Armenia in the Soviet Union. He could have his U.S. citizenship in time for the 
1992 Summer Olympics. 
In an international survey conducted by Italy's largest sports daily newspaper, 
Gazetta dello Sports, Carl Lewis was voted the male athlete of the '80s. 
Runners-up, in order, were Maradona, Wayne Gretzky and Mike Tyson. 
In voting for the female athlete of the '80s, Martina Navratilova was first, 
Steffi Graf second and East German track star Marita Koch third. 
