WHY L.A.'S AIR HAS GONE STALE; 
BROADCASTING: THE LOCAL MARKET IS HUGELY PROFITABLE, BUT THE AIRWAVES HAVE 
GOTTEN BLANDER AND DUMBER SINCE THE FCC CANCELED PUBLIC-INTEREST RULES. 
"Los Angeles," a local broadcast executive recently crowed, "is undeniably the 
healthiest radio market in the U.S. today." 
Judged solely by advertising, that may be true. An industry survey projects 
1989 ad revenues of a staggering $400 million or more. Commercial spots on one 
highly rated rock station now sell for as much as $1,500 a minute. 
Boom times indeed, it would seem -- at least for broadcasters. But for 
audiences, the times are increasingly a bust. And a combination of market 
pressures and federal deregulatory policies dictates that this destructive 
trend not only will continue, it will accelerate. 
Last year, classical music listeners mourned the demise of venerable KFAC, Los 
Angeles' only commercial classical outlet, transformed by its new owners into a 
more marketable rock format. KKGO-FM has stepped into the breach with an 
all-new classical format, leaving its loyal jazz listeners in the same 
predicament that classical fans had just escaped. 
How is it that a broadcast market with more than 80 stations serving millions 
of listeners can no longer find room for even one classical and one jazz 
station at the same time, while endless variations on the same old rock themes 
elbow one another up and down the dial? 
The paucity of quality programming is not confined to music, or even to radio. 
For more than a decade, the TV air time devoted to serious public-affairs 
programming has steadily dwindled. A 1989 study by Essential Information, a 
Washington-based research organization founded by Ralph Nader, charted an 
average 51% decline during the past decade in issue-oriented public-affairs 
programming on TV stations across 50 markets surveyed. 
When I became a Los Angeles County supervisor in 1974, most local radio and TV 
stations maintained some kind of news department and carried regular newscasts. 
As part of their public-affairs programming, nearly a dozen radio and TV 
stations aired editorials on timely and important issues. They offered a forum 
for public discussion of the public's business. 
Today, that vigorous, multifaceted debate has faded. Only a few public-minded 
radio and TV stations broadcast any editorials whatsoever. Broadcast schedules 
are stuffed with sensation-seeking talk shows, so-called "tabloid-TV" programs 
and "infotainment." 
Washington must share the blame for this sorry situation. For decades, federal 
policy decreed that the airwaves belonged to the public and that broadcasters 
earned the right to retain their monopoly licenses on a given frequency by 
operating "in the public interest, convenience and necessity." The Federal 
Communications Commission scrutinized their program logs, entertaining 
challenges from competing applicants before it granted a license renewal. 
All that changed when Ronald Reagan assumed the presidency, claiming a mandate 
to "get government off our backs." Mark Fowler, Reagan's man at the FCC, 
virtually abandoned his assigned role of ensuring that broadcasters operated in 
the public interest. 
Fowler's commission abolished the modest guidelines mandating a minimum amount 
of news and information programming. Further, it repealed the so-called 
"anti-trafficking rule," which required owners to hold onto a station for at 
least three years before selling and put other limits on station ownership. The 
FCC said its rules were just that, not laws, and could be unilaterally canceled 
by their makers. 
These actions destroyed any sense of broadcaster responsibility to the public 
and touched off a frenzy of speculation that sent station prices skyrocketing 
while burying new owners under mountains of debt. In such an environment, only 
the most profitable -- that is, mass-appeal -- formats can hope to survive. 
A 1987 FCC action delivered the fatal blow to issue-oriented public-affairs 
programming. In the name of expanding broadcasters' First Amendment rights, the 
commission abolished its 38-year-old "Fairness Doctrine" rule, which called on 
broadcasters to devote a reasonable amount of time to opposing views on issues 
of public importance. 
The industry had denounced the Fairness Doctrine's "chilling effect" on free 
speech, but after its repeal, the big chill only deepened. More and more 
stations abandoned any pretense of serious commentary and analysis. 
Only Congress can cool the speculative fever that undermines quality 
programming by reinstating, with the force of law, FCC policies governing 
station ownership; only Congress can reinvigorate the public-policy debate by 
codifying the Fairness Doctrine into law. 
Broadcasters instinctively resist any regulation as an infringement on their 
constitutional rights. But the First Amendment protects and empowers everyone, 
after all, not only the media. As the Supreme Court noted in its unanimous 1969 
decision upholding the Fairness Doctrine, "It is the right of the viewers and 
listeners, not the right of the broadcasters, which is paramount." 
It's time for Congress to take that principle to heart, and re-enact it as 
federal law. 
