TEXTBOOKS AND FAIRY TALES: THE VALUE OF CLASSIC MYTHS 
Parents in La Puente recoiled recently at what they found in their children's 
elementary-school reading books: monsters that cut children's heads off, pigs 
that live on body wastes, witches that cast spells. Their objections, spread 
through a national Christian group called Citizens for Excellence in Education, 
has resulted in several school districts dropping the nationally used texts. 
In targeting the series called "Impressions" and its publisher, Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, the complaining parents seem unaware that what offends them arises 
from the nature of many literary classics themselves, and that such elements 
abound in classic literature. The decision to base reading texts on classics -- 
getting away from Dick-and-Jane style readers -- was made by the creators of 
the English-Language Arts Framework of the state of California, not by textbook 
publishers. 
The new texts have been praised by educators for stimulating children's 
imaginations, but Citizens for Excellence in Education and other fundamentalist 
Christian groups have mounted a growing attack on such books as inappropriate 
for young children, claiming the books attack values that parents try to 
inculcate in the home. 
California-approved school texts are now required to draw selections from 
literary classics. Such classics have retained their popularity over time and 
are valued by educators for richness of language, appeal to universal feelings 
and needs and a "capacity to move the human spirit in any age," as the state 
guidelines put it. 
But a decision to choose classics as sources of reading material is a decision 
to accept elements that would not be acceptable in material written in 1990 for 
today's educational market. Any reading series adopted in California, 
therefore, is likely to contain some such elements. 
A story that has been around long enough to become classic has necessarily 
originated at times when different values dominated -- some of which are 
incompatible with those embraced by today's educational system. Therefore 
publishers who would write textbooks for the state of California face 
contradictory mandates. Any original material they write must be free not only 
of gruesome elements, but of sexism, racism and ageism. 
Text material must deal sensitively with disabilities and deformities. Yet 
textbooks are required to include classics written in a setting where racism 
and sexual stereotyping are a fact of life; good parents and teachers beat 
children; elderly or deformed characters are often cast as villains; witches 
cast evil spells, to be countered by benevolent spells, and a happy tale ends 
with the cruel and unusual punishment of the guilty. 
The elements probably most at odds with today's values are to be found in fairy 
tales, traditionally read to young children. 
"I would suggest that parents who are concerned about these stories take a look 
at the Brothers Grimm," said Thomas Williamson, director of the school textbook 
division of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
The Brothers Grimm -- Jakob and Wilhelm, 19th-Century German philologists -- 
created early written versions of the oral tales from which many of today's 
popular fairy tales are derived. 
Let's look at the Grimm fairy tales, which children have loved for years -- 
they offer magic and enchantment, triumphs of good over evil, wishes fulfilled 
under impossible odds. They are tales in which the small, young or weak can 
vanquish a monstrous or powerful villain, giving children hope. Long before 
they can evaluate more complex issues, children can appreciate the stark 
contrast of absolutes: good versus evil, greed versus generosity, industry 
versus laziness, beauty versus ugliness, cleverness versus stupidity. 
On the other hand, Grimm's and other fairy tales embody many elements that 
would seem grotesque or perverted even in today's adult literature. Characters 
are threatened or devoured by cannibals or human-eating animals and monsters. 
In the "Robber Bridegroom," for example, a betrothed maiden discovers that her 
intended plans to cook and eat her. Hansel is fattened up by the witch and 
checked daily for weight gain. In early versions of "Little Red Riding Hood," 
the heroine is eaten alive as a fitting punishment for her disobedience. In the 
later Grimm version, she is unappetizingly rescued through an incision in the 
wolf's belly, which is subsequently filled with rocks. 
The wolf's punishment is mild compared with that inflicted on many fairy-tale 
villains. Children demand justice in a story, but justice hardly requires the 
brutal, inhuman penalties imposed on villains in Grimm's fairy tales. In "The 
Goose Girl," for example, a treacherous maid is "put stark naked into a barrel 
stuck with nails, and dragged along by two white horses . . . until dead." In 
Grimm's version of "Snow White," the stepmother is forced to dance in red-hot 
iron shoes until she dies. In the Grimm version of Cinderella, the stepsisters' 
eyes are pecked out by doves -- this after they have mutilated their feet in 
attempts to fit the glass slipper. In "The Pink," a villain is forced to eat 
live coals and is then torn into quarters. 
Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tales also contain material that seems sick by 
today's standards. In "The Wild Swans," for example, witches dance naked in the 
cemetery, dig up dead bodies and eat them. In "The Rose Elf," a young girl 
visits her decapitated lover's grave, digs up his body, retrieves his head, 
kisses it, takes it home with her and buries it in a flowerpot. 
Karen Stone, El Segundo children's librarian and instructor of literature for 
adolescents and children at Loyola Marymount University, points out that 
ancient tales were not originally created for children. "The concept of 
childhood as we see it is a recent invention -- children were once viewed as 
small adults. They were dressed as adults, educated as adults and worked with 
adults. Issues in these tales were addressed to adults and children alike." 
In other words, cautionary tales required penalties more significant than being 
grounded or standing in the corner. Many traditional tales were written to 
influence the behavior of the audience, and storytellers who would discourage 
given behavior were challenged to devise deterrents more severe than the 
hardships and brutal conditions of the historical period. 
Not that the behavior rewarded in fairy tales is always exemplary. For example, 
the "villain" who tears himself in two at the end of "Rumpelstiltskin" is the 
only character who has told the truth, kept his word and showed compassion. The 
miller who lies about his daughter, a wife who deceives her husband and a 
husband who threatens to kill his wife live happily ever after. 
Disney versions of fairy tales omit the most gruesome elements. Snow White's 
stepmother does not eat the heart she believes to be Snow White's. Commercial 
producers are free to adapt these tales at will. The Disney versions of "The 
Little Mermaid" and "Peter Pan," for example, depart radically from the story 
lines of the original classics. Textbook publishers, however, can be penalized 
for taking such liberties. In many districts, adoption committees rate programs 
by a system that penalizes them for any editing, abridgement or adaptation of a 
classic, regardless of the reason. 
Publishers can choose from many classic versions of fairy tales, and they 
choose versions containing the least violence and morbidity. However, they 
cannot get around the fact that these tales themselves came from times and 
cultures whose values clashed with our own. Many elements considered 
objectionable today are inherent in such tales. Can publishers be blamed for 
that? 
Apart from violence, the sexism that pervades fairy tales could never be 
smuggled past adoption committees if it were written today. In many fairy 
tales, the heroine is valued primarily as a sexual prize. She need only be 
young and beautiful to attract countless suitors, often despite appalling 
behavior and character traits. For example, in Andersen's "The Traveling 
Companions," Hans tours the garden of the princess and finds it decorated by 
the bones and skulls of the imprudent suitors who have courted her. She had 
agreed to marry any man who could guess her thoughts, but the penalty for error 
was a cruel death. Nevertheless, Hans falls in love at first sight. 
Fairy tales and other classics are well-crafted works of literature with 
enduring appeal. As such, they are worth teaching. It behooves parents and 
teachers, however, to discuss classics in light of the way values have changed. 
Parents also need to understand that in order to influence textbook content, 
they must make their concerns known years before textbooks are purchased. To 
give one example: The question of evolution versus creation, which came to the 
fore in California last year during debate over science textbooks, pertains to 
a science "framework" for schools that will be implemented in 1994. 
