SPORTS TALK ; 
QUARTERBACK'S PASSING FANCY GIVES FRANKLIN ANOTHER TITLE 
Another football championship was in the bag for Franklin High School, and 
Coach Armando Gonzalez, the architect of what is shaping into a dynasty, was in 
a jubilant mood. 
"I don't mean to take anything away from my other teams," said Gonzalez, who 
has won four city 3-A titles during his eight years at the school, "but this 
one is the best I've ever had. . . . This guy (quarterback Santiago Alvarez) 
has been phenomenal." 
He won't get much of an argument there. 
All Santiago (Chago) Alvarez did last season was become the most prolific 
single-season passer in California high school history by throwing for a state 
record 4,019 yards and 52 touchdowns, which were two short of the national 
mark. He had 11 in 1988, when his 1,643 yards were second in the city's 3-A 
division. 
The senior quarterback also equaled the state single-game record with eight 
touchdown tosses for the Highland Park school against Verdugo Hills. 
And he capped the year by leading the then 12-1 Panthers -- with a hefty assist 
from the team's stingy defensive unit, which allowed an average of only four 
points per game -- to the city 3-A title with a 24-6 victory over Garfield at 
East Los Angeles College last month. 
In that one, which could have been billed in anatomical terms -- The Arm vs. 
The Legs -- he faced a squad whose offensive scheme centered around Hilario 
Espinosa, a senior running back who rushed for 2,142 yards on the year and who 
scored 25 touchdowns, including the lone one against Franklin. 
The upper limb prevailed. 
"This is the ultimate," commented an exuberant Alvarez during the post-mortem. 
"Right after we scored the first TD, I knew we were going to win." 
Alvarez knows something about winning. He lost only two games as the starting 
quarterback for the Panthers, which is part of the reason why Gonzalez, who has 
had a string of standouts at the position, calls him the school's all-time top 
gun. 
"By far he is the best quarterback I've ever coached," noted Gonzalez, whose 
teams have gone 44-5 the last four seasons. "He gets the ball to where it is 
supposed to be, and he picks up secondary receivers real well. One statistic 
that I really look at is completion percentage. He is 62%. In high school, to 
have a kid over 60%, that's amazing. . . . The kid is a winner." 
Said wide receiver-defensive back Lamar Lovett, who snatched 19 of Alvarez's 
scoring aerials: "Our receivers (were) good, but he just made us that much 
better. He has tenacity. He comes to play." 
Gonzalez and Lovett are not the only ones singing high praises. College 
recruiters, including those from UCLA and USC, have sent letters to Alvarez, 
but a couple of obstacles might prevent him from playing next fall at a major 
(Division I) school. 
For one, there's the question of whether, at 5-foot-10 and 160 pounds, he would 
be big enough to play quarterback at a major university. The other is 
academics. He carries a C+ grade average but apparently did not take some 
required college preparatory courses mandated by the National Collegiate 
Athletic Assn. 
That would make him a "Proposition 48 athlete," named after an NCAA rule that 
could be toughened for the 1990-91 school year to force such players to sit out 
their freshman year and make them ineligible for a scholarship that season. 
If he doesn't want to lose a year, Alvarez could go the junior college route 
for a couple of seasons, then transfer to a Division I school. One such school, 
Los Angeles Valley College in Van Nuys, wouldn't mind that alternative. 
"He's poised and has the athletic ability to scramble," said Valley assistant 
coach Ron Ponciano. "You go to a game to see if anyone jumps at you, and he 
does right away. First time I saw him I thought, 'Good grief!' " 
But what about the size? 
"Regardless, if you are good, you get the job done. He's got the arm. There's 
no question he can play. He's typical of the athletes at Franklin," Ponciano 
said. 
The quarterback agreed: "People say I'm not tall enough, I'm not heavy enough. 
I think that as long as I get the job done that's what basically it's all 
about." 
Alvarez is not opposed to the junior college option, although he would love to 
wear the gold and blue of UCLA and eventually study physical therapy or sports 
medicine. Besides, he's partial to that institution. He was born at its medical 
center, the youngest of three children of Salvador Alvarez, a junior high 
school English teacher, and Francisca, an accounting manager at a department 
store. 
(His father, a former halfback at Army, gave Santiago the nickname chango -- 
Mexican slang for monkey -- because he was such an active child. The nickname 
lost the "n" somewhere along the line.) 
Referring to his college plans, Alvarez said, "I would like to stay close to 
home." 
That kind of talk, from that kind of talent, is what Southland college football 
recruiters call answered prayers. 
