PLEA BARGAIN OFFERED TO PARENTS ACCUSED IN BEATING AT COMMUNE 
The district attorney's office has offered a plea bargain to resolve criminal 
charges against a couple accused in the beating of their 11-year-old son at the 
Tony and Susan Alamo Foundation's commune in Saugus, an attorney in the case 
said Friday. 
Arraignment for Marc Stuart Landgarten, 40, and Carol Ann Miller Landgarten, 
37, had been set for Thursday in Antelope Municipal Court. But the hearing was 
continued to Feb. 14 so the couple could consider the offer, said Charles A. 
Klum, a public defender representing Carol Landgarten. 
The Landgartens, who remain free on $25,000 bail each, were originally charged 
in an October, 1988, complaint that included felony child abuse charges against 
Tony Alamo and three other church members stemming from the incident. Alamo and 
the three others remain fugitives. 
"Basically it's going to be up to them to decide" if the couple wants to accept 
the plea bargain and avoid trial, Klum said. 
The attorney added that he could not discuss the proposed terms because he had 
yet to present them to his client. 
The district attorney's office confirmed that plea-bargain discussions are 
occurring in the case against members of the anti-Catholic sect but declined to 
elaborate. "There have been some negotiations, but I don't know what the status 
of those are," said Deputy Dist. Atty. Steven D. Ogden. 
Klum, head public defender in Lancaster, said prosecutors acknowledge that the 
mother was not an active participant in the January, 1988, incident on Alamo 
foundation property. Her son allegedly was struck about 140 times on the 
buttocks with a three-foot paddle. 
The stepfather held the boy down but did not spank him, Klum said. 
The stepfather is represented by attorney Robert M. Talcott, who could not be 
reached for comment. 
Klum said he expects the Landgartens will respond to the district attorney's 
offer before their return to court. 
The public defender said he had yet to decide whether to recommend the offer. 
He added that it does not involve the couple providing information about other 
sect members. 
