WE NEED A VISION 
Twenty years ago the United States threw massive amounts of money and manpower 
at Vietnam without having a clear goal of what the nation wanted to achieve in 
Southeast Asia. Today the state of California is in danger of doing the same 
thing with transportation. 
Dealing with growth is the state's most complex and perplexing problem. But 
California will forfeit the best opportunity of managing its future if the 
state pours new billions into more freeways without a clear idea of where it 
wants to go. This reality is beginning to strike close to the office of Gov. 
George Deukmejian, and there are hopeful signs that it is penetrating the inner 
sanctum of the governor's office. 
In a breakfast interview with The Times' Sacramento bureau the other day, state 
Transportation Director Robert K. Best acknowledged: "We don't have a clear 
vision about how to deal with transportation." 
The state now spends about $1.5 billion a year on transportation, without a 
real transportation plan. What passes for a plan now is the state 
Transportation Commission's five-year state Transportation Improvement Program, 
which essentially is a wish list of individual projects stapled together by 
local governments with little assurance that any one project will connect with 
any other. Best is absolutely correct when he says that California must turn 
this process on its ear by asking first this question: "What is it that we 
think we ought to be trying to achieve?" 
Last year Assemblywoman Delaine Eastin (D-Union City) sought a modest first 
step in achieving what Best says should be done. She sponsored a bill to create 
a 22-member Blue-Ribbon Transportation Commission to assess California's 
highway and transit needs between now and the year 2010. The commission, on an 
advisory basis only, was to develop a transportation strategy and study ways to 
finance it. The bill passed both the Assembly and the Senate only to be vetoed 
by the governor. As for financing, Deukmejian has indicated a willingness to 
consider a gasoline-tax increase, whereas last year he insisted that additional 
highway funding come from a bond issue. But Deukmejian's bond proposal was 
defeated at the polls. Competing gasoline-tax measures have been introduced in 
both the Senate and the Assembly, and the governor has summoned a 
transportation finance summit meeting in Sacramento on Feb. 8. Deukmejian 
invited 27 representatives of all segments of the transportation industry to 
participate. Presumably, some compromise gasoline-tax plan will emerge this 
summer, either with or without a statewide vote in the June, 1990, primary 
election. 
But just as important is that the state begin a process that attempts to 
envision what patterns growth will take in the next 20 or 30 years and how that 
growth can be affected or channeled through development of a transportation 
system. 
Someone needs to devise the sort of long-range strategy envisioned by Eastin's 
legislation of last year. Which areas might better be served by light rail 
lines or commuter railroads? In what areas might transportation planning be 
used as a tool to discourage development because of environmental and other 
considerations? Factored into this thinking should be ideas like Deukmejian's 
suggestion that truck traffic be restricted during rush hours, enhanced 
car-pooling, altered work hours, and working at home on some days by means of 
computers. 
There are reports that Best is about to take on such an effort in his own 
office in conjunction with the state's regional planning agencies like the 
Southern California Assn. of Governments. If so, and if it has the support of 
the governor, this effort has a potential of being one of the most important 
initiatives to emerge from the Deukmejian Administration. California might yet 
have hopes of salvaging a future in which it is possible to get from here to 
there -- and on time. 
