BOOK REVIEW; 
PROBING THE SOUL OF LATIN AMERICA 
Interviews With Latin American Writers by Marie-Lise Gazarian Gautier (The 
Dalkey Archive Press: $19.95; 370 pp. 
As interview subjects, Latin American writers have appeared in the print and 
electronic media since the literary "boom" of the '60s. 
Heirs to an intellectual tradition that associates the act of writing with 
political and social responsibility, poets and novelists such as Octavio Paz, 
Carlos Fuentes and Ariel Dorfman are also recognized as journalists and 
commentators. Their voices and views, as well as those of other Latin American 
writers, have never been limited to their fictional and poetic work. 
Instead, because of their participation in politics, public opinion and even 
films, they form part of a larger narrative -- the recording and documentation 
of our historical time and place. 
Novelist Mario Vargas Llosa is a candidate for president of Peru, poet Ernesto 
Cardenal is a cabinet member of the Sandinista government of Nicaragua; 
novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez is a founder of a Latin American film institute 
in Havana. Ripe interview material indeed, for the intrigues and events 
experienced by these writers in the world beyond the mythical Ivory Tower at 
times surpass their imagined fictions. 
While only two of the above-mentioned writers are interviewed in this new 
collection (Fuentes and Vargas Llosa), that sense of commitment toward social 
responsibility is not only stated, but clarified within the personal 
circumstances of each writer. 
Among the 15 interviews -- which include Isabel Allende, Guillermo Cabrera 
Infante Jose Donoso, Rosario Ferre, Isaac Goldenberg, Juan Carlos Onetti, 
Nicanor Parra, Elena Poniatowska, Ernesto Sabato, Luis Rafael Sanchez, Severo 
Sarduy, Luisa Valenzuela, as well as those mentioned above -- that commitment 
goes far beyond a creative or intellectual game. Devoid of patriotic or 
rhetorical adornment, it becomes instead a deadly objective particularly well 
expressed by Allende and Cabrera Infante, who were forced to leave their 
respective countries because of reprisal, repression and censorship. 
While this issue is probably the most important in all, Marie-Lise Gazarian 
Gautier, a professor of Spanish and Latin American literature, also includes 
topics as far-ranging as the role of the woman writer in a male-dominant 
society, the relationships perceived by each author between Anglo America (the 
United States) and Latin America, the effect of exile and self-exile on writing 
and the question of Latin American identity on the eve of the 400th 
commemoration of Columbus' voyage. Each interview closes with a call for 
self-definition: "Who are you?" 
Of these, however, the issue of exile beyond the points already raised and its 
diverse implications on the act of writing are particularly intriguing. How 
does distance from the source affect the world of the work? How does a writer 
continue to find a linguistic and semantic link between the space where he or 
she is today and the place of origin? What meaning does that have in terms of 
the constant reworking of a language and of its process? How is the reading of 
the work affected? Is the work circulated in the homeland? 
Yet the responses of the writers chosen for this collection only partially 
answer these questions or others that arise during the reading of this book. 
The problem lies in the structure of the work itself, in the tone that the 
interviewer conveys, and, to a lesser degree, in the omission of writers of the 
stature of Paz and Garcia Marquez. 
In her introduction, Gazarian Gautier refers to the interview as a "revealing 
and authentic approach to literature" in that it "allows the reader to 
penetrate the creative mind and find out first-hand . . . the components of the 
craft of writing and the workings of the author." 
To a degree, that is accomplished. This book is an excellent introduction to 
the personalities and personae behind the works and the device of using the 
same or similar questions for each writer permits the reader to compare and 
contrast the writers' responses. 
On the other hand, this format also cuts off the flow of thought emanating from 
the writer and instead focuses the interview on the prepared question. By 
attempting to extract information or commentary that Gazarian Gautier thinks 
important, she loses the essence of continuity that allows for dialogue. What 
we have before us finally is a question-and-answer format. What is absent is 
the interplay between voice and silence based on listening and communication. 
In her interview with Elena Poniatowska, Gazarian Gautier recalls that 
Poniatowska, an insightful interviewer in her own right, has been called an 
"inquisitor, a confessor, a psychiatrist, a torturer and an adviser to the 
lovelorn, all at the same time." In response, Poniatowska avoids the question, 
referring instead to the friendships that she had developed through the course 
of conducting her interviews. 
It is a point worth noting, for the great interview has always forged a link 
between two voices: We need only recall those of Luigi Barzini, Oriana Falacci 
and Poniatowska. And that is what is lacking here, the intimacy and confidence 
born of a mutual conversation, the ebb and flow of ideas between two minds, the 
essence, after all, of dialogue and dialectic. 
