FOOD FOR THOUGHT: CRUMBS FOR MIGRANTS 
The Dec. 18 article ("Breaking Camp") relating to the housing problem of 
migrant farm workers in North San Diego County was indeed upsetting, but not 
surprising. 
During my four years as California state director of migrant education, I had 
the opportunity to visit many migrant camps and other farm worker housing 
throughout the state. The impressions leave a lasting dismal memory in my mind 
. . . as well as deep anger that our society can treat one segment of our 
population so callously. 
To the farmer, as well as the community, the workers are an implement to be 
used for bringing in the crops, then to be ignored, like machinery or farm 
animals. They are not perceived as human beings. . . . like you and me. 
Yet they are very human . . . perhaps most of them are more decent humans than 
many of us. They live in a close-knit family, loyal to each other, with high 
moral values, and of deep religious beliefs. They are a proud people, unwilling 
to take a "handout": welfare or social services for which they have not worked. 
Crime, drug or alcohol abuse is rare in these families. 
Housing is always a problem. They stay in a community for only part of a year. 
Thus, permanent housing is out of the question. Rental payment for middle-class 
apartments or houses is well beyond their means. So they are forced to live in 
camps, caves, shacks, trailers, their cars . . . wherever. Consequently, both 
they and their children tend to be of poor health, with little chance to learn 
English and not accepted as part of the community. 
During the '60s, over 20 camps were built for the migratory farm workers in the 
central valleys of California. The funds came from the federal government to 
the state, which built the camps cooperatively with the counties, which then 
managed the camps that were built on land donated by farmers. These facilities 
are fairly decent temporary housing, and far better than the alternative. Each 
camp houses about 100 families; and several hundred are turned away each year 
because supply does not meet demand. 
Currently, I am on the board of directors of the Coachella Valley Housing 
Coalition. We are a small, nonprofit organization, building farm worker 
housing, both apartments and self-help homes. Our first two projects, built 
with federal and state funds, provided very decent multi-bedroom housing for 
100 families, and we are funded for an additional 140 units. Five hundred 
families applied for the first 50 units. We'll keep building until all families 
are out of the ditches and shacks and filthy camps . . . or until the money 
runs out. 
So I read about the solution used in North San Diego County: bulldoze the only 
housing the farm workers have been able to provide for themselves! Assure that 
14,000 workers and their families are homeless. Despite the rationalizations by 
the local officials, this action is the most brutal which has yet come to my 
attention. 
I guess Congressman Ron Packard (R-Carlsbad) speaks for the majority of the 
folks in that area when he throws the responsibility for finding housing and 
meeting health regulations back on the migrant workers. I wish he could spend a 
few days living under their circumstances. 
There are solutions. Let the growers, who need the workers, donate a few acres 
each for camps. At the state level, Proposition 84 specifically provides $10 
million for the construction of migrant farm labor camps. It wouldn't take 
much, in terms of federal or state spending. And, provide something more decent 
than the current proposal down there: a 14-foot plastic unit to house a family 
of four. Unbelievable! Would Congressman Packard move his family into such a 
unit? 
Just think! If readers of this letter are compassionate, or if they are 
Republicans who believe the private sector should solve all problems . . . if 
all those readers contributed $10 each; then that money might be sufficient to 
house an awful lot of workers who provide the food on our table, and who live 
worse than any other segment of our population. 
But then, who really cares? 
FRED WOLFF 
La Quinta 
