CARLUCCI OKS CLOSING OF MILITARY BASES; 
'LONG OVERDUE' STEP WILL SAVE MONEY, IMPROVE DEFENSE, HE SAYS 
Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci announced today that he had approved a 
recommendation to close dozens of military bases across the country, calling 
the action "long overdue." 
Carlucci declared at a Pentagon briefing, "The department has wanted to close 
bases for many years. . . . I would like to reiterate that this is a unique 
opportunity to make significant changes to (the department's) base structure 
(that) will not only save taxpayer dollars but also improve our nation's 
defense." 
He said he will ask Congress for $500 million in the fiscal 1990 budget and 
another $500 million in the 1991 budget to help cover expenses of closing 
military bases. 
Carlucci also said that he would like to see even more bases closed but that he 
isn't about to tamper with the political compromise that produced the current 
closing list. He added that the Defense Department might be able to close some 
of the bases even more quickly than envisioned by the special commission that 
prepared the list. 
"Base closings are long overdue," Carlucci said. 
Adm. William J. Crowe, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told 
reporters that he and the other leaders of the armed services supported the 
closures. 
"It is our view as a body that this action would not adversely affect military 
operations or the ability to carry out the national military strategy," Crowe 
said. 
Carlucci's decision, which was expected, sets the stage for one final debate on 
the matter on Capitol Hill. 
Under a law passed last year, a special government commission was given the 
authority to review all military facilities and to prepare a hit list of those 
considered obsolete or unnecessary. 
Now that Carlucci has endorsed the panel's recommendations, Congress must 
either accept or reject the list of bases proposed for closure in its entirety. 
It cannot pick and choose or bargain over the fate of individual bases on the 
list. 
The commission -- known formally as the Base Realignment and Closure Commission 
-- has recommended that 34 military installations and 52 military housing 
complexes be closed; that five other installations be partially closed, and 
that 54 others get new missions or additional personnel. 
All told, the panel has estimated the actions would save $693 million a year. 
Among the California bases listed to be closed is the Army's historic Presidio 
in San Francisco. Letterman Army Medical Center on that base also would be shut 
down. 
In Southern California, Norton Air Force Base near San Bernardino and George 
AFB near Victorville would be closed with some personnel and functions 
transferred to March AFB near Riverside. 
Mather AFB near Sacramento also would be closed. 
