MEXICO'S ARREST OF OIL UNION CHIEF SPURS PANIC BUYING AT GAS STATIONS 
Mexican motorists jammed gas stations in panic buying and armed soldiers 
guarded most of the nation's refineries against possible sabotage Wednesday 
after the violent arrest of the leader of the oil workers union on arms 
smuggling charges. 
The arrest of the powerful union chief, Joaquin Hernandez Galicia, the day 
before provoked early morning work stoppages and slowdowns Wednesday at several 
of the state oil company's installations, but most of the workers apparently 
were back on the job after receiving orders from union leaders meeting in 
Mexico City. 
The government news agency Notimex reported that the navy was protecting 
coastal installations and oil tankers in the Gulf of Mexico. Reporters in 
Campeche state said military airplanes were circling the 36 offshore drilling 
platforms in Campeche Sound. 
The government had feared violence by some of the nearly 200,000 oil workers 
who are considered to be fiercely loyal to Hernandez Galicia, but there were no 
reports of disturbances. 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari met privately with Fidel Velasquez, the 
leader of the Mexican Workers Congress, the umbrella group for organized labor 
in the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or the PRI. The oil workers 
union is a key sector of the congress. 
The president is scheduled to meet today with the congress' entire executive 
committee. 
Hernandez Galicia, known as La Quina, is the popular and allegedly corrupt 
power behind the union in the nation's strategic oil industry. He was detained 
by federal police and the army Tuesday morning at his home in Ciudad Madero in 
the coastal state of Tamaulipas, after a gun battle with his bodyguards that 
left one federal agent dead. 
The attorney general's office said 44 other people have been arrested in 
conjunction with the case, including the secretary general of the union, 
Salvador Barragan Camacho. Barragan Camacho, who turned himself over to 
authorities before dawn Wednesday, is in police custody at a Mexico City 
hospital, where he is being treated for a heart condition. 
Security agents found 200 Israeli-made Uzi submachine guns and thousands of 
rounds of ammunition in Hernandez Galicia's house and are charging the union 
leader with arms stockpiling and smuggling, the attorney general's office 
added. 
Government officials charge that Hernandez Galicia was conspiring to take over 
installations of the state oil company, Petroleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, to 
destabilize the government. 
An opposition member of the federal Chamber of Deputies, however, was quoted in 
the Mexico City newspaper La Jornada as saying he saw the army plant the guns 
in Hernandez Galicia's house. Alfredo Pliego Aldana, a member of the leftist 
National Democratic Front, said, "I was there . . . (the army) brought the 
weapons in a military truck, unloaded them and took them into La Quina's 
house." 
Charge by Unionists 
Union officials charge that the government has framed Hernandez Galicia and 
other leaders in a political move to break their power and that of the union. 
In a simultaneous attack on Hernandez Galicia's economic interests, the 
government arrested Sergio Bolanos, the businessman who is said to handle 
Hernandez Galicia's business affairs. Bolanos and several of his associates are 
accused of evading $1.5 million in taxes. 
A government spokesman who declined to be identified by name said that two of 
Hernandez Galicia's bodyguards in detention told authorities that they murdered 
one of Hernandez Galicia's rivals in 1983 on orders from their boss. According 
to the official, the bodyguards said they killed Oscar Torres Pancardo, mayor 
of Poza Rica in the state of Veracruz, who appeared to have died in a 
mysterious car wreck. 
Meanwhile, soldiers surrounded several of the country's nine refineries while 
troops in army jeeps escorted trucks delivering gasoline to stations throughout 
the country. Motorists fearing an eventual strike waited in long gas lines that 
clogged streets throughout the capital. 
"The people are panicked and we have long lines because they think there is 
going to be a shortage," said Alberto Servin, an attendant at one Pemex gas 
station. 
Gas in Short Supply 
With the high demand, some stations ran out of gas, but Pemex officials 
guaranteed that all stations would have gas today. 
In Ciudad Madero, where the union headquarters is situated, state officials 
reported stores and gas stations closed and a morning demonstration in the 
central square by about 3,000 union members protesting "the kidnaping" of 
Hernandez Galicia. 
"The workers are disoriented and alarmed," said Manuel Montiel, spokesman for 
the state government. 
By afternoon, however, the Notimex news agency reported that "hundreds of 
workers" had gone back to the refinery there after receiving orders from the 
local union leader. 
In the states of Tabasco, Campeche and Oaxaca, reporters said that protesting 
workers returned to their jobs by midday. 
In Tabasco, a local newspaper reporter said that soldiers were searching 
employees as they entered the 25 Pemex work sites. 
Tuesday's arrests have met with mixed reactions. Business leaders generally 
have lauded the move while the leftist opposition has protested the violent and 
allegedly illegal way in which Hernandez Galicia was detained. 
At a meeting of a permanent joint committee of Congress, lawmaker Jesus Ortega 
of the opposition Democratic Front called the arrest a "classic example of 
state terror." He said the oil union was targeted because "the government does 
not want an obstacle to its policy of privatizing the nation's industries." 
President Salinas favors selling off many of the government enterprises and 
breaking up others. 
