LOTUS FOUNDER, AT NEW OUTFIT, DEBUTS PRODUCT 
Nearly three years, $4 million and an entire business strategy later, the 
company formed by departed Lotus Development Corp. founder Mitchell D. Kapor 
has introduced its first software product. 
The program, unveiled Monday by Kapor's new firm, On Technology, is designed to 
help users of Macintosh personal computers better organize files and data 
stored in their machines. Although the product, called On Location, has already 
been hailed by reviewers, analysts said it is not likely to reach the superstar 
status of Kapor's first program, Lotus 1-2-3, the best-selling personal 
computer software program ever written. 
Nevertheless, the introduction of On Location is a milestone of no small 
proportions for Kapor, a 39-year-old Yale University graduate and former rock 
and roll disc jockey who founded Lotus Development in 1978 and introduced the 
popular Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet program just three years later. 
Kapor left Lotus in 1986, citing its huge size and growing impersonal corporate 
culture. Within months, he had opened On Technology and announced grandiose, 
but vague, plans to develop an advanced and highly sophisticated personal 
computer software system. However, two years later, Kapor scrapped those plans 
and said the company would instead concentrate on smaller and specific 
applications programs, such as the product unveiled Tuesday. 
"This is what we are," Kapor said. "We're going to find niches where there are 
real problems and we're going to offer the best solutions we can." 
Kapor acknowledges that he, and the notoriety he generated at Lotus, are key 
ingredients to the success of the new strategy. "Certainly there's a curiosity 
factor. Certainly people are interested in what we're doing because of who I 
am." 
But Kapor said his public persona should be sufficient to draw attention to the 
company in the increasingly crowded pack of software developers. After that, he 
said, the products have to speak for themselves. 
So far, early reviews of On Location, which is expected to be available next 
month for $130, are favorable. Richard Shaffer, editor of a personal computer 
newsletter in New York, pronounced the product a "hit" in his most recent 
issue. 
