DEUKMEJIAN SAYS HE WON'T OUST TRUSTEE 
Gov. George Deukmejian said last week he would not ask the chairwoman of the 
California State University trustees to resign, although she made a "bad 
mistake" by misrepresenting her educational background. 
In a press conference in San Diego, Deukmejian said Huntington Beach resident 
Marianthi K. Lansdale has apologized to him for claiming a community college 
degree she did not have when the governor first nominated her to the 
prestigious CSU Board of Trustees nearly four years ago. The claim was also 
forwarded to the state Senate, which confirmed her nomination for a term that 
expires in March 1993. 
But the governor praised Lansdale for doing an "outstanding job" as a trustee 
and added: "At the present time, I am not intending to ask her to resign." 
"From all accounts, she has been doing a superb job," Deukmejian said in his 
first comments on the matter. "She works very hard at it. She has been very 
effective. And she is a real fine representative for the system. 
"But she shouldn't have said what she said," he added. "She has acknowledged 
that. She regrets it. It was a bad mistake." 
Lansdale admitted to The Times last month that she never received a 1959 
Associate of Arts degree from Long Beach City College as she claimed at the 
time of her 1985 appointment. 
Although Lansdale said she accumulated the 60 credits "equivalent" for an AA 
degree, she conceded she lacked a required course in either geography or 
history. 
Lansdale's admission caused such a furor that she issued a public apology and 
offered to give a personal explanation in January to the Senate Rules 
Committee, which is responsible for confirming gubernatorial appointments. 
Senate President Pro Tempore David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles), who is chairman 
of the Rules Committee, said Lansdale should resign. The controversy also 
inspired proposed legislation by Sen. Gary K. Hart (D-Santa Barbara) to empower 
the Senate to remove any gubernatorial appointee caught lying about his 
educational background. 
Meanwhile, CSU trustees last week passed a resolution expressing their "full 
support" of Lansdale. Deukmejian kept mum until Thursday, when he met with 
reporters before touring the Mexican border. 
"There is no question she made a mistake, and she has acknowledged that 
publicly and to me personally," Deukmejian said. "She apparently had sufficient 
credits to earn a degree but she did not actually have a degree. 
"But she did represent that she had it and it was a big mistake for her to 
make," he said. 
"On the other hand, she has done an outstanding job as a member of the Board of 
Trustees to such an extent that her fellow members of that board have selected 
her to be the chairperson and she has been serving in that capacity," he said. 
Lansdale and her husband, Long Beach developer William M. Lansdale, gave 
Deukmejian more than $100,000 in money and in the use of an airplane during the 
1982 gubernatorial campaign. 
As chairwoman, Lansdale heads a 24-member volunteer board charged with making 
policy for one of the largest public four-year university systems in the world. 
