EUROPEAN SECURITY TALKS REPORTED NEAR AGREEMENT 
The 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which has been 
meeting in Vienna for more than two years, is on the verge of an overall 
agreement, diplomatic sources said Wednesday. 
The final breakthrough was the result of the United States agreeing to a Soviet 
proposal that a human rights conference be held in Moscow in 1991, on condition 
that the Soviets continue to improve their record on human rights, the 
diplomats said. President Reagan announced his assent to the Moscow conference 
on Wednesday from his new home in Bel-Air, where he has been spending the 
holidays. 
Most important, an agreement in Vienna would lead almost immediately to the 
long-awaited mandate for a new conference on the reduction of troops and arms 
in Europe, known as "conventional stability talks." 
"We think the CST could begin as soon as February or March," an American 
diplomat in Vienna said Wednesday. "Right now, it looks as if everything can be 
wrapped up in a final (security conference) document to sign within two weeks." 
West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said in Bonn on Wednesday 
that Alois Mock, the Austrian foreign affairs minister, had invited officials 
of the participating nations to attend the windup of the security conference's 
meeting in Vienna on Jan. 17-20. 
The new conventional arms talks, expected to be held in either Vienna or 
Geneva, would replace the long-moribund mutual and balanced forces reduction 
talks, which have been going on for 15 years with no result. 
The security conference, under way since November, 1986, is the third follow-up 
conference to monitor the original Helsinki accords of 1975, signed by all 
European nations except Albania, plus the United States and Canada. 
The new conventional stability talks will involve only the 16 nations of the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the seven members of the Communist 
Warsaw Pact, although European neutral countries will be kept informed. 
But the conventional arms talks will cover a much broader concept of Europe -- 
from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ural Mountains, as it has been expressed. 
The Vienna talks had been expected to move quickly but ran into difficulties -- 
with the Soviet Union over the human rights issue, and even with France, which 
objected to arms talks between power blocs rather than a European-wide 
conference. 
Other NATO nations argued that serious discussions on reducing conventional 
arms should involve only NATO and the Warsaw Pact, because including other 
European countries would only confuse the issue. 
The Soviet Union has been determined to hold a human rights conference in 
Moscow, sponsored by the security conference, which would follow a similar 
rights conference this year in Paris and another next year in Copenhagen. 
