VERIFICATION OF GAS PLANT A MURKY TASK; 
GLOBAL INTELLIGENCE EFFORT USED TO BUILD CASE AGAINST LIBYA 
In contrast to facilities producing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles, 
facilities that make chemical weapons are becoming increasingly hard to 
distinguish from ordinary industrial plants turning out pesticides and 
medicines, arms control analysts say. 
The murky problem of verification -- the difficulty of telling a benign 
chemical plant from one manufacturing chemical weapons -- is a major barrier to 
a treaty to control the increasingly worrisome proliferation of chemical 
weapons in developing countries. 
According to a variety of government and industry analysts, however, there are 
few doubts, at least among American experts, about the purpose of the large 
industrial plant in the Libyan desert at Rabta, 40 miles southwest of Tripoli, 
that has become a new object of contention between the United States and Libyan 
leader Col. Moammar Kadafi. 
The Libyans insist that the plant, known as Pharma-150, is being built to 
manufacture pharmaceuticals. U.S. officials say that it is on the verge of 
manufacturing mustard gas and possibly sarin, a far more lethal nerve gas. 
This concern, officials say, is based in part on global intelligence efforts 
that monitor exports and imports of critical materials for such plants, 
including glass-lined piping and unusual corrosion-resistant steel alloys. It 
is a task, they note, that is far better suited to human intelligence-gathering 
than satellite photography, although satellites are believed to have been 
monitoring construction and other aspects of the Libyan project. 
Surrounded by Missiles 
While U.S. officials have been reluctant to disclose detailed intelligence that 
they say supports this contention, they note that the Libyan plant is unusual 
in at least one respect: It is surrounded by anti-aircraft missile 
emplacements. 
"A chemical manufacturing plant is a chemical manufacturing plant. It can 
manufacture all kinds of chemicals," William F. Burns, director of the Arms 
Control and Disarmament Agency, acknowledged Wednesday at a breakfast meeting 
with reporters. 
But if Pharma-150 is what Libya insists it is, Burns added, it would be "the 
most heavily defended pharmaceutical plant in the world." 
Kyle Olson, an arms control analyst with the Chemical Manufacturers' Assn., 
reinforces the point, noting that "most countries don't view aspirin as a 
target of opportunity" in need of such costly protection. 
"You also have to ask if a pharmaceutical plant makes any economic sense," 
Olson observed. "For Libya, does it make sense to build a pharmaceutical plant 
out in the east end of nowhere, to wade into an oversaturated world market?" 
As further evidence of its weapons mission, according to other sources familiar 
with the Libyan facility, U.S. intelligence analysts have concluded that 
Pharma-150 contains metal-machining equipment obtained from Japanese firms for 
producing artillery shells or gas canisters for use in other munitions. These 
sources said the United States has obtained corroborating information from 
foreign technicians who have worked at the Libyan plant. 
U.S. intelligence agencies also are believed to monitor shipments and 
commercial transactions with national security implications, using 
communications intercepts involving Libya and an array of other sources. 
U.S. sources said this week that Libya has been moving equipment associated 
with weapons production away from the chemical plant in an effort to protect it 
from retaliation. The officials would not say how they knew of the Libyan 
activity at the plant, which was described as taking place only within the last 
few days. 
Although there appear to be few doubts among U.S. analysts about the nature of 
the Libyan plant, the broader problem of telling innocent chemical plants from 
weapons plants is one of the knottiest on the arms control agenda of industrial 
nations. 
Satellite photography, for example, is said to be less useful than when used to 
pick out ballistic missile facilities and nuclear weapons production plants. 
A decade ago, chemical weapons plants had a number of distinguishing features 
that would show up in photographs, such as tall ventilator stacks and large air 
filtration systems. Now, however, such signs are less-certain indicators of 
weapons activity. 
Strict Standards 
As industry has adapted to increasingly strict environmental and occupational 
health standards, ordinary chemical plants have acquired these and other exotic 
features, such as steel piping and reaction vessels lined with glass and 
double- or triple-sealed pumps to guard against leaks. 
With changing industrial standards, the task of discerning the purpose of a 
suspicious plant, an Administration expert said, begins with looking at the 
collective implications of a package of "indicators," which in turn requires 
knowing how a plant is built, what key materials are involved and the degree of 
precautions taken to protect workers from toxic substances. 
The toxicity of chemical weapons such as mustard gas and nerve agents is 10 
times to 1,000 times greater than pesticides and requires a corresponding 
degree of built-in protection. 
"If they want their people to last more than a couple days on the job, they're 
going to have to isolate piping and valves, and men are going to have to go 
around in peculiar rubber suits," said this analyst, who asked not to be 
identified by name or agency. 
Although similar precautions are taken in modern pesticide plants, he noted, 
"there is a discernible difference" in facilities designed to produce chemical 
weapons. 
A further sign of intent to produce chemical weapons, at least in developing 
countries, is the importation of exotic anti-corrosion alloys. When sarin, a 
fluoride-based nerve gas, is manufactured, even glass-lined piping dissolves. 
One indicator of an interest in making sarin, officials said, is the import of 
high-nickel alloys. They declined to say, however, whether Libya was known to 
have imported such alloys for its plant. 
The scale of pharmaceutical plants is also much smaller than chemical weapons 
plants, which have to produce larger doses. 
While tiny amounts of toxins can be lethal in confined spaces, the military use 
of chemical weapons usually requires large quantities of the poisons. 
Weapons plants, government analysts said, also tend to lack supplies of steel 
drums and other forms of packaging for their product. 
Times staff writer Norman Kempster contributed to this story. 
