AT&amp;T SUES MCI, CLAIMS TOP RIVAL IS STEALING CUSTOMERS 
American Telephone &amp; Telegraph charged Wednesday that its leading 
competitor, MCI Communications, has been stealing AT&amp;T long-distance 
customers. 
"People are being hoodwinked," claimed Merrill Tutton, AT&amp;T vice president 
for consumer services, in announcing the firm's filing of a deceptive-practices 
lawsuit in U.S. District Court in Newark, N.J. 
The suit alleges that MCI or its agent, Pioneer Teletechnologies, have used 
"false and misleading" direct-sales practices and, in some cases, signed up 
AT&amp;T customers without the customers' authorization. Separately, AT&amp;T 
asked the Federal Communications Commission to require that customers authorize 
in writing any changes of long-distance carriers. 
AT&amp;T claims that up to 15% of the customers who shifted to MCI in recent 
months either were duped by sales representatives or had never talked to an MCI 
agent. 
MCI spokesman John Houser acknowledged that deceptive practices occur in direct 
marketing programs but insisted that MCI and Pioneer punish or fire anyone who 
uses them. He also noted that AT&amp;T sales agents have used similar tactics. 
He said AT&amp;T was just "whining" because it is losing market share. 
Spokesmen for federal and state regulatory agencies said they were aware of 
such problems, but said they were common to many direct-sales campaigns and are 
corrected when consumers complain. 
Since the 1984 breakup of the Bell System, customers must choose a primary 
long-distance carrier for their telephone service. They can change carriers at 
will -- either by calling their local phone company and requesting a new 
primary long-distance carrier, or by telling the new carrier to make the change 
for them. 
Local phone companies charge customers a state-authorized fee for making the 
computer change that automatically routes long-distance calls to the designated 
carrier's network. 
According to AT&amp;T's lawsuit, which seeks unspecified damages, MCI sales 
agents told some AT&amp;T customers that AT&amp;T no longer handled 
long-distance calls. In some cases, the suit said, the agents said AT&amp;T was 
going out of business. In still others, however, AT&amp;T customers had their 
accounts changed without any contact from a sales agent, the suit alleged. 
Houser of MCI called AT&amp;T's examples of false sales claims "ludicrous." But 
he acknowledged that fraudulent sales -- claimed by agents who work on 
commission -- likely occur in any direct-marketing campaign. 
"This has always been a concern," Houser said. "It's nothing new." 
He added that MCI's customers "have on occasion told us that they have been 
switched over to AT&amp;T" without authorization. 
But given the "millions of calls a month" made by carriers to solicit 
customers, he added, the number of complaints on all sides "is not large." 
Houser added that "It definitely is not a corporate strategy." He said the vast 
majority of customers who are switched to MCI have no complaints. 
Houser said MCI would "evaluate" AT&amp;T's petition that the FCC require 
customers to make written authorization, but considers the present situation 
adequate and convenient to consumers. 
Duane Filer, who supervises telecommunications for the consumer affairs branch 
of the California Public Utilities Commission, said the problem is not unique 
to AT&amp;T or MCI. "It is industrywide," he said. Nonetheless, he added, many 
customers prefer handling a change by phone "and letting the carrier do the 
legwork." 
While saying deceptive sales practices are "a growing problem," Filer said he 
had heard nothing about it from AT&amp;T "until about 10 days ago." 
Houser countered by claiming that AT&amp;T was stunned by the numbers of 
defecting customers. "They talk about promoting competition on the one hand, 
but when they get it they complain," he said. 
AT&amp;T's lawsuit is not the first pitting it against its original 
long-distance competitor reaching back two decades. MCI sued and AT&amp;T 
countersued last October over what each called the other's false claims in 
television ads. Those cases are pending. 
LONG-DISTANCE MARKET SHARE 
AT&amp;T: 71% 
MCI: 13% 
US Sprint: 10% 
Other (300 regional and specialty carriers) 
Source: Industry estimates / Los Angeles Times 
