SINGLE LIFE: AN ETUDE TO SOLITUDE; 
ARTISTS FIND THE FREEDOM TO GO IT ALONE GENERATES NEW CREATIVITY AND AMBITION 
Terry Black joked that his ideal mate would be "a woman who travels a lot." 
"We could have a deliriously happy relationship 2 days a week, and then she 
would be out of town on business trips the other 5," the Costa Mesa 
screenwriter said, tongue somewhat in cheek. 
He is not alone in his need to be alone. 
Newport Beach author Doug Muir can become so enmeshed in his fiction that he 
neglects friendships. Laguna Nigel poet Susan Hecht enjoys spending secluded 
weekends hiking in the mountains. Laguna Beach musician Ronald Ravenscroft 
cited "the inclination to remove one's self from society" when he is composing. 
Whether painting with watercolors or words, creative people share a need for 
what cannot be shared: solitude. Without it, no great book would have ever been 
written or sculpture ever sculpted. 
Yet pop psychology reveres social interaction almost to the exclusion of 
equally vital roads to self-fulfillment, Oxford University psychiatrist Anthony 
Storr complained in his recently released book, "Solitude." 
"Current wisdom assumes that man is a social being who needs the companionship 
and affection of other human beings from cradle to grave," the book begins. "It 
is widely believed that interpersonal relationships of an intimate kind are the 
chief source of happiness." 
However, Storr noted, many creative geniuses throughout history have led 
rewarding lives absent of marriage: composer Ludwig van Beethoven, artist 
Francisco Goya y Lucientes, writer Franz Kafka, physicist Sir Isaac Newton and 
philosopher Rene Descartes. 
"One might argue that people who have no abiding interests other than their 
spouses and families are as limited intellectually as those who have neither 
spouse nor children may be emotionally," he wrote. 
The retired professor said in an interview that "our culture has made us feel 
guilty if we like to be alone. 
"We do need interaction with others, but many aspects of one's self are only 
discovered in solitude. When we're with other people, we tend to lose 
ourselves, to overadjust." 
"Creative people draw inward," said Black, 34, who wrote the 1988 movie "Dead 
Heat," starring Treat Williams. "As a result, you look to your own ideas and 
examine them more closely than an extroverted person might; any little spark 
gets attention and has opportunity to flourish. If you are too extroverted, 
your attention is diffused by all your contacts, and you don't have that 
pinpointed focus a creative person has." 
Although a bachelor whose "creativity springs from solitude," Black said, "I 
don't eliminate the possibility of marriage, if the right girl comes along. She 
would have to be someone who could sympathize with a writer's odd personal 
habits. If you know anybody who qualifies, send her my way." 
Married and the father of three, Storr did not hail single life as an 
intellectual virtue. But he repeatedly stressed in his book his belief that the 
modern mind-set places far too much importance on matrimony as the ultimate 
goal. 
"Even with the divorce rate as high as it is, we still have this romantic 
notion that marriage is the happy ending -- but it's really not all that big of 
a deal," Storr laughed in the interview. 
He attributed this 20th-Century obsession with wedlock to psychoanalyst Sigmund 
Freud's "emphasis on sex as the source of fulfillment." 
"Virtually all the great philosophers in the Western world since the Greeks 
have been unmarried," he said. "And the Victorians thought it was rather 
admirable if you were strong enough and courageous enough to live on your own. 
"But today we glorify marriage, as if there were something wrong with not being 
married. I think that's very hard on people because not everybody's suited to 
marriage. Not everybody needs it or wants it." 
Artist Nixson Borah discovered "a new-found freedom" in the dissolution of his 
long marriage. Bachelorhood, he said, has allowed him to pursue creative 
outlets formerly unfeasible -- including a move to his downtown Los Angeles 
loft after living for 25 years in Fullerton. 
"I couldn't have raised my family in this loft," said the 50-year-old father of 
two adult children. "We needed a house with doors to shut so that all of us 
could have our separate spaces." 
"I love the jingle of city life -- the pace, the energy, the art openings and 
concerts to go to. I see the contrasts of our society -- Skid Row and 
skyscrapers -- much more vividly than I was conscious of when living in 
suburbia," said Borah, who commutes four times a week to teach at Fullerton 
College. 
Muir, 56, a film editor until he began writing suspense novels in 1985, said he 
could not have afforded his midlife career change were he responsible for a 
wife and children. 
"I tell my students, while you're still single, get out there and take a 
gamble," said Muir, who teaches at Irvine Valley College. "Write that book 
while you have the freedom to take financial risks; you might not ever get the 
chance to do it again." 
Rather than viewing her single status as facilitating her writing, Hecht has 
found that she consumes more time socializing than she did when married. 
"People who are married will stay home at night, but when you live alone you're 
more apt to want to go out," the 40-year-old poet said. "So I'm not sure that 
being married impinged upon my writing; I think it's always been me." 
Even when married, Hecht sought out large doses of solitude: "I'm probably 
alone more than a lot of people are and like it more. During my 30s, I devoted 
some time to validating my need for solitude -- I let myself feel OK about it. 
I was brought up with the attitude that just sitting around and thinking was 
lazy and unprofitable. 
"But I've come to realize that creative people have to spend a lot of time 
daydreaming and looking like they're doing nothing -- that is indeed part of 
the process." 
Like Hecht, creative people in general take deep pleasure in their own company 
and thoughts, Storr said. Often they develop their streak of emotional 
independence while children. 
"Quite a number of famous writers were for some reason isolated in childhood, 
which set them off on the path of using their imagination more than the 
average," Storr said. He named Beatrix Potter, Edward Lear and Rudyard Kipling 
as examples of writers who passed much of their young lives in a world apart 
from their peers. 
"I began painting at age 3 because I had severe asthma that made recreational 
activities difficult," Borah said. "I wouldn't wish asthma on any child, but at 
least it led me to be creative." 
Singer/songwriter Jennifer Warnes, who was raised in Anaheim and is acclaimed 
for her unusual and delicate voice, recalled that she "was not very present in 
high school." 
"They were pleasant years, but something much more important was occupying my 
inner life," she said. "I was planning my breakaway and just watching the 
clock. 
"I have a memory of walking to the bus stop every morning at 6, to get to 
Montessori in Santa Ana by 6:45, and thinking, 'If I were to meet these people 
sometime again in my life, they would never know me. If I left right now, they 
would never even notice.' " 
Now a Los Angeles resident, the Grammy-winning musician said she has recognized 
a common thread running through performing artists from the county: "I've 
talked to a lot of people who grew up in Orange County: (musicians) Jackson 
Browne, the Dirt Band, the Righteous Brothers, (comedians) Steve Martin, Pat 
Paulsen, (actress) Diane Keaton. They all say that their vision of the world 
and of their work developed in the privacy of their rooms. 
"In those days, there were no art museums of any note in Orange County, no 
predominate ghettos, no real cultural celebration. Those of us who wanted to 
see a Van Gogh or experience a ballet had to go to the libraries. If you could 
read about it in a book, you could imagine it to be true. But you couldn't see 
it first hand, like a person raised in Greenwich Village could. 
"So our work was influenced by nobody or nothing, except our imaginations. We 
had no grand masters. The people who came out of that era are highly 
individualistic." 
A self-described "basic high school nerd," Black today has no regrets about his 
gawky adolescence. "I turned to writing as an escape," the Pittsburgh native 
said. "Now that I am grown up, sort of, I find that I have become more adept at 
making friends -- yet the writing skills I developed as a lonely teen-ager 
don't go away. So I can have my cake and eat it, too." 
Like Black, most creative people appreciate the social and private side to 
their personalities. 
"Just because an artist shuts the studio door when he's painting, it doesn't 
mean that he's unconnected to the world," Borah said. "The artists I know are 
very socially active." 
"A writer has to experience life -- to travel, to interact, to get out and 
scrape the underbelly of society," said Muir, author of "Tides of War," 
"American Reich" and "Red Star Run." 
But when the time comes to sit down and write about those experiences, Muir 
added, "it's just me and my computer." 
"For most people, interacting with colleagues at the office is a necessary part 
of their work," said composer Ravenscroft, 34, whose violin concerto was 
performed last year by the Pacific Symphony. "Composing, however, is done in 
complete quiet. During creative times, I'm sensitive to the slightest sound; 
the buzzing of the refrigerator can drive me insane." 
Creativity at its best occurs only in total solitude, Borah agreed. "Other 
people's judgments come later, when the work is finished. But if outside voices 
are telling you what to do while you are creating, you cannot hear your own 
inner voice." 
"I think the reason there are so many bad movies and bad television shows is 
that film and TV are very much collaborative mediums," said Black, who is 
writing a science-fiction movie for Disney. 
"When a movie is based on a book, you always hear the complaint that the book 
was better," he said. "That's because a book comes from one person, whereas a 
movie comes from the consensus of a committee." 
Benefits of solitude apply not only to those who possess artistic talent, Storr 
said, but to all people -- married or single. 
"Everybody needs a hobby or a passionate interest to call their own," he said. 
"Everybody needs something to which they can turn, no matter what happens -- 
for there is always an element of uncertainty in interpersonal relationships." 
