ENDPAPERS: JOURNALISM TEXAS STYLE 
Dan Jenkins comes by journalism organically: "Part of it was going to movies 
where guys like Clark Gable wore a press pass in their hat." In downtown Ft. 
Worth, he attended Paschal High School, which also brought us writers Bud 
Shrake and Liz Smith, movie star Ginger Rogers, golfer Ben Hogan, Gov. Price 
Daniel and man-on-the-moon Alan Bean. Jenkins and his wife, June, just attended 
the 100th anniversary of the high school this Oct. 28. 
"I can't remember when I didn't want to be a writer. As an 8-year-old kid, I 
pulled an old typewriter out of the attic, put it on the kitchen table and 
started copying news stories out of the paper," he recalls. "Later, I started 
writing my own versions." 
It was in high school when he wrote a funny satire on a Ft. Worth Star-Telegram 
columnist for his school paper. The sports editor at the Ft. Worth Press, 
Blackie Sherrod, read it and hired Jenkins sight unseen "because he was gutsy 
and a satirist." That was 40 years ago. 
"Dan was the most confident writer I ever knew. Never re-wrote anything, had a 
sense of the ridiculous and the best ear for dialogue I ever read," Sherrod 
recalls. 
Thus began the reporting saga of Dan Jenkins, who spent 15 years as an ace 
sportswriter when little Davey O'Brien and Slingin' Sammy Baugh were making 
football history. 
Last November, Jenkins published his ninth novel,"Fast Copy" (Simon &amp; 
Schuster: $19.95), his resounding "yes" to the country and Western song, "Does 
Ft. Worth Ever Cross Your Mind?" Crossing Jenkins' mind is not only Ft. Worth 
but the 1930s, "when everything was better -- theater, football games, 
gangsters (of course), Presidents, summer nights, cafes, saloons -- everything 
but air conditioning." 
We were having breakfast to talk about the book, the rollicking saga of Betsy 
Throckmorton, a beautiful and feisty newswoman who returns to her hometown of 
Claybelle, Tex., with her Barnard College education, her Time magazine 
experience and her handsome, ever-loving husband. Once home with Daddy, the 
publisher of the Claybelle newspaper, Betsy discovers the hometown banker 
engaged in a get-rich murder scheme. It is Bonnie-and-Clyde time, with every 
banker in Texas scared silly of a hold-up. The Texas Bankers Assn. has littered 
the state with a brochure that reads: "Reward -- $5,000 for every dead 
bankrobber; not one cent for a living one." 
Into this story of blood and print and love, Jenkins weaves those 
thigh-slapping cornball descriptions that are so characteristic of his style. 
In "Fast Copy," he doesn't disguise his long romance with news reporting and 
"every ink-stained wretch who knows what it's like to wait for the deadline 
muse." 
Jenkins admits to rewriting, researching -- and suffering while writing this 
novel. "I hit the microfilm at the Star-Telegram for nine months when (wife) 
June was establishing Juanita's," a Mexican restaurant chain she owns in New 
York, Florida, and on Ft. Worth's Sundance Square, where you find the flavor of 
Cowtown restored by the Bass Brothers. 
Out of it came the headlines and news stories that verified his own memory of 
his favorite era: 
"I loved everything about the '30s," which he stretches from the Depression 
(1929) to Pearl Harbor (1941), "the Texas Rangers, Bonnie and Clyde, Al Capone, 
and the glittery Texas Centennial with Amon Carter's billboard invitation: 'Go 
to Dallas for culture; come to Ft. Worth for fun.' " 
"Ft. Worth is Texas; Dallas is Atlanta," Jenkins says. 
The flavor of Jenkins' prose, like Pace's picante sauce, stretches from 
Claybelle clear to New York City. A "Fast Copy" sampler: 
 -- "Texans never let facts interfere with their opinions." 
 -- " 'Waco?' Florine said, 'There's nothing in Waco but tornadoes and Baylor. 
If the Baptists don't get you, the funnels will.' " 
 -- " 'Why wouldn't she know what she's talking about?' Ben said. 'She's my 
daughter, isn't she? It's a genes deal.' " 
 -- "Betsy had spent more time in the newsroom than a moldy sandwich. . . . She 
had grown up on Southwest Conference football, but Ben would have suffered two 
strokes and a hemorrhage if she hadn't gone East to get the thick-book 
education he could well afford at Barnard College for Women." 
 -- Time editors: ". . . all dripping with Princeton ivy or speaking in quaint 
Harvard stammers." Time researchers: ". . . headed by a woman whose hair was 
worn in bangs, who wore bulky sweaters, Scottish plaid skirts, ballet shoes and 
could name all of the European capitals." 
 -- "Ruth was a sob sister for the Daily News, a plump, gaudily dressed woman 
with frosty eyes and dyed-blond hair. Her ambition was to get off the 
tear-stained gossip sidebars about the mothers of dead cops and become a 
three-dot gossip columnist so she could eat free in good restaurants." 
During the '30s, Jenkins remembers, hobo towns in Texas were easy prey of 
small-town scams and bigots who would deliver DOA anybody who hadn't shaved, 
just to claim the reward offered by the Texas Bankers Assn. Jenkins based his 
story on a small-town newspaper editor who teamed up with Texas Ranger Frank 
Hammer to stop the human slaughter. 
"I work a lot on picking names for my characters, names that should be in 
Texas. The right name in a novel is important," he says. "Ft. Worth had two 
good guys who were rich, Amon Carter and Sid Richardson." 
Both appear in the person of his 55-year-old publisher of the Claybelle 
Times-Standard, Ben Throckmorton. The villain is named Lank Allred. 
Part of the charm of the book is print folklore, a Texanized version of "Front 
Page." It should be required reading at journalism schools, which are now all 
named Departments of Communications or Media Centers. There, the rollicking 
romance of the trade is lost. Journalism history should never fall into the 
cracks. No -- once there was a bar near every newspaper office where reporters 
gathered after deadlines, drank cheap whiskey and indulged in their favorite 
pastime: quoting leads and guessing whether it was from the by-line of Damon 
Runyon or H. L. Mencken or Herbert Bayard Swope. Matthew Arnold called it 
"literature in a hurry." But it was a time that produced newspaper copy so 
vivid and free-wheeling that readers were lured into the story, however trivial 
or world-shaking, and became part of the human comedy and tragedy going on 
around them. 
For his own part, Jenkins' favorite lead was written by St. John in the Bible: 
"Jesus wept." 
On second thought, he says, maybe it was Damon Runyon's lead on Al Capone's 
trial: "Al Capone was quietly dressed this morning, except for a hat of pearly 
white, emblematic, no doubt, of purity." 
 Jenkins, long acclaimed as the best sports writer Texas ever bred, may be 
more: He may be simply our best writer. 
