KIDS NEED TO EARN 'A' IN SELF-CONFIDENCE; 
COMPETENCE: THE BETTER STUDENTS JUDGE THEMSELVES, THE MORE THEY ARE EMOTIONALLY 
LINKED TO SCHOOL, THE BETTER THEIR CLASSROOM PERFORMANCE. 
The California Task Force to Promote Self-Esteem and Personal and Social 
Responsibility has just released its report. The findings in "Toward a State of 
Esteem" confirm what we have learned in our educational reform efforts. There's 
a critical link between competence and self-confidence; emotional and character 
development are inextricably linked with instructional development; and, most 
important, successful strategies exist for promoting positive attitudes toward 
self and school. 
We've worked hard to upgrade the curriculum and raise the standards of 
California schools. We've also discovered that unless students are willing to 
work considerably harder, they will never reach the higher levels of 
achievement expected of them. Educators not only must train students' minds; 
they must also inspire their hearts and strengthen their wills. 
Much has been written and said about the academic effectiveness of Japanese 
education. Less is known about how that system nurtures self-esteem, character 
and responsibility. 
In Japan, children are encouraged to form a bond with their school. 
Kindergarten begins with an entrance ceremony similar to our graduation 
ceremony. The whole family, dressed in its finest, attends. During the first 
three weeks of school, students learn how to recite, speak out, stand erect and 
be at ease. They also take turns playing leader. Symbolically and ceremonially, 
each Japanese youngster is welcomed into the fold. 
In California, our middle schools recently posted the biggest gains in test 
performance ever recorded in a three-year period. When I called the schools to 
find out how they'd done it, a few key strategies emerged. The schools reported 
that they strengthened academics and invested heavily in teacher training. To 
bolster student self-esteem, study teams and schools within schools were formed 
to foster support systems and a more human dimension for youngsters. But all 
strategies had one element in comment: linking student and school emotionally. 
The self-esteem task force makes a number of important recommendations along 
these lines that will further strengthen our efforts to reform California 
education. Among them is that self-esteem and responsibility must be woven into 
school programs. Every adult working at a school should feel responsible for 
every youngster in that school. Parents need assistance in becoming more 
effective partners in their child's education. And the entire community needs 
to recognize and understand the diverse needs of the student population. 
Students whose lives are plagued by drugs, gangs and teen pregnancy need 
special attention. The key to preventing their failure in school is helping 
them to develop a sense of purpose, feel part of a nurturing community and 
believe in themselves enough to be able to resist peer pressure. 
We're also finding that students deserve to know the connection between hard 
work and a good job or a good life. If they have clear expectations, 
continually experience the rewards of their work and receive timely support, 
they will be confident enough to tackle the difficulties of a demanding 
curriculum. 
Accordingly, some schools have initiated buddy systems in which an older 
student works with a younger one. Others have set up study teams and peer 
counseling that help students help themselves and each other. In still others, 
a teacher remains with the same class for several years to capitalize on the 
bonds developed with the students. In all schools, programs to counteract 
bigotry and prejudice, which destroy self-worth, have been implemented. 
If we are going to follow through on these and other recommendations, schools 
also must restructure the way they do business. We can't educate our children 
to higher levels -- recognizing the problems we face with the diversity, 
emotional distress, family upheaval and other real-life pressures -- unless 
educators create high-performance teams at every school. If we expect students 
to develop character, initiative, responsibility and proper attitudes, we need 
to reflect that behavior ourselves. Only by treating each other with respect, 
working together, communicating and forming organizations that promote 
self-esteem and personal and social responsibility can we succeed. 
The self-esteem task force has presented us with some tremendous challenges. 
Our work is cut out for us, but it is well worth the effort. We need only to 
look to teachers like Jaime Escalante to see how it can work. Escalante knows 
his subject and knows how to package it for kids. His class is part college, 
part summer camp and part football team. He expects his students to work hard, 
and they do. He expects them to work as a team, and they do. They respond to 
Escalante's spirit, his competence and his belief in them and, as a result, 
reach levels no one ever expected them to reach. That's not a bad prescription 
for every classroom in California. 
