RADICALLY NEW U.S. APPROACH TO HIGH-TECH RESEARCH URGED 
A presidential commission charged with finding a way for the United States to 
beat Japan in capturing a large share of the lucrative market for 
superconductor technology has recommended a radically new approach to promoting 
and funding high-technology research. 
The commission's key recommendation is the formation of a half-dozen 
consortiums, each made up of several private companies, a government research 
laboratory and a university laboratory. The federal government would fund the 
long-range research that the companies need but are poorly equipped to pursue 
alone. University facilities, by contrast, are adept at such efforts. 
Researchers from each member of a consortium would work together toward making 
marketable products from the new technology. 
Without the adoption of such an approach, the commission said in a report to 
President Reagan, U.S. industry "is unlikely to survive in what we believe will 
be a long-distance race" for prominence in the superconductor field. 
The new superconductors are ceramic materials that, when cooled to about minus 
238 degrees Fahrenheit, suddenly lose their resistance to carrying electricity. 
This resistance, which creates waste heat, makes electricity more expensive to 
generate, to transmit over wires and to store. 
But the cooling process itself requires costly energy. The United States 
currently leads in the search for materials that become superconductors at 
warmer temperatures, making them cheaper to exploit. 
Among the new products envisioned with superconductors are super-efficient 
power transmission cables and faster computers. However, the report said some 
of the hopes for superconductivity are overblown. For example, magnetically 
levitated trains still may not be practical in spite of higher-temperature 
materials, said Ralph Gomory, the chairman of the panel and the chief scientist 
of International Business Machines Corp. 
The proposed consortiums would close the gap between the short-term profit 
focus of industry laboratories and the long-term scientific focus of university 
laboratories, Gomory said. 
Americans are probably "neck-and-neck" with the Japanese in basic scientific 
research on superconductivity, Gomory said. 
But the report said that in terms of commercial applications, the Japanese 
effort is "better structured than the U.S. both for systematically developing 
new materials and for coupling these developments closely to industry." 
Gomory said important commercial applications are so far off that there is 
plenty of time for Americans to catch up. 
"Everybody's just out of the gate. Ahead or behind doesn't matter. What matters 
is who's better structured to run," he said. 
