CHILDREN'S DEATHS LIKELY TO FUEL DEBATE ON AIRCRAFT SAFETY SEATS 
The deaths of four children and one infant in last Thursday's crash of Avianca 
Airlines Flight 52 in New York is expected to fuel the debate over child safety 
on airliners. 
The Federal Aviation Administration allows children under age 2 to sit on 
adults' laps and fly free, but safety experts contend that children who do so 
are not safe. 
Child safety advocates want the FAA to mandate the use of child safety seats on 
airliners, but it appears unlikely that the agency will do so. An FAA spokesman 
said Monday that the agency will propose a rule that will allow parents to use 
a safety seat on all flights by U.S. airlines if a ticket is purchased for the 
child. 
"That is not good enough," said Cheryl Kim, spokeswoman for the Los Angeles 
Area Child Passenger Safety Assn., which has petitioned the FAA for a tougher 
rule. "The FAA should require that all young children are buckled-up." 
Rep. Jim Lightfoot (R-Iowa) said he would seek legislation to mandate child 
restraints if the FAA does not require them. Since most airlines already allow 
use of the seats, "what the FAA is suggesting is little different from what we 
have now," he said. 
A spokesman for Avianca Airlines, a Colombian carrier, said Monday that he did 
not know whether any of the seven infants aboard Flight 52 were riding in 
safety seats. He added that five infants who survived the crash remained 
hospitalized Monday, including one in critical condition. 
That child, 9-month-old Daniela Andrea Montoya, suffered internal injuries when 
she flew from her father's arms and became wedged between two seats as the 
plane crashed. 
The Boeing 707 crashed in Cove Neck, N.Y., as it approached John F. Kennedy 
International Airport, killing 73 of the 158 persons on board. 
Safety advocates contend that child restraints are needed on aircraft because 
the force of gravity builds in a crash, making an infant impossible to hold. 
The child safety issue arose after last July's crash of a United Airlines jet 
in Sioux City, Iowa, in which one infant died, along with 111 other people. 
Recent FAA crash tests show that safety seats can protect infants against 
injury. But the FAA has resisted a rule that would require use of the seats 
because the agency says some parents prefer to hold infants in their laps to 
save money. Moreover, the airline industry, which encourages voluntary use of 
safety seats, is concerned that a mandate would force airlines to provide the 
seats. 
The industry also says that safety seats, designed for use in automobiles, are 
too bulky and clumsy for airline use. The industry has asked the FAA to help 
design a child restraint more suitable for airliners. 
