MINKOW AIDE AT ZZZZ BEST GETS 8-YEAR SENTENCE 
Mark Morze, the one-time UCLA linebacker whose finesse with accounting ledgers 
and smooth-talking helped the ZZZZ Best carpet cleaning company pull off a 
$70-million swindle, was sentenced Tuesday to eight years in prison. 
"The integrity of the American financial system is at stake, and I don't think 
you can just do some wrist-slapping," U.S. District Judge Dickran Tevrizian 
said in sentencing the second of 12 men convicted in the ZZZZ Best case. 
Morze, an accountant who prosecutors said had a genius for generating phony 
invoices, ledgers, checks and other financial documents, has been portrayed as 
the brains behind the fraudulent insurance restoration scheme that bolstered 
ZZZZ Best's books with up to $43 million a year in phantom revenues. 
Senior Vice President 
Morze, 38, was appointed by ZZZZ Best founder Barry Minkow as the senior vice 
president in charge of a division that purportedly earned 90% of the company's 
revenues by repairing buildings damaged by fire or flooding. 
He was, prosecutor James R. Asperger said Tuesday, a "classic con man" who 
could persuade lawyers and accountants from prestigious financial firms that 
the phony insurance jobs were real -- thus bringing in millions of dollars 
through bank loans and driving up the value of the Reseda-based company's 
stock. 
Morze's role, Asperger said, was to breeze in to meet with investment officers, 
introduce himself as ZZZZ Best's vice president in charge of insurance 
restoration, then rush off to catch a plane or answer a phone before too many 
questions could be asked. 
In at least two cases, the prosecutor said, Morze led financial officers on 
tours of phony job sites, choreographing every detail to make it appear as 
though the floor space ZZZZ Best had hastily rented in distant office buildings 
was actually the site of extensive restoration jobs. 
"Mr. Minkow had the idea, but he didn't have the bookkeeping skills to carry 
this thing off," Asperger told the court. 
Federal prosecutors have estimated that Morze funneled more than $3 million to 
himself, his family and his girlfriend, of which about $650,000 was converted 
to cash and cannot be accounted for. Some of the money, Asperger said, went to 
buy cars, furs, a house and jewelry for Morze's girlfriend. 
Amends Cited 
Morze told the judge he has sought to make amends for his conduct since the day 
Minkow resigned from the company in 1987. 
"I immediately felt an unbelievable pressure because it started to become 
clear, literally within a matter of hours, just what I had done," he said. "I 
was suddenly barraged with a feeling of remorse, embarrassment and shame." 
Even before he hired an attorney, Morze said, he began contacting ZZZZ Best 
board members, notifying them that the insurance restoration work was a hoax 
and offering to make reparations. 
He has delivered box loads of financial documents to the government and spent 
nearly 40 hours in interviews with the FBI and the Internal Revenue Service to 
aid ongoing investigations, according to his attorney, Anthony Glassman. 
"I think we have someone who has committed, without question, a major financial 
offense but who has done everything conceivable to rectify the circumstances," 
Glassman said. "His testimony really was a road map to and through the finances 
of this company." 
Morze has said that top ZZZZ Best officials were planning to carry on the fraud 
only long enough to complete a $40-million acquisition of a new chain of 
carpet-cleaning companies. They hoped the deal -- which never was completed -- 
would enable ZZZZ Best to pay off its debts and begin operating legitimately, 
he said. 
But Asperger rejected that notion. "I think his hope that the lies would stop 
was really more of a self-rationalization," the federal prosecutor said. "His 
hope that the fraud would be ended was, I think, a pipe dream." 
'Second-Tier' Defendant 
Tevrizian said he was sentencing Morze as a "second-tier" defendant, a man who 
was more culpable than others in the scheme but who was not as guilty as 
Minkow. The judge said he was also taking Morze's cooperation into account. 
"Yours was a youth where you were never handed anything. You had to work for 
it," he told Morze. "But people go for the home run all the time . . . (and) it 
only comes one step at a time." 
Morze, who pleaded guilty to three counts of stock fraud, bank fraud and income 
tax evasion, will be eligible for parole after serving 32 months of his 
sentence. 
Minkow, who was convicted by a federal court jury Dec. 19 on 57 fraud counts, 
is scheduled for sentencing Feb. 21. He faces a maximum sentence of 403 years 
in prison. 
