BONN JOLTED AS RIGHTISTS GAIN IN W. BERLIN VOTE 
The center-right government of West Berlin suffered a severe defeat in a 
city-state election Sunday that saw an unexpectedly strong showing by a 
far-right party known as the Republicans, which campaigned on an anti-foreigner 
platform. 
Voters gave governing Mayor Eberhard Diepgen's conservative Christian Democrats 
only 36.9% -- a slump of nearly 10 percentage points from the last election 
four years ago. It lost 22 seats in the outgoing 144-seat West Berlin 
legislature. 
The junior partner in the Berlin ruling coalition, the liberal Free Democrats, 
failed to gather the necessary minimum 5% and lost their 12 seats in the Berlin 
legislature. But the left-wing Alternative List, West Berlin's version of West 
Germany's Greens party, held on to its 15 seats in the legislature with 11.5% 
of the vote. 
It was not immediately clear Sunday night whether Mayor Diepgen could continue 
in office, although political observers speculated that he might form a 
so-called grand coalition with the opposition Social Democratic Party, which 
polled 38%. 
The results shook the Christian Democrats in the capital of Bonn, and West 
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said late Sunday that it was a "heavy election 
defeat." 
The big surprise, and one that worried many West German political observers, is 
the newly won power of the Republicans -- an extremist group that has a 
national membership of about 7,000. The national chairman is Franz Schoenhuber, 
a former officer in Adolf Hitler's elite SS troops, who had to resign a post 
with Bavarian radio when he wrote a book glorifying his Nazi past. The party 
leader in West Berlin is Bernhard Andres, a 37-year-old policeman. 
"Today the Germans have shown again the need for a democratically-purified 
patriotism," Schoenhuber said on West German television after the returns were 
in. 
His party polled 8.5% of the vote, well over the 5% needed for representation 
in the legislature, and was awarded 11 seats. 
It was the first time that the far-right Republicans, founded in 1983 in 
Bavaria, had reached the 5% mark and gained representation in a state election. 
West Berlin, like Hamburg and Bremen, has the status of a state, but it is not 
a fully integrated part of West Germany as a result of post-World War II 
agreements. 
The Republicans were originally created as a far-right alternative to the 
conservative Christian Social Union, the Bavarian sister party of the national 
Christian Democrats. 
Failed in Other States 
Since then, they have run in other West German state elections but failed to 
poll the necessary 5% for representation in the legislatures. 
The coalition of Christian Democrats and Free Democrats had governed West 
Berlin since 1983, and Diepgen had been expected to lead the two parties to 
another victory Sunday. 
Diepgen, 47, said the results were a "real surprise" and called the 
Republicans' showing "catastrophe." 
West Berlin Social Democratic leader Walter Momper said the success of the 
Republicans will damage West Berlin's international image. 
When Republican party leaders arrived at Berlin City Hall for postelection 
statements Sunday night, they were called "Nazis" by protesters. 
Law and Order 
Like France's far-right party, the Republicans campaigned for law and order and 
against drug abuse and foreign workers. 
West Berlin has 150,000 Turkish residents, the largest such community outside 
Turkey, who make up about 10% of the city's population. 
Strong Republican support came from West Berlin working class districts, 
political analysts said, where unemployment is high and competition for jobs 
stiff. 
The election was viewed as a setback to the political fortunes of Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats. 
In elections held in eight states since national balloting returned Kohl to 
office two years ago, the Christian Democrats have lost support in six. 
