FEDERAL PANEL FAVORS EARLY USE OF AIDS DRUG 
A federal advisory panel on Tuesday recommended expanding the approved uses of 
the antiviral drug AZT to include AIDS patients in the early stages of the 
disease as well as those who are infected with the AIDS virus but have not yet 
developed outward symptoms. 
In the case of the latter group, the panel said, the drug should be 
administered only to infected patients whose level of critical T4 cells has 
dropped below 500 per cubic millimeter of blood, providing evidence of damage 
to their immune systems. 
The normal range for T4 cells, the primary targets of the human 
immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, is 800 to 1,200 per cubic millimeter. 
The unanimous recommendations of the Food and Drug Administration's antiviral 
drugs advisory committee are not binding on the agency, but it traditionally 
wields considerable influence in FDA decision-making. The agency is expected to 
go along with the suggestions. 
AZT, also known as zidovudene, currently is approved only for patients with 
fully developed AIDS or advanced AIDS-related complex. 
"Unless we intervene early . . . we are not going to accomplish the true 
therapeutic goals for this disease," said Dr. Richard J. Whitley, a consultant 
to the panel and chairman of the independent scientific board monitoring the 
AZT studies. 
"If we hold out a decision . . . we potentially could be doing a disservice to 
individuals" who could benefit from the early administration of AZT, he said. 
The panel raised some concerns about the potential for HIV to develop a 
resistance to the drug, a phenomenon already seen in patients with fully 
developed AIDS. In addition, recently released results of animal studies have 
shown that AZT can cause cancer. 
Despite these reservations, the panel agreed that the potential benefits of 
taking the drug at an earlier stage appear to far outweigh the risks. But they 
called for additional research to evaluate the long-term effects of the drug, 
which are unknown. 
"It looks as if the effectiveness of AZT in the earlier stages of disease has 
been demonstrated," said Dr. Alvin Novick, a professor of biology at Yale 
University and a member of the panel. "It is important to recognize this 
officially to inform physicians and patients across the country." 
Regarding the concerns about developing a resistant virus, Novick said he 
thought it "unthinkable to withhold therapy from today's patients out of fear 
that we will be reducing the effectiveness of therapy 10 years from now. 
"Not that I'm not respectful of patients 10 years from now -- they're just as 
precious -- but I believe we'll have alternative therapies for them that we 
don't have for the current patients of today," he said. 
The committee action was unusual because it was taken before studies on 
affected patients have been published in a medical journal. However, the 
results of the studies of AZT on two patient groups were so compelling that the 
studies were stopped for most of the participants so that those in the 
comparison groups, which had been taking a medically worthless placebo, could 
instead receive AZT. 
As a result, the FDA has been under increased pressure in recent months to 
formally expand the drug's approved uses for the general public. 
The decision, if enacted by the FDA, almost certainly will be welcomed by many 
physicians and AIDS advocacy groups, who have been pushing for such a change 
since the studies were announced with considerable fanfare last summer by 
federal health officials. 
Although physicians are free to prescribe a drug any way they see fit once it 
has been approved for marketing, many have been reluctant to administer AZT for 
unapproved uses before the study data is available. In addition, many insurers 
will not pay for the drug unless it is prescribed for a use approved by the 
FDA. 
In the months following announcement of the study results, many AIDS activists 
charged that thousands of patients around the country were being hurt, either 
because their doctors were giving them too much AZT, or in the case of infected 
patients without symptoms, no AZT at all. 
Offering the first real evidence that AZT benefits patients with the beginning 
symptoms of infection, health officials announced last Aug. 3 that a study 
showed AZT "significantly" slows the progression of disease in patients with 
early AIDS-related complex, a finding they estimated could benefit 95,000 to 
200,000 people. 
Two weeks later, the government announced that the drug had been shown to delay 
the onset of the disease in infected individuals with T4-cell counts of less 
than 500. The study also tested AZT on infected individuals with more than 500 
T4 cells, but the information was inconclusive and the research on that group 
is continuing. 
The studies also showed that AZT was tolerated better by patients who received 
it early. Many individuals with fully developed AIDS have experienced toxic 
side effects from AZT. 
If the FDA follows the panel recommendations, the decision could have an impact 
on about 600,000 of the estimated 1 million or more infected individuals in 
this country, federal health officials said. 
