FOOTLOOSE: LOCARNO OFFERS ITALIAN FLAVOR IN A SWISS VILLAGE 
With the blue waters of Lago Maggiore lapping at its palm-fringed lake front, a 
Mediterranean climate and the harmony of Italy's lilting language and hearty 
food, this Swiss town wears the style of its Latin neighbor. 
In Switzerland's southernmost canton of Ticano adjacent to Italy, Locarno also 
has a southern Mediterranean heritage. It was a flourishing town during Roman 
times and became even more prosperous in the Middle Ages with the arrival of 
the Lombard families. Locarno finally fell to Swiss armies in the 16th Century. 
Homes and buildings in the narrow streets of the Old Town were built in the 
16th and 17th centuries, and their pastel hues and tile roofs resemble the 
architectural style found farther south on the shores of Italy's lake region. 
That, combined with the 650 types of camellias the city boasts, creates a town 
that looks more Italian than Swiss. 
From the center of Locarno there's a cog-wheel train up to the Madonna del 
Sasso basilica. It then climbs to the Cardada Alp, which offers Alpine views, 
brisk mountain air and winter skiing. 
Getting here: Take Swissair's recently begun nonstop flight to Zurich. 
American, Pan Am and TWA also will get you here with stops. Then use a Swiss 
Pass (see below) for a four-hour train ride through the heart of Switzerland to 
Locarno. Alitalia flies nonstop to Milan, which is less than two hours by car 
or train from Locarno. 
How long/how much? While a full day will let you see most of the town, Locarno 
is an excellent base for a week of visiting Lugano, Ascona and other towns of 
Ticino and the Italo-Swiss lake region. Lodging costs are moderate for 
Switzerland, dining the same. 
A few fast facts: The Swiss franc recently sold at 1.65 to the dollar, making 
it worth about 60 cents. Locarno claims to be the sunniest town in Switzerland, 
with an average yearly temperature of 60 degrees. May/June and 
September/October are the best months for a visit, because European visitors 
create crowds during midsummer. 
Getting settled in: Garni Fiorentina (Via St. Antonio 10; $72 B&amp;B double 
high season, $66 low) is dead center of Old Town in a quiet pedestrian zone. As 
the French word garni implies, Fiorentina serves breakfast only, but a 
restaurant downstairs offers other meals. 
This is a little place set above a flowery patio, with contemporary bedrooms 
that use old and new fabrics imaginatively in the decor. 
Hotel Zurigo (lake front, in town; $66 to $107 B&amp;B double, seasonal) has a 
small, cluttered lobby, but don't let that put you off. There's a good terrace 
restaurant and sidewalk cafe facing the lake, plus lake front bedrooms with 
balconies. It's near the train station, funicular, pier and shopping. 
Rosa Seegarten (Viale Verbano 25; $70-$103 B&amp;B double) also has a lake 
front terrace restaurant covered with a lush grape arbor and ringed with 
flowers and tropical plants. Most bedrooms facing the promenade and lake have 
small balconies with geranium boxes. There's also a tiny grotto-like bar, and 
breakfast is a generous buffet. Rosa Seegarten is also central. 
Regional food and drink: Locarno's food has all the zest and exuberance of a 
Neapolitan tenor. There's plenty of pasta, hearty sauces, great veal and lots 
of northern Italy's polenta. 
Trout from the lake and mountain streams, plus egli (a lake fish), are 
plentiful, as is the local chestnut bread and minestrone ticinese. 
Good dining: Trattoria Marcacci (Via Marcacci 9) is in the heart of Old Town in 
a 450-year-old building. Dining is beneath rustic beamed ceilings inside or on 
a sunny patio. Try crostini porcini (toasted bread topped with wild mushrooms), 
gamberoni (prawns) or the risotto porcini (rice with mushrooms). What Marcacci 
lacks in decor it makes up for in friendliness and good food. 
Trattoria da Luigi (Via F. Balli 3) has a marvelous antipasti table within its 
skylighted indoor room. Seven fresh pastas are served daily and it offers a 
full menu of interesting Italian dishes. 
It's near the main piazza. Dining is on an outside terrace, beginning always 
with crostini "on the house." Owners Jeanette and Luigi Belfiore serve a superb 
ravioloni di magro al burro e salvia (thin ravioli with butter and fresh sage). 
Ristorante la Fiorentina (Via San Antonio 10) has perhaps the finest ambience 
in town, with a vaulted dining room, a patio with fountain and flowers and 
views of the mountains behind the town and lake. 
There's a daily menu of Italian specialties (all you can eat) in the $11 range, 
another for $7.50. Both give you pasta, salad and such main courses as veal 
scaloppina di tacchino with rosemary. Fiorentina is a real bargain, and the 
food is excellent. 
Going first-class: Grand Hotel Locarno (Via Sempione 7; $96-$120 B&amp;B 
double, low season, $114-$138 high) dates from 1876 and has the soaring 
ceilings, chandeliers, neo-classic columns and faint aura of faded elegance 
that characterize a grand dame of that era. The dining room has a gigantic 
fireplace, baroque ceiling painted with a distinct ecclesiastic feel to it and 
superb food. The shrimp bisque with cognac, panache of gnocchi tessinoise and 
saddle of veal with mushroom sauce were all outstanding. 
There's also a bar, gardens, pool and tennis courts. Bedrooms are huge. 
On your own: After strolling the lake front, take the cog train up to the 
15th-Century Madonna del Sasso church, then continue to Cardada Alp for a walk 
over to the rustic Ristorante Colmanicchio for lunch or a coffee on the terrace 
while you view the town and lake below. 
Back in town, visit the 14th-Century Visconti Castle that houses the town's 
Archeological Museum with Roman-era artifacts and later frescoes. Nearby is 
Casa Rusca, a patrician home converted into an attractive modern-art gallery. 
From Modonna del Sasso, a funicular and chairlift takes you to the crest of 
Cimetta at 5,500 feet where there is a winter Swiss Ski School, restaurant and 
lodging. 
Be sure to visit the 17th-Century nobleman's home in town with its beautiful 
garden and chapel, the last built so that the then-Pope would issue a 
dispensation for the owner to marry his first cousin. 
For more information: Call the Swiss National Tourist Office at (415) 362-2260, 
or write 260 Stockton St., San Francisco 94108 for brochures on Locarno and 
Ticino with hotel listings, a map of Switzerland and information, plus costs 
for the Swiss Pass, good on most all types of transportation within the 
country. Ask for the Locarno package. 
