USING THE CLINICAL APPROACH; 
HEALTH: FRED HOSILLOS' FITNESS PROGRAM STRESS FUN ON THE RUN. 
As a health educator at the Vallejo Drive Adventist Church in Glendale, Fred 
Hosillos is in charge of several activities -- most of which are identifiable 
from the T-shirts he wears. 
Walking Clinic, Bicycle Clinic, Backpacking Clinic are emblazoned on the shirts 
Hosillos presents to members of the exercise groups he has founded since 
arriving in Glendale from the Philippines in 1984. 
The aforementioned programs are offshoots of the successful Adventist Marathon 
Clinic, which will begin its seventh year in March. 
Open to people of all ages and religions, the Marathon Clinic is designed to 
improve health and self-esteem, especially in those that have only run away 
from exercise before. 
"A fitness program does not have to be intimidating," Hosillos said. "You don't 
have to be a track star to accomplish athletic goals in life." 
Hosillos, 49, has helped turn hundreds of couch potatoes into avid exercisers 
since he began a running program in 1982 in his hometown of Iloilo City in the 
Philippines. Invited by the Southern California Conference of the Seventh-day 
Adventist Church to import his program to Glendale in 1984, Hosillos has since 
helped launch marathon clinics in the South Bay and the San Fernando and San 
Gabriel valleys. In March, the program will expand to Westchester to service 
West Los Angeles. 
Alumni include a 71-year old woman who completed a 15-kilometer race in 1984, 
but the majority of participants are between 20 and 50 years of age. Some join 
to lose weight or as a way to start exercising regularly. Others have been 
referred by doctors to help channel stress. 
The running program itself was originally developed by John O. Wagner -- a 
Honolulu cardiologist who devised it 16 years ago as a cardiac rehabilitation 
program. 
The 12-week clinic, which costs $30, includes a once-a-week Sunday meeting at 
Glendale High or Verdugo Park, where a discussion of health-related topics 
precedes a group run. 
Each clinic is broken into beginner, intermediate and advanced groups. 
Beginners start by jogging 30 minutes three times a week at a 15-minute-a-mile 
pace. 
Participants must have medical clearance and, in some cases, undergo treadmill 
tests before they begin. But Hosillos says anyone who follows the program 
sensibly will be able to traverse nine miles by the end of the first four 
months. Participants who want to go longer distances stay on for 36 weeks. 
Rather than focusing on competition, Hosillos stresses the social aspects of 
exercise. If you can't hold a conversation while you're running, you're going 
too fast. The emphasis is on finishing, not winning. 
For the past six years, the group has concluded the program with a pilgrimage 
to Hawaii to participate in the Honolulu Marathon. Last month, 26 participants 
from the clinic walked, ran or did a combination of both to finish the 
26.2-mile course. 
"Calling it a marathon clinic is a misnomer and probably scares a lot of people 
away even though many people do, in fact, do the marathon," clinic participant 
Dan Engel of Glendale said. "The goal is to impact your life style and 
introduce a certain aspect of healthy activity into it." 
That's all Engel, 36, was looking to achieve when he joined in 1987. 
"I was definitely a couch potato-type person," he said. "I was somewhat 
overweight and definitely sedentary." 
When he began, Engel's goal was to finish a 10-kilometer race by the end of 12 
weeks. It took him just a month to achieve that, so he shot for a 
half-marathon. 
He conquered that distance in 12 weeks and decided to stay on for the marathon, 
which he also completed. 
Since then, Engel has run five more marathons, including two in Los Angeles and 
another in Portland, Ore. He covered the course there in a personal-best four 
hours, eight minutes. 
"It's an easy program that does not compel a person to look at performance or 
put himself in with a bunch of jocks," Engel said of the Marathon Clinic. 
"You're just in with a bunch of sedentary folks like yourself. 
"There's a certain camaraderie that exists in the group and it's the thing that 
made it very workable. There's no pressure." 
Hosillos' plans for the clinic include a trip to the Singapore Marathon in 1991 
and to the Montreal Marathon in 1992. 
Despite a 40% to 70% dropout rate -- typical, Hosillos said, of all exercise 
programs -- the Marathon Clinic continues to grow. Last year, Hosillos started 
a program in Seattle and he has been approached to do the same in Canada. 
However, the formula for success remains the same wherever runners venture. 
"If they stick with it and take our advice about what to eat and drink and how 
to space their program with periods of relaxation there is no doubt they will 
achieve their goal," Hosillos said. "We don't care whether they walk it or run 
it, they will attain their stated goal." 
