MUSIC REVIEW; 
NO SHOCKS IN 'CULTURE SHOCK!' 
There was only one culture and absolutely no shock in "Culture Shock!" Sunday 
afternoon at the Japan America Theatre. 
Extravagantly billed as "a fusion of music and dance idioms from Indo-Hispanic 
and Asian cultures," this was a program that used native instruments to garnish 
lightweight suites resolutely in the European classical tradition. 
Though she led a chamber ensemble bristling with exotic winds and percussion, 
composer-conductor Elisabeth Waldo inevitably reduced such "ethnic" elements to 
teasers or dabs of local color in her sweetly melodic evocations of the Spanish 
Conquistadors, Central American Maya, Peruvian Incas, Chinese Silk Route and 
California Indians. 
Far from a fusion of idioms, or even multicultural expression, this approach 
represented a throwback to the court entertainments and opera-ballets that 
titillated Europe from the 16th to 18th centuries with stylized suggestions of 
faraway places. Rameau's "Les Indes Galantes" is probably the most famous -- 
and, like Waldo's program on Sunday, the 1736 version included depictions of 
Incas and North American aboriginals. 
Of course, Waldo relied more than Rameau on folk sonorities but she proved no 
less Eurocentric in style or outlook. Indeed, she celebrated the forced 
Christianization of Mexico as if this bloody process of enslavement had been 
merely a matter of gentle padres winning hearts. Ai, yai yai. 
Throughout, Waldo's resourceful orchestrations achieved maximum variety and 
camouflaged the lack of development in any of this music. Her song-lyrics, 
however, were deadly, though their stale ideas and ghastly rhymes did give them 
an archaic, foreign flavor -- as if they'd been translated into English a 
century ago. Paul Morse delivered every cliche solemnly. 
Four choreographers contributed diversionary dances to the program -- many of 
them ethnographically dubious and appallingly cutesie-poo. Pei Ming Tang, 
however, brought great charm and surety to the Chinese numbers. LEWIS SEGAL 
