POP BEAT: ORANGE COUNTY UNKNOWNS GET TOGETHER FOR CD; 
MUSIC: 10 OF THE 16 UNSIGNED ROCK AND POP PERFORMERS SHOWCASED ON THE 'CO-OP' 
RELEASE WILL APPEAR ON STAGE TONIGHT IN LONG BEACH. THEY REPRESENT WIDELY 
VARIED STYLES. 
It has been said that each rock or pop band has the talent to write at least 
one good song. It has also been said that, when it comes to doing business, 
it's a rare musician who has any talent at all. 
"CO-OP," a compact disc showcasing the work of 16 unsigned rock and pop 
performers -- most of them from Orange County -- pretty much bears out the 
first truism. Its main intent is to compensate for the second. 
Ten of the "CO-OP" performers will play tonight at Bogart's in Long Beach, in a 
special concert celebrating the disc's release. Musically, these acts have 
little in common. But their situation within the music business is the same: 
Each has no record contract and no certain means of getting the attention of 
record companies and radio programmers. 
The idea behind "CO-OP" is to improve each member's chances of getting a fair 
hearing by pooling resources. Usually, bands cast their hooks into the music 
industry's inhospitable ocean by sending unsolicited tapes to radio stations, 
record companies and music publications. Then they sit back and hope for a 
bite. "CO-OP," in essence, makes the bait bigger, shinier, more attractive, 
harder to ignore and casts it in a wider arc than most aspiring bands could 
manage individually. 
The CD, which is not available for purchase, is a well-packaged compilation in 
which each performer is represented by one or two songs. The album notes 
contain photos and thumbnail information on each act involved, as well as their 
address and phone number. Since October, "CO-OP" has been sent to about 500 
college radio stations (college radio being the only outlet remaining in the 
United States where grass-roots bands not signed to a major label can get a 
hearing). Major labels also received copies, and so have some music publishing 
companies (who listen with an ear for songwriting ability, rather than 
performance talent) and music writers. 
The force behind "CO-OP" is Exude, an Anaheim dance-rock band that has 
developed some business savvy during a 10-year career full of ups and downs, in 
which the band has confronted setbacks with scrappy persistence. 
In 1987, Exude was about to send copies of a self-produced album, "Play With 
the Boys," to radio stations around the country. Then it got a bright idea: Why 
not split the mailing costs with other unsigned bands looking to reach the same 
outlets? The first CO-OP project was simple enough -- packages went out 
containing Exude's album, as well as LPs by four other unsigned bands willing 
to share the cost. 
According to Exude's singer, Frank Rogala, that first CO-OP mailing had its 
problems. Some of the bands packaged their releases haphazardly, leaving out 
such basic information as a contact phone number. 
Rogala said Exude got the idea for a cooperative CD in 1988, after it achieved 
its career high-water mark to date: inclusion on a Musician magazine CD 
compilation of the best unsigned bands in the country, as determined by such 
judges as Elvis Costello, Mark Knopfler, T-Bone Burnett and Mitchell Froom, who 
were commissioned by the magazine. 
Starting in spring, 1989, Exude began advertising for interested unsigned bands 
to join it in another "CO-OP" release, this time with the packaging carefully 
thought out and some extra promotional push by the Jensen Crew, a public 
relations firm that has worked with Exude in recent years. 
The cost of producing and mailing the CD was about $7,000, Rogala said. Each 
band paid $285 per song. When expenses overshot the original $5,000 budget, 
Exude kicked in an extra $2,000 to see the project through to completion, 
Rogala said. (Exude also enclosed a new full-length CD album of its own, 
"Testosterone Tapdance," with the "CO-OP" mailing.) 
Rogala said radio stations have been returning cards enclosed with the "CO-OP" 
CD, indicating that it has been getting some college airplay. The project has 
also gained Exude a nibble from one major label that was interested in its own 
entry on the "CO-OP" disc, "Get Your Meat." 
For others represented on the disc, at the very least "CO-OP" has provided a 
classy way to approach the record and radio industry. 
"I've always been very weak at that," said Beth Fitchet, whose song, "Repay," 
is the finest of the 19 tracks on the disc. Fitchet and her husband, Steve 
Wood, are both alumni of Honk, an Orange County band that had a major label 
recording career in the 1970s. 
"I've always concentrated on playing my music, and I'm terrible at marketing," 
Fitchet said. "Both Steve and I really don't know how to do that, and this was 
an opportunity to pay a little money and have somebody else be our promoter for 
us. Maybe somebody will perk up their ears and like it." 
The styles on "CO-OP" range from the adult-pop of Fitchet and Wood to pacifist 
protest rock from Salt, a Los Angeles band, to the snappy, sardonic punk-pop of 
Mission Viejo's Poodles Must Die. 
The show tonight at Bogart's offers a chance to hear many of the songs and 
performers from the album. In order of appearance, Carol Martini, Salt, George 
Lawton, Ted Waterhouse, The Girls (Fitchet's vocal group), John Walker and 
X-Factor will play short sets, followed by longer sets from Exude, the 
Tearjerkers and Them Lonesome Tracks. 
The idea, Rogala said, is to lend the "CO-OP" project an enjoyable, public 
dimension, instead of having it remain strictly a business proposition directed 
at radio and the music industry. "I want to have something a little more 
casual, a little more fun," he said. "If the industry people we've invited want 
to come, fine. But this is kind of a celebration." 
CO-OP's CD release party takes place tonight at 8:30 at Bogart's, 6288 E. 
Pacific Coast Highway, Long Beach, in the Marina Pacifica Mall. Tickets: $5. 
Information: (213) 594-8975. 
SEND HIM FORGET-ME-NOTS: James Harman had a couple of unusual experiences last 
Friday at the Belly Up in Solana Beach -- one enjoyable, one not so pleasant. 
The not-so-pleasant moment came before the show, when Harman realized that, for 
the first time in 30 years of playing the blues, he had showed up for a gig 
without bringing his harmonica and the special 1940s-vintage microphone he uses 
on stage. 
"Whenever I start down the driveway (on the way to a show), I stop, just to 
make sure my harp's there," Harman said Tuesday. 
But this time, hurrying out of his house on the way to some pre-concert 
business meetings, "I left it covered up with paper work," he said. "Thirty 
years, and it finally happened." 
Harman got through the show with borrowed equipment, then resolved to operate 
from now on with two sets of harmonicas and microphones -- one to keep at home, 
and another to keep in his band's equipment truck, in case he should forget 
again. 
On a more pleasant note, Harman and Walter Trout, two of the finest blues-rock 
talents in Orange County, marked a reconciliation at the Belly Up after many 
years of awkward, stand-offish relations. Trout's band opened for the James 
Harman Band, the first time the two players had shared a stage since some 
late-'70s jam sessions at a small club in Costa Mesa. 
Trout recalled Tuesday that he relocated from New Jersey to Orange County in 
1973 with the specific aim of overwhelming Harman with his guitar ability and 
winning a spot in the Icehouse Blues Band, Harman's band at the time. But 
Harman was not impressed by Trout's prolific, fast-flurrying style. Trout did 
not suffer the rejection lightly. 
"We went through some times where we were sort of like enemies -- there was bad 
blood between us," Trout said. 
Although Harman and Trout both live in Huntington Beach, they had not been in 
contact for more than 10 years. But a few weeks ago, Trout said, Harman called 
him up to congratulate him on the release of his first album, "Life in the 
Jungle." 
"I was really moved" by Harman's kind words, Trout said. "I thought, 'This is 
great, we can re-establish our friendship.' I've always had nothing but respect 
for the guy. I've known him a long time, and that bad blood between us was 
childish. It's good to be his friend again." 
Trout said that his album, released only in Scandinavia, has done well in 
Europe but that U.S. labels have been cool toward it because of a stylistic mix 
that veers among traditional blues, pop-flavored ballads and rock 'n' roll. 
"The blues purist labels are staying away from it (because of the rock songs), 
and the other labels are staying away from it because there are blues on it," 
Trout said. "It's like Catch-22." 
Trout's solution will be to develop a U.S. following with live shows. Next 
month he'll play shows in New Orleans and along the East Coast, his first U.S. 
tour since he left John Mayall's Bluesbreakers in spring, 1989. Then Trout will 
head to Europe for further touring. 
Opening Saturday at the Coach House for his old boss, Mayall, Trout showed in a 
passionate, fiercely energetic set that he and his band should have no problem 
winning an audience on the road. 
The Walter Trout Band will play at its home club, Perq's in Huntington Beach, 
on Sunday, with weekend stands coming up at Perq's Jan. 25-28 and Feb. 1-4 
before it leaves on tour. 
The James Harman Band will headline Jan. 27 at the Coach House in San Juan 
Capistrano. 
ODD COUPLE: Mark Feb. 9 and 10 on your calendar if you like interesting musical 
contrasts. Headlining at the Coach House on the 9th and at Bogart's on the 10th 
is Dick Dale, the surf guitar king who recently reverted to playing in a raw, 
power-trio format after years of performing with horn-driven show bands. 
Dale's trio approach was nothing less than exhilarating in his recent 
appearance at the Orange County Music for the Needy benefit. 
Opening both nights will be Jonathan Richman, a one-of-a-kind solo performer 
whose songs and showmanship are full of gentle whimsy. Richman asked to be 
included on the bills with Dale, according to Coach House booking agent Ken 
Phebus. 
In a recent song called "Fender Stratocaster," Richman sings the praises of the 
very instrument that Dale helped popularize during the surf rock craze of the 
early 1960s -- so there are some grounds for mutuality here. What would 
Richman's classic Bostonian rock rave-up, "Roadrunner," sound like with Dale 
drenching it in reverberating waves of Southern California surf guitar? It 
would sure be fun to find out. 
