TROOP CALL-UP LEAVES ETHNIC RUSSIANS BITTER 
"My Son Was Not Born to Die in Azerbaijan!" 
The hand-lettered sign, held up by a Russian mother at a weekend rally in 
Moscow, demanded the withdrawal of the troops sent to Azerbaijan and Armenia to 
prevent a potential civil war between the two southern Soviet republics. 
"If they want to fight, why is it our responsibility to stop them?" Natalya 
Kuznetsov declared, articulating the surprising and still growing backlash here 
against the deployment of troops, even in a peacekeeping role. "Today, my son 
Misha is in Azerbaijan. Who sent him there, and why? 
"Enough Russian blood has been spilled by this government in places like 
Afghanistan. None need be spilled in Azerbaijan or Armenia." 
Even as the Soviet army tightens its control on Azerbaijan after fighting its 
way into the republic's capital of Baku a week ago, strong sentiments are 
developing, particularly among ethnic Russians, for pulling the troops out 
before they are trapped in a lengthy peacekeeping operation that already is 
threatened with guerrilla warfare. 
"This is a job for police officers, perhaps, not soldiers," a young army 
officer from an anti-establishment military group called Shield told the rally. 
"We will defend the motherland to the death -- that is our oath. But why are we 
fighting our own countrymen? How great was the danger that the army had to be 
deployed?" 
Troops were sent into Baku after a week of anti-Armenian violence, 
characterized as pogroms by the government, in which 72 people were killed. 
According to military commanders, 125 more people, including 27 soldiers and 
police officers, died in the week of fighting that followed. A number of other 
deaths, including those of two soldiers, were reported over the weekend. 
When the government dispatched more than 100,000 troops to Afghanistan a decade 
ago for what became the Soviet Union's longest war, only a few dissidents 
protested, and they were promptly punished. 
But the bitterness left from that 10-year war, the 15,000 Soviet lives that it 
claimed and the billions of dollars that it cost have made it difficult to use 
the army, even inside the Soviet Union, in an unpopular cause. That development 
reflects the many fundamental political changes that are taking place here. 
"Why should Russian lads die for these (no-goods)?" a speaker from Pamyat, an 
ultra-nationalistic group, asked at the rally. The speaker employed a vulgar 
and highly chauvinistic term that many Russians use for people from Armenia and 
Azerbaijan, the neighboring southern republic of Georgia and Soviet Central 
Asia. 
"These places are not worth Russian lives. Let them fight each other, let them 
kill, let them die, but get our lads out of it." 
Although Pamyat is regarded by most Soviet observers as extremist in many of 
its positions, it draws on an upsurge of Russian nationalism. That trend has 
been stimulated, in part, by the strongly anti-Soviet, anti-Russian movements 
in many of the Soviet Union's constituent republics -- and by the visceral but 
growing feeling that Russia might be better off without those rebellious 
regions. 
The government's assertion that militant Azerbaijani nationalists, led by the 
Azerbaijani Popular Front, were about to take over Baku and end Soviet rule 
there is widely dismissed, even in the Soviet news media. 
"Sons and parents ask themselves: What kind of mission do the soldiers fulfill, 
and for whose miscalculations and irresponsibility will they have to pay with 
their own blood?" the liberal news magazine New Times commented Sunday. 
"Who issued the order?" the newspaper Workers' Tribune asked in a highly 
critical account, also published Sunday, of how army reservists were mobilized 
in three military districts in southern Russia two weeks ago. Russia is the 
largest republic in the Soviet Union. 
Noting that the military ordered only Slavs -- Russians, Ukrainians and 
Byelorussians -- to be called up, apparently to ensure reliability in the 
politically volatile situation in Armenia and Azerbaijan, the paper said this 
provoked days of protest demonstrations, mostly by mothers and wives, in the 
cities of Krasnodar and Stavropol. 
Why, the women demanded, were their sons and husbands called upon and not those 
from other nationalities? Why were any reservists needed? Were there not enough 
regular troops and internal security forces in the country? And why were they 
rounded up in the dead of the night and put on planes for Azerbaijan without 
any explanation, not even the disclosure of their destination? The number of 
those called up is still undisclosed. 
Military authorities began the mobilization secretly, "practically taking away 
people by force," according to the independent news bulletin Glasnost. But 
angry mothers and wives ran after the mobilization units, throwing themselves 
in front of their trucks and then laying siege to local military headquarters. 
Women's committees were quickly established to organize more protests, 
including mass demonstrations and warning strikes, and this brought 
cancellation of the call-up, but only after thousands of the reservists were 
already deployed in Azerbaijan. 
Even local Communist Party officials, few of whom were informed of the move, 
are expressing their opposition to the mobilization of reservists and their 
deployment in Armenia and Azerbaijan. 
Igor K. Polozkov, the party first secretary in Krasnodar, told the newspaper 
Komsomolskaya Pravda that the local reaction was so negative, a virtual revolt, 
that it has threatened the traditionally strong support that the party and 
government have there. 
"The reaction could not have been different," Polozkov said, criticizing the 
order's implementation, particularly the selective call-up of only Slavs and 
the suddenness with which it was carried out. "Times have changed, and people 
are totally different now." 
In its defense, the military has explained that, to enforce a state of 
emergency in Baku, a city of nearly 2 million people, at least 40,000 troops 
would be needed initially and that more would be required to separate the 
heavily armed Armenian and Azerbaijani militias elsewhere in the region. 
Only 22,000 internal security troops were immediately available, however, and 
officials have contended that regular soldiers could not be quickly deployed 
without pulling them out of front-line positions. 
But officers belonging to Shield, which seeks democratization of the Soviet 
armed forces and the application of "new political thinking" there, said the 
real reason appeared to be the desire of top commanders for all-Slavic units to 
go into Baku. Reserve units, which are constituted on a territorial basis, are 
often homogenous while regular units are made up of soldiers from dozens of 
different ethnic backgrounds. 
