THE SURRENDER OF NORIEGA; 
TEXT OF PRESIDENT'S STATEMENT ON NORIEGA 
The following is a text of President Bush's statement Wednesday night 
announcing that deposed Panamanian dictator Manuel A. Noriega has surrendered 
to U.S. authorities: 
 On Wednesday, Dec. 20, I ordered U.S. troops to Panama with four objectives: 
safeguard the lives of American citizens, help restore democracy, protect the 
integrity of the Panama Canal Treaties and bring Gen. Manuel Noriega to 
justice. 
All of these objectives have now been achieved. 
At about 8:50 this evening, Gen. Noriega turned himself in to U.S. authorities 
in Panama with the full knowledge of the Panamanian government. He was taken to 
Howard Air Force Base in Panama, where he was arrested by DEA. 
A U.S. Air Force C-130 is now transporting Gen. Noriega to Homestead Air Force 
Base, Florida. He will be arraigned in the U.S. District Court in Miami on 
charges stemming from his previous indictment for drug trafficking. I want to 
thank the Vatican and the papal nuncio in Panama for their evenhanded, 
statesmanlike assistance in recent days. 
The United States is committed to providing Gen. Noriega a fair trial. 
Nevertheless, his apprehension and return to the United States will send a 
clear signal that the United States is serious in its determination that those 
charged with promoting the distribution of drugs cannot escape the scrutiny of 
justice. 
The return of Gen. Noriega marks a significant milestone in Operation Just 
Cause. The U.S. used its resources in a manner consistent with political, 
diplomatic and moral principles. 
The first U.S. combat troops have already been withdrawn from Panama. Others 
will follow as quickly as the local situation will permit. We are now engaged 
in the final stages of a process that includes the economic and political 
revitalization of this important friend and neighbor, Panama. 
An economic team under the direction of Deputy Secretary of State Eagleburger 
and Deputy Secretary of Treasury Robson is just returning from Panama. A team 
of experts has remained on hand there to assess the full range of needs. 
We will continue to extend to the Panamanian people our support and assistance 
in the days ahead. Panamanians and Americans both have sacrificed much to 
restore democracy to Panama. The armed forces of the United States have 
performed their mission courageously and effectively. And I again want to 
express my gratitude and appreciation to all of them. 
And I want to express the special thanks of our nation to those servicemen who 
were wounded and to the families of those who gave their lives. Their sacrifice 
has been a noble cause that will never be forgotten. A free and prosperous 
Panama will be an enduring tribute. Thank you all very very much. 
