YOU CAN HELP!: PRESSING FOR AN OLD-STYLE SQUEEZER 
Because she has rheumatoid arthritis, Marilyn Stein of Los Angeles would like 
to get an old-fashioned aluminum citrus squeezer with a lever-like handle, 
which requires little force to press the fruit. Can you get Stein out of this 
tight squeeze, or will she be unable to handle the situation until the juices 
start flowing again in her kitchen? 
Shawn Wilson of Pasadena is looking for a way to restore the non-stick surface 
to Silverstone pans and wonders if a spray or liquid is on the market for that 
purpose. Can you make sure that this request pans out soon? 
Martina Flores of Pomona has been hunting around for old-fashioned photo albums 
with opaque pages to which you affix the pictures with plastic corners. Can you 
help corner the market for Flores, or will there be no way she can get back 
into the picture without taking a page from another book? 
Reader-to-Reader Help Line: For a friend's 4-year-old daughter, Harriet at 
(213) 376-9822 would like to find a Rainbow Brite unicorn, which isn't made 
anymore; the little girl was so sure Santa would find one for her. Please help 
with this not-so-corny request, so Harriet won't have to search somewhere over 
the rainbow. . . . Dorothy at (619) 589-8539 needs the 46-ounce carafe for a 
Ronson Foodmatic blender; that model, with the detachable carafe, is no longer 
being made. Please restore a semblends of harmony in Dorothy's kitchen and 
contact her; she'll even pay for the phone call and all expenses in this 
sblendid endeavor. . . . Two weeks ago, when we reported that Norm at (818) 
705-4277 needed a video unit (preferably a Sony) that records and plays Beta, 
we made a slight mistake. We neglected to stipulate that he was talking about a 
Beta 1 unit, which is no longer in production. So please make this your No. 1 
priority and assure Norm that he's no longer off the record. 
Note: The Reader-to-Reader Help Line is only for one-time items or for products 
no longer available in stores. And you must give us written permission to 
publish your telephone number, so that others may contact you directly. 
Georgeanne Brunner, who was looking for a Broxodent toothbrush, can stop 
gnashing her teeth. (And so can Betty Freedman of Los Angeles, who was looking 
for the same item.) Betts Waite of Ventura says she recently bought a Broxodent 
set at Osco for about $60. Richard Hughes of Los Angeles says they are 
available at the Rexall Drug Store on La Cienega and Beverly boulevards. Hedy 
Gourarie of Studio City bought her Broxodents from the Fedco store in Van Nuys. 
And if all of these give anyone the brushoff, Marjorie Hammond of La Crescenta, 
Lee Bailey of Bonita and Don Yinger of Escondido suggest E. R. Squibb &amp; 
Sons, Somerset Labs, 700 W. Michigan Blvd., Michigan City, Ind. 46360. 
