MAN FIGHTS THEFTS OF CHINESE SIGN 
When Caesar Wu picked a Chinese name for his fledgling real estate company in 
San Marino, he settled on two Chinese characters that mean "great prosperity." 
That was exactly what he expected when he opened a branch of his business in 
November on Huntington Drive. 
But what he got was great trouble and misery. 
Wu's efforts to mount two one-foot-high blue plastic Chinese characters on his 
building have sparked complaints from some longtime residents. 
Although use of the characters above the company's English sign is legal under 
a city ordinance requiring English on 80% of a sign, dozens of people called 
City Hall to complain. 
Stolen 5 Times 
And in the past two months, the characters have been stolen five times. They 
have been replaced each time at a cost of $140 and then stolen again within a 
week. 
"I really don't know what to think," said Wu, a Monterey Park resident who came 
to this country 22 years ago from Taiwan. "But we're not going to give in. We 
have to let people know that we stand by our rights. You can't let people push 
you around." 
Mayor Paul Crowley has tried to calm the situation by writing a letter, 
published in the San Marino Tribune, explaining that Wu's sign is perfectly 
legal. 
Crowley said that the thefts have probably been committed by mischievous 
teen-agers and that the whole situation is a "tempest in a teapot." 
Festering Resentment 
But others in San Marino are not so sure. Police Cmdr. Paul Butler said some 
parts of the community hold a festering resentment against Chinese newcomers, 
who now make up 35% of the city's population. "It may be an isolated incident, 
but there are a lot of bigots out there," Butler said. 
The San Marino Tribune in an editorial has condemned the thefts as "blatant 
bigotry." 
Wu, who started his company last March in Alhambra, has plotted a moderate 
course, saying he is worried but still not sure that the thefts are motivated 
by racism. 
But if the situation continues and the city fails to catch the vandals, he 
said, he may call on the Chinese community to help, although he is not sure 
how. 
Wu's sign is not the first to use foreign words in San Marino. Just down the 
street, the Shanghai Palace restaurant has had a sign adorned with blazing red 
and yellow characters for 14 years. The East-West Federal Bank also has a sign 
that uses Chinese characters in its company logo. Both companies say they have 
never had any problems with their signs. 
Followed Suggestions 
Before Wu put his sign up, he tried to make it as unassuming as possible and 
agreed to every suggestion made by the city. 
He originally planned to put up 10 Chinese characters on the building above the 
company's English name, Golden Acres Realty Inc. 
But because of the city's prodding, he reduced the number to four characters 
and finally to two. 
"It can't get any smaller than that," Wu said, adding that he needs a Chinese 
sign because many of his clients are from Taiwan and Hong Kong and do not read 
English well. Wu said the business in San Marino has not been open long enough 
for him to determine how well it will do. 
Received Complaints 
With the city's blessing, Wu put the two characters on the building and 
immediately began receiving complaints. "They weren't threats, just 
objections," he said. 
The callers' main concern was that Wu's two characters were a sign that 
Huntington Drive was turning into a replica of Alhambra's bustling Valley 
Boulevard, one of the main Chinese commercial streets in the San Gabriel 
Valley. 
"Everybody immediately began equating those two characters with Valley 
Boulevard," Crowley said. "That's just ridiculous." 
Wu added: "Even the Chinese don't want Huntington to look like Valley. I don't 
want it to look like that." 
Within a few days, Wu's sign was stolen. The characters were mounted about 20 
feet above the sidewalk and had to be pried off by someone standing on the 
roof. 
Patrols Ineffective 
The police increased their patrols around the company, located at the busy 
intersection of Huntington Drive and Del Mar Avenue, but it didn't stop the 
sign from being stolen four more times. 
The last theft occurred just before the end of the year, and Wu plans to put up 
a replacement. He has no idea how long that sign will last, although he said 
with a touch of resignation that it may not survive much longer than the 
others. 
But he said that no matter how many more signs are stolen, he will continue to 
put up new signs as long as necessary. 
"If I took the sign down, I would have more Chinese people attacking me, 
saying, 'Are you giving in?' " he said. "That would really hurt my business." 
