DYMALLY DEFENDS HIS ROLE IN ANGOLAN OIL CONTRACT 
Rep. Mervyn M. Dymally's (D-Compton) office brushed off a published report 
Tuesday that he had interceded with the president of Marxist Angola to help a 
wealthy Los Angeles supporter nail down a $12-million contract for the sale and 
shipment of Angolan crude oil. 
Dymally, who has boasted of past attempts to help black-owned U.S. firms get 
business from African and Caribbean governments, was traveling in the Middle 
East and could not be reached for comment on his efforts to assist Richard G. 
Griffey, head of Solar Records in Hollywood. 
Griffey and his wife gave $1,750 to Dymally's most recent election campaign. 
Griffey also is reported to be the chief benefactor of the Coalition for a Free 
Africa, which has paid part of Dymally's travel expenses on recent trips to 
Nigeria, Brazil and elsewhere. 
An article in the Washington Post said that Dymally, a five-term House member 
known as the staunchest congressional advocate of Mobutu Sese Seko, Zaire's 
strongman-president, was accompanied to Angola by Griffey in October, 1988. 
While Dymally later reported to Congress that he had discussed "peace efforts" 
in Angola and Namibia with Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos, Griffey 
also met the Angolan leader on that visit. 
A month later, the article said, Griffey's firm -- African Development Public 
Interest Corp. -- received the $12-million shipment of Angolan oil that had 
been promised nearly two years before. 
Earlier, Griffey was invited by Dymally to join in a June, 1987, meeting in 
Washington between the congressman and Angola's minister of petroleum and 
industry, Pedro Van-Dunem. 
While the minister wanted to enlist Dymally's help in blocking efforts in 
Congress to impose an embargo against Angola, Griffey complained to him of 
delays in the shipment of oil that Angola had agreed to sell to his firm. 
Dymally supported Griffey's position, the Post reported, but the story quoted 
the Los Angeles business executive as saying that Dymally did not demand a quid 
pro quo for opposing the proposed embargo. 
In a statement issued by his office, Dymally did not challenge the account but 
said that the reporter who wrote the article "spent four months trying to prove 
that I tried to help African-American businessmen, minorities and women gain a 
foothold in Africa." 
Dymally said that as far as he knows, "The Department of State is pleased with 
my work in Africa, and more than 30 million African Americans will benefit when 
we are able to do business with Africa." 
Griffey, who has been trying to do business with African countries for nearly a 
decade, founded the Coalition for a Free Africa in 1986. Dymally is on its 
board of advisers. 
Dymally has acknowledged that he wrote a letter to the president of Uganda in 
1988 to try to get another friend and political supporter a contract for 
handling U.S. food shipments to Uganda. 
He defended his strongly worded letter on behalf of Mamadi Diane, however, as 
proper for a black member of Congress in advocating the interests of a 
black-owned American firm. Diane, a native of Guinea who is head of the 
Zaire-American Research Institute, has accompanied Dymally on trips to Zaire 
and acted as his interpreter there. 
Dymally has reported that the government of Zaire has paid for his airline 
tickets and hotel expenses within Africa and even a three-day stay on the 
French Riviera for a visit with the vacationing Mobutu. 
A recent report by Dymally's campaign fund shows that he picked up a $629 
dinner tab at an expensive Chinese restaurant in Washington to entertain a 
visiting delegation from Angola last April. 
