POP EYE: CLINKERS AMONG THE POP NOTES OF '88 
Everybody hooted last January when Texas record producer (and legendary 
self-promoter) Major Bill Smith concocted an Elvis Presley birthday tribute, 
"Hey! Big E. Happy 53!," claiming The King had faked his death so he could live 
in anonymity. 
But Major Bill had the last laugh. In a year when Brian Wilson, Patti Smith and 
Jimmy Page's comebacks flopped, Elvis had the biggest revival of all, making 
tabloid headlines, starring in Priscilla's best-seller and being celebrated in 
a musical about his life. 
By the end of the year, you got the feeling Elvis was on tour again -- popping 
up at Burger Kings in Kalamazoo, car washes in Georgia and the parking lot of a 
Las Vegas hotel. In August, WCVG in Cincinnati switched to an all-Elvis format. 
In September, Cheap Trick's "Don't Be Cruel" became the first Elvis re-make to 
go Top 10. In November, Priscilla and Lisa Marie did an Olds ad. In December, 
an L.A. Elvis impersonator announced plans to turn his San Fernando Valley home 
into a mock Graceland. 
Even without Elvis, 1988 was a banner year for pop follies. So let's celebrate 
the music world's clown princes in our yearly round-up of dubious achievements, 
inglorious moments and show-biz scams. 
PRESENTER OF THE YEAR: Beach Boy Mike Love, who livened up the 1988 Rock and 
Roll Hall of Fame Awards by noisily blasting Mick Jagger: "We did 180 
performances last year. . . . I'd like to see Mick Jagger get on stage and do 
'I Get Around' rather than 'Jumpin' Jack Flash.' Mick's always been chicken to 
get on stage with the Beach Boys." 
JAIL SENTENCE: To the Yugoslav folk singer who was sentenced to 60 days in jail 
and fined $80 for refusing to sing "Comrade Tito, We Pledge to You That We Will 
Not Swerve From Your Path," an official state song glorifying Marshal Tito, 
founder of the country's Communist Party. 
PRINCE FAN: Richard Nixon, who titled his latest political tract "1999." 
NATIONAL ANTHEM PERFORMANCE: Saxophonist Kenny G, whose anthem rendition at the 
sixth game of the National League playoffs here was blasted as "unbelievably 
terrible" by Dodger second baseman Steve Sax. "I can't believe it. It was the 
worst I ever heard. I could have played it better than he did," said Sax, who 
was so upset that he shook his fist at G while walking back to the dugout. 
Dodger right fielder Mike Marshall added: "It was a disgrace to America." 
QUOTE, PART 1: Debbie Gibson: "On Halloween, I had a party where we had a 
seance. We tried to contact Liberace and Sid Vicious." 
DRUG BUST: Reporting that soul legend James Brown was charged for possession of 
the hallucinogenic drug PCP after a car chase through two states this fall, 
Rolling Stone quoted a Georgia Highway patrolman who said that when arrested, 
Brown "started singing 'Georgia' and was doing his 'Good Foot' dance when we 
gave him the sobriety test." 
GRAMMY ACCEPTANCE SPEECH: Best Female Country Vocal Performance winner K.T. 
Oslin, who told the press: "I'm so excited that I feel like I'm going to throw 
up any minute now." 
PUBLIC ADDRESS ANNOUNCER: Paul Strelzin, announcer for the Texas League's El 
Paso Diablos, was ejected from a game against the Jackson Mets after 
infuriating umpires by repeatedly playing the verse "I've been cheated, been 
mistreated" from Linda Ronstadt's "When Will I Be Loved" after a series of 
close calls at first base. 
BACKSTAGE STIFF: When ex-Ollie North secretary Fawn Hall asked to meet Bruce 
Springsteen backstage at his Washington concert, she received a note saying: "I 
didn't think much of Ollie North, so why should I want to meet his secretary?" 
QUOTE, PART 2: Terence Trent D'Arby: "I've had three lives: The first time I 
was an Ethiopian pirate around 600 BC. Then I was an 18th-Century painter. The 
last time I was a very talented but unsuccessful country and Western singer." 
RAMONES FAN: Celebrated Manhattan preppie-killer Robert Chambers. He donned a 
shoulder-length wig and imitated Ramones leader Joey Ramone singing "Rockaway 
Beach" on a videotape that an ex-girlfriend sold to a local New York TV 
station, which aired the clip earlier this year. 
SUBPOENA: When contestants in a lawsuit involving former MCA artist Donnie Iris 
couldn't persuade MCA Records chairman Irving Azoff to testify in a lawsuit 
hearing, they served the industry mogul with a subpoena at the Forum during 
half time of a Lakers-Spurs playoff game. 
DEEJAY: After the Baltimore Orioles lost 10 straight games, Baltimore morning 
deejay Bob Rivers swore he would stay locked in his WIYY-FM studio until the 
team won a game. He ended up stuck on the air for 258 straight hours until the 
team ended its record 21-game losing streak last April. 
WORST BAND NAME: Johnny Hates Jazz. 
MOLL: Dolly Parton, who totes a gun -- legally -- and said she pulled it out of 
her purse when accosted by a man when she was walking in New York this summer. 
"I pointed it at him and told him if he didn't take a hike, I'd turn him into a 
soprano." 
LED ZEPPELIN FAN: Spago impresario Wolfgang Puck, who apparently forgot that 
Jimmy Page was the band's guitar hero. When ex-Zeppelin singer Robert Plant was 
in town for a summer concert appearance, Puck presented him with a 
guitar-shaped pizza. 
QUOTE, PART 3: Washington Wife crusader Tipper Gore: "I love rock 'n' roll. I 
was one of the earliest Springsteen fans. I played drums in high school. You're 
talking to someone who really understands rock music." 
EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW: During last year's February sweeps, KABC-TV ballyhooed a 
chat with ex-Beatle George Harrison as an "exclusive" interview -- even though 
Harrison complained throughout the story about "all these interviews" he had 
been doing. 
MANAGER: Doc McGhee, whose management firm handles such pop superstars as Bon 
Jovi and Motley Crue, pleaded guilty last January to importing 40,000 pounds of 
marijuana, worth $9 million, into the United States. The indictment came weeks 
after McGhee and partner Doug Thaler were named personal managers of the year 
in Pollstar magazine's Readers Poll Awards. 
OVERSTATEMENT: When the American Cinematheque screened the rarely seen Sex 
Pistols documentary, "The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle" in January, festival 
organizers ballyhooed the showing as "the last U.S. screening ever." This came 
as a surprise to Julien Temple, the film's director, who quipped: "What are 
they going to do -- burn it?" 
FRAGRANCE: John Lennon's first wife, Cynthia, took advantage of the hoopla 
surrounding her late husband by launching a new fragrance, Woman perfume. The 
fragrance was named after the song "Woman," from Lennon's "Double Fantasy" 
album, even though the ballad was written for Yoko Ono, the woman Lennon left 
Cynthia to marry. 
REUNION: When the Stray Cats held a press conference in August to herald the 
band getting back together after a four-year layoff, the group somehow 
neglected to mention that they had recorded a reunion album two years ago -- 
which stiffed. 
MAGAZINE ISSUE: Spin magazine's November issue, which contained a free condom 
in each copy as a symbol of the editors' support for safe sex practices. 
