MANKIND POSES GRAVE THREAT TO MADAGASCAR'S UNIQUE FLORA AND FAUNA 
This island off the East African coast is to today's naturalists what the 
Galapagos Islands off South America were to Charles Darwin, a study in 
evolution. 
But the island's unique and diverse plant and animal life is under grave threat 
as man continues to torch the forest to clear the land in what one newspaper 
calls a kind of "national pyromania." 
As a result, heading off the destruction of Madagascar's fragile habitat has 
become the premier goal of many international environmental groups. 
After Madagascar split from the African mainland more than 150 million years 
ago, its plants and animals went on their own evolutionary course. 
Some became extinct, like the pygmy hippopotamus, elephant bird and giant 
lemurs. 
"There was a tremendous explosion of different forms from very, very few 
ancestors," said Dr. Martin Nicoll, a zoologist who represents the World 
Wildlife Fund here. "Madagascar lets you look at the limits of adaptability. 
"You can make really nice biological comparisons. What do plants have to do, 
for example, to live in a desert?" 
Madagascar's terrain ranges from rain forests to prairie to desert. 
Ninety percent of the plant and animal species on the 226,658-square mile 
island are found nowhere else: from the lovable lemurs to hundreds of species 
of orchids and more than 350 species of amphibians and reptiles. 
There are 29 species of lemurs, primates whose name comes from the Latin word 
for ghosts because of their largely nocturnal habits. The closest living 
descendants of the common ancestor of humans, monkeys and apes, lemurs were 
displaced by monkeys elsewhere in the world. Here they had a chance to survive 
in isolation. 
Madagascar's equivalent of the woodpecker is a lemur called an aye-aye. It 
detects insect larvae moving in decaying trees with its sharp ears and then 
uses a skinny middle finger to reach in and pull them out. 
The largest lemur is the indri, a black-and-white creature that weighs about 15 
pounds at adulthood and can leap 20 feet from treetop to treetop. 
The indris, whose haunting calls are reminiscent of sounds emitted by great 
whales, are the main attraction for the small but growing number of tourists 
who visit this small reserve about 60 miles east of the capital of 
Antananarivo. 
A short walk through a rain forest, led by a guide, inevitably turns up a 
family of the indris, staring down with their Teddy bear-like faces, bemused 
but not much interested in their visitors. 
The humans, whose slash-and-burn agricultural methods now threaten wildlife and 
the nation's watershed, are late arrivals, coming from Africa and the Malay 
Archipelago only 1,500 years ago. Fourteen species of lemurs have become 
extinct since humans arrived, and ecologists fear that others are in danger of 
joining them. 
The island's population has more than doubled since 1950, and now exceeds 11 
million. Farmers are so desperate for land they are felling trees on 70-degree 
slopes. Four-fifths of the island's land is barren, and its forests have been 
reduced by half in the last three decades. 
The government's agriculture department long encouraged farmers to cut trees 
and burn the stumps to clear the ground for cash crops. The savanna is burned 
to produce tender shoots for an estimated 10 million zebu cattle. 
"In the West and in the East, not far from the capital, the fires continue to 
burn," said U.S. Ambassador Patricia Gates Lynch. "Sometimes you see the smoke 
trapped right here in the city." 
The government and environmental organizations are working together now to 
discourage slash-and-burn land clearing, though the education process is slow. 
"It's primarily a human problem," Prime Minister Victor Ramahatra said. "We 
must teach people that the natural environment is their principal source of 
wealth." 
The government has shifted course from the policies adopted in a 1975 socialist 
revolution and now follows the advice of Western donors on economic policy. But 
a U.S. Embassy economic report says no economic reforms will work in the long 
run "without corrective action against Madagascar's single greatest 
self-inflicted problem: the destruction of its environment." 
The government also has broken out of the virtual self-imposed isolation since 
President Didier Ratsiraka came to power in 1975. 
Nicoll says the government has cooperated with environmental groups since the 
end of 1985. "It is our No. 1 conservation priority," he said. 
A recent issue of the daily newspaper Midi said an average of 3.7 million acres 
of land was being burned each year. Midi, an independent journal, likened the 
burning to "national pyromania." 
Some peasants reportedly continue to burn the land to show their displeasure 
with the steady decline in the nation's economy since the revolution. Per 
capita income declined 24% between 1979 and 1983. 
Destructive Erosion 
The denuded hillsides are no match for heavy rains and occasional cyclones. 
Great holes are carved in the landscape by erosion. The Indian Ocean north of 
the island is red from the red clay soil washed out to sea. 
The World Bank is organizing an international effort to halt the degradation, 
which it estimates will cost from $300 million to $400 million over the next 15 
to 20 years. 
Already 11 major projects aided by Western environmental groups, universities 
and governments are under way. They include efforts to save existing reserves 
and plans to create new reserves or national parks. 
Nicoll, whose WWF is managing projects covering 10 reserves, said efforts have 
to take into consideration the needs of the people who live nearby. 
"The people don't want to cut down the forest just because it's there," said 
Yale University anthropologist Eleanor Sterling, who is studying the aye-aye. 
"They truly need the wood for firewood or for land for agriculture. Many of 
them understand the problems in the environment and would like to do something 
to help, but they have to feed their children." 
People Accept Change 
Nicoll says the success of the Perinet reserve proves people can be persuaded 
to change. 
"I was there in 1985, during my first long-term stay in Madagascar," he said. 
"When you'd go into the reserve you'd meet people walking along with an ax. 
Just about every day you'd hear the chop, chop of an ax. You never hear that 
now. Tourism has done that. Tourism has put that place into a sort of protected 
status. Nobody would dare go in there now with an ax." 
Western organizations are pushing tourism, which up to now only brings a few 
thousand people to the island, many of them bird watchers or naturalists. 
