MORPHINE CAN KILL ONLY PART OF THE PAIN; 
DEATH: WE FOCUS ON PHYSICAL PAIN, BUT EMOTIONAL PAIN USUALLY IS MORE DIFFICULT 
TO TREAT. 
The fatal shooting of Steven Charles Jenkins, a terminally ill AIDS patient, by 
his friend Philip Lee Saylor on Jan. 2 at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center has again 
focused attention on the problems of death and dying in our society. 
The attending physician in the case, Dr. Phillip C. Zakowski, expressed his 
regrets about the apparent mercy killing, saying that although he understood 
the emotional difficulties of the situation, "allowing us to use morphine 
(anesthesia) would have been a much more humane way . . . . That is a very 
comfortable, painless way to let nature take its course." 
Unfortunately, there is no painless way to die. By focusing on the physical 
pain, we lose sight of the emotional pain facing patients and their families. 
The latter is usually more difficult to "treat." The dying patient must 
struggle with loss of physical function, increasing dependence on others, 
constant threats to dignity brought about by the illness and the growing 
awareness that he or she will be separated from loved ones. Loved ones suffer 
as they watch the patient endure this. 
They grieve for his or her losses as well as their own. In addition, they must 
deal with their guilt over past conflicts with the patient, feelings of 
inadequacy from their inability to help and questions of their own mortality. 
Obviously, intravenous morphine will provide little relief for these things. 
Yet there is much that can be done, starting with communication. Patients must 
try to express their wants, needs and fears. Physicians must facilitate this by 
being willing to listen to patients. They also must explore these issues 
directly. 
Family members must be involved from the start to help provide support for the 
patient and to deal with their own emotional needs. Through this, realistic 
goals can be established and a treatment plan formulated according to the 
patient's wishes. Through communication, understanding and support, desperate 
acts by patients and family members can be avoided. 
Finally, we must all acknowledge that in many situations, a "painless" death is 
a myth. There are times when physical and emotional pain persist, despite all 
efforts. Some patients say that the only time they are without pain is when 
they are receiving so much medication that they are unconscious. Others, 
although not in pain, are so debilitated by their condition that they find that 
the burdens of life surpass any joy that they might feel. 
Whether this constitutes an acceptable existence is something that only the 
patient can decide. We must not delude ourselves into believing that we can 
eliminate this type of suffering. 
We must acknowledge our limitations so that our society can move forward and 
explore more humane options for dealing with the terminally ill, such as 
euthanasia. Unless we provide patients and their families with some way of 
relieving their anguish, they will continue to use whatever means they feel are 
available to them. 
