BANK EXAMINATIONS -- SYSTEM NEEDING REPAIR 
As financial markets become more deregulated and banks undertake riskier 
ventures for which they have no historical experience, the stability of the 
financial system is more dependent than ever on sound bank examinations. The 
current system, which is incompetent and rife with conflict of interests, 
requires reform. 
The process of bank examination in the United States, entrusted to the 
Comptroller of Currency and the Federal Reserve, has broken down. Bank 
examiners have stood aside while traditional rules of sound banking have been 
discarded. In some instances examiners have pushed unsound banking practices on 
banks. Banking problems in Chicago, Oklahoma and Texas are evidence that bank 
examinations have become virtually worthless. 
Moreover, in recent years the Federal Reserve, which is responsible for 
examining state-chartered member banks, has created a conflict of interest for 
itself that undermines its ability to perform an honest examination in some 
instances. During the 1980s banks that refused to lend money to Third World 
governments to pay interest on their existing indebtedness were requested by 
Federal Reserve officials to reconsider. Such circumstances make it impossible 
for a bank examiner to criticize a loan requested by the Fed or a comparable 
one made without the Fed's intervention. The overall impact is to lower 
examination standards. 
The Federal Reserve should be relieved of its examining responsibilities. These 
responsibilities should be given to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which, 
as the agency responsible for insuring the banks' deposits, has the strongest 
incentive to keep banks out of trouble. As the FDIC does not conduct monetary 
policy, it does not have the enormous scope for conflict of interest that 
bedevils the Fed. The comptroller's office, with beefed-up capacity, should 
continue with the responsibility for examining national banks. 
Some dispute our view, claiming instead that such practices as lending money to 
pay interest simply round-trip the funds to the bank, thus preventing technical 
default rules from causing a crisis. However, when a bank increases a loan in 
order to receive interest, it leaves its balance sheet in a weaker position. 
The round-tripped funds are added to profits, which are subject to taxation and 
to any profit-sharing or bonus program based on earnings. By lending money to 
pay interest, banks add more to their problem loans than they are able to 
retain from the interest received. 
In a world in which solutions to problems often consist of weakening the 
standards of the past, our criticisms may seem dogmatic. However, the evidence 
of problem banks is everywhere. Taxpayer bailout of bankrupt savings-and-loan 
associations is now estimated to cost $100 billion. 
If bank examiners had enforced standards, the problems afflicting our financial 
institutions would not have materialized. However, during a period when bank 
lending exploded in proportion to bank capital, examinations became 
increasingly meaningless and in some cases perverse. Banks were even required 
by law to reduce their reserve for bad debts. 
The availability of funds in the Euro-dollar market together with the increase 
in the guaranty of deposits by the FDIC made it possible for commercial banks 
to increase their lending. By 1970 many banks' loans exceeded 10 times their 
capital -- an all-time high. This beginning was followed by a real explosion in 
the loan-to-capital ratio as a result of lending to Third World governments and 
government-sponsored agencies. Total loans of some major banks swelled to 30 
times their capital. Only when this occurred together with evidence that Third 
World countries were having difficultly with their debts did the Federal 
Reserve suggest that banks should increase their capital. 
The financial problem in the banking sector is primarily the responsibility of 
bank managers. However, these problems developed over a period of years, and if 
the examining authorities had done their job, unsound practices would have been 
halted before they became major problems. One of the basic rules of banking is 
that no bank should lend more than 10% of its capital to any one borrower. Yet 
80% of the loans to several Third World countries went to government entities 
and totaled more than 50% of the capital of some banks. The examiners obviously 
approved this unsound concentration of lending. 
In the 1980s prudent bank management has brought criticism from the 
comptroller's office for not showing sufficient profits. In one case a bank 
that cleaned up its investments, charged off all non-performing loans, built a 
bad-debt reserve of 3% of loans outstanding and maintained a capital base of 9% 
of total assets drew the ire of the examiner. This is not an extreme or 
isolated example. 
The breakdown in bank examinations has coincided with the public's lack of 
attention to the quality of management of institutions in which they place 
funds. Fraud and risky lending practices have multiplied, especially among S 
&amp; Ls, but depositors, protected by federal guarantees, have had no 
incentive to monitor the management of their financial institutions or to 
remove their funds from risky S &amp; Ls. 
It may be the case that no one any longer knows what sound banking practices 
are. On the other hand, major accounting firms might have senior partners who 
could establish training programs for the comptroller and the FDIC that would 
refurbish the process of bank examination and make it again contribute to the 
security of our financial institutions. In these days of so much talk about 
cooperation between the public and private sectors, this is one that might be 
worthwhile exploring. 
