FREEWAY PHONE SYSTEM IS FINALLY STARTING TO CLICK 
After more than 3 1/2 years of frustrating delays, stalled starts and legal 
threats, an emergency telephone system designed to aid stranded or endangered 
motorists is nearing completion on freeways throughout San Diego County. 
Installation of the roadside telephones by Anaheim-based Cellular 
Communications Corp. began last summer, and 750 of the call boxes in the 
1,032-phone system are already operational. The remaining phones, most of them 
to be installed on California 78 in North County and Interstate 8 in East 
County, are expected to be in place by next month, according to officials of 
the San Diego Service Authority for Freeway Emergencies (SAFE). 
"There were times when I doubted we'd ever see this day," said county 
Supervisor Leon Williams, SAFE's chairman. "It's been a long road and there 
have been problems along the way. But that's behind us now, and I think we're 
about to see our freeways become safer." 
Most Are Out of Gas 
Figures compiled by the California Highway Patrol show that about 1,100 calls a 
week -- a number expected to grow when the system is completed -- are being 
logged on the boxes, with most of the calls coming from drivers of disabled 
automobiles. 
The No. 1 reason for a call: The vehicle is out of gas. 
The impending completion of the $5.3-million system comes after a series of 
legal and procedural problems that plagued the project since its inception in 
early 1985, when it arose out of the outrage over one woman being killed and 
another raped at gunpoint after their cars broke down on freeways. 
In 1987, SAFE awarded a contract to Comarco Inc. -- a subcontractor to Cellular 
-- calling for the installation of the call boxes at half-mile (1-mile in some 
rural areas) intervals along the county's 300-mile freeway system to make it 
easier for motorists to telephone for help in the event of automobile problems 
or other emergencies. 
That contract was challenged in court, however, by Cubic Corp., a San 
Diego-based firm that had bid about $500,000 less than Comarco. Ruling that 
SAFE's action violated competitive-bidding procedures, a Superior Court judge 
nullified the contract with Comarco and ordered the agency to award the project 
to the "lowest responsible bidder." 
In appealing that decision, SAFE officials argued that the state legislation 
creating the agency specifically exempted it from competitive-bidding 
guidelines, adding that Comarco was selected because it was viewed as having 
more experience with the phone system envisioned for the San Diego project. 
Last February, the 4th District Court of Appeal sided with SAFE. 
The following month, SAFE planned to reapprove the Comarco contract, but those 
plans were dashed at the eleventh hour when the company revealed that it was 
involved in a since-resolved patent dispute. With its members visibly 
exasperated -- Williams so much so that he suggested scuttling the troubled 
project -- SAFE then voted to solicit new bids, a process that culminated in a 
new contract being awarded to Cellular last 
June. 
Cellular's revised $5,271,820 bid, which covers both the cost of installing the 
call boxes and maintaining them over the next 10 years, was $122,000 less than 
that of Comarco, the next-lowest bidder. 
The yellow call boxes, installed along the outside lanes of all local freeways, 
contain a solar-powered cellular-phone unit with a receiver to put the caller 
in direct contact with the Highway Patrol. People using the phones need not 
dial; they simply push a button that shows CHP dispatchers where the caller is 
and lets them talk to the dispatchers. 
The phones, to be funded through a special $1 fee on annual vehicle 
registrations for San Diego County cars, initially will be spaced about half a 
mile apart on most freeways in urbanized areas, with the distance expanding to 
about 1 mile along more remote sections of I-8 east of Alpine, according to 
Ralph Thielicke, SAFE's project manager. 
Granville Bowman, San Diego County's director of public works and administrator 
of the SAFE program, said that when more funds are available, the distance 
between the boxes could be shortened to about a quarter-mile in most areas. 
"The call boxes definitely will increase the safety level on our highways," 
Supervisor Williams said. "Before, when you stalled along the highway, you had 
to either wait in your car for help, sometimes for a very long time, or walk to 
get help yourself. And it was that situation that often led to trouble or 
tragedy. The phones will reduce those hazards, both in terms of getting quicker 
help for individuals and making sure that disabled cars don't stay on or 
alongside the road so long that they become an additional hazard." 
CHP officials said that, to date, the vast majority of calls -- 815 of 1,069 
during one week last month -- have come from drivers whose cars were out of gas 
or were disabled by mechanical problems. In those cases, the CHP will either 
contact an emergency road service crew or the driver's family for help, or send 
a patrol car to assist. Reports of accidents or traffic hazards are other 
common reasons the phones are used. 
While no major emergency calls have been received, said Katie Deuel, a CHP 
communications supervisor, there have been a number of comical calls, many of 
them from motorists who mistakingly assume that the boxes can be used like 
normal public pay phones. 
Once, for example, when a CHP dispatcher asked a businessman who was using the 
call box to describe his problem, he said that his pager had gone off and he 
needed to contact his office. On another occasion, a woman asked the dispatcher 
to contact her husband to remind him to bring their dog inside their house when 
it was raining. The Highway Patrol also frequently receives calls from drivers 
seeking directions, Deuel said. 
"When we get calls like that, we have to tell people that that isn't the 
purpose of the system," she said. 
One of the final hurdles remaining for the project involves efforts to make the 
emergency phones more accessible to handicapped drivers. 
Last fall, a group of disabled drivers tried unsuccessfully to halt 
installation of the call boxes until the phones were redesigned or modified to 
provide better access. 
"Why do you want us wheelchair drivers to not be equally protected from harm?" 
Noel Neudeck of Del Cerro asked in a letter to county Supervisor George Bailey. 
SAFE officials, while emphasizing that the boxes' design was approved by the 
California Department of Transportation, concede that many of the phones are 
located in places where freeway shoulders are too narrow to accommodate 
vehicles equipped with wheelchair lifts. At the site of other call boxes, 
berms, guardrails or elevated shoulder slopes make it difficult or impossible 
for those in wheelchairs to reach the phones. 
While local officials declined to further postpone the already much-delayed 
project in the face of those objections, SAFE awarded a contract in November to 
Thomas Komar, an architect who is handicapped, to recommend changes on how 
access could be enhanced. 
Komar, who estimates that about half the call box sites present at least some 
problems to handicapped people, said many of those difficulties could be solved 
through relatively simple modifications, such as cutting through the curb-like 
berms or constructing a small ramp next to the poles on which the phones are 
situated. His report on those options -- which as yet do not have cost 
estimates attached -- may be completed by next month, he said. 
"Some of the existing curb configurations could be traversed by wheelchairs, 
but then you get into the degree of safety," Komar said. "To make it more 
suitable and safer, some physical modifications would be needed." 
Williams, however, argues that the question of handicapped access can be better 
-- and, perhaps, less expensively -- addressed by installing cellular phones in 
handicapped drivers' vehicles than by altering the call box sites. Although 
normal cellular phones cost hundreds of dollars, Williams said, he believes 
units designed to activate only the call boxes would be less costly. 
"I think we have to recognize that we can never make it totally safe for a 
person in a wheelchair to get out of his car to use one of these phones along 
the freeways," Williams said. "Guardrails and the narrow roadsides are enough 
of a problem even to people who can walk. It makes more sense to try to find a 
way to give handicapped people access (to the phones) from inside their cars." 
The price tag and possible funding source for cellular phones for handicapped 
drivers, assuming that approach is ultimately adopted, has not yet been 
determined, Williams said. However, he suggested that revenue generated by the 
$1 annual registration fee or state and federal grants perhaps could be used 
for that purpose. 
