A NEW ALLEGIANCE TO THE VEIL; 
FEMALE WARRIORS OF ALLAH; 
WOMEN AND THE ISLAMIC REVOLUTION BY MINOU REEVES (E. P. DUTTON: $17.95; 210 
PP.; 0-525-24712-2) 
In the decade since the overthrow of the regime of Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi 
and the start of the Iranian revolution, a virulent strain of Islamic 
fundamentalism has spread throughout the Muslim world, espousing a social order 
that appears to promote medieval attitudes, to restrict individual freedoms and 
to foster misogynist beliefs. Yet, women in one Muslim country after another, 
many of them educated in the West, have flocked to its banner, repudiating 
Western clothing and value systems and declaring themselves willing to fight 
and die for their beliefs. 
Those early Western-inspired feminist movements in such countries as Egypt, 
Iran, Lebanon and even Turkey, which sought to improve the lot of women through 
legislation limiting polygamy and restricting men's freewheeling divorce and 
custody rights, appear to be dead. In their place have emerged widespread 
demands to return to Islamic roots, to rescind foreign-inspired legislation, to 
reintroduce Islamic sharia law, to re-segregate educational systems. And 
everywhere, women appear in the forefront of a movement to return to a 
seemingly outmoded way of life, one that restricts their activities and limits 
their choices. 
Minou Reeves seeks to explore the reasons for the resurgence of Islam in the 
late 20th Century, to explain the baffling paradox of women who freely 
sacrifice their lives in war, bravely engage in guerrilla attacks, actively 
take part in combat, yet voluntarily return to the veil, historically a symbol 
of their exclusion from public life. 
In seeking to uncover the sources of a phenomenon that has baffled and even 
frightened many world leaders, the author links the resurgence of Islamic 
traditions to anti-Western attitudes, whose roots lie in centuries of 
confrontation between the West and the Islamic world, and more recently in 
"anti-colonialist" and "anti-imperialist" sentiments born of post-World War II 
experiences with foreign powers. 
She outlines the historical development of repressive customs and attitudes 
toward women in Muslim societies, in spite of Islam's originally liberating and 
progressive tenets. She delineates the absorption into Islam of such 
pre-existing local customs and practices as veiling and polygamy, showing how 
obscurantist exegetes reinforced the misogynistic attitudes of patriarchal 
societies. 
She follows the emergence in the late 19th and early 20th centuries of Muslim 
reformers in Egypt and Tunisia who objected to misogynistic interpretations of 
the Koran and the hadith (the sayings of the prophet Muhammad). She touches 
upon early 20th-Century reforms in such countries as Tunisia, Iran and Turkey, 
which resulted from attempts at modernization inspired by Western models. She 
sees feminism within the broader framework of nationalist and socialist 
tendencies of the time. 
The major contribution of this book lies in the author's sketching of the 
larger historical and political framework for today's Islamic revival and in 
making it clear that the resurgence of Islam cannot be understood outside of 
the nationalist revival. The author has tackled a large and complex subject and 
has managed to weave together many strands into a comprehensible and valuable 
whole. 
A narrower focus, however -- on Iran alone -- might have made this an even more 
valuable book. The author has spread herself thin by attempting to cover too 
much. Although she singles out Iran as the major moving force behind the 
Islamic revival, in touching on events in a number of other Muslim countries 
she neither does justice to them, nor to Iran. Had she concentrated exclusively 
on the Iranian revolution, the author might have succeeded in exploring the 
resurgence of Islam in far greater depth. 
She might, for example, have examined in more detail -- and with actual 
anecdotal accounts -- the difficulties that a tradition-bound and 
underdeveloped country such as Iran faced when trying to compress several 
hundred years of modernization into one or two decades. She might have 
explained what cultural aspects of Western culture have been so offensive to 
Muslim sensibilities as to have provoked violent rejection. 
She might have recounted, through the testimony of those who lived through the 
revolution, what it was like to have experienced the trauma and the chaos of 
those times. She might have studied, through the words of Iranian religious 
leaders (many of whom are at odds with one another), the unresolved conflicts 
over national goals, philosophy, and identity that continue to plague Iran and 
that, at a deeper level, were to some degree responsible for the force of the 
explosion that rocked this ancient land. 
Furthermore, by limiting her sources to published documents, the author, in the 
end, does not succeed in leading the reader across the cultural barriers to see 
events as an insider. 
Despite these shortcomings, however, this book is a much-needed corrective to 
the paucity of objective information available to Western readers on the 
subject of Muslim women. It goes a long way toward combatting much 
disinformation, as well as misinformation, on the Muslim world in general and 
its women in particular. 
Finally, writing as she was at the height of Iran's xenophobic anti-Westernism, 
the author could not have foreseen the current trend in Iran toward moderation 
and pragmatism, as exemplified by the ending of the Iran-Iraq war. Recalled 
from the front, women are having to put down their arms and set aside their 
virulent anti-Western rhetoric. What role they will be allowed to play, amid 
the high unemployment and economic chaos of their war-torn and 
revolution-ravaged land, remains to be seen. But that is another chapter, and 
it has not yet been written. 
