SHULTZ ASSAILS ARAFAT OVER WEST BANK 'INTIMIDATION' 
Secretary of State George P. Shultz denounced Thursday as "intimidation that 
falls more into the terrorist category" PLO leader Yasser Arafat's broadcast 
suggestion that Palestinians who advocate a West Bank truce with Israel may be 
assassinated. 
Talking to reporters on his way to Paris for a conference on chemical weapons, 
Shultz said Arafat's interview earlier this week on Radio Monte Carlo has added 
"a real problem" to the new U.S. dialogue with the Palestine Liberation 
Organization. 
Arafat said that Palestinians who advocate accommodation with Israel might 
"face the bullets of their own people." It was an apparent reference to 
Bethlehem Mayor Elias Freij's call Dec. 23 for a year-long cease-fire in the 
Palestinian uprising in the Israeli occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Freij 
immediately withdrew his plan. 
In Bethlehem, Freij denied Thursday that he has been forced into hiding because 
of the implied threat. In a telephone interview with the Associated Press, he 
said that various news reports are groundless and that he has taken no extra 
security precautions. 
"I was in my office all day yesterday," Freij said. "Now, I'm still in the 
office. . . . Everything is normal." 
According to AP, Israeli soldiers rounded up youths and some shopkeepers and 
ordered them to paint over slogans threatening Freij. The slogans, signed by a 
radical PLO faction, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, said 
"Shame on All the Traitors" and "The Fate of Freij Will Not Be Better Than That 
of Zafer Masri." Masri was the pro-Jordanian mayor of Nablus. He was slain 
March 2, 1986, after indications that he might play a role in the peace process 
with Israel. The PFLP claimed responsibility for his death. 
Shultz made it clear that he does not agree with Israeli assertions that the 
uprising, by itself, is a manifestation of terrorism. 
"There is a difference between the uprising and terrorism," he said. "On the 
other hand, threats against people who attempt to move in a constructive or 
more peaceful manner are acts of intimidation that fall into the terrorist 
category." 
Arafat last month renounced terrorism in all forms, accepted two key U.N. 
resolutions on the Middle East and recognized Israel's right to exist. Those 
were conditions without which successive U.S. administrations would not speak 
with the PLO. Once a series of statements by Arafat in Geneva and Stockholm 
satisfied the Reagan Administration, it reversed U.S. policy of the last 13 
years and agreed to hold talks with the Palestinian organization. 
Shultz said it is unlikely that there will be another U.S.-PLO meeting before 
the Reagan Administration leaves office Jan. 20. Therefore, he said, it will be 
up to President-elect Bush to decide if the dialogue will continue. 
