GOVERNOR TO BUSH: KEEP TAX PLEDGE, ASK EUROPE TO PAY MORE FOR DEFENSE 
Gov. George Deukmejian declared Sunday that President Bush should live up to 
his campaign promise and resist pressure to raise taxes, asserting a tax 
increase could "trigger a worldwide recession." 
The governor also gently lectured his largely European audience at an 
international economic conference here that, if Europe were to shoulder more of 
the burden of its own defense, the United States could cut military spending 
and reduce its budget deficit. 
Deukmejian further suggested that the Bush Administration and Congress restore 
tax-deductible individual retirement accounts (IRAs) for all taxpayers, a 
casualty of the 1986 tax reform. This would stimulate savings, generating 
capital for investment and reducing the flow of U.S. consumer dollars overseas, 
he said. 
The Republican governor's adamant anti-tax posture was not shared by two fellow 
members of his panel: U.S. Sen. Bill Bradley (D-N.J.), a member of the Senate 
Finance Committee, and John A. Young, president and chief executive officer of 
Hewlett-Packard Co. 
"Personally, what do I think we should do?" Bradley asked rhetorically. "I 
think we should cut spending. I think we should pass a gasoline tax and have an 
increase in cigarette taxes, in the neighborhood of $25 (billion) to $30 
billion. 
"I, however, would not advocate that in the United States publicly, because I 
am a Democrat." 
Recalling that Democratic presidential nominee Walter F. Mondale was hurt 
politically in 1984 by promising voters a tax increase, and that Bush was 
helped in 1988 by vowing not to raise taxes, Bradley -- himself considered to 
be a potential White House aspirant -- said: "I, therefore, as a Democrat do 
not want to play 'Fool' in George Bush's drama." 
Concern Over Trade 
Martin Feldstein, who was Ronald Reagan's chief economic adviser in his first 
presidential term, advocated a further weakening of the dollar by 10% to 15% in 
order to make U.S. exports less expensive abroad and more attractive to foreign 
consumers. He insisted that this is the only way to substantially reduce the 
nagging U.S. trade deficit, estimated to have been $136 billion last year. 
The four-member panel expounded on "the U.S. world role after the elections" 
before several hundred attendees to the annual conference of the World Economic 
Forum. People shell out registration fees of $4,000 to $8,000 to attend this 
weeklong conference at a ski resort in the Swiss Alps. 
Deukmejian, here for three days, freely acknowledged that he is "not an expert 
in international economics." He said he came as governor of a state with the 
sixth-largest economy in the world -- and as a campaigner for Bush who "saw 
firsthand which issues made a difference with the voters and which did not." 
"Make no mistake, there was indeed a mandate in the vote for President," the 
governor asserted. "(Americans) voted for the candidate who told them without 
hesitation that taxes should not be increased." 
Bush's chief of staff, John H. Sununu, recently suggested that the no-tax 
pledge might have to bend if an adverse economic "climate" were created by 
failure to significantly reduce the nation's $155-billion budget deficit. 
But Deukmejian urged Bush indirectly to stick by his guns. 
"I know the conventional wisdom says that a tax increase is the answer," 
Deukmejian commented, adding: "The deficit can and must be reduced by 
controlling spending. We cannot risk triggering a worldwide recession through a 
major tax increase." 
And bringing up a sensitive subject, Deukmejian said: "Many have suggested that 
we further limit defense spending. That can be done if our allies, who want us 
to reduce the deficit, agree to a greater sharing of the burden of maintaining 
our defenses around the world." 
Roughly half the U.S. military budget currently is devoted to the defense of 
Europe. And many in Washington -- Democrats and Republicans -- have been 
demanding increased "burden-sharing" by the other North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization countries. 
Deukmejian also said the U.S. government "should work toward a tax system that 
penalizes debt and encourages savings -- and not the other way around." 
Asked later to elaborate in an audience question-and-answer session, Deukmejian 
said that abolishing tax credits for IRAs "was a very unwise move." And he said 
they should be reinstated. 
Deukmejian also denounced as "very, very poor policy" the controversial idea 
recently floated by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady of taxing savings and 
checking accounts to help finance bailouts in the savings and loan industry. 
"That would be completely contrary to encouraging savings," Deukmejian said. "I 
hope it does not receive any kind of support in Washington." 
