WESTERN OFFICIALS LOOK TO AFGHANISTAN AND SEE A NEW PROBLEM -- HEROIN 
In northeastern Afghanistan, small numbers of returned refugees have been 
rebuilding their homes and replanting their terraced fields. 
But not all the fields returned to the plow in the last year have been planted 
with wheat and corn. Many -- perhaps one out of every two -- were turned over 
to the cultivation of marijuana and opium-producing poppies. 
In fact, many Western narcotics control officials, diplomats, some members of 
the Afghan resistance, and Pakistani officials, are concerned that this region 
could develop into the world's leading producer of heroin -- the potent drug 
derived from opium. 
The primary source of opium for the West remains Southeast Asia's "Golden 
Triangle" -- Burma, Laos, and Thailand. But since the mid-1980s, international 
narcotics control sources say, the "Golden Crescent" of Southwest Asia has 
gained prominence. 
30% of Market 
Together, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran account for at least 30% of the 
United States heroin market, these sources estimate. 
Afghanistan, according to narcotics officials, is the region's largest 
producer. Last year's opium crop is estimated at between 500 and 700 tons. The 
1988-89 poppy season, which normally begins with the first rains in December, 
is expected to increase output by 100 to 200 tons. The reasons for 
Afghanistan's increased production include: lack of government control in much 
of the countryside during the nine-year war against Soviet occupation; 
crackdowns on cultivation in Pakistan, which have made Afghanistan a safer 
production center; Tehran's apparent willingness to allow trafficking through 
Iran; and growing demand in neighboring Pakistan and the West. 
For many peasants, white-and-pink poppy flowers are the easiest and most 
lucrative cash crop. Harvesting the sticky, black sap can bring a small farmer 
up to $2,000 -- a fortune in this area. Dealers take the opium by horse and 
mule across the border into Pakistan's tribal border districts; there, scores 
of illicit laboratories process the opium into heroin. 
Difficult to Control 
"We don't have to be Adam Smith to realize we have a problem," says Carlo 
Boccia, a representative of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration in Paris. 
"When drugs become more readily available, they become more difficult to 
control." 
Western narcotics officials say they do not know how much of Iran's 
"tremendous" poppy production reaches the international market. Pakistan is 
believed to have produced 200 or more tons of opium last year. Most of the 
region's heroin is manufactured in Pakistani labs. (Ten pounds of opium produce 
about one pound of pure heroin, which can sell for tens of thousands to a few 
hundred thousand dollars in the West. Heroin sold in the West is diluted, about 
5% pure.) 
One of the most severe effects of this rapidly growing regional trade, Western 
aid officials and other sources say, is its corrupting and undermining 
influence on Pakistani and Afghan society. They cite: 
* A rise in the number of Pakistani addicts, most of whom "chase the drag-on" 
(smoke heroin), from an estimated 200,000 in the early 1980s to between 1 
million to 3 million today. 
* The spread of heroin abuse among Pakistan's 3 million Afghan refugees. 
* Corruption that involves senior Pakistan government officials, Army officers, 
politicians, refugee administrators, businessmen, tribal leaders, and members 
of the Afghan resistance. This was alleged separately by narcotics and 
intelligence officials, and Western aid sources. 
Gang Warfare Feared 
In addition, there are fears that the "drug and gun culture" on both sides of 
the border could increase gang warfare. "You have got to understand that it is 
a huge business in this part of the world. There are terrible things going on, 
and they involve a lot of people," says a worried representative of the Afghan 
resistance. 
Pakistan's new prime minister, Benazir Bhutto, has described illegal drugs as 
the country's "No. 1 problem" and has created a Ministry of Narcotics to tackle 
it. Diplomats and aid workers are skeptical about chances for success. 
"The only reason we have not yet seen the sort of violence you find in Colombia 
(South America) is that enough people here are getting paid off to keep the 
trade going," a Western aid official says. "The moment you start hitting where 
it hurts, the situation will start getting nasty." 
A Route Through Karachi 
Narcotics from eastern and northern Afghanistan and Pakistan's border areas are 
channeled to Karachi; those from southern Afghanistan go toward Iran. 
According to aid sources, trucks from the government-run National Logistics 
Corporation, which normally carry goods to Afghan refugee camps, often take 
heroin to Karachi. 
"There is a lot of direct collaboration with the police, the Army, and the 
refugee administration," says a Western official. 
For appearances, sources say, a vehicle is sometimes deliberately sacrificed to 
the police. The rest then proceed unhindered to Karachi, where the heroin is 
taken by boat or plane to the Mideast and Europe. 
Berlin an Entry Point 
Some sources allege that officials in Pakistan's National Shipping Company are 
involved. Narcotics officials say East Berlin, a drugs gateway in the 1970s, is 
once again becoming a major entry point. 
The production of opium in southwest Afghanistan has come under the control of 
local drug lords, cooperating closely with Pakistani traffickers as well as 
drug syndicates from Europe and North America, intelligence sources say. 
At Musa Qala, a fertile region in southern Afghanistan, poppy growing is 
largely run by Nassim Akhun Zada, say journalists and relief workers who have 
visited the area. Zada is a guerrilla commander, reportedly still affiliated 
with an Afghan resistance party, the Harakat-i-Inqilab-i-Islami, but who 
operates largely on his own. Western sources say Zada leads a private army of 
1,200 fighters. Recently, there have been reports of pitched battles with a 
rival, Abdul Rahman Khan of the Hizb-i-Islami resistance party. 
Government Role Seen 
From Musa Qala, part of the opium harvest is transported to eastern Iran. But 
most is taken to the Pakistani desert refugee camps at Gerde-Jangal. There, 
resistance and aid sources say, trafficking is carried out in collaboration 
with officers of Pakistan's Interservices Intelligence (ISI) organization. 
At Gerde-Jangal, the opium is weighed and some is processed by local labs. 
"There is so much dealing going on that the money is not counted but weighed," 
a Western aid representative says. Various sources, including a former 
trafficker from Quetta, say narcotics are driven in five-vehicle convoys -- two 
carrying drugs, the other three armed guards and heavy machine guns -- through 
government checkpoints, to Robat. 
Robat is believed to have 20 or more heroin labs, from which the drug is driven 
in armed convoys across southern Iran to Turkey and on to Europe and America. 
Sources say the Robat operations involve members of at least three Afghan 
resistance parties. It is uncertain whether party officials in Quetta and 
Peshawar are linked to the trafficking. 
Foreigners are forbidden to enter Robat "for security reasons." Some sources 
claim that the aim is to prevent outsiders from witnessing what goes on. 
"It is perfectly obvious that this trafficking could not proceed without the 
full knowledge of the ISI (Interservices Intelligence) and the local Pakistani 
authorities," a West European diplomat says. 
