NUTRITIONALLY SPEAKING: RETHINKING PERCEPTIONS OF PORK 
The nutrient-dense quality of pork is frequently overshadowed by the 
misconception that it, like many other red meats, is fatty. In response to such 
perceptions, the pork industry has reduced the fat content of its pork cuts in 
the marketplace. 
Today's pork is about 50% leaner than the pork brought to market 20 years ago, 
according to industry experts. Its high nutritive value is an added plus. At 
about 200 calories per three-ounce serving, pork is an excellent source of 
protein -- a three-ounce serving provides about 24 grams, nearly half the 
Recommended Dietary Allowance. 
Pork also is a good source of iron, offering between 5% and 10% of the RDA for 
adult women in each three-ounce serving. It also contains zinc and some B 
vitamins. (The recommended amount for both of these minerals was reduced when 
the 10th edition of RDA was released late last year. The RDA for iron for women 
is 15 milligrams, for zinc 12 milligrams. The suggested intake for men is 10 
milligrams of iron, 15 milligrams zinc.) 
There's something else that's new about pork in today's marketplace. After 
evaluation of previous handling and preparation techniques, the industry has 
revised the minimum safe cooking temperature for pork cuts from 170 degrees to 
160 degrees. It was previously thought that the higher temperature was 
necessary to prevent trichinosis, an infection caused by a parasite, trichinae. 
But, according to the industry, trichinae infection is rarely seen today 
because of improved feeding practices. Trichinae is killed at 137 degrees, 
which falls well below either of the recommended temperatures, according to the 
industry. 
A boneless pork loin roast may now be served at either 160 degrees or 170 
degrees, although cooked to the lower temperature, the meat will be slightly 
pink in color and more juicy. At 170 degrees, the pork has a more developed 
flavor. 
A pork cut with the bone may also be cooked to an internal temperature of 160 
degrees, but there will be an intensely pink color near the bone. For a serving 
that is no longer pink, cook to 170 degrees. 
Because of its muscle content, the recommended cooking time for pork shoulder 
remains 170 degrees. It requires the additional time for even cooking and full 
flavor development. 
When roasting large cuts, it is necessary to remove the cut while still 5 
degrees below the preferred end temperature and allow 15 to 20 minutes standing 
time. If, for example, the desired serving temperature is 160 degrees, the 
roast should be removed from the oven at 155 degrees, tented with foil and 
allowed to stand. The roast will continue to cook and the temperature will rise 
about 5 degrees during the rest period. 
By following these new cooking times and by trimming cuts of any excess fat, 
health experts agree it is possible for lean pork to fit into sensible eating 
plans where balance and variety are compatible goals. 
PORK MEDALLIONS WITH DIJON-DILL SAUCE 
1/2 pound pork tenderloin 
1/2 teaspoon garlic salt 
1/8 teaspoon black pepper 
1/4 cup plain low-fat yogurt 
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
1/4 teaspoon dill weed 
1/4 teaspoon sugar 
Cut pork crosswise into 4 pieces. To make medallions, place each piece, cut 
side down, on flat surface. Cover with wax paper and flatten gently with heel 
of hand to 1/4-inch thick. 
Pan broil pork in nonstick skillet over medium heat 3 to 4 minutes, per side. 
Remove medallions to warm platter. Season both sides with garlic salt and 
pepper. 
Meanwhile, combine yogurt, mustard, dill and sugar. Place in heat-proof measure 
over hot, not boiling, water and heat 2 to 3 minutes. Do not cook or mixture 
will curdle. Serve with medallions. Makes 2 servings. 
PORK MEDALLIONS IN BRANDY-PEAR SAUCE 
1 pound pork tenderloin, cut into 1-inch thick slices 
Coarsely ground pepper 
1 (16-ounce) can pear halves, in juice 
1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/4 cup lemon juice 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/2 cup pear brandy or pear schnapps 
1 tablespoon butter 
1 small onion, minced 
Coat each side of medallions to taste with pepper and set aside. 
Combine pears and juice, nutmeg, cinnamon, lemon juice, salt and brandy in 
blender container. Process to puree. Place pear puree in saucepan and simmer, 
stirring occasionally, until reduced by half, about 20 minutes. 
Meanwhile, melt butter in heavy skillet over medium-high heat. Add medallions 
and onion to pan and cook until pork is browned, about 2 minutes per side. Add 
pear mixture and reduce heat to simmer. Cook 7 to 8 minutes. Serve with sauce. 
Makes 4 servings. 
OVEN-ROASTED CARAWAY PORK LOIN 
1 teaspoon dried rosemary, crumbled 
1/2 teaspoon caraway seeds, crushed 
1/2 teaspoon dried thyme leaves, crumbled 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 (3-pound) boneless trimmed pork loin roast 
Spiced Red Cabbage 
Combine rosemary, caraway seeds, thyme and salt. Rub evenly over surface of 
roast, then place roast on rack in open roasting pan. Insert meat thermometer 
so bulb is centered in thickest part. Roast, uncovered, at 325 degrees until 
thermometer registers 165 degrees, 35 to 40 minutes per pound. 
Remove from oven and allow to stand (roast will continue to cook upon removal 
from oven) in warm place 15 to 20 minutes. Serve with Spiced Red Cabbage. Makes 
12 servings. 
Spiced Red Cabbage 
4 cups coarsely shredded red cabbage 
2/3 cup water 
1/3 cup red wine vinegar 
3 tablespoons apple jelly 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
Dash ground allspice 
Dash ground cloves 
Place cabbage, water, vinegar, apple jelly, cinnamon, allspice and cloves in 
large saucepan. Bring to boil, then reduce heat and simmer, covered, 30 minutes 
or until cabbage is tender-crisp. Makes 4 servings. 
SWEET AND PUNGENT PORK MEDALLIONS 
1 pound well trimmed pork tenderloin 
1/2 cup water 
1/3 cup vinegar 
1/4 cup strained apricot preserves 
1 tablespoon cornstarch 
1 tablespoon sugar 
1 tablespoon dry Sherry 
1 tablespoon soy sauce 
1 clove garlic, minced 
2 cups hot cooked rice 
2 cups steamed broccoli florets 
Cut tenderloin crosswise into 12 pieces, about 1-inch thick. Place each piece, 
cut side down, between wax paper on flat surface and flatten with mallet to 
1/4-inch thick. 
Combine water, vinegar, preserves, cornstarch, sugar, Sherry, soy sauce and 
garlic in small bowl. Set aside. 
Brown pork in large nonstick skillet 6 at time, over medium-high heat, 2 to 3 
minutes per side. Remove to platter and keep warm. 
Add preserves mixture to skillet and cook 3 to 5 minutes or until thickened, 
scraping up browned bits from pan. Add pork medallions, turning over to coat. 
Combine rice and broccoli and place on serving platter. Arrange pork over rice 
mixture to serve. Makes 4 servings. 
LUNCHTIME PORK IN PITA 
1 tablespoon reduced-calorie mayonnaise 
1 teaspoon spicy brown mustard 
1/4 teaspoon lemon juice 
Dash pepper 
1/3 cup coarsely chopped, cooked trimmed pork loin 
6 apple slices, cut 1/4-inch thick 
1/4 cup shredded lettuce 
1/2 pita bread round 
Combine mayonnaise, mustard, lemon juice and pepper in small bowl. Add pork, 
tossing lightly to coat. Place apple slices, lettuce and pork mixture in pita 
bread. Makes 1 serving. 
