THE THOROUGHLY CONTEMPORARY ROBERTSON DAVIES 
Robertson Davies is a 75-year-old Canadian writer with flowing white hair, 
beard and mustache, bright blue eyes and a very pink face. His portly bearing 
reflects the good food and drink he enjoys. He has kept the upper-class English 
accent he acquired while at Oxford half a century ago, and his diction and 
syntax have more in common with that time and place than the contemporary 
scene. His conversation is wide-ranging and his wit sharp, vast, sometimes 
bawdy and always learned -- full of plays on words, literary allusions and very 
eclectic esoterica. He has what has been called a cult following among his 
readers, and his persona seems that of an elitist fuddy-duddy who has known 
comfort and privilege for a very long time. 
The man does not look like a "women's libber." 
And yet it is one of the many ways in which he is modern. 
"Christianity has remarkably little to say about women. . . . Women cannot be 
expected to hold a wholly subordinate position. All this hullabaloo regarding 
women as priests is just a flea bite in a great struggle about what constitutes 
life in its fullness, about human balance." Davies made those remarks while 
sitting before the fire in the den of the Canadian consul general's house in 
Hancock Park where he and his wife of 48 years, Brenda Maddox, had been 
welcomed to Los Angeles, their first visit, with a luncheon. 
Here on a tour for "The Lyre of Orpheus," third novel of a trilogy that began 
with "Rebel Angels" and the best-selling "What's Bred in the Bone," he has, he 
said, been "running around like a mad dog since September." He was spending 
just one day in Los Angeles and it was raining. 
His writings appear old-fashioned, if not downright medieval, in their esoteric 
bits from astrology, hagiography, magic, the occult, the marvelous, 
Christianity, history, intricate and tricky plots, interactions of bizarre and 
mundane characters. But they are also full of Jungian analysis, myth, the 
eternal questions and modern dilemmas. 
Therefore, his feminism is no contradiction. He has a moral vision and social 
consciousness that are anything but static. Like his novels, Davies seems to 
accommodate a lot and it all dwells inside him in a state of lively 
coexistence. He seems comfortable with paradox. More than anything, perhaps, he 
is an original. 
This is a man who does not drive a car, has "not much use" for computers and 
won't use a word processor, having ascertained it would take him six months to 
master one and "there's a lot I can do in six months without doing that." He 
deplores the loss of ritual in the Catholic Church and says, of onlookers with 
Protestant backgrounds like himself, "some of these hippie priests with guitars 
give us the jumps." Yet his mind is often on the future, and all that baggage 
he carries around from the past is what informs his vision of it. 
"I have to dip into a notion of Plato's that human history develops in 
2,000-year sections. The 2,000 years of Christian influence seem to be coming 
to a conclusion. The next is not known, but the hint is there in the area of 
technology. I think we're going to experience revelation of the marvelous in 
the next few hundred years." 
Turning to the Marvelous 
As formal religion begins to lose its grip, he has often observed, people turn 
to the marvelous. At a simplistic level, people turn to popular astrology, 
teacup readings, card readings, superstition. That is not it, he says. Nor, 
necessarily, he said, is it the robots and computers of the future, since they 
are man-created and follow orders. They cannot tell us about anything 
important, he said. 
"I think we'll be evolving something new, although we won't utterly desert 
Christianity. It has given us too much," he said, adding that compassion was 
perhaps its greatest contribution. It bears remembering, he said, that at the 
time of Christ, the city of Rome did not have a single hospital. 
One of the problems with Christianity, he said, is that it "urges us to 
perfection and perfection is inhuman. Perhaps the new thing will be to 
understand that wholeness rather than goodness is the thing to aim for." 
As the human race steps into the next millennium, he said, if women were more 
equal, "they could get down to what is deepest in femininity. They can teach 
us. Men are more aggressive, combative. Women are not perfect, but when they 
fight, they fight one at a time. They do not get organized very easily. Men are 
too easily herded into gangs and armies. This may be one of the great blessings 
of the future. It could lead to a totally new concept of war and politics, or 
the forgetting of war altogether." 
Society is far from there, and he has devoted one devastating page in "The Lyre 
of Orpheus" to the place of the social wife. It is wickedly satirical 
description of "dogsbody jobs associated with art and music which wealthy 
volunteers are graciously permitted to do by the professionals," and of the 
"great Ladder of Compassion," on which diseases are ordered in terms of 
prestige." 
"Cheap labor!" Davies said of the whole business, leaning forward and raising 
his voice to outrage. "They're getting them real cheap. Their reward will be 
some sort of vague social acclaim. It stinks, you know, the way in which women 
are exploited." 
Phrases like "Canada's pre-eminent man of letters" abound now and the 
provincial novelist has an international standing. It nettles him, however, 
that he was not taken seriously in Canada until he was taken seriously in the 
United States with the publication of "Fifth Business" in 1970, the first novel 
of his Deptford Trilogy. 
"It's a fact Canada is obsessed with the United States. . . . It's true we have 
a feeling that a greater degree of sophistication in art exists here than in 
Canada. And, until recently, it seemed there was a greater sophistication 
financially as well." 
Running Against Tide 
Mentioning the large real estate holdings Canadians have here, and Canadian 
ownership of "the big booze companies," he said, "suddenly we realize we own a 
big piece of the action. We may wake up to the fact we are not entirely 
insignificant in the actual world." 
Such awareness is still running against the tide, and he tells one story, a 
true one, he says, that he labels "the essence of Canada." 
It involves the late Prime Minister Lester Pearson, who prior to heading the 
government was active in the United Nations and was awarded the Nobel Peace 
Prize in 1957 for helping establish a U.N. Emergency Force after the 1956 
Egyptian-Israeli war. 
"A friend of mine was at a cocktail party in Vancouver," Davies said, "when 
someone came running in, saying: 'Have you heard the news? Mike Pearson got the 
Nobel Peace Prize.' 
"There was silence and then one little old lady spoke up and said, "Well! Just 
who does he think he is?' That's Canada." 
America's Ignorance 
At the same time he has rather acerbic observations to make about Americans' 
relative ignorance or indifference to "the rather large land mass north of the 
border" and has particular disdain for the weather maps he sees on American 
television news where there's a vast blank to the north. 
Later that night he gently chided an amused audience of 300 seemingly devoted 
fans about that land mass to the north. He read to a packed house at UCLA's 
Dickson Auditorium. A former actor with England's Old Vic company, he is a 
performer and chose several very dramatic passages, full of dialogue and wit, 
to his audience's obvious delight. 
They loved it, as they had John Espey's introduction of him. Espey, a retired 
UCLA professor, had been at Oxford with Davies in the late '30s. The two of 
them, Espey told the audience, represented fully half the membership of the 
Long Christmas Dinner Club, an elitist little Canadian/American group that 
named itself after a play of Thornton Wilder's, and dressed formally for dinner 
several times a term, ate and drank a lot and played literary hoaxes on the 
English. 
Such privileged pranks seemed a far cry from the circumstances and politics of 
the UCLA audience, but his fans savored the revelation. 
