ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: IRVINE; 
TRIAL READY TO BEGIN ON MEASURE D ISSUE 
It's been 18 months since Cameron Cosgrove was sworn in as a member of the 
Irvine City Council, but some residents still refuse to call him "councilman." 
One speaker at a council meeting last week strode to the podium and introduced 
herself to the staff, members of the public, Mayor Larry Agran, "members of the 
City Council and Mr. Cosgrove." She leaned heavily on the "Mr.," denying 
Cosgrove the title accorded his office. 
From his seat, Cosgrove quietly burned. 
"I feel like a victim," he said later. "I really do." 
For Cosgrove and his foes, the question of whether he deserves a seat on the 
council comes to a head this week, as a long-awaited trial begins in Orange 
County Superior Court. Beginning Wednesday, plaintiffs in the case will argue 
that Cosgrove was seated illegally in July, 1988, and that he should be removed 
from office before he is allowed to enter the June 5 election as an incumbent. 
Cosgrove and his allies retort that the lawsuit is purely political and is 
designed as much to hurt Agran as it is to clarify legal issues raised in the 
1988 race that put Cosgrove into office. 
That election, in which Cosgrove was the third-place finisher -- less than 150 
votes short of finishing second -- had another item on the ballot. It has 
become the source of a bitter controversy in Irvine, and the issues and 
personalities revolving around it expose some of the city's most tempestuous 
political disagreements. 
That item was Measure D, a provision that voters approved at the same time they 
elected Cosgrove to the council and Agran to the mayoralty. The measure stated 
that the third place finisher in some council races -- those with two seats 
open but a third vacated by a council member becoming mayor -- could be subject 
to a special election if enough signatures were gathered to force it. 
What Judge Claude M. Owens will have to determine is whether Measure D is 
binding on the same election in which voters approved it. Normally, measures of 
its kind only affect subsequent actions, but Measure D states that it shall 
"become effective with the General Municipal Election of June 1988." 
"The intent of the voters was clear," said Howard Klein, an Irvine realtor who 
is one of the plaintiffs in the case. "What we're asking is that the judge 
carry it out." 
An ardent champion of the case, Klein not only fights it in the courts -- where 
he and his allies estimate that they have already spent more than $30,000 -- he 
also occasionally shows up at City Council meetings. Last week, he and the 
normally even-tempered Agran verbally tussled, demonstrating how high emotions 
have risen over the issue. 
Klein blamed Cosgrove's attorneys for delays in the court case, and Agran, a 
Cosgrove backer, defended his colleague. The two traded sharp words and then 
Agran shot out: "Mr. Klein, I would suggest that you do what you do best, which 
is to file frivolous lawsuits against this city." 
Disgusted, Klein marched away from the microphone. 
Agran and his supporters view the case as an effort to discredit the mayor, who 
swore Cosgrove into office and who has consistently supported him. As they 
note, Klein is a prominent local Republican, and Agran a Democrat. 
Cosgrove is a Republican, but Councilwoman Sally Anne Sheridan, a vocal 
Cosgrove opponent, openly mocks Cosgrove's party affiliation. "If Cam Cosgrove 
is a Republican, I'm Karl Marx living in Woodbridge," she said. 
Even Klein, who denies that the suit is partisan, admits that it has a 
political edge. If successful, it would force Cosgrove to run without the 
benefits of incumbency this June. 
And it would presumably provide ammunition to Sheridan in her effort to unseat 
Agran. Sheridan, observers agree, would spare few chances to accuse Agran of 
illegally seating his ally in 1988. 
Even if Measure D is found to legally apply to the 1988 election, plaintiffs 
will have to overcome obstacles before deposing Cosgrove. There are, for 
instance, questions about the timing and manner in which their petitions 
calling for a special election were distributed. 
But both sides have reached at least the semblance of accord on one point. All 
parties say they want the matter resolved quickly: plaintiffs so that Cosgrove 
will be stripped of his incumbency, and Cosgrove so that he will have time to 
rebound from the controversy before hitting the campaign trail. 
"I really just want to get this over with," Cosgrove said in an interview last 
week. "I've been caught up in the middle for too long." JIM NEWTON 
