NICARAGUA STRUGGLES TO AID ITS CHILDREN 
Eight years of socially and economically devastating war with U.S.-backed 
Contra forces -- topped off 10 weeks ago by the most destructive hurricane in 
decades -- have sucked much of the substance but not the spirit from 
Nicaragua's 3.6 million people. 
A few years ago Nicaraguans talked enthusiastically of government campaigns to 
reduce infant mortality, eradicate malaria, distribute land to the landless and 
wipe out illiteracy. 
For a while great strides were made toward realizing those goals. But today, 
for the first time since the revolution that overthrew dictator Anastasio 
Somoza in 1979, children beg on the streets as government officials reluctantly 
slash health programs that once drew international praise. 
In an effort to help hundreds of thousands of Nicaraguan children who have been 
displaced, wounded, orphaned or otherwise traumatized by the Contra war, the 
U.S. Congress appropriated $17.7 million. Two days after President Reagan 
signed the bill on Oct. 1, President Daniel Ortega said Nicaragua would not 
accept the money. 
To Nicaraguans, refusing the aid was a symbol of dignity and national pride. 
Tied to the legislation was a second bill that provided a similar amount in 
non-lethal aid to the Contras, the very forces whose attacks on civilian 
outposts were -- and still are -- responsible for the misery of many children. 
For Nicaragua to have accepted the aid, said Paul Oquist, an adviser to Ortega, 
would be comparable to the United States having accepted a donation of blood 
from Japan following the attack on Pearl Harbor. 
"If the U.S. wants to help children, lift the trade embargo and stop the war," 
he said. "That would stop the production of orphans and allow more (Nicaraguan) 
resources to deal with the problem ourselves." 
Critics of the Sandinistas say the party's bungling management of the economy 
is the real reason for its desperate straights. They accuse the Sandinistas of 
torpedoing peace efforts with the Contras, suppressing the opposition press, 
squelching political dissent and endlessly confounding friend and foe alike 
with contradictory actions. 
Nevertheless, representatives of U.S. and foreign relief agencies based here 
and even mothers who have lost sons in the war say they supported Ortega's 
action. 
A summary of the immense effects of the war on children appears in a 
little-publicized report prepared last summer by a team of American health 
professionals sent to Nicaragua on behalf of the U.S. Agency for International 
Development to assess children's needs. Among their findings, gleaned from 
interviews with 40 humanitarian agencies working here and with the Nicaraguan 
government: 
 -- About 500,000 of the nation's 1.8 million children under age 17 have been 
directly affected through destruction or disruption of schools and other 
services, displacement from homes, death of parents, injuries and psychological 
trauma. 
 -- At least 455 children under 15 years have been killed and 691 are missing 
through the end of 1987. Another 1,542 under 15 have been wounded, with an 
additional 1,865 wounded among youngsters aged 15 through 20. About 1,200 have 
experienced serious physical handicaps such as amputations and 568 children 
have lost both parents, while 138 lost mothers and 9,371 lost fathers. 
 -- As many as 50,000 children have suffered psychological trauma after seeing 
their villages shot up, parents or neighbors killed and having been forced to 
resettle in strange areas. 
Despite the cease-fire treaty of last spring, attacks on farm cooperatives and 
killing and wounding of children continue. In October, in the province of 
Jinotega, a well-marked Red Cross ambulance was shot up by Contras and one 
passenger was wounded. The Contras also attacked a civilian truck, killing nine 
civilians, three of them women. Two children injured in the attack later died. 
Four civilians were killed in an attack in another province that occurred only 
hours before Hurricane Joan struck on Oct. 22. 
Two American physicians, Tim Takaro and Susan Cookson, who have worked for two 
years in the Jinotega war zone, said $300,000 of the U.S. aid had been slated 
for treating intestinal parasites in 30,000 children in their region. But 
conditions imposed by the U.S. Agency for International Development, which 
administers such aid funding, would have undermined the existing health system 
in Nicaragua, they said. 
AID requires that any private agency receiving federal funds have no connection 
with the Nicaraguan Health Ministry. Yet Takaro, Cookson and other U.S. health 
workers here agree that all private agencies working in health cooperate with 
the government system because that is the most efficient and economical way to 
get services to the people. 
One of the Health Ministry's goals since the 1979 revolution has been to expand 
health centers in rural areas. The policy saved many lives during the Contra 
conflict. Last summer's report by the American team on the needs of children 
noted with some surprise that the primary medical and social needs of most 
war-injured and orphaned children had already been cared for within government 
facilities. Most who required specialized care not available in Nicaragua were 
sent to Eastern Bloc countries, it said. Several Health Ministry doctors said 
there has been great difficulty arranging for specialized care in the United 
States. 
The priority need now, the report said, is for continuing rehabilitation within 
the children's own homes. 
All U.S. federal aid to Nicaragua was suspended in 1981. Some of the slack has 
been taken up by U.S. allies, including Canada, Sweden, Holland, Italy, France, 
Spain and other European countries who have contributed hundreds of millions of 
dollars in medical supplies and assistance. Health Ministry officials said the 
severe strains on the economy have forced them to charge for certain health 
services that were previously free. 
Health workers have also been victims of Contra attacks. So far this year, 
according to Takaro and Cookson, two volunteer Nicaraguan health workers 
(brigadistas) have been killed in Jinotega province alone, eight have been 
kidnaped and three are missing. 
Because brigadistas live in communities where there is usually no doctor or 
nurse, their services are highly valued. 
"They are hard to replace when killed because others become too frightened to 
volunteer," Cookson said. "Eight health centers have been attacked by Contras 
in Jinotega this year. Some were destroyed and the medicine supplies were 
always destroyed." 
Hurricane Joan added to the general misery because of the destruction of crops, 
homes, roads, bridges and service centers totaling $828 million, according to 
the Social Welfare Ministry. Officials predict severe food shortages beginning 
in the spring as a result of ruined bean and corn crops. The ministry has 
called for $16.1 million in aid to clothe and feed for six months the 118,000 
children whose lives were disrupted by the hurricane. 
