LOOKS: UPLIFTING EXPERIENCE; 
THE BENEFITS AND LIMITATIONS OF FACIAL CONTOURING AS TREATMENT FOR SAGS 
FACIAL contouring, which involves manual massage or mechanical manipulation of 
the facial muscles, is coming into vogue as more men and women seek ways to 
look younger without going under the cosmetic surgeon's knife. 
Although many cosmetologists refer to these facials as "non-surgical face 
lifts," contouring treatments are not a true alternative to the scalpel. 
Rather, they are intended to develop facial muscle tone. Vera Brown's salon, 
Vera's Retreat in the Glen in Los Angeles, offers both manual and machine 
treatments. She claims that both methods increase the circulation in the face 
and neck "the same way that exercise works on the rest of the body. These 
treatments won't get rid of deep wrinkles. Only plastic surgery will do that. 
But for people who can't -- or won't -- have surgery, they're the next best 
thing." 
Television star Linda Evans of ABC's "Dynasty" reports that 10 years of 
contouring treatments have kept her face firm and have, so far, eliminated the 
need for cosmetic surgery. Evans and fellow actresses Ali MacGraw and Jamie Lee 
Curtis receive treatments at Louise Bianco's salon in Westwood. 
Bianco uses a manual massage technique developed about 60 years ago by a 
Viennese surgeon. Bianco says the surgeon perfected the technique with a French 
cosmetologist named Renna Campbell, who later brought it to the United States. 
Her husband, L.A. dentist Dr. George Campbell, gave up his practice to perform 
what he called the "Renna" technique on such stars as Marilyn Monroe and Clark 
Gable. "The deep massage works on all of the muscle groups in the face, keeping 
the cheeks round and the jawline firm," Bianco says. 
Jean Carle Devereaux, who uses the "Renna" method at Brown's salon, says that 
lubricating emollients must be used so the skin is not stretched during the 
massage. "The circulation is increased about 20 times faster than normal," he 
says. "The increased oxygen causes the muscles to become stronger." 
Today, not only facialists, but doctors, physical therapists, practitioners of 
acupuncture and other health professionals use new facial devices on their 
clients. Specialists claim that the machines "exercise" the face and soften or 
eliminate wrinkles. 
Equipment with names such as Electro-Acuscope, Myopulse and Myopulse 
Renaissance are called "acupressure face-lift machines." Small amounts of 
electrical current stimulate the nerves, which causes capillaries to enlarge, 
increasing circulation. The skin looks flushed and healthy, and fine wrinkles 
seem to disappear. Margo Jordan, who administers such treatments in her Santa 
Monica office, says that after 16 weekly visits, the "face-lift" effect can be 
maintained with monthly treatments. 
A hand-held version of the machine has been developed by Dr. Dean Richards of 
Australia. The Acuhealth locates acupuncture points and gives off mild 
electrical impulses. This $245 home-use unit is marketed by mail from Woodland 
Hills. 
Neither manual nor mechanical contouring treatments have the long-lasting 
effect of plastic surgery. Treatments must be continued to sustain results, and 
at $30 to $100 per treatment, the maintenance process can be costly. But for 
many people who don't want to risk the dangers of anesthesia, incisions and 
infection, contouring treatments may be a reasonable alternative. 
Makeup: Lucy Baldock / Celestine-Cloutier; model: Donna Denell / Prima 
