SINGLE LIFE: SERVICES PROVIDE WELCOME RELIEF TO MOVING EXPERIENCE 
Making a move from one place to another is always difficult, and as a single 
person, you may be facing it alone, often with no support system to lean upon. 
A single person sometimes relocates to a new town, new home and new job in one 
step. For the single custodial parents, there is the added pressure of helping 
children adjust to new surroundings. 
Growing comfortable with a new job, new home and new friends may simply take 
time; however, there are ways single people can hasten the process. 
The Smart Move specializes in minimizing moving trauma. "We take up where the 
moving van leaves off," says Patty Dakides, founder and president of the Laguna 
Hills-based company. 
For $25 an hour, Dakides and company will coordinate your move, unpack, line 
the shelves, wash, clean, organize and, if you wish, decorate your new home. 
A well-worn and weary transplantee can come home after a long first day at the 
office to discover a dinner complete with wine, fresh-cut flowers and a card 
that reads "Welcome to your new home" waiting on the table. 
"When everything is in order on the home front, the rest of life seems to run 
more smoothly," Dakides says. 
Betsy Collins started Irvine-based Bright Beginnings, a neighborhood welcoming 
service, five years ago when she was newly single. "My husband and I split up 
suddenly after our move here. I had lived in Ft. Worth for many years, and I 
hadn't made any friends. Starting the company was really a defense against the 
devastation of a 28-year marriage." 
Working with local chambers of commerce, city officials, real estate agents and 
referrals from private citizens, Collins and her daughter, Melanie Hodgson, 
cover an eight-city spread from Fountain Valley to Newport Beach. 
They phone new residents to schedule a "welcoming" appointment. Then they 
dispatch a company representative to each recipient's home, bearing free and 
"dollars-off" coupons for goods and services offered by local sponsors. "We 
also present them with a valuable packet of civic information that includes a 
letter of greeting from the mayor, maps, DMV and voter registration 
information," Collins says. 
Local retailers, such as beauty salons, fast-food chains, department stores and 
malls, offer free gifts of haircuts, pizza and dry-cleaning services. Health 
care professionals, such as dentists, doctors, optometrists and chiropractors, 
offer complimentary teeth cleaning or a free medical diagnostic evaluation. 
The welcoming packet also includes information on social, cultural and charity 
groups. "We leave each newcomer with a consumer directory of sponsors and our 
phone number, in case they have any questions or require further assistance," 
Hodgson adds. 
Bright Beginnings welcomes all newcomers, single or married. For new citizens 
who reside in South Orange County, Collins and Hodgson offer free referrals to 
other neighborhood welcoming services. 
Both mother and daughter are unmarried, and they believe that single people on 
their own have special needs when relocating to a new place. "The toughest part 
about being new in town," Hodgson says, "is taking that first step of getting 
to know your community." 
They offer these tips to help singles make a smoother and faster transition: 
Get involved mentally, physically and spiritually, according to your interests. 
Join groups that cater to your favorite pastimes and hobbies. 
Subscribe to a newspaper and regional magazine so you can learn about the area. 
They list places to visit, dine and shop, and publish information about 
scheduled events that can acquaint you with singles activities and cultural 
events. 
Nearly all large apartment or condominium complexes organize regularly 
scheduled events, from aerobics classes to Sunday brunches, barbecues and ski 
trips. Many of the participants will be new to the area. Take advantage of 
these offerings. Many are low cost and some are free. 
Networking is the name of the game for any professional, especially if you're 
single. Contact the chamber of commerce in your area. You need not be a 
business owner to join your local chamber. The general public is welcome. Fees 
vary among chapters, but average annual membership runs about $75 for 
non-business owners. With a variety of motivational breakfasts, mixers, 
cocktail parties and other events offered throughout the year, you can make 
valuable business and social connections. 
It's rare to find a native Californian in Orange County. Why not start your own 
newcomer's social group? 
Ask other people who have moved to Orange County for suggestions on making a 
smooth transition. People enjoy being helpful, and they will probably extend a 
social invitation. 
Don't wait for someone else to make the first move. If you want to be part of 
your new environment, you need to show your interest in it. 
It's easy to bury yourself in work when you don't have new friends or your 
social calendar is unfettered. But don't get into a routine that you can't 
change once your social life perks up. 
Make a point of an in-person meeting with the parents of your child's friends. 
Not only is this something that every parent should do, but you will widen your 
social network. 
Reach out. Let people know you need them. Talk to people at your health club, 
the dry cleaners, at church or while doing volunteer work. As a newcomer, your 
best resource is other people. 
