DOLLAR CLOSES AT BEST LEVEL IN 3 MONTHS IN LIGHT HOLIDAY TRADING 
The dollar closed sharply higher in light holiday trading today, hitting the 
best level in three months on speculation that Western trading partners are 
tolerating a stronger U.S. currency. 
It jumped to 1.8550 West German marks at the close from Friday's 1.8445, which 
had also been a three-month high. 
It also advanced against Japan's currency to 128.00 yen from 127.40. 
Trading was slow, however, with banks closed for the Martin Luther King Jr. 
federal holiday. The shortened trading day ended at 1 p.m. EST instead of the 
normal 4:30 p.m. 
With the Federal Reserve and commercial banks closed, dealers neither expected 
nor reported any central bank intervention to halt the dollar's rise, as there 
had been on several days last week. But speculators continued to buy. 
"There is natural demand for the dollar," said Yani Budiman of Chemical Bank. 
The dollar has been buoyed in recent weeks by steady U.S. interest rates and 
stronger economic reports, as well as the perception that the U.S. trading 
partners are allowing it to rise. The Fed may be seeking a stronger currency to 
reduce the threat of inflation from expensive imports, dealers say. 
Looking ahead, a sharply wider November U.S. trade gap Wednesday could dim the 
dollar's luster, dealers said. Others felt that for technical reasons alone the 
currency could be due for a decline. 
"We could reach 1.88 marks by Wednesday," a Frankfurt dealer said. "But it's 
gone up too fast. . . . Next week it might correct four or five pfennigs," she 
added. 
Dealers said the dollar extended last week's gains on the back of West German 
Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg's remark Friday that the dollar's present 
level is acceptable. Expectations that U.S. interest rates will remain firm 
also helped. 
Stoltenberg said current values -- up more than 4.5% against the mark since the 
start of the year -- were acceptable to the Group of Seven industrial powers. 
Speculative money has flowed to dollars because high U.S. interest rates offer 
a good return on many dollar assets. 
