IF THE COLLAPSE OF MARRIAGE IS NOBODY'S 'FAULT,' WHY DO WOMEN PAY?; 
LAW: TWENTY YEARS AGO, CALIFORNIA MOVED TO MAKE DIVORCE RATIONAL, EVEN 
CIVILIZED. ENTER THE HORROR STORIES. 
At the very end of "The War of the Roses," Danny de Vito delivers the moral to 
his cautionary tale about the mutually assured destruction of a marriage. 
"Civilized divorce," he concludes, "is a contradiction in terms." 
This is more than a punch line to the movie. It may serve as the footnote to 
that product of wishful thinking and right-minded reform that marks its 20th 
anniversary this week: no-fault divorce. 
In January, 1970, the state of California put into effect a kind of peace 
treaty. No-fault divorce was to end the use of the courtroom as a battleground 
between divorcing parties. 
Until that moment, divorce in America was for the most part awarded only after 
one party was proved to be guilty for ending the marriage. This was a messy and 
often deceitful process to prove that one person was at fault, guilty of 
adultery or cruelty, and that there were "grounds" for divorce. 
In a legislative sweep of the hand, California eliminated fault as the grounds 
for divorce, or for awarding alimony, or for dividing property, which was to be 
split equally. The law, signed by then-Gov. Ronald Reagan, was hailed as the 
first step to making divorce rational, equitable, modern, quick and, yes, 
civilized. 
Where California led, the country followed. In relatively rapid order, no-fault 
divorce became common in every state. And so, too, more slowly, did the horror 
stories. 
Judith Wallerstein, the author of "Second Chances," says now from the vantage 
point of two decades, "How little we anticipated what the results might be. We 
passed legislation without a sufficient attempt to foresee the consequences." 
What were the consequences? No-fault divorce did make the legal process less 
scandalous. But the new law and the loss of the old bargaining chip, fault, 
contributed to an economic disaster. 
Lenore Weitzman's seminal book, "The Divorce Revolution," was the first to 
document the real-life effect of the law in California. "No fault was taken to 
mean no responsibility," says Weitzman, now a sociology professor at Harvard. 
The results were "a systematic impoverishment of women and children." 
In the early flush of feminism, the law presumed and the judges rigorously, 
even ruthlessly, implemented the idea that women should be able to support 
themselves, even if they'd been out of the work force for years. The strict 
equal treatment of economic unequals was financially disastrous. 
Alimony or spousal support diminished in amount and length. Ordered to divide 
property equally, couples had to sell homes, taking children away from their 
old neighborhoods and schools. There was no allowance made for the one real 
economic asset of a modern marriage: present and future earning power. 
"No-fault was the vehicle or the excuse for saying that what happened in the 
past didn't matter, what matters is that you divide up the property and each go 
your own way, "says Weitzman. " Judges used it to cut women off." 
To this day, economists argue about how much no-fault divorce added to the 
plight of women and children. But they all agree it was a factor. Today, 
nationally, five years after divorce, a woman's income is still 30% of what it 
was during the marriage. A man's income is 14% more. 
Now there is a movement to reform the reform. The movement says that no fault 
is not the same as no responsibility. 
Once again California has been among the first to experiment. It has, among 
other things, revised the standards for spousal support and the duration of 
that support. Equally important, it is changing judicial attitudes about 
property division that forced the sale of children's homes. 
Across the country, the second wave is pointed not only at a more viable 
spousal support, but also at enforcing child-support decrees. There is heated 
discussion as well about whether business assets and professional credentials 
should be considered "marital property" upon divorce. 
But this reform wave, like the last one, takes place in a larger context. Today 
most families need two incomes. When one family becomes two single households, 
there is rarely enough. 
Moreover, for all the rhetoric and real change, most women still enter marriage 
earning less. They often go on earning less throughout marriage and especially 
motherhood. And so they leave a marriage earning less. 
There are limits to how much any divorce law can make up for the inequities of 
a whole society. The old reforms continued and even exaggerated those 
inequities. All these reforms can try to do, as Weitzman puts it, is to see at 
least that husband and wife "both share the burdens of divorce in America." 
So a truce signed 20 years ago with high ideals about marital peace and 
domestic justice and gender equality has come up against economic reality and 
more than a touch of emotional cynicism. It just may be that a civilized 
divorce law is also a contradiction in terms. 
