BIPARTISANSHIP GOAL IN SENATE FOREIGN AGENDA 
Seized by the spirit of bipartisanship for which President Bush appealed on 
Inauguration Day, Senate Democrats and Republicans on Wednesday laid out 
similar legislative agendas and pledged to end the constant bickering over 
foreign policy that has characterized their relations with the White House over 
the last eight years. 
"We are here to make a new start," declared Senate Majority Leader George J. 
Mitchell (D-Me.) in a floor speech. "In his inaugural address, the President 
put his hand out to me and to the Speaker of the House. I now extend mine to 
him." 
Cabinet Members Confirmed 
Mitchell's words opened the first full day of Senate business -- a day devoted 
to long speeches, an avalanche of new legislation and roll call votes 
confirming three Bush Cabinet appointees: Secretary of State James A. Baker 
III, Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Hanford Dole and Budget Director Richard G. 
Darman. 
During the 101st Congress, Mitchell said, the Democratic majority is committed 
to enacting legislation that would provide better housing, child care and 
health care; fully fund existing anti-drug legislation; improve air quality; 
increase the minimum wage; reform campaign financing; establish a system of 
national voluntary service and set new ethical standards for people who serve 
in government. 
Responding for the GOP, Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole (R-Kan.) listed many of 
the same goals, though he acknowledged that his party has different ideas of 
how these objectives should be achieved. He also noted that Republicans are 
awaiting Bush's legislative plan, which he is expected to outline in a speech 
to Congress Feb. 9. 
Barely mentioned in any of these speeches was what most members of Congress 
view as the nation's most pressing problem -- the deficit. Both Democrats and 
Republicans will wait for Bush's long-promised proposal for cutting the deficit 
without raising taxes. 
The Democrats introduced their proposal for voluntary service, a sweeping plan 
for a "citizens corps" that would work to combat such national problems as 
illiteracy, homelessness and crime in return for cash vouchers that could be 
used for education expense or a down payment on a home. Described by its 
sponsors as an updated version of the GI Bill of Rights, young Americans who 
volunteered for the program would choose either civilian or military service. 
The strongest theme running through the remarks of both Mitchell and Dole was 
their common desire to develop a bipartisan foreign policy with Bush instead of 
constantly battling the White House, as they did during the Ronald Reagan 
presidency. The tension between Congress and the President over foreign policy 
reached a peak with the disclosure of the Iran-Contra scandal, which many 
Reagan Administration officials sought to hide from the lawmakers. 
War Powers Dispute 
Both party leaders expressed a desire to revise the controversial 1973 War 
Powers Resolution, which restricts the President from placing American troops 
in "imminent hostilities" for more than 90 days without the consent of 
Congress. No President has ever willingly complied with the law, which 
inevitably precipitates a battle between Congress and the White House whenever 
U.S. forces come under hostile fire. 
"Overcoming this stalemate should be a high priority for both Congress and the 
executive," Mitchell said. "Enacting any change in the law will encounter 
strongly held and conflicting views. But the effort should be made (and) . . . 
I believe a constitutionally sound compromise is possible." 
Dole concurred. "The time has come to re-examine the war powers resolution,," 
he said, adding that the Administration already has expressed "considerable 
concern" about it. 
Nevertheless, Mitchell warned that while the Democratic majority in Congress 
wants to be cooperative with Bush on foreign policy initiatives, it will 
continue to insist on being a full partner with the President in shaping policy 
and deciding where force is necessary. 
Byrd Reintroduces Bill 
Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D-W.Va.) reintroduced a Democratic measure first offered 
last year that would require consultation between the President and Congress. 
Among the most urgent foreign policy issues facing Congress is the spread of 
chemical warfare throughout the world. Both Sens. Dole and Claiborne Pell 
(D-R.I.) said that they would introduce differing bills designed to curtail the 
manufacture of chemical weapons. 
On social programs, Mitchell -- keying off Bush's pledge to bring about a 
"kinder, gentler America" -- declared that the nation and the government are 
entering a new era. "The New Deal and the Reagan reaction to it are over," he 
said. 
As Mitchell spoke, Democratic senators reintroduced much of the social 
legislation that was left on the calendar when the 100th Congress adjourned, 
including a bill by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) to raise the minimum wage 
to $4.65 an hour and another measure by Sen. Christopher J. Dodd (D-Conn.) to 
provide subsidized day care -- two pieces of legislation that the party 
leadership intends to push this year. 
Although Dole also mentioned raising the minimum wage, Republicans are expected 
to insist on a sub-minimum wage for teen-agers as well, which Democrats oppose. 
Likewise, two Republicans -- Sens. Pete Wilson of California and Pete V. 
Domenici of New Mexico -- offered alternative legislation to Dodd's child-care 
bill, which they estimated would cost $10 billion. 
