BIGGER SHARE OF GAS FUNDS FOR NORTH MAY BE SOUGHT 
In a move that could renew old North-South battles over highway funding, 
Assembly Speaker Willie Brown said Tuesday that he may seek more revenue from a 
proposed gas tax increase for Northern California highways and mass transit. 
The San Francisco Democrat, speaking off the cuff after a California Teachers 
Assn. rally, said that as the revenue split is proposed, it appears the North 
would be shortchanged on these priority projects. 
If his analysis proves correct, Brown said, he will seek legislation forcing a 
redistribution of the new tax revenues. 
Brown, who was one of the architects of a complex plan to increase the gasoline 
tax and modify the state's spending limit, is the first top state leader to 
express qualms about the proposal. By demanding changes, Brown could upset the 
delicate compromise that was crafted last year by legislative leaders and Gov. 
George Deukmejian. 
The proposal calls for a 9-cent-per-gallon increase in the gasoline tax, which 
would be used to help finance a 10-year, $18.5-billion program to improve the 
state's transportation system and reduce congestion. Because the tax increase 
would create more revenue than the Legislature could spend under current 
restrictions, the gas tax increase is tied to a constitutional amendment that 
would modify the state spending limit. 
The gas tax cannot go into effect unless voters approve the spending limit 
amendment next June. 
As planned, 60% of the new tax revenues would go to Southern California and 40% 
to Northern California. Brown does not quarrel with the overall split but he 
notes that of the North's 40%, most is allotted for highway maintainance and 
only a small portion is designated for new highways and mass transit. The 
South, on the other hand, would receive most of its share for highways and such 
projects as light rail. 
Although Brown said at the rally that he considers the breakdown unfair, a 
spokesman for Brown hastened to add afterward that the Speaker had not meant by 
his comments to indicate that he was openly opposing the proposed new tax. 
"He just thought it (the formula) was a done deal," the spokesman said. "He's 
under a lot of pressure from city and county officials in his area and he wants 
to look into it. " 
However, key legislators in both houses disagreed about a possible solution to 
Brown's concerns. 
Senate Transportation Committee Chairman Quentin Kopp (I-San Francisco) said 
problems with the formula could be addressed easily in new legislation but 
Assembly Transportation Committee Chairman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) said 
Southern California lawmakers would not be willing to support any change that 
would take money from their area. 
"If there are to be changes, they will not come at the expense of Southern 
California," Katz said. "One thing the North has to remember is that the vast 
amount of the sales tax being raised to help the Bay Area is coming from 
Southern California. That's something that can't be overlooked when we discuss 
these proposals." 
A quarter-cent sales tax increase went into effect Dec. 1 to help pay for 
repairs and rehabilitation to areas damaged by the Oct. 17 earthquake. 
Katz said the planned allocation of funds is reasonable, but Kopp said he 
didn't think it was fair that maintenance funds be considered in the formula, 
especially when his area was being hit with additional costs because of the 
earthquake. 
"I'm pleased that Speaker Brown recognizes that we have a problem," Kopp said. 
"To me it's a solvable problem. I think (Brown's comments) are a healthy sign 
because this is the major issue as far as I'm concerned." 
