ECHOES OF STRIFE HAUNT U.S. ON KING'S BIRTHDAY 
Church bells across the country tolled the loss of Martin Luther King Jr. today 
as echoes of the racial conflicts the slain civil rights leader struggled to 
overcome continued to haunt the nation. 
In Atlanta, worshipers at King's church were urged on the slain civil rights 
leader's birthday to keep alive his memory and his philosophy of nonviolence. 
"This is a man who is a deep current in our memory," said the Rev. Cecil 
Williams, pastor of Glide Memorial United Methodist Church in San Francisco. 
"Let us live then not only his dream, but let us live the practice of 
nonviolence and unconditional love." 
Williams spoke at the annual ecumenical service at Ebenezer Baptist Church. 
Church services, parades and other celebrations were held nationwide during the 
weekend before the federal holiday, which for the first time falls on the slain 
civil-rights leader's actual birthday. 
He would have been 61 today. 
In Los Angeles, Mayor Tom Bradley observed the holiday today by ringing the 
City Hall bell three times. 
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference, meanwhile, demonstrated at the 
downtown headquarters of Security Pacific Bank to protest the bank's decision 
to stay open on the federal holiday. 
Also planned today in Atlanta was a "March of Celebration" parade, being 
televised nationally for the first time. 
This year's holiday follows a series of bombings and threats, apparently 
racially motivated, in the Southeast, and a flare-up of racial tensions in 
Boston after an apparent hoax in which a white man had claimed that a black 
mugger fatally shot his pregnant wife. 
It also comes at a time of gains for blacks -- the election of David N. 
Dinkins, first black mayor of New York City, and the nation's first elected 
black governor, L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia. 
"Today, the sound of liberty is being heard all around the world," said James 
Farmer, founder of the Congress for Racial Equality, as he pounded three times 
with his fist on the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia. "Those who have been denied 
liberty love it most. Dr. King loved liberty and he fought and died for it." 
The New York Stock Exchange held a moment of silence at noon. 
In Arizona, one of just four states without some form of King holiday, 
thousands marched in Phoenix and Tucson today to honor King. A racially mixed 
crowd carried black balloons along a four-mile stretch of downtown Phoenix as 
they headed for a rally at the Capitol. 
