SCORING OFF THE BOARD; 
BASKETBALL: MATIJASEVIC DITCHES SKATEBOARD TO BECOME A CRESCENTA VALLEY FORCE. 
Silly Paul Matijasevic. For a moment, he expected a modicum of praise from 
Crescenta Valley High Coach John Goffredo for his performance in a recent 
victory over Burbank. Instead, awaiting Matijasevic in the locker room was a 
mortar blast of criticism. 
Inconsistency was the problem. At times, Matijasevic would hustle. At other 
times, he would loaf. Some players run with the speed of a deer; Matijasevic 
posted up with the timidity of one. 
A quick check of the scorebook silenced Goffredo. Matijasevic had scored 20 
points and grabbed 19 rebounds. 
"I have some pretty high expectations," Goffredo said. "Most coaches would have 
patted him on the back and said, 'You're wonderful.' I was on his butt." 
For good reason. Goffredo has held a flame to the 6-foot-7 senior before, and 
the results have been remarkable. Matijasevic's turnaround in the past three 
years has been more impressive than a 360-degree dunk. He changed from an 
aimless skateboard fanatic to one of the top high school frontcourt players in 
the Valley area. The transformation took place on the basketball court but the 
effects were felt in the classroom and in his personal life, as well. 
Basketball was not an immediate elixir. The discipline of practices frustrated 
Matijasevic during his first two seasons. He often considered quitting the 
team. Life was simple on a skateboard. There were no rules on the sidewalk. 
"I think it was quite a challenge because Paul wasn't quite ready to knuckle 
down with it," Paul's mother, Elizabeth, said. "I don't think he knew how much 
he would have to give of himself to basketball." 
Dividends began to trickle in when he made the varsity last season. The local 
press took notice of his play. He got attention on campus. 
"I saw a big difference," Elizabeth said. "He thought, 'Maybe it's worth all 
the time and effort I put into it.' Then, the skateboard was thrown aside." 
He often would go to school at 6 a.m. on school days to shoot on his own. He 
spent his spare time scouting games with Goffredo. 
"I don't know how I turned it around," Matijasevic said. "Coach just started 
helping me." 
And Matijasevic, who was gangly and awkward as a freshman, has flourished. He 
now averages 15 points and 10 rebounds a game, and he scored 28 points against 
Montebello. He was chosen the most valuable player of the Saugus tournament and 
named to the All-Crescenta Valley tournament team. In a showdown last month 
with North Hollywood's Dana Jones, Matijasevic outscored the Pepperdine-bound 
center, 16-11. 
"He's great near the basket," Glendale Coach Bob Davidson said of Matijasevic. 
"A very good inside player. He's got a real good touch in there and he jumps 
real well too." 
Matijasevic, once resistant to authority, has come to terms with occasional 
lambastings from Goffredo. 
"When you're doing something wrong, he gets on you a lot and that sort of makes 
me mad," Matijasevic said. "But that's just him. 
"I feel like I've got my act together." 
Had it not come together, Matijasevic might have been sprawled across some La 
Crescenta street. Although he has forsaken his skateboard, he used to ride for 
hours every day. His favorite game was to lie on his board in a position aptly 
dubbed "the coffin" and plummet feet first down the steepest, most toe-tingling 
hill he could find. It was a sort of urban luge run. Friends drove alongside 
the then-6-foot-5 missile and, Matijasevic says, clocked him at more than 40 
mph. 
And then there was the one-armed handstand. 
"The shorter kids could do it with ease," Matijasevic said. 
He couldn't. As proof, a nasty, cigar-sized scar runs along the inside of his 
left elbow. While skateboarding during his freshman year, he attempted the move 
and fractured his arm in three places. He still has trouble fully extending the 
arm. 
The risky antics terrified his mother. "We tried everything with the 
skateboard," she said. "Confiscate it. Nothing worked. He and his skateboard 
always seemed to get together." 
Meanwhile, he and academia drifted briskly apart. Matijasevic's grades plunged 
more quickly than he did in "the coffin." His record of classroom offenses grew 
as long as his shaggy blond hair. He had a 1.1 grade-point average after his 
freshman year. It has since improved to 2.9. 
"I would come to school and teachers would say that Paul's done this or that -- 
disrupting the class," Elizabeth said. "He was very mischievous. I wouldn't say 
he was a bad kid." 
Not a bad kid, but an apathetic one. 
"He was just disinterested in school," Crescenta Valley Principal Ken Biermann 
said. "Or just simply, if I have to (go to school), I have to." 
Enter Goffredo, who lives little more than a long jump shot from the 
Matijasevics. He had seen the lanky youngster skateboarding around the 
neighborhood. As a 6-foot-4 eighth-grader, Matijasevic was tough to miss. He 
was also a regular at the local video arcade owned by Norm Jones, the Falcons' 
freshman basketball coach. 
Goffredo approached him once but Matijasevic said that he would be attending 
St. Francis High and did not plan to play basketball. His grades were too low 
for St. Francis, however, and he wound up at Crescenta Valley. 
The metamorphosis on the court has not been complete. 
"He loses focus," Goffredo said. "He'll put out and then he'll drift. 
"He's an emotional player and he has to stay emotional. If he's not, then he's 
not effective. You have to be intense. Nobody cares how tall you are." 
Matijasevic plans to attend a junior college and would like to play eventually 
for Loyola Marymount. According to Goffredo, he would face long odds in making 
a Division I roster. 
About as long as the odds that basketball could change Matijasevic. 
