JACK SMITH: ANOTHER QUOTE ATTRIBUTED TO A QUOTED OTHER 
In writing the other day about kittens, I quoted an eternal truth as expressed 
in verse by Ogden Nash: 
The trouble with a kitten is 
THAT 
Eventually it becomes a 
CAT 
That attribution has provoked a literary footnote from attorney John Hamilton 
Scott: "It is said that Jeremiah Clarke died of despair because his best 
Trumpet Voluntary was constantly attributed to Henry Purcell. I sometimes think 
that Richard Armour is suffering the same fate by having his works constantly 
credited to Ogden Nash. Richard Armour is one of the best American writers of 
light verse, and I believe that he does not deserve to be obscured by the more 
well-known name of Nash. 
"I must, therefore note that it was not Ogden Nash who wrote about kittens 
becoming cats; it was Richard Armour. His verse, entitled 'Lady, your claws are 
showing,' appeared in his first collection, entitled 'Light Armour,' and reads 
as follows: 
One dreadful truth I rather wish 
I did not know is that 
The woman who is kittenish 
May one day be a cat. 
Let me say first that I am a friend and a great admirer of Richard Armour, and 
I agree that in the writing of light verse he has few peers. Armour achieves 
his felicitous rhymes without distorting words, as Nash often does, e.g., (from 
"Reflections on Babies") -- 
A bit of talcum 
Is always walcom 
However, in Nash's defense, I must say that I do not consider his verse on 
kittens plagiarism. Nash was writing about kittens. Armour about women. Though 
his point was that they are in some sense similar, it remains that they are two 
different species. Besides, an idea can not be copyrighted. Armour's 
observation that kittenish women sometimes become cats, is no bar to Nash's 
observation that kittens always become cats. 
If Armour's verses are sometimes attributed to Nash, it is also true that 
Nash's verses are sometimes attributed to others. Most people think it was 
Dorothy Parker who made this classic observation -- 
Candy 
Is dandy 
But liquor 
Is quicker 
That was written by Ogden Nash. 
Nash, on the other hand, is sometimes given credit for -- 
Men seldom make passes 
At girls who wear glasses 
That was written by Dorothy Parker. 
Scott also notes that another famous Armour verse, "Going to Extremes," appears 
in "Light Armour" -- 
Shake and shake 
The catsup bottle. 
None will come, 
And then a lot'll. 
Another eternal truth encapsulated in four brief lines. ("A lot'll" is a 
precise rendition of how we say "A lot will.") 
Armour is living in retirement with his wife, Kathleen, in Claremont, and 
illness, alas, has strictured the flow from his own creative bottle. But in his 
creative lifetime Armour probably made more insightful comments on life in 
America, in fewer words, than any other writer. 
He made fun of such sacred institutions as art, education, medicine, history 
and sports, among almost everything else. In "Good Looking," from "All in 
Sport," he employed a mischievous comma to make his point -- 
It's not her figure skating that 
Men find exhilarating. 
No, what they're always looking at 
Is just her figure, skating 
In the foreword Armour defined sport as -- 
Exercise 
In disguise 
He added: "That is about all I can say also for the verses in this little book: 
they are short and they rhyme. They scan, too, if your read them right. There 
is no use analyzing them for symbolism or hidden meaning or for the influence 
of Milton, John Donne, or T. S. Eliot." 
Dick Armour -- a man for our times; 
He sees, he scans, and he rhymes. 
