DR. JOYCE BROTHERS: ALCOHOL AFFECTS CHILDREN, TOO 
What does it mean to grow up as a child of an alcoholic parent? Here's a chance 
to compare your views with those of some experts. True or false? 
1 -- Most children of alcoholics, having seen what alcoholism can do, shun 
drinking themselves. 
2 -- Children of alcoholics tend to put great emphasis on control in their own 
lives. 
3 -- As adults, children of alcoholics are no more vulnerable to illness than 
others. 
4 -- A child's having to feel responsible for parents isn't such a bad thing. 
5 -- Neglect, broken promises and inconsistency are usually the worst problems 
associated with homes where one or both parents are alcoholic. 
6 -- If an adult child's parents are still getting into trouble with alcohol, 
the child should help them. 
7 -- Because children of alcoholics have usually lived with lies, they're often 
scrupulously honest. 
8 -- So much damage has been done to children of alcoholics that support groups 
are generally less effective than with other victims of abuse. 
ANSWERS: 
1 -- FALSE. More than half of all alcoholics have at least one alcoholic 
parent. While some children of alcoholics are violently opposed to drink, 30% 
of children raised by alcoholic parents become or marry alcoholics. 
2 -- TRUE. Many adult children of alcoholics fear that if they don't maintain 
tight control, they'll become like their parents. They put an extraordinary 
emphasis on control of anger and emotions. 
3 -- FALSE. Children of alcoholics are more vulnerable to many stress 
illnesses. As children, they're more likely to be bed-wetters, to be 
hyperactive and asthmatic, and as adults, they tend to have ulcers, colitis, 
migraines and bulimia. 
4 -- FALSE. Children who grow up having to feel responsible for their parents 
almost always have difficulties with intimacy. The overly responsible child 
doesn't learn how to play, to be spontaneous and to share in decision making. 
5 -- FALSE. Violence, incest and sexual abuse are three times more common in 
alcoholic households than in the general population. 
6 -- FALSE. One way to help break the destructive pattern is for the child to 
stop covering up for the parents' drink-induced behavior. 
7 -- FALSE. Unfortunately, lying frequently becomes a way of life, and as 
adults, these children often lie when it may be just as easy to tell the truth. 
8 -- FALSE. Alateen, a support group for the children of alcoholics, Al-Anon, 
for adults with alcoholic relatives or friends, and ACA, Adult Children of 
Alcoholics, are effective in helping victims recognize the disease. 
If you answered six of these questions correctly, you're better informed than 
most on this subject. 
