NICHOLLS-TO-RANGERS TRADE SEEMS LIKELY 
The Kings and the New York Rangers are expected to make a deal for center 
Bernie Nicholls within the next 24 hours. The proposed trade would send Tomas 
Sandstrom and Tony Granato, both right wingers and both 25, to the Kings for 
Nicholls, 28. 
"I can't comment," King General Manager Rogie Vachon said from his Los Angeles 
home Friday night. "There is no deal now. I'm not denying anything. There is 
certainly something in the works, but I can't say it is finalized. Yes, we've 
been talking to the Rangers. We've been going back and forth with proposals and 
everything is on the table now." 
Ken Baumgartner, a former teammate of Nicholls in Los Angeles who plays for the 
New York Islanders, said in today's editions of Newsday: "He had a bad month, 
and all of a sudden he's on the block. I don't see how he fell out of favor. 
Any other place, if you get in a slump, they'll let you get out of it. 
"But there, they are in such a hurry to win, they make more moves. Maybe 
they're still looking for that European player (as Sandstrom is) to play with 
Wayne. And Granato has that speed." 
Baumgartner was traded by the Kings to the Islanders earlier this season. 
It is believed the trade has been held up while Nicholls underwent minor 
bladder surgery Friday. The Rangers wanted to make sure there were no medical 
problems. 
Nicholls was scheduled to play in Sunday's All-Star game here. He was ticketed 
to fly out of Los Angeles Friday night. 
"He'll go if he feels up to it," Vachon said. "I left it up to him. He was 
going to see how he felt." 
Nicholls is coming off his best season. He scored 70 goals, becoming only the 
fifth player in NHL history to do so. He also totaled 150 points a year ago, 
his seventh full season with the Kings. 
This season, he has 27 goals and 48 assists for 75 points, but recently, 
bothered by several nagging injuries, he has slumped, failing to score a goal 
since New Year's Day. 
That coincided with a Kings' slide all the way to fourth place in the Smythe 
Division. They were 0-6-1 since the start of the year before beating the 
Detroit Red Wings, 9-4, Thursday night. Nicholls had three assists. 
The Kings' problems caused their owner, Bruce McNall, to publicly promise big 
changes. Now, a big change may be at hand. 
