THE SAVVY TRAVELER: SOME COUNTRIES OFFER BARGAIN PRICES 
As you begin making preliminary travel plans for next summer, you may be 
pleasantly surprised. 
Americans have become much more sensitive to travel costs, and their travel 
choices are reflecting that concern. For example, the number of Americans 
visiting the United Kingdom in 1988 was about the same as 1987. 
For 1989 that figure is not expected to grow. Why? In a survey conducted by 
Ogilvy &amp; Mather, an advertising agency, only 38% believed that Great 
Britain is cheaper than other countries in Europe. 
With the dollar still weak against the pound, the United Kingdom is in the same 
category as France and Italy, relative to expenses. 
Thus, many Americans have adjusted their trips accordingly. The trend started 
last year with some surprising travel choices by Americans. The biggest 
surprise was to the Middle East. 
"Tours to Egypt were booming," says Robert Cazian, owner of R&amp;H Voyage in 
Glendale, a company that specializes in Middle East travel. "In 1987 hardly 
anyone went, and our business dropped off more than 60%. But 1988 saw a 
dramatic turnaround." 
Operators such as Cazian had trouble accommodating everyone who wanted to go to 
Egypt. It was nearly impossible to get space at most Cairo hotels, and it was 
impossible to get berths on Nile River cruises. 
Indications are that this trend will continue through 1989. 
Tour operators offer a variety of Egypt trips -- the more traditional Pyramids 
and Luxor, as well as the Sinai and St. Catherine's Monastery. 
A changing aspect of Middle East travel is the move toward individualized 
itineraries with firms like Abercrombie &amp; Kent offering first-class trips 
to Egypt. (One R&amp;H itinerary features a private dinner trip on the Nile 
aboard a felucca.) 
Turkey also has become a hot destination. Europeans have known about Turkey for 
years, but until this year most of the Americans who visited did so on one-day 
stopovers via cruise ships or they were backpackers. 
This year the flow to Turkey is due to its not being expensive. It has one of 
the best -- and one of the most unspoiled -- seacoasts. It has one of the best 
charter yacht fleets in the world and has a rich cultural heritage. Also, the 
people are great. 
But don't look for promotions and advertising. Instead, many major hotels and 
resort developers are putting their money into construction and development. 
Hotels (including a Regent) and elegant restaurants are being built, and 
tourism is slowly becoming more sophisticated. 
Many luxury tour operators also are combining Turkey with Egypt in one tour. In 
addition, more cruise lines are exploring Istanbul as a destination. 
Expanding Europe Service 
Some international airlines are investigating both Istanbul and the resort city 
of Izmir as new destinations. Some, like KLM, offer good connections and 
attractive air fares from the United States via Amsterdam. 
Many of these airlines also areconsidering flying into numerous U.S. gateway 
cities to expand European service. 
During the next few months Portugal and Spain will join Turkey as hot 
destinations. Both of these countries have always been terrific alternatives to 
the usual European itineraries of England, France and Italy. 
Tourism to Portugal and Spain is growing, and with good reason. The dollar 
simply buys you more, and both national airlines are marketing attractive tour 
packages. 
TAP, the Portuguese airline, begins service to Los Angeles in April. 
Iberia, the Spanish airline, now has flights out of Miami, Chicago and Los 
Angeles to Madrid, in addition to its regular New York City service. Flights 
from Los Angeles are now nonstop. 
An example of the bargains: Iberia is offering a one-week trip to Madrid or 
Spain's Costa del Sol with hotel rates at $5 a day. 
Here's the deal: Buy an inexpensive APEX ticket from New York City to Madrid 
and Iberia will virtually host you for a week for $5 a day. This includes daily 
breakfast, hotel taxes and service charges. It's available through March 18 
from Petrabax World Tour Operators. Call toll-free (800) 367-6611. 
American Airlines 
But Iberia isn't the only airline that flies from the United States to Spain. 
TWA and Pan Am fly there, too. And American Airlines has started service from 
Dallas. 
American is also rapidly expanding its European route network, but along 
nontraditional routes. "If someone is going to the South of France," says 
spokesman Tim Doke, "then why do they have to fly through Paris?" 
Already, American flies from Chicago to Manchester, England, for those folks 
who don't like to go through London. And on May 1 American begins service from 
New York City to Lyon, France. On the same day the airline begins flying 
between Chicago and Stockholm. On May 12 American starts flying to Brussels. 
American's New York City flight to Brussels will continue to Hamburg, West 
Germany. And the Chicago-Brussels flight will fly on to Duseldorf. That will 
increase American's European routes to 13 cities and 119 flights a week. 
Swissair has decided on California as its sixth U.S. destination and will begin 
service in November between either San Francisco or Los Angeles and Zurich. 
There are also great bargains in Latin America, an area expected to become the 
destination of the 1990s. Already South America has experienced a major cruise 
ship boom. In 1987 only four or five ships visited. In 1988, 14 ships cruised 
there. 
Brazil is touting the Pantanal, an incredible wetlands wilderness. Ski trips to 
Chile will be advertised, as well as adventure trips to Patagonia. 
South American airlines will help make it happen. Six carriers have begun 
promoting in-country air passes, great ticket deals that allow inexpensive 
travel within a country once you get there. 
Aerolineas Argentinas offers a "Visit Argentina" fare. You can buy a pass good 
for three cities in 14 days ($199) or unlimited cities in 30 days ($299). 
Avensa, the Venezuelan airline, offers an air pass with unlimited stopovers in 
Venezuela. And the airline will even throw in Aruba. The one-week pass is $110, 
two weeks will cost you $125 and three weeks is $139. 
Varig offers the Brazil Airpass, with an unlimited number of flights and 
stopovers for 21 days, for $330. 
