MONEY TALK / CARLA LAZZARESCHI: HOW SAVERS FARE IF AILING S&amp;L TAKEN OVER 
QUESTION: About six years ago, I opened a 10-year savings account at an S&amp;L 
that allowed additional deposits to the account to earn the initial rate of 
interest, regardless of the prevailing rate at the time of the deposit. I was 
able to "lock in" an interest rate that is quite favorable by today's 
standards. 
However, now this institution is listed among the nation's "troubled" S&amp;Ls, 
and I am worried that it will be bought out and the terms of my savings 
certificate will be nullified. If a new buyer takes over my institution and 
breaks the savings account contract, offering a substitute rate that is 
considerably lower, must I accept whatever interest rate the buyer offers, or 
may I withdraw my funds without penalty? I am really concerned that the saver 
is being sacrificed so the buyers of these troubled institutions can get cheap 
deposits to "save" the S&amp;Ls. -- B. W. 
ANSWER: Your situation highlights a frequently overlooked participant in the 
current S&amp;L mess: the saver. Although your account is probably covered by 
federal deposit insurance, you have unfortunately discovered that savers do not 
necessarily emerge untouched by an institution's failure. In fact, in order for 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which oversees the merger of insolvent 
institutions into healthy ones, to find a buyer willing to take over a failed 
institutions, something has to give. Often it is the interest rate on deposits, 
usually higher than the industry average, that the failed institution had been 
paying to attract savers. 
The FDIC takes the position that the failed institution's savings account 
contracts are unbreakable only as long as that institution is in business. 
According to this reasoning, once the association is sold to or merged with 
another association, those savings contracts are not necessarily in force. 
So if your institution is taken over by another association that later decides 
to break your savings account contract, you have a choice: Accept the new rate 
of interest offered by the buyer, or take your money elsewhere. If you elect 
the latter, you will not be penalized for withdrawing your funds before the 
account matures. 
Calculating Minimum IRA Withdrawal 
Q: My individual retirement account is in certificates of deposit distributed 
among three different banks. When I finally begin taking mandatory 
distributions, does the Internal Revenue Service require that I withdraw the 
minimum from each bank account, or may I withdraw the combined minimum total 
from the one account where I am earning the least interest? I have received 
conflicting answers to this. -- B. H. C. 
A: There has been a great deal of confusion about this issue because the IRS 
has never definitively laid down the law. But our experts say you may elect to 
take the withdrawal from whatever account or combination of accounts you want, 
provided that you do indeed take the minimum required distribution. 
The minimum withdrawal should be calculated based on the total in all IRAs. 
Take the distribution from the account of your choice and then notify the 
trustees of your other accounts of what you are doing. This final step is 
important because these account trustees could review your account activity and 
determine that you had not made the proper withdrawals and force you into a 
lengthly discussion. Worse yet, they could just calculate the minimum required 
withdrawal and send you a check for it. Untangling all this would be a pain in 
the neck. 
Changes in Law for Deals Between Spouses 
Several weeks ago, a reader asked what the tax consequences would be if she 
sold some shares of stock to her husband. We said that if she realized a gain 
from the deal, her profits would be taxable. 
However, according to recent changes in the tax laws -- specifically, Section 
1041 of the Internal Revenue Code -- transactions between spouses are not 
taxable. Instead, the seller reports no gain or loss, and the buyer takes the 
seller's taxable basis in the asset. This means that when the buyer later sells 
those shares, his taxable gain is the difference between the sales price and 
the price his spouse originally paid for those shares. 
Although the title of Section 1041 would lead one to believe that it applies 
only to transactions between spouses conducted in connection with a divorce, 
Los Angeles attorney Paul Gordon Hoffman assures us that "it is clear from the 
language of the law, congressional reports and Treasury regulations that the 
section applies to all transactions between spouses, whether or not they are 
connected to a divorce." 
Carla Lazzareschi cannot answer mail individually but will respond in this 
column to financial questions of general interest. Please do not telephone. 
Write to Money Talk, Business Section, Los Angeles Times, Times Mirror Square, 
Los Angeles, Calif. 90053. 
