LOSS OF JOB IN ORANGE COUNTY OFTEN DEVASTATING 
Just back from vacation in October, Gil Banfill played the messages on his 
telephone answering machine. A woman from his employer's personnel office asked 
what he wanted to do about his pension fund. 
Banfill, 53, returned her call and learned that the Irvine computer memory disk 
plant where he worked had been closed the previous week. After 5 years with 
Xidex Corp., his job was gone. 
Three months after the plant closing, Banfill is still making the rounds of 
prospective employers. So far, he has received only one offer, a late-night 
factory job paying $6 an hour. Banfill, who made nearly $11 an hour at Xidex, 
turned it down. 
"When I'm out looking, I see others too," Banfill said recently. "When I put in 
an application yesterday, the place was full." 
Like many other laid-off workers in Orange County, Banfill is caught in an 
economic squeeze: unable to qualify for jobs that pay as much as he had been 
earning and unable to afford to take the lower-paying jobs for which he 
qualifies. 
With its thriving economy and 2.9% unemployment rate -- so low it is considered 
"full employment" by economists -- Orange County has jobs to spare. But many 
are unskilled assembly or service positions paying about $5 an hour. 
The difficulties faced by the Orange County residents classified as unemployed 
and actively looking for work is compounded by the area's escalating housing 
expenses and high cost of living. 
According to economists and employment experts, Orange County's unemployed 
typically hunt for 2 or more months in an often unsuccessful effort to find 
comparable jobs. 
And in the end, many find themselves sliding down the economic ladder into 
lower-paying, less-skilled positions. 
Assistance Program 
The plight of the unemployed "is a side of Orange County that you won't see in 
tourist brochures," said Bill Fogarty, who runs a displaced worker assistance 
program for the Orange County Central Labor Council. 
Higher-paid manufacturing jobs account for a shrinking percentage of overall 
employment in Orange County, while lower-paid service jobs are proliferating in 
such sectors as retail, hotels and restaurants. 
What's left of the manufacturing base is shifting from traditional "low-tech" 
assembly jobs to high-tech assembly lines requiring different skills than those 
possessed by many unemployed workers. 
"There is a big expansion of jobs in Orange County at both the top and the 
bottom of the pay scales," said Allen J. Scott, a UCLA professor who has 
studied the effects of a changing industrial base in Southern California. 
Many casualties of plant closings are unskilled or semiskilled workers whose 
former jobs paid from $7 to $12 per hour, Scott said. While other jobs may now 
be available, the pay often is too low to allow them to earn a comparable 
living. 
During the 12 months ended in June, 1987, the 90,854 jobs posted at EDD offices 
in Orange County offered wages averaging $5.36 an hour. That amounts to $11,149 
a year, or less than the official poverty level of $11,650 for a family of four 
in California. 
According to the Orange County Social Services Agency, in order for a typical 
welfare family in the county to become self-sufficient, the breadwinner must 
earn at least $7.90 an hour, or $16,432 a year. 
The crunch is compounded by Orange County's sky-high housing prices, which have 
increased at a far faster rate than prevailing wages. According to the 
Apartment Assn. of Orange County, average rent for one-bedroom apartments in 
newer complexes is $806 a month, or $9,672 a year. 
"We have a special problem in Orange County," said Harriet Fox, assistant 
manager of the EDD office in Santa Ana. "While the price of housing is 
exceptionally high, the growth of service industries such as retail and 
restaurants is creating a lot of low-paying jobs." 
Wages paid for many production and assembly positions have been held down in 
part by a huge influx of immigrant labor into Orange County. 
"Anyone coming into the market from a job at $8 an hour is going to have to 
compete with immigrant labor, which often is able to make do with lower wages 
by pooling family incomes and living quarters," Scott said. 
And in an area where the high cost of living makes two-worker households a 
necessity and savings a luxury, the loss of a job can lead to financial 
disaster more quickly than in other parts of the country. 
Workers who are obliged to depend on unemployment insurance, which in 
California provides a maximum of $166 a week for up to 26 weeks, often have to 
dip deeply into savings to make ends meet while hunting for a new job. 
"Because so many in Orange County are living over their heads, if they lose 
their job they soon will face the bill collector and (then) the loss of their 
homes, cars and families," said Fogarty, the labor council program 
administrator. "It has a domino effect." 
The emotional toll of a job loss can be devastating, said Fogarty, who recalled 
that a year ago he recognized a gaunt middle-aged man among the homeless people 
waiting in line for a night's shelter at the Santa Ana Armory. 
The man had held a $25,000-a-year job at the Voit rubber plant in Santa Ana 
before the plant closed in 1983, Fogarty said. But in the intervening years, he 
had been unable to find work, lost his house and family and suffered a mental 
collapse. 
To some extent, the experiences of the unemployed in Orange County reflect 
economic changes affecting the entire nation. 
Despite the longest peacetime economic expansion in the country's history, 
nearly 10 million Americans were victims of plant closings and layoffs from 
1983 to 1988, according to a recent study by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
Of 4.7 million people who had worked at least 3 years for their former 
employer, 70% had found new employment by January of last year, the study said. 
But only half managed to match their previous incomes, and one in three took 
pay cuts of 20% or more. 
More Changes Expected 
The trend is expected to continue as corporate America restructures itself to 
become more competitive in the world marketplace. 
"I do believe the average American laborer is in for a lot of pain," said Ray 
Catalano, a professor of social ecology and management at UC Irvine. "I think 
the age of the job with good benefits and some security is pretty much gone." 
Some unemployed workers participate in retraining programs in order to update 
their job skills or prepare for a new occupation. 
But many can't take advantage of free vocational instruction provided by 
government-subsidized programs because they can't afford to keep paying 
household bills during the months of training. 
After 2 months or so of searching, employment officials said, unemployed 
workers usually start feeling pressured by financial obligations. When their 
unemployment benefits are exhausted, they begin accepting jobs that pay 
considerably less than they previously earned. 
Those who had put in many years with their previous employers tend to take the 
biggest cuts, employment experts said, because the company-specific knowledge 
they acquired is not valued by new employers. Many must start over at 
entry-level positions. 
The outlook for casualties of future plant closings in Orange County is not 
rosy, UCLA's Scott said. 
Jobs are available, he said, so long-term unemployment is not the problem here 
that it is in other areas of the country. 
But many of the county's unemployed eventually find themselves joining an 
economic underclass of low-paid workers. 
Jan Newman, business manager for the International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers local in Santa Ana, said most of the electrical assemblers laid off 
since last April from a Collins Defense Communications facility in Santa Ana 
have found it nearly impossible to find jobs with comparable pay and fringe 
benefits. 
Newman said she has received numerous calls from assemblers who are still 
searching. 
"Maybe they are being too particular," she said. "They want something that 
isn't there. And they aren't willing to settle for less. But they will have 
to." 
Times staff writer John O'Dell contributed to this report. 
