PROTECTION FROM ILLEGAL EVIDENCE BACKED 
The Supreme Court, providing a rare victory for criminal defendants, ruled 
Wednesday that prosecutors may not use illegally obtained evidence at a trial 
to show that a defense witness had lied to the jury. 
On a 5-4 vote, the high court chose to rigidly uphold the so-called 
exclusionary rule against the use of illegal evidence, even at the expense of 
the "truth-seeking function" of a trial. 
"As long as we are committed to protecting the people from the disregard of 
their constitutional rights during the course of criminal investigations, 
inadmissibility of illegally obtained evidence must remain the rule, not the 
exception," Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote for the court. 
The decision is significant for what the court did not do. Prosecutors had 
hoped that a more conservative high court would allow a much broader use of 
illegally obtained evidence if it could be used to rebut questionable testimony 
by defense witnesses. 
Instead, one of the court's usual hard-liners on crime, Justice Byron R. White, 
joined sides with Brennan's liberal allies. White did not explain his stand, 
which resulted in a ringing affirmation of the exclusionary rule. 
Since the court imposed the exclusionary rule on state and local law 
enforcement in 1961, it has allowed a variety of exceptions. If police officers 
acting in "good faith" raid a house based on a search warrant that later proves 
to be flawed, their evidence may nonetheless be used at a trial. In addition, 
prosecutors may use illegal evidence to contradict a defendant who takes the 
witness stand and lies. 
Based on such exceptions, the Illinois Supreme Court said last year that 
illegal evidence may also be used to rebut false testimony by a witness for the 
defendant. 
The ruling stemmed from the trial in Chicago of Darry James, a youth who was 
convicted of killing another young man in a 1982 gunfight. 
Five witnesses at James' trial testified that the defendant, sporting 
shoulder-length reddish hair, did the shooting. But a family friend testified 
-- falsely -- that James had black hair on the day of the shooting. 
In the trial, prosecutors were able to rebut this testimony because the police, 
after illegally arresting James during their investigation, had obtained his 
admission that he had dyed his hair from red to black after the shooting. 
But the Supreme Court held that the police evidence, although apparently 
accurate, could not be used in a subsequent trial of James. It ordered a new 
trial with that evidence excluded. (James vs. Illinois, 88-6075.) 
In a sharp dissent, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy complained that "today's opinion 
grants the defense side in a criminal case broad immunity to introduce whatever 
false testimony it can produce from the mouth of a friendly witness." He was 
joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Sandra Day O'Connor 
and Antonin Scalia. 
In a second criminal case, this one a prosecution victory, the court ruled that 
a jury may be told about a defendant's past criminal activities, even if the 
defendant was acquitted in the earlier cases. 
In this case, Rueben Dowling, a Virgin Islands man, was charged with robbing a 
bank of $12,000 while wearing a ski mask. At his trial, a woman testified that 
Dowling had broken into her home and robbed her, also while wearing a ski mask. 
However, Dowling had already been acquitted of this robbery. 
Dowling was convicted of bank robbery. On a 6-3 vote, the high court upheld the 
conviction and said the woman's testimony did not put Dowling in double 
jeopardy. 
