SCIENTISTS ISSUE CALL FOR ACTION ON WORLD'S ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS 
Increasing environmental problems -- from global climate changes to beaches 
fouled with medical wastes -- demand reinvigorated environmental activism, 
several leading scientists said Saturday at Stanford University. 
The call to action came at a student-run conference, coincidentally held on the 
20th anniversary of the Santa Barbara oil spill, at which scientific, political 
and business leaders debated how to jointly contend with the world's worsening 
environmental state. 
Throughout the first day of the two-day meeting, speakers repeatedly warned 
that established assumptions about consumption and need are pushing the world 
toward environmental crisis, despite many effective environmental programs 
begun over the last 20 years. 
'Addiction to Growth' 
"We have a severe addiction to growth without asking what kind we need and what 
kind we can afford," said David Brower, founder and chairman of the Earth 
Island Institute. 
"It's time to stop looking at things in terms of (getting) more or less" than 
others, said Joan Martin-Brown of the United Nations Environmental Program. 
"What we need to look at is not what we want, but what we need to live in 
dignity." 
Others urged conference members to educate people to problems before they 
become crises, and support politicians who are pro-active on issues. 
Washington University, St. Louis, botanist Peter Raven, secretary of the 
prestigious National Academy of Sciences, began the conference by warning that 
ignorance, indifference, poverty and greed are producing interrelated problems 
that threaten to radically alter Earth for the worse over the next 50 years. 
"There is evidence all around us that the world is changing in ways that deeply 
disturb us," he said. "Unless we change, the world we leave our children and 
grandchildren will only vaguely resemble the world we know today." 
Debt Is a Factor 
Crushing Third World foreign debt, for example, encourages peasants to cut and 
burn tropical rain forests as a way to survive, he and others noted. This 
worsens atmospheric changes, hurts global resource supplies and prevents 
research into the possible uses of plants and animals before their extinction 
-- all of which harm the nations benefitting from the debt. 
Such problems require global answers because local laws often only displace 
environmental degradation, he said. In particular, he cited efforts by wealthy 
nations to ship toxic and hazardous wastes to underdeveloped countries. 
