49ERS' CARTER JUST WANTS A CHANCE TO PLAY 
Here's what Michael Carter, the San Francisco 49er All-Pro nose tackle and 
Olympic shotput silver medalist, has been doing every weekday the past 11 weeks 
while his teammates have been honing themselves into what might be the finest 
NFL team of the decade: 
He'd call his wife around noon from the locker room and ask if she'd had lunch 
yet. She'd say no, so he'd take her to lunch. Then they'd go to a movie or to 
the mall. Later he'd help clean the house and maybe wash some dishes. At 4, 
they'd pick up their two daughters from preschool, make dinner, watch TV, read 
to the children and go to bed. 
Only in the morning was he still a 49er. He'd get to the 49er training facility 
at 6:30 or 7, ride the stationary bike and lift weights. Maybe he'd visit with 
the team trainer, who'd inspect his sprained foot. Carter left by lunch time. 
No reason to stay around. Even if Carter was able, players on injured reserve 
can't practice with the team. 
"You feel like you're not really a part of the team," Carter said. "You have to 
keep setting goals for yourself. You have to keep busy. If you didn't keep 
thinking about the light at the end of the tunnel, you couldn't make it." 
When Carter sprained his foot against the Jets on Oct. 29, doctors put him in a 
cast and told him he'd have to wear it four weeks. The 49ers would be playing 
the Giants on Monday Night Football in four weeks. Carter thought of nothing 
but that game. It was his light at the end of the tunnel. 
But when the doctors removed the cast, the foot hadn't healed. Two weeks later 
his foot went into a cast again. That cast, like the first one, would have to 
stay on a month. So now the light at the end of the tunnel was the playoffs. 
The doctors removed the cast Jan. 1, five days before the 49ers' semifinal 
playoff game against the Vikings. The foot still wasn't strong enough for 
Carter to return to practice. 
"It was a big letdown," Carter said. "You anticipate something for four weeks 
and then it's not what you expect. 
"I told the guys, 'Win this one for me so I get a chance to play in the next 
one.' After they won, they said, 'OK, now get your butt out there.' But here I 
am still limping around." 
Doctors took X-rays of the foot Wednesday. Carter's status for today's NFC 
championship game against the Rams is still uncertain. 
He returned to practice for the first time Tuesday but didn't participate in 
drills. He jogged on the sideline and felt sore afterward but not as sore as 
the doctors warned him he would. So he's encouraged. 
"The last 11 weeks have been a roller coaster that hasn't stopped yet," he 
said. "Normally when you have an injury, you can deal with it, compensate for 
it in some way. But with a foot injury, well, you don't think of a foot injury 
as significant, but if you don't have a foot, you can't walk. You can't run. 
You can't do anything." 
You can't stand for long periods either. So Carter attended only four 49er 
games while he was out. He knew it wasn't good for him to stand on the sideline 
for three hours, and he didn't want to sit in the stands. He tried that when he 
was injured a few years ago and found it to be more trouble than it was worth. 
So he watched his teammates on television. 
"I almost didn't want to watch," he said. "It was hard." 
He looked at the game like a coach, analyzing the 49er defense, picking up on 
his teammates' tendencies, their strengths and weaknesses. On Mondays, young 
defensive players such as Larry Roberts and Charles Haley would corner him for 
his observations. 
"The role I took during that time was more of a coach's role," Carter said. 
If Carter doesn't play today, and the 49ers win, he'll likely be ready for the 
Super Bowl. Lord help the center who faces Carter in his first game back. 
"I want to make someone pay," he said, smiling. "I'm not worried about being 
out so long. Once the Adrenaline gets going and if your heart's big enough, 
you're going to make something happen." 
