BENCH APPOINTEE'S DRUNK-DRIVING RECORD DISCLOSED 
Ronald L. Johnson, appointed Wednesday to the San Diego Superior Court bench, 
said Thursday that he has been convicted twice of drunk driving and told Gov. 
George Deukmejian "about the whole thing" when seeking the appointment. 
Johnson, 52, the assistant San Diego city attorney, said he has not had a drink 
since the second conviction, about five years ago, and feels confident that his 
alcohol problem is in the past and will not affect his performance. 
Johnson said that, in applying for a vacancy on the 71-member court, he and 
Deukmejian's appointments secretary, Terry Flanagan, had a "long discussion" 
about the convictions, after which Deukmejian was told. 
Susan Trowbridge, a spokeswoman for the governor, confirmed those briefings and 
said Thursday that, because "the problem" was "several years ago" and appears 
to be "completely resolved," Deukmejian "doesn't feel it will in any way affect 
performance on the bench." 
Cynthia Roark, president of the San Diego-area chapter of Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving, said Thursday the group will not challenge the appointment because 
Johnson had "paid his dues." 
Johnson said both convictions occurred in San Diego, the first 11 years ago and 
the second about five years ago. Neither case involved injuries, he said. 
Johnson received fines in both cases and, in the second, the choice of a day 
spent in public service in jail. He said he chose public service, mowing lawns 
and trimming hedges at a fire station. 
The second case made him realize that he had a "problem with alcohol," and he 
entered an outpatient treatment program. He said he has been sober since. 
"If there is any benefit that can come of this, and obviously it's an 
embarrassment to me, it's that you can recognize a problem and do something 
about it," Johnson said. 
Johnson is expected to be sworn in next week. As a Superior Court judge, he 
will not preside over drunk-driving trials, which are heard in Municipal Court. 
However, Johnson said it is possible that he might hear civil cases in Superior 
Court that somehow involve drunk driving. In such an event, "I'm going to 
enforce the law as written by the Legislature, and my personal problems with 
alcohol aren't going to affect the way I handle the case," he said. 
Johnson has been the assistant city attorney since 1988. For 17 years before 
that, he was a deputy city attorney specializing in civil cases. 
Deukmejian appointed Johnson along with Thomas J. Whelan, 49, a deputy district 
attorney, and Wesley R. Mason III, 50, a family law specialist. The 
appointments completed the 18-judge court expansion announced last year. 
