SHAKESPEARE, MOZART, PUCCINI; 
OPERA REVIEWS; 
A FINE 'FIGARO' AT MUSIC CENTER 
No shenanigans. No gimmicks. No cliches. No caricatures. No exaggerations. No 
innovative distortions. 
Whew. 
The Music Center Opera takes the human comedy of "Le Nozze di Figaro," which 
opened at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion on Friday, very seriously. 
This doesn't mean that the production, borrowed from the Chicago Lyric Opera, 
reveres tradition for its own tired sake. It merely means that the director, 
Peter Hall, and his associates have gone back to Mozart and Da Ponte -- 
possibly back further to Beaumarchais -- for their inspirations. 
This may not be a perfect marriage. The singing is a bit uneven. The musical 
perspective seems more romantic than baroque. One can quibble. 
Still, Hall and Stephen Lawless, his faithful directorial ally, really care 
about the characters, their needs and their frustrations. That makes all the 
difference. 
This "Figaro" savors telling motivation and expressive detail. The action 
springs forward with a disarming air of spontaneity in recitatives that really 
sound like casual conversation. The words count. 
Interrupted by a single intermission, rather than the usual three, the long and 
convoluted narrative flows naturally, almost quickly. Compositional sprawl is 
minimized and cumulative tensions are heightened. 
The intrusion of farce is permitted only where it is logical and irrepressible: 
in the mistaken-identity hysteria of the garden scene. And here it is 
strikingly effective because it sets off the cathartic pathos of understanding 
and forgiveness that follows ("Contessa, perdono . . . "). 
The musical standards of this "Figaro" turn out to be somewhat less lofty. 
Lawrence Foster, the conscientious if somewhat bland conductor, has opened all 
the conventional cuts. Even Marcellina and Basilio get to attempt their bravura 
arias in the last act. Foster has restored the high Cs of the second-act 
terzetto to the Countess. In general, one must admire his integrity, not to 
mention his concern for matters of poise, balance and propulsion. 
Like hungry little Oliver, however, a Mozartean ingrate wants more. He wants 
more moon-struck lyricism for Susanna's "Deh vieni, non tardar," more ironic 
fury for Figaro's "Aprite un po' quegli occhi." In the enlightened days of 
1990, he wants some linear embellishment, a few cadenzas, consistent 
appoggiaturas. 
Although the Los Angeles cast can boast several international stars, the 
participants obviously appreciate ensemble values. That is rare, and wonderful. 
Young Rodney Gilfry introduces a very wide-eyed, very intelligent and very 
mellifluous Figaro. With agile wit, he holds his own against the mature, 
magnificently befuddled Count of Thomas Allen, whose darker baritone encounters 
vocal problems only in the climactic fioriture of "Vedro mentr'io sospiro." It 
may be worth noting, incidentally, that Allen has frequently sung the role of 
Figaro, and Gilfry will soon depart for Germany where he is to sing the Count. 
Arleen Auger is a somewhat matronly, unaristocratic Countess, and on this 
occasion she sang her two great arias with unaccustomed, gingerly caution. But 
she certainly knows the style. Angela Maria Blasi -- tiny, adorable and totally 
innocent of arch soubrette manners -- sounded engagingly wistful if sometimes a 
shade too wispy as Susanna. 
Frederica von Stade remains the Cherubino of one's dreams. She somehow manages 
to be impetuous, cheeky, sensitive, shy, smug, erotically combustible and 
self-amused, all at the same delirious time. Also, she happens to sing as one 
hopes angels sing. 
The buffo roles were discreetly delineated by versatile members of the local 
team. Marvellee Cariaga stumbled a bit in the formidable flourishes of "Il 
capro e la capretta," yet she managed to make the usually crotchety Marcellina 
sympathetically as well as amusingly maternal. Michael Gallup dispatched the 
pomposities of Bartolo with crisp abandon. Jonathan Mack offered a beautifully 
vocalized Basilio (that may be an oxymoron), though the impact of the sly old 
intriguer was compromised by sketchy characterization. 
Dale Wendel, like all Barbarinas, looked cute and piped prettily. John Atkins 
revealed an unsuspected flair for character comedy as a blustery Antonio. 
Stephen Plummer stammered dutifully and unfunnily as Curzio. 
John Bury's raked, warm-hued sets and muted costumes (a bit dowdy in the case 
of the Countess) exerted their own atmospheric allure. The Chicago decors 
seemed small, however, for the Pavilion proscenium -- one doesn't automatically 
achieve intimacy merely by leaving the sides empty -- and the banks of stage 
lights visible in the wings remained an irksome, Brechtian anachronism. 
Francis Rizzo's thoughtfully phrased supertitles were, well, supertitles: 
distracting or helpful, depending on the viewer's priorities. They actually 
came close to destroying the poignant climax of the opera (the audience 
tittered at that sublime moment when the Count finally begs for forgiveness). 
At least the instant translations reinforced the syllabic rhythm of the Italian 
text. And, for once, an attempt was made to time the word-flashes in a way that 
would discourage premature laughter ("Ecco tuo padre...."). 
This was, in all, a happy marriage. 
