ARAFAT'S ROADBLOCKS TO PEACE; 
MIDDLE EAST: THE PLO WON'T SURRENDER POWER AND INFLUENCE TO ELECTED 
REPRESENTATIVES WHO HAVE A DIRECT STAKE IN REACHING A SETTLEMENT WITH ISRAEL. 
No other country this century has suffered more wars than Israel. During the 
past four decades, that tiny nation of 4.5 million people living in a space of 
8,000 square miles has fought five bloody conflicts with neighboring hostile 
Arab states. 
Today, of the 21 Arab countries, only Egypt recognizes Israel's right to exist. 
Still, Israel knows it must find a lasting peace, and in the face of hostile 
powers continues to seek a negotiated resolution to regional disputes. 
Most recently, Israel proposed a comprehensive four-point plan that offers 
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip the opportunity to participate in 
free and democratic elections to select representatives to negotiate a possible 
end to military occupation and the establishment of self-rule. 
Under the plan, if an interim period of stability and joint cooperation on 
local governmental policies succeeds, the representatives would then take the 
next step of negotiating final status of the territories. 
This plan originated with the Camp David accords, jointly developed and signed 
by the United States, Egypt and Israel. After its presentation by Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Shamir, it was warmly embraced by President Bush and Secretary 
of State James A. Baker III. 
While some Palestinian leaders in the territories reportedly wish to respond 
positively to the Shamir plan, Yasser Arafat and his Tunisia-based Palestine 
Liberation Organization have supported a campaign of terror and intimidation 
designed to block any progress. 
Tragically, between 200 and 300 Palestinians have died at the hands of their 
fellow Arabs, according to Israeli authorities. 
The PLO opposes free elections precisely because it does not want to surrender 
its power and influence to elected representatives, who, as a result of their 
residency in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, have a direct, personal stake in 
reaching a settlement with Israel. 
Israel has prudently agreed to discuss substantive issues with those who are 
most directly involved -- the democratically chosen representatives of the 
territorial residents. But with equal prudence, Jerusalem has persevered in 
refusing to allow terrorists masquerading as diplomats to sit at the conference 
table. 
In one breath, Arafat proclaimed an end to terrorism against Israel by the PLO, 
then announced that anyone daring to seek a peaceful resolution of the intifada 
could expect "10 bullets in the chest." 
Since Arafat's supposed renunciation of terrorism and recognition of Israel's 
right to exist, the PLO has continually supported terrorist action against 
Israel. 
 Those who believe we can trust the PLO to govern the West Bank should heed the 
lesson of Lebanon. In September, 1970, when King Hussein expelled the PLO from 
Jordan to prevent his own intifada, this infamous terrorist group moved into 
southern Lebanon. They brought hatred and divisions that fueled a 14-year civil 
war while they used the country as a base and safe haven from which to project 
terrorism against Israel. 
The peace process recently took a major leap forward when the governments of 
Israel and Egypt agreed -- with conditions -- to Baker's five-point plan to 
begin discussions leading to elections as envisioned by Shamir. 
Israel's acceptance is rightly based on the understanding that it will not deal 
with the PLO and that substantive issues will be negotiated only with elected 
Palestinian representatives. Egypt's acceptance in principle of the Baker plan 
reinforces Israel's position that negotiations must be limited to the authentic 
civilian leadership of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, which further isolates the 
terrorist elements of the PLO from the search for a diplomatic resolution. 
As a result, U.S., Israeli and Egyptian officials are expected to meet in 
Washington for discussions on the agenda for initial negotiations between 
Jerusalem and Palestinian representatives of the occupied territories. 
Responsible Palestinians now have an opportunity to show that they can act in 
good faith and seriously discuss conditions needed to secure enduring peace. If 
not, we can expect them to continue the public relations effort that Arafat 
launched in 1988, aimed at creating American impatience with the Shamir 
government's rightful insistence upon protections required for Israel's 
survival. 
Rather than expressing dismay with the Israeli government, Americans should 
condemn the ongoing duplicity of the PLO. Our sympathy and encouragement should 
be reserved for those Palestinian leaders in the West Bank and Gaza who have 
the great courage to brave PLO threats and work for an accord within the 
framework of the Israeli initiative. 
Americans, above all, ought to be not just patient but unequivocally in support 
of the position of America's strategic ally, Israel, that it cannot -- and 
should not be expected to -- negotiate with those whose ultimate aim is its 
annihilation. 
