CONSUMERS; 
SHOPPING FOR EMERGENCY AIR FARES 
Since 1978, when domestic airlines were deregulated, wise consumers have 
learned to shop around for savings on airfares. But -- something most travelers 
don't know -- if you had a sudden medical emergency or death in the family, 
would the airline consider waiving a fare restriction for you? 
Some will, some won't. 
An informal survey of major carriers reveals that those who will waive 
restrictions in an emergency situation -- so you can get a cheaper ticket -- do 
so on an individual basis. And the emergency must pertain to the immediate 
family: father, mother, son, daughter, husband or wife. 
For example, a Los Angeles woman recently needed to fly to the Midwest for her 
mother's funeral, and couldn't wait seven days in order to get a discount 
ticket. The regular fare was $998; the economy one, $418. 
A reservations supervisor agreed to waive the seven-day restriction and give 
the passenger the discounted rate. The airline ticket agent verified the death 
by checking with the funeral home in Ohio. 
"We don't have a blanket policy on emergency fares or a death emergency, but a 
reservations supervisor can authorize the waiving of restrictions," said Sara 
Dornacker, media relations manager for United Airlines in Chicago. "Depending 
on the circumstances, exceptions can be made on a case-by-case basis. But it 
has to be a management decision." 
Dornacker said that if the airline ticket agent does not inquire about the 
reason for the passenger's emergency, the passenger should tell the agent and 
have him or her check with a supervisor to see if fare restrictions might be 
waived. 
"If people have verification that they do have a medical emergency, or death in 
their family, then we will go ahead and accommodate them if we can," said 
American's Al Becker, managing director of external communications in Dallas. 
"We try to be as flexible as we can." 
American also offers passengers a 40% discount on a normal coach fare if they 
are traveling with human remains; United offers a discounted fare in that 
situation, too. Called a YRHR fare, it varies depending on where you are 
flying. 
All airlines who will waive fare restrictions insist on verification of the 
emergency, just as they do if you have one of their non-refundable tickets and 
cannot use it because of illness or a death in your family. In that case, they 
require a letter from a doctor stating your illness, or a copy of your 
relative's death certificate or a newspaper obituary notice. 
Airlines spokesmen note that some people have tried to get lower rate fares by 
lying about a death in their family. 
"But the vast majority of people are honest and reputable and want to do the 
right thing, so we try to accommodate them," American's Becker said. 
If a person traveling on a death emergency has his or her initial flight 
canceled, both United and American will give that passenger priority standing 
on another flight. 
"They just have to let the customer service representative know they're 
traveling on a death emergency," United's Dornacker said. "We do the same for 
unaccompanied minors and disabled people." 
TWA's Don Morrison in St. Louis said: "We have no general policy as far as 
waiving restrictions. That would be a difficult policy to manage and to 
administrate. But from time to time, it does occur on a case-by-case basis. 
'We Help Out' 
"We have had situations in the past where we've helped with the transportation 
for a patient who needs a kidney transplant or bone marrow transplant and the 
family is drained of their normal funds. Often a community group assists in 
raising money. And we help out." 
Alaska Airlines, on the other hand, waives no fare restrictions for any 
unticketed passengers. 
"If you're unticketed, there is nothing that is available from the airline in 
an emergency situation," said Tim Orkins, director of consumer affairs for 
Alaska Airlines in Seattle. "Probably 5% of anyone traveling does so on an 
unforeseen need of a personal nature. And that kind of program would be 
impossible to administer. The airline would have to determine an individual's 
financial need and we wouldn't have the time on such short notification." 
However, in the reverse situation -- if you have a non-refundable, discounted 
ticket and can't take the flight because of a medical emergency to yourself, 
traveling companion or immediate family, or a death in your immediate family -- 
Alaska Airlines will refund your money if you provide documentation of the 
illness or death. 
Alternative Assistance 
And although Alaska Airlines does not waive fare restrictions for passengers 
without tickets, it does, Orkins said, "make contributions -- cash, free 
transportation, waivers of restricted fares -- through various charitable or 
nonprofit organizations. 
"That way the different groups can do the screening (of passengers who need 
assistance with fares)," Orkins added. 
Among the groups to which Alaska Airlines contributes are Ronald McDonald 
House, Air Lifeline and Travelers Aid. 
Travelers Aid, which has offices at major airports and assists travelers in 
dire need, does not assist travelers in negotiating with airlines for fare 
reductions or in getting money in case of a family death emergency, according 
to Susan Edelstein of the Los Angeles International Airport office. 
In the case of overseas air carriers and the waiving of fare restrictions in 
medical or death emergencies, the rules cannot be bent so easily, according to 
Joe Zucker, public relations manager for Lufthansa in the Western U. S. region. 
Easing of Restrictions Seen 
"It's completely different than in the U.S. We're not deregulated and the rules 
are still pretty strict," Zucker explained. He added, however, that increasing 
"liberalization" in the Common Market area of Europe should result in some 
easing of airline restrictions by as early as 1992. 
But for now Zucker said that most international carriers are owned by their 
governments, and follow "the common safety standards, fare restrictions, rules 
and regulations of the IATA, International Air Transport Assn," which Zucker 
called "the U.N. of the airline business." 
However, Lufthansa might do some waiving of restrictions if a passenger who 
already has a ticket has a medical or death emergency, Zucker said. 
"If a person was here and had a death in the family . . . they might waive the 
restrictions without a penalty," he said. 
"In such a terrific emergency, we might work with the passenger's travel agent 
and make some agreement," Zucker continued. "We have agents appointed to 
represent us. If the travel agent knows a passenger, in some cases we might 
work with the agent as an intermediary. But we're not likely to do something 
for a stranger just coming in off the street." 
Contact Travel Agent 
If you have a medical or death emergency and are flying Pan American either 
domestically or internationally, Pan Am's Klaus Hofmeister also suggests that 
you contact a travel agent and let him or her try to make arrangements for you. 
"There are so many rules and so many fares, we suggest they go through the 
travel agent," said Hofmeister, assistant manager of sales for Pan Am in Los 
Angeles. "If it's a bona-fide death emergency, we try to deal with it. The same 
applies to non-refundables in the case of illness or death. We want a doctor's 
letter or documentation. What's usually involved in these situations is 
ticketing time limits, how long they are and the reason they need to be 
waived." 
