STATE JUMPS INTO CALAVERAS' FRAY ON GOLIATH FROGS 
State fish and game wardens Wednesday hopped into the fight over a Seattle 
man's plan to enter eight-pound Goliath frogs in Calaveras County's whimsical 
frog-jumping contest, saying the African amphibians are not welcome in 
California. 
The policy flip-flop -- contest organizers said game wardens originally said 
the frogs could legally be brought into the state for display -- came after 
some wardens expressed fears that the giant, sharp-toothed frogs might run amok 
in the wild. 
"There are some real concerns about the frogs getting loose and negatively 
impacting the environment," said spokesman Lanny Clavecilla of the California 
Department of Fish and Game in Sacramento. "Such exotic, or non-native, frogs 
are prohibited and undesirable." 
Well, not entirely prohibited and undesirable. Clavecilla said the decision to 
ban the huge frogs from being brought into the state for the Calaveras 
competition -- made famous in a Mark Twain short story -- does not mean 
researchers and zoos will have to surrender their own Goliaths. 
"It is OK (to import them) for scientific research or agricultural purposes" -- 
that is, frog ranching to satisfy frog's leg lovers -- "but frog-jumping 
contests are another matter," he said. 
The concern about the Goliaths is that should they escape from the contest, 
they will terrorize local populations of small fish and insects, which make up 
their diet. 
Such fears about the Goliaths are unwarranted, said Andy J. Koffman, the exotic 
animal exporter who sparked the controversy. The frogs are difficult to keep 
alive beyond the warm, humid climate of their native habitat and would not 
survive long in the semi-arid central Sierra Nevada region, he said Wednesday 
from his Seattle home. 
"I'm not saying Mr. Koffman is wrong," said fish and game biologist Steven 
Taylor. "But I'm not willing to concede he is correct, either. We can only 
permit importation (of the frogs) if it can clearly be demonstrated the action 
will have no harmful effect. The burden of proof is on the importer, and he 
hasn't done that yet." 
Koffman's pledge to enter his Goliaths in the frog-jumping contest created a 
stir because it was assumed that they would easily defeat the much smaller 
California bullfrogs that normally compete. 
Diane Baumann of the 39th District Agricultural Assn. -- which conducts the 
frog-jumping contest as part of the mid-May Calaveras County Fair -- said the 
fair's board of directors is still scheduled to meet in executive session 
Friday to decide whether to rewrite the rules to accommodate -- or eliminate -- 
the Goliaths. 
Koffman is unruffled. 
"As long as I am not creating a real menace, it always works out in the end," 
he said. "I'm sure I'll jump my frogs at Calaveras." 
He's also fairly confident that the contest won't be their first experience in 
California. Koffman and his amphibians have been asked to appear this week on 
"The Tonight Show With Johnny Carson" -- in Burbank. 
