RECORD BEEF PRICES PROJECTED FOR '89; 
TRADE GROUPS CITE HERD REDUCTIONS, EXPECT 4%-7% JUMPS 
Record-high beef prices are in store for consumers in the coming months, 
according to meat industry projections. 
Estimates vary on the extent of the increase, but two leading trade groups 
expect prices to jump between 4% and 7% above last year's levels. 
And premium cuts, such as steaks and roasts, will rise at a rate well in excess 
of the average cost for all beef products. 
Fueling the hikes are steady reductions in the nation's herds. In fact, 1989 
will mark the first time since the early 1960s that fewer than 100 million head 
of cattle are being raised in the United States. 
Complex Reasons Given 
Oddly enough, declines in consumer demand for beef and competition from other 
protein sources such as chicken forced cattlemen to thin their livestock 
holdings. The decreased meat supplies resulting from widespread liquidations 
are now responsible for the rising prices. 
Further, the availability of leaner cuts has renewed interest in the leading 
red meat. Even consumers who may have avoided beef because of its fat content 
are taking another look at the slimmed-down version marketed as USDA Select 
Grade. Also contributing to the change in beef's fortunes is a 
multimillion-dollar advertising campaign. 
"Consumer perceptions of beef have improved in the last year or two. The beef 
in the retail case is a leaner product that is more consistent with demand," 
said Chuck Lambert, an economist with the National Cattlemen's Assn. in Denver. 
"But it will be one or two years before we can respond with increased supplies 
to meet the changes." 
In the interim, consumers can expect prices to reach a peak during a 
three-month period beginning in February, according to Lambert. 
The average price currently paid for all beef cuts at the retail level is $2.81 
a pound, down slightly from an all-time high of $2.85 reached in late 1988. 
However, the present price will begin an upward swing in the coming months and 
hover at a $2.90-a-pound average. 
No Reverse 
The renewed interest in beef, however, is not expected to reverse a decade-long 
slide in per capita consumption. The disparity between consumption rates and 
retail costs exists because the industry has better balanced supplies and 
demand than has been the case in decades. 
Citing U.S. Department of Agriculture figures, Lambert said that Americans will 
eat about 66.8 pounds of beef in 1989, down from 72.1 pounds last year. 
Conversely, chicken consumption is expected to increase to 65 pounds per person 
a year, or up about 2.5 pounds from 1988's levels. Consumers also eat about 
62.7 pounds of pork annually as well, a level that has remained fairly steady. 
Overall per capita meat consumption in the United States now totals about 221 
pounds per person a year, and beef's share of this category will slip below 33% 
for the first time. In fact, USDA projects that chicken will surpass beef as 
the nation's most popular meat sometime in 1990. 
"Actually, this past year there were record supplies of all meats if you total 
pork, poultry and beef," Lambert said. "There is a lot of competition for 
consumer spending and the (other) meats have gained market share. We are not 
operating in a vacuum." 
Despite the disappointing news about consumption trends, 1989 will be the fifth 
consecutive year that cattlemen have seen profits, Lambert said. 
Maintaining profitability, though, will require that the industry constantly 
juggle production levels in order to prevent consumer resistance to steadily 
higher prices. 
"These are the best of times for producers because it is putting money in their 
bank accounts," said Rosemary Mucklow, executive director of the Oakland-based 
Western States Meat Assn. "But if, in the process, the public gets turned off 
from the product then . . . that will be sad." 
When beef costs skyrocketed in the early 1970s, for instance, many people 
readily turned to other meat and non-meat protein sources. This time around, a 
move away from beef would be much easier on the public psyche because of 
changes in dietary habits that can be traced, in part, to that very era. 
Also entering the pricing equation is the European Economic Community's ban on 
sales of U.S. beef treated with growth hormones, a trade measure that went into 
effect on Jan. 1. There is some uncertainty, though, about the actual impact 
this action will have on domestic prices. Much of the U.S. beef sold to Europe 
is composed of specialty cuts -- such as organ meats -- that are not popular in 
this country. 
Beef Byproducts 
Mucklow said that the beef byproducts the Europeans are rejecting may force 
producers to raise prices elsewhere in order to compensate for the loss. 
"If there are more beef byproducts on our domestic market, then their price 
will go down because liver and kidney is not consumed much here. And if those 
items become cheaper, then there is more (upward price) pressure on the balance 
of the carcass to even things out," she said. 
Countering the export loss in Europe, however, may be an expanded market for 
U.S. beef in Japan. Under a recently signed trade agreement, the Japanese will 
import 60,000 metric tons of American beef annually for the next three years. 
At that point, the Japanese will lift the ceiling. 
Throughout, though, the Japanese are likely to be interested primarily in the 
premium cuts of beef, said Lambert of National Cattlemen's. 
And it is these premium cuts -- sirloin, prime rib, etc. -- that will 
experience the sharpest increases in the coming year. 
"The premium cuts are the loin and rib, the center meat in the animal," said 
Mucklow. "You cannot increase the prices of the beef rounds or chucks the way 
you can the premium cuts. Out of the whole carcass you cannot increase the cost 
of the byproducts, the briskets, whatever, as you can the steaks and roast. 
When everything goes up 5% to 10%, the center cuts go up much higher." 
While the current conditions linger, however, cattlemen can congratulate 
themselves on deriving profit from declining market share. 
"Beef is going back on the center of the plate again," said Mucklow. "People 
realize the value of having it in the diet. They are missing it and pleased to 
have it back again. But if beef is priced out of the pockets of most people, 
then that would be very unfortunate." 
