DESPITE SPLIT WITH MOSCOW, DEFECTIONS SAP LITHUANIAN COMMUNIST PARTY; 
SOVIET UNION: WITH ELECTIONS DUE NEXT MONTH, SOME MEMBERS SEE BEING INDEPENDENT 
FROM THE NATIONAL PARTY AS THEIR ONLY HOPE. 
When a nervous Alexander N. Varivoda walked into Communist Party headquarters 
here on a snowy morning a month ago, he was about to end a 10-year commitment 
by dropping out of the organization he had once so proudly joined. 
"When I handed in my membership card, my hands were actually shaking," the 
41-year-old factory worker said. "I had thought about it for a long time, but I 
was still apprehensive. I knew once I quit, there was no turning back." 
It was far different, he recalled, from the spring day in 1979 when he became 
the first person in his family to join the party. Then, the party's first 
secretary grinned and shook his hand, and his wife hugged him. 
"On that day, I was happy," he said bitterly. "But it seems long ago. Now, I'm 
finished with the Communist Party for good." 
Throughout the Soviet Union, the list of those joining the Communist Party in 
the last year has shortened dramatically. Although officials have declined to 
make public the number of new party members, some say privately it may have 
reached an all-time low. 
In Lithuania, previously staunch Communist Party members are deciding to leave 
the party by the thousands. The republic's leaders say it is in part a result 
of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policy of glasnost, or greater openness, 
which has permitted free discussion here of how Lithuanians, among other 
nationalities, were victims of Stalinist era crimes. 
In the last year, party officials say, about 6,500 people in Lithuania quit the 
party, while only about 850 joined. 
This is a significant turnaround in a country where Communist Party members 
traditionally have been viewed as among the most idealistic and powerful and 
where tombstones list the year the deceased got his party card right next to 
the year of birth. 
A faction of the republic's Communist Party, representing at least 80% of its 
200,000 cardholders, has decided to declare its independence, prompting a 
crisis with Moscow. 
The breakaway group believes the growing unpopularity of Communists in this 
largest of the three Baltic republics made such a move necessary if the party 
is to win any seats in February elections to the local congress. They have 
stressed this point to Gorbachev in a series of meetings and telephone 
conversations, most recently during a session Thursday in the Kremlin. 
Gorbachev reportedly remains unpersuaded and will travel this week to this 
republic of 3.5 million sandwiched between Poland and Latvia to try to hammer 
out a compromise to mend the first split in the Communist Party in more than 80 
years of Soviet rule. 
Nevertheless, it is undeniable that the daring displayed by the Lithuanian 
party in declaring its independence has given it a boost in popularity that 
most political analysts here predict will be visible at the polls. 
However, for some, like Varivoda, it is too late. 
Varivoda's grandfather was among those taken away in the middle of the night 
and killed during the Stalinist purges in the 1940s. Lithuania, along with the 
other Baltic republics of Latvia and Estonia, was independent until August, 
1940, when it was absorbed into the Soviet Union under a secret pact between 
Josef Stalin and Adolf Hitler. 
In the years after the loss of independence, tens of thousands of people from 
the Baltics were deported in massive sweeps, including businessmen, prosperous 
farmers and any potential political leaders. 
"Until glasnost, no one really told me anything about what happened to my 
grandfather. We were all expected to believe in our party leaders, and we all 
did," Varivoda, a tall man who smelled of cigarette smoke, said during a work 
break in the computer-making factory as he sat playing dominoes with three 
friends. 
"But then, under Gorbachev, we found out about Stalin and about the corruption 
of other party leaders. Being a cardholding Communist was no longer something 
to be proud of," he said. 
Varivoda said he began considering quitting the party three years ago but was 
afraid he would lose his job or that his family would suffer some sort of 
repercussions. 
Last year, the Lithuanian Congress passed a law that stated no punitive 
measures could be taken against anyone who quit the Communist Party. 
"Still, my wife was worried," Varivoda said. "We spoke about the possibility 
that I might be fired. Then we decided together that quitting the party was the 
right thing to do. I wasn't raised to support corruption and evil." 
Another domino player, Pavel N. Shipkov, also recently handed in his Communist 
card after eight years as a party member. 
"I was approached by the party chief in my plant and asked to join, simply to 
fulfill the quotas they had that year. I agreed without thinking," said 
Shipkov, 30. 
"I quickly discovered that even as a party member, the simple worker has no 
real power here. When my friends asked me why I was a member of the party, I 
had no good answer," he said. 
"I was afraid to quit at first, because I thought they would take away the 
communal apartment we live in, which is supplied by the factory. But when I saw 
my friends quitting and saw nothing was happening to them, I decided I could, 
too." 
At the factory where Shipkov and Varivoda work, about 10% of all party 
cardholders have quit in the last year, leaving about 650 party members among 
4,000 workers. 
These are figures that are particularly alarming to men like Albinas Dastikas, 
who, as the Communist ideology chief at the plant, serves as a kind of 
counselor to those suffering from doubts about the worthiness of the party. 
Dastikas said that despite many hours of talking, he has been able to persuade 
only two workers so far not to go ahead with their plans to hand in their 
membership cards. 
"Glasnost revealed the true character of our leadership, and it was a great 
blow to the workers," Dastikas said. 
"It even raised some questions in my own mind," he acknowledged. "But I decided 
that a man who is not part of the collective is just an empty vessel. And 
besides, I'm only 40. I still have strength to fight the battle for a better 
party." 
