PUBLISHERS IN A FRENZY OVER BOSTON DEATHS 
Charles Stuart's body had not even been fished out of the Boston harbor on 
Thursday when Colleen Mohyde received her first call about a book on the 
murder-suicide case that has gripped this city and much of the country. 
"I had hardly had time to get my coffee," the assistant editor at Little, Brown 
Co. said. 
Since then, Mohyde said, at least eight more literary agents and writers have 
contacted her about possible books on the stunning story of a pregnant woman 
shot and killed in inner-city Boston last October while driving home to the 
suburbs after a birthing class. 
Her husband, Charles Stuart, who was seriously wounded in the incident as well, 
at first told police that he and his wife had been shot by a black man who 
leaped into their car at an intersection and demanded their money and jewelry. 
But last Wednesday evening, Stuart's youngest brother Matthew came forth with 
information implicating Charles Stuart as his wife's murderer. Early the next 
day, before the morning rush-hour traffic had begun, Charles Stuart apparently 
parked his car on the Tobin Bridge and jumped to his death. 
Since then, with bizarre details continuing to tumble out, the city has talked 
of little other than the strange tale of the victim-turned-villain. 
"We've been living and breathing this case here," said Mohyde. She added that 
several editors at the New York office of her publishing house had received 
proposals for books on the Stuart case as well. 
"You know, it's a wonderful story, just a wonderful story," Jane Dystel, a 
literary agent in New York, said. "There are so many different elements to it." 
Dystel was so convinced of the marketability of the Stuart case that she pulled 
one of her client-writers, Joseph Sharkey, off another true-crime project and 
ordered him to take the first shuttle to Boston. Sharkey arrived here within 
three hours of Stuart's suicide. 
"I'm not sure where the body was," Dystel said when asked if Sharkey had 
arrived in town before the body was pulled from the harbor. "But we were 
there." 
In New York, Henry Dunow, a literary agent with Curtis Brown Associates, said 
that when he first read of the case in the Friday morning newspaper, he saw 
quick parallels to such true-crime bestsellers as Joe McGinniss' "Fatal 
Vision," and "Small Sacrifices," by Ann Rule. Dunow immediately picked up the 
phone and called Constance L. Hays, a reporter in the New York Times' Boston 
bureau. 
Dunow said he recognized the complex story instantly as "obviously, a very 
fertile subject for a book." There was racism, violence, a personality who 
would apparently "walk out of a birthing class and shoot his wife" as well as 
the fact that so many people so willingly swallowed the story of Stuart, who 
first telegraphed the tale when he called state police for help on his car 
telephone, Dunow said. 
His call to Hays came, by her recollection, before coroners had completed the 
autopsy on Stuart. Hays, covering the story for her daily newspaper beat, told 
Dunow she was too busy to think about his proposal or any of the other seven 
inquiries she received from agents and publishers within days of Stuart's 
suicide. 
"But my husband, ever practical, said I should find out how much the advance 
should be," Hays said. 
At the city's two daily newspapers, the Boston Globe and the Boston Herald, 
reporters on the Stuart case said that they, too, had been besieged by calls 
from publishers and agents seeking to interest them in Stuart book projects. On 
Tuesday, one Globe writer was said to be in New York, negotiating a contract 
for a book on the story. 
But while "it's tempting, very tempting, to think that in three months you 
could make a lot of money slapping something out very quickly on a story that 
already has a lot of information out about it," Globe reporter Matthew Brelis 
said he had heard colleagues echo his own view that for journalists, there is 
sometimes a fine line between exploiting a story and covering it. Brelis said 
that at least 10 Globe reporters, as well as several columnists, had been 
assigned to the Stuart story. 
Brelis said he got a call from Dell about doing a book. But like Hays of the 
New York Times, "I said, look, I'm just too busy to think about it," Brelis 
said. 
Even in publishing -- a field quick to recognize a commercial topic -- the 
flurry of interest in this case of true crime and a seemingly happy, upwardly 
mobile suburban young couple appeared to set new records, James Frost, the 
editor in chief at Warner Books in New York, said. 
"I've never seen anything like this," Frost said. 
"We saw a lot (of interest) for the Lisa Steinberg case," involving child abuse 
in New York City, Frost said. "And if the Green River suspect" -- referring to 
a string of murders near Seattle -- "had actually been the man who had 
committed the murders, you would have seen a similar response. A good mass 
murderer with the psychological underpinnings is always a good subject." 
Frost said the number of inquiries he had received suggested that "every major 
agent in town has someone wanting to write this book." 
Frost said he expected that "publishers will probably shy away from" the racial 
angles of this story. Instead, "we see it as personality-driven. Everyone wants 
to know what makes Charles Stuart tick." 
While conceding that the field was something of a derby at the moment, Frost 
predicted that the market could sustain "two, maybe three books, tops" on the 
case. However, said Frost, "I don't think you're going to see that few." 
John Sterling, editor in chief of the adult trade division at Houghton Mifflin, 
a publishing house based jointly in Boston and New York, said he had several 
Stuart proposals on his desk, and that he had spoken to at least half a dozen 
agents about Stuart book projects. He said he knew of "seven or eight" other 
proposals circulating within his publishing house. 
"But I am not terribly interested, I confess, in the numbers," Sterling said. 
"What is clear is that people are going crazy on this." 
Part of the explanation for the feeding frenzy, Sterling said, was "a very 
quiet fall (autumn) on the acquisition front. 
"Frenzies tend to happen when people get hungry," he explained. 
But to Sterling, what makes the story so fascinating is the surprise element of 
Stuart's apparent involvement in his pregnant wife's death. 
"Who could imagine?" Sterling asked. "Who could imagine that this man would 
shoot his pregnant wife?" That kind of "whiplash" effect, he continued, "is 
like suddenly feeling the ground beneath you shift. 
"Suddenly," Sterling said, "you have this amazing lightning rod." 
At Little, Brown, Colleen Mohyde took much the same position. 
"It's a question of trust, the public trust," she said. "You don't want to be 
cynical. You want to believe that victims really are victims. We all sort of 
become victims otherwise." 
Some publishers predicted that big advances might be forthcoming as a result of 
competition over Stuart books. But as James Frost at Warner Books noted, "the 
big unknown is that we haven't heard from the heavyweights yet" -- writers, 
said Frost, such as Joe McGinniss, Ann Rule and Norman Mailer. "They're still 
out there," he said. 
Still, interest continues at a feverish pitch. Mohyde, for one, said she had 
heard the Stuart tale likened to "a nonfiction 'Bonfire of the Vanities,' " or 
to "An American Tragedy," by Theodore Dreiser. 
"There's definitely a book there," she said. 
And apparently a movie as well. Ron Howard, the Hollywood producer, was 
reported to have made extensive inquiries about securing rights to the story. 
And Hays, at the New York Times, said she had been unsure what to respond when 
a producer called demanding to know who owned the rights to the Stuart case. 
