THE SHOPPER: MILAN: PORTO TICINESE CHARMS BUYERS 
It's ironic that Milan, a businesslike and somewhat grimy industrial city, 
should be the capital of ultra-chic and trendy Italian style. 
Consider that historic Rome (with its architecture and monuments) and romantic 
Florence (laden with artistic treasures) are more interesting as tourist 
destinations. Nevertheless, when it comes to trend-setting shopping, Milan 
draws the accolades . . . and the crowds. 
Milan boasts the flagship boutiques of Armani, Versace, Krizia, Missoni, 
Biagiotti, Ferre and other alta moda designers that determine silhouette 
shapes, hem lengths, fabrics and colors for trendy dressers worldwide. 
These designer shops, offering the very latest styles and more complete 
collections than in U.S. boutiques or department stores, are easy to find in 
the city's well-known and pricey Via Montenapoleone district ("Montenapo," to 
those in the know). 
Across Town 
However, some of Milan's trendiest clothing and most distinctive personal and 
home accessories are displayed in some very unusual boutiques across town in 
the southwestern Porta Ticinese section. 
This old working-class neighborhood was recently gentrified and is now a modish 
gathering place for Milan's upcoming designers and crafts people. 
In addition to the interesting merchandise, the area has a distinctive ambiance 
and neighborhood charm. 
Weathered but attractive buildings line several canals linked by little 
footbridges. Among them are an appealing array of inviting cafes and lively 
wine bars. It's fun to kick back in Porta Ticinese and it's a great place to 
shop. 
The kind of unusual merchandise the area displays is at The Kooky Shop (Corso 
di Porta Ticinese 16). This youth-oriented showcase of Italian ultra-chic punk 
features a lot of leather, mostly sleek and form-revealing. There are 
miniskirts (about $50 U.S.) with high-tech zippers and halter tops (about $48) 
to match. Also a lot of clinging, silk, jersey leggings and tops (about $40 
each) in wild tiger, leopard and other animal skin patterns. 
Popular Cotton Fabrics 
Naj Oleari (No. 58), the chain of faddish fabric, accessories and clothing 
stores, was one of the first retailers to move into the Porta Ticinese area and 
was a key factor in the district's gentrification. 
Like the other Naj Oleari outlets throughout Italy, this shop sells book bags 
($50), deck chairs ($125), umbrellas ($60), sneakers ($60), eyeglasses cases 
($20), place mats ($50 per set of four), lamp shades ($60 and up), quilts ($500 
and up), picture frames ($18 and up) and notebooks ($15 and up), all made from 
the company's popular 100% cotton fabrics. 
Naj Oleari is a bit like the Italian edition of Laura Ashley, Pierre Deux or 
Marimekko, except that this company's cheerful patterns are all hand-drawn by 
artists rather than stamped with blocks, and aren't floral or geometric designs 
so much as naive-style airplanes, clouds, palm trees and eyeglasses, all on 
very colorful backgrounds. 
The shop also sells a limited selection of adult and children's clothing, plus 
uncut chintz and quilted and plastic laminated fabrics. Not all of the 
company's 700 fabric patterns are available at this shop. 
Lo Gnomo (No. 70) shows and sells a wide variety of handbags, carryalls and 
other personal accessories, made (mostly on the premises) of untanned leather 
and canvas by young artisans. The bags are big, bold and beautifully colored 
with bright, fashion-coordinated dyes. 
The unusual multipocketed knapsacks are especially popular with school kids. 
Prices begin at about $40. There are also wide belts with well-done clasps ($40 
and up) and stylish sandals ($70 and up). 
Prem Legnodipinto (No. 76) is a young artist who makes and sells her own 
charming and amusing hand-painted wooden jewelry and accessories. Most unusual 
and whimsical are tiny earrings ($35 and up) shaped like flowers, airplanes, 
sea horses, birds, ice cream cones, polka-dot bows, dancing dolls and an 
assortment of other items. 
Each pair of these decorative accessories is carefully painted with bright, 
colorful details. Also popular are Prem's hand-painted wooden belt buckles 
attached to broad elasticized waistbands ($50). There are also nonwearables, 
including piggy banks, picture frames and clocks. 
High Tech (No. 77), as the name states, has ultra-modern accessories and 
furnishings for home and office. One of the two distinct sections is stocked 
with household goods, with an emphasis on kitchenwares selected for excellence 
by professional chefs. 
Included are Alessi's handsome stainless steel pots, Richard-Ginori's wonderful 
porcelains, copper pots and pans from France, plus an assortment of espresso 
makers and cutlery. The other section features gadgets, some of museum-quality 
design. 
There are clocks, razors, desk sets and pens, plus some electronic equipment 
and furniture, mostly of Italian design and manufacture. The striking display 
against sleek black walls emphasizes the design quality of these items, many of 
which have been exported to the United States. 
Shoes and Accessories 
Panca (No. 103) is a good source for stylish but inexpensive men's and women's 
shoes from $40 up. The seasonal collection includes all the fashionable colors 
in styles that are simple and versatile. There is always a pleasing selection 
of flats and pumps for women, loafers and oxfords for men. 
Nearby, at Corso Genova 6, is Biffi, one of Milan's great multi-label boutiques 
for trendy men's and women's clothing, known for clever accessorizing and 
wardrobing. The selection of women's labels includes Alaia, Byblos, Yamamoto 
and others. For men, fashions are by C. P. Co., Allegri, Guido Pellegrini and 
others. 
In addition, Biffi has its own line of ultra-modish garments and accessories 
including hats, scarfs and belts. Outfits from about $220 and up. The shop's 
open display is great for browsing and for trying to fit things together for 
individualized looks. 
Zeus, at Via Vegevano 8, is another super-stylish boutique and gallery with 
avant-garde clothing and home accessories, created by a group of young 
designers who work with the shop. A boutique features clothes, most of which 
are casual in mood and minimalist in style, but cut with varied angles in 
darkly dramatic and intriguing colors. Outfits $160 and up. 
The Zeus Gallery and Design Studio has gadgets, furniture and some art. Again, 
the style is sleek and minimalist, with an emphasis on the functional elements 
of an item, with great inventiveness and individuality in the design. 
Break From Boutiques 
Coin, on Piazza Generale Cantore, is a five-story branch of Milan's popular 
department store, and offers a good contrast to the area's boutique 
environments. 
Merchandise is more general in style than that in the smaller shops and 
boutiques. But you'll still find some trendy and moderately priced Milan-style 
clothes and accessories mixed in with the more traditional ready-to-wear for 
men, women and children. 
There is always a fine selection of nicely detailed men's cotton shirts ($25 
and up) and woolen sweaters ($40 and up) in very modish colors. 
Bianca e Blu at Via de Amicis No. 53 shows a distinctly different profile in 
the middle of high-tech Milan. Designer Monica Bolzoni uses antique fabrics and 
silhouettes from the 1940s to create her line of women's clothes, which are 
often featured on the pages of top European fashion magazines. 
The look is fun and feminine. Dresses sell for about $180 and up, chic hats, 
belts and scarfs to match. A few doors down the street is another Monica 
Bolzoni boutique featuring the designer's line of jersey knits and sale items 
from the main store. 
Next door at Via de Amicis No. 51, Franco Fiorentino sells comfortable casual 
shoes and matching handbags in latest styles and colors. The shoes, from about 
$35 and up, are excellent buys. 
Prices quoted in this article reflect currency exchange rates at the time of 
writing. 
