GROWTH, TRAFFIC, AIRPORT ARE ISSUES FOR '90S; 
FUTURE: HIGH HOUSING COSTS MAY SEND WORKERS SOUTH OF THE BORDER IN SEARCH OF 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE NEW DECADE. 
People are lined up on the freeway, trying to get to work from San Diego's most 
popular new suburb -- Mexico. 
It's 7:15 a.m. In 45 minutes, you and thousands of others will have beaten the 
morning rush -- you hope -- only to sit at your desk for eight hours before 
returning to the San Diego/Tijuana/drive-time fray. 
The scenario is more likely than you might imagine. 
Thousands may work in "America's Finest City" but they won't be able to live 
here. Those who cannot afford California may look in desperation to Baja 
California, or points many miles east of here. 
Welcome to San Diego in the 1990s. 
The place where the population will continue to boom; where the Hispanic and 
Asian communities will gain increasing prominence; where the work force will 
undergo sweeping changes. It's the place with more traffic, more smog, and a 
vexing need to resolve such problems as what to do with the airport and how to 
build more jails. 
With a population expected to reach nearly 2.8 million in the year 2000, 
growing 16% from today's 2.4 million, San Diego County will continue its 
urbanization curve through the 1990s, demographers predict. 
Even more stunning growth is expected in the San Diego Unified School District. 
From 1986 to the turn of the century, the number of students is expected to 
increase 46% to 165,000. The largest increase is expected to be in the 
high-school population. 
But planners say those increasing numbers of people will be increasingly 
squeezed for places to live -- leading to higher prices, vanishing open space 
and the emergence of new suburbs. 
Max Schetter, director for the Economic Research Bureau of the Greater San 
Diego Chamber of Commerce, said the county growth will produce surprising 
shifts and turns, not the least of which is the "Tijuana factor," in which not 
only do Mexicans continue to migrate to the United States to find jobs, but 
U.S. residents move in the other direction, with affordable housing in mind. 
The poor and lower-middle class might settle in Mexico only because the average 
price of a San Diego home may be prohibitive by the year 2000, outstripping 
gains in income. 
The average household income is expected to rise 90% during the decade, to 
$92,400. But the average home price is expected to rise by 124%, to $439,500. 
"The huge numbers of Hispanics and Asians coming into the county will work in 
San Diego but may live in Mexico," Schetter said. "As housing becomes less 
affordable, they'll have to consider Tijuana, or points considerably east of 
here. 
"People will want to work here but can't afford to live here. It could affect 
all ethnic groups of the lower middle class (including non-Hispanic whites)." 
As workers line up at the border, creating massive traffic jams in an effort to 
get to work, Schetter predicts, the county will need new border crossings. 
Schetter and other experts say that, 
except for the upper class, those who wish to move within the county -- "to 
trade up" -- will be severely limited in doing so. 
Residents will have massive equity in their homes, but it won't do them much 
good unless they move to another region, because all the other houses in San 
Diego County will have gone up just as much. 
In response to the demand for housing, during the 14 years from 1986 to 2000, 
the number of housing units is expected to increase by 37%, to more than 1 
million. Vacant land is expected to undergo a corresponding shrinkage of 
100,000 acres, a loss of about 10%. 
Ethnic Makeup 
Given the press that the increasing Hispanic population has received, it is not 
surprising to most San Diegans that continuing migration and high birth rates 
will mean that the number of Hispanics in the county will more than double, to 
700,000, from 1980 to the turn of the century. 
But what confounds even some demographers is that the Asian population will 
more than triple during that time, to 356,600. The change was not foreseen 
until recently. 
But Richard Madsen, a sociologist at UC San Diego and contributor to the book, 
"Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life," said the 
Asian explosion makes perfect sense when considering its sources: Hong Kong, 
Indochina and other cities in California. 
Control of Hong Kong reverts from the British to the Chinese in 1997, so Madsen 
believes refugees will leave Hong Kong -- San Diego being only one destination 
-- over a gradual 7-year period. He believes the evacuation of Indochinese from 
Cambodia and Vietnam has by no means ceased. He sees greater numbers of 
Japanese and Koreans arriving in San Diego because of its promise of 
opportunity. 
"You have as many as 50,000 people a year leaving Hong Kong now," he said. 
"Plus, the Hong Kong government recently turned away thousands of Indochinese 
refugees. They had to return to Vietnam. Sooner or later, some of those will 
come here." 
Madsen sees the West Coast as becoming "much more multiethnic in the '90s. 
"Every generation has had its share of immigrants, but clearly the most visible 
immigrants in this generation will be Asians and Hispanics. It presents certain 
challenges. 
"America has long been dominated by European values. The mentality has been 
WASPish or European, and that may change. Americans have tended to be more open 
than some societies, but on the other hand, this nasty streak of racism seems 
to be coming back. I thought racism had waned after the civil rights movement, 
but that isn't the case at all." 
The non-Hispanic white population -- in 1988, 67% of the county's residents -- 
is expected to fall to 58.5% by the year 2000. The county's black population is 
expected to stay about the same, at nearly 6%. 
Neither the San Diego Police Department nor the San Diego County Sheriff's 
Department keep statistics on so-called hate crimes, except to say that they 
rose significantly in the 1980s. Madsen fears the county's clash of cultures 
may ignite more in the future. 
He noted, for instance, that the number of Asians entering the state's elite 
University of California system increased dramatically during the 1980s, with 
the trend expected to flex itself more strongly during the next decade. As 
minorities win out in academic and professional challenges, "it's not hard to 
see," he said, why tensions will be inflamed. 
Age 
The aging baby boomers will play a major role in making San Diego an older 
county in the year 2000. 
In 1980, the median age was 28.8 years; by the year 2000, it is projected to be 
35.8 -- just about middle age. 
Jeff Tayman, senior planner with the San Diego Assn. of Governments (SANDAG), 
said that change will affect the make-up of families, putting older parents at 
home with their children. "The baby boomers are having kids a lot later," he 
said. "We'll have a lot more parents, 50 and 60 years old, with kids home. It's 
kind of terrifying when you think about it. We expect to see a tremendous 
increase in high school students in the Nineties." 
Madsen, the sociologist, said older parents may be a change for the better. 
"Such parents will probably be more mature, more comfortable materially and 
thus better able to take care of children," he said. "I see it as a plus. They 
may feel more sympathetic to paying for education, as much as they do, say, for 
health care." 
But those older parents are expected to face double burdens -- caring for their 
own parents at the same time that they care for their children. 
As life expectancy increases, the number of double-generation elderly is 
expected to increase -- "younger" senior citizens in their 60s, for example, 
caring for parents who are in their 80s. 
"We'll see a significant increase in the elderly," Tayman said. 
Employment 
Tayman predicts dramatic changes in the county's work force. He said that more 
than half the new workers will be female, and more than 60% of new workers will 
be minorities. He said that only 15% of new workers will be white, non-Hispanic 
males. 
Because of the increasing entry of women into the workplace, he foresees child 
care becoming perhaps the most major employment issue of the 1990s. In 
addition, the new ethnic makeup will make affirmative action a major issue of 
the new decade, he said. 
"We expect to see a lot of discrimination suits." 
Those workers are expected to go to jobs increasingly centered in the high-tech 
arena and focused more and more away from the military. 
Recent studies of employment trends predict the number of direct military jobs 
staying the same in the county through the year 2000. But Schetter said those 
figures might have been outdated by a combination of glasnost and the federal 
deficit. 
"It's a trend that's been growing for a long time," he said. "At the end of 
World War II, 70% of all county jobs were oriented to the military. Now, the 
figure is somewhere near 20%." 
Even if the number of military workers remains the same, it will be dwarfed by 
expected increases in other fields. For example, the number of retail service 
employees will increase from 1986 to the turn of the century from 141,069 to 
203,307. Manufacturing, which employed 127,893 people in 1986, is expected to 
provide jobs for 200,000 by the end of the new decade. 
Overall, the county's work force is expected to increase during that time by 
50% and almost 500,000 jobs -- none of those in the armed services. 
And very little of that increase -- 139, to be exact -- is expected to fall in 
the agricultural category, a sign of increasing urbanization in the county. 
Schetter said the county is becoming more high-tech, more white-collar, more 
business-oriented and much less dependent on the military. 
No sleepy little Navy town any more; no rural backwater in the shadow of Los 
Angeles. 
Transportation 
The dramatic increase in the number of workers also puts pressure on the county 
to find a way of getting those people to work. 
"Because of the growth of the work force, the increase in traffic will be much 
greater than the growth of the population," Tayman said. 
Tayman said San Diego's "drive-alone" compulsion has to cease, or the rush-hour 
commute will be "horrendous," on the order, say, of Houston or Los Angeles. He 
said the current average of 1.1 San Diegans commuting to work each day by car 
must increase to 1.5 or 1.7 by the end of the decade to avoid disastrous 
traffic snarls. As a result, Tayman said car-pooling may evolve from the realm 
of "polite suggestion" to a legislative mandate born of necessity. 
Bill Tuomi, SANDAG's transportation expert, said San Diego County has 56% more 
traffic today than it did nine years ago. He said new freeways, extensions of 
old ones, an expanded trolley line and a commuter rail system through North 
County will ease the traffic burden, but the key is boosting the passenger load 
per car. 
Tuomi said that 55 million people ride the county's trolley or bus lines each 
year; the number "needs to reach" 95 million by 1995. In the 1990s, the 
trolley's eastern end, now in El Cajon, will stretch as far as Santee. It will 
move north, from downtown to Old Town and will soon service the new Convention 
Center as well. 
Tuomi said the No. 1 traffic hot spot of the 1990s is Interstate 5, 
specifically the junction of Interstates 5 and 805. 
"Interstate 5 carries more than 200,000 cars a day now," Tuomi said. "In 1980, 
the number was 100,000, so it's doubled in a decade. We're expecting 310,000 
cars a day on I-5 by the year 2000. That's definitely a source of concern. 
"Interstate 8 is our most heavily traveled freeway, handling about 270,000 cars 
a day. We expect to hold at that number until the year 2000. The traffic growth 
of East County is no longer as fast or fierce as up north. We expect the 
extension of California 52, which now goes from I-5 to Tierrasanta, to be 
extended to Santee and to ease the west-east burden dramatically." 
The other major transportation conflict of the 1990s will be the airport. 
Jack Koerper, SANDAG's special projects director, said the question of what to 
do with Lindbergh Field will be resolved in the Nineties, one way or the other. 
If it isn't, if procrastination rules, then that in itself will be a decision, 
Koerper said: "Some people don't act until there's a crisis, so maybe we'll 
have one." 
The Navy objects to making Miramar Naval Air Station the site of a new regional 
air facility, although the air station comes up repeatedly among the panels 
charged with making a decision on a new location. The Navy says the air station 
is not now and never will be available to civilian use. 
Koerper sees potential crises as an air crash in the downtown area, traffic so 
ugly on Harbor Drive that "you'll have to arrive two hours early to catch your 
flight." 
"Or we might have our air-carrier service curtailed because of use restrictions 
on the runway," he said. "Lindbergh might be taxed with one big convention 
after another coming in to use the Convention Center. We'll find we don't have 
the airport to accommodate the Convention Center, and then we'll do something." 
The Prognosis 
Tayman and others say San Diego "will be more big-city in the years to come," 
taking on the good, and the bad, that come with high-level urban living. 
We may see a downtown sports arena, and a professional basketball or hockey 
team to play in it; we should see at least one more Super Bowl (probably in 
'93); at least one baseball All-Star Game (for sure in '92) and maybe another 
World Series. 
Tayman and others think planning is sophisticated enough here to prevent San 
Diego from becoming a crude clone of its northern neighbor, Los Angeles. 
"Ironically," said Schetter of the Chamber of Commerce, "our organization was 
formed in 1870, and the issues they were talking about then -- housing, 
transportation, water, commerce, jobs, crimes . . . are the same ones we're 
talking about now. We seem to have done pretty well between then and now. I see 
no reason why we can't move forward with hope." 
On a Growth Curve: PROFILE OF SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
An older and higher-income population of San Diegans will crowd into more 
expensive houses in the year 2000, planners predict. The county expect to add 
about 400,000 new residents in the 1990s. While much public attention has been 
given to the projected rise in Hispanic population, it is the Asian population 
that will have the largest relative growth. 
More people in the same space 
Population in San Diego County 
1960: 1.03 million 
1970: 1.36 million 
1980: 1.86 million 
1989: 2.42 million 
2000: 2.78 million 
For Sale 
INCOME RISING, HOME PRICES RISING MORE 
Average income per household and average home price: 
1980: 
Average Income Per Household: $28,200 
Average Housing Price: $116,800 
1990: 
Average Income Per Household: $48,600 
Average Housing Price: $195,700 
2000: 
Average Income Per Household: $92,400 
Average Housing Price: $439,500 
GRAYING OF THE COUNTY: Median age in San Diego County 
1980: 28.8 years 
1990: 32.5 years 
2000: 35.8 years 
COUNTY'S CHANGING FACE 
1980 
Non-Hispanic White: 73.8% 
Hispanic: 14.7% 
Asian/Other: 5.9% 
Black:5.4% 
1988 
Non-Hispanic White: 67.0% 
Hispanic: 18.6% 
Asian/Other: 8.7% 
Black: 5.5% 
2000 
Non-Hispanic White: 58.5% 
Hispanic: 23.6% 
Asian/Other: 12.0% 
Black: 5.9% 
Note: Does not equal 100% due to rounding. 
Sources: San Diego Assn. of Governments (Sandag); Economic Research Bureau, 
Greater San Diego Chamber of Commerce; Center for the Continuing Study of the 
California Economy, Palo Alto. 
