HARRIED DRUG LORDS SEEKING TIME TO REGROUP, ANALYSTS SAY; 
COLOMBIA: TRAFFICKERS' PEACE OVERTURE IS SEEN AS A BID FOR A RESPITE FROM SUCH 
ACTIONS AS EXTRADITION TO THE UNITED STATES. 
Beleaguered Colombian drug lords are suing for peace, but they are unlikely to 
throw themselves to the mercy of government authorities and courts, analysts 
say. 
Instead, they seem to be seeking an accommodation that will give them respite 
from official action against them in return for an end to their 
"narco-terrorist" activities. And high on the list of official action the 
traffickers are known to hate and fear is extradition to the United States for 
trial. 
In a dramatic declaration this week, the traffickers acknowledged the supremacy 
of the Colombian government and announced a halt in their campaign of murders, 
bombings and kidnapings. 
Like many Colombians, President Bush expressed skepticism over the declaration, 
in which the drug lords also promised to suspend cocaine shipments and turn 
over weapons if they receive "constitutional and legal guarantees." 
The document was delivered Wednesday with the release of a mother and daughter 
who were kidnaped in mid-December. On Thursday, the traffickers released a 
third hostage, businessman Roberto Toro, in the city of Medellin. 
Toro, who was kidnaped Dec. 14, brought a verbal message from "the 
Extraditables," as the traffickers call themselves in public statements. 
According to Toro, they said they would free all of their hostages, believed to 
number about 20. Toro also said they posed a question for the Bush 
Administration and the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration: "If you do not 
believe the word of narcotraficantes, why do you negotiate with them, why do 
you have them testify against other narcotraficantes?" 
The example of plea-bargaining in U.S. drug cases has been used here to rebut 
official Colombian policy against negotiating a peace settlement with drug 
traffickers. 
The Extraditables have been seeking negotiations with the government of 
President Virgilio Barco Vargas since he signed an emergency decree Aug. 18 
permitting extradition of accused drug traffickers to the United States. 
In previous messages, the traffickers have made it clear that the main issue 
they wish to negotiate is extradition. Barco has refused, and 13 Colombians 
have been extradited under the August decree. In retaliation for the 
extraditions and for raids on properties owned by traffickers, they launched a 
terrorist bombing campaign. 
In December, after security forces killed drug lord Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha in 
a shoot-out, the traffickers began a campaign of kidnapings. Rodriguez Gacha, 
one of the three top chieftains of the notorious Medellin cocaine cartel, was 
wanted by U.S. authorities. 
Early this week, two former presidents and the archbishop of Bogota signed an 
open letter proposing that the traffickers release their hostages and stop 
dealing cocaine in hopes of "less rigorous treatment" under the law. 
The army's commanding general in Medellin has said the traffickers were 
consulted on the draft text of the letter through a lawyer. Former President 
Misael Pastrana, who endorsed but did not sign the letter, said he was 
consulted on the text by former President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen, who Pastrana 
says called him from the presidential palace. 
Those reports indicate to many analysts that some sort of agreement was being 
brokered between the traffickers and the government. 
Rodrigo Losada, a Colombian political analyst, said he fears that the 
government may secretly have relented on extradition in exchange for peace with 
the traffickers. Government officials deny that. Losada said such an agreement 
could have disastrous consequences for Colombia. 
It would be extremely hard to determine whether traffickers were keeping a 
promise to quit the cocaine business. And even if they did, Losada said, others 
would quickly move into the lucrative field, so trafficking most likely would 
continue. 
If accused traffickers were not extradited, they would be subject to Colombian 
justice. But, Losada said, bribes, intimidation and the killing of judges have 
rendered the court system in this country impotent in cases against important 
drug traffickers. 
The traffickers will not change their corrupt and brutal ways of dealing with 
the courts, and the judges will continue to be cowed, Losada said. "What judge 
will have the courage to convict them or even put them on trial?" he asked. 
As a result, he said, the power of the traffickers would increase. 
"The narcotraficantes would remain in Colombia with their capital," he said. 
"Then what could keep them from investing in big companies, taking over banks, 
buying politicians?" 
Meanwhile, Barco may have a compelling personal reason to reach an agreement 
with the traffickers. One of their hostages is the son of his friend and 
closest adviser, German Montoya. 
But Losada said any official concession could be politically costly for the 
Barco administration, which now is claiming victory over the traffickers. 
"If the government gives in and relinquishes extradition, people will 
eventually realize that the Extraditables won," he said. 
A U.S. official in Bogota said that because the government now has the upper 
hand, it is an especially inopportune moment to give the harried traffickers a 
chance to regroup their forces. 
"I think they are under tremendous pressures," the official said. "Their 
organization is deeply disrupted." 
And, he said, Colombia should not stop extraditions until it can build "a legal 
system that has a lot of force and authority, and that is going to take a lot 
of time." 
The U.S. official acknowledged that willingness to negotiate is a strong 
Colombian cultural trait. 
"There is a very strong perception in Colombian culture that gentlemen are open 
to negotiations," he said. "Even with your worst enemy, you are open to 
negotiations." 
Nevertheless, while the latest peace proposal by the traffickers has raised 
some hopes for a negotiated end to the plague of "narco-terrorism," many 
Colombians remain skeptical and cautious. 
The newspaper El Tiempo warned Thursday that "this could turn into a Trojan 
horse." 
