YOUR WHEELS: TIRE RATINGS CONFUSE TRUCK OWNER 
Question: I am confused about tire sizes. I have a 4-wheel-drive pickup truck 
and wanted to buy a Michelin P225/75R15, rated for mud and snow. But the tire 
dealer said that tire wouldn't fit and that I should use a truck tire. Aren't 
they both the same size, if they are rated the same? 
Answer: In most respects the dimensions will be the same, though the truck tire 
probably carries a higher load rating than the passenger-car tire. 
As you probably know, the P identifies the tire as a tire for a passenger car. 
The 225 tells you that the tire is 225 millimeters in width. The 75 means the 
tire is 75% high as it is wide. 
All those dimensions will be the same regardless of whether the tire is P-rated 
or LT-rated for light truck. But some other things can differ. For example, the 
thickness of the tread can differ on some identically sized tires, meaning that 
the overall diameter of the tires differ. 
The other major difference will be in the load rating, or what the tire 
manufacturer recommends as the maximum load. The sidewall contains a load 
rating, expressed in pounds and kilograms. That's the maximum load it can carry 
at its maximum-rated air pressure. 
All of these factors and others are often wrapped up in the 
tire-performance-criteria specification number or TPC Spec, which is molded 
into the sidewalls of many tires. You can check the specification on your 
original tires and attempt to match it with your replacement tires. Otherwise, 
you can consult your owner's manual or the tire inflation sticker inside your 
car to determine the load rating your vehicle needs. 
Q: My car, a 1981 Pontiac Le Mans, runs rough with a slight vibration. I was 
told by a mechanic that the problem stems from a vacuum leak. He said it could 
be anything from a loose hose connection to a faulty part. Is his diagnosis 
feasible? -- S.B. 
A: The diagnosis could be correct, but it is too vague. A vacuum leak almost 
anywhere in the maze of tubing that helps operate the emission control system 
on the engine could cause performance problems. A large number of valves and 
switches are designed to operate off vacuum pressure, and a leak could cause an 
improper fuel mixture being supplied to the engine or faulty exhaust-gas 
recirculation, among other problems. 
But your mechanic should be able to diagnose more precisely where the problem 
is occurring. If the only problem is a loose-fitting vacuum hose, then that 
should be easy to find. With the proper equipment and the on-board diagnostics, 
a vacuum leak should not develop into a wild-goose chase. 
Q: The owner's manual for my 1986 Honda Accord calls for a 20W-40 viscosity 
oil, which doesn't seem to me to be all that different from a 30W. It would be 
a lot cheaper to use the single-weight oil. Could I do that? -- D.H.F. 
A: The multiweight oil is of much higher quality, and you would be losing a lot 
of engine protection for not much savings in the cost of the oil. Today's 
multigrade oils are about 20% additives by volume, providing a significant 
boost in engine protection over the basic petroleum oil. By comparison, 
straight-weight oil is made up of about 7% additives. The multiweight oils also 
provide better protection in the critical few seconds after a cold start, when 
most engine wear occurs. 
