CONSUMER AFFAIRS: WHY RETURNABLE CARS HAVEN'T CAUGHT ON 
In the view of many consumers, a car, like other goods, should be returnable. 
It's a big purchase, full of details and fraught with uncertainty, sometimes 
including problems on delivery and seemingly endless "adjustments" thereafter. 
Amazingly, car makers have responded. Chrysler, Pontiac and Oldsmobile have 
recently made it possible to return some of their cars at least some of the 
time. 
But a customer service that should have been greeted with cheers has barely 
been noted. Perhaps it's not what consumers want, or it wasn't offered right, 
or perhaps nobody, consumers included, really understands what sells cars. 
Chrysler started with limited tests in individual cities half a dozen years 
ago. Then, for several months in the fall of 1988, Chrysler buyers in 
Washington were offered their money back on cars returned within 30 days or 
1,000 miles, while buyers in Denver and Chicago could exchange them for another 
car, for any reason, as long as the car hadn't sustained more than $300 in 
damage. 
That same fall, General Motors' Pontiac division, having tested a similar 
program in California with its Grand Am model, offered nationwide to exchange 
any 1989 Grand Prix within 30 days or 3,000 miles. And last September, GM's 
Oldsmobile division introduced the "Oldsmobile Edge," a "customer satisfaction 
program" including, among other benefits, the right to exchange any new Olds 
within the first 1,500 miles or 30 days. 
Such programs convey the message that "we stand behind the product," says Mike 
Losh, Oldsmobile's general manager and GM vice president. "Our products are 
better than five years ago, and this is a very graphic way of telling people." 
It's also a message these manufacturers thought consumers would welcome. 
Pontiac's market research, for example, indicated that more than 85% of 
households would be more likely to consider a car with that guarantee than one 
with other "inducements," such as rebates and low financing. 
Trouble is, no one seems sure whether the programs were successes or failures, 
or how to interpret the results. Actual returns were few -- less than 1% of 
Chrysler's sales during the periods covered, less than one-half of 1% of 
Pontiac Grand Prix cars sold that year and of Oldsmobiles sold in that 
program's first three months. 
These numbers are taken as proof of product quality, because the reason for 
most returns was not mechanical problems but customer taste, a simple change of 
mind. Typically, say dealers, cars came back because someone disliked the 
color, or the model seemed too small for the family. 
There's some disagreement, however, among car dealers (who were compensated for 
any financial losses) about the consumer's view of such programs and about 
whether either traffic or sales were increased at their dealerships. Some say 
customers weren't aware of the program, which lasted in some areas for only a 
couple of months. Others thought customers were well aware; they even joked, 
says Bill Haeger, owner of Des Plaines Chrysler/Plymouth in Illinois, warning 
that "if you don't make me happy, I'm going to bring it back." 
At Pontiac, "few took advantage of (the program), and few said it was important 
to them," says Sheila Main at Pontiac in Michigan; when asked, buyers said it 
was neither their primary nor their secondary reason for purchase. At 
Oldsmobile, however, only 11% of November's showroom visitors may have been 
aware of the program, but of those, says Losh, "roughly half indicated it was a 
factor in bringing them in." 
Among dealers, Chrysler's Washington experiment -- the money-back offer -- was 
probably least popular, considered "a little strong," laughs Mike Haeger at Des 
Plaines Chrysler/Plymouth. But some thought the exchange program -- extended 
several times in some areas -- an asset. Others thought it "an interesting 
selling tool," says Chrysler spokesman Tom Houston, "but not much more. It was 
well received but didn't result in a stampede." 
No one's sure why not, given consumer complaints about new cars. Were the test 
programs so limited and poorly publicized that they don't really prove the 
consumer's lack of interest? Were returns few just because the process of 
choosing and taking title to a car is so arduous that no one wants to do it 
twice, or do aggravating mechanical problems surface only after the first 
month? 
Perhaps new car shoppers voiced no particular interest because they'd already 
chosen a specific brand. They "came in to buy a Pontiac," says Main, "and were 
going to buy one anyway." Many, adds Chrysler dealer Jack Bosak in 
Merrillville, Ind., "came in for a specific model," although some traded up 
when there. 
Of the "one-third of the people in the market for a car who aren't 
model-specific," says Stanley Plog, head of a Reseda-based marketing research 
firm, "how many can you grab their attention, and how many will think it's a 
legitimate offer? There's so much distrust, and people may worry that it's not 
that easy to get in or out (of the deal), that there are probably a lot of 
gimmicks." 
The test results may also be skewed by the fact that the market is tired right 
now, overstocked and over-promoted. Sales are off industrywide, and the number 
of people in the market for new cars is, says Plog, the lowest in three years. 
It would take more than an exchange program to boost sales. 
The real news is in Oldsmobile's stated view that its return policy is a 
long-term commitment, not just a brief promotion. "We think it'll work even 
better over time," says Losh, "not just to draw people in but to make sure they 
come back. Our aim is to provide a good, comprehensive ownership experience" -- 
the return policy, 24-hour roadside service, perhaps eventually loaner cars and 
other services. 
Nothing more and nothing less than customer service -- this is a radical idea 
in the auto industry, and one that deserves attention. If consumers really want 
what they say, Olds could indeed have an "edge" in the market. 
