DRIVING AUTO RATES UP, INSURERS SAY; 
INFLATED CLAIMS SEEN AS FAST LANE TO EASY MONEY 
First there's the screeching of tires. 
Then comes the crash of metal on metal. 
And finally there is the tinkle of falling glass as headlights and taillights 
crumble to the pavement. 
These are the all-too-familiar sounds of motorists meeting by accident. 
But to many Californians, these are also the sounds of opportunity knocking, 
according to auto insurers who say Californians are routinely abusing the 
insurance system by running up thousands of dollars in unnecessary medical 
bills and pain-and-suffering claims. 
Simple but powerful incentives under California law -- such as the ability to 
collect multiple medical benefits from several insurance companies for the same 
injury -- are creating an atmosphere in which, the insurers say, an accident is 
not a tragedy but an opportunity to reap a financial windfall. 
"It's like hitting the lottery," said Melville P. Windle, general counsel of 
20th Century Insurance Co. 
Industry officials say it is these claims that are the engine driving runaway 
auto insurance rates in California. 
Trial lawyers and consumer advocates, most notably Ralph Nader, say that fraud 
is only part of the reason for high insurance rates. 
Even the insurers concede that eliminating fraud altogether would not make 
insurance cheap. One industry estimate is that cleaning up the fraud problem 
would mean a 7% to 17% cut in auto insurance rates, while other estimates run 
as high as 30%. 
Still, an examination of injury claims submitted to several California auto 
insurers reveals a pattern of large medical bills arising from even minor 
accidents -- some so insignificant that there was no damage to any vehicle. 
Files reviewed by The Times showed that medical reports often differed only in 
the name of the patient -- with the diagnosis, cause, treatment and final 
billing amount almost identical to those of other patients visiting the same 
doctor. 
And, curiously, the files showed that accident victims often did not visit 
their neighborhood family physicians, but rather chose to see doctors and 
chiropractors miles away, at the suggestion of their attorneys. 
During the last 10 years, the rate at which Californians make claims against 
auto insurers for physical injuries has nearly doubled at some of the state's 
large insurers. The highest rates are recorded in metropolitan Los Angeles, 
where, on average, there is one bodily injury claim filed for almost every 
accident reported -- more than double the pace found in rural areas or smaller 
cities such as San Diego -- according to a study by 20th Century Insurance. 
"You have to conclude that people are double as fragile, or something else is 
at work . . . that something else is clearly wrong," said Rick Dinon, vice 
president of 20th Century. 
The Automobile Club of Southern California reports that the frequency of 
physical-injury claims has jumped 32.4% over the last seven years, even though 
the frequency of accidents resulting in damage to autos fell by 6.5%. 
Few Have Visible Wounds 
What makes insurance officials skeptical of many of these bodily injury claims 
is that only a small percentage of all auto accident victims claiming personal 
injury have any wounds or other visible or verifiable injury. At the Automobile 
Club, for instance, only 10% of bodily injury claims have an "objective," or 
physically verifiable, injury. 
The remainder are for what medical officials refer to as soft-tissue, 
subjective injuries. 
In simpler terms, that means whiplash maladies -- sore backs, sore necks and 
headaches. 
Some medical authorities, such as Dr. Richard Corlin, speaker of the house of 
delegates of the California Medical Assn., said in an interview that "an 
overwhelming majority of these cases could have been treated adequately with 
home treatment of aspirin and heat and one or two visits to a family 
practitioner." 
Dr. Peter Martin, president of the California Chiropractic Assn. and a 
practicing chiropractor in Lancaster, said "10 years ago they would just take 
aspirin and walk it off." 
But now victims of minor accidents are routinely seeking legal assistance and 
extended medical treatment. 
Greater Awareness 
Many attorneys and doctors defend the trend of increased medical claims by 
saying that it is rooted in a greater consumer awareness of legal rights and a 
heightened concern for personal health. 
But some also acknowledge that there is a pervasive and cynical desire among 
Californians to seize any opportunity to get even with the insurance industry. 
"There's not an attorney in California that hasn't had someone walk into his 
office and say, 'I just got hit and I want to make some money,' " said Will 
Glennon, legal analyst for the California Trial Lawyers Assn. 
Glennon maintains that most attorneys would promptly show such a client to the 
door. "The job of an attorney is not to create injuries," he said. 
But hundreds of lawyers in California openly solicit personal-injury cases. 
Daytime television is filled with their ads, as are the Yellow Pages. 
And many California doctors regularly solicit attorneys to send them patients, 
according to Donald Kottler, a Los Angeles attorney who specializes in 
personal-injury cases and advertises his services in the Yellow Pages. 
Defends Referrals 
Kottler defended the practice of steering clients to specific doctors who 
specialize in personal-injury lawsuit work. 
He said that many accident victims have no medical insurance and do not have 
the money to pay doctors, so he sends clients to physicians who are willing to 
wait to be paid until the claims are settled. 
Kottler said that many neighborhood family physicians "don't want to get 
involved" with lawsuits or are unwilling or unable to prepare the detailed 
medical reports necessary to build a successful claim file. 
To be sure, not all or even a majority of these whiplash claims are pumped up 
or fraudulently invented. 
And there are a host of other reasons besides increasing medical claims for 
escalating insurance rates, including the inefficiency of some insurance 
companies, higher medical costs, worsening traffic and increased numbers of 
accidents. 
Critics suggest that insurance rates have grown at an even faster pace than the 
actual costs of the increased bodily injury claims. 
Dispute Claim of Insurers 
The legal and medical lobbyists say that the extent of fraud through pumped-up 
claims is nowhere near the magnitude claimed by the insurers. Still, early 
indications from a continuing RAND Corp. study of auto insurance claims 
indicates that there has been a sudden and sustained jump in lawsuits filed 
since 1985, following a 10-year period of flat growth. 
The growth is due to a number of factors such as changing legal precedents, the 
advent of attorney advertising, changing health concerns and social norms. 
People who have successfully milked the system often prod others to seek the 
same windfall. "People are talked into it by attorneys and their neighbors," 
said Michael Josephson of the Josephson Institute for the Advancement of 
Ethics. 
"It spreads by word of mouth," said J. David Cummins, a professor of insurance 
at the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania. 
In response to these changes, a complicated system has been created in which 
all the players now have a great financial interest. And the system is 
seemingly impossible to dismantle. 
Making Claim Credible 
Lawyers send clients to doctors to form the basis of a credible claim, Kottler 
said. 
Doctors then often over-treat and test to an extreme out of fear of missing a 
real injury and then being sued for malpractice, according to Martin and 
Corlin. 
Insurance companies in turn pay off on many frivolous and questionable claims 
out of fear of being sued later for bad-faith dealings and because it is often 
cheaper to settle the claims than to fight them in court, claims executive 
acknowledged. 
Even when cases are headed for trial, judges routinely pressure insurance 
companies to settle claims of less than $25,000 out of court, in an effort to 
clear packed court calendars. 
"Who's unhappy" about the trend? asked Dick Sacino, senior vice president of 
claims at CalFarm Insurance Co. "Not the doctors. Not the lawyers. And 
insurance companies can pass (the costs) along. If the public wants to tolerate 
this abuse, we'll deliver it." 
The myriad cases of what insurance company executives call "legalized fraud" or 
"claim inflation" are not the multimillion-dollar damage awards to 
quadriplegics and other severely injured victims. Those cases are rare and 
represent a small portion of an insurance company's costs, officials say. 
Considered 'Peanuts' 
And the out-and-out fraud of staged accidents, while troublesome, is considered 
"peanuts" in comparison to the daily barrage of real, but deliberately 
inflated, cases, according to Sacino and other claims officials. 
Insurers say the most troublesome cases are the seemingly innocuous ones where 
medical treatment runs from $1,000 to $4,000 and requests for compensation run 
from $5,000 to $20,000. It is these relatively small cases that add up to 
billions of dollars annually. 
Several major insurers in the state allowed a Times reporter to review these 
whiplash and other soft-tissue injury claims files at random, under the 
condition that names of the claimants, doctors or lawyers not be used. 
One extreme case that illustrates the problem of growing medical claims was 
recently filed with the Automobile Club. 
In this case from Hollywood, a Mercedes-Benz carrying three occupants 
rear-ended a Cadillac carrying six people. The Mercedes driver, insured by the 
Automobile Club, admitted that he was at fault. 
There was no damage to either car, but all six occupants of the Cadillac sought 
and received medical care. Three ran up bills in excess of $3,500 each, and the 
others spent in excess of $2,500 each for treatment of sore backs and necks. 
Two passengers in the Mercedes also sought and received medical care in excess 
of $3,000 each for their sore backs and necks. 
Only the driver of the Mercedes did not seek medical care. He is also the only 
one of the nine people involved in the accident who is not in a legal position 
to sue for general damages, or the so-called pain-and-suffering awards. 
Pain and suffering is usually calculated at three to five times the value of 
medical care and lost wages. That legal precedent is seen as an incentive to 
all involved to run up, or build up, the medical bills as much as possible, 
insurers say. 
In the case of the Mercedes and the Cadillac, total claims for medical costs 
and pain and suffering are expected to top $50,000. 
"We don't believe that any trier of fact will believe (that this is a valid 
claim)," said Bruce W. Randall, director of claims for the Automobile Club. 
"But then, we have no evidence (that it is fraudulent). And if we are wrong, 
and they get an award (from an arbitrator or a jury) they can turn around and 
sue us for wrongful denial of the claim." 
Get Multiple Payments 
In many cases, the medical costs have already been paid by the victim's own 
medical insurance, according to insurers. The injured can also file under the 
medical coverage of his own auto insurance for compensation. A third medical 
payment from the at-fault driver's insurance company is also gravy. 
So, even without a pain and suffering award, a victim with a $3,500 bill from a 
chiropractor could easily put $7,000 in his pocket even after paying off the 
doctor. And all insurance settlements are tax free. 
In another case that CalFarm Insurance claims manager Bud Myers called "very 
typical," one car rear-ended another in Los Angeles. One car sustained no 
damage, the other had damage of just $107. The driver of the not-at-fault car 
saw a doctor for whiplash and received $567.92 in care. She is suing for 
$5,000. CalFarm offered $2,000 to settle the case and indicated that it would 
not pay more than $2,750. The plaintiff's attorney would not budge and the 
matter is now headed for court. 
"In a vast majority of cases, there has been an accident, there has been an 
injury. But it is a matter of degree," Myers said. "The same accident 10 years 
ago would not result in medical claims. The same accident in Fresno would not 
result in a claim." 
In another low-speed rear-ender case submitted to CalFarm, three young laborers 
have filed suit. "Three people were in the car; three were injured. All with 
the same attorney, all the same injuries, all soft tissue (whiplash), all (had) 
90-day treatments," said Sacino, reading in a monotone suggesting that he has 
seen the same facts, from the same word processor, again and again. 
$8,916 Medical Bill 
The total medical bill came to $8,916 -- half of which was for medical tests 
rather than therapy or treatment. Their attorney has asked for $15,000 for each 
of the plaintiffs. 
CalFarm plans to offer $7,500 each, and hopes to actually settle for $10,000 
apiece, or $30,000, in this routine case. 
"They may have been hurt, but were they hurt $10,000 worth?" asked Sacino, 
adding that he thinks this is a classic case of what has become know in the 
industry as "building up" a claim. 
"It's not fraud in the true sense of the word; it is not a staged accident. The 
build-up is a difficult kind of fraud (to prove). It's in degrees," he said. 
Insurance claims executives displayed a cynicism of their own. 
Some victims who saw doctors immediately following an accident were faulted for 
not waiting to see if the injury would go away naturally. 
Basis for Lawsuit 
Others who did wait, and visited a doctor weeks after an accident, were 
suspected of seeing the physician only as a basis for filing a lawsuit. 
It difficult to tell who is actually suffering from whiplash and who is not. 
But until recently, insurers have had a great incentive to settle even 
questionable cases. A landmark 1978 California Supreme Court ruling known as 
the Royal Globe decision, gave accident victims the right to sue insurance 
companies for bad-faith dealings. If an insurer made a low offer to settle a 
claim and the injured party later received a much higher award from a jury, he 
could then sue the insurer for tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
Four months ago, the high court reversed itself. 
It is still unclear what immediate effect the reversal is having on frivolous 
cases. 
Some insurance executives say claims adjusters are inclined to follow the old 
rule and pay off on many marginal claims. Trial attorneys, however, say the 
insurers started delaying claims settlements right after the Royal Globe 
decision was reversed. 
And just how much money would be saved by eliminating marginal cases is also 
unclear. 
Could Reduce Costs 
Stanley Zax, president of Zenith Insurance and former head of the Assn. of 
California Insurance Companies, said that cutting fraudulent claims out of the 
system could cut auto insurance rates by 7% to 17%. 
Cummins, the professor at the Wharton School of Business, said that estimate is 
conservative. 
Cummins, who said California insurance claim rates are "outrageous," suggested 
that cutting out fraud and frivolous claims could lower rates by 30%. And 
"squeezing the fat" out of the insurance companies could save an additional 
10%, he said. 
Insurance industry critics question whether fraudulent claims are as much of a 
problem as the insurers say. 
Harvey Rosenfield, consumer advocate and Proposition 103 author, Glennon and 
others said they believe the problem is a minor one. The insurance industry is 
using the issue as leverage to usher in a no-fault system of auto insurance, 
they said. 
Doctors, lawyers and consumer advocates say that wholesale changes in the 
system are not warranted. 
They say that if fraudulent claims are the problem, then the solution is to 
prosecute offenders. 
Said Glennon: "To the extent fraud is out there, let's do something about it; 
let's clean it up." 
RISING BODILY INJURY CLAIMS 
Reported Claims Relative to 1980 
Source: Auto Club of Southern California 
According to figures supplied by the Automobile Club of Southern California, 
the frequency at which motorists filed bodily injury claims rose by 32.4% 
during the first seven years of the decade, while the frequency of accidents 
that actually resulted in damage to vehicles dropped by 6.5%. Verifiable 
injuries, such as broken bones, cuts and bruises, represent just 10% of the 
claims filed. The vast majority of claims are for so-called whiplash injuries 
-- primarily sore backs, stiff necks and headaches. 
Bodily Injury: 132.4 % (as of June 1987) 
Property Damage: 93.5% (as of June 1987) 
Whiplash: 90% 
Verifiable Injuries: 10% 
