ART BUCHWALD: THEY'RE TRADING IN WHITE-COLLAR CRIME 
There is a great deal of plea-bargaining going on between Wall Street and the 
government these days. Some defend it as the best and cheapest way of dealing 
with zillion-dollar crime. The trouble with this plea-bargaining is that the 
public has no idea if it got taken or not by the terms of the agreement. 
Take the case of Pixel, Bumrat &amp; Greed, the investment bankers who cheated 
their clients out of $2 billion. The government intended to charge Pixel with 
stock manipulation, mail fraud, forgery, homicide and statutory rape. 
But just before bringing the charges, Pixel's lawyer, Noel Contendre, showed up 
at the Justice Department and said, "My clients admit to nothing, but they are 
men of reason. If you promise to drop the indictments and publicly apologize to 
them, they are prepared to forget the matter." 
Assistant Atty. Gen. Able replied, "We can't do that. Your clients committed 
every crime known to the SEC. They violated banking laws, securities 
regulations, fire codes, and then drove with an expired sticker on their 
windshields. We're going to throw the book at them." 
"You're really talking about nothing more than parking near a fire hydrant. My 
people may have occasionally resorted to playing it close to the edge, but it 
was only to avoid causing panic in the streets. Suppose we offer to pay a $100 
fine on the understanding that our little secret is never revealed to any human 
being on the face of the Earth?" 
"Are you kidding? Pixel committed the Wall Street 'Crime of the Century.' How 
will it look if I let them off with a fine? My intention is to send your guys 
on a slow boat to Dannemora." 
"Now just a minute -- we're talking about white-collar crime committed for 
greed. You don't send anyone to jail for that any more." 
"The public lost their shirts in the October crash and they're still mad. They 
are looking to us to protect them. I can't let your people off. America will 
say that I am soft on criminal racketeering." 
"What if Pixel agrees to pay $500 and put in 10 days of community service at a 
health club? Would that satisfy the hardliners in the Justice Department?" 
"I don't think so. But I might consider a guilty plea in which your clients 
agree to serve 30 days as valet car-parkers at the Westchester Country Club." 
"You must be kidding. Valet parking is cruel and unusual punishment. He only 
stole $2 billion. Wouldn't justice be better served if my clients were 
sentenced to 15 days retrieving balls from a golf-driving range?" 
"You better get serious, Noel. Unless you come up with a satisfactory proposal, 
we're going to go for a jury trial." 
"For argument's sake, let's say that my people admit they made a couple of 
mistakes. In addition, they agree to give back half the money they obtained by 
methods that might not be considered kosher. This should take care of the 
entire matter and everyone could just go about their business as usual. Mind 
you, I'm not sure if my clients will agree to that as they may have spent the 
$2 billion already." 
"It won't fly. There has been too much press on this story and we can't make it 
look as if the government caved in again. The only thing I would consider at 
this point is if Pixel gives back 60% of the ill-gotten gains, and all the 
partners serve as busboys in the Big Boy restaurant of their choice for one 
week." 
"I doubt if I can persuade them to buy it. They're not going to accept the 
humiliation of working in the restaurants where they usually eat." 
"Take it or leave it. I have to go to a press conference in a few minutes." 
"Wait. Perhaps we could take the deal. But does it mean that Pixel has to admit 
any wrongdoing?" 
"Of course not. When it comes to white-collar crime, a plea of guilty means 
your heart is in the right place." 
