REMAINS OF 76-YEAR-OLD HOLLYWOOD PILOT FOUND IN WRECKAGE ON ANACAPA ISLAND 
John F. Thomson was to turn 77 years old this month, but even at his age, the 
Hollywood resident never gave any thought to giving up his favorite pastime: 
flying. 
In fact, Thomson, a professional photographer, was in the process of upgrading 
his credentials to a commercial pilot's license when the single-engine plane he 
was flying solo was reported missing earlier this month, his daughter recalled 
Monday. 
"He thought it would be a kick," Anita Thomson said. "And he wanted to become 
better qualified to do aerial photography." 
Thomson's Cessna 172 was reported missing Jan. 5 after he failed to arrive at 
Santa Monica Airport from Watsonville during stormy weather. The wreckage was 
discovered late last week in a wildlife preserve on west Anacapa Island, and on 
Monday the Ventura County medical examiner confirmed that the lean, athletic 
septuagenarian had died in the accident. 
"If you have to go I guess he was doing what he liked to do," said E. Bruce 
Howell, an associate at Thomson's Hollywood photo studio. "He wasn't the kind 
of person who would want to end up in a rocking chair and be unable to carry 
his heavy photo equipment." 
Federal flying rules do not prohibit medically fit pilots from retaining their 
air licenses, regardless of age. According to other pilots at Santa Monica 
Airport, several contemporaries of Thomson still fly single-engine planes out 
of Santa Monica. 
Thomson, who was flying home after visiting a friend in Northern California, 
had been a pilot for three decades and was no stranger to long, grueling 
flights, friends said. 
Five years ago, he and his wife Jann, who died last year, flew a single-engine 
plane to Upstate New York with a second couple, Roger and Nancy Bowman. After 
leaving the Bowmans off -- and going water skiing -- Thomson proceeded to fly 
to Newfoundland. 
"He loved to fly into remote areas -- he kept in good shape," said Bowman, 
president of the Air Spacers Flying Club, based at Santa Monica Airport. 
Thomson, past president of the club, also had once flown to Alaska and crossed 
the Arctic Circle, friends said. 
"It was real hard to think of him as elderly -- he was old but he sure wasn't 
elderly," said Rol Murrow, president of the Santa Monica Airport Assn. "He was 
alert as most 20-year-olds, if not more so." 
Thomson, who operated American Photo on Melrose Avenue, was in a rented Air 
Spacers plane when he was reported missing. 
An 11-day Civil Air Patrol search ensued, covering 13,650 square miles on 
several 300-mile trips between Watsonville and Santa Monica. But the searchers 
did not fly over Anacapa, which is well outside the normal route. 
On Monday, federal authorities said they were still investigating and had no 
idea why Thomson crashed into Anacapa. Pilot friends of Thomson theorized that 
he may have flown along the California coast past Santa Barbara and because of 
foul weather did not see the steep cliffs of Anacapa, 15 miles offshore. 
The plane's wreckage was spotted last Thursday by a passing pilot, according to 
Cindy Nielson, a spokeswoman for Channel Islands National Park. Authorities are 
seeking to remove the wreckage by helicopter as quickly as possible because it 
is strewn in a remote nesting habitat for the endangered California brown 
pelican. 
Thomson, born in New York City on Jan. 11, 1912, moved to Hollywood with his 
parents in 1919. 
His father, Bing, was a stage and film director, and Thomson himself worked 
briefly as an actor, including a part in a silent movie version of Heidi, 
according to his family. The Hollywood High School graduate went on to work in 
a 20th Century Fox photography darkroom before eventually opening his own shop. 
Thomson leaves two daughters, Anita, of Berkeley, and Sandy, of Hollywood, and 
a granddaughter, Pira Kelly, of Berkeley. 
His ashes will be scattered at sea. 
