THEY SPREAD THE WORD TO THOSE WHO CAN'T READ 
The 27-year-old gardener's Little League team had won all its games since he 
began coaching -- a proud accomplishment for the shy, burly young man. 
But before the season ended, he abruptly resigned. He quit because the league 
office required some paper work, and the fact was that he could neither read 
nor write. 
He is not alone. About 27 million Americans are classified as functionally 
illiterate. That means about 1 in 5 adults in the nation -- and the estimates 
are identical for Orange County -- are unable to read a medicine bottle, want 
ad, phone book or bus schedule. 
The South Coast Literacy Council and its three offspring organizations are 
working to change those statistics. Last year more than 3,000 Orange County 
residents received free tutorial help from the organizations' 1,000 volunteers 
in rooms supplied by high schools, libraries and churches. 
One of the biggest problems is convincing people to accept the help. 
"There is such a stigma (associated with illiteracy), many people are too 
embarrassed to admit it," said Estelle Rosenthal, a tutor and board member of 
the council. 
"If they come to us, we can help them, but they have to 'come out of the 
closet.' Many are afraid to do this and lead terrible lives of frustration and 
deceit, with low self-esteem." 
The South Coast Literacy Council was founded 18 years ago and is strictly 
nonprofit, charging nothing for its services and depending entirely on 
volunteers. It has since given birth to councils offering services in Orange, 
the central county and the north county. They use the Laubach method of 
teaching, a system developed by the late Dr. Frank C. Laubach, called "Mr. 
Literacy" by Time magazine and "the greatest teacher of our time" by Lowell 
Thomas. 
It was as a missionary in the Philippines in the 1930s that Laubach discovered 
the value of key words to aid students in identifying sounds. He drew worldwide 
attention with his methods and rallying cry of "Each One Teach One." In 1955, 
he founded Laubach Literacy International. 
Although the program handles both American and foreign-born students, the 
latter studying English as a Second Language, Rosenthal specializes in people 
who have lived here all their lives. 
"Those who contact us are tutored in total privacy," said Rosenthal, 66, a 
retired administrative secretary whose own immigrant parents were tutored in 
English by volunteers in the 1920s. 
"Student anonymity is preserved unless they wish to break it. Once their 
self-esteem is heightened because of their newly learned skills, they start 
feeling proud of their accomplishments and, like many religious converts, begin 
extolling the benefits of literacy and the program." 
Such was the case of a 49-year-old successful salesman named Jim who earned 
between $60,000 and $80,000 a year, yet could not read and could write only his 
name, address and numbers. 
"He had developed an incredible memory to compensate for his lack of literacy," 
Rosenthal said. "He once said that he wasn't stupid, just that he couldn't 
read. He has been in our program now for 6 months. 
"He recently started to tell me a story which points out the indignities an 
illiterate faces on a day-to-day basis. I asked him to write it down as part of 
his homework. This poignant piece is the most he has written in his life." 
Here is what Jim wrote: 
 I want to tell you about traffic school. I got there at 8 in the morning. The 
teacher gave us a card to fill out. It was not hard to do. When class started, 
he asked people to read. I was lucky he did not call on me. 
 At 10 a.m. we had a coffee break. I went outside to meet him. I told him that 
I could not read. He said, "How did you fill out the card?" I said it was easy, 
it was just your name and address and only numbers. So he said that he would 
not embarrass me. After the coffee break we started class, and it was fun. 
 After our lunch break he gave us a book of traffic laws. He asked people to 
read and then he looked at me and said, "Would you read the next paragraph? Oh, 
I am sorry, I said I would not embarrass you." Well, he already did. So I stood 
up and told the class that I was illiterate; that I did not know how to read, 
but I am going to school to learn how, and I feel good about it.... 
 I have a wife and two children. I have made good money in the past years. The 
only time I was ashamed was when my 3-year-old daughter asked me to read her a 
story and I couldn't. That is a shame. A man stood up and said, "I have a 
22-year-old son and he cannot read. May I have your phone number? I would like 
him to talk to you after school." 
Rosenthal said self-esteem definitely rises with students as they progress in 
their studies. Robert, the gardener, used to come to his lessons with head down 
and not look at his tutor for the whole hour. Little by little, he is opening 
up, smiling and discussing the problem. At a recent lesson he was able to read 
a few words in a newspaper. His mother said he was so thrilled, he came 
directly home and asked her to order daily delivery of a newspaper. 
How did he manage to graduate from a Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., high school without 
being able to read or write? "All through school I was overlooked," the shy, 
sunburned gardener said haltingly. "I was in slow-learner classes, and I just 
got shuffled through the system. They told me I would never be able to learn to 
read. I hate them for that." 
"There is no reason for illiteracy -- but many causes of it," said Rosenthal, 
recently named Retired Senior Volunteer Program Tutor by Laubach Literacy 
International. "Adult illiterates may quit school, or have learning 
disabilities. He or she may have a physical or emotional disability, or be 
uninterested in learning at an early age. There might have been a traumatic 
period or incident. The teacher may have been ineffective, or the individual 
may not have been motivated to learn to read." 
Besides the functionally illiterate, Rosenthal said, another 47 million 
Americans are categorized as marginally literate -- able to read, write and 
compute but unable to use these skills proficiently. 
 "Each One Teach One" is free to any adult who wants to learn to read, write 
and speak English. Prospective tutors and students may call (800) 228-8813 for 
the location of the nearest teaching facility. 
