ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: WESTMINSTER; 
39 DRIVE-IN MAY FALL FOR SHOPS, HOTEL 
The chill of a cold January night didn't discourage the movie-goers who began 
lining up outside the Hi-Way 39 Drive-In more than an hour before dusk. 
As it has since the drive-in theater opened in 1955, the crowd included 
families in station wagons, young couples on dates and teen-agers crowded into 
cars. By the time "Back to the Future, Part II" appeared on the screen, the 
drive-in was packed. 
But the scene, repeated nightly for 35 years, eventually might be history. 
Hi-Way 39 Drive-In is one of a dwindling number of drive-ins in the county. If 
Westminster officials have their way, it, too, soon will disappear and be 
replaced by a shopping center or hotel. 
Mayor Charles V. Smith said he would like to see the 25-acre site used in a way 
that is more financially lucrative to the city. 
Smith said the location of the drive-in, off Beach Boulevard just south of the 
Garden Grove Freeway, makes it prime commercial property that could bring the 
city as much as $1 million in sales tax each year after a shopping center or 
hotel were built. 
"It will remain a drive-in for at least another year," Smith said. "But there's 
a strong chance that we'll be working on some plans by the end of the year." 
City Manager Jerry Kenny said his staff has been meeting with representatives 
of Pacific Theaters for nine months, discussing the "highest and best use of 
the property." 
Kenny said a final decision on closure of the drive-in is up to Pacific 
Theaters. 
Milt Moritz, a spokesman for Pacific Theaters, insists that the closure isn't 
imminent. 
"The city has been talking about closing the drive-in for years," Moritz said. 
"As far as we know, we're still operating a drive-in there, and a very popular 
one at that." 
Hi-Way 39 and Anaheim Drive-In are the only drive-ins operating year-round in 
Orange County. Drive-ins in Buena Park and La Habra are closed for the season 
but scheduled to reopen later this year, said Moritz. 
The possibility of Hi-Way 39 Drive-In eventually closing was unsettling to some 
movie-goers. 
"There's too many shopping centers around already," said George Ross, 27, of 
Garden Grove. "Drive-ins are always good, and this one has to stay. I have a 
family, and this is the easiest way for us to go to the movies." 
Sandy Bryski, 35, said, "It's very personal here at the drive-in. You can sit 
together and bring the kids. They can fall asleep, and if they act up, you can 
just roll up the windows and not bother anybody else." 
At $4.50 a head, Bob Briggs of Huntington Beach said, drive-ins are still the 
best bargain in town. 
"You get to see two movies for the price of one," said Briggs, 26. "I've been 
coming to this drive-in since I was 6 years old. I remember when it just had 
one screen. There was a time when I was coming here two times a week and knew 
just about all the employees. I would hate to see a place like this close down 
for something as ordinary as a shopping center." 
Huntington Beach resident Julieanne Doan said she prefers a drive-in to a 
walk-in because she can just be herself. 
"I can relax, dress how I want, talk during the movie and smoke a cigarette and 
not have to worry about bothering anybody," said Doan, 19. 
Huntington Beach resident Paula Andrews said she would be upset if her monthly 
trips to the drive-in came to an end. 
"This is the last place," said Andrews, 29. "If they take this one away, we're 
in trouble." 
But not everybody waxed sentimental about nights at the drive-in. 
Robert Busenburg, a snack bar attendant, said getting rid of the drive-in 
simply signals progress. 
"I think people are starting to go to walk-ins more now anyway," said 
Busenburg, 17. "Drive-ins are becoming a thing of the past." GREG HERNANDEZ 
