AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM FOR HANDICAPPED OKD 
A proposed after-school care program for severely handicapped students won 
initial approval Tuesday from Glendale school officials, who heralded it as a 
breakthrough for parents. 
The program, the first of its kind in Glendale, will provide free care and 
innovative recreational instruction weekday afternoons for up to 24 mentally 
and physically impaired students from Glendale, Burbank and La Crescenta. 
Designed by the Easter Seal Society, the program could serve as a model to be 
duplicated nationwide, officials of the nonprofit organization said. Easter 
Seal already is considering creating a similar program in Orange County. 
"It's going to make a big difference in the children's and parents' lives," 
said Mary Anne Dan, supervisor at College View School, a specialized facility 
for handicapped students that will house the program. "It's virtually 
impossible to find quality, affordable after-school care. And these kids have 
had few recreational opportunities." 
The state still must agree to fund and license the program as a day-care 
service. But Easter Seal officials, who said informal approval and funds 
already have been given, consider those measures largely procedural. 
The service is expected to be in operation no later than May, said Carlene 
Holden, Easter Seal's vice president of program service in Los Angeles County. 
The after-school care proposal was praised by parents of College View students, 
who had struggled unsuccessfully for almost three years to establish such a 
service at the school. 
Many parents have been unable to afford expensive, specialized aides or find 
day-care centers capable of providing proper care and have had to forgo working 
in the afternoons to look after their handicapped children, Dan said. 
"They really are at the cutting edge of something that's been a long-time 
need," said Don Eells, a La Crescenta training specialist whose handicapped son 
attends College View. "Something like this gives parents many more 
opportunities to lead a more normal life. Obviously it's very difficult to hold 
a regular job." 
But one handicapped services specialist cautioned that the program should be 
viewed only as a stepping stone to a better solution -- after-school care that 
would integrate normal and handicapped students. 
"We're supporting the after-school program because right now there's a great 
need for it. But it's not the ideal situation," said Sam Suzuki, program 
manager for school-age children's services at Lanterman Regional Center, a 
nonprofit agency contracted by the state that will allocate the money for the 
program. 
"Handicapped children are really best served when they are integrated with 
non-handicapped services," Suzuki said. "That's a direction we'll eventually 
go." 
But Board of Education members didn't hesitate Tuesday to embrace the program 
by agreeing to lease two classrooms at College View School for its operation. 
"It's a real breakthrough," one board member told Emmy Pennington, the 
district's director of special education, after she presented the proposal. 
The program won quick approval from the board in part because it requires no 
school district funding, officials acknowledged. In fact, the district will 
receive about $20 a day for leasing the classrooms. 
Easter Seal and College View will hire and supervise at least four instructors 
and aides and may seek donations for student scholarships. But teachers' 
salaries, rent for the classrooms and students' costs largely will be paid by 
the state, Holden said. 
Holden would not disclose how much the program is expected to cost. But Dan 
said a proposed budget requests about $9.35 an hour per student. 
The program will emphasize recreation and interaction and provide therapeutic, 
specially designed toys for students that can be borrowed by parents for use at 
home, Holden said. It also will offer computerized work stations with adaptive 
equipment and programs that also can be borrowed. 
"We are not talking about a baby-sitting program," Holden said. "We are talking 
about having a professionally staffed program with a lot of special features 
that are normally difficult to find. We're considering this a model program." 
Severely handicapped students, who attend either regular or special schools 
during the day, will be bused to College View and cared for from 3 p.m. to 6 
p.m., when their parents will pick them up, she said. 
About 2,800 students with various degrees of handicaps are enrolled in special 
education programs throughout Glendale, Burbank and La Crescenta, which operate 
a consortium to provide services for them, according to Pennington. About 100 
severely handicapped students attend College View. 
Although the program initially will be limited to 24 students, Dan said, 
immediate demand is not expected to be overwhelming because many handicapped 
students live in permanent care facilities outside their homes. 
