MUSIC AND DANCE / CHRIS PASLES: ORIGINALITY CAN BE BAD, PROFESSOR SAYS 
In the world of classical music, the question of "What's new?" too frequently 
supersedes all others, even that of "What's good?" 
At least, that's the feeling of Bernard Gilmore, professor of music and 
composition at UC Irvine. 
"Quite often, when students bring a piece into my office, they really disregard 
its quality," Gilmore said in a recent interview. "They're (more) concerned 
with doing what's never been done before. 
"Of course, it's impossible. No matter how innovative a piece is, it's beholden 
to something in the past. My feeling is that they are concerned with the wrong 
things." 
Gilmore plans to fulminate against what he calls the "obsession with 
creativity" in a talk entitled "Originality and Other Sins" at noon Thursday at 
UCI's Bren Events Center. 
"I'm neither an aesthetician nor a musicologist. I am a composer," he said. "My 
interest in the subject comes out of composing and, more particularly, having 
taught music composition for several years and realizing with how obsessed 
(students) are with originality." 
But Gilmore doesn't blame his students alone. 
"The public also tends to admire 'originality,' and I think that admiration is 
misplaced and is part of the same tendency to venerate a few masterpieces and 
'definitive' performances," he said. "It's an issue blown way out of 
proportion." 
"We've all become enamored with such terms as 'the cutting edge.' But the 
emphasis is all misplaced, particularly with respect to a young composer. . . . 
It can really stifle creativity." 
Gilmore, 51, has taught composition, music theory and conducting at UCI since 
1982; last year, he also was acting dean of the School of Fine Arts. He was 
reared in the San Fernando Valley, did undergraduate and graduate work at UCLA 
and received his doctorate in performing arts from Stanford University. 
Gilmore insists that preoccupation with "originality" is a comparatively recent 
phenomenon. 
"Basically, originality is a 19th-Century idea -- which we're stuck with 
today," he said. "If you read the letters of Mozart, you will never find him 
worried about being original. Mozart just ignores it. It's not an issue. 
"What he talks about is skill, generally. For example, in one letter to his 
father, he brags he can imitate any style. His writings tend to be very 
practical in their orientation." 
But things changed with the "heaven-storming" composers of the Romantic 19th 
Century. 
"The 19th Century develops the conception of artist-as-hero," Gilmore said, 
and, to clarify the term, borrowed from the writings of mythology expert Joseph 
Campbell's description of the mythic hero: "The mythic hero has to journey to 
Hades or past the pillars of Medusa, slaying the dragons of the status quo, to 
achieve rebirth. From the 19th Century on, we tend to look at the artist that 
way." 
Like many an academic, Gilmore proceeds by defining terms. 
"We think we probably have some common understanding when we say a work is 
'original,' " he said. "But if we start to pin (the word) down, we reveal 
paradoxes and incongruities. . . . We think we know what we're talking about, 
but we don't. . . . 
"The more we talk about it, the more confusing it is, arriving (finally) at the 
understanding that it is really an irrelevant notion." 
Gilmore plans to play parts of three works commonly referred to as "original" 
and ask, "What it is about them that causes us to say they are original works?" 
The works include Stravinsky's "Le sacre du printemps," Debussy's "Prelude a 
l'apres-midi d'un faune," and Charles Ives' "Three Places in New England." 
"In my process of defining, the works which we call original are those which 
reveal new possibilities to us or new relationships. There is a revelatory 
quality in all those works we call 'original.' 
"For a composer to create such a piece, he has to be open to those 
possibilities of a child. For an adult, a pot is a pot; whereas to a kid, it 
can be a helmet or a drum or all sorts of things." 
But Gilmore wonders whether it is even possible to be original any more, "given 
the fact that every possible sound has been made." 
He plans to draw on excerpts from the works of minimalist composer John Adams 
("Nixon in China") to show that what is considered original and new may merely 
be ideas whose times have come. 
"The point I want to make with Adams is the irony that, just as with 
representational painting -- which we filter through our experience of decades 
of non-representational painting -- these very familiar sounds (by Adams), had 
they been written in 1940, we wouldn't have paid any attention to them. 
"Now they sound fresh. Here again, it's a paradox of 'originality.' " 
In his own teaching, Gilmore advises his students to follow Stravinsky's 
description of composing as "an act of speculative volition. 
"I urge my students to speculate, 'What would happen if I do this?' To work 
more out of their head and on paper rather than to realize on paper sounds that 
they have imagined. 
"I think the composer needs to be much more attuned to the process of 
composition rather than (to) the product. What results, results. If it's 
original, fine. If not, is it good? Is it interesting?" 
Gilmore sees his approach as "taking pressure off the students." 
'That was the original purpose of the talk," he said. "We all value innovation 
and freshness, but if there were less obsession with the masterpiece and the 
original masterpiece, we would have more of a comprehensive view of the arts 
and a more practical conception of creating the arts." 
That is not, however, a process that ends with training in a composition class 
or at a university, he cautioned. 
"If someone graduates from here with a Ph.D. in composition, I hope they would 
not think they are a finished composer," he said. "You're never completely 
developed as a composer. You learn all the time. 
"I remember Haydn's quote when he was on his deathbed, 'I have just learned how 
to write for the winds, and now I must leave this world. . . . ' " 
As for whom historians will regard as the creators of our time, Gilmore said, 
"I prefer to avoid speculating." But he thinks things "are going in a very 
fruitful direction. 
"As Stravinsky (forced us to do) in the 'teens and '20s, we are forced to look 
at the tradition again and come to terms with it," he said. "I'm optimistic." 
 Bernard Gilmore will lecture on "Originality and Other Sins" at noon on 
Thursday in the Steward Room of the Bren Events Center, Bridge Street at Campus 
Drive, on the UC Irvine campus. The lecture is free. Information: (714) 
856-8748. 
