HAROLD EDGERTON, 86; PHOTO PIONEER 
Harold (Doc) Edgerton, whose development of the electronic flash showed 
humankind brilliant images of a world never before seen, died of a heart attack 
Thursday afternoon. 
Edgerton, 86, whose work was familiar to millions through stop-action 
photographs of such images as the wings of a hummingbird in flight or of a 
bullet shattering a balloon, died while having lunch at the faculty club of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He was professor emeritus of electrical 
measurements at the school. 
The achievements of Edgerton, a much loved professor dubbed "Papa Flash," 
spanned much of the 20th Century. 
As a boy he learned photography from an uncle but grew frustrated when his 
first roll of indoor pictures was underexposed. After receiving a degree in 
electrical engineering from the University of Nebraska he entered MIT, where he 
earned a doctorate in 1931. 
It was while a graduate student that he built his first flash tube using 
vaporized mercury. He later turned to the xenon gas still in use today. (The 
concept itself dates to the 19th Century, and electric-spark photographs were 
done at the beginning of this century.) 
Edgerton succeeded in making exposures of less than one microsecond's duration. 
(A microsecond is one-millionth of a second.) And the process was repeatable. 
Edgerton's revolutionary work in the use of strobe lights captured images long 
hidden to the naked eye. His famous photographs of a drop of milk splashing on 
a table top and of a bullet shooting through apples and balloons showed the 
world what time looks like when it stands still. 
Edgerton's strobe work also led to underwater exploration. He helped search the 
Aegean Sea for the mythical city of Atlantis and surveyed Loch Ness in an 
attempt to solve the mystery of the Scottish monster. In 1973 he helped find 
the remains of the Civil War ironclad Monitor, which had sunk off Cape 
Hatteras, N.C. 
His strobe lamps enabled the Allies to track enemy movements at night during 
World War II and were used to photograph the first atomic tests. He once 
photographed a football player kicking a ball, showing the ball compressed 
almost in half at the moment of impact. 
In 1988, he was awarded a national medal of technology by then-President 
Reagan. Undersea explorer Jacques Cousteau used some of Edgerton's sonar 
equipment, and the two collaborated in locating the British Army ship HMS 
Britannia, which was sunk by a mine off the Greek coast during World War I. 
Edgerton's influence even penetrated to the depths of the Titanic. His 
underwater camera was used to photograph the shipwreck when it was discovered 
in 1986. 
"If it comes, it comes," Edgerton once said of his ideas and inventions. "It'll 
come by inspiration and God almighty and hit you right in the middle of the 
night." 
Although officially retired from MIT in 1968, he continued to live in an 
apartment next to the campus and most days could still be found in his 
laboratory just off MIT's "Strobe Alley," where his work is displayed. 
"I got stuck," he once said of his long affiliation with the university. "But 
it's given me a very nice place to work." 
In addition to his inventions, Edgerton and two former students started a 
company called EG&amp;G in 1947, specializing in electronic technology. Now a 
multimillion-dollar engineering concern, the company was under contract to the 
military and designed and operated systems that timed and fired U.S. nuclear 
bomb tests. 
At a recent meeting of the Archaeological Society of America, Edgerton offered 
words of advice to a group gathered to honor his life's achievements. 
"Work like hell, tell everyone everything you know, close a deal with a 
handshake, and have fun," Edgerton told the society's members. 
He is survived by his wife of 62 years, Esther, a daughter and a son. 
