COURTING THE ACADEMY 
The way the producers of "Stand and Deliver" figure it, Edward James Olmos 
deserves more exposure in the Oscar race. 
Olmos' portrayal of a barrio high school teacher in that film earned him some 
critical acclaim and a Golden Globe nomination. But when it came to the annual 
ritual of studio campaigning for Oscar nominations, Warner Bros. bought only a 
handful of advertisements in the Hollywood trade papers. 
A Warners spokesman insists the film received the same treatment as the 
studio's other Oscar contenders. But Olmos' agent, Jim Cota, takes a different 
view. "We got absolutely no support from the studio -- it's terrible," Cota 
said. 
So Cota, the film's investors (who sold "Stand and Deliver" to Warners in a 
pick-up deal) and Olmos are pooling their own money to buy ads in the trade 
papers, asking members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to 
consider Olmos for a best actor Oscar. "We had to beat up Eddie over the head 
to do this," Cota said. 
That "Stand and Deliver's" supporters are dipping into their own pockets to the 
tune of several thousand dollars is a sign of how important marketing campaigns 
have become in the race for Oscar nominations. 
True, the Academy warns members about "advertisements, promotional gifts and 
other lobbying tactics," and Academy members love to expound at length about 
the integrity of their voting process. But many Hollywood insiders also concede 
that marketing campaigns do help shape the thinking of Academy members -- 
though not always in the manner that the studios intend. 
This year, for example, Cannon has launched an aggressive campaign for its 
critically acclaimed "Little Dorrit," prompting some Oscar race veterans to 
snipe that the studio's "garish" advertisements work against the picture. 
Universal's marketers thought Academy members would enjoy an elegant dinner 
before the studio's free screenings, but others say that strategy could 
backfire. "If (promotion) gets too elaborate," one producer said, "people are 
going to feel like you're trying to buy their vote." 
In contrast, Warners' decision to hold back on its campaign for Olmos could 
actually aid his Oscar race. "This casts him as the underdog," explained Gabe 
Sumner, executive 
producer for Odyssey Entertainment Ltd. "Fellow actors might be more receptive 
to nominate him. They would probably appreciate (his situation)." Indeed, 
Sumner purposely positioned "Rocky" as an underdog candidate in 1976, when that 
film won the best picture Oscar. 
Marketing campaigns are especially important this year, which appears to be 
short on front-runners. In contrast to past years, there has been a notable 
lack of agreement among the various critics' groups that bestow their own 
awards in advance of the Oscars, including the Hollywood foreign press, which 
handed out its Golden Globes awards on Saturday. "When there are no shoo-ins, 
it's open season for every studio's publicity department to spend lots of 
money," said producer Robert Radnitz. 
Since November, the 4,632 voting members of the Academy have been bombarded by 
advertisements in the trade papers (principally Daily Variety and the Hollywood 
Reporter), gold-embossed letters in their mailboxes, and sound tracks passed 
out at screenings. Once the nominees are announced on Feb. 15, the volume of 
advertising will increase even further until the winners are announced March 
29. 
Like the presidential primary, the Oscar season only gets longer and longer. 
"Every year they seem to start the campaign earlier," said Lynne Segall, 
marketing and sales director for the Hollywood Reporter. Prime advertising 
spots in that paper are locked up beginning in August. 
Compared to 1960, though, when an Oscar campaign for John Wayne's "The Alamo" 
equated a best picture vote with patriotism, studio strategies for seeking 
Oscar nominations are downright tame. So tame, in fact, that the Academy even 
plans to tone down its written warning to members about "crude and excessive 
solicitations," an Academy spokesman said. 
Watching the studio's marketing moves can be almost as entertaining as the 
Oscar race itself. Here's a look at some of this year's strategies: 
The resurrection strategy: "The Unbearable Lightness of Being" faces unbearable 
odds: Nearly 80% of the films that have gone on to win a best picture Oscar in 
the past 54 years were released in the second half of the year. "Unbearable 
Lightness" was released in February last year, and it didn't survive at the box 
office for long. 
So producer Saul Zaentz, together with the film's distributor, Orion, mounted a 
major advertising campaign, hiring Lloyd Leipzig, who had conducted the 
successful Academy Award campaign for Zaentz's "Amadeus." Leipzig and the Davis 
&amp; Grimaldi agency began routinely reminding Academy members about 
"Unbearable Lightness" back when most people in Hollywood were still talking 
about the Thanksgiving box office results. A rough survey of the trades shows 
that, so far, "Unbearable Lightness" is the most advertised film in the race. 
The bottom-line strategy: "Rain Man" is already considered a top contender for 
an Oscar nomination. But MGM/UA isn't taking any chances: Colorful, poignant 
scenes from the film regularly fill up two-page ad space in the trade papers, 
and the studio is running a lengthy commercial about the making of "Rain Man" 
on Los Angeles cable systems. 
MGM/UA is hoping that a few nominations will help "Rain Man's" prospects at the 
box office when it is released overseas in late February or early March. That 
same strategy worked wonders when "Moonstruck" collected a satchel of 
nominations before going overseas last year. 
The re-release strategy: One key to any Oscar campaign is to get voters to see 
the film. "The problem gets worse and worse," says producer Jere Henshaw, a 
30-year Academy member. "How do you get people out of the house and in to see 
the picture?" This year, in addition to free, private screenings for Academy 
members, studios are re-releasing films in commercial theaters close to Academy 
members' neighborhoods -- "Who Framed Roger Rabbit," "A Cry in the Dark," 
"Bird," "Running on Empty" are among the re-releases. Some films, like 
"Unbearable Lightness" are also available on videocassette. 
The quotable critics strategy: Any film critics left out of the campaign for 
Clint Eastwood's "Bird" must be feeling pretty lonely. In one Daily Variety ad 
alone, critics from 30 different outlets were quoted -- ranging from Newsweek 
and NBC's "Today" show to the University of Texas' student newspaper, the Daily 
Texan. That contrasts with Weintraub's campaign for the less-than-critically 
acclaimed "My Stepmother is an Alien," which had to resort to filling up its 
advertising space by reprinting two entire reviews. 
