MEANWHILE, THE NEW MEMORABILIA MOUNTS 
This may be the first time that seasoning packets have been sold as official 
inaugural memorabilia. 
"They reflect the life style of the First Family," said Lisa Goddard, assistant 
director of promotion for the Inaugural Committee. 
Although President-elect George Bush and his family are developing a reputation 
more for their love of Chinese food than down-home Texas cooking, Goddard 
thought the items were "great. I don't think I've ever seen seasoning mix in an 
inaugural catalogue. Someone here is cooking it up right now, and it smells 
great." 
The $7.50 trio of seasoning mixes -- Texas chili, barbecue and gumbo -- is one 
of 48 items in the official American Bicentennial Presidential Inaugural 
commemorative catalogue and is among the hundreds of souvenir items being sold 
by street vendors and local merchants as tourists descend on the town for 
inaugural festivities. 
Outside the JW Marriott Hotel, one of the first of 20 official souvenir stands, 
vendor Bernard Lloyd reported that T-shirts ($10) and sweat shirts ($39.95) 
were selling well. He expected pennants to do better when the parade gets under 
way. 
What wasn't hot? A giant Nestles Crunch bar with inaugural stickers at $2. 
Displayed at the stand was a sample vanity inaugural license plate ($50 for six 
letters, good in all states) that was curiously stamped "NANCY." 
The Inaugural Committee's catalogue also includes such pricey items as a 
Steuben glass eagle atop a crystal ball: $1,195. A Boehm porcelain eagle sells 
for the same price. But Goddard was quick to note that there were other, more 
affordable items, like a 95-cent inaugural book cover. 
"One of the top criteria was that the items had to be affordable," she said. 
They also had to be made in the United States. 
Other "Bush life style" items include a $35 man's golf shirt. "It looks like 
George Bush's favorite golf shirt," Goddard said. "He likes the way the pocket 
buttons and it has longer tails in back. And it's his favorite color blue." 
Blue is the predominant color of the merchandise, including a travel umbrella 
($20), coffee mug ($10) and hat and muffler set ($15). 
Bush's penchant for horseshoes is reflected in a horseshoe design belt buckle 
($25) and key ring ($8). 
Goddard wouldn't speculate on how much the committee hopes to raise from sales 
of souvenirs. 
"It's hard to tell," she said. "In 1985, we raised $2 million." Considering 
that year the parade was canceled due to bad weather and it was the second 
inaugural for President Reagan, vendors are hopeful they'll hear the happy 
ringing of cash registers this time around. 
For the Democrats 
There is even something for nostalgic Democrats -- one street vendor had an old 
Mondale-Ferraro campaign button for sale. 
The Inaugural Committee expects competition from other merchants waiting to 
cash in on memorabilia and from bootleggers. 
"It'll happen," Goddard said. "Some of the things get bootlegged. But," she 
sniffed, "it's usually the sorts of things we'd never do anyway." 
Not all souvenirs being offered are reverential to the offices of President and 
vice president. 
The Fit to a Tee T-shirt shops in Alexandria, Va., and Georgetown report good 
sales of a shirt emblazoned, "Hey George! You've just been elected president of 
the United States! What are you going to do now?" "I'm going to Disney World!" 
proclaims a smiling, waving Bush. 
Another shirt features Bush and Vice President-elect Dan Quayle as wine-cooler 
hawkers Bartles &amp; Jaymes. "Thanks for your support," it reads. 
Where's Quayle? 
Absent from most of the memorabilia, official and unofficial, are the 
likenesses of Quayle and his wife Marilyn. The Inaugural Committee catalogue 
merchandise features them on buttons and offers a color photo of Bush and 
Quayle in a "leather-like booklet" with the oaths of office ($17.50). 
It's customary with official commemoratives, Goddard explained, to concentrate 
on the likeness of the President. 
That may disappoint some Los Angeles residents who were hoping for irreverent 
Quayle merchandise from friends visiting Washington. 
But Quayle did turn up in public display, in a corner window at Garfinckel's 
department store at 14th and F streets. There a display features a photo 
blow-up of George Bush. Standing behind him, partially hidden, is Dan Quayle. 
"I'm not going to pretend to be witty or make any kind of comment. It was 
simply logistics," explained Jeffrey Mattson, the store's director of visual 
merchandising. 
"We did it that way because of the size of the blow-ups," he said. "We tried 
three or four possibilities, and this seems to be the one that worked best 
visually. I wasn't sure that when I saw Quayle's face behind Bush and cut off, 
that we wouldn't get comments . . . a lot of people could find humor in that, 
depending on how they viewed the vice president." 
He has received no negative comments, so far. But if he did receive a call from 
an official wanting the window changed? "If someone raised a fuss, we'd try to 
come up with another solution. We're not out to offend anyone." 
