GM UNVEILS AN ADVANCED ELECTRIC PASSENGER CAR 
General Motors Corp., hoping to steal a lead in the race to develop 
lower-emissions vehicles, Wednesday unveiled a prototype electric passenger car 
that can go 124 miles on a single charge and even outrace some internal 
combustion vehicles. 
The Impact, a teardrop-shaped two-seat car, has a top speed of 75 m.p.h. and 
would place GM "on the cutting edge of technology," GM Chairman Roger B. Smith 
said at a news conference in Los Angeles. 
The sleek car, powered by 32 10-volt lead-acid batteries, was designed from the 
ground up as a practical electric car for the consumer market, Smith said. In 
that, it differs from other electrical vehicles under development, which are 
essentially converted delivery vans intended for commercial fleets. 
He maintained that the Impact is "producible" as currently designed, although 
production will depend on its meeting federal safety standards, consumer 
acceptance of an electric car and financial feasibility. 
"There are no yet-to-be-solved secrets," Smith said. "The thing is its 
marketability . . . . We want an electric car that's producible, that can 
handle itself on the highway and that can meet the federal standards out there 
and that is a marketable product. We believe we've accomplished two-thirds of 
that." 
The soonest that GM would go into production is 1993 or 1994, said John S. 
Zwerner, executive director of GM's advanced product engineering department. 
"The public generally perceives electric vehicles as slow-moving golf carts," 
Zwerner said. "The Impact absolutely shatters that perception." 
Observers, including state and local air quality officials, praised the new 
car, which was designed and engineered mainly in Southern California. 
"This is certainly as advanced as anything I'm aware of," said Arnold Fickett, 
a vice president of the nonprofit Electric Power Research Institute, funded by 
the electrical utility industry. "It's a giant step forward." 
GM engineers borrowed from a prototype GM solar vehicle, the Sunraycer, to give 
the Impact a lightweight, aerodynamic design and improvements in motor and 
controls that partly account for the car's range, speed and acceleration: 0 to 
60 m.p.h. in 8 seconds. A GM video showed the Impact out-accelerating Mazda 
Miata and Nissan 300ZX sports cars. 
GM said it uses about a third of the energy of a conventional car. 
Smith refused to estimate how much the car would cost if it went into 
production, except to say that it would be priced competitively with other 
cars. He refused also to say how much GM spent developing it. 
Some industry observers said they do not see a big consumer demand for the 
cars, short of federal or state requirements. 
"I think, in a free market situation, with no market incentives, electrically 
powered cars would have no impact," said Chris Cedergren, a senior automotive 
analyst with J. D. Power &amp; Associates, an Agoura Hills auto market research 
firm. "They would have to be forced on consumers." 
Smith admitted that the car has drawbacks. For one thing, at current gasoline 
prices and electricity rates, the car would cost about twice as much to operate 
as a conventional auto: about $70 a month, compared to $40 a month for a 
gasoline-engine auto driven 10,000 miles a year. 
That is mainly because of the batteries' relatively short life. An Impact owner 
would need to replace the battery pack every 20,000 miles at a cost of roughly 
$1,500. The electricity to run the car would cost about $5 to $12 a month, 
Smith added. 
Expected improvements in battery design in the next three to four years could 
extend battery life to 50,000 miles, which would make monthly operating costs 
competitive with those of conventional autos, Smith added. 
Unlike electric vehicles that use exotic nickel-iron or sodium-sulfur batteries 
as power sources, the Impact uses lead-acid batteries, whose 870 pounds account 
for about 30% of the car's total weight. 
But improvements in battery design eliminate the need to add water and also 
overcome some of the traditional drawbacks of electric vehicles: low speed, 
short range and the relatively long time it takes to recharge. 
The average electric vehicle now has a top speed of 50 to 70 m.p.h. and a range 
of 60 to 100 miles. It typically takes up to 12 hours to recharge an existing 
electric vehicle. 
But GM said the Impact can be charged halfway in as little as half an hour and 
almost fully recharged in six, simply by plugging the vehicle into a home 
circuit. 
Eventually, Smith said, he foresees recharging circuits being placed around 
cities, much as some Canadian cities put outlets at parking meters to power 
engine warmers. 
Because the Impact is designed as a consumer car rather than as a fleet 
vehicle, it would have a much broader market than electric vans -- a necessity 
for mass production of a new vehicle, analysts said. 
GM would have to sell more than 100,000 Impacts a year to make production 
feasible. The market for vans converted to electric power from gasoline engines 
may be fewer than 20,000 a year, observers said. 
Proposed federal and local clean air standards may spur acceptance of electric 
vehicles generally because they are virtually pollution-free. 
The California Air Resources Board is considering a proposal to require that 
15% of new vehicles sold by the year 2003 be so-called ultra-low-emission 
vehicles, which would include electrics. 
"There's definitely a need for alternative fuels, and this shows that the kind 
of standards that the Air Resources Board is working on are feasible and 
realistic," said Bill Sessa, a spokesman for the California Air Resources 
Board. "It's consistent with the kinds of emissions standards that we are 
developing for the future." 
Electric vehicles would, in effect, transfer pollution from cars to the power 
plants that produce the electricity for the vehicles. But that would still 
result in pollution reductions of up to 90%, said Tom Eichhorn, a spokesman for 
the South Coast Air Management District, because of greater efficiency at the 
power plants. 
It is unlikely that new power plants would need to be built, at least in the 
near future, to meet demand from such vehicles. Electrical utilities such as 
Southern California Edison have enough excess capacity to power electrical 
vehicles, especially if most recharging occurs at night -- typically a 
utility's period of lowest usage, said Lawrence Hamlin, manager of research at 
Edison. 
GM is not the only company working on electric vehicles. The Electric Power 
Research Institute has worked with both GM and Chrysler to develop 
electric-powered vans for eventual production. Ford Motor Co. is developing its 
own electric-powered van. 
GENERAL MOTORS' IMPACT 
Power: Two electric AC motors, one for each of the front wheels. 
Battery pack: 32 10-volt lead-acid batteries, total weight 870 lbs. Can be 
recharged in about six hours on ordinary household current. 
Acceleration: from 0-60 m.p.h. in eight seconds. On the highway, can accelerate 
from 30-60 m.p.h. in 4.6 seconds. 
Range: 124 miles on one charge. 
Cooling system: Fan-assisted flow-through air cooling. 
Tires: Special low-resistance tires, inflated to 65 psi (double the inflation 
of ordinary tires). 
Weight: 2,200 lbs. 
