WYCHE; 
FOR ALL HIS EFFORT, HE IS STILL KNOWN AS WICKY WACKY 
There was once a Cal center named Roy Riegels who ran in the correct direction 
10,000 times on the football field, but did anyone call him Right Way Riegels? 
No-o-o. 
But let him take one wrong turn, as he did after picking up a Georgia Tech 
fumble in the 1929 Rose Bowl, and he was Wrong Way Riegels forever. 
There is now a coach named Sam Wyche . . . 
He's 44 years old, in his fifth season, has just put together the league's No. 
1 offense and guided the Bengals to the Super Bowl. 
Does anyone call him innovative? 
Bold? 
Dynamic? 
Try Wicky Wacky. 
A Pittsburgh Steelers assistant hung that on him last season when Wyche botched 
the end of their game. This was shortly after Sam's pratfall de resistance, 
against the San Francisco 49ers, replays of which are being shown every hour on 
the hour this week. If Custer had survived the Little Bighorn, he wouldn't have 
been asked about it any more than has Wyche about this. 
Do they call Wyche warm? 
Caring? 
Down to earth? 
Many do, since 99% of the time, he's as nice as you please and has a heart that 
is clearly in the right place. This is the man who drives around the empty 
streets early Sunday mornings before games, notices the people sleeping in the 
doorways, and volunteers to speak during the off-season for $5,000 a pop so he 
can donate the money to aid the homeless. 
Unfortunately, there are those nights when the moon is full and he grows fangs 
and turns into a werewolf. 
There's still a warrant out for his arrest in New Orleans, where he slammed the 
locker-room door on the hand of a deputy sheriff who was trying to serve papers 
on a Bengal player in 1985. Wyche missed both the Super Bowl and the scouting 
combine workout that season, because the law in New Orleans would have picked 
him up the moment he set his first tiger paw down at the airport. 
In 1986, after a close loss at Denver, he threw a 5-alarm tantrum in the 
postgame press conference. He kicked the door on the way in, ordered reporters 
to wipe those smiles off their faces and ask their questions. 
A traffic reporter, working weekends for National Public Radio, asked why Wyche 
had kicked the door. Wyche ordered that the man be removed, leaped off the 
podium, grabbed his microphone, tore the sponge cover off it and threw it in 
his face. 
Wyche later apologized for this one and no charges were filed. 
In 1987, he had those losses to the Steelers and 49ers to explain, and a 4-11 
record. 
Let's face it, we can't put this man up for canonization yet. He's lucky he's 
still working. 
Working he is, however, and quite well. 
He has a team in the championship game and is known around the league as a 
bright guy with a fine football mind. 
"If Sam has a problem, it's that he's too much of a human being," says Boomer 
Esiason, who knows all about Sam's problems, having been one for their first 
few years together. 
"He cares too much. An NFL coach has got to walk around like a block of 
granite, not caring about anything. I mean, if I had a problem, I wish that 
were my problem." 
And inventive? 
Says Esiason: "He's brought a lot of things to this game. Our audibling system 
is incredible. Our language is incredible. 
"Most teams would say, '84-Z-in.' We never say that. We go, 
'Split-Painter-Denver-Zebra-Dover.' What the hell is that? 
"It took me 2 years to learn the damn language. I'm yelling out there, 'Ralph!' 
and 'Lou!' and 'Lester!' and 'Denver!' and 'Dallas!' and the Bills (the 
Bengals' opponent in the conference final) are saying, 'They're coming this 
way! No, that way! No, they're coming at me!' 
"They don't know what the hell we're doing." 
"Sam's always thinking. He's thinking about our offensive schemes. Or he's 
scheming about the way our offense thinks, I don't know." 
 -- Boomer Esiason 
The first thing to understand about Wyche, he's an overachiever. 
His brother, Bubba, was a star quarterback at Tennessee. Sam was a plugger who 
had to walk on at Furman. 
But it was Sam who gutted it out in the Continental League, got a tryout with 
the newly formed Bengals and impressed enough coaches with his want-to to last 
9 pro seasons. 
"I wasn't very good," he says. "I didn't have a very strong arm. I was the guy 
who stayed after practice because I needed it. I knew the game plans cold 
because I knew if I had to rely on sheer ability, I was in trouble. 
"But it didn't take anybody very long to figure out I couldn't hit a quick 
'out' to the left and they'd trade me somewhere else. I played for 5 teams in 
the space of 9 years." 
The next thing to understand is that Wyche is smart. 
And the next, that he was groomed as a Bengal quarterback, and as a 49er 
assistant coach, by Bill Walsh. 
Genius may be excessive language for a man with flair for X's and O's, even one 
who could get 300 yards of passing offense out of a Scout troop, but whatever 
you want to call Walsh, he's among the game's most astute men and has proved it 
several times over. 
Walsh isn't at all offended at being called a genius, however. Raider Coach Tom 
Flores, asked at the '84 Super Bowl if he was a genius, too, answered, 
becomingly, that Einstein was a genius. 
Walsh, asked the same question the year before, started his answer this way: 
"Some people have said that. . . . " 
And Walsh raised Wyche from a puppy. 
So what we have here is a hard-driving young man with a genius-designate for a 
mentor who likes the challenge of living by his wits and isn't bashful. 
Can Sam think, or what? 
Even his quotes are masterpieces of invention: 
Did Seattle have Joe Nash feign injury -- "The big Nash attack," Sam dubbed it 
-- to stalemate his no-huddle offense? 
Sam's protests included one from the often overlooked medical-ethical 
perspective. 
"The Seattle doctors came out on the field," Wyche said. "Either the doctors 
were duped by all this, or they were involved in the sham. There is a medical 
code of ethics, you know, and I'm sure the Seattle association of physicians, 
or whatever the group is, would check into it." 
So far, the King County (Wash.) Medical Society has announced no action. 
Did the league stop the Bengals from going on a quick count in their no-huddle 
offense against the Bills? 
Sam came up with a jurisprudential angle. 
"Sports sometimes teaches the world a lesson," he said. "I think in these days 
of overcrowding of jails, this is probably an answer. The next time somebody 
robs a restaurant at 6:30 in the evening, the police should let the crook go 
and tell the restaurant, 'You can't stay open until 6:30 because you're 
vulnerable to being robbed.' " 
Did Buffalo Coach Marv Levy suggest that the Bengals have enough talent to 
dispense with the Mickey Mouse stuff and just line up and play? 
"That's another disappointment from Marv Levy," Wyche said. "I've always 
thought so much of him. It's kinda like finding out about Santa Claus." 
Wyche can coach, too. 
The Bengal offense isn't exactly talent-shy, but his contribution counts, too, 
and he's had it at the top of the league ratings for years. 
He could have run double reverses to his heart's content, and picked off the 
occasional media straggler, too, without ever calling down public scorn upon 
himself, but for one feverish moment, late in the afternoon of Sunday, Sept. 
20, 1987. 
The Bengals, who had gone 10-6 the year before and missed the playoffs by a 
tiebreaker, were 1-0. 
The 49ers and Sam's old mentor, Walsh, were in town. 
The Bengals led, 26-20, with 6 seconds left, with fourth and long at their 
30-yard line. 
You're the coach, what's the call? 
Did anyone out there say anything but "Punt!"? 
Wyche ran halfback James Brooks on a sweep, trying to eat up the remaining 
time, but the 49ers threw him for a 5-yard loss. The clock stopped at :02. The 
49er offense came out and Joe Montana threw a touchdown pass to Jerry Rice, 
tying the game, 26-26. 
Wyche, clearly in never-never land, then crossed the field to shake Walsh's 
hand -- before Ray Wersching kicked the extra point that won the game. 
To this day, Wyche won't concede it was a bad call. 
So how does he remember it? 
"Well, we lost a close game," he says. "They were a top team. We played 'em 
right to the end of the game. . . . 
"The strategy at the end of the game was correct. It will be the strategy that 
we'd employ again." 
Not unless he wants Paul Brown to come down from the owner's box and choke him, 
it won't be. 
The august and rarely-heard-from Brown, himself, later alluded to unspecified 
big mistakes in that game. 
The players reportedly weren't too supportive either. 
"There were players literally going after him after that game," says Tom 
Dinkel, a former Bengal linebacker who covers the team for a Cincinnati radio 
station. 
"Some of the players got vocal with Sam. There were players on defense who 
wanted part of him." 
However, there's a sanitizing process at work, too. 
Walsh called Wyche the next day and told him it was the right call, that they 
had put their fastest runners on the punt-block team and would have blocked any 
kick. 
Bob Trumpy, the NBC sports anchor in Cincinnati and a Wyche stalwart, says, "I 
still don't know what Sam did wrong." 
Trumpy says the problem was that the Bengal fullback didn't block the 49er end, 
resulting in the loss. Of course, a player missing an assignment is part of the 
risk of running any play. 
Unfortunately, Wyche was soon going to have more to answer for. 
Five weeks later, with the regulars just back from their strike and the Bengals 
at 2-3, they picked up the season at Pittsburgh. 
The Bengals trailed, 23-20, but reached the Steeler 18, with 15 seconds left 
and no timeouts. Esiason started to line the offense up so he could spike the 
ball behind center for an incomplete pass and stop the clock, a tactic that had 
just been legalized, when Wyche sent the field goal unit on. It couldn't get 
lined up in time and the clock ran out. 
On an elevator down to the locker room, Pittsburgh assistant coach Dick Hoak 
told a couple of writers: 
"Wicky Wacky messed up another one." 
A nickname was born. 
The Bengals lost 8 of their last 10 games and Wyche's firing was expected 
imminently. 
"I stood around at a lot of practices with Mike Brown (Paul's son, the general 
manager)," Dinkel says. 
"Mike's not one to cuss so he can sound like one of the boys, but he was saying 
things like, 'I don't believe what the . . . is going on out there. . . . No . 
. . organization.' 
"I think Mike was totally fed up with the deal." 
The day after the season, the coaches and writers waited all morning to see 
what action would be taken. At noon, Wyche and the coaches left, saying they 
were going to lunch. 
Who's buying, yelled a writer. 
"Jim McNally," Wyche replied. "He's the only one with a guaranteed contract." 
Actually Wyche was forgetting someone. He still had a guaranteed contract, with 
another year left on it. 
The next day, Paul Brown called him in and told him they'd honor it, if Wyche 
agreed to some changes. 
He was to stop skipping meals, stop working all night, stop keeping the staff 
there all night. 
If this sounds a little like the famous Dan White "Twinkie defense," wherein a 
junk-food diet was argued in court to have driven a man to crime, it should 
also be noted that Wyche is a lot mellower these days. 
"Players feel comfortable around him," Dinkel says. "He's not so 
schizophrenic." 
However, there is one other difference in the Bengals this season, that Brown 
doesn't mention -- and Wyche won't concede. 
Did Paul Brown tell him to cut out a lot of the tricky stuff? 
"Regardless of what Sam says, they've kept things so simple," Dinkel says. 
"They took out all the gadgets. If you say the word gadget to Sam, he'll blow 
up in your face. He doesn't want people to think he's controlled." 
But has he been? 
"There's no doubt." 
There's no keeping a good man down, though, and Wyche's mind whirls on. 
His fake punt helped beat the Bills in the conference final. His plan to have 
the Gatorade in David Fulcher's barrel replaced by confetti, whereupon he would 
turn around and douse Fulcher with the real stuff, didn't work, though. 
All Cincinnati waits expectantly -- fearfully? -- for what he might come up 
with in Sunday's think-off. 
"Especially now," Dinkel says. "I think there's going to be some serious 
gimmick plays in this game." 
To borrow the Sundance Kid's injunction to Butch Cassidy: 
Keep thinking, Sam. That's what you're good at. 
