JOSEPH S. CLARK; FOUGHT FOR REFORMS AS SENATOR 
Former U.S. Sen. Joseph S. Clark, a liberal and civil rights activist who as 
mayor brought reforms to Philadelphia's City Hall and tried to do the same in 
the halls of Congress, has died. He was 88. 
Clark died at home Friday, said his wife, Iris. No cause of death was given. 
Clark became Philadelphia's first Democratic mayor in 67 years in 1951 and 
later took his advocacy of civil rights to the Senate. 
A series of speeches he gave in 1963, later published in book form as "The 
Senate Establishment," attacked the upper house as "a self-perpetuating 
oligarchy." He also wrote another book, "Congress: The Sapless Branch." 
His election as mayor ended a corruption-ridden Republican administration and 
he replaced the city's spoils system with Civil Service regulations. 
He took black friends to the Philadelphia Cricket Club near his home -- the 
first time in the club's 100-year history that blacks had been guests. 
In 1956, Clark was elected to the first of two Senate terms. 
He sponsored the Manpower Development and Training Act and the Area 
Redevelopment Act, but was often frustrated by the chamber's ruling powers. 
"The Senate establishment is almost the antithesis of democracy," Clark told 
his Senate colleagues in 1963. "It is what might be called a self-perpetuating 
oligarchy, with only mild overtones of a plutocracy." 
James MacGregor Burns, the Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, called Clark's 
speech "of historical significance, because it aims squarely at this 
century-old coalition as it operates quietly in the Senate. He has moved the 
power process out of dim and musty committee and caucus rooms into the 
spotlight of the Senate floor." 
Clark did not initially support John F. Kennedy's 1960 presidential campaign, 
but he campaigned hard after the Massachusetts senator was nominated. Kennedy 
asked him to draw up a civil rights agenda for his New Frontier programs. 
Clark eventually gained seats on the Senate's Foreign Relations, Labor and 
Public Welfare and Rules and Administration committees. 
But his relations with President Lyndon B. Johnson were cool. He complained 
that the War on Poverty lacked sufficient funds. He also broke with the 
Administration over the war in Vietnam. 
When he sought reelection in 1968, local Democratic leaders failed to work 
enthusiastically for him and he lost to Republican Richard Schweiker. 
