ROOS' BILL WOULD DEPORT ILLEGAL ALIEN CRIMINALS 
Hoping to take an Orange County program statewide, Assemblyman Mike Roos 
announced Friday that he will introduce a bill designed to guarantee the 
deportation of illegal aliens who commit serious crimes in California. 
Roos, a Los Angeles Democrat, said he got the idea from Orange County Superior 
Court Judge David O. Carter, who began screening illegal alien defendants in 
his Santa Ana courtroom a year ago. Carter's program is believed to be the only 
one of its kind in the country. 
If the bill is approved, Immigration and Naturalization Service agents would 
fan out into California courts and determine the citizenship status of those 
accused of so-called aggravated felonies, such as murder, robbery, drug-dealing 
and other serious crimes. 
Defendants who are in this country illegally would be tracked as they move 
through the justice system, Roos said. Once they are convicted, a judge could 
choose to waive sentence and turn them over to the INS for deportation, or 
sentence them to jail and have the INS deport them afterward, Roos said. Those 
re-entering the country would be subject to enhanced penalties. 
Roos, Carter and Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Richard Byrne discussed the 
proposal at a news conference in MacArthur Park, a notorious hangout for drug 
dealers. 
Carter said Roos' bill is intended to remedy the lack of coordination between 
state and federal authorities, which he said results in the release of many 
illegal alien convicts back onto the streets of California after they serve 
their time. 
"If the Medellin and Cali cartels can cooperate to get 19 tons of cocaine into 
a warehouse in Sylmar, the state and federal governments can cooperate to get 
illegal aliens who commit crimes out of the country," Carter said, referring to 
last year's discovery of a huge cache of drugs in the San Fernando Valley. 
Nativo Lopez, spokesman for Hermandad Mexicana Nacional, a Santa Ana advocacy 
group for undocumented workers, agreed that illegal immigrants who commit 
serious crimes should be deported, but he expressed fear that the program could 
lead to harassment of non-citizens. 
"Today, it's aggravated felonies. What will it be tomorrow, driving under the 
influence of alcohol? It expands the power of the judiciary to persecute these 
people even more," Lopez said. 
Carter, assistant presiding judge of Orange County Superior Court's criminal 
division, has pushed for nationwide legislation to implement his idea. Last 
November, he pitched the program to a subcommittee of the House Judiciary 
Committee and to federal drug czar William J. Bennett. 
Roos said he believes the INS should redirect its current efforts to focus on 
those who are "the scourge of our society." The INS should cut back on raids of 
"fields, sweatshops and garment businesses," whose workers are "trying to make 
something of themselves," and concentrate on illegal aliens who have committed 
serious crimes, Roos suggested. 
Virginia Kice, spokeswoman for the INS's western regional office in Laguna 
Niguel, said the identification and deportation of criminal aliens has always 
been a "top priority" for the agency. But any change in the enforcement targets 
of the INS in California would be impossible without a national policy 
directive from Washington, she added. 
Carter estimates that at least 40% of the people arrested for felonies who pass 
through his court are illegal aliens. In the first nine months of 1989, 685 of 
the 1,880 felons brought before him were here illegally from 17 other 
countries, he said. INS is now tracking all 685, Carter said. 
Roos said a recent INS study of crimes in the Los Angeles Police Department's 
tough Rampart Division near downtown showed that 80% of those arrested on 
drug-related crimes and 70% of the total number of arrestees were illegal 
aliens. About 120,000 prison inmates nationwide are deportable because of their 
criminal convictions, he said. 
