CSUN GUARD WEINERTH GETS RIGHT TO THE POINT; 
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL: THE SPIRITED FRESHMAN FROM BUENA HIGH HAS PERFORMED CAPABLY 
IN THE LADY MATADORS' BACKCOURT. 
Trying to keep in touch with friends in Ventura has become quite expensive for 
Joan Weinerth since she moved to Cal State Northridge in the fall. 
"My phone bill is enormous," said Weinerth, 18. "I have so many friends still 
living there. It's hard to stay in contact with all of them." 
But it was that way even when the former Buena High basketball standout was 
living in Ventura. 
Her parents had to install a second telephone line in their home because 
Weinerth and her brother, Robert, 20, used to fight over use of the phone. 
Her fighting spirit extends well beyond the length of a phone cord -- all the 
way to the court. 
It is 10 a.m. the day before the CSUN women's team is to depart for a game at 
Southern Utah. 
During practice in the empty CSUN gym, Weinerth displays a tenacity that many 
players reserve for game days, diving for loose balls, sprinting at full speed 
downcourt on breaks and fighting for rebounds. 
"Intense is a good word," Northridge Coach Leslie Milke said. "She has a little 
wild side in her and sometimes she has a tendency to get out of control. She 
likes to play with a lot of emotion." 
At Buena last season, the 5-foot-6 point guard was selected to the Southern 
Section Division I first team after leading the Bulldogs to the Channel League 
title, averaging 19.8 points and 5.4 assists. 
Despite those credentials, Milke didn't envision Weinerth in a starting role 
this season. 
After all, at point guard Northridge returned two-year starter Bridgette Ealy, 
a California Collegiate Athletic Assn. first-team selection who led the team in 
assists last season. 
But when Ealy was forced to redshirt with a nagging hamstring injury after the 
fourth game, Weinerth was pressed into a starting lineup and has filled in 
quite nicely. 
Going into Friday night's home contest against Cal State Dominguez Hills, 
Weinerth leads Northridge (4-12, 1-0) in steals (2.6) and assists (3.3) and is 
second in scoring (9.6). 
"We knew she had the potential to be a starter," Milke said. "She had good 
instincts and defensive skills. We thought that she would see a lot of playing 
time, but mostly in a backup role." 
Weinerth had other plans. 
"I expected to be playing," she said. "I don't like watching from the bench. I 
didn't see myself as a practice player." 
Joe Vaughan, Weinerth's coach at Buena, doesn't find her quick contribution 
surprising. 
"She's a real competitor," Vaughan said. "It's a rare ingredient that she has. 
She was born with it. It's something that you can't teach. She has a will to 
win." 
Milke agrees. 
"She has that competitive instinct, a real competitive fire," said Milke, who 
played at Northridge in the late '70s. "She's just doesn't like to lose. I like 
that. She kind of reminds me of myself when I was playing." 
Because Weinerth was to have been primarily a ballhandler, her point production 
has been surprising. She has led the team in scoring in three games, including 
a career-high 22 points in a win over San Angelo State. 
"With Bridgette out, we needed someone to take charge," Milke said. "She's done 
a really good job. Joanie's getting better and better each game. She had a lot 
of raw ability out of high school and she's poised for a freshman. 
"We really didn't anticipate that. I think her background has a lot to do with 
it. She came from a very good high school program." 
How good? 
The Buena program has won the Channel League title 11 times -- and the state 
title twice -- in the past 13 years. In Weinerth's three years, Buena was 73-9. 
Last season, the Bulldogs advanced to the Southern Section 5-A semifinals 
before losing to eventual champion Hart. 
But such success comes only after hard work nearly year-round. 
Buena begins workouts, including pick-up games and drills, almost immediately 
after the regular season ends. In May, the team begins practice for summer 
league, playing 20 to 25 games. 
In the fall, an intensive conditioning program starts with rope jumping, 
sprints and work on basic skills; in November, practice for the regular season 
begins. All told, the program requires a commitment of 11 months. 
"We have a tradition and a reputation," said Vaughan, whose career record of 
340-29 is the best among girls' coaches in the state. "The kids understand that 
and make the commitment. The ones that don't fall by the wayside." 
It was that reputation that attracted Weinerth to Buena. 
Weinerth lived midway between Ventura High and Buena in Ventura's district. 
However, Weinerth obtained a permit to attend Buena. 
"Everybody who comes out of there knows the fundamentals," Weinerth said. "They 
know how to shoot, dribble and play defense. It was hard, but it has prepared 
me for the college level." 
She may have been less prepared to lose more games in two months than she lost 
in three years in high school. 
"In high school, every game I went into I expected to win. Now it's different," 
she said. "I'm not getting used to losing. I'm accepting it better. In the 
beginning I was really frustrated. You try to think of all the things you do 
wrong and all the things you can do to improve. 
The Lady Matadors have shown improvement of late, winning their first CCAA 
game, 68-65, over Cal Poly San Luis Obispo last week. 
"Now that conference has begun, it means a lot more to us to win. It was a big 
boost to win our first game," Weinerth said. 
Win or lose, Weinerth maintains intensity and a positive outlook. It is evident 
even at practice. 
As Northridge concludes its workout, each player must make a free throw. With 
each miss, the entire team must sprint up and down the court. 
Weinerth is the first one back each time. 
After the last player has made her free throw, Milke hands out itineraries for 
the next day's trip to Utah. 
"We're leaving at 7:30 in the morning and we have to drive there," Weinerth 
says to a reporter with her eyes rolled skyward. "It's going to take forever." 
She paused for a moment and then smiled. 
"But I guess that's OK, I have a lot of friends on the team. It should be fun." 
