SALE TO MINORITY TEAM MAY REAP TAX BENEFITS; 
NEW YORK TIMES AGREES TO SELL CABLE SYSTEM 
The New York Times Co. said Monday that it has agreed to sell its cable 
television system for $420 million to a venture that will be managed by a 
minority investment group. 
The price amounts to nearly $2,600 per subscriber, which industry analysts said 
made it one of the more expensive cable system sales to date. 
Because the sale was to a minority-managed venture, the deal may also qualify 
for tax advantages that would boost its effective value to the Times. 
Parties to the transaction also said it would be the nation's biggest cable 
television system with sizable minority ownership. 
J. Bruce Llewellyn, who heads a soft drink bottling concern in Philadelphia and 
is one of the nation's top black business executives, will head the minority 
group being assembled that will manage and have at least a 20% interest in the 
new cable venture. 
The other investors, which will split evenly the remaining ownership in the 
venture, are two cable TV companies based in the Philadelphia area, Comcast 
Corp., the nation's fourth-largest cable operator, and Lenfest Communications 
Inc. 
The system being sold is NYT Cable TV of Cherry Hill, N.J., which serves 
162,000 subscribers in 59 communities in southern New Jersey, a suburban area 
that analysts said should prove attractive to advertisers. 
The Times had put the cable system up for sale in late October, saying it 
wanted to concentrate on its core businesses that include newspapers, 
magazines, broadcasting and forest products. It bought the system in 1981 when 
it had about 72,000 subscribers. 
David Gorham, chief financial officer for New York Times Co., said the Times 
expects to record an after-tax gain of about $183 million, or $2.34 per share, 
on the sale. The deal is expected to close in the second quarter after various 
federal regulators complete their review. 
As a result of the minority group's involvement in the purchase, the Times 
requested that the Federal Communications Commission grant a tax certificate in 
connection with the sale that will entitle the Times to defer payment of about 
$138 million in taxes on the transaction, Gorham said. 
The tax-deferral provision was created by Congress in 1978 to encourage 
minority ownership of communications companies. The minority group must be the 
managing partner for the deal to qualify. 
Gorham declined to say how much the deferment would mean to the Times, but 
others familiar with the deal said that during negotiations with a number of 
prospective buyers, the Times valued it at $55 million. 
That would push the effective value of the deal to the Times to $2,932 per 
subscriber. 
