GARDENING; 
FRUIT-TREE PRUNING MEANS LESS IS MORE; 
GARDENING: PROPER TRIMMING IS NECESSARY TO INSURE FULL PRODUCTION FROM FRUITING 
TREES. 
The most important job in proper fruit-tree care -- except for the basics of 
watering and feeding -- is pruning, says Jim Barry, certified arborist and 
horticulture instructor at Cal Poly Pomona. It is also the most difficult job 
to learn to do properly. 
We are talking about mature deciduous fruit trees, not citrus trees. Citrus 
trees require only occasional pruning to remove deadwood, to shape and to open 
up the interior of the tree. 
By deciduous fruit trees, we're referring to peach, plum, nectarine, apple, 
pear, persimmon, almond and a few others. All except apple and persimmon trees 
should be pruned yearly to rejuvenate the fruiting wood (parts of branches that 
bear the fruit). Pruning is done while trees are dormant -- anywhere from late 
December through the middle of February. This is the key to decent fruit 
production. 
Because the main goal of pruning is to renew fruiting wood, a gardener must be 
able to locate and identify the wood on each type of tree. For instance, 
peaches are produced on last year's wood, while apricot and plums are produced 
on 2- or 3-year-old wood. 
The pruning of fruit trees is difficult to learn because they are all 
approached differently. You don't prune a peach like a plum, or an apple like 
an apricot. 
By far the best way to learn to prune is to attend a demonstration. 
Barry said attendance at the demonstrations will also help gardeners with the 
secondary goals of fruit-tree pruning -- controlling the height and shape of 
the tree and removing dead, diseased or surplus branches. 
Two fruit-tree-pruning demonstrations are taking place in the Southland this 
month. They are quite popular, so get there early. 
The first of these demonstrations will be Jan. 14 at South Coast Botanic 
Garden, 26300 Crenshaw Blvd., Palos Verdes Peninsula; phone (213) 772-5813. 
The demonstration, scheduled for 2 p.m. in the auditorium, will be led by Jean 
Natter, a horticulture instructor at Cerritos College and a garden columnist. 
The pruning demonstration will be held in an auditorium rather than out among 
the trees because last year's demonstration was so popular that the area around 
the trees was crowded. Many people complained that they couldn't see or hear 
the demonstrators properly. 
Natter's demonstration will include a lecture, diagrams and slides. She will 
offer pruning techniques for apricot, peach, nectarine, plum, apple and almond 
trees. Although the pruning of citrus is not a crucial item, Natter will cover 
the topic because it has been so popular at past demonstrations. 
After the demonstration will be a question-and-answer session. The 
demonstration is free; however, there is a charge to get into the South Coast 
Botanic Garden. 
The second demonstration, the one in which Jim Barry is involved, will be Jan. 
20 from 1 to 3 p.m. at the Fullerton Arboretum. The arboretum is at the 
northeast corner of the Cal State Fullerton campus, at Yorba Linda and 
Associated Road in Fullerton; phone (714) 773-3579. Admission is free, but 
donations to the arboretum are appreciated. 
Barry's demonstration is more "hands on," utilizing the extensive fruit tree 
orchard on the grounds. It will feature Barry; Dr. Alden Kelley, a certified 
arborist; Rico Montenegro, associate director of the arboretum, and various 
tree experts from the Tree Society of Orange County. The demonstration is 
co-sponsored by the arboretum and the society. 
The demonstration will open with a presentation on fruit-tree-pruning 
fundamentals. The audience will be divided into small groups for the actual 
tree-pruning demonstrations. 
Because the arboretum has a nice selection of the various deciduous trees, 
spectators will get a good look at the particular trees they are interested in 
pruning. 
If you are unable to attend one of these demonstrations, Barry said the next 
best thing for learning proper pruning techniques is a good book. 
He likes "Pruning, A How-to Guide for Gardeners" from HP Books, and a small, 
locally produced book titled "How to Prune Fruit Trees" by Sanford Martin. Both 
should be available at Southland nurseries. 
