FUMES IN CAMPER SUFFOCATE MOTHER, 3 CHILDREN 
A mother and her three children suffocated in the back of a pickup truck as the 
father drove home from a holiday in Mexico, unaware that deadly carbon monoxide 
fumes had seeped into the camper shell, officials said Monday. 
Customs inspectors at the Port of Entry here found the four unconscious when 
the father pulled up to the border station at 12:35 a.m. Monday after a three- 
to four-hour wait in bumper-to-bumper traffic, Police Sgt. Bill Matus said. 
"I understand that there were holes in the bed of the pickup truck that allowed 
carbon monoxide to seep into the camper shell," Customs spokesman John Miller 
said. 
Customs inspectors attempted to revive the four with cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation and oxygen, and paramedics arrived almost immediately. But 
officials at Calexico hospital pronounced the woman and children dead on 
arrival. 
The victims were identified as Micaela Iniguez Aguilar, 26; and Horacio, 6; 
Francisco Javiar, 4, and Camilio, 3. 
The father, Horacio Aguilar, 36, was unhurt. 
Matus said the family, all Mexican nationals who lived in the United States as 
resident aliens, were returning to the San Joaquin Valley town of Laton after a 
holiday visit to Mexicali. 
The four deaths led Customs officers and Calexico police to alert their Mexican 
counterparts, who went through the line of cars approaching the border station 
to warn motorists about carbon monoxide dangers. 
Less than 1 1/2 hours later, a U.S. Customs inspector found two other children 
unconscious in the back of another pickup with a camper shell. The children in 
the second truck, Angelica Ortega, 11, and Armando Ortega, 12, of Niland, 
Calif., were revived, but remained hospitalized for observation, said Customs 
spokeswoman Bobbie Cassidy. 
Several factors were cited by officials as leading to Monday's tragedy, 
believed to be the first such incident in the Calexico Port of Entry's 15 years 
of operation, Miller said. 
Holiday traffic caused a massive backup at the border station about 100 miles 
east of San Diego. "That could have contributed to the whole thing," Matus 
said. 
Miller declined comment on the delays, except to say that all eight lanes at 
the border station were open. 
Miller said the truck's faulty exhaust system and a cold night also were 
factors. The camper shell's windows were closed to ward off the cold, 
preventing fresh air from flushing out the odorless and invisible carbon 
monoxide fumes. 
Miller added that one of the primary symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning is 
drowsiness, which left the four particularly vulnerable because they were 
resting at the time the gas leaked into the compartment. 
The Customs spokesman said he expects a review of the case to be made to see if 
procedures could be revised to help prevent a repetition of such accidents. 
