SALUTING THE HEROES; 
DEPUTIES HONORED FOR RISKING THEIR LIVES TRYING TO SAVE OTHERS 
Sheriff's Deputies Tim Parker and Gean Okada risked their lives trying to save 
two small children from a burning house in South-Central Los Angeles. 
Deputy Ronald Gilbert and four other sheriff's officers pulled two men from a 
burning van 15 seconds before the vehicle exploded. 
And Deputy Hagop Kuredjian saved the life of a Malibu woman who was hanging 
from a tree branch on a hillside over the Pacific Coast Highway on the Fourth 
of July. 
Ceremony Held 
On Monday, in a ceremony observed by 108 members of the latest graduating class 
of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, those officers were honored as 
heroes. 
Introducing the officers at a ceremony at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, 
Sheriff Sherman Block kept his remarks brief. 
"Far too much attention is given to the anti-heroes," Block said. 
With that, Block presented the department's highest award for heroism, the 
Medal of Valor, to Parker for his actions in May, 1988, when he tried 
unsuccessfully to save the lives of two children trapped in a burning house. 
Parker and Okada, who was awarded a Silver Meritorious Conduct Medal, arrived 
at the house just before midnight and were told that children were trapped 
inside. Parker braved the flames repeatedly in an effort to find them, 
suffering second-degree burns on his arm and hand. Okada fought the fire from 
outside the house. 
One child died of smoke inhalation during the fire, and the other died 10 days 
later. After receiving his award Monday, Parker said he still thinks of the 
children. 
"You just have to deal with it (their deaths)," he said. "You do the best job 
you can and hope that it will produce the results you want." 
Also awarded the Medal of Valor were Deputy Gilbert and former Deputy Lewis 
Hicks, who resigned from the department last week. 
Gilbert and Hicks were two of five officers who came across a fiery traffic 
accident in Lynwood last May, involving a van that had crashed into a bus 
bench. 
Fighting off choking smoke and flames, Hicks and Gilbert dragged one passenger 
out of the van, while officers Hilbrand Goedhart and David Sauer rescued the 
driver. 
Goedhart, Sauer and Deputy Allyn Martin, who had launched the rescue operation 
while off-duty, were honored Monday with Gold Meritorious Conduct Medals. 
Also receiving a Gold Meritorious Conduct award was Kuredjian, who rescued a 
Malibu woman last July 4 after she almost fell to her death while watching a 
fireworks display. 
Kuredjian responded to a 911 call after the woman had fallen down a steep 
incline over Pacific Coast Highway and found her hanging from a tree branch 150 
feet over the highway. 
Pulled to Safety 
Kuredjian could not pull her up with his arms, so he made his way below the 
woman and coaxed her into dropping 5 feet, where he caught her and pulled her 
to safety. 
A Silver Meritorious Conduct Medal was also awarded to Deputy Richard Wright 
for his efforts to rescue the occupants of a burning car in Riverside County in 
1987. 
Wright and a paramedic managed to drag one of four passengers from the burning 
car, but the passenger later died. 
Commenting on the bravery of the officers at the ceremony was state Supreme 
Court Justice Malcolm Lucas, who noted that "some of the most successful police 
work" never requires taking a gun from a holster. 
Borrowing a line from the "Hill Street Blues," TV series, Lucas advised his 
audience: "Let's be careful out there." 
