CAL/OSHA NOT DOING ITS JOB, CRITICS CHARGE; 
SAFETY: THEY QUESTION THE GOVERNOR'S COMMITMENT TO RESTORING AN AGENCY THAT HE 
LARGELY DISMANTLED. 
Despite a 1988 ballot initiative that restored funding for Cal/OSHA, the 
state's workplace safety agency is making 24% fewer inspections than it was 
three years ago, before Gov. George Deukmejian dismantled much of the program. 
Although Cal/OSHA was supposed to return to its previous level of strength by 
last October, it continues to operate with substantially fewer people than it 
had before the cuts, according to figures released Wednesday by Cal/OSHA 
officials at a legislative hearing. 
The hearing, called by two Democratic lawmakers highly critical of the agency, 
drew testimony from numerous labor and workplace safety advocates who accused 
the Deukmejian Administration of sabotaging Cal/OSHA's restoration. 
Critics said Cal/OSHA has less experienced personnel than it previously had, 
has failed to draft a formal plan of attacking workplace safety violations and 
is too timid about stepping into new areas of concern such as the 
repetitive-stress injuries caused by improper use of video display terminals. 
The complaints mirrored those of disgruntled legislators who last year 
introduced numerous bills to force Cal/OSHA to more aggressively adopt tougher 
standards. 
After several years of reducing Cal/OSHA's budget, Deukmejian in 1987 
eliminated the agency's budget for private-industry inspections, forcing the 
federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration to assume responsibility. 
Voters rebuked the governor by passing Proposition 97 the following year. 
The Administration's commitment to restoring Cal/OSHA has been questioned 
because the governor gave two key jobs to men who signed the sample ballot 
argument against Proposition 97. One of them, Robert Stranberg, a longtime 
official in the state Department of Industrial Relations, which oversees 
Cal/OSHA, was appointed head of Cal/OSHA in mid-1988. 
The other, John T. Hay, a former longtime president of the California Chamber 
of Commerce, was appointed last September to the sole "public representative" 
seat on the seven-member Cal/OSHA board of standards, which can create or amend 
state workplace health and safety regulations. 
Los Angeles County Dist. Atty. Ira Reiner, one of the few prosecutors in the 
nation with a separate unit that prosecutes work safety violations, said at 
Wednesday's hearing that the Administration "seems to be trying to accomplish 
indirectly what they could not accomplish directly." 
Assemblyman Tom Hayden (D-Santa Monica), who co-chaired the joint legislative 
hearing as chairman of the Assembly Labor and Employment Committee, suggested 
to Stranberg that he could be considered "not even a caretaker (of Cal/OSHA) 
but a mortician." 
Stranberg, however, said, "We think we're doing pretty well." 
Stranberg said the rebuilding of the agency, which has a $23-million budget, 
has been hindered because hundreds of staff members took other jobs after 
Deukmejian's budget cuts, and the agency had to move many staff members and 
files from its San Francisco headquarters after last October's earthquake. 
Figures comparing the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth quarter of last year 
showed that inspections made in response to public complaints are up about 15%, 
but inspections in response to accidents are down approximately 20% and 
"discretionary" inspections -- visits made to keep tabs on the more dangerous 
workplaces -- have fallen by two-thirds, to 568 from 1,749. 
