ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
2 FIRMS MOVE TO BID ON HIGH-SPEED TRAIN 
Two companies expressed formal interest Wednesday in building a 
high-speed-train link between Orange County and Las Vegas. 
A German company and a French company each put up an initial $5,000 deposit and 
announced its intention to bid on the train, which backers hope will link Las 
Vegas to a station near Anaheim Stadium with trains running at 300 m.p.h. by 
1997. Round-trip fares would be $75 to $100, according to recent estimates. 
"This is a monumental occasion," said Arnie Adamsen, a Las Vegas city 
councilman and chairman of the bi-state California-Nevada Superspeed Train 
Commission. "Everything up to this point has been speculation and theory. Now 
we have actual dollars involved from the private sector." 
The two companies, Transrapid International, a German company bidding in 
conjunction with the Bechtel Corp., and TGV, a subsidiary of the French 
national railroad, must submit their proposals along with another $495,000 to 
the commission by July 15. 
In Santa Ana Wednesday, Commission Vice Chairman Don R. Roth, an Orange County 
supervisor, mailed out requests for proposals to dozens of other firms as well. 
Roth previously acknowledged, however, that Transrapid starts out as the 
front-runner because it has expressed the most interest and has already 
committed millions of dollars to preliminary project documentation. 
Under terms of the bidding procedure, the proposed trains must run at least 180 
m.p.h. and firms must show they have the estimated $4 billion in private 
financing that is needed to build and run the system. 
The request for bids followed the earlier selection of the Anaheim area as the 
Southern California terminus of the proposed train system, which was originally 
proposed by Las Vegas gambling interests. A spur that would take trains to 
Palmdale is also tentatively planned. 
Adamsen said the Transrapid-Bechtel combine is strengthened in its position as 
front-runner because, unlike TGV, it plans a magnetically levitated system in 
which the trains run on a cushion of air above the tracks. 
Bechtel officials said in December that the company had already spent $3 
million studying the feasibility of the line and was prepared to spend another 
$12 million to prepare the studies necessary to secure financing for the 
project. 
TGV, however, is the manufacturer of Europe's only operational super-speed 
train, which travels on traditional rails at speeds approaching 200 m.p.h. Last 
month the train set a world record for the highest speed on rails, rocketing a 
train along a section of track in France at a speed of 299.7 m.p.h. JEFFREY 
PERLMAN WITH WIRE REPORTS 
