U.S. TO SUE 15 FIRMS OVER POLLUTION; 
ENVIRONMENT: OFFICIALS DESCRIBE THEIR NEW "OFFENSIVE" AS THE LARGEST EFFORT OF 
ITS KIND. THEY SAY THE CASE SIGNALS RENEWED SUPPORT FOR ECOLOGICAL CONCERNS BY 
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION. 
Federal officials, in what they described as a new "offensive" in environmental 
protection, announced plans Wednesday to sue 15 industrial companies for 
allegedly polluting Southern California's coastal waters with cancer-causing 
toxins that have threatened marine life. 
Attorneys for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the agency 
spearheading the action, described it as the largest effort of its kind and 
said the case signals renewed support for the environment by the Bush 
Administration. 
Among the accused companies are Westinghouse Electric Corp., Chris-Craft 
Industries and Benjamin Moore Paint Co. 
The 15 companies are suspected of having discharged either the pesticide DDT or 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) into Los Angeles Harbor, onto the Palos Verdes 
Shelf off the Palos Verdes Peninsula, and at two sites in the San Pedro Channel 
north of Santa Catalina Island. 
Some of the companies, according to NOAA, dumped the contaminants as industrial 
byproducts directly into the ocean; others contributed to the problem by 
letting toxics pour into sewer systems that drain into the ocean. 
Thomas A. Campbell, NOAA's general counsel, said that his agency on Wednesday 
formally notified each of the companies that a lawsuit will be filed against 
them within 60 days. Such notice is required under environmental law. The 
lawsuit will demand that the firms first collectively fund a 
multimillion-dollar, comprehensive "damage assessment" study of the 
contamination and then pay to clean it up. 
"The bottom line," Campbell said at a press conference in Los Angeles, "is that 
they're going to have to pay now or they can pay later." 
Much of the contamination, of which officials and marine biologists have long 
been aware, dates back to the late 1940s. 
When asked why NOAA had not undertaken such a lawsuit earlier, Campbell 
appeared to take an indirect swipe at the Reagan Administration, long a target 
of environmentalists who charged that it was lax in enforcing regulations. 
"There's a new political wind blowing," Campbell said. "Our mission is no 
longer to maintain the status quo, but to take the offensive, to improve the 
environment across the board." 
Meanwhile, Rep. Mel Levine (D-Santa Monica) said Wednesday that he had secured 
nearly $1 million in federal funding for NOAA to develop the case against the 
accused companies. The money, according to NOAA attorneys, will be reimbursed 
to the government by the accused companies should the agency win its case in 
court. 
"This lawsuit should send a simple message to polluters: We mean business and 
we're coming after you," Levine said in a statement released in Washington. 
He estimated that the lawsuit could net as much as $88 million for cleanup and 
restoration of the coastal region. 
NOAA officials declined to speculate on how much money could be recovered by 
suing the 15 companies. 
Under the federal Superfund program, NOAA is entrusted with marine natural 
resources and can file claims against companies found responsible for toxic 
pollution. One such case, initiated in 1983 against a New Bedford, Mass., 
electronics firm accused of discharging PCBs into the Atlantic, is expected to 
begin in federal court next month. 
A prime source of toxic contamination in regional waters, NOAA has alleged, is 
the Montrose Chemical Corp., a Delaware-based company that produced more DDT 
than any other company in America. Montrose ceased operations at its Los 
Angeles plant in 1982 after 35 years. 
The company, according to federal officials, dumped acid wastes and DDT-laden 
sludge directly into San Pedro Channel, disposed of them in area landfills and 
discharged them at county waste-water treatment plants. 
Other companies similarly accused by NOAA of contaminating coastal waters with 
DDT include Chris-Craft Industries; Stauffer Chemical Co. and Stauffer 
Management, and chemical manufacturers ICI Inc., ICI Americas and ICI American 
Holdings. 
Those accused of polluting the ocean with PCBs include Benjamin Moore; Simpson 
Paper Co., Apex Drum Co. Inc., Ted Levine Drum Co., Myers Drum Co., Potlach 
Corp., and Trans Harbor Services. 
Also named as a polluter of PCBs was a Westinghouse plant in Compton that 
repairs electrical transformers. 
"I don't know anything about this," said plant manager Jordon Weinstock on 
Wednesday. 
Officials from several other of the accused companies were similarly puzzled by 
NOAA's allegations. Many said they were unaware of the action until they were 
contacted by reporters. 
NOAA officials said its assessment of damage to aquatic life and coastal waters 
-- expected to take two years -- will also involve the Interior Department and 
various California agencies. Birds, marine mammals and fish will be studied. 
Environmentalists hailed NOAA's announcement as a substantive step toward 
cleaning up the ocean off Los Angeles. 
"We really are thrilled that they're interested," said James Thorton, a senior 
attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council in Los Angeles. "If (NOAA) 
plays a tough game, it could really make a difference." 
