TELEDYNE ELECTRONICS, 6 PEOPLE PLEAD NOT GUILTY IN FRAUD CASE 
A unit of Teledyne, three of its vice presidents, a Navy official and two 
defense consultants pleaded not guilty on Friday to charges filed against them 
in a 27-count indictment stemming from the government's massive investigation 
of defense procurement fraud. 
A federal judge set March 27 as the date for trial. 
The government has charged that Teledyne Electronics of Newbury Park, Calif., 
hired William L. Parkin, a Washington-area defense consultant, to get 
information about a $100-million contract from the Navy and Air Force for 
equipment used in checking radar sets. 
Parkin, according to the indictment, then paid a second consultant, Fred H. 
Lackner of Woodland Hills, to bribe his friend, Stuart E. Berlin, the Navy 
official charged in the case. Teledyne subsequently obtained the contract in 
part because of the confidential information Berlin passed along, prosecutors 
charge. 
Berlin, a civilian purchasing expert for the Navy, has now been suspended 
without pay from his $74,304-a-year job. Teledyne Electronics has been barred 
from doing business with any federal agencies. 
The defendants, all of whom were released on $10,000 personal recognizance 
bonds, proclaimed their innocence Friday. Parkin, leaving the court disguised 
in a beard and cap, muttered, "I'm going to be exonerated," to reporters who 
caught up with him before he sprinted away to avoid questions. Berlin, when 
asked if he expected to be acquitted, said simply: "Sure do." 
Defense attorneys had asked U.S. District Judge Richard Williams to delay the 
trial until late April, saying that the government plans to use scores of 
wiretaps and a "warehouse of documents." The defense has "a daunting task in 
front of us," Teledyne attorney Thomas Patten told the judge. 
Could Face Fines of $6.5 Million 
Williams, however, rejected the request, saying that the accusations concern 
"garden-variety crimes." 
The company potentially faces fines up to $6.5 million if convicted of all 
counts in the indictment. Teledyne's lawyers insist that the company did 
nothing wrong and had no knowledge of any private deals among the consultants 
and government employees. 
Patten said Friday that he would press for a separate trial for the firm. 
Another defense contractor, Hazeltine Corp., two of its former officers and a 
former Washington marketing official for Teledyne last week pleaded guilty to 
charges stemming from the same investigation. 
The Hazeltine case involves charges that the company also hired consultant 
Parkin to get confidential information to assist it in bidding on a 
$15.9-million contract for electronic testing equipment used in aircraft. 
Hazeltine also has been suspended from bidding on government contracts. 
The former Teledyne official, Michael Savaides, is expected to be a major 
witness in the government's case against his former employers. He is not 
scheduled to be sentenced until April 28. The two former Hazeltine executives 
who pleaded guilty along with him are expected to be sentenced in mid-March. 
In addition, further indictments are expected as the government continues to 
build its case from the huge 2 1/2-year "Ill Wind" investigation. 
