CITY TO MIRROR MAJOR LEAGUES IN SCHEDULE FORMAT 
City Section baseball teams have photocopied a page from the Major League 
schedule and revised the order in which teams face each other as part of the 
City's sweeping releaguing proposal that went into effect this school year. 
The playoff structure also has been altered under the new format, which was 
adopted last fall on a 1-year trial basis by administrators acting on the 
advice of a panel of area coaches. 
In a conference containing 2 four-team leagues, for example, teams will face 
league opponents 3 times and conference opponents twice in a 17-game league 
schedule. Teams will play regular-season games on Tuesdays and Thursdays. 
"We looked at the Major Leagues," San Fernando Coach Steve Marden said. "A team 
in the Western Division will play other teams in the division 18 times and 
teams from the Eastern Division 12 times. We were looking for that same 3-to-2 
ratio." 
Under the new plan, teams will face each other 2 times in the same week on a 
home-and-away basis. 
"Now a guy with one great pitcher can't ride him all the way through the 
schedule," said Grant Coach Tom Lucero, who admittedly used right-hander Rodney 
Beck at every crucial juncture of Grant's drive to the 1986 4-A title. "We'll 
see everything a team has to offer by playing twice in a week. No more one-man 
teams." 
In addition, league foes will face each other for the first 6 games, beginning 
in mid-March. Teams will then play conference opponents for the next 8 games 
and conclude the regular season with single games against their 3 league rivals 
-- for a total of 17 games. 
The playoffs also have been restructured. Sixteen teams will qualify, including 
automatic berths for first- and second-place teams from each of the 6 4-A 
leagues. Two additional teams -- those with the best record from among the 6 
third-place finishers -- also automatically qualify. The remaining 4 
third-place teams will play in wild-card games to determine the final 2 playoff 
teams. 
"That way, a team doesn't get penalized if it happens to be in a very strong 
league," Marden said. "Even if they face some of the best teams all year long, 
they can still qualify." 
Last season Monroe, playing in the highly competitive Mid-Valley League, had to 
win a fourth-place league tiebreaker game against Birmingham to make the 
playoffs. The Vikings eventually won the City 4-A title, defeating league rival 
San Fernando in the final at Dodger Stadium. 
Additionally, teams will play on consecutive days in the weeks preceding and 
following spring break. Teams will play Tuesday and Wednesday before the 
vacation and Wednesday and Thursday after the break. In the past, only 1 game 
had been scheduled in each of those weeks. 
Rainout games, which under the previous format had always been scheduled for 
replay on Monday, will be made up on the next available day, Marden said. 
