COUNCIL STUDIES ZONING AS WAY TO BLOCK SUNSHINE LANDFILL EXPANSION 
Los Angeles City Council members asked for legal advice Wednesday to determine 
whether they can use zoning powers to pressure Sunshine Canyon Landfill to drop 
plans to expand into county territory. 
City attorneys were asked if the city can grant a zoning permit for changes at 
the landfill under a condition that the operator, Browning-Ferris Industries, 
withdraw its application for expansion beyond city boundaries. 
The request was made by members of the city Board of Referred Powers, which is 
headed by Councilman Hal Bernson, an opponent of the proposed expansion. 
Bernson's district includes the Granada Hills landfill. 
Representatives of Granada Hills homeowners groups said Wednesday they believe 
the real purpose of the zoning permit sought by Browning-Ferris is to prepare 
for expansion onto 542 acres of adjacent land in Los Angeles County and are not 
needed to continue operations on the city side of the dump. 
Bernson sided with homeowners and said he believes that the improvements "will 
in fact be beneficial to the potential expansion into the county." 
BFI has asked for a city zoning permit to relocate a haul road and the dump 
entrance, construct a large sediment catch basin and install a new leachate 
system. 
Browning-Ferris attorneys said the construction is necessary for the company to 
comply with City Council orders to stop dumping near homes in the southern 
portion of the landfill and move operations to a smaller northern sector of the 
landfill, where they are permitted to operate until 1991. 
BFI property straddles the Los Angeles city-county border. A city zoning 
administrator approved the BFI improvements last year, but homeowners asked the 
city Zoning Board of Appeals to review the decision. The case went to the Board 
of Referred Powers, however, because Joseph D. Mandel, a commissioner on the 
zoning appeals board, had a conflict of interest. He is an attorney with a law 
firm that also represents BFI. 
Expansion of the dump, which would more than double daily garbage intake to 
between 12,000 and 14,000 tons daily and extend operations well into the 21st 
Century, is under environmental review by the county and is the source of 
intense community and political debate. 
BFI attorney Christopher Funk said "there are some real misconceptions" about 
the construction plans and insisted that they are "not part of any plan to 
facilitate or further the county case." 
Bernson countered by proposing a measure supported by homeowners that would 
allow for the improvements on the condition that BFI drop plans for expansion 
onto county land. 
Three other board members, however, were reluctant to vote on the issue until 
the city attorney ruled whether it is lawful for the city to place conditions 
on development issues outside city borders. The matter is scheduled for 
consideration Jan. 12. 
Browning-Ferris attorney Linda J. Bozung said it is "probably not likely" that 
landfill operators would drop their application to expand the dump in order to 
pursue the improvements on land within the city. She declined to speculate how 
landfill operations would be affected if those improvements are not made. 
