HIJACK ALERTS AT ASIAN AIRPORTS; 
SECURITY CRACKDOWN TURNS UP FAKE VISAS 
An alert among Asian airports against possible hijackings has revealed a large 
number of people traveling with fake documents. 
Manila airport officials said these would-be immigrants have been bounced back 
and forth by countries that did not want them. 
"It's like a Ping-Pong ball," said Ruben Domingo, head of immigration 
intelligence at Manila International Airport. 
Airports in the region have tightened security since a warning early this month 
that Palestinian guerrillas planned to hijack an Asian airliner. 
Domingo said that since then alert immigration personnel have been turning away 
one or two foreigners a day with fake or insufficient travel documents, most of 
whom are from Asia or the Middle East. That was up from an average of two or 
three a week over the last six months. 
Fake Canadian Visas 
He said that in the last two days of December officials expelled three Chinese 
holding fake Canadian visas, an Iraqi with an altered Saudi Arabian passport 
and a woman describing herself as Palestinian and carrying a false U.S. 
passport. 
He said many people turned away were sent back and forth several times between 
the same countries. A Chinese-speaking man with a fake Filipino passport was 
sent back and forth between Hong Kong and the Philippines five times, he said. 
A Western official of an international humanitarian organization said some 
individuals without legal papers spent years "in orbit," either locked away in 
immigration detention centers or deported from one country to another. 
Domingo said that for years Manila had the reputation of being one of the 
easiest capitals to travel through illegally, but security had become tighter 
over the last year. 
Last February the immigration commissioner described Manila as the "world's 
capital" for obtaining fake passports, with around 80 syndicates operating in 
the city. 
Fakes Previously Used 
Domingo said many of the forged travel papers recently confiscated indicated 
that they had been used successfully before in getting the illegal traveler 
through the airport. 
"Things are a lot stricter now. . . . We can no longer accept the rejects of 
other countries," he said. 
In Canberra, an immigration department spokesman said Australia deals with 
about 2,000 cases of forged passports a year, and considers itself one of the 
toughest countries to enter using forged documents. 
In Japan an immigration official at Tokyo International Airport said about 
7,500 foreign arrivals -- mostly from Asian countries -- were refused entry in 
1988 because of forged entry documents. 
The Japanese Foreign Ministry said Japan plans to suspend its mutual visa 
exemption agreements with Bangladesh and Pakistan due to an increase in illegal 
entrants. 
