HOME CONSTRUCTION DROPS 8.2% IN 1988 
Housing construction dropped 8.2% in 1988 to its lowest level in six years, the 
government reported today, but analysts said the industry remained in good 
shape. 
Construction of both single-family homes and apartments fell during 1988 to 
leave total housing starts at 1.49 million units. It was the poorest showing 
since the recession year of 1982, when 1.06 million units were built. 
Analysts said that despite the decline, which is likely to continue into the 
current year, 1988 was a good year for the housing industry because the level 
of construction remained relatively high. 
"We do not get very concerned when we're building over a million single-family 
homes a year," said Dale Stuard, president of the National Assn. of 
Homebuilders. 
"There's nothing to get panicky about," he said. "It's a very controlled 
slowdown." 
Analysts said the decline had been expected because much of the pent-up demand 
for homes that developed during the recession was satisfied in subsequent boom 
years, and housing requirements are decreasing with the aging of the Baby Boom 
generation. 
In addition, mortgage interest rates are inching upward. Interest on fixed-rate 
mortgages reached 10.81% last week, according to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
Corp. 
Economist Mark Obrinsky of the U.S. League of Savings Institutions said the 
housing industry "held up reasonably well, all things considered. Nonetheless, 
it is a decline and I think we'll see a little further decline in 1989." 
Housing construction reached its post-recession peak in 1986, when 1.81 million 
units were built, but then began sliding. Analysts believe further decreases 
are inevitable as interest rates continue to rise, the economic expansion runs 
its course and demographics take their toll. 
"As we go through the years toward the year 2000, we need fewer and fewer net 
additions to our stock of housing," said economist Richard Peach of the 
Mortgage Bankers Assn. of America. "We're just not creating as many new 
households as we used to." 
December's seasonally adjusted annual construction rate of 1.52 million units 
was down a moderate 2.2% from a month earlier. 
