LOS ALAMITOS CENTER NAMED FOR DOCTOR; 
NOTED BRAIN SPECIALIST JOHN FRENCH DIES AT 77 
John Douglas French, a founder of the UCLA Brain Research Institute, died 
Wednesday at the Los Alamitos Alzheimer's disease care facility that bears his 
name. He was 77. 
His personal battle with Alzheimer's disease took on public overtones when his 
wife, diva Dorothy Kirsten, began a lengthy campaign to house those with the 
affliction. 
Opened in November, 1987, the John Douglas French Center for Alzheimer's 
Disease was the nation's first facility designed and built to care for those 
affected by the degenerative brain disease. 
French's wife, who once was the definitive "Madame Butterfly" at the 
Metropolitan Opera Co., has said that when her husband was diagnosed as having 
Alzheimer's in 1982, there was no suitable facility for his care. She embarked 
on a campaign to build one. 
She created the French Foundation for Alzheimer Research to advance scientific 
and medical research and to provide methods for caring for America's 3 million 
Alzheimer's patients. The center was built through the foundation. 
French's fate was ironic, since he was a physician who devoted most of his 
career to the mysteries of brain disease. 
A native of Los Angeles, he earned his medical degree at USC and received 
additional training in neurosurgery in the East. 
In the late 1940s, French directed the residence program in neurosurgery at 
Long Beach Veteran's Hospital. There, he met Prof. H.W. Magoun, with whom he 
later co-founded the UCLA Brain Research Institute. He served as its director 
for 20 years. 
French's research focused primarily on brain mechanisms related to epilepsy, 
comas, anesthesia, sleep and wakefulness. 
He and Kirsten married in 1955 and they often traveled together; he to attend 
medical meetings, she to sing in performances. 
"It was terrible to watch this beautiful man deteriorate before my eyes," she 
said at the 148-bed center on the eve of its opening. "But I'm very pleased 
that he will finish his days here." 
A memorial service will be held at the Bel Air Presbyterian Church at 2:30 p.m. 
Monday. His wife has asked that in lieu of sending flowers, memorial 
contributions be made to the French Foundation for Alzheimer Research, 11620 
Wilshire Blvd., Suite 260, Los Angeles, Calif. 90025. 
