COLLEGE NOTEBOOK: USD'S FIRST, ONLY VOLLEYBALL COACH STEPS DOWN 
The first and only women's volleyball coach at the University of San Diego, 
John Martin, has stepped down after 17 seasons. 
A university official said the search is on for a replacement. 
Martin, with a 133-219 career record, is leaving the position to concentrate on 
his duties as recreation and facilities director. 
"John had two other responsibilities that were extremely time-consuming," said 
Tom Iannacone, USD's athletic director. 
Iannacone said there is no target date for hiring a replacement but that time 
is critical. The signing date for recruits is Feb. 14. 
One possible candidate is John Cook, who coached at Francis Parker High before 
becoming an assistant at Nebraska. Nebraska was NCAA runnerup to Cal State Long 
Beach this past season. 
"If John Cook wants the job and goes after it, he's got it," said Fred 
Featherstone, a former U.S. International coach who intends to apply. "He's got 
tremendous potential as a women's volleyball coach. I think he's the best 
person possible." 
A drawback to the USD job is that it is not a full-time position. 
Colleen Suwara, recently named national community college coach of the year for 
guiding Grossmont College to the state championship, said she might be 
interested if the position were full-time but added that she is happy at 
Grossmont. 
According to Suwara, her brother Terry McLaughlin, a coach at Chemeketa 
Community College in Salem, Ore., is also interested in the position. 
In a season of firsts, here is another one for the University of San Diego 
women's basketball team. The Toreras' West Coast Conference opener at 
Pepperdine Friday night (7:30 p.m.) will be telecast by Prime Ticket on a 
tape-delayed basis at 10:30. 
USD's 10-3 record equals the best WCC mark in pre-conference play. But the 
Toreras hardly will be at full strength. Two players -- Rachal Chism and 
Rochelle Lightner -- are out indefinitely with injuries suffered late last 
week. 
Chism, who was red-shirted last season after surgery on her left knee to repair 
ligament damage, will have a similar operation on her right knee Monday. 
Lightner, who broke her nose twice last season and required postseason surgery, 
broke it again Saturday at Colorado-Colorado Springs. She played for six weeks 
last year with a face mask and might do so again this year. 
Paula Mascari cracked her contact lens against Colorado and had to leave the 
game. She has been practicing with glasses this week while a new pair is on 
order. Christy English (bronchitis) and Julie Lemery (flu) will not practice 
this week but are expected to play Friday. Chris Enger is nursing a sore 
hamstring and knee, and Lynda Jones has a sore hamstring. 
Said USD Coach Kathy Marpe, "It's our time, I guess." 
Eric Wynalda, a junior forward, has turned professional and will not return to 
the San Diego State soccer team next season, said Linda Keck, assistant sports 
information director. Wynalda, of Westlake, had 35 goals and 25 assists in 
three seasons. He currently is working out with the U.S. national team in La 
Jolla. 
Jose Luis Noriega of USD is the No. 1-ranked men's tennis player in the West 
Region, according to the latest Volvo Intercollegiate Tennis Coaches Assn. 
rankings. USD's team is eighth. 
Suzy Schutz, who led Grossmont College to the state women's volleyball 
championship and a 27-1 season, has been chosen the national player of the year 
by Volleyball Monthly. 
"She's just been a great leader for the team," Grossmont Coach Colleen Suwara 
said. 
Said Schutz, who played at Grossmont High, "We had a lot of fun this year. We 
didn't play for the awards or any of that. I didn't even know about it until I 
got it." 
Among others, Schutz is being recruited by Texas Arlington, Arizona State, 
Florida, Nevada Reno, Georgia and UC Santa Barbara. 
Christian Heritage, which on Saturday defeated previously top-ranked Malone 
College, is tied for the top spot in this week's National Christian Colleges 
Athletic Assn. poll with Olivet Nazarene of Kankakee, Ill. 
Using computer power rankings, the Hawks (10-4) are tied with Olivet (12-6) 
with a 44.8 rating. Malone (11-5) was third with 44.3. Southern California 
College, The Master's and Biola, three Southland schools with upcoming games 
against Christian Heritage, round out the top six. 
Against Malone Saturday in the Westmont Tournament, Christian Heritage trailed 
by three with 7:09 left, but the Hawks scored on their last nine possessions to 
win, 99-92. 
On Jan. 20, it will have been 38 days since U.S. International men's basketball 
team played a road game. The Gulls' nine-game home stand concludes Thursday 
against Point Loma Nazarene. 
USD has not played outside its Sports Center for more than a month. Games 
Thursday (against Pepperdine) and Saturday (Loyola Marymount) will end an 
eight-game stand. 
San Diego State has played five in a row at the San Diego Sports Arena since a 
pre-Christmas tournament at Alabama Birmingham. 
None has played the other during these current home stands. 
Imperial Valley (19-0) of the Pacific Coast Conference moved to No. 1 in the 
state community college men's basketball poll. Imperial Valley is one of only 
two undefeated teams in California. 
