BELLFLOWER PLANNER NAMED; 
CERRITOS COLLEGE BOARD FILLS VACANCY 
Joseph Stits, a high school principal and Bellflower planning commissioner, was 
chosen over eight candidates last week to fill the Cerritos Community College 
term of outgoing Trustee Robert D. Epple. 
Stits, 51 and principal of Somerset Continuation High School, won appointment 
on a 5-1 trustee vote. Trustee Ruth Banda, also of Bellflower, cast the 
dissenting ballot. Stits will serve at least until next November, when his seat 
and three others go up for election. 
Epple resigned last fall upon his election to the Legislature. 
"I have something to offer in regards that my background has been so varied," 
Stits said of his appointment. 
Professional Educator 
Because he is a professional educator whose wife, Darla, works part-time as a 
graphics designer for the college, Stits said he had worried that the trustees 
might see him as having "a couple of liabilities." 
Stits has worked in the Bellflower Unified School District for the past 25 
years as a teacher, counselor and administrator, and has more than 20 years of 
professional and community service in the area. 
He is the past president of both the Bellflower Leadership and Support Team and 
the Los Angeles County Continuation Education Assn. He has a bachelor's degree 
in social science from Cal State Long Beach and a master's degree in psychology 
and counseling from La Verne University. 
Mayor Pleased 
Hawaiian Gardens' Mayor Kathleen Navejas, a frequent opponent of the at-large 
selection and appointment process for trustees, said she was pleased with 
Stits' selection. 
"It sounds like they (the trustees) made a good choice," she said. 
Stits may be asked to resign his Planning Commission post if Bellflower 
officials determine that it poses a conflict of interest with his 
responsibilities as a college trustee. 
Stits said he is unsure whether he will seek election to the board in November. 
"I just want to learn to be a good board member," he said. "It takes a while to 
learn the ropes." 
Ten candidates had applied for the appointed position, but one withdrew before 
last week's trustee vote. 
