STATE TEACHERS' UNION WARY OF GAS TAX MEASURE 
California Teachers Assn. President Ed Foglia urged delegates Saturday to 
withhold support for a 9-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax increase and changes in the 
state spending limit until the union's March meeting to ensure that provisions 
are included in the measures to protect spending for education. 
In an address at the union's state council meeting in Los Angeles, Foglia said 
that before the 200,000-member union supports the June ballot measure it must 
be sure that the spending limit does not diminish the gains education has 
achieved since Proposition 98, the school finance initiative that was passed by 
voters in 1988. 
The teachers' association has lobbied hard against the gasoline tax proposal as 
it is currently written. But that could change, Foglia said, if lawmakers 
follow through with their assurances that education would not be harmed by the 
proposals. 
"We want to see the guarantees," Foglia said. "It all sounds good, but you know 
how it is when you buy a car. We have to see it in writing." 
The gasoline tax increase would help finance a 10-year, $18.5-billion 
transportation improvement plan that includes programs to upgrade highways, 
expand mass transit and manage congestion. 
Because the tax hike would raise more money than the state could spend under 
current restrictions, the increase would be tied to a proposed constitutional 
amendment that would modify the state's spending limit. The tax cannot go into 
effect unless voters approve the ballot measure in June. 
In brief remarks Saturday to the teachers, Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San 
Francisco) said he supports the union's position that reforming the state's 
spending limit not be used to reverse gains made in funding for education. 
The teachers' union has contended that the proposed constitutional amendment 
contained a loophole that provided that funds spent by the state for capital 
outlays would be outside the spending limit. If those funds were not considered 
in determining education's 40% of the state budget, the union argued, schools 
would lose substantially. 
Gov. George Deukmejian has warned that if the gasoline tax does not pass this 
year, the state will face a moratorium in new highway construction until July, 
1991. 
