BORDER DEATHS OF 4 LABELED UNPARALLELED 
The New Year's weekend deaths of four members of a San Joaquin Valley family 
who apparently succumbed to carbon monoxide poisoning while awaiting entry into 
the United States resulted from a freak accident that is apparently 
unprecedented along the U.S.-Mexico border, authorities said Tuesday. 
The four were discovered unconscious shortly after midnight Monday in the back 
of a pickup truck, equipped with a camper shell, that had waited more than 
three hours to enter the United States via the crossing at Calexico, 100 miles 
east of San Diego. The camper's windows were shut but there were rust holes in 
the pickup's bed, said authorities, who theorized that the deadly gas -- a 
byproduct of gasoline combustion -- may have entered through the holes or via a 
malfunctioning exhaust system. 
Heat Stroke More Common 
While occasional illnesses have been attributed to carbon monoxide at border 
posts, where lines of idling vehicles are a frequent sight, authorities said 
they could remember no other fatalities. Heat stroke victims are more 
commonplace, but deaths at the border lines are rare, officials said. 
"We checked all around the border, and no one can ever recall this happening 
before," said Edward Kelliher, assistant district director for the U.S. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service in San Diego. 
"It's a terrible tragedy, but it's a fluke," said Maryanne Noonan, a 
spokeswoman with the U.S. Customs Service in Los Angeles. 
However, two children were found unconscious, suffering from carbon monoxide 
poisoning, in the back of another pickup at Calexico fewer than 90 minutes 
after the fatal accident, U.S. Customs officers reported. The two, Angelica 
Ortega, 11, and Armando Ortea, 12, of the Imperial County community of Niland, 
were revived in time. 
Short of Inspectors 
The long delays at Calexico, San Ysidro and other crossings, officials said, 
were caused by the usual holiday weekend traffic crush now exacerbated by an 
influx of newly legalized amnesty recipients who were returning from visits to 
relatives south of the border. 
The INS acknowledged that it was short two inspectors due to illness when the 
deaths occurred at Calexico, but Kelliher minimized the importances of the 
absences, contending that the delays would have been substantial even if the 
border station had been fully staffed. 
"Maybe instead of a 3-hour wait, there would have been a 2-hour wait," Kelliher 
said, noting that Calexico can only accommodate 8 lanes of traffic, most of 
which were open all of the time. "With carbon monoxide, you could be poisoned 
in 20 minutes." 
While carbon monoxide poisoning is strongly suspected in the deaths, 
authorities are scheduled to perform autopsies today, said Imperial County 
Sheriff's Deputy Sharon Housouer. 
'Unfortunate Accident' 
Calexico police are treating the case as "an unfortunate accident," said Sgt. 
Paul Bugarin. 
The driver of the vehicle, Horacio Aguilar, 36, who was unhurt, was described 
as disconsolate after losing his wife, Micaela Iniguez Aguilar, 26, and 3 
children -- Horacio Aguilar, 6, Francisco Javier, 4, and Camilio, 3. The four, 
residents of the Fresno County town of Laton, were returning home after 
visiting relatives in Mexicali, officials said. 
