PRISONER IN HOSPITAL KIDNAPS GUARD, ESCAPES 
A hospitalized prisoner being guarded by a private security officer hired by 
the Sheriff's Department escaped when he and his girlfriend kidnaped the guard, 
authorities said Monday. 
Michael Ismael Valdez, 27, had been taken to Mercy Hospital for treatment of a 
gunshot wound after a car chase Thursday with National City police. He was 
arrested on suspicion of narcotics and weapons violations, and was being held 
on a no-bail warrant for robbery. 
According to a Sheriff's Department spokesman, Valdez's girlfriend, Teresa 
Juliana Reyes, about 24, had been given permission to visit Valdez. When she 
arrived Sunday afternoon, she told the guard stationed outside Valdez's room 
that she had a bomb and a weapon in the sack she was carrying. 
She and Valdez then forced the guard to take Valdez, in a wheelchair, to the 
first floor of the hospital. The three then drove to Mexico in Reyes' car, the 
spokesman said. The car was described as a tan or beige Chevrolet Chevette 
whose license plate had black lettering on a blue background. 
At the guard's request, the pair let him out in Mexico, and he found his way to 
the border and called the Sheriff's Department. Authorities would not release 
the name of the guard, who is an employee of Wackenhut Corp., a security firm 
under contract to the department. 
Hospital guards are unarmed and do not wear uniforms, said sheriff's Lt. 
Sylvester Washington, a shift watch commander at County Jail downtown. 
The Sheriff's Department "prefers it that way," he said. "The guards don't have 
adequate training to be armed." Inmate patients are not separated from other 
patients, he added, although the jail has a hospital ward for recuperating 
inmates. 
Washington said it's a wonder hospital escapes aren't more common. "We've been 
lucky, very lucky," he said. 
Authorities said Valdez, who goes by the aliases Ismael Gomez, Michael Antonio 
and Mike Valdez, is considered armed and dangerous. 
