VALLEY SOCCER; 
NORTH HOLLYWOOD DOUSES MONROE TO TAKE SOLE POSSESSION OF FIRST, 1-0 
North Hollywood High outlasted Monroe, 1-0, on a drenched field Monday at 
Monroe to move into sole possession of first place in the Valley Pac-8 
Conference boys' soccer standings. 
The win moved the Huskies (8-3-1, 3-0-1 in league play) a half-game ahead of 
previously unbeaten Monroe (7-1, 3-1). 
"It was wet, but the field was in pretty good shape," North Hollywood 
first-year Coach Chris Van Duin said. "If it had been at our place, the field 
would have been a mud bowl. We call ours Astro-dirt." 
Senior forward Pablo Crespo scored the only goal of the match 5 minutes into 
the second half on an assist from senior halfback Jose Umana. 
Junior goalkeeper Leo Gonzalez, who recorded his third shutout, preserved the 
lead by blocking a penalty kick by Oscar Rios with 15 minutes to play. 
Chatsworth 5, Canoga Park 0 -- Jason Theodoratos, Pethan Tin, Hermann Reyes, 
Adam Cooper and Ji Kim scored goals for Chatsworth in a one-sided Northwest 
Valley Conference match at Chatsworth. 
Reserve goalkeeper Greg Williams held Canoga Park scoreless in the first half 
as the Chancellors built a 3-0 lead. Starter Scott Kuhn shut down the Hunters 
in the second half. 
San Fernando 3, Kennedy 2 -- Sergio Pizano scored all 3 goals for San Fernando 
with assists from Elenilson Garcia, Jaime Ballesteros and Marco Jaramillo in 
the Northwest Valley Conference match at Kenendy. 
San Fernando led, 1-0, at halftime, but Keith West and Rubin Rios scored for 
Kennedy early in the second half. 
Pizano scored with 10 minutes remaining and again with 3 minutes to play. San 
Fernando is 6-1-2, 3-0-2 in league play. Kennedy is 3-3-3, 1-1-3. 
Grant 3, Birmingham 0 -- Birmingham, playing without its 4 starting forwards, 
each sidelined with the flu, was unable to mount a consistent offensive attack 
in a Valley Pac-8 Conference match at Birmingham. 
Birmingham is 6-3, 2-2 in league play. 
Reseda 0, Poly 0-Reseda goalkeeper Danny Keeva recorded his fourth shutout of 
the season in a Valley Pac-8 Conference match at Reseda. 
Both teams had 12 shots on goal. 
Reseda, the defending City Section champion, is 3-3-3, 0-3-2 in league play. 
Cleveland 0, Granada Hills 0 -- Granada Hills forward Heros Daniels was awarded 
a penalty kick after being tripped midway through the second half. But Daniels 
missed the shot and the Northwest Valley Conference match ended in a scoreless 
tie. 
Granada Hills goalkeeper Erick Miseroy blocked 11 shots. Granada Hills took 
only 5 shots on goal. 
Cleveland (3-0-2) remained a half-game ahead of Granada Hills (3-1-1) in the 
conference standings. 
GIRLS 
Alemany 3, Chaminade 2 -- Robyn Renaud scored the winning goal with 2 minutes 
remaining to give host Alemany a San Fernando Valley League win. 
After a scoreless first half, Chaminade's Maria Costa scored the game's first 
goal before Renaud, a junior, and teammate Yvette Lopez each scored to give 
Alemany (11-6-2, 4-0) a 2-1 lead. 
Jenny Roberts added a goal for Chaminade (2-2 in league play) to tie the score 
before Renaud followed with the game-winner. 
