WORKPLACE VIRUS HAZARDS CITED; 
HEALTH: WITNESSES AT HEARING URGE OSHA TO STRENGTHEN PROTECTIONS FOR 
HEALTH-CARE WORKERS. THEY TELL OF DANGERS OF CONTRACTING BLOOD-BORNE HEPATITIS 
OR HIV DISEASES IN HOSPITALS AND LABS. 
LaVonne Wilenken on Tuesday told of coming home from her job as a nurse soaked 
to the skin with blood. 
Don Jewett, an orthopedic surgeon, told of having blood seep through his mask 
and protective goggles during surgery. Jewett said he concluded that he would 
be safer wearing a respirator. 
The two were among the first in what is expected to be a weeklong parade of 
witnesses supporting the federal government's first proposed crackdown on 
biological hazards in the workplace. 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration is gingerly stepping outside 
its traditional confines of factory floors and construction sites by proposing 
that hundreds of thousands of the nation's employers spend $850 million a year 
to better protect 4.7 million health-care workers against contracting 
blood-borne viruses such as hepatitis B and HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. 
The agency on Tuesday began the last in a series of regional public hearings on 
a proposal that has drawn more public interest than any in OSHA's 20-year 
history, generating 3,000 pieces of correspondence, both pro and con. 
The proposed rules, expected to be completed early next year, are aimed 
primarily at the 12,000 people -- from nurses to lab technicians to hospital 
janitors -- who are infected with hepatitis B on the job each year, often by 
accidentally puncturing their skin with needles that have been used to draw 
blood from infected patients. 
Nearly 3,000 of these hepatitis cases became acute, resulting in 600 
hospitalizations and 200 deaths a year. There have been only 19 reported and 
documented cases involving health-care workers who have been infected with HIV 
through job-related exposure. The HIV virusis far less easily transmitted than 
hepatitis B. 
In addition to health-care workers, the regulations would cover another 600,000 
people in law enforcement. 
The largest number of workers identified by OSHA as "at risk" are 2 million 
nurses, doctors and janitors who work in 5,000 hospitals. Other major targets 
include workers in 180,000 doctors' offices, 12,000 medical and dental labs and 
20,000 residential care facilities. 
The regulations would require that employees receive free hepatitis B 
vaccinations, formal periodic training in the risks of their job and extensive 
protective equipment, including disposable gloves, gowns, leak-proof 
containers, fluid-proof aprons, face masks and goggles. About half of the extra 
cost would go for equipment. 
The rules would apply to any worker who is likely to be exposed to a virus 
carrier once a month or more. 
Many hospitals, blood banks and medical offices already voluntarily follow 
"universal precautions" recommended by the Centers for Disease Control. Under 
the CDC guidelines, all blood is treated as potentially infectious. 
However, organized labor, which has pressured OSHA for years to require and 
enforce such procedures, has contended that employee awareness of the CDC 
recommendations and of the general danger of contacting viruses is low. 
Officials of the 925,000-member Service Employees International Union, which 
first asked OSHA in 1983 to require free hepatitis B vaccinations for 
health-care workers, conducted a survey of 40 hospitals in 1987 and found that 
compliance with CDC recommendations was "spotty at best." 
According to OSHA's own estimates, hospitals provide gloves to at-risk workers 
90% of the time but provide other protective equipment only 60% to 80% of the 
time. 
Wilenken, director of family health studies for the Santa Monica-based American 
Assn. of Women, testified Tuesday that an informal poll by her group of 50 
nurses and doctors at several Los Angeles County-run hospitals found that 
three-quarters of the workers did not report all needle-puncture incidents and 
that one-third did not know the proper procedure for reporting them. 
Wilenken, who also works as a nurse at Los Angeles County's Olive View Medical 
Center, objected to the amount of money being spent to educate drug addicts and 
prostitutes about the dangers of AIDS compared to what she characterized as 
"the pitiful excuses for protective eye wear, paper scrub suits and barely 
waterproof surgical gowns found in every L.A. County-operated medical 
facility." 
"Millions of health care workers in this country, both union and non-union 
alike, are employed in the practice of what can only be described as 
'battlefront' medicine. They are like the proverbial sacrificial lambs to the 
slaughter," she said. 
The women's group last week filed a complaint with Cal/OSHA alleging a lack of 
training. 
"Many times when the evening or night people arrive there are no linen 
garments," Wilenken said. "What's left are paper scrub suits. . . . I go home 
sometimes soaked to the skin with blood." 
The hospital industry, which the government estimates would have to spend an 
extra $194 million a year to comply with the regulations, opposes the mandatory 
rules. 
Jim Karpiak, a staff specialist for the American Hospital Assn., said in a 
telephone interview from Chicago that the regulations improperly go beyond the 
CDC standards and suggested that OSHA was venturing into the health-care field 
with an overly rigid approach. 
Hepatitis inflames the liver. The type known as hepatitis B, formerly called 
serum hepatitis, is transmitted sexually or by blood-to-blood contact. Of 
several types of viral hepatitis, it is by far the kind most likely to be 
contracted by health-care workers. Between 7% and 30% of health-care workers 
sustaining needle-stick puncture wounds from hepatitis B-infected patients 
become infected, OSHA said. 
While health-care workers have been recognized as suffering from high rates of 
hepatitis B since the 1970s, and while a vaccine against the virus has been 
available since 1982, it was not until the more recent furor over AIDS that 
OSHA began to fashion rules for hospitals, nursing homes, labs and other work 
sites 
As recently as 1987, OSHA turned down a petition from the American Federation 
of State, County and Municipal Employees asking the agency to set an emergency 
regulation requiring hepatitis B vaccinations for at-risk workers. 
Joanne Santangelo, a representative of the California Nurses Assn., was among 
several speakers Tuesday who urged that vaccinations be made available to all 
health-care workers, not merely those whose exposure is predictable. 
Santangelo also urged that OSHA require confidentiality for infected workers 
who seek workers compensation through local governments. A nurse who 
accidentally stuck herself with an AIDS-infected needle at San Francisco 
General Hospital in 1987 fought a two-year battle over confidentiality before 
reaching a settlement in which the city's workers compensation system agreed to 
process her claim without revealing her name. 
Other speakers called on OSHA to strengthen the proposed rules by requiring 
engineering improvements in hospital needles and other sharp hospital 
instruments to reduce the incidence of accidental punctures. 
Jewett, a professor of orthopedic surgery at UC San Francisco, urged OSHA to 
add to the regulations a requirement for operating room personnel to wear 
respirator-like devices in surgery where power tools are used. 
Jewett said the large amount of blood produced during such surgery makes 
traditional protection ineffective. Blood can splatter under masks and goggles, 
he said. 
