MAYOR'S MOTIVES SPAWN FRENZIED DEBATE 
Stunned by Mayor Maureen O'Connor's announcement that she will not seek 
reelection in 1992, local civic leaders spent much of Tuesday speculating on 
the motives for her surprising decision even as they began assessing how it 
dramatically alters the city's political horizon. 
It ranks as one of the central ironies of O'Connor's 3 1/2-year-old mayoralty 
that her planned early retirement -- announced during Monday's annual State of 
the City address -- has spawned more frenzied debate and wide-ranging 
interpretations than perhaps anything else that she has done since becoming the 
city's first woman mayor in July, 1986. 
In an interview Tuesday, the 43-year-old O'Connor reaffirmed that she plans to 
step down in order to be better-positioned to campaign for the sweeping 
political and City Hall ethical reforms that she proposed in her Monday speech 
-- changes that, among other things, would move the city closer to a 
strong-mayor form of government by giving the mayor veto power over City 
Council actions. 
"I want the changes I'm proposing to be the issue -- not my motives," O'Connor 
said. "Since I'm not going to be the long-range beneficiary of these changes, 
critics won't be able to say that I'm power hungry or just out to strengthen 
myself." 
Some San Diego leaders wondered aloud Tuesday, however, whether additional 
factors influenced her decision. A few O'Connor allies suggested that her 
growing disdain with an increasingly fractious council and personal 
distractions -- notably, the fact that her father recently suffered a serious 
stroke and her husband's long-time leukemia -- may have played a role in her 
decision. 
Critics, meanwhile, speculated that O'Connor was simply becoming disenchanted 
-- or simply bored -- with a job in which she has been consistently criticized 
for lacking a long-range vision for the city and for inattention to many of the 
major problems facing the city, as well as for other perceived shortcomings. In 
a recent report card in San Diego Political Watch, a monthly newsletter, 
O'Connor was ranked last overall among the council members. A recent San Diego 
Union review also showed that O'Connor had the worst attendance record on the 
council last year -- repeating a pattern seen late in her tenure as a 
councilwoman in the 1970s. 
O'Connor's declaration of non-candidacy also was interpreted by her foes as an 
effort to position herself above the political fray in anticipation of future 
council battles. 
"She's trying to stake out the moral high ground," Councilman Bob Filner, who 
has clashed often with O'Connor, said Tuesday. "For the next three years, 
she'll say, 'I'm not running again -- my motives are pure.' But any time any of 
us disagrees with her, she'll say we're politically motivated or that we're 
just after her job. I see a couple of horrendous years ahead." 
Saying simply, "I'm the only one who really knows," O'Connor dismisses all 
those theories as "total non-factors" in her decision, which she insists stems 
primarily from her strong support for a two-term limit on local elective 
office. Though her first term was a shortened one -- the uncompleted term of 
former Mayor Roger Hedgecock, who resigned after his 1985 campaign-law 
conviction -- O'Connor said she felt that her push for a two-term limit on 
council and mayoral service would have been weakened if she herself sought a 
third term. 
"Because of the circumstances, a third term was was a very tempting idea to 
play around with, but I finally decided it's better to leave after 6 1/2 years 
than 10 1/2," O'Connor said. "One of the things I like least about politics -- 
and something I think has turned off a lot of people -- is that so many 
officeholders try to hang on forever. We need new blood and new ideas in local 
government. So, I'm going to lead by example." 
Among O'Connor's confidants, there was greater surprise over the timing of her 
announcement -- which comes 2 1/2 years before the next mayoral primary and 
with nearly three years remaining in her term -- than over its content. 
"She's been hinting for some time that she was leaning this way, so it doesn't 
come as a shock," said land-use attorney Paul Peterson, one of O'Connor's 
closest advisers. "She might have preferred to wait longer to make her 
announcement, but I think the timing was dictated by her desire to campaign for 
these reforms without having it look like she was trying to feather her own 
nest." 
Beyond the two-term limits and mayoral veto, O'Connor also proposed other 
fundamental changes that would reshape, in both form and content, local 
campaigns and officeholders' behavior at City Hall. 
The mayor's recommendations -- which she hopes to put before voters this spring 
on a special mail ballot -- include expansion of the council from eight to 10 
seats, barring council members from voting on projects involving contributors 
from whom they have received more than $1,000 in the past year, confining 
political fund-raising to nine months before a campaign and requiring 
candidates to eliminate campaign debts within 30 days after an election. 
Ironically, the last time that a mail ballot was used in a citywide election -- 
the 1981 convention center campaign -- O'Connor's husband, multimillionaire 
businessman Robert O. Peterson, challenged its constitutionality, suing the 
city all the way to the state Supreme Court, which upheld the electoral 
method's legality. Emphasizing that she prefers mail ballots because they 
encourage higher turnouts, O'Connor said wryly: "My husband and I disagree on 
this, but I guess I should thank him for taking care of the legal questions." 
The need for the proposed structural and ethical changes included in her reform 
package has been accelerated, O'Connor argued, by the advent of district 
elections in council campaigns. As the only member of the council still elected 
citywide, the mayor needs additional powers to better balance citywide 
interests against district concerns, O'Connor contends. 
"The problem is, we've got a system of government that simply doesn't work any 
more in San Diego," O'Connor said. "Without these changes, the problems of the 
'80s will be unsolved in the '90s. I want to give people a new government and 
process they can be excited about. When only 25% of the registered voters 
bother to go to the polls, that's a pretty strong indictment of the system we 
have now." 
Though O'Connor views her non-candidacy as strengthening her lobbying efforts 
for the proposed changes, others suggested that it could have the opposite 
effect by transforming her into a lame duck with ever-diminishing clout both 
inside and outside City Hall. 
"I don't think anyone has to worry about Maureen becoming a lame duck," 
responded San Diego Unified Port Commissioner Lou Wolfsheimer, a longtime 
O'Connor confidant. "Just because you're going to be leaving in three years 
doesn't mean you can't be effective, especially if you're the mayor." 
O'Connor added: "That's the old thinking of the past. All the way from Eastern 
Europe to San Diego, reform is in the air, and if we want a new San Diego 
Spring, we'd better spring right up there with reforms. That thinking is 
obsolete. Actually, I think I'll be stronger." 
Moreover, even some O'Connor opponents concur with her analysis that she 
probably had to remove herself as a future mayoral candidate in order to 
effectively push for adoption of her proposed reforms. 
"It may be that the only way San Diego is ever going to get a strong mayor is 
to have a lame duck campaigning for it," said political consultant Tom Shepard, 
who helped manage the 1983 campaign in which Hedgecock narrowly defeated 
O'Connor. Indeed, when then-Mayor Pete Wilson sought to strengthen the mayor's 
office in the 1970s, his plan was soundly rejected. 
While O'Connor's announcement may be tantamount to the opening bell in the 1992 
mayoral campaign, most of the potential candidates whose names are included in 
the early line on the race agree that it is premature to even begin most 
behind-the-scenes politicking. In addition, most confront more immediate 
concerns. 
Three possible mayoral contenders -- Councilmen Ron Roberts, Bruce Henderson 
and Filner -- face 1991 reelection campaigns that will mark their first taste 
of district-only races. 
Similarly, former San Diego City Councilman Mike Gotch must first try to win 
this spring's special 78th Assembly District race before possibly turning his 
attention to an office that he has flirted with in the past. And county 
Supervisor Susan Golding, who carefully weighed the possibility of challenging 
O'Connor in 1988 before opting to seek reelection to her own seat, realizes 
that her own political future could be affected by the outcome in the spring 
trial of her husband, businessman Richard T. Silberman, on federal 
money-laundering changes. 
"If you're thinking of running in 1992, probably the best thing you could do 
right now is to concentrate on doing a good job at what you're already doing," 
political consultant Jim Johnston said. "It's a little early to be collecting 
checks." 
Perhaps more to the point, as O'Connor herself noted, if her campaign and 
ethics reform package wins public approval, the size of those checks and the 
manner in which they are collected could change the dynamics of the 1992 race. 
"It could be a new game with new rules the next time around," O'Connor said. 
