ISRAEL HAS U.S. AID PROMISE, RABIN SAYS; 
MIDDLE EAST: OFFICIAL TELLS OF FUNDING PLEDGE IN '91 DESPITE CALL FOR CUT BY 
SEN. DOLE. BUT HE WORRIES ABOUT BEYOND NEXT YEAR. 
Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today he received assurances that 
U.S. economic and military aid to his country will not be cut through 1991 even 
if the Bush Administration reshuffles its $14.6-billion budget for aid 
worldwide. 
But Rabin registered concern beyond next year, saying Israel's own budget is 
strained by a rising influx of Soviet Jews and efforts to cope with Soviet 
weapons shipments to Syria, Iraq and Libya. 
"In view of all this, we believe that we deserve the continuation of the level 
of support that we get," Rabin told reporters after a 70-minute meeting with 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III. 
Israel is the largest recipient of American foreign assistance, receiving $1.8 
billion in military aid and $1.2 billion in economic aid this year. Senate 
Republican leader Bob Dole of Kansas, apparently with the support of the 
Administration, proposed this week diverting to Eastern Europe about $330 
million of the $6.8 billion that Israel and four other countries receive. 
The idea is to promote democracy and to keep within current overall aid 
figures. The four other nations are Egypt, the Philippines, Turkey and 
Pakistan. 
Rabin did not say who assured him that Israel could count on current levels, at 
least through fiscal year 1991. But he made the statement in discussing a 
meeting he held Wednesday evening with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney. 
"I believe that for this fiscal year the budget is approved, and unless there 
will be cuts, which I hope will not take place, there will be continuation," 
Rabin said. "When it comes to fiscal year 1991, I have the reasons to believe 
there will be no reduction in the support to Israel." 
Asked if he meant both military and economic aid, Rabin replied: "Yes." 
U.S. officials say Israel and the others are not being targeted; that the 
Administration simply wants more flexibility in dispensing aid. But Israel's $3 
billion a year could be trimmed. 
The Dole proposal is unpleasant for Israel, which also came under criticism 
Wednesday from the State Department for regarding the West Bank and Gaza as 
potential homes for Soviet Jews. 
Swiping at Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, who vowed on Sunday to retain the 
territories and to settle some Soviet Jews there, State Department spokeswoman 
Margaret D. Tutwiler said his statements "were not helpful." 
