4 IN CONGRESS WANT WORLD DISASTER UNIT; 
DORNAN IN GROUP THAT SAW ARMENIAN EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE 
As a Californian, Rep. Robert K. Dornan is used to earthquakes. 
But he said Wednesday that the impact of seeing firsthand the devastated 
Armenian town of Leninakan has left him with some chilling images. 
"The children who still had parents would usually smile," he said, " but the 
ones who had lost their parents usually wouldn't smile. I can remember one such 
girl, who had only one arm and one leg remaining, and she barely managed a 
smile when I squeezed her hand." 
Dornan, a Garden Grove Republican, returned Wednesday from a two-day tour with 
Reps. Tony Coelho (D-Merced), David E. Bonior (D-Mich.) and Robert G. 
Torricelli (D-N.J.) of the areas hardest hit by the quake last month in Soviet 
Armenia. 
Coelho said Secretary of State George Shultz had proposed the trip as "a 
humanitarian gesture" by the U.S. government. 
"It will take decades to rebuild to where it was," Dornan said, "but we have 
now learned how important it is to really study the California earthquake 
situation. There is something about all of that twisted rubble that is too 
depressing." 
'Awesome Force' 
Both Dornan and Coelho said they found it difficult to imagine similar 
destruction occurring in earthquake-prone Southern California, where buildings 
are built with just such a catastrophe in mind. 
However, Dornan said he is now even more conscious of the dangers of a major 
earthquake and the need for adequate building codes and emergency preparations. 
"The results of improper construction are shocking," he said. "We saw a stack 
of nine slabs of concrete that used to be a nine-story building. Our buildings 
are better, but (in a major quake) we would have a great deal of fires." 
Coelho echoed that concern. 
"I don't think we appreciate the awesome force of an earthquake," he said. "We 
tend to believe that we can handle anything. But the awesomeness of an 
earthquake is something even pictures can't show. When you see it, smell it, 
hear it, you realize how devastating it is. There are forces stronger than 
Americans." 
Dornan said the four congressmen on the tour would issue a recommendation to 
House Speaker Jim Wright (D-Tex.) next week calling for a worldwide commission 
to provide immediate assistance in future disasters. 
"We just have to have some coordinating commission for disasters like this," 
Dornan said. "Even hours are important when people are crushed under 
buildings." 
Red Tape Snarled Dogs 
The congressmen will suggest that such a commission be set up through the 
United Nations. 
"The United Nations has a high commissioner for refugees," he said. "We now 
need a high commissioner for disaster relief." 
In one instance after the Armenian quake, Coelho said, search dogs remained on 
a U.S. plane for nearly 4 hours until papers required by the United States had 
been processed. 
"That is just absurd," he said. "Our government took the position during the 
Armenian quake that we were not going to do anything unless they asked. Every 
other country said they were going to help unless they object. We need to be 
able to respond faster." 
Dornan repeatedly talked about the children he saw on his trip -- on the 
streets and in the hospitals. 
"You almost feel foolish passing out coloring books and candy among all that 
agony," he said, "but it's all we could think to do. We told them that the 
American people were praying for them." 
Both Dornan and Coelho said their visit seemed to have an impact on the 
survivors in Armenia as well. 
"It's all in the eyes," Dornan said. 
