CRESPI NAMES LINS TO REPLACE REDELL AS FOOTBALL COACH 
Tim Lins, a member of the Crespi High coaching staff for the past 6 years, was 
named Thursday to succeed Bill Redell as the school's head football coach. He 
was selected over fellow assistants Joel Wilker and Jim Benkert. 
Lins, 27, served as defensive coordinator last season, quarterback coach the 
season before and guided the Celts' sophomore team to records of 9-0-1 in 1985 
and 7-3 in 1986. He was a varsity assistant the previous 2 seasons after 
playing football at Cal Lutheran, Cerritos College and St. Paul High. 
"We felt that Tim's experience and what we had seen here at Crespi made us 
confident that we made the right decision," Crespi Athletic Director Paul Muff 
said. "He's familiar with private high school football, coming from St. Paul, 
and I think Tim really learned from a pretty good situation here over the past 
few years." 
Lins, who graduated from Cal Lutheran in 1982, was an NAIA All-American tight 
end in his junior and senior seasons. 
"I feel real good about it," Lins said. "Like I tell everybody, it was like a 
dream come true. I was surprised, but I wanted the job. I didn't go into the 
interview for the experience." 
Redell resigned in December after compiling a 5-year record of 43-16-1 in 2 
separate stints at Crespi. Under Redell, the Celts won the Big Five Conference 
championship in 1986, the school's only Southern Section football title. Redell 
said that he recommended all 3 assistants upon leaving the position. 
"I think the world of all three of those guys," said Redell, who coached the 
defense at Cal Lutheran in Lins' junior year. "Tim is an outstanding coach. I 
think he brings a great rapport with the kids. They have great respect for 
him." 
Lins was chosen by a 3-member panel composed of Crespi principal Father Joseph 
Atcher, Vice Principal Greg Gunn and Muff. The decision was made Tuesday and 
Lins met with team members Thursday. 
Lins said that he has asked Wilker and Benkert to remain with the football 
program. 
"I'd love to have both of them back, but I don't know what's going to happen," 
he said. "I want them, and I told them that." 
Because of its recent success and the well-publicized exploits of All-American 
running back Russell White, Crespi has become one of the high-profile teams in 
the Valley area. 
"Bill established a great program, he left a great program and he left things 
intact," Lins said. "Ever since I came to the school, that has been my goal -- 
to be head coach." 
White, however, will graduate this spring, as will All-Valley quarterback Ron 
Redell and All-Valley defensive lineman Quinn Fauria, among others. Lins said 
that the direction his team takes will depend on incoming personnel. 
"I'm more of a team-oriented kind of guy," he said. "I teach the team 
philosophy. 
"And those guys are hard to replace." 
