PLAN TO CUT OFF CLINICS' FUNDS CALLED ILLOGICAL 
Calling on the hot line was a tearful, stammering 15-year-old girl with 
gonorrhea. 
She was coaxed into visiting T.H.E. Clinic for Women in Los Angeles, where she 
had a medical exam and was given antibiotics to cure her condition. She also 
got her first birth control device. 
The teen-ager was one of more than 500,000 young females statewide who last 
year visited hundreds of state-supported family planning clinics that are 
scheduled to lose their funding in July under Gov. George Deukmejian's newly 
proposed state budget. 
Health care advocates denounced the governor's plan Wednesday. They defended 
the state's expenditure of $36.2 million -- by far the largest source of 
support for family planning services -- as one of the state health department's 
most cost-effective programs. 
"I thought we'd gotten past this kind of illogical cutting of programs that are 
so cost-effective," said Sylvia Drew Ivie, executive director of T.H.E. Clinic 
on Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard in the Crenshaw area. 
Her clinic receives about $300,000 a year in state family planning funds to pay 
for birth control supplies, exams, counseling and testing for sexually 
transmitted diseases in more than 3,000 low-income females, who are mostly 
Asian, black and Latino. None of these state funds may be used for abortions, 
although some clinics do provide abortion referrals. 
"We save the taxpayers an enormous amount of money by helping women prevent 
unwanted births through birth control," Ivie said. 
Without the state funds, she said, services at T.H.E. Clinic, founded in 1972, 
would be "devastated." Statewide, these cuts will cause "more unwanted 
pregnancies, less prenatal care and a higher infant mortality rate," she said. 
Planned Parenthood officials in Sacramento said that it has been shown that $6 
in medical care and social services is saved for every $1 spent on family 
planning services, according to a study by the Institute for Health Policy 
Studies at the University of California. Planned Parenthood's 90 clinics 
statewide receive about a quarter of the state's family planning funds, 
spokesman David Alois said. 
The federal government also funds family planning services, amounting to $12.5 
million in the state last year. That funding is expected to continue, but would 
probably be stretched so thin that drastic cuts would undoubtedly have to be 
made in innovative programs such as the one at T.H.E. Clinic targeting pregnant 
teens and adolescent boys. 
Federal, State Money 
In Los Angeles County, about $9.4 million in state money and $4 million in 
federal funds support 90 family planning clinics. Half are run by nonprofit 
groups and the rest are public clinics located in county facilities, said Tom 
Kraing, director of the Los Angeles Regional Family Planning Council, which 
distributes both the federal and state money. 
He predicted that many excellent nonprofit clinics would be forced to close, 
including perhaps T.H.E. Clinic. 
Ivie described the clinic's family planning funds as "the core of . . . our 
financial strength." Cuts in these services, she said, would jeopardize the 
viability of the whole clinic, including its other services -- prenatal care 
for hundreds of pregnant women, AIDS testing, nutritional programs, free 
immunization of children as well as free breast examinations and pap smears. 
Legislative Action 
To eliminate $36.2 million in family planning funding, the Legislature must 
repeal legislation that set up and funded the state health department's office 
of family planning. If the Legislature refuses to do so, Deukmejian has said 
that he will gut the program by slashing its budget by two-thirds. 
"I do not wish to have to make any of these reductions," Deukmejian said 
Tuesday. "But if the Legislature does not support such actions, I fear that the 
alternative will be much worse." He threatened to slash other programs, 
including those for local mental health, Alzheimer's disease research, senior 
nutrition and alcohol and drug treatment programs. 
The matter will be debated during the next six months. Meantime, a spokesman 
for the state Health Services Department said, grant applications for family 
planning funds will be accepted and evaluated. 
