NBA NOTES; 
DANNY MANNING'S INJURY HITS THE STRUGGLING CLIPPERS HARD 
Since moving from Buffalo to the West Coast a decade ago, the Clippers have 
been the National Basketball Association's most beleaguered franchise, a 
monument to mismanagement and misfortune. But nothing could compare to the 
nightmare confronting them now. 
Doctors in Los Angeles have confirmed the worst, that rookie Danny Manning has 
suffered a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee, an injury that 
will sideline him for at least a year and could prevent him from ever realizing 
his obvious and wondrous potential. 
Wednesday in Los Angeles, Clippers management and team physicians huddled with 
Manning's agent, Ron Grinker, to ponder the next course of action in what 
promises to be a lengthy rehabilitation for the player chosen No. 1 overall in 
last year's draft. 
Manning will have an arthroscopy to determine the extent of the tear. Then, in 
all likelihood, he will undergo reconstructive surgery. First, the Clippers 
must decide on a doctor. Grinker will not permit Tony Daly, the Clippers' team 
physician, to be involved because his clients (notably Derek Smith) have had 
bad experiences with Daly in the past. 
At any rate, Manning, who injured the knee coming down with a rebound in 
Milwaukee Jan. 4, faces a difficult rehabilitation. The injury is similar to 
that of former New York Knicks star Bernard King and former Los Angeles Laker 
Mitch Kupchak, who were never the same after suffering damage to an anterior 
cruciate ligament. 
"If the injury is similar to mine, you're looking at one-and-a-half to two 
years," Kupchak, now the Lakers' assistant general manager, said. "If they 
reconstruct the knee, you have to hope the doctors do a good job. If he's given 
what's called a 'tight knee,' then there's a good chance he could be close to 
what he once was. But if he's given anything less than a good, tight knee, he 
will lose quite a bit of effectiveness." 
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, said he suspected the anterior 
cruciate when he heard Manning describe the knee having "snapped." 
"But there are two things in his favor," Scott told a Los Angeles reporter. 
"His youth and the fact it's the right leg and not the left." Manning 
ordinarily pushes off his left leg. 
Manning's injury has done nothing for the spirit of the Clippers, who were 
struggling before he was hurt and are struggling now. In successive road games, 
they lost by 35 to Indiana, 34 to the Knicks and 35 to Boston. Team President 
Alan Rothenberg was on hand for the latter two defeats, a discouraging sign for 
Coach Gene Shue. Observers in Los Angeles are wondering if Manning's injury 
will give Shue an excuse for his team's play, or expedite what seems to be his 
inevitable dismissal. 
Now that Willis Reed has accepted the inevitable and placed Dennis Hopson and 
Chris Morris in his starting lineup, it's time the New Jersey Nets bid a swift 
goodbye to Walter Berry, who no longer figures in their plans. 
There was little risk involved when the Nets acquired Berry from San Antonio 
for a second-round pick before the season. It was hoped Berry, sixth in the 
league in field-goal percentage last season, could provide offense while the 
Nets brought Morris along slowly. 
But Berry has been a bust offensively. Despite being in the final year of his 
original contract, Berry has shown little inclination to work diligently for 
another one. 
So the Nets might as well waive him, eat the remainder of his $300,000 salary 
and find a more willing body to take his place. 
Notes 
Charles Barkley and the 76ers will be featured on the Jan. 24 episode of the 
ABC series "thirtysomething," which is set in Philadelphia. Michael Steadman, 
the character played by Ken Olin, takes a feed from Barkley and slam dunks 
during a fantasy sequence. ... Having put up with the indifferent practice 
habits of Rony Seikaly and Pearl Washington for three months, Miami Heat 
coaches and front-office types vow never to draft another Syracuse player. . . 
. Roy Tarpley's drug relapse isn't the only problem in Dallas. As of Tuesday, 
Mark Aguirre hadn't scored 20 points for five straight games and had shot 39.6 
percent over his last 19. Aguirre, a 24.9-point career scorer, was down to 20.2 
for the year. ... Knicks General Manager Al Bianchi denies reports that he 
considered trading Rod Strickland to Indiana in a three-way deal that would 
have brought Kiki Vandeweghe to New York. Pacers General Manager Donnie Walsh 
says a three-way deal was discussed, but Strickland's name wasn't included. . . 
. Manute Bol, who was charged with drunk driving twice last summer, said he 
hasn't had a beer in four months. Bol is fast friends with recovering alcoholic 
Chris Mullin. "He and Chris are tight, really tight," Warriors assistant Garry 
St. Jean said. 
