GOOD-BAD ADVICE FOR EAST EUROPEANS NOW ENTERING THE WORLD MARKETPLACE; 
FREEDOM: WHAT MAKES FREE MARKETS SO ATTRACTIVE IS THE OPPORTUNITY TO CULTIVATE 
INDIVIDUALISM -- BUT THE BAD NEWS IS THAT PEOPLE LOSE ALL SENSE OF BELONGING TO 
A GROUP. 
During the past few months, we have witnessed the most unexpected change in 
political life that any member of my generation could have imagined. Those of 
us who fought in World War II -- when the Western democracies were "allied" 
with the world's largest communist country -- assumed that the price to be paid 
for helping democratic institutions survive was a recognition that 
Soviet-dominated countries would survive in like manner. That is to say: 
forever. 
But political science is no more a science than economics is, and no one in the 
world has come forward to claim that he or she predicted the downfall of 
dictatorial regimes in Eastern Europe, even as recently as two days before any 
one of them collapsed. And no one has come forward with new information sheets, 
guidebooks, directions or instructions as a briefing on what to expect of a 
free economy. So I offer a few notes. 
In my Western, democratic, free-market country, worldly wisdom consists in 
understanding that there is no good news without attendant (simultaneous or 
resultant) bad news. For example, so many of our advanced medications eliminate 
pain but cause insomnia. 
The essence of what makes political freedom so attractive is the opportunity to 
cultivate one's individualism. This is usually achieved at a cost of losing all 
sense of being a member of a group. What goes first is responsibility for 
supporting your nation civically, militarily or financially. What goes next is 
participation in fraternal social groups: political parties, philanthropic 
organizations, religious bodies. 
Professional organizations might be the last to be abjured and abandoned, 
because they contribute to the possibility of enhancing income. The smallest 
and most intimate group, the nuclear family, survives despite the fact that 
much of the population confuses it with a catastrophic stage of war. 
In the old days, there was at least the possibility of some social relationship 
established by talking with a person at a bar. A bar was a public house where 
one could reasonably expect to engage in conversation with another human being 
and come away somewhat revived or enriched. All that ended when television was 
introduced. Once that set was suspended above the head of the bartender -- 
every pair of eyes of every person seated on a bar stool was riveted to it -- 
the possibility of spontaneous social intercourse died. Most people have become 
inarticulate (dumb), except in their workplace. 
On the other hand, if it hadn't been for television, this great change taking 
place in response to popular uprisings throughout Eastern Europe would not yet 
have come about; the regimes would probably have machine-gunned to death every 
protester. But only six months earlier, for every night, every week, adding up 
to the months during which all those Chinese youths yearned for a little bit of 
participatory democracy, what was seen on television was the way a senile, 
entrenched totalitarian communist regime murdered its own children. 
Never before in the history of the rise and fall of governments has the whole 
world been able to watch such disasters unfold and see how the refusal to share 
power makes self-justifying rejection possible -- and deadly. 
The good news about political freedom combined with a market economy is that 
you have the chance of doing something you like to do -- and do it well enough 
to make a decent or reasonable living. That achievement gives not only the 
material satisfaction of making a better living than you made before, but it 
also has the psychological reward that comes with doing something worthwhile. 
The bad news is that even more money can be earned by doing things that are not 
worthwhile. Thus, the opportunities may come about for riches of such magnitude 
as constitute an indecent and unreasonable living. 
Although economics is not a science, business administration is a practical 
skill; our graduate schools of business have so evolved that they can instruct 
people unable to produce any object or perform any service to make more money 
than people who can carry out either task. The key is to treat all resources 
abstractly. For example, think of a factory that produces automobiles merely as 
a mechanical operation that results in a profit. 
By eliminating any thought of the well-being of the people who pay for and 
drive automobiles, and similarly abstracting any concern about the quality of 
the automobile produced, an executive may concentrate exclusively on the 
financial relationship between costs, sales and income to maximize profit for 
the longest period of time. Then he can move off to the retirement homes of the 
rich and famous. 
Who wants to work hard to make movies when you can sell movie studios much more 
easily -- and for a great deal more money? 
In other words, for all the good news of the chance to improve your life 
financially through actions in a free-market economy, the bad news is that the 
practical consequences of conditions that allow the free-market economy to be 
what it is ultimately result in individualism at its worst. The successful 
manipulator abstracts himself from all care about what his activities produce 
other than financial bounties. 
If that is not bad enough, a concomitant decay in the quality of life comes 
about because of treating other people impersonally. The hidden side of the 
shiny coin of individualism is the bleak refusal to consider questions of the 
humanity of others, let alone questions of social justice. To put it bluntly: 
There is no evidence that anywhere in the Western democracies where political 
theories justify the cultivation of individualism is there any instance where 
the vigorous freedom of a market economy is compatible with giving a damn about 
anyone else. 
On the contrary, treating everyone else in an impersonal way -- as a 
functionary, i.e., as a means of performing some work function -- rather than 
as a complex whole human being relieves the politically free and enterprising 
consumer-producer-manipulator from all concerns about the well-being of others. 
If you new free marketeers come into the West with your eyes open to the human 
dangers and drawbacks of the long run as well as to the personal advantages and 
satisfactions of the short, then the new blood you bring with you could even 
help us reorder our good and bad news. 
