INTIFADA LEAVES MANY ISRAELIS FEELING LIKE STRANGERS IN THEIR OWN LAND; 
MIDDLE EAST: THEIR EXPRESSIONS OF FEAR CHALLENGE THE OFFICIAL WISDOM THAT 
ISRAEL HAS ADJUSTED TO THE ARAB UPRISING. 
Perhaps the most striking impact of the Arab uprising on Israeli life is that 
the Palestinians have managed to make Israelis feel less at home than ever 
before in the 41-year history of the Jewish state. 
This may seem curious given Israel's military might, not to mention the toll of 
more than 600 Palestinian lives during the two years of turmoil. But in recent 
conversations in half a dozen Israeli towns with a score of residents, reserve 
soldiers included, a picture of extreme discomfort among Israelis emerges. 
When asked what the intifada means to them, they responded with some variation 
on a single theme: the intifada scares them; it makes them strangers in their 
own land, not just in the occupied and disputed territories of the West Bank 
and Gaza Strip. It is a Zionist nightmare: Having come to Israel to shed the 
hostilities of the Diaspora, Israelis find themselves in endless animosity, not 
just from across the borders but in their midst. 
Every street corner is a potential conflict, every mundane encounter a possible 
clash. Last week, a Palestinian worker at a Jerusalem restaurant was charged 
with poisoning salad with insecticide after four customers became severely ill 
after eating there. 
The expressions of fear by Israelis challenge the current official wisdom that 
Israel has adjusted to the Arab uprising. Although Israelis did comment on the 
severe punishment dealt to the Palestinian population, the limits on their own 
personal freedom resulting from the intifada provoked near-rage. 
Everyone seemed anxious for some solution and, like the wildly gyrating Israeli 
public surveys on the subject, the preferred solution alternated between a 
willingness to sort out the problems with the Palestinians and a yearning to 
end the conflict by expelling Palestinians en masse from the occupied lands. 
Ideological concerns were secondary: Neither the expansionist dreams common to 
Israel's rightist camp nor the ardent soul-searching characteristic of the left 
was much in evidence. Even in religious neighborhoods, biblical considerations 
of God's will in the matter took a back seat to questions of personal safety. 
Peace talks, tentatively scheduled to begin in Washington in the coming weeks, 
appeared to be far less daunting than the prospect of living in perpetual fear, 
even among the many who expressed profound mistrust of Palestinians. 
Over coffee at the Shimson Meeting Place cafe outside the small town of Bet 
Shemesh, truck driver Moshe Ashkenazi complained of a feeling of confinement. 
"I own trucks. We used to transport things from the territories. There are 
places I want to go to, but the rocks break my windows every day. 
"I have a gun, but the gun license says it is for self-defense. If I go to the 
territories, I can't use the weapon. You know, if they throw stones and hit 
you, you can die. If they try to kill a Jew, we can't protect ourselves. 
"We Jews have to choose whether to go in and, in order to stay alive, get in 
trouble, or get out. So most people stop going. 
"I want to make clear to the American people and the world at large that our 
enemy is not civilized, but primitive. Most Israeli people support the 
government decision not to talk to (Palestine Liberation Organization leader) 
Yasser Arafat, whose hands are full of blood. Instead, we want to talk to 
people who live here." 
The owner of the Shimson Meeting Place, Shlomo Malka, came over with more 
coffee. "It's a mess. We should find a place for them and give them a state -- 
on the other side of the Jordan River. Could be Gaza, but some place completely 
separate. It's a question of security." 
At the Mahaneh Yehuda market in Jerusalem, almost any kind of pickled fish, 
spice and salads are available, but usually only one kind of political opinion: 
right-wing and anti-Arab. 
So it came as something of a surprise to hear Boaz Zidkiyahu, a purveyor of 
pungent Oriental salads, say that talk is the best way to get out of the tangle 
of the intifada. 
"There are solutions. We must sit down and talk with local residents of the 
territories. Not with the PLO, that's for sure. I am in favor of sitting down 
and talking, because the way things are now, there will be no end, not for us 
and not for them. 
"The intifada has placed great limits on Jews in their own land. People in 
Jerusalem can not even go to the Old City without a certain element of danger. 
Israelis in the territories have great difficulty traveling to their places of 
work and employment. In contrast, the Arabs can come into our areas, and feel 
much better among us than we do among them. In fact, the Arabs feel more 
comfortable in our areas than we do." 
"It's a guerrilla war," exclaimed Itzik Avraha, a fruit vendor. "It will 
continue for a long time; it will be very hard to find a solution. 
"I don't mind any solution so long as it brings us rest. Maybe they should have 
a state in Jordan. What do I care about the West Bank? Even Jerusalem, with the 
special feeling we have for it, is not worth the life of one soldier." 
Eli Pasha, another vendor, remarked: "I am worried about the influence it has 
on my children; things will only get worse, not better. Once they were just 
Arabs, like there are Jews and there are Moroccans; an Arab was an Arab like 
any other human being. Today, we see it differently, like to be an Arab is to 
be terrifying." 
Bnei Brak is a religious neighborhood near Tel Aviv, a place seemingly distant 
from the intifada. Most young men from there do not serve in the army, 
receiving instead exemptions for religious studies. Still, even there a pall of 
uncertainty prevails. 
Raphael, a 23-year-old yeshiva student, was idling at a wedding hall waiting 
for festivities to begin. 
"It's a catastrophe," he said of the uprising. "In our own state, we can't live 
in peace. The Arabs walk around in Bnei Brak and feel more secure than we do. 
He looks at us like he owns us. 
"My wife is very scared. There are lots of Arab workers around. They do 
construction work. My wife is afraid to walk in the street -- only since the 
intifada. We don't even think of going to the territories. 
"I'm not a radical, (but) maybe we should deal with them more harshly. I don't 
hate Arabs, but if they find reason to kill us, well, it's our state. If they 
don't like us, they should get out. 
"Every part of the land of Israel is holy, but for the peace, the rabbis say, 
we are allowed to give some back. But everything you give the Arabs they want 
more. There has to be real peace. We have to get something back in return." 
Grocer Naimrod Yovel, manning the cash register at his nearby shop, commented: 
"We should deal with the Arabs like the Arabs deal with themselves, like in 
Algeria; (or) kill 200 in one day, like Syria would. 
"I had a small spice factory in the territories and sold food over there. Now I 
don't go. People are scared to go. It's crazy to go. 
"There is land enough to give some away. Not Jerusalem -- ever. But other 
places. 
