NEWS ANALYSIS; 
FOR BUSH, PANAMA SEEN AS MAJOR 'POLITICAL BONANZA' 
Whatever the cost in lives or long-term U.S. relations with Latin America, the 
massive U.S. invasion of Panama appears to be a tremendous political plus for 
President Bush -- maybe "the biggest political bonanza" to come any President's 
way in 25 or 30 years, in the view of one senior Bush adviser. 
Republican strategists, almost euphoric over public reaction to the military 
operation, declare that Bush finally has shed the "wimp" image that has dogged 
him since the 1988 presidential campaign. A GOP poll shows that Americans 
heavily favor the operation and that they are ready to leave American troops in 
Panama "as long as necessary." 
Even Democrats concede that, despite hundreds of casualties on both sides and 
heavy destruction in Panama City, the military operation represents a big 
political plus for the President, at least for the immediate future. 
Down the road, however, Panama could pose a variety of problems for Bush -- 
from lasting damage to U.S.-Latin American relations and possible embarrassing 
disclosures at the drug trial of deposed strongman Manuel A. Noriega to the 
high cost of rehabilitating Panama and propping up the U.S.-installed 
government of Guillermo Endara. 
Some Latin American leaders have been extremely critical of the invasion, and 
specialists in Latin American affairs say that the damage goes beyond 
traditional rhetoric. Further, estimates of the cost of restoring Panama's 
economy -- devastated first by more than two years of U.S. economic sanctions 
and now by the invasion -- will run into the billions of dollars. 
"The cost of proselytizing democracy is not cheap," warned James Schlesinger, a 
former Cabinet member of the Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter administrations. 
He said that the United States will pay a heavy price in damaged Latin American 
relations if it leaves "a lot of wreckage behind." 
Republican National Committee Chairman Lee Atwater insisted that he sees no 
possible political downside to the Panama operation. But the President himself 
recognizes he may yet confront political fallout that is not all positive. 
At a White House news conference Friday, Bush expressed concern that U.S.-Latin 
American relations may have been adversely affected. He pledged to campaign 
personally and send Vice President Dan Quayle on a mission to Latin American 
countries to try to repair any damage. And he emphasized that he has given 
"major priority" to revitalizing Panama's economy and providing the country 
with humanitarian assistance. 
Nothing to Say' 
The President, who has said he is not concerned about the possibility of any 
embarrassing disclosures at a trial of Noriega, suddenly turned prickly when a 
reporter asked whether he had been aware of any drug trafficking by Noriega 
from 1981 to 1986, the period when a federal indictment alleges that the 
Panamanian was involved in a drug conspiracy. 
Declaring that he had made statements on that subject in the past and did not 
want to "even inadvertently prejudice" the case against Noriega, Bush told the 
reporter: "So punch it in the computer, and I'll have nothing more to say about 
it." 
In the past Bush has said that he did not know Noriega was suspected of drug 
trafficking until the Panamanian was indicted in February, 1988. Bush has 
denounced as "total lies" rumors of a secret Noriega-Bush connection. 
As CIA director during the Ford Administration and later as vice president, 
Bush did have an official relationship with Noriega. But the President has 
pointed out that it was the Ronald Reagan-Bush administration "that brought 
this man to justice." 
The Noriega case notwithstanding -- and its final resolution may be a year or 
more away -- leaders of both parties say that Bush has reaped a rich political 
harvest from the military operation. 
"He knocked the question about being timid and a wimp out of the stadium," 
declared GOP chairman Atwater. "He listed four goals for the invasion -- 
protecting American lives, restoring democracy in Panama, protecting U.S. 
rights under the Panama Canal Treaty and capturing Noriega -- and he completed 
the mission. It was an absolute jackpot. The biggest single problem in America 
is drugs and the President just nabbed the king of the drug kingpins." 
Political observers of both parties said that scenes of Panamanians cheering 
American troops and denouncing Noriega while officials of the Vatican embassy 
were pressuring him to surrender cast the U.S. invasion -- and therefore Bush 
-- in a highly favorable light. 
"The President went up against a guy everybody thinks is a scumbag and with the 
papal nuncio working against the guy, too, it had the imprimatur of rightness 
to it," said James Lake, a Washington consultant who was a senior official in 
Bush's presidential campaign. "And the Panamanians cheering the American 
soldiers showed the President did the right thing for the right reason." 
Although some Democrats suggested that a prolonged American occupation of 
Panama could cause political problems for Bush, a GOP strategist cited a party 
poll which showed that 77% of Americans favor keeping U.S. troops in the 
country "until we are sure the new government is in control even though it may 
be several months." Only 14% said that the troops should be withdrawn "in a 
week or so." 
Former Democratic Party Chairman Robert Strauss, who opposed the invasion and 
who said that it may still emerge as a political issue, nonetheless declared 
that it is an immediate political windfall for Bush and caps "a very good first 
year" for him as President. Agreed former Chairman John White: "Bush is on a 
real high right now and there's no question but it's a political plus." 
Although Democratic Chairman Ron Brown said "we have to applaud (that) we 
played a role in restoring democracy in our hemisphere," he cautioned that any 
long-term analysis "is very premature at this point." 
"Atwater grossly overstates the case," he said. "Most responsible people have 
tried to assess the operation in a nonpartisan way. It's too early to tell what 
the real consequences are. A lot depends on how the new government makes the 
transition. A lot will depend on the Noriega trial and how that proceeds." 
However, two prominent Washington-based Democratic consultants, Peter Hart, and 
Greg Schneiders, said that they see plenty of political gain and little or no 
downside for Bush. 
"Americans accomplished what they needed to, and the President directed the 
operation and he became the beneficiary of it," Hart said. "More than just the 
political gain is what it does for the President's self-confidence. He has to 
feel very good about it. The sense of self-mastery he gets from it should be 
important as he handles other crises." 
Said Schneiders: "It's an unquestionable gain for him." 
