ROBITAILLE, GRETZKY TOP ALL-STARS 
Los Angeles' Luc Robitaille outpolled his more famous teammate, Wayne Gretzky, 
for the second consecutive year to lead all vote-getters today in balloting for 
the Campbell Conference starting team in the 41st NHL All-Star Game. 
Robitaille, a left wing who leads the Kings with 31 goals, received 298,914 
votes in fan balloting for the Jan. 21 game at the Pittsburgh Civic Arena. His 
vote total was more than three times the number received by runner-up Gerard 
Gallant of Detroit. 
"I'm pretty happy. It's always a surprise," Robitaille said. "I guess I picked 
the right position as a kid, left wing. It's always fun to be there." 
Gretzky, who broke Gordie Howe's career scoring record earlier this season and 
leads the NHL in scoring, had 276,980 votes, more than twice as many as 
Detroit's Steve Yzerman. 
Robitaille and Gretzky were joined on the starting team by two members of the 
defending Stanley Cup champion Calgary Flames, goaltender Mike Vernon and 
defenseman Al MacInnis, as well as right wing Brett Hull of St. Louis and 
defenseman Kevin Lowe of Edmonton. 
Vernon received 216,448 votes, beating out Edmonton's Grant Fuhr to earn his 
first All-Star start. MacInnis, last spring's playoff MVP, led all defensemen 
with 218,000 votes, followed by Lowe, one of eight Oilers on the ballot, with 
187,091. Steve Duchesne of the Kings was third, less than 5,300 votes behind 
Lowe. 
Gretzky was happy for Lowe, his long-time teammate with the Oilers, and 
Robitaille, a teammate since the trade that sent Gretzky to Los Angeles in 
August, 1988. 
"Kevin works hard every game and comes to win every game. It's great to see the 
fans recognize his contributions," Gretzky said. "Luc is having a great year, 
31 goals. What else do you need to say?" 
Of his own selection, Gretzky said, "It's nice of the fans. I just come out to 
play every night. All-Star games are fun." 
Hull, son of Hall of Famer Bobby Hull, has 35 goals, tying him with Pat 
LaFontaine for the league lead. He was tops among right wings with 248,024 
votes, edging Edmonton's Jari Kurri, who got 230,565. Kurri became the 25th 
player in NHL history to reach 1,000 career points when he had a goal and two 
assists in a 6-4 victory over Hull and the Blues Tuesday night. 
The Wales Conference starters, announced Tuesday, include Pittsburgh center 
Mario Lemieux and defenseman Paul Coffey, Boston defenseman Ray Bourque and 
right wing Cam Neely, Montreal goaltender Patrick Roy and Philadelphia left 
wing Brian Propp. 
Wales Coach Pat Burns of Montreal and Campbell Coach Terry Crisp of Calgary 
will select the rest of the 20-man rosters. Each of the 21 NHL teams must have 
at least one representative. 
