BOTTOM LINE PUSHED COUNTY TO SETTLE SUIT BY LANDSLIDE VICTIMS 
Los Angeles County faced economic disaster if it continued to resist settling 
with 240 landslide victims on Big Rock Mesa in Malibu, but it still took some 
intense lobbying of county officials to arrive at a tentative $97-million 
agreement, several of the chief negotiators said Wednesday. 
The county faced costs of more than $200 million if it lost a massive trial 
scheduled to begin next month, plus another $20 million in legal fees if the 
case lasted more than three years as expected. 
Eventually, the county yielded, both because of the costs it faced and from 
pressure to settle from the California Department of Transportation and dozens 
of insurance firms, which had already suffered huge financial setbacks in the 
case. 
'Economic Hemorrhaging' 
"It was a case where the bottom line became how to stop the economic 
hemorrhaging," said attorney Al Buckner, who represented several of the 
insurance companies. "Ultimately, it became a numbers game." 
The settlement announced Tuesday ended nearly five years of litigation to 
decide who was responsible for the damage to and destruction of 250 Malibu 
homes during a 1983 landslide. Under the terms, the county will pay the 
property owners $35 million, Caltrans will furnish $40 million and the 
insurance companies will contribute the remaining $22 million. 
Particularly persuasive in the negotiations was attorney Karl Samuelian, one of 
Gov. George Deukmejian's chief fund-raisers who was hired by the county to work 
on the case last year, and the Superior Court judge in the case, Robert I. 
Weil. 
Weil, who has been trying to get a settlement in the Big Rock case for more 
than three years, is credited by all the lawyers in the case with breaking the 
log jam. He interrupted a vacation to attend the key settlement meeting last 
week. 
"Maybe it was the Christmas spirit or maybe it was the holidays, but somehow 
they all decided that maybe it would be wise to abandon these extreme 
positions," Weil said. "I'm paid to do only one thing, and that's keep the puck 
out of the net. The net is going to trial. 
"When all the sides looked at what they faced, it was my job to show them that 
it might be better (to settle) than slugging it out for three or four years. 
This settlement fits what I call the equal-stink test, where if everyone thinks 
it stinks a little and is a little unhappy with it, then it's probably the 
right settlement. I think that's what we have here." 
Samuelian presented his case to the Board of Supervisors during a closed 
meeting Tuesday, emerging with the final piece needed to swing the deal. 
'Uncertainty' Cited 
"The cost of the defense and the uncertainty of what the future would bring, I 
think, culminated in the settlement," Samuelian said. "I was one of the few 
people in a detached position who could assess the case in global terms." 
The homeowners had sued the county and the state for approving development of 
Big Rock Mesa with seepage pits and horizontal drains rather than sewers. They 
claimed that the county's action contributed to a rise in ground water that 
triggered the September, 1983, landslide. 
The county responded by filing more than 300 countersuits against past and 
present Big Rock Mesa homeowners, arguing that property owners caused the slide 
by allowing water to build up from septic tanks, showers and toilets instead of 
following drainage procedures. 
The tentative settlement will erase the need for the massive trial with more 
than 275 lawyers involved. 
It also means that none of the parties involved will have to admit 
responsibility for the landslide at a time when the homeowners' attorneys said 
they had some explosive evidence to show a jury. The lawyers said they could 
show from internal county memos that county officials were aware of the 
potential danger to Big Rock homeowners and failed to warn them two years 
before the landslide struck and turned some million-dollar homes into rubble. 
However, the homeowners were ready for a settlement, said Richard Norton, one 
of the homeowners' lead attorneys. 
"There was a series of interdependent pieces that had to fall into place before 
we could reach an agreement," he said. "But the key factor in all this is that 
the case had grown to a point where it had become completely unmanageable. It 
was beyond control in both its size and its cost." 
Combatants in the massive legal struggle point to a meeting held in Santa 
Monica on Dec. 29 as one of the turning points in the proposed settlement 
although that was not the meeting's initial purpose. 
It was held to find a way for the attorneys to reach a settlement involving 16 
additional Big Rock Mesa homeowners who had declined to participate in the 
settlement. Those property owners are still trying to reach a separate 
agreement. 
Six at Meeting 
Present at the meeting was Judge Weil and five attorneys representing 170 of 
the homeowners' insurance companies involved in the case: Buckner, Charles 
Bennett, Raoul Martinez, Jon Kodani and Gene Weisberg. The meeting came three 
days after Weil spent most of Dec. 26 on the phone with settlement lawyers, 
trying to get them to agree to specific payment figures for the homeowners. 
Although parts of the settlement had already been worked out, the attorneys 
spent all day in Kodani's law office trying to figure out a way to achieve a 
"global" agreement that would finally dispense with the entire case. 
The lawyers were reluctant to strike a deal that left out the 16 holdout 
homeowners but decided to work through lunch and ended up spending nearly eight 
hours conferring and arguing. They made more than a dozen calls to Norton and 
to Peter Anderson, an attorney in Samuelian's firm. 
By the end of the day, a tentative settlement had been reached, dependent on 
the county's approval of the $35 million the following Tuesday. The county's 
offer, in turn, was based on the insurers agreeing to add $22 million to the 
pot. Caltrans had already said its settlement cost was based on the county's 
decision to pay a certain amount. The attorneys reluctantly agreed to leave the 
other 16 homeowners out of the settlement and resolve as much of the case as 
they could. 
"But for that week and that meeting, we would still be sitting in a settlement 
conference," Buckner said. "By the time we broke, we knew we had a deal. As 
long as everybody did what they said they would do." 
For his efforts, the lawyers gave Judge Weil one of the baseball caps they had 
made with an emblem of a leaking toilet. The emblem is inscribed, "The Battling 
Bastards of Big Rock." 
KEY FIGURES IN THE BIG ROCK AGREEMENT 
Karl Samuelian, of Parker, Milliken, Clark, O'Hara &amp; Samuelian. Gov. 
Deukmejian's chief fund-raiser. Samuelian, an attorney hired by the county, is 
credited with persuading the county counsel's office and the Board of 
Supervisors to settle for $35 million. 
Superior Court Judge Robert I. Weil. Weil is credited by all with getting the 
players to come up with the final money figures they needed to reach a 
settlement. He took calls day and night. 
Al Buckner of Simon, Buckner &amp; Haile. Buckner represented seven insurance 
firms for 21 Big Rock homeowners; was one of the six attorneys involved in a 
key settlement meeting. 
