HOME TECH / WHAT'S NEW : YEAR STARTS OFF WITH POWERFUL DRAMAS ON SOCIAL STRIFE; 
THIS WEEK'S MOVIES 
Topping many critics' best-of-'89 lists, Spike Lee's provocative "Do the Right 
Thing" (MCA, $89.95, R) is a controversial drama concerning racial tensions on 
a summer day in New York's Bedford-Stuyvesant community. The cast includes 
Danny Aiello, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee and Lee himself. "The Women of Brewster 
Place" (J2, $79.95 for the two-cassette set) is a 180-minute release that 
combines the two parts of this thoughtfully made TV movie about seven black 
women who work together to improve their lives. This was Oprah Winfrey's TV 
acting debut, and the filming of Gloria Naylor's novel also stars Cicely Tyson, 
Robin Givens and Paula Kelly. 
Also concerning social strife, though for the young people of Northern Ireland, 
is "Children in the Crossfire" (Vestron, $79.98), a George Schaefer-directed TV 
movie from 1984. 
Back to Hollywood-as-usual, "Pink Cadillac" (Warner, $89.95, PG-13) throws 
together Clint Eastwood and Bernadette Peters in an action-comedy about a 
skip-tracer (someone who hunts down people who skip bail) and his involvement 
with the woman he pursues. If the plot reminds you of the 1988 Robert De 
Niro-Charles Grodin film "Midnight Run," the quality probably won't. 
More Hollywood-as-usual: "Eddie and the Cruisers II: Eddie Lives!" (IVE, 
$89.95, PG-13), and "Signs of Life" (IVE, $89.95, PG-13). 
From Britain: "Paperhouse" (Vestron, $89.98, PG-13), an intelligent 1988 horror 
film starring Ben Cross and Glenne Headly, which, like the "Nightmare on Elm" 
series, has scary fun with the confusion between dreams and reality; and 
"Wonderland" (Vestron, $79.98, R), a Philip Savile-directed drama about two 
boys who witness a murder. 
OTHER NEW VIDEOS 
Two excellent 100-minute documentaries shown on PBS, "W.C. Fields Straight Up" 
(narrated by Dudley Moore) and "The Marx Brothers in a Nutshell" (narrated by 
Gene Kelly), lovingly survey the careers of some of the funniest performers who 
ever lived, with generous film clips. They're $59.98 each from Vestron. TERRY 
ATKINSON 
