BUSH EXPECTED TO CALL FOR PLANTING BILLIONS OF TREES 
President Bush is expected to unveil a national tree planting campaign next 
week, proposing the government join private citizens and businesses in planting 
billions of trees to beautify communities, combat erosion and fight the 
greenhouse effect, Administration sources said Tuesday. 
The plan, calling for $175 million in federal spending during the upcoming 
fiscal year, will be offered as part of an "America the Beautiful" initiative 
which will also include increased funds for government land acquisition and 
protection of national parks and forests, the sources said. 
Details will be made public when the Administration budget is sent to Congress 
on Monday, and perhaps will be embellished in Bush's State of the Union speech 
Wednesday. 
Environmentalists were generally reluctant to comment on the initiative until 
they see its details. 
But George M. Woodwell, director and founder of the Woods Hole Research Center 
in Massachusetts, said it appears to only be "a useful palliative, a mere 
palliative." To have an impact on the greenhouse effect and the warming of the 
Earth's atmosphere, he said, the over-arching problem of fossil fuel use must 
be addressed. 
Sources familiar with the plan said it will call for the government to support 
the forestation of lands endangered by erosion and the creation of "energy 
parks." 
While the program will be carried out largely by the Agriculture Department's 
National Forest Service, it has been pushed by the Environmental Protection 
Agency as an element of a pollution prevention strategy and as a step to fight 
the greenhouse effect largely caused by the emission of carbon dioxide. 
The Administration also intends the program to be a message to Third World 
countries where the massive destruction of forests makes a substantial 
contribution to the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. U.S. criticism of rain 
forest destruction has been met by charges that the United States is guilty of 
destroying its own forests by encouraging timber exports. 
The Administration's initiative comes as private groups and organizations such 
as the American Forestry Assn. have already made successful strides in 
increasing reforestation efforts. 
Estimates are that 2 million trees have been planted in the last two years, and 
there has apparently been a small gain in acreage in forests, but data on tree 
harvests is scanty. 
The new Administration program has been under consideration for months. The 
American Forestry Assn. has urged that efforts be focused on urban and 
community programs, and the planting of trees for windbreaks, shelter belts and 
along stream channels. 
Under present programs, the Forest Service spends about $20 million per year on 
reforestation of public lands and supporting tree planting as part of the 
Agriculture Department's soil conservation efforts. In addition, as much as $35 
million a year is available from a trust fund supported by tariffs on forest 
products, and is used to protect and enhance existing timber stands. 
Altogether, about 490,000 acres are replanted by the government annually. 
