DRIVER WHO HIT TRAIN BLAMES CITY OF TORRANCE FOR LACK OF WARNINGS 
If the city of Torrance had installed warning lights or gates at a railroad 
crossing in the downtown area, Eda Miller says, she never would have driven her 
car into a train. 
The 58-year-old Los Angeles resident strained her back and broke several ribs 
when she drove her car into an Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway train 
Dec. 12 on Alaska Avenue. 
Last week, Miller filed a claim with the city, blaming it for her injuries and 
the damage to her car. She has not determined how much she wants in damages, 
she said. 
Lynn Shall, the city's risk management technician, said she could not comment 
until the traffic department finishes its investigation. City Manager LeRoy 
Jackson said the state Public Utilities Commission is responsible for 
installing warning lights at railroad crossings. 
Miller, a quality assurance inspector for a mechanical parts manufacturer in 
the area, said she was on her way to a meeting about noon when she approached 
the railroad tracks on Alaska near Maricopa Street. Miller said the street was 
busy, and she was watching for cars pulling out in front of her. 
"I just plain didn't hear it or see it," she said. "The next thing I knew, the 
train was in front of me." 
Miller said she was going 20 to 25 m.p.h. when she hit the slow-moving train, 
which was on a spur serving the industrial area. Her car was pushed to the 
opposite side of the street, nearly 20 feet from the point of impact. 
"It scared the daylights out of me," she said. 
Miller said that her car was wrecked beyond repair and that her injuries have 
kept her from returning to work since the accident. She said she expects to go 
back next week. 
She was cited for failure to yield the right of way, she said. 
Denise Cohen, a paralegal for Miller's attorney, said Miller will probably ask 
the city to pay for her medical bills, the damage to her car and lost wages. 
Cohen said Miller is also seeking unspecified damages from the railroad, 
alleging that the train operator failed to blow a whistle or give any other 
signal as it approached the intersection. 
Santa Fe officials said federal law requires all train operators to sound a 
whistle when crossing a roadway, but would not comment further. 
A security officer who said he was working at a nearby plant at the time of the 
accident disagreed, saying the train was blowing its whistle and ringing a bell 
as it crossed the intersection. 
The security officer, who would not give his name, said he did not see the 
collision but was less than 20 feet away when it occurred. 
"The train was blowin' its horn and ringing the bell and everything," he said. 
"I heard the horn and bells, and then I heard this big bang." 
Sgt. Steve Ross of the Police Department's traffic department said accidents 
involving trains and automobiles occur "very, very seldom" in Torrance. "The 
last one I heard about was about 10 years ago." 
