LABOR: UAW FACTION ERECTS ROADBLOCK TO INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY 
A disturbing counterrevolution is being mounted in the United Auto Workers 
against the union's drive toward industrial democracy. 
After 54 years as a leading force in the UAW, Victor Reuther is now a furious 
leader of the battle against the union's cautious acceptance of a plan that 
gives rank-and-file workers a significant voice in making decisions about the 
way their companies are run. 
Reuther, 77, the retired brother of the late UAW founder Walter Reuther, is not 
alone. Other present and former UAW leaders are denouncing the idea and want to 
return to the traditional adversarial relations between management and labor. 
But most officers of the 1-million-member union finally have accepted the plan 
that allows workers to join managers as decision makers. It is such a great 
idea that the counterrevolutionaries should have almost no chance of forcing 
the union to cling to the old confrontational ways that were indispensable when 
all companies struggled unceasingly to prevent unionization. 
Where industrial democracy has been tried, even on a limited scale, its success 
usually has ranged from slight to phenomenal. Total failures have been rare. 
Still, controversy swirls around it, and the next major battlefield for the 
counterrevolutionaries will be on the convention floor of the UAW convention in 
Anaheim in June when the union will elect officers and debate its future. 
The dissidents are almost certain to reelect one of their most articulate 
spokesmen, Jerry Tucker, as a regional director. They hope to add momentum to 
their cause by electing more officers to top posts, or at least get enough 
support to slow the real progress being made in democratizing the workplace. 
Before the national convention battle, there will be a small but interesting 
test of the dissidents' strength. UAW members in Van Nuys will vote today for a 
new shop chairman, a top union job. 
However, the outcome will not be a clean-cut decision on the popularity of 
workplace power-sharing systems. 
True, one candidate, Paul Goldner, opposes the system. The other candidate, 
Richard Ruppert, supports it. Presumably, a victory for Ruppert would be a 
defeat for the counterrevolutionaries. 
But a key factor influencing the vote could well be the failure of General 
Motors executives in Detroit to tell the Van Nuys workers everything about the 
widely rumored plan to shut down the facility soon. Many workers may vote 
against the candidate supporting industrial democracy because of their 
frustration with GM secrecy. 
Mutual trust and complete honesty at all levels are essential ingredients in 
true labor-management cooperation. 
Yet the critical decision on the life or death of the jobs of 3,800 GM workers 
in Van Nuys is being made, in secret, in the executive suites in Detroit. 
As part of the new power-sharing system, the Van Nuys workers already have new 
supervisorial roles and full information about the financial condition and 
productivity of the local facility. 
It will be difficult, but perhaps the workers will understand that the 
demeaning, foolish blackout imposed by top corporate executives about their 
tentative plans for Van Nuys does not invalidate the strides already made 
toward workplace democracy. 
Workers should not turn away from workplace democracy by voting for people who 
would take a step backward. Instead, it must be vigorously pursued to help 
assure the future of the Van Nuys plant and to end the undemocratic way 
executives in Detroit are dealing with issues such as plant closure. 
Potential management abuses of the system are always there. Some companies use 
minimal power-sharing as a ruse to trick employees into working harder for less 
money. Some non-union firms use it to persuade workers they don't need a union 
to protect their interests even though management actually reserves almost 
totalitarian control of the workplace. 
But most UAW leaders say the need for increasing workplace democracy is so 
important that they are ready to accept the risks. 
Reuther fumes that many UAW leaders are "selling out the workers' interests for 
some illusory tidbits of power they gain for themselves." 
He accuses most UAW officials of promoting the idea of workplace democracy by 
"brain-washing the members because our leaders haven't the guts to stand up and 
fight the greed of corporate America." 
But Douglas Fraser, a highly respected past UAW president, says men such as 
Victor Reuther, Tucker and other "reactionary foes of labor-management 
cooperation are prisoners of history. They are stuck in the past and see no 
alternative to the old way of just slugging it out with management." 
Bruce Lee, UAW Western regional director and an architect of the highly 
successful cooperative team system at the GM-Toyota plant in Fremont, Calif., 
is certain that "the old-fashioned radicals will be defeated because the old 
ways just don't work. We must watch out for management trickery, but learn to 
work cooperatively with management and work smarter, not harder." 
Reuther is convinced that men such as Lee will be "surprised as hell, by God, 
when the floodgates break and workers show they no longer trust the leaders who 
are betraying them." 
Union activist Eric Mann says the cooperative system is badly flawed because 
"the long-term interests of the working class and business class are inherently 
in opposition to each other." 
That sounds like old radical philosophy about inevitable class conflict. Of 
course, the interests of workers and owners are not identical. 
But they are not diametrically opposed, either, and new tactics and strategies 
are needed to give workers more power and a sense of dignity that they rarely 
have had before. 
Industrial democracy offers the best hope so far to achieve that admirable 
goal. 
