SECORD GETS PROBATION, CALLS REAGAN COWARDLY; 
IRAN-CONTRA: THE FORMER GENERAL ADMITS HE MISLED CONGRESS. THE JUDGE DECIDES 
PRISON WOULD BE TOO HARSH. 
Richard V. Secord, who ran the shadowy enterprise set up to channel money from 
Iran arms sales to the Contras in Nicaragua, was sentenced to two years' 
probation Wednesday. 
The former Air Force major general faced up to five years in jail, but U.S. 
District Judge Aubrey E. Robinson Jr. said that prison would be too harsh a 
punishment. 
Secord pleaded guilty to one felony count of misleading Congress as part of a 
plea bargain that resulted in the dismissal of 11 other charges. Also, Robinson 
ordered Secord to pay a fee of $50, the minimum required for all defendants who 
plead guilty in federal court. 
Robinson said it was his judgment that there had already "been punishment in 
this case," an apparent reference to Secord's contention that he had spent a 
great deal of his own funds for his defense and has been unemployed in the two 
years since being charged. 
Hours after he left the courtroom, an unrepentant and defiant Secord called a 
press conference to announce a nationwide fund-raising campaign to challenge 
the constitutionality of the independent counsel system that prosecuted him and 
seven others in the Iran-Contra scandal. 
In addition, he berated former President Ronald Reagan, calling him a coward 
who ducked responsibility for the consequences of a covert program initiated to 
support Reagan's own foreign policy. 
"I've been involved in this witch hunt for too long to stop now," he said. "It 
is not in my nature. I am trying to shift over a little bit . . . from the 
defense to the offense." 
Secord's two years of probation was the same as the penalty imposed on 
Iran-Contra defendants sentenced previously. However, former White House 
National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane was also fined $20,000 and 
ordered to perform 200 hours of community service. And former Lt. Col. Oliver 
L. North was fined $150,000 and ordered to perform 1,200 hours of service. 
North was convicted of three crimes, including aiding and abetting an 
obstruction of Congress, altering and destroying National Security Council 
documents and accepting an illegal gratuity from Secord, a home security 
system. McFarlane pleaded guilty to four counts of withholding information from 
Congress in connection with inquiries about whether secret assistance was going 
to the Contras. 
Secord sounded contrite when he addressed Robinson just before the judge 
imposed sentence. "I deeply regret not having been more candid with the 
investigators of the Congress," he told the judge. "If there was any way to 
correct this, I surely would. I'll regret it for the rest of my life." 
He pleaded guilty to telling congressional investigators he was unaware that 
any money in the Iran-Contra affair had benefited North personally. Secord paid 
for North's $13,800 home security system and established a fund for the 
education of North's children with proceeds of his Iran-Contra enterprise. 
The 11 counts that were dismissed as a result of the plea bargain included 
broad charges of conspiracy, theft of government property, mail fraud and 
perjury. 
In imposing sentence, Robinson said: "The necessity for incarceration does not 
exist by virtue of the offense for which he was permitted to enter a plea of 
guilty." 
At his press conference, Secord insisted that his answers to investigators had 
been literally true, but misleading. He admitted that he knew what the 
investigators wanted to know and should have leveled with them because, if he 
had, "I would have avoided all of this." 
But he expressed no regrets for his part in the covert operation that sent 
overpriced weapons to Iran and diverted the proceeds into a fund for the 
Contras at a time when U.S. law prohibited the expenditure of public funds to 
support the Nicaraguan rebels. 
"I don't think there was anything illegal going on," he said. "I thought at the 
time I was doing the President's bidding in a covert operation." 
Reid H. Weingarten, the prosecutor who handled the case for independent counsel 
Lawrence E. Walsh, urged Robinson to sentence Secord more harshly than 
McFarlane or North, who he said had acted out of a sense of "misguided 
patriotism." 
He said Secord misled investigators only to save his own skin. "This is the 
stuff of routine felonies," Weingarten said. 
The charge of misleading Congress was similar to the one brought against former 
Atty. Gen. Richard G. Kleindienst for his part in the Watergate scandal 15 
years ago. In 1974, Kleindienst was sentenced to a suspended one-month jail 
term and a $100 fine. 
Rita Lavelle, a former Environmental Protection Agency official, was sentenced 
in 1984 to six months in prison and fined $10,000 for lying to Congress about 
the Superfund toxic-waste cleanup program. 
In a more recent case, Michael K. Deaver, former President Reagan's close 
friend and adviser, was given a suspended three-year sentence in 1988 for three 
counts of lying to Congress and a grand jury about using his influence on 
behalf of high-paying private clients after leaving office. Deaver was also 
ordered to perform 1,500 hours of community service and fined $100,000. 
At his press conference, Secord said he intended to raise money to sponsor a 
new test of the constitutionality of the Watergate-era law that calls for the 
appointment of independent counsels to prosecute government corruption cases in 
which the Justice Department might have a conflict of interest. 
He conceded that the U.S. Supreme Court has already ruled that the statute is 
constitutional, but he said the issue must be "readdressed and readdressed 
until favorable rulings can be had." 
Secord said he believes that the money left from his now-defunct Iran-Contra 
enterprise is "something over $8 million." Although some is in Swiss bank 
accounts, he said that he is uncertain about the exact location of some of the 
funds. 
During hearings two years ago, members of Congress suggested that the money be 
reclaimed by the United States, but the government has taken no official 
actions to regain the funds. Secord insisted that he would not claim them 
either and said he has already collected "something over $240,000" in fees for 
his services in running the business side of the Iran-Contra scheme. 
Secord said he has no evidence that President Bush played a role in the 
scandal. But he was bitter about Reagan and former Atty. Gen. Edwin Meese III. 
"I think President Reagan has been hiding out," he said. "I think it's 
cowardly." 
As for Meese, Secord said that the former attorney general disclosed to the 
press the diversion of funds to the Contras and called for an independent 
counsel "in panic and out of ignorance . . . . He had all of his facts wrong." 
THE PRICE OF MISLEADING CONGRESS 
Iran-Contra defendants: 
Richard V. Secord -- retired Air Force major general. 
Case: Pleaded guilty to making a false statement to congressional investigators 
when he said he wasn't aware of any money that went to the benefit of Oliver L. 
North from the maze of companies known as "the Enterprise" that he had used in 
the Iran-Contra affair. 
Sentence: On Wednesday, he was sentenced to two years' probation and was 
asessed a $50 fee. 
Oliver L. North -- former National Security Council aide. 
Case: Found guilty by a jury of three felonies -- aiding and abetting the 
obstruction of Congress, destroying official documents and accepting an illegal 
gratuity. 
Sentence: 1989 -- two years' probation, fined $150,000 and ordered to perform 
1,200 hours of community service. Appealing fine and probation while serving 
the community service in an anti-drug program. 
Robert C. McFarlane -- former national security adviser. 
Case: Pleaded guilty to four misdemeanors involving withholding information 
from Congress while helping move supplies to the Nicaraguan rebels and denying 
that he knew anything about third-country financing of the Contras. 
Sentence: 1988 -- two years' probation, fined $20,000 and ordered to serve 200 
hours of community service. 
Defendants in other cases: 
Richard G. Kleindienst -- former attorney general. 
Case: Pleaded guilty in a Watergate-related case to a misdemeanor charge of not 
having testified accurately in Senate confirmation hearing. 
Sentence: 1974 -- suspended one-month jail term and $100 fine. 
Rita Lavelle -- former Environmental Protection Agency official. 
Case: Convicted on four counts in connection with lying to Congress about her 
handling of the government's $1.6-billion toxic waste cleanup. 
Sentence: 1984 -- six months in prison and fined $10,000. She was released from 
prison after serving four months. 
Michael K. Deaver -- former adviser to President Ronald Reagan. 
Case: Convicted of lying to a House committee about lobbying for big companies 
after leaving the White House. 
Sentence: 1988 -- suspended three-year sentence, fined $100,000 and ordered to 
do 1,500 hours of community service in alcoholism programs. 
