1,000 FEARED DEAD IN SOVIET ASIAN QUAKE, MUDSLIDES 
Rescuers worked feverishly Monday, but with little hope of finding survivors, 
after the second major earthquake in less than two months jolted the south of 
the Soviet Union, triggering a mudslide that buried parts of two villages and 
an estimated 1,000 people under a 50-foot layer of earth and rock. 
Officials stressed that the casualty toll was preliminary since the disaster 
had wiped out roads, bridges, power and telephone lines, making it impossible 
to reach several other villages in the mountainous area of Tadzhikistan. At one 
point Monday, Radio Moscow put the death toll at 1,415. 
Tass, the official Soviet news agency, said that at its epicenter, the tremor 
measured 7 on the 12-point Soviet scale, the rough equivalent of a magnitude 
5.4 quake by Western measurements. 
Last month's devastating earthquake that killed at least 25,000 people in 
Soviet Armenia, near the Turkish border, registered 10 on the Soviet scale, or 
magnitude 6.9. 
That giant quake also left 500,000 people homeless. And officials in the 
Armenian capital of Yerevan revealed Monday that, based on geologic phenomena 
that could "portend a dangerous release of energy accumulated in the Earth's 
crust," the population has been warned about possible new shocks to come. 
Tass said the latest temblor was centered 20 to 30 miles southwest of Dushanbe, 
capital of the Central Asian Soviet republic of Tadzhikistan. 
"Cries and wails can be heard everywhere," the news agency reported in a 
dispatch from the area. "Some are bemoaning and burying their relatives and 
near ones, while others are trying to find the few survivors beneath the thick 
layer of sand and clay." 
State television showed film Monday evening of dozens of local men dodging the 
bucket of a heavy bulldozer as they tried with picks and shovels to help dig 
through the fast-drying mud. 
Others dressed in traditional, calf-length padded robes and square, embroidered 
skullcaps carried away a body in what appeared to be a funeral procession. 
State television reported only 104 people being treated in hospitals more than 
18 hours after the quake. Most of those were apparently injured when their 
adobe houses and other buildings collapsed from the quake. 
Those in the path of the giant mudslides apparently had little hope. Novosti 
News Agency correspondent Rima Alekseeva said in a telephone interview from 
Dushanbe that fewer than 10 people had been pulled alive from the mud by Monday 
afternoon, and they were lucky to have been at the outer edge of the 
devastation. 
The worst hit was reportedly the village of Sharora, where at least 100 of 150 
homes were completely or partially buried by a murky wall of mud and debris 
measuring more than a mile across at its widest point. 
The village had grown up around an experimental farm, according to the 
government newspaper Izvestia, and it butted up against a high earthen mound. 
"Rains and wet snow, falling almost incessantly in the last weeks, 
significantly weakened the soil," the newspaper said. And when the quake struck 
at about 5 a.m. local time Monday, the earth gave way. 
In the Tadzhikistan village of Okuli-olo, Tass quoted Hairrulo Yuldashev, head 
of the local cooperative farm, as saying that 70 homes had been demolished by 
Monday's quake. State television film from the settlement showed adobe-type, 
one- and two-story buildings that looked as if they had been crushed like 
cookies in some giant, unseen hand. 
Panels of corrugated metal that had once been roofs lay scattered like a 
dropped deck of playing cards. The gnarled roots of a large tree swept along by 
a mudslide protruded grotesquely from the dirt and rubble. 
"The natural calamity has also battered several other villages of the 
district," Tass reported. "The number of killed was estimated at 1,000 by the 
close of the day, but this is a preliminary figure as yet. Rescue work is being 
continued and distant mountain villages have not been checked yet." 
The disaster also killed "thousands of head of publicly owned cattle," Tass 
said, and buried "thousands of hectares of fertile plow-land." 
Izvestia quoted local officials as saying rescue operations began within two 
hours of Monday's earthquake and that military units and teams of doctors, some 
from as far away as Moscow, were taking part. Heavy excavators, bulldozers and 
cranes were rushed to the scene from nearby Dushanbe. 
Tass said that 35 special medical brigades were sent from Dushanbe to the 
disaster area within hours of the quake. A group of specialists also set off 
from several Moscow institutes and others were standing by, it said. 
One village jolted by the quake but apparently not badly damaged was Nurek, 
home to one of the world's highest dams, a 984-foot-tall structure filled with 
compressed clay. The dam, completed in 1980, is almost a mile thick at its base 
and was built especially to withstand strong earthquakes. There was no 
indication that it was damaged. 
Novosti correspondent Alekseeva said that officials in Dushanbe saw no reason 
at this point to seek international relief, although both France and West 
Germany were reported by Tass to have offered assistance. 
In Washington, Soviet Ambassador Yuri V. Dubinin, after a meeting with acting 
Secretary of State Michael H. Armacost, said the United States has offered to 
help and that he would cable Moscow asking if the assistance was needed. 
In the much larger Armenian earthquake, which felled multistory apartment 
blocks, a lack of heavy equipment hampered relief efforts and is believed to 
have resulted in the deaths of untold numbers of victims who might have 
survived had rescuers been able to clear away the rubble fast enough to reach 
them. 
