PUTTING A PREMIUM ON HEALTH CARE 
Gov. George Deukmejian's Administration is making good on his commitment of 
Jan. 9 to draft legislation "which addresses the health care needs of the 
uninsured." His staff is now circulating a draft plan that holds real promise, 
although it may fall short of his own goal of universal coverage. 
Drafted by the Health and Welfare Agency, the plan has yet to be endorsed by 
Deukmejian, but it clearly will expedite the work of a task force that he and 
the Legislature created last year to develop a health plan by March. 
Three fundamental problems still require careful study: funding, mandates and 
cost containment. 
Still short on details, the new plan appears to rely on a mixture of premiums, 
to be paid by both workers and employers, tax incentives and subsidies, with an 
expanded Medi-Cal program as backup. Reliance on Medi-Cal could be a problem; 
the system is already over-used and under-funded. The report suggests a 15% 
increase in reimbursement rates paid to doctors, but that would not begin to 
correct the underpayments that have kept doctors and dentists from providing 
services and have driven hospitals out of Medi-Cal. 
In place of a mandate for universal insurance for all workers, the draft gives 
employers who don't provide insurance the option of paying health-care expenses 
of their workers and their dependents directly. That may be as good a way as 
any to implement universal coverage for the work force. 
Cost containment features of the plan do not yet appear fully developed. This 
is a sensitive issue with doctors and hospitals, who generally resist 
constraints on their discretion, but employers and insurance companies are 
right in making cost controls an essential element of any plan. Fortunately for 
the task force, there is a growing body of research demonstrating effective 
ways to control costs. But medical inflation figures show how little has been 
accomplished. 
Under the draft, all health-insurance payments beyond those covering basic 
benefits would be taxable and health-insurance premiums would no longer be 
fully deductible as a business expense. Alain Enthoven, a leading health-care 
economist at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, has long proposed this 
latter reform to discourage excessive coverage that can drive up medical costs. 
The cost of the plan is not calculated as yet. The range of premiums dramatizes 
the disparities in coverage implicit in the plan, with monthly costs ranging 
from $85 for Medi-Cal coverage to $128 for private fee-for-service coverage. 
Premium subsidies for low-income employees and tax credits for their employers 
would add to the cost to the state. There probably would be an overall saving, 
however, as broader insurance coverage resulted in better prevention and 
primary health care, reducing the high costs associated with postponement of 
treatment. 
As now written, the draft appears to fall short in two ways. It does not cover 
all 5 million uninsured Californians, leaving as many as 1 million exposed. And 
its provisions seem least effective for those most in need, imposing costs that 
the working poor may find impossible to pay and limiting benefits in ways that 
may still leave the health-care system with uncompensated care. 
But there is time to work those problems out, and the task force has talent 
enough for the job. 
