CROSSING RACIAL BARRIERS 
It would seem that Greg and Amy, both 17 and honors students at Irvine's 
University High School, are a perfect match. 
They radiate niceness, exuberance and brightness, the very model of 
well-behaved, relatively trouble-free youth. Their friends are much like them 
-- students whose interests range from Disneyland and beach picnics to American 
politics and global technology. 
For 2 months now, they have been going steady. But no matter what Amy and Greg 
(not their real names) do, no matter how societally correct they appear, there 
is an inescapable -- and physically obvious -- fact about them as a couple. 
Greg is white. Amy is Korean. 
And interracial dating in this day and age is still not a matter to be taken 
lightly. 
Interracial dating remains a societal anomaly -- a subject to be approached 
with great caution, a practice admired by some, vilified by others. 
True, there are signs that the practice is becoming more acceptable, as 
indicated by the accompanying High Life poll of students at 14 Orange County 
public and private schools. 
Nevertheless, analysts in multicultural relations and assimilation argue that 
this kind of relationship, long taboo throughout American society, remains 
light-years from being widely accepted. 
Despite the years of highly publicized integration efforts in housing and 
schools, the greater influxes of ethnic-minority immigrants, and the vanishing 
of anti-miscegenation laws, "I don't think the opposition to (interracial 
couples) has really eroded all that much," says one leading analyst, UCLA 
sociologist Harry Kitano. 
Some parents agree. 
"The kids may downplay (racism), but it's out there, as much as ever," says an 
Orange County parent whose son, who is white, is dating a black girl. "If they 
go to a restaurant, and if they hold hands or snuggle a little -- believe me, 
they get the stares, the double takes." 
And for most families, the issue of interracial couples, while a far less 
closeted practice these days, remains an intensely private matter. 
It helps explain why there are no reliable estimates on the numbers of 
teen-agers in interracial relationships. 
However, researchers believe that such interracial dating trends parallel the 
nationwide trends in interracial marriages -- greater visibility, yes, but the 
rates of growth are relatively slow. (Nationally in 1984, according to the U.S. 
Census Bureau, there were 739,000 interracial marriages in which one of the 
partners was white.) 
"There has been some growth (in interracial marriages), especially with some 
Asian groups. But overall there hasn't been a real breakthrough, a real 
dramatic increase," says Kitano, a Japanese-American and acting director of 
UCLA's Asian American Studies Center. 
And the trend in Orange County, researchers suggest, is probably even less 
prominent, at least statistically, even though the High Life poll suggests that 
interracial couples are becoming a more visible if still small phenomenon. 
"You're talking about a highly conservative county and one that is still 
overwhelmingly Anglo," says multicultural specialist Christine Hall, former 
counseling psychologist at UC Irvine's College of Medicine. 
"I question whether this kind of practice can ever really take hold in Orange 
County," says Hall, now an ethnic minorities administrator with the 
Washington-based American Psychological Assn. and herself of mixed black and 
Japanese descent. 
There is still "color" hierarchy at work in reactions to interracial couples. 
To white supremacists and other opponents, analysts say, the most taboo 
combination is still black and white, while Asian and white or 
"dark-complexioned" Latino and white are less objectionable. 
"We're literally talking color here, the visible gradations," explains Raymond 
Vagas, a Laguna Hills-based marriage therapist, who is of African and Spanish 
descent. "When you're talking 'race' in those terms, you're including 'dark' 
Hispanics." 
Psychologically, the reasons for entering an interracial relationship, 
counselors say, are exceedingly complex. 
It can involve such lofty reasons as multicultural idealism, defiance of 
tradition -- and love. It can also involve fascination with ethnic myths, with 
"opposites" and with protest chic. 
But that is one of the problems, says Vagas, whose clientele includes 
interracial couples. "There is this tendency to keep harping on what's 'wrong' 
with these couples." 
Rather, the issue should be "what's wrong with a society that refuses to accept 
these relationships as normal," says Vagas, a member of Multi-racial Americans 
of Southern California, a newly organized support group of about 200 
interracial or intercultural families. 
Indeed, the parents interviewed for this story argue that this "societal 
labeling" is a key problem. 
"The beauty of (an intercultural) relationship at their age," says one Anglo 
parent, whose son is dating an Asian, "is that they're so open and fresh now. 
They're not stuck with the labels that society -- and adults -- pin on such 
relations." 
Consider a 17-year-old couple in Santa Ana -- we'll call them Deborah and Ken. 
To them, their dating -- she is white, he is black -- is not that startling, 
especially in Santa Ana. After all, the high school population in that city is 
predominantly nonwhite: 72% Latino, 12% Asian, 7% black. 
Their backgrounds, other than racial, are notably similar. Both are from 
middle-class families. Both grew up in ethnically mixed neighborhoods. 
At their high school, their closest friends are other inter-ethnic couples, 
including Latinos, blacks and Filipinos. Mixed dating "is no big deal," Deborah 
says. "I mean, so many people are doing it, especially at our school." 
Ken is "great to be with. We kid a lot, and he's easy to talk with," says 
Deborah, who had previously dated only whites. "He's really nice. He can be 
very serious and thoughtful." 
The reactions of parents, of course, are crucial. "We know couples who don't 
dare tell their families," Deborah says. "Not us. Our parents have been real 
supportive." 
Deborah's mother says she took the news in stride. Deborah "told me she was 
going out with someone new -- a real neat guy. Then she told me, sort of 
offhanded like, that 'he's black, you know.' " 
"My concern wasn't his color, but whether he was good for her," the mother 
adds. "This is the way I've tried to raise her -- to be a person without 
prejudice, to see past color and cultural differences. This is the way it's 
supposed to be in America, right? 
"I have a snapshot now of them," the mother says. "It's always in my wallet. I 
like to show it off. Why not? They're great kids. 
"People will look at it, and say, 'My, she's very pretty.' But when they see 
him, they usually say nothing. They just stare." 
Amy, the 17-year-old Korean immigrant in Irvine, represents a dramatically new 
ethnic demographic. 
Asians are no longer a rarity in that part of south Orange County. Although the 
high school population in Irvine is still overwhelmingly white -- 76% of total 
enrollment -- the number of Asian students has grown significantly, and is now 
15%. 
Still, Amy and her white boyfriend, Greg, like to say it was good old American 
politics, not some classic East/West encounter, that drew them together. 
"We're both interested in politics and we were both Dukakis supporters," 
recalls the tall, personable Greg. With a laugh, he adds, "That makes us a 
minority, all right -- a pair of liberals in Orange County!" 
Other factors may have helped. Greg has long shown an eclectic interest in 
things Asian -- particularly ancient philosophers, films directed by Japan's 
Akira Kurosawa and dining at Oriental restaurants. 
And Amy, whose family immigrated from South Korea in 1980, has become highly 
Westernized -- her English is virtually unaccented, her dates have always been 
with Caucasians. 
In the other American regions where her family lived, like Idaho, there were no 
Korean or other Asian communities. So, explains Amy, who can project both 
shyness and vivacity, "if you went out, you dated Americans." 
Her parents, at first, were not pleased by this. "We were worried because our 
two cultures are so different," says Amy's mother. "Koreans are so traditional; 
Americans are so open, so direct." 
But Amy's mother says she no longer harbors such reservations, and Amy herself 
rejects any suggestion that she may be abandoning her Korean heritage. 
"I am still respectful of my parents' culture," she says. "I will always be 
part Korean." 
Greg describes their bicultural relationship this way: "We're sharing, not 
giving up our cultures. This makes us both more receptive, I think, to real 
differences between us, not just the common bonds." 
"Besides, race is not the issue," Greg says. "The issue is that we're 
individuals -- we're persons. I don't see (Amy's) color. I see her." 
Quietly, he adds: "We wish people didn't always have to bring that issue (race) 
up." 
But, intentionally or not, students involved in interracial dating cannot help 
but stand out. 
"I know these students resent being considered trailblazers," says Bruce Baron, 
an Irvine Unified School District principal, who developed a study project on 
racial and other inter-ethnic issues, including dating, for the district's high 
schools. 
"But in their own way," he says, "what they're doing is pretty gutsy. Whether 
they like it or not, it puts them right on society's frontiers." 
Indeed, counselors say, the reality of racism is as ominous as ever. And 
interracial couples are often among the choice targets. 
It helps explain why several of the families contacted for this story did not 
want to be interviewed at all. Families that agreed did so under the proviso 
that no photographs be taken or actual names used. 
Said one of these parents: "We don't hide it. My son's friends know, their 
schoolmates, and a few others." 
Citing recent reports of racist-oriented outbreaks in Orange County 
neighborhoods and campuses -- such as a lawn cross-burning and circulation of 
white-supremacy literature -- this parent adds: "But we don't want the whole 
world to know it. Not now. Not with the way things seem to be going." 
While those incidents were mostly directed at blacks, state Atty. Gen. John K. 
Van de Kamp last week noted: "There is an intolerable level of hostility 
against Asian/Pacific Islanders throughout this state, and it has to stop." 
However, parents and teen-agers say, racism in Orange County is usually 
subtler, more covert. 
There haven't been any "problems," says one black youth, who is dating a white 
girl, "at least not big problems." 
"If you mean stares and people saying things to you to your face -- that 
doesn't really happen much," he says. "I mean, if you're cool about it and 
don't go looking for it -- people leave you alone in Orange County." 
Indeed, he and the other students interviewed tend to treat the question of 
racism -- and the whole matter of interracial dating -- with a studied 
nonchalance. 
But not some of their parents. 
"I tell my son (who is dating a girl of another race), that he better get used 
to (racist attitudes), and if he doesn't, he had better get out of it," said 
one father. "Because if they decide to stick it out, things could get a lot 
meaner for them." 
