IT'S BACK TO SCHOOL FOR EXILED TEACHER 
Jean Stapleton's troubles arrived a year and a half ago in an envelope with no 
return address. 
Next month, they will end when she goes back to work as a journalism teacher 
and adviser to the campus newspaper at East Los Angeles College after winning a 
prolonged battle with the school. 
In April, 1988, Stapleton had almost completed her 15th year as faculty adviser 
to Campus News, the student newspaper at ELAC. The award-winning paper 
regularly incensed school administrators for its critical -- some said biased 
-- coverage of campus issues. 
The envelope that initiated Stapleton's ordeal contained a photocopy of the 
academic transcript of ELAC's student body president. It showed she was 
enrolled in three units instead of the nine-unit minimum required by those in 
student government. 
The next week, the paper published a story with the headline "Lisa Quesada 
taking insufficient units to hold ASO president post" next to a photograph of 
the alleged transcript. It included Quesada's explanation that she had been 
late in adding two classes that didn't show up on the transcript. 
That story -- which the newspaper later retracted -- would prove Stapleton's 
undoing. 
A livid Quesada and school administrators maintained that the article was 
incorrect. More seriously, they said in a formal disciplinary action that the 
school paper violated federal, state and college district privacy rules by 
printing the transcript. 
For administrators, it was only the latest in a long string of stories that had 
stirred up trouble. Last May, saying it was "for the good of the school," the 
Los Angeles Community College District transferred Stapleton to Pierce College 
in Woodland Hills. 
The transfer reduced Stapleton from head of ELAC's journalism department to an 
instructor with five classes. Her commute more than doubled. She was separated 
from longtime friends and colleagues because, Stapleton said, she exercised a 
principle she had been teaching for many years: freedom of the press. 
Stapleton fought back, and in late fall, an arbitrator ruled that the district 
had no right to transfer her. It ordered her reinstatement effective Feb. 5, 
when the spring semester begins. 
Stapleton will return to a different ELAC. Many former administrators have 
retired or been transferred, bringing once-bitter faculty infighting to an end. 
Those who remain speak highly of the new president, Omero Suarez. 
"There's a whole new attitude on this campus now," said Raul Cardoza, ELAC's 
vice president of academic affairs. 
Although Stapleton was vindicated, the case raises important questions about 
freedom of the press and censorship. The debate is especially acute for 
school-financed campus papers, where students often use investigative reporting 
skills learned in class to turn a critical eye on administration policies. 
At Stapleton's hearing, the teachers' union argued that upholding the transfer 
would create "a serious chilling effect on freedom of the press at ELAC and on 
academic freedom of all advisers in the district." The district argued that 
Stapleton was at the center of controversy on campus and that her transfer 
would alleviate "substantial instability and strife." 
In the last six years, Campus News has come under criticism for stories about: 
* Problems in the administration of former ELAC President Arthur Avila, who 
received a faculty vote of no confidence for what was called poor morale and 
lack of leadership. Avila resigned in August, 1988, under pressure, according 
to the Los Angeles Community College District. 
* The arrest of Hal Mintz, chairman of ELAC's business department, for running 
a house of prostitution and income tax evasion. Mintz eventually resigned from 
ELAC and pleaded no contest to the charges. 
* Avila writing a letter of praise about Mintz to the West Hollywood Business 
License Commission, which later revoked the license of Mintz's massage parlor. 
* A $250 phone bill for ELAC's Associated Student Organization that included 
charges for calls to Acapulco, Mexico, El Salvador and at least a dozen 
976-prefix numbers. 
* Three ELAC professors who held doctorates from colleges that were 
unaccredited at the time their degrees were awarded. 
Some faculty members have applauded the paper's coverage. "There's a lot of 
dirty politics going on at our school," said Daniel Fertig, a life science 
instructor. "She was doing a good job, but she printed too many hot stories 
about the administration," he said, referring to Stapleton. 
But school administrators say Stapleton should have seen to it that the 
students printed more balanced stories. They say she violated one of the basic 
tenets of journalism by printing several critical stories without giving 
administrators a chance to respond. 
"We believe Jean Stapleton created too much conflict on the campus . . . and 
that it was in the best interests of the students and faculty to make the 
change," Jose Robledo, acting vice chancellor of human resources for Los 
Angeles Community College District, said of the transfer. 
Stapleton noted that the Campus News won several state investigative reporting 
awards last year from the state Journalism Assn. of Community Colleges. Her own 
experience included covering portions of the Charles Manson trials for City 
News Service. She has been president of the Los Angeles chapter of the National 
Assn. for Women, and has written three books, one on women in management. 
The administration "thought the newspaper should be a PR piece that said how 
well the football team was doing and when the band was going to play," 
Stapleton said. "I was teaching them to be reporters, and that's not always 
nice." 
Because of the paper's feisty coverage, Stapleton said, the administration cut 
its annual budget from $30,000 to $5,000. In October, 1988, a faculty member 
upset about a story was authorized by Avila to search the newspaper offices 
escorted by campus police, Stapleton said. 
Stapleton maintains that Quesada gave up privacy about her qualifications when 
she became a school leader and that U.S. Supreme Court decisions that give 
newspapers broad freedom to write about elected officials also apply to campus 
papers. She likened the Quesada story to stories exposing star college athletes 
who fail to carry full academic loads. 
But her arguments didn't sway the administration. In addition to transferring 
her, it placed the student editor who wrote the Quesada story on probation for 
a year. A staff photographer was placed on probation for a semester. 
Some faculty members accused Stapleton of fomenting dissent and using the paper 
for her own ends. "The campus newspaper should be an instrument of education 
and not a political weapon as it was in the past," says Ray Ceniceroz, head of 
the ELAC Chicano Studies Department. 
Stapleton's students are pleased she is coming back. "Her return will help 
bolster the department," says Mike Ortiz, editor of Campus News. "She's very 
supportive; she motivates students." 
