STAR WARS DEVICE EXPLODES IN TEST DESCRIBED AS SUCCESSFUL; 
DEFENSE: NINE OF 10 OBJECTIVES WERE ACHIEVED DURING THE FIRST FLIGHT OF HEDI, 
BUILT BY MCDONNELL DOUGLAS SPACE SYSTEMS IN HUNTINGTON BEACH, A SPOKESMAN SAID. 
The first flight test of a Star Wars weapon ended Friday when the anti-missile 
system, built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems in Huntington Beach, 
accidentally detonated before separating from its booster. 
But before that happened, nine of the 10 test objectives were accomplished, 
said Alan Sherer, manager of the Army's High Endoatmospheric Defense 
Interceptor, or HEDI, project. 
Sherer characterized the morning test launch at White Sands Missile Range in 
New Mexico as "very successful." 
McDonnell Douglas officials could not be reached Friday for comment. 
C.E. Grubbs, an independent defense industry consultant in Newport Beach, said 
the failure of the last step of the test should not pose a problem for the 
giant defense contractor. 
"In the early stage of designing any missile system, just getting it off the 
ground is a success," Grubbs said. "The fact that their telemetry apparently 
worked is grounds to call Ripley's 'Believe It Or Not.' " The telemetry is the 
electronic linkage between a missile and ground control. 
McDonnell Douglas, which has received about $300 million to develop the missile 
interceptor, has about 180 employees in Huntington Beach assigned to the HEDI 
project. But Space Systems officials said last December that the firm will lay 
off or reassign 60 workers this year. Budget cuts also will delay a number of 
other test flights. 
HEDI is designed to stop nuclear warheads before they reach ground targets. It 
is one of the multiple layers planned for the Star Wars program, formally known 
as the Strategic Defense Initiative. 
Sherer said the greatest successes in Friday's launch were getting the HEDI to 
cool down after firing it through the atmosphere at high speeds and the 
separation of a shroud that protects the HEDI warhead from heat and pressure 
during the launch. 
"No one has ever separated a shroud at these kinds of velocities and 
temperatures, and no one has attempted to cool an endo-interceptor at these 
kinds of speeds and velocities," Sherer said. 
The final phase of the test called for the missile "to go into a kind of coast 
phase and then separate the kill vehicle and then blow the warhead. We didn't 
get to do that separation of the kill vehicle" because it detonated, Sherer 
said. 
The HEDI flight test was the first since the Pentagon launched the six-year, 
$383-million project in January, 1986, to design a weapon against enemy 
warheads in their last stage of flight. 
HEDI mates a sophisticated warhead -- the "smart rock" -- to a modified Sprint 
rocket. The Sprint was built for the U.S. Safeguard anti-ballistic missile 
defense in the 1960s, but has been mothballed since the 1972 Anti-Ballistic 
Missile treaty with the Soviet Union. 
When it nears its target, the modified Sprint rocket would eject the smart 
rock, which would use an infrared seeker and its own maneuvering jets to home 
in for the kill. The rock would explode like a hand grenade to demolish the 
warhead with lethal pellets. 
The HEDI rockets are the lower-technology end of the Star Wars system, which 
would include several defenses against enemy missiles: hitting them in their 
boost phase shortly after launch, intercepting them in mid-course when they 
cast off their warheads and decoys in space, and attacking them in the terminal 
phase when the warheads re-enter the atmosphere. 
HEDI would handle the terminal phase. Particle beams and laser zappers usually 
associated with Star Wars technology would make up the other layers of the 
system. 
Space Systems is the prime contractor on the HEDI program. Hughes Missile 
Systems Group and Aerojet Technical Systems are the major subcontractors. 
