COLUMN ONE; 
AIR TICKETS RIVAL CASH AS BOOTY; 
THE LURE OF FREE TRIPS IS MAKING TRAVEL AGENTS AS VULNERABLE TO ARMED ROBBERS 
AS BANK TELLERS. 
Jesse James and John Dillinger would fit right in. But today, instead of waving 
guns at stage coaches and bank tellers, they might well be getting the drop on 
travel agents -- and stealing airline tickets. 
The taking of blank ticket stock in armed holdups has become a major menace to 
the nation's travel agents and a big worry to the airlines, which are losing 
millions of dollars as a result. Bandits are not the only problem, however, as 
ever-increasing numbers of counterfeiters, con men, corrupt travel agents and 
credit card cheats are also stealing ticket blanks. 
The blanks are extremely valuable because thieves can simply fill in the 
amounts they want to steal. A blank ticket is even better than blank check, 
because no signature is necessary. The thieves sell them for expensive travel 
at huge discounts -- often, but by no means always, to unsuspecting customers. 
Sometimes they are brazen enough to try to turn them in for cash "refunds." 
Most stolen tickets are written for international flights in first class. It is 
estimated that the average stolen blank is used for $1,000 worth of travel. 
Many such tickets are used for even more expensive trips -- on the supersonic 
Concorde, for example. 
"There's a lot of incentive to take blank ticket stock," said Kenneth D. 
Gilbart, a corporate security official with United Airlines. "Blank ticket 
stock can be diverted into a lot of value. It is more or less like cash -- in 
fact, maybe better than cash in a way. If you rob a bank you get $300, but you 
can take a blank ticket and bump it up to any figure you want to." 
John D. Boggs, managing director of ticketing and terminal services for 
American Airlines, said: "It doesn't take a lot of tickets to get something 
negotiable for a significant amount of cash." 
In the first nine months of 1989, the latest period for which figures were 
available, United confiscated stolen tickets that had been filled in for trips 
worth $232,000. 
The illegal acquisition and use of airline tickets increasingly cuts into the 
carriers' profits. If it is correct that the average stolen blank is used for 
$1,000 worth of travel, then in the last year about $100-million worth of 
airline tickets were taken illegally, at gunpoint or in other ways. 
That is almost enough to buy one of the Boeing 747-400s that have just come on 
the market. It is an amount also equal to the net profits of USAir, the 
nation's sixth-largest airline, in the first nine months of 1989. And no one 
knows how many tickets stolen in previous years but not yet used are still out 
there. There have been estimates that these might represent $500-million worth 
of travel. 
"Such losses are passed on to airline stockholders (in the form of reduced 
dividends) and to the traveling public in higher fares," said Voit Gilmore, 
operator of Four Seasons Travel Service in Pinehurst, N. C., and president of 
the American Society of Travel Agents. 
The problem has taken on more serious proportions because so much violence now 
accompanies the crimes. In 1989, one travel agent was killed in a holdup and 
another in Southern California was knifed. Both were attacked while trying to 
protect their blank airline tickets. 
And, while the taking of tickets through violence has been growing steadily 
throughout the nation, law enforcement officials, airline executives and travel 
agents say the problem is most serious in Southern California. 
In 1989, there were 23 armed robberies in which airline ticket stock was taken, 
a record number, according to the Airline Reporting Corp., a ticket 
clearinghouse in Washington that is owned by the U.S. carriers. 
Most of those robberies occurred in California, which has more travel agents -- 
5,591 or 16% of all agents nationwide -- than any other state. 
In all of 1988, tickets were taken in just eight armed robberies. The number of 
blanks taken in these incidents jumped from 423 in 1988 to 4,318 in 1989. 
And these figures don't tell the whole story. Law enforcement officials pointed 
out that the Airline Reporting Corp.'s numbers do not include robberies of 
agencies in which no tickets were stolen. 
Although people caught with stolen tickets invariably plead that they did not 
know their origin, law enforcement officials scoff at such claims. 
A Detective's View 
Charles Schmidt, a detective with the Port Authority of New York and New 
Jersey, said that some famous entertainers and sports figures have been caught 
trying to get on planes with tickets acquired improperly. 
One well known Hollywood couple -- both are in the movies -- recently bought 
stolen tickets and were about to use them on Air France. The airline found out 
about it and warned them. They subsequently purchased legitimate tickets and 
claimed that their production company had unwittingly purchased the stolen 
tickets. 
Schmidt, who is one of half a dozen police officials who work full time on 
ticket fraud (others are in Miami, Los Angeles and at Britain's Scotland Yard) 
said that few people who use bogus tickets are innocent. "If you get a $7,000 
ticket for $3,500, and it says $7,000 right on it," Schmidt said, "there is a 
presumption that something is wrong." 
The tickets are often sold through newspaper classified advertisements or in 
bulk quantities to rings that arrange travel for illegal aliens who have been 
smuggled into Southern California and are headed for destinations throughout 
the United States. Bad tickets have also been traced to Europe, where they are 
sold and seldom detected. 
For holdup men, blank tickets are higher on the most-favored-items-to-steal 
list than blank checks. Indeed, armed robbers at travel agencies have 
frequently demanded tickets without even asking for cash or other valuables. 
Another popular method of stealing tickets is to divert the attention of a 
travel agent or airline ticket clerk and simply grab some blank tickets. These 
sneak thieves might bring along a boisterous group of fellow "customers" or 
have screaming children in their arms. Feigning sudden illness is another 
favorite trick. Often the loss of blank tickets is discovered only days later. 
During lunch hour or early or late in the day -- a time when few employees are 
around -- is when thieves most often strike. 
Ralph E. Conner Jr., owner of the El Monte Travel Center in El Monte, Calif., 
said that his wife, Jean, was alone in the agency office when three people held 
her up for 188 tickets. That occurred Sept. 11, four days before 46-year-old 
Van Nuys travel agent Hernan Vacha was shot to death in a robbery at Excelsior 
Travel and Tours. 
While stolen tickets cause most of the trouble, airlines also must cope with 
forged or altered tickets, counterfeit tickets, and tickets bought with stolen 
or otherwise unauthorized credit cards. 
Often, in what in travel agency vernacular is called a "bust out," agency 
owners in financial difficulties close up shop and abscond with the ticket 
stock. Agencies might be sold to crooked individuals who want them just to get 
their hands on unused tickets. Employees of airlines have been known to point 
out agencies in financial difficulties to such individuals. Prosecutors 
recently charged an Alitalia employee with helping to identify failing 
agencies. 
Once tickets are stolen, it takes a certain expertise to prepare them for 
undetected use. Because airline tickets are generic, they must be properly 
filled in and validated with special stamps denoting the name of the airline 
and a travel agency. 
Since many travel agents now use tickets prepared by machine, a thief must also 
have the proper hardware, such as a personal computer, to make a stolen ticket 
look authentic. Validating stamps also are often stolen. 
"I don't want anyone to be under the impression that you can go and hold up a 
travel agency and that you immediately have something that is convertible to 
cash," said David R. B. Collins, president of the Airline Reporting Corp. "Lots 
of know-how is needed in order to make it look like the real thing." 
Plenty of Criminals 
But one law enforcement official said that there are plenty of criminals around 
with such practical knowledge. 
"They read the travel magazines and get information from them," said Gail 
Coutts, a detective with the Los Angeles police airline ticket forgery squad. 
One such "bad guy," she recalled, "had an article from the Airline Reporting 
Corp. about fraudulent tickets." 
Many thieves are insiders, or at least people with a working knowledge of the 
travel business, law enforcement officials say. United Airlines, for example, 
lost more than $60,000 last year because an employee of a Chicago company that 
had a travel agency's computerized machine in its office stole a large amount 
of ticket stock. The employee took the tickets after after he learned that he 
was about to be fired. 
Some of the people who prepare stolen tickets for sale are not the robbers or 
burglars, who are hired to do the dirty work. "I think that this is a core 
group with interchangeable parts," Coutts said. 
The rash of crimes involving airline tickets has put the airlines and the 
travel agents at odds over who is responsible for the losses and how they can 
be prevented. 
The airlines claim that travel agents are frequently negligent in protecting 
their ticket stock. If it is determined that the travel agent has not 
safeguarded tickets properly, the airlines hold the agent responsible for the 
travel when it takes place and charge the agency accordingly. 
Airline Reporting Corp. rules limit an agency to ordering no more than a 
three-month supply of tickets at a time, with the specific amount determined by 
the agency's past level of business. An agency may not keep more than a week's 
worth of blanks on the premises, and those must be kept in a safe overnight. 
The rest must be stored elsewhere. 
Paul G. Davidoff, owner of Belair Travel Consultants in Bowie, Md., and 
president-elect of that American Society of Travel Agents, said he keeps only 
an immediate supply at the agency. The rest, he says, he keeps across the 
street in a trunk in the vault of a bank. "When we need tickets," he said, "I 
walk across the street and fetch them." 
Even with the Airline Reporting Corp.'s stringent rules, the group does not 
want travel agents to risk injury to protect tickets. It instructs agents not 
to resist robbers. 
The travel agents, for their part, say that the airlines are not doing enough 
to catch ticket criminals, especially at the time they try to board flights. 
The airlines counter that such procedures would slow airport check-in 
procedures and require hiring more people. 
Detective Schmidt said, however: "We find the airlines at fault for not 
screening tickets. It is not true that it would slow things down. It would take 
15 seconds a passenger to check each passenger." 
Airlines Use Profile 
The airlines concede that they do not check every ticket, but they say that 
their employees at airport gates are under orders to look out for passengers 
who fit descriptions of terrorists, ticket thieves and other undesirables. If a 
passenger fits such a profile, he or she is kept under close scrutiny. 
Also, once a ticket theft is reported to the Airline Reporting Corp., the 
ticket numbers are immediately put into the airlines' computerized "black 
lists." But airline gate personnel often don't have time to check the computer; 
to encourage them, some airlines pay a bounty, usually $25, for catching a bad 
ticket. 
The travel agents are demanding that the airlines come up with new technology 
for detecting stolen tickets. For example, magnetic strips, similar to those on 
credit cards, could be used to verify tickets. 
But Joe Whitby, a security official with British Airways, said a magnetic strip 
procedure would be difficult to use, since there are so many ticket formats in 
the world. The only "sure fire" way to block the use of stolen tickets, he 
said, is to have airline gate workers check the black list. 
"We want to encourage the airlines to develop procedures that would make the 
use of stolen tickets more difficult," said Davidoff, the Maryland travel 
agent. "If they are harder to use, the incentive to steal them would decline 
greatly." 
