GROUP TO STAGE PLAY IN COUNCIL CHAMBERS 
The Santa Susana Repertory Company has announced the schedule for its second 
season, including a production of the courtroom drama "Inherit the Wind" that 
will be staged in Simi Valley's City Council chambers. 
"When the council chambers were originally designed in 1984, the idea was that 
they should be used for purposes other than governmental meetings," said Brian 
Gabler, an assistant to the city manager. "When Santa Susana Repertory was 
searching for a location, the City Council was very enthusiastic about them 
coming here." 
So, the fledgling company -- which does not yet have a permanent stage -- will 
open at City Hall Feb. 23 with its version of the 1955 play about the trial of 
Tennessee biology teacher John T. Scopes, who broke state law by teaching 
Darwinism in his classroom. 
The remainder of the season will include a three plays and "A Christmas Carol" 
for next holiday season. 
Santa Susana Repertory had hoped to premiere a play by Dale Wasserman, who 
wrote the musical "Man of La Mancha" and now serves as a board member for the 
theatrical group. Production costs prohibited that show. 
In fact, the repertory company has tightened its money belt to make up for last 
season when, several weeks before opening "La Mancha," the troupe was informed 
by city officials that it could not stage plays in an empty, donated 
supermarket. The company was forced to rent a $7,500-a-month tent for its 
well-reviewed production. 
"That was a great expense," said David Ralphe, who has directed a number of the 
company's plays. "But it's a fact of life. It's not stopping us." 
Much of Santa Susana Repertory's second season will again play under the big 
top. This season the company has had time to shop for a less costly tent that 
will be raised on a vacant lot between the library and City Hall, where the 
city's planned cultural center is to be built. 
"Lion in Winter" opens May 16. "Jesse and the Bandit Queen," a retelling of the 
romance between Jesse James and Belle Starr, opens June 14. "Romeo and Juliet" 
opens July 6. 
While all of this is going on, the company will present Saturday matinees of a 
children's musical. An improvisational comedy show will play late Saturday 
nights. 
"A Christmas Carol" opens Nov. 24 at an undetermined site. 
