LOCAL LAWS '89 
Last year, local and municipal governments approved many new laws and 
regulations that will affect many residents throughout the region. In Los 
Angeles County, owners of biting dogs will pay more in fines, while city 
residents will feel a pinch in the wallet from higher fees for water, sewer and 
power. Burbank has placed restrictions on metal balloons and the homeless won't 
be able to sleep in West Hollywood parks overnight. 
Los Angeles County 
DOGS -- Fines against owners for dog bites were increased from a maximum of 
$500 to $1,000. 
SYPHILIS -- Treatment and prevention programs for syphilis were expanded and, 
for a six-month period, the county waived the $20 fee charged for diagnosis and 
treatment of all venereal diseases and tuberculosis. 
DISPLAY -- Limits were placed on the display of sexually oriented materials in 
news racks. 
LIQUOR -- The supervisors made it harder to get a liquor license in East Los 
Angeles. Zoning approval is now granted only after local residents are given a 
chance to protest. Limits were placed on granting the licenses near schools, 
playgrounds and churches. 
PARKING -- More parking is now required for several traffic-generating 
enterprises, including animal hospitals, medical offices and galleries. 
Los Angeles 
POLICE -- The number of Los Angeles police officers was increased by 150 to a 
record level of 7,500. A new deputy chief job was authorized to assist in 
fighting drug-related gang activity. 
FINES -- Rush-hour parking fines were increased from $28 to $53 in an effort to 
deter motorists from blocking intersections. 
WATER -- A number of measures were passed by the City Council and signed by the 
mayor to save water, both because of a series of dry years and the need to 
reduce the amount of water flowing into the city's inadequate sewage disposal 
system. Residents are forbidden to hose down patios, sidewalks and driveways. 
Restaurants now can serve water only upon request. Property owners must repair 
leaking faucets and toilets. Residents are requested to voluntarily reduce 
water use by 10%. Decorative fountains without recycling features are banned. 
Water-saving toilet and shower devices, provided by the Los Angeles Department 
of Water and Power, must be installed by Jan. 13. Also, a new ordinance took 
effect limiting construction in neighboring cities connected to the Los Angeles 
sewer system. 
SEWERS -- Average monthly residential sewer fees were increased from $6.14 to 
$17.52 per month by 1993 to help pay for the rebuilding and modernization of 
the city's aging sewer system. 
RATES -- Water and power rates went up about $6 on the average bimonthly 
residential bill. The average bimonthly electric bill was increased from $65 to 
$67.84 and the average bimonthly water rate increased from $34.98 to $38.32. 
Lifeline customers received an increase from about $26.86 to $27.86. 
HIGH-RISE -- Following the fire in the First Interstate Bank building in 
downtown Los Angeles, pre-1974 high-rises were required to be retrofitted with 
automatic sprinklers, fire-resistant elevator vestibules and roof-top smoke 
escapes within three years. 
RESTROOMS -- Businesses with customer and employee restrooms were required to 
make them available to the disabled even if they are not patrons. 
ANIMALS -- In January, an ordinance took effect that prohibits feeding of 
coyotes, raccoons, foxes, skunks and opossums. Dog license fees were increased 
from $16 to $18, but license fees for spayed or neutered dogs remained 
unchanged at $8. 
CRUISING -- Motor vehicles are now limited to a round trip every six hours on 
streets where police determine that cruising is a problem. 
CAR POOLING -- Employers with at least 200 workers now must offer $15 bus 
passes, car-pool and van-pool subsidies each month if they also provide 
subsidized parking. New laws make available up to $5,000 to employers for lease 
or purchase of employee commuter vans. Rates were increased for parking spaces 
on city-owned or city-leased lots in the downtown area from $5 to $25, with 
car-poolers exempted. 
AMBULANCES -- Six additional rescue ambulances for paramedics were approved for 
South-Central Los Angeles, East San Fernando Valley and the Harbor area. 
BINGO -- Nightly bingo sessions at a single location are limited to 40 games to 
reduce the amount of prize money available. 
LEAVE -- Unmarried Los Angeles city employees living with a "domestic partner" 
are entitled to the same sick and bereavement leaves as married workers. 
CULTURE -- Los Angeles got its first municipal culture program of grants and 
other assistance to art, the theater and other cultural activities, financed by 
$20 million a year coming from fees and the city's hotel bed tax. 
MALLS -- Parking restrictions were tightened for mini-malls and requirements 
were added for decoration and shade trees. 
SLUMLORDS -- Tenants in slum buildings now have the option to put rent into a 
"rent escrow account program," maintained by the city, rather than pay it to 
landlords who refuse to repair their buildings. 
West Hollywood 
PARKS -- City Council was criticized after it approved park regulations that 
the homeless said discriminate against them. Over complaints of discrimination 
by the homeless, the City Council closed city parks from midnight to 6 a.m., 
outlawed such activities as erecting tents, using drinking fountains for "other 
than their intended purpose" and hanging clothes and blankets on walls and 
shrubs. Sheriff's Department deputies are empowered to expel violators from 
parks. 
Agoura Hills 
SPRINKLERS -- An ordinance was passed in July requiring automatic sprinkler 
systems in all new homes, making the city the first in Los Angeles County to 
impose such a requirement. City Council acted soon after the May 4 fire at the 
downtown First Interstate Bank building but officials said the idea was 
conceived months earlier in the brush-fire prone city. 
Burbank 
BALLOONS -- Law made effective in June requires businesses that sell metallic 
balloons to post signs warning of the hazards of metallic balloons near sources 
of electrical power. The legislation was prompted by several incidents of such 
balloons causing outages when they collided with power lines. 
San Fernando 
NOISE -- Under a new city ordinance, hosts of loud and unruly parties can be 
fined up to $500 if police are summoned more than once to quiet the 
festivities. Police first issue a written warning to the hosts of noisy 
parties. If called again, officers write up a bill at the scene, with the fee 
being determined in part by the number of officers who responded. 
Lakewood 
SMOKING -- As of October, smoking is restricted to limited, specified areas in 
city-owned buildings. Businesses are required to submit written policy 
statements to the city detailing the extent to which they will restrict 
smoking, or they may have a policy statement of no restrictions. 
Long Beach 
PRESERVATION -- An Office of Neighborhoods and Historical Preservation was 
created to try to identify and save significant historic buildings in the city. 
City Council action came as final demolition occurred on two well-known 
landmark buildings, the Pacific Coast Club and the Jergens Trust building. 
Paramount 
LIMITS -- As the result of a voter-approved initiative in November, apartment 
and condo complexes are limited to 22 units per acre. The limit previously had 
been 70 units per acre. A public outcry against a building boom, especially 
apartment construction, fueled passage of the measure. 
Times researcher Cecilia Rasmussen and Times staff writers James M. Gomez, 
Chris Woodyard, Roxana Kopetman, Lee Harris, Gabe Fuentes, Greg Braxton and 
Stephanie Chavez contributed to this report. 
