DECISION ON INGLEWOOD PRINCIPAL AFFIRMED 
At an emergency meeting marked by charges of political favoritism, Inglewood 
school board members voted once again Thursday to reverse a decision to dismiss 
Leonard Matthews, a politically connected former high school principal accused 
of embezzling school funds. 
Board members voted, 3-1, to approve Supt. George McKenna's recommendation to 
demote rather than fire Matthews, the former principal of Hillcrest High 
School, who officials say has agreed to pay the district $10,000 in restitution 
for funds he allegedly misused. 
Board member Zyra McCloud and several residents spoke out loudly against the 
decision. 
Ken Gossett, a local businessman, said: "Probably nowhere else in the United 
States would a board of trustees consider putting a person in a classroom who 
apparently admits to misappropriating $10,000 in public funds. . . . It is 
completely out of balance that you would tolerate such behavior, much less 
reward it." 
Matthews was not present. He and his lawyer, Carl Douglas, repeatedly have 
declined comment on the allegations. 
Some Outraged 
The vote was the second this week on the Matthews case, which has outraged some 
school employees and community members who say the board should fire Matthews. 
They say he is being protected because he has been active in the campaigns of 
board members Larry Aubry, Caroline Coleman, Lois Hill-Hale and Joseph Rouzan, 
a former Inglewood police chief. 
Aubry, Coleman and Rouzan voted Thursday to reverse Matthews' dismissal. 
McCloud voted no, and Hill-Hale did not attend the emergency 4:30 p.m. meeting. 
McKenna and the board members said politics had nothing to do with the 
decision. 
They noted that Matthews -- who was transferred to a central administrative 
post after charges against him surfaced in late 1987 -- could again face 
dismissal if he is convicted of a felony. Inglewood police, who investigated 
the case for a year, have referred the results of their inquiry to the Los 
Angeles County district attorney. 
At Monday's regularly scheduled meeting, board members voted, 2 to 1, to 
rescind their decision in October to initiate dismissal procedures against 
Matthews. Instead, they demoted him from a $55,000 administrative post to a 
$42,000 teaching position. However, county attorneys deemed that action illegal 
because three votes are required for the five-member board to approve an 
action. That opinion forced Thursday's emergency meeting, when the board 
ratified its previous vote. 
Before Thursday's vote, five residents, including Gossett and PTA Council 
President Norma Smith, criticized the board for being too lenient with 
Matthews. McKenna and the board members did not respond. 
Police affidavits say Matthews set up a bank account into which he 
systematically diverted at least $4,000 in Hillcrest funds from employees' 
paychecks, a school snack store and donations to Hillcrest from businesses 
during 1986 and 1987. Matthews allegedly used the school money for personal 
expenses including clothes, groceries and Christmas decorations for his front 
yard, police say. 
Board members said Matthews was previously disciplined by the board in 1987 for 
using school district equipment to prepare political flyers for candidates. 
