DEUKMEJIAN TELLS COURT HE'S NEUTRAL ON 103 
Gov. George Deukmejian and state Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie, 
filing a joint brief with the state Supreme Court, took no stand Thursday on 
the constitutionality of Proposition 103 or its prescribed insurance rate 
rollbacks. 
Rather, they asked the court for guidance on how to interpret the measure if it 
is upheld, particularly with respect to what date any rollbacks that may be 
ruled valid are to be made effective. They also asked for a clear definition 
from the court of what constitutes a "substantial threat of insolvency" that 
may exempt an insurance company from the rollbacks. 
While Deukmejian and Gillespie, two of the four defendants named in the 
insurance industry's lawsuit to overturn the initiative, stuck to a neutral 
position, the other two defendants, Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp and the 
State Board of Equalization, submitted a joint brief that defended the measure, 
rollbacks and all. 
Underscoring the split, Van de Kamp, a prospective candidate to succeed 
Deukmejian in the 1990 elections, told a Los Angeles press conference that he 
was "disappointed that the governor is not taking a strong role in defense of 
the will of the people. 
"The governor may be neutral on this issue, but I'm not," he said. 
Deukmejian, speaking at his own press conference nearby an hour before, said 
that he and Gillespie felt that Van de Kamp and other parties -- the insurers 
and other groups filing friend-of-the-court briefs -- would provide the Supreme 
Court with adequate arguments on the constitutional issues. 
"We are ready, willing and able to implement all of Proposition 103," the 
governor said. "We're urging the court to make a quick decision and we are 
asking for it to clarify how 103 should be interpreted. . . . We want them to 
give us as much guidance as they can." 
Deukmejian said he felt this was the "proper role" for him and Gillespie to 
play. Their brief declared they were "mindful of their role as executive 
officers of the state who are constitutionally charged with the responsibility 
of enforcing Proposition 103" and implied that this was a reason they should 
stay out of the fray over the measure's constitutionality. 
Harvey Rosenfield, chairman of the Proposition 103 campaign, accused the 
governor, however, of showing a lack of leadership. 
Governor Criticized 
"It says about what we've suspected all along," Rosenfield declared. "The 
governor has decided to bail out on this issue." 
Thursday was the day set by the Supreme Court as a deadline for defendants of 
Proposition 103 to file briefs answering the industry's lawsuit. In addition to 
the Deukmejian and Van de Kamp filings, briefs also came in from Rosenfield's 
Voter Revolt organization, Los Angeles City Atty. James K. Hahn and a coalition 
of 13 citizens groups led by Consumers Union. All of the other briefs urged the 
court to find Proposition 103 constitutional. 
Its rollback provisions, calling for 20% reductions from 1987 rates in auto, 
homeowners, commercial and other forms of property-casualty insurance and a 
one-year rate freeze, have been stayed by the high court, but other parts of 
the initiative have been allowed to go into effect pending the review. 
Van de Kamp's Brief 
The most elaborate presentation came from Van de Kamp, who also submitted a 
lengthy declaration by insurance expert J. Robert Hunter, president of the 
National Insurance Consumer Organization, and a critic of the industry's 
financial claims, to the effect that the insurers have been charging too much 
in California and that the industry is far better able to comply with the 
rollbacks called for in Proposition 103 than it claims to be. 
Van de Kamp said his own brief could be summarized in just 21 words: "The 
people knew what they were doing when they voted for insurance reform. And what 
they voted for was perfectly legal." 
Van de Kamp spoke scathingly about the insurance industry's argument that the 
Supreme Court ought to strike down Proposition 103 because the public would not 
have approved it without the rate rollback provisions that the insurers argue 
are unconstitutional. 
Van de Kamp called this argument "a blatant attempt to thwart the people's will 
on the flimsiest of pretenses." Major portions of Proposition 103, he argued, 
"are so manifestly constitutional that not even the most fertile minds of 
insurance company lawyers can conjure up a respectable argument against them. 
"Instead, they propose that the court throw an entire seven-course meal into 
the garbage if it decides there are too many calories in the dessert. Well, I 
doubt the justices will find that an appetizing suggestion." 
As for the rollbacks, the attorney general asserted that insurance company 
profits are at record levels, reserves are often larger than necessary, some 
companies are holding excessive surpluses and that some are wasteful and 
inefficient. Those companies that, nonetheless, cannot afford the rollbacks may 
go to the insurance commissioner for relief under terms of the initiative, he 
pointed out. 
A common strand running through the briefs, except for the one from the 
governor and insurance commissioner, was that both the California Supreme Court 
and other courts have traditionally been loathe to interfere with the people's 
will as expressed in initiatives, except as a last resort. Proposition 103, the 
briefs argue, does not pose issues that would justify such interference. 
The Proposition 103 campaign's brief, prepared with the assistance of six 
professors from schools of law at the University of California and elsewhere, 
declared: 
"This court (is being invited) to indulge in an extraordinary exercise in 
judicial activism. Petitioners, an aggregation of large and powerful insurance 
carriers, seek to completely nullify the will of the voters of this state to 
enact broad-based insurance reform." 
