JAMES FLANIGAN: IF THINGS ARE SO GOOD, WHY IS FED SCARED? 
Prosperity is everywhere, but appearances may be deceiving. The Tokyo stock 
market is hitting new highs. New York is no slouch either, trading these days 
at its highest levels since the October, 1987, crash. And European stock 
markets are rising strongly for the first time in years. 
Furthermore, the world's economies are going great guns. The U.S. economy grew 
last year at a rapid 4%, and unemployment is low. Japanese government officials 
look forward to 4% economic growth in the new fiscal year; and growth in Europe 
is picking up as Common Market nations prepare for economic unity in 1992. 
Confidence is high. The dollar is strong as world investors want to put money 
in U.S. assets. 
You'd think there would be happiness all around. Yet on both Monday and 
Tuesday, the Federal Reserve and other central banks sold dollars in 
international markets in an attempt to keep the currency's value down. 
And central banks everywhere are trying to raise interest rates to slow 
economic growth. 
That's no distant thunder. It could mean prohibitive mortgage rates for you 
within the next six months. If you have a variable-rate mortgage, your payments 
could go up; if you plan to buy or sell a house, it could be more difficult to 
do so. 
Has Negative Side 
What's going on? Transition in a world economy in which a growing number of 
newly industrialized countries, such as South Korea and Taiwan, Thailand and 
India, are producing more goods than they can consume and sending them to the 
developed countries -- the United States, Canada, Japan and in Europe -- that 
are consuming more than they could possibly produce. That situation has its 
advantages. American consumers and businesses get a lot of goods, from Hyundai 
cars to Radio Shack electronic products, at low prices. 
But international monetary authorities see a negative side to the equation. The 
developed economies are growing faster than their capacity to produce for 
themselves, and that can lead to inflation, explains economist Jonathan Francis 
of Roh Management, a New York-based international investment firm. U.S. 
inflation is currently running at 4.75% a year. 
Furthermore, central banks worry because global money flows are accelerating 
beyond their control. When the International Monetary Fund compiled records for 
1988, it discovered more money sloshing around in developed-nation economies 
than it had thought. 
The problem is that the bustling South Koreas and Taiwans, which logically 
should present ideal investment opportunities, are unwilling or unable to 
accept investment from outside, explains economist Albert M. Wojnilower, of 
First Boston. "So the retirement savings of the advanced countries search for 
outlets at home." That has resulted in abnormally high stock prices in Japan, 
and leveraged buyouts and other oddities in the United States. 
May Soon Change 
Why haven't retirement savings resulted in more productive investment? Because 
many businesses, facing a need to expand capacity in a high-cost country like 
the United States, look over their shoulder at the low labor rates and 
operating costs of a newly industrialized country such as South Korea, and get 
nervous. So spare cash is often invested in money markets, which turn it over 
in financial transactions and give us the paradox of U.S. industry lagging in 
capacity and productivity, while billions churn senselessly in massive buyouts. 
That may be about to change, says investment strategist Charles Clough of 
Merrill Lynch. The Federal Reserve is sharply restricting money supplies in the 
U.S. economy, pushing up interest rates. So far the Fed has hit short-term 
rates -- which increases the cost of financing inventories and affects retail 
businesses. 
But to really slow the economy, the Fed must hike long-term interest rates for 
business loans and mortgages. How does it do that? It pushes up short-term 
rates until long-term markets have to offer higher interest to attract 
investors. That is, long-term government bonds will have to go to 10% to 11%, 
which means 12% to 13% mortgages. 
The prospect is of recession in six months' time, unless the Fed sees business 
activity slowing before then and eases up, explains Robert D. Laurent, an 
economist with the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. 
And if recession comes? It would signal an initial failure of the world 
economic system to cope with prosperity. The overriding point of the changing 
world economy, after all, is rising living standards. But happily, say economic 
experts, any recession at this time will be short and much less severe than the 
1981-82 downturn -- and the world system will get a second chance. 
New Bull Market 
Even pessimists about the current economy forecast the 1990s as a golden 
decade, when more nations join the industrial world, and developed nations 
better coordinate their economies. "It's spread the wealth," says veteran 
investor John Templeton, of Templeton, Galbraith &amp; Hansberger, a mutual 
fund company based in London and the Bahamas. "It's wonderful." 
That's why Templeton, 76, who made his mark years ago with international 
investing, looks past this year to a "new bull market." He predicts the Dow 
Jones index hitting 4,000 a few years from now (from 2,193.21 on Tuesday), 
while Japan's market stalls and marks time but doesn't crash. 
Which sounds like a world in better balance, where the appearance of widespread 
prosperity will also be the reality. For now, however, the Fed and other 
central banks are making ominous moves on interest rates. 
