COUNTY TO BUY APARTMENTS AT SLIDE SITE; 
EVICTION NOTICES STUN RESIDENTS OF 6 CANYON UNITS 
County officials agreed Tuesday to buy six luxury apartments in Malibu so they 
can tear them down. 
The Board of Supervisors, in another landslide-related pay-out, approved a 
$750,000 price tag for the apartment complex in rustic Las Flores Canyon, about 
a third of a mile from Pacific Coast Highway. The vote follows by three weeks 
the supervisors' $35-million landslide settlement with 240 homeowners on nearby 
Big Rock Mesa. 
The razing of the three A-frame apartment structures would allow Las Flores 
Creek to widen, reducing the chance of flooding throughout the canyon during 
storms, county officials said. 
The creek is narrowest, about three feet wide, at a bend where the apartments 
are located. It has lost about 35 feet in width there and 95% of its volume 
since March, 1985, as a Rambla Pacifico hillside has slid into it, officials 
said. 
Eviction Notice 
The purchase of the apartments leaves temporarily unresolved, however, the 
future of residents of five of them. The sixth apartment is vacant. 
Residents say they were stunned by a county eviction notice served last Tuesday 
that declared their homes unsafe and gave them 10 days to move out. They have 
begun negotiations for more time and relocation benefits. 
Supervisors on Tuesday approved payments of up to $10,000 per dwelling, and 
county negotiators said they intended to offer each household a $4,000 lump-sum 
payment plus moving costs and reimbursement for any temporary shelter and 
storage that may be necessary. 
But residents said Wednesday morning that no agreement had been reached, and 
they were planning to plead their case for more time to the county Building 
Appeals Board on Friday, the day on which the county first said it intended to 
raze their homes. 
"It may be that the appeals board will grant them additional time on Friday, 
subject to (the arrival of) a big storm," said Richard Hoff, assistant deputy 
Public Works director in charge of property management. "In that case, we would 
require them to move immediately." 
Even if the dispute is eventually resolved satisfactorily, several residents 
said they were angry over the county's sudden insistence that they move 
immediately. 
"We knew we were going to have to move eventually," said Andrew McCartney, an 
attorney's assistant who has lived with his actress wife, Franny, in one of the 
condemned apartments for 10 years. "But giving us 10 days to move is totally 
outrageous." 
Neighbor Leni Corwin, a free-lance writer, said: "We know there's the risk of a 
possible slide and a possible flood . . . but to be ordered out in 10 days is 
vicious, like Simon Legree. . . . " 
County officials said they made the decision to buy the apartments and evict 
the residents quickly because of a flood scare two weeks ago. 
"We had a situation before that last storm," Hoff said, "where the ground was 
50% saturated and it was still raining. 
"We got very concerned. Once the ground gets 100% saturated and you get a 
certain size storm, (flood waters) can build up within a minute. That's when we 
sent out the notices to vacate. We did weigh it very carefully." 
The decision came after five years of monitoring the situation, Hoff said. 
Each winter since the massive 1983 Rambla Pacifico landslide -- which destroyed 
eight homes, an electrical substation and undercut a busy street -- the county 
has notified about three dozen Las Flores Canyon residents that landslide 
encroachment into the creek has increased the danger of flooding, he said. 
Though Hoff could not estimate how much the slide has moved into the creek this 
winter, he said: "A year ago, there was more of a safety factor than there is 
today." 
Under current conditions, during a major storm, the apartments would block 
rushing waters at a tight turn in the creek, Hoff said. Debris could then dam 
the channel, flooding homes upstream, he said. In addition, a major flood could 
wash away the apartments, threatening the lives of residents and possibly 
damaging downstream property. 
