ONLY IN L.A. / STEVE HARVEY 
Santa Monica has an official bird (the brown pelican) and an official plant 
(bougainvillea), but lawmakers aren't sure whether there's an official song. 
The shocking development came to light the other day when resident Lillian 
Abelson submitted her composition, "That Santa Monica Feeling," to the City 
Council, only to learn that five other city ditties also exist, including one 
dating back to 1916. 
Even Redondo Beach has a clear-cut song ("Redondo Beach for a Day or a 
Lifetime") to go along with its official bird (the Goodyear Blimp). 
Anyway, the matter has been turned over to the Santa Monica Arts Commission's 
Henry Korn, who says a contest may be held to determine the winner. 
For a city that's famous worldwide, Santa Monica has been virtually ignored by 
pop composers. Residents probably don't get misty eyed over "You're the Reason 
God Made Oklahoma," even though it contains the lyric "Santa Monica Freeway 
sometimes makes a country girl blue-ooh-ooh-ooh. . . ." 
Unlike Santa Monica, Reseda is the current subject of a tribute in song from 
Tom Petty, whose "Free Fallin' " offers the tender line: "It's a long day 
living in Reseda/ There's a freeway running through the yard." 
Reseda native Bill Cartwright says he feels honored, except for one small 
point. 
"There's no freeway in Reseda," he pointed out. 
Plenty of yards, though. 
Donald Trump may yet build his tasteful 125-story smogscraper on Wilshire 
Boulevard. But his monument won't be constructed in time to be included in 
"American Highrise." 
The 8-foot-long mural by Richard Daniel Clark depicts the nation's best-known 
buildings, in shapes ranging from cylinders and pyramids to plain old 
rectangles. 
The artwork began as a doodle on a napkin a decade ago. "I was on a plane that 
was circling above Manhattan and I just started sketching the skyline," said 
Clark, a Canoga Park artist/writer who previously produced a live act called 
the "Traveling Gong Road Show." 
"Highrise" features a tiny, 28-story City Hall (crouching second from the left 
in the mural), the 73-story First Interstate World Center (at the right edge of 
the stars) and the Bonaventure Hotel (to the left of the Statue of Liberty). 
Clark's work is subtitled "Land of Man-Made Wonders." Among the wonders, by the 
way, is the fact that L.A.'s First Interstate stands taller than both the 
102-story Empire State Building and the 110-story twins in New York's World 
Trade Center. It's a shame there was no room to include L.A.'s best-known 
structure, the Tail-O-the-Pup emporium, which stands two buns high. 
Some people become nervous in a jury box. Jose Guzman sits there to relax. 
Guzman, a court interpreter, meditates 20 minutes every morning and night. And, 
if he has a morning date, he'll show up early and climb into the box, as he did 
Friday in Division 55, Municipal Court. 
Eyes closed, head tilted back, hands resting in his lap, he sat alone in the 
box, listening to a tape player through headphones. 
Meditation is necessary because his job is so stressful, he said. 
"The defendants are tense," he explained. "They have very nervous vibrations." 
Beware of congressmen bearing gifts? Lawmakers seem to be sensitive about their 
lack of credibility. 
The other day, Rep. David Dreier (R-Covina) presented the Diamond Bar City 
Council with a 1-inch-by-1-inch chip that he himself removed from the Berlin 
Wall earlier this month. 
Just in case anyone doubted the authenticity of the chunk, Dreier added that he 
had a photo taken of himself chipping off the piece. 
Of course, he didn't have the photo with him. 
But he promised to mail it to the council. . . . 
