COLOMBIA'S DRUG LORDS CONCEDE THEY LOST WAR; 
COCAINE CARTELS: DECLARATION PROMISES AN END TO KILLINGS AND TRAFFICKING. VOWS 
RAISE HOPE AND QUESTIONS. 
Warring drug lords conceded victory to the Colombian government Wednesday, 
announcing a suspension of their bloody campaign of bombings and killings. 
In a declaration delivered with the release of a mother and daughter kidnaped 
last month, the traffickers also promised to free other hostages, suspend 
cocaine shipments and turn over their arms if they receive "constitutional and 
legal guarantees." 
The surprise declaration, which immediately raised both hopes for peace and 
skeptical questions, was signed "the Extraditables." That name is used by an 
anonymous group of traffickers believed to include kingpins of the so-called 
Medellin cartel, one of the richest and most brutal crime syndicates in the 
world. 
The drug lords have sued for peace in the past, offering to give up their 
multibillion-dollar cocaine trade in exchange for amnesty. But Wednesday's 
11-point declaration made no specific demands for amnesty and appeared to 
signal a unilateral and unconditional suspension of hostilities. 
Point No. 10 of the document declared "that there will be no attacks with 
explosives in any part of the national territory and that we have ordered the 
suspension of any kind of executions of political leaders, organizational and 
governmental officials, judicial officials, journalists, policemen and military 
men." 
Point No. 11, however, said that the "essential cause" of the drug traffickers' 
fight "has been and will always be our families, our freedoms . . . and our 
rights of nationality." That point raised doubts about the ultimate surrender 
of the traffickers as long as the government insists on prosecuting them for 
crimes or permitting their extradition to the United States for trial. 
The declaration said the traffickers recognize the right of the government to 
assure its own survival "in the face of organizations and persons who, as is 
our case, live outside the law, combatting institutions and the very existence 
of the established juridical order." 
It added: "Consequently, we accept the triumph of the state, of the 
institutions and the legitimately established government, though we will lay 
aside the arms and the goals of our struggle. . . . 
"We accept the existing legal order with the hope of obtaining from the 
government and society respect for our rights and a re-integration of our 
families and communities." 
The declaration said the traffickers "have decided to suspend the shipment of 
drugs and to turn over the arms, explosives, laboratories, hostages, 
clandestine landing strips and other elements that form part of our activities 
as soon as we are given constitutional and legal guarantees." 
Minister of Government Carlos Lemos said accused traffickers will receive the 
same guarantees as all Colombians for a free and fair trial, but the government 
will not make "any kind of commitment" beyond that. 
Asked on television if the government would consider exempting traffickers from 
extradition, Lemos said: "The government has won this war on the basis of not 
making concessions. I don't see why it has to change policy, when its enemies 
themselves have declared that this policy has triumphed." 
Hernando Correa, Lemos' press spokesman, called the traffickers' declaration a 
surrender. 
"It should be received with much satisfaction, but with much precaution, 
because in the past they have said many things that were not fulfilled," Correa 
said in an interview with The Times. 
Security forces under President Virgilio Barco Vargas have sharply increased 
pressure on the cocaine trade during the past year, raiding numerous drug 
laboratories and other trafficking centers. In apparent retaliation last 
August, gunmen killed a judge, a police colonel and a popular politician who 
was running for president. 
Barco then signed emergency decrees that allow the confiscation of accused 
traffickers' properties and that override a legal impediment that had prevented 
extradition since 1987. 
In announcing the decrees, the president declared war on the traffickers. In 
return, the Extraditables declared war on the government. 
In Washington, White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater called on the Barco 
government to continue to resist the cartel's overtures. 
"We have always said, 'No deals,' " he said. ". . . President Barco has been 
clear on no deals, and so have we." 
The Colombian government in recent months has seized scores of ranches, offices 
and homes, arresting hundreds of suspects. For their part, the Extraditables 
have terrorized the country with a campaign of bomb attacks. About 260 bombs 
have exploded since late August, killing more than 200 people. 
Plastic explosives planted aboard an airliner killed 107, and a bus bomb at the 
headquarters of Colombia's equivalent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
killed 63. 
On Dec. 15, authorities hunted down kingpin Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, reputedly 
the No. 2 trafficker in the Medellin network, and killed him in a shoot-out. 
Since Rodriguez Gacha's death, "narco-terrorists" have raised tensions further 
with a series of more than 20 kidnapings. Many of the victims have been 
prominent, including the son of President Barco's closest adviser, German 
Montoya. 
The son, Diego Montoya, was still being held Wednesday when kidnapers released 
Patricia Echevarria and her teen-age daughter, Lina. 
Echevarria is the wife of a prominent Medellin doctor and the sister of Barco's 
son-in-law. She and her daughter had been held in a rural house by hooded men 
since Dec. 16. 
The kidnapers released the pair Wednesday morning at a Medellin housing project 
that was financed by trafficker Pablo Escobar, the alleged leader of the 
Medellin network. News reporters, acting on a tip, found the victims inside a 
parked van. 
Echevarria delivered the declaration from the Extraditables, who said in the 
document that they were releasing the two hostages as proof of good faith. The 
hostages said other hostages would be released as circumstances permit. 
The Extraditables also offered to act as peace mediators for the government 
with groups of hired killers and paramilitary death squads. Officials say 
traffickers have helped finance and train many of the hired killers and death 
squads. 
The declaration was written at least partly in response to a public letter 
signed by former Presidents Alfonso Lopez Michelsen and Julio Cesar Turbay 
Ayala and Archbishop Mario Revollo Bravo, the Roman Catholic primate here. 
The letter, published Tuesday, urged the Extraditables to release kidnap 
victims and suspend drug shipments. It said by doing so, the traffickers would 
merit "less rigorous treatment than if they persist in their criminal 
activities." 
In their declaration Wednesday, the Extraditables called the proposal "a 
patriotic invitation." A controversy has broken out in the Colombian media over 
whether the letter's authors consulted with traffickers and government 
officials before making the proposal. 
Lemos, the minister of government, declined to say Wednesday whether the 
government would offer "less rigorous treatment" to the traffickers. "Let's see 
first whether they turn themselves in or not," he said. 
Gen. Nelson Mejia, commander of the Colombian armed forces, said the 
traffickers' promises were "all magnificent, but the state makes no 
concessions." Sen. Ernesto Samper, a presidential hopeful in Barco's Liberal 
Party, said the traffickers do not seem to be demanding concessions in their 
declaration. 
"I think it is an unconditional surrender that doesn't even leave room to talk 
about negotiations," Samper said. He added that the main question now is 
"whether, really, the offers they make are going to be carried out." 
Meanwhile, Colombian authorities Wednesday turned over an accused 
brother-and-sister team of cocaine traffickers to U.S. marshals in Bogota. The 
Colombian pair, Diana Maria Caballero Rangel Gamber, 29, and Roberto Caballero 
Rangel, 32, bring to 13 the number of Colombians extradited to the United 
States for drug charges since Barco's crackdown. 
The defendants fled to Colombia after being indicted in September, 1988, in 
Greensboro, N.C., with 11 others on charges of conspiring over a six-year 
period to possess and distribute cocaine. 
