EXPANDING L.A. COUNTY BOARD 
In response to your editorial "The Selfish Gang of Five," Jan. 5: 
The Times' continued obsession with larger government and higher taxes can be 
best described as "Edsel Economics." 
Just at the moment when we are witnessing the communist world's move toward a 
free market orientation and a dismantling of authoritarian government, The 
Times is suggesting that Los Angeles County move toward bigger and more 
centralized government, by expanding the Board of Supervisors and creating a 
strong executive. 
Expanding the board is not the best answer. The City of Los Angeles, with its 
15-member council and mayor, has failed to provide adequate municipal services 
for its residents. 
Because the Los Angeles Police Department has been deliberately understaffed, 
parts of the inner city are infested by gangs and look like Lebanon. Lack of 
foresight and planning has led to a solid waste crisis, with landfills filled 
to capacity. The city has a severe sewer problem and is being sued by the 
federal Environmental Protection Agency. The streets are not adequately 
cleaned. And yet, the mayor and 15-member council members sit around like Nero, 
fiddling while Rome burns. 
Those who are hurt by this liberal philosophy are the middle and lower economic 
classes. The strident wailing for a larger Board of Supervisors would result in 
many millions of dollars being taken from our essential sheriff, fire and 
health budgets to pay for more bureaucrats and bigger government. This mode of 
thinking is reactionary. 
Enlarging the Board of Supervisors in order to encourage greater ethnic and 
racial voting is a step backward from our goal of a color-blind society. Just 
as we do not require a religious test for office, we should not require one to 
be of a particular ethnic background to run for public office. 
I would venture to say that the County of Los Angeles has a higher ethnic 
diversity in top management than The Times. People of various ethnic 
backgrounds have been candidates for the Board of Supervisors. In fact, The 
Times endorsed Kenneth Hahn over a qualified black candidate, Gil Smith, in a 
recent election. Now The Times is calling for a quota predicated upon race. 
The Board of Supervisors is a diverse body, with Protestant, Catholic and 
Jewish members. One member is foreign-born, two others were born outside of 
this state, one is of Hispanic heritage, another is of Slavic heritage. Each 
member has been elected with the active support of our various ethnic 
communities. 
Within the 86 cities, the mayors, city council and school board members are 
comprised of all of our ethnic groups. Within county government we have ethnic 
diversity in management and in our many county commissions. 
MICHAEL D. ANTONOVICH 
Supervisor, Fifth District 
Los Angeles County 
