SIGNALS ON ARMS CONTROL 
President Bush may have been conducting a form of arms-control negotiations 
with the Soviet Union during his televised press conference on Friday. 
Early arms-control theorists worried that formal negotiations between 
Washington and Moscow eventually would get so technical and so bogged down in 
bureaucracy that they would collapse. Writing in 1960, Tom Schelling and Morton 
Halperin of Harvard University suggested that a series of displays of restraint 
on both sides might be the only way to achieve arms-control goals if that 
happened. Instead of written agreements, the superpowers would send signals to 
one another saying, in effect, "We could be building or deploying this weapon 
or that, but you will notice that we are not doing so." 
Congress experimented with such a signal of restraint in the mid-1980s, banning 
tests of weapons designed to destroy satellites in space (ASATs) as long as the 
Soviet Union did no testing of its own. The signal of restraint worked. The 
Soviets have not tested an ASAT since 1982. 
In his press conference, Bush endorsed something that former Sen. John Tower 
(D-Tex.)said about the Strategic Defense Initiative, also known as "Star Wars," 
during hearings the day before on his nomination to be defense secretary. 
"I don't believe that we can devise an umbrella that can protect the entire 
American population from nuclear incineration," Tower said. Asked about the 
comment, Bush said: "If he's talking about a shield that's so impregnable that 
it probably eliminates the need for other defense, I probably would agree with 
him." 
Scientists have been saying for years that building a shield is beyond their 
skills and that it may always be. But Administration officials were mum 
concerning the point while President Reagan was still in office, partly because 
he believed in the shield and partly because Americans will not be nearly as 
willing to pour $4 billion a year into research on an umbrella that would leak 
missiles like a sieve. 
Most Soviet scientists seem to be satisfied that Star Wars is out of reach. But 
Soviet soldiers and politicians, starting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, are 
reluctant just to take their scientists' word for it, and they want to limit 
tests of defense weapons. 
Star Wars has enough conservative support to make it tough for Bush to put any 
such limits in writing. But he could signal restraint on Star Wars, leaving 
Congress to back him up with cuts in research funds. It would be a bold 
departure from the traditional White House approach to arms control, but you 
may have seen it happen Friday. 
