ON THE RUN WITH TV'S MARATHON MAN; 
PRODUCER DEAN HARGROVE SPECIALIZES IN SOLVING MYSTERIES -- ZILLIONS OF 'EM 
Dean Hargrove doesn't seem to sweat. His sleeves are buttoned and his tie is 
invariably knotted neatly in place. His desk is serenely clear of clutter, his 
office accented with red poinsettia and French lithographs. 
He is soft-spoken, reticent, the picture of equanimity. 
But Dean Hargrove's profession is murder and mystery. Four times a week. Rain 
or shine. 
He is executive producer of "Matlock" on NBC, "Jake and the Fatman" on CBS, 
"Father Dowling Mysteries" on ABC and "Max Monroe: Loose Cannon" on CBS. 
The A.C. Nielsen Co. counting staff figures that Hargrove's shows had a 
combined viewing audience last week of between 120 million and 130 million 
people. 
And that doesn't include the 38 million who watched his fifth series last 
Sunday, the recurring "Perry Mason" adventures on NBC. 
What with people around like Aaron Spelling, Norman Lear, Stephen Cannell and 
others who are renowned for sheer television bulk, it's uncertain if Hargrove 
can claim a Guinness World Record as a creative writer-producer. But in 
observing him over several weeks in casting sessions, story conferences and 
assorted meetings trying to solve unsolvables, he seems to stretch human 
endurance. 
Life in television is life on the cutting edge of deadlines. 
One of the gags around his office -- like gallows humor -- is that if something 
is demanded four days or more from this moment, that's "an eternity." 
As of this week, Hargrove and his merry band had produced 51 episodes this 
season, had five more in production and had 17 scripts in various stages of 
writing, rewriting and pre-production. 
A status report on each series: 
"Perry Mason" is in its fifth season of three or four movies a year, with 
Raymond Burr in the not-unfamiliar role. A first cut of an episode shot in 
Paris before Christmas, to play in May, was just turned in. Another installment 
begins shooting Monday in Denver. And NBC just ordered six more movies. 
"Matlock," starring Andy Griffith in his fourth season as a country-folks 
lawyer, is shooting its 18th and 19th episodes (a two-parter) for the year. 
"Jake and the Fatman," with William Conrad and Joe Penny in their third season, 
is doing its 18th episode this week. 
"Father Dowling," which shoots in Denver, premiered Jan. 4 on ABC 
(matriculating from a short run on NBC), with Tom Bosley as the high-collared 
investigator and Tracy Nelson as Sister Steve. Episode 10 started Thursday. 
"Loose Cannon" opened on CBS Jan. 5, starring Shadoe Stevens as an L.A. cop who 
has perfected a style of reckless abandon. Episode 6 is being completed. But 
the series -- pummeled by the critics and disdained by viewers -- was pulled 
after Friday's episode and, Hargrove shrugged, "they (CBS) will bring us back 
in March in a different time period and we'll see." 
Hargrove takes a simple approach to pressure: "It's turning out scripts," he 
said. "I mean, I think producing a TV series is essentially producing scripts. 
Every eight days somebody's got their hand out for another script." 
He works on a series "until it finds its speed or own internal rhythms." Then 
the day-by-day duties are handled by the staff. 
But: "Well, there's always going to be problems -- most of which you can never 
anticipate. You deal with them and move on. I've had to make a couple of trips 
to Hawaii (where "Jake and the Fatman" is filmed) where I fly over, get off the 
plane, have meetings and get on the plane and fly back. 
"The only time I ever really feel the pressure is like starting these two new 
shows from a standing start. I have to put together a staff and I've got to put 
enough scripts together and I'm looking at those dates (deadlines)." 
His partners are Fred Silverman, who does the dealing for the team, and Viacom 
Inc., the entertainment conglomerate. It puts up the money. 
Silverman is a legend of the business with stints as programmer at all three 
major networks. His image has been Couch Potato Supreme -- one of the rare few 
TV executives who will "admit" that they watch TV and love it. 
He talked show details with Hargrove most every day until felled by a coronary 
in November. "Now I do a couple hours of work every other day," Silverman said 
from his Malibu beach house. "I hope very shortly to be back to a fairly normal 
schedule." 
He acknowledges that he and Hargrove are "an unlikely odd couple -- Dean is 
lower-key, kind of WASPish. I'm more volatile. He's from Kansas; I'm from New 
York. . . ." 
One of their producers said that they're most anxious to get a sitcom on the 
air because of all their murder shows. "We call them," he said, "the Beasts of 
Brentwood." 
Assessing "dailies" (each day's shooting) or episodes in varying stages of 
editing can be an exercise in anguish, since it essentially is a matter of 
assembling bits and pieces of the story so that it results in a reasonable 
logic. 
Hargrove sits behind his desk, visitors on the sofa. They all eyeball the TV 
set as the cassettes run. 
He told the producer and editors one day that the music was too thin in one 
"Loose Cannon" scene and too big in another. 
He froze the tape when NBC called. The network has this idea about opening 
"Matlock" next season with an episode in Japan, for the promotional value. NBC 
wanted his opinion. 
Back to the tape. Producer David Solomon spotted graffiti on an alley wall that 
Max drives by: "Is that the Crips (the L.A. gang)?" Hargrove laughed: " 'Fraid 
they're gonna sue?" 
Hargrove looked at cryptic notes: This sequence he didn't believe. One action 
needed to be "punctuated more"; "this scene just lays there for me." 
In one "Loose Cannon" episode, Max is trying to trap a hit man and gets himself 
up in blackface as a cook with some sort of twisted dialect. Might have been an 
attempt at Pakistani. 
Solomon reported that "Shadoe wants more of that scene. How he got a cut of the 
show, I don't know." 
Hargrove: "He got a cut of this show?" 
Director Chris Hibler: "That shouldn't ever happen." 
Solomon: "It should never happen. But he did and called about changes in that 
scene." 
Hargrove: "We should find out how it he got it (the tape). I don't want to 
persecute him. Just make sure it doesn't happen again." 
Solomon: "I said, 'Where did you get it?' He said, 'I'm not talking.' " 
Hargrove shares a suite on the Universal Studios campus with Joel Steiger and 
Joyce Burditt, his key "Matlock" producers. On one of the walls in his office 
there's a monster photograph and autograph of Boris Karloff and a quaint 
picture of half of Alfred Hitchcock looking around a corner outside Studio 18. 
Through the window to the lot, you can see the caricature of Hitchcock's round 
cheeks against the screening theater bearing his name. 
With a shag of hair, with the smallest flecks of gray, Hargrove, 52, is 
laid-back, Midwestern proper. He looks trim. He noticed a paunch last August 
and now brings in an exercise pro three early-morning half-hours a week. 
Hargrove has lost 29 pounds, bought some new ensembles, and is holding. 
He doesn't strike you as a funny guy but "I still see myself as a comedy writer 
basically" and "if there is a common trend in the shows, I would hope it would 
be a sense of humor." 
He started off straight enough -- born in Iola, Kan., went to Wichita State 
(political science), UCLA film school, then jokes on the original "Bob Newhart 
Show." 
Other employments: "Man From U.N.C.L.E.," "Girl From U.N.C.L.E.," "It Takes a 
Thief," "Name of the Game" (Gene Barry's segments), "Columbo," "McCloud," 
"Madigan," "McCoy," "Holvak," "Me and Mom" and "Return to Mayberry." 
But it's hard to see the writer -- which is how Hargrove sees himself. He 
leaves few clues around. 
There's a typewriter covered in the corner, next to a computer, new and unused. 
"I never learned it," he said. (Secretary Ann Farina figures that he's afraid 
of the technology.) 
There are no shreds of old notes and misdirected scenes scattered around, sure 
signs that a writer has been there. 
Hargrove is all calm and composure. 
Andy Griffith calls him "the quiet man." 
His wife, the former actress Brenda Scott, who runs Fables, an antique store in 
Studio City, asserted that "it's taken me forever just to get him to do the 
minimum talking." 
In a craft given to frustrations and tantrums, where's the temper? 
One of his "bosses," Henry Schlieff, chairman and CEO, Viacom Broadcasting and 
Entertainment Groups, New York, marvels that Hargrove is "almost unique in that 
(Hollywood) environment," referring gingerly to "the diversity of personalities 
out there." 
The NBC executive on "Matlock," Charisse McGhee, director of drama programs, 
said that the extent of Hargrove's temper in disagreements with her are 
something like "Are you ever going to leave me alone on this?" 
Billy Campbell, director of current series at ABC and the contact on "Dowling," 
only recalled a single time when Hargrove raised his voice: "When he and I 
played basketball at his club one Sunday morning, because I didn't pass him the 
ball." 
Hargrove knew Gerry Conway as a writer with Marvel Comics and worked with him 
on a long-ago project. Conway came in to talk with Hargrove and was assigned to 
rewrite a script. He was sent "Loose Cannon" scripts. Then he came in to see 
the boss. 
"What we'd like to do is run it through your typewriter," Hargrove said. "And 
we should make it a little more urban, a little more contemporary. . . ." 
The script came from Brian Clemens, a writer-producer of some special regard 
since he co-created "The Avengers," a most celebrated English series. He now 
works as executive story consultant via phones and faxes from his home in 
London. 
The plot is tricky -- the episode is called "Tricks" -- about a silent movie 
star whose nephew is immersed in the arms racket. Plus other complications. 
(Director Dan Attias instructed an actress during the audition for another key 
role, "She's an undercover FBI agent who's chasing a terrorist -- but she's got 
amnesia. So you don't really need to know that anyway. . . .") 
Hargrove said the basic structure of the scripts works well: "I don't think you 
have to do much in terms of plotting. At this point, we just wanted to get you 
to get a pass at it." 
Conway: "How about the humor?" 
Hargrove: "The humor in it should be a little more like the humor you read in 
the other scripts." 
Conway: "Seemed a little more distant." 
Hargrove: "Exactly. Brian is British and, you know, there's a slight idiomatic 
difference. I mean, he's terrific and he has some very nice things. As I say, 
this is not to make work. If you find parts of it in terms of dialogue you 
like, don't feel that you're obliged to do anything to it. But I'd like to get 
basically your fingerprint on it." 
As it turned out, Conway's eventual rewrite was adjudged on the button and 
Hargrove promptly gave Conway a "Dowling" assignment. 
What makes for good television? "I don't know how to answer," Hargrove said. 
"That's always a matter of opinion. There are successful programs and there are 
good programs and sometimes they're the same programs. How often, that's the 
question." 
His shows are obviously popular but, if not critically attacked, "they're 
usually critically ignored. I'd say 'Matlock' has never been acclaimed, but I 
don't think it's ever been badly reviewed. 'Loose Cannon' got some bad 
reviews." 
The appeal is traditional-form, old-fashioned mainstream mystery. 
The stories are outlined in enormous detail before scripting: "Once we have the 
premise, the next thing that we want to know is the finish," he said. "Then you 
know how to get there. Say that we're constructing a 'Matlock' story. We work 
out the murder. We work out who the suspects are. And then we jump to the end 
and say, 'Well, what's the finish? What's the finish clue?' " 
The "Perry Masons" are especially by-the-book mysteries: "They have to be. It's 
a tradition. You now only have a society of people who pay a lot of attention 
to 'Perry Mason' but the Erle Stanley Gardner estate is very specific about 
maintaining those traditional elements. We send them copies of the scripts and 
the shows." 
The approach is taking a personality and designing the show for him, "because 
if we feel we can get the right character married to the right star then we 
have a chance of doing something that's going to be popular." 
Adjustments are made. "Jake and the Fatman," for example. 
"It's changed radically," he said. "It started out telling what we call open 
mysteries, where you saw the killers in advance. We tried to play it slightly 
film noirish. We used old standards for all the song titles, integrated them 
into the musical underscore for each episode. Then, when the show was renewed, 
part of the condition was that we take it to Hawaii. Then the show changed and 
became a much more straight-forward cop show." 
After a zillion shows, how does he keep from going back to the same old well 
for ideas? 
"Well, I guess that's a question you can ask almost anybody who does a series. 
When you hit the 90th episode or beyond, you have to try not to get stale. What 
we try to do on 'Matlock' is to vary the format of the show, or bend it a 
little bit, do variations on the central them, so that we're not to hidebound 
that it becomes overly familiar to the audience. 
"It's a good question. It's one that we ask ourselves quite a bit and I guess 
what happens is we get attracted to ideas that are off form simply because we 
want to avoid repeating ourselves." 
In fact, Hargrove and his troops have had to throw out virtually completed 
episodes because they just couldn't make the twisted mystery work to any 
reasonable degree of logic. 
But despite his achievements in murder and mystery, he wants to do a comedy 
series: "At the moment, we're dealing with everything we've got. But at that 
point where we sit down to start doing some new development, which would 
probably be next year, that's certainly going to be part of it." 
Whatever eventuates, in the world of TV programming, you never get too distant 
from humble. 
He had one lesson one day during an audition. One young man said it was good to 
see Hargrove again; Hargrove had hired him for his first TV acting job five 
years ago on a TV movie, "Goldie and the Bears." 
Hargrove paled, as if someone had kicked him in the gut: "Oh my god," he said, 
"that goes back." 
They exchanged niceties. The actor did well enough on his reading (but not well 
enough to get cast). When he left everybody wanted to know about "Goldie and 
the Bears." 
"I blocked it all out," Hargrove said. "Something you don't want to be reminded 
of. . . . It was Warner Bros. I got assigned to it." 
The plot: Three former Chicago Bears players and the detective daughter of 
their dead coach take on a hot case of spies and murderers. Starring Stephanie 
Faracy, Ben Davidson, Terry Hogan, Julius J. Carry III and Thomas Rhiner. 
Solomon wanted to see a cassette. 
Hargrove wanted to change the subject: "Nothing's available on that one." 
