1ST CONTRACT SINCE FIRINGS; 
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS IN ACCORD WITH FAA 
Air traffic controllers have reached tentative agreement with the Federal 
Aviation Administration on their first union contract since President Reagan 
fired 11,400 controllers in 1981. 
"It's a clear victory for both the FAA and the union," said union President R. 
Steve Bell, who predicted easy approval of the agreement by the National Air 
Traffic Controllers Assn.'s 7,000 members. They make up just over half of the 
nationwide controller work force. 
"It represents a new spirit of cooperation between labor and management at FAA, 
in sharp contrast to past problems," said FAA spokesman John G. Leyden. 
The tentative contract was signed late Thursday after a third round of talks in 
Baltimore, Md. The negotiations began in Washington in November. 
The union won the right to represent the 13,000 controllers in June, 1987. The 
former union, the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization, was forced 
into bankruptcy and decertified after Reagan's mass firings of most of its 
members during the strike. 
The contract does not cover salaries, which are set by Congress, or any matter 
that would significantly increase cost of the operation. 
It covers some working conditions, guaranteeing breaks for employees and 
changes in working positions after every two hours. The controllers monitor and 
control air traffic at about 400 installations around the country. 
The contract also sets up several committees on safety, technology and other 
matters, a development that union negotiator Elizabeth Thomas of Tamiami, Fla., 
said would give the union more involvement in FAA decision making. 
Among provisions are participation of the union in accident investigations that 
involve a controller's actions, immunity for controllers who report 
deficiencies in the system, local and national committees on keeping a safe 
workplace, and evaluation of possibly setting up a program to deal with job 
stress. 
Controllers earn between $19,000 and $55,000 a year, depending on experience 
and the number of operations conducted at their assigned facilities. 
