SOCCER ROUNDUP; 
HARVARD TOPS BELL-JEFF IN LEAGUE OPENER AS WEISS SCORES HAT TRICK 
Andrew Weiss, in his first match since he twisted an ankle against San Fernando 
on Dec. 28, scored a hat trick in leading Harvard High to a 5-1 thumping of 
Bell-Jeff in a San Fernando Valley League opener Friday at Harvard. 
Weiss, a striker, scored goals at the 10- and 12-minute marks in the first half 
to give Harvard a 2-0 lead. Greg Harlan's 23-yard free kick with 11 minutes 
left in the half gave the Saracens a 3-0 advantage at the break. 
Harvard outshot the Guards, 26-8, but Coach Barclay Mackinnon said he was 
disappointed his Saracens did not score more. 
"They played a very hard defensive track that left a lot of holes open for us," 
he said. "Weiss could have easily had six or seven goals." 
Midfielder David Moran made the score 4-0 with a shot from 15 yards 15 minutes 
into the second half. Bell-Jeff trimmed the deficit to 4-1 on a corner kick two 
minutes later. 
Weiss capped Harvard's scoring with a goal at the 29-minute mark. 
Senior Rob Faucett recorded six saves in goal for the Saracens (8-2-3). 
In other boys' matches: 
L. A. Baptist 3, Village Christian 0 -- Striker Dan Stepper scored from three 
and 25 yards out to lead the Knights (10-1-2) in an Alpha League opener at L. 
A. Baptist. 
Stepper scored 15 seconds before halftime to give L. A. Baptist a 1-0 lead. 
Chris Herthel's head shot from five yards out after a Paul Berry free kick put 
the Knights ahead, 2-0, at the three-minute mark of the second half. 
Village Christian is 3-5-1. 
St. Francis 3, St. John Bosco 1 -- The first time Kevin Hurley touched the ball 
in a Del Rey League opener at St. Francis, he scored for the Golden Knights, 
who are ranked No. 6 in the Southern Section 3-A Division. 
Hurley's head shot from five yards off a deep cross pass by Erik Franken from 
35 yards gave St. Francis (9-1-1) a 1-0 lead 15 minutes into the first half. 
The Golden Knights scored again on Jason Sinner's free kick at the 10-minutes 
mark in the second half. 
St. John Bosco (5-2-4) cut the deficit to 2-1 with 15 minutes remaining, but 
St. Francis iced the match on a goal by George Ryan a minute later. 
Palmdale 1, Quartz Hill 1 -- Fullback Lorren Long's penalty kick at the 
24-minute mark of the first half gave host Quartz Hill (5-4-2) a 1-0 halftime 
lead. 
Palmdale (1-2-6) tied the score 15 minutes into the second half on forward 
Aaron Cottrell's head shot from 15 yards that sailed over the goalkeeper's 
head. Halfback Rosario Mayoral had the assist. 
Antelope Valley 1, Canyon 0 -- Left forward John Stebleton scored off Tom 
Quinn's cross pass at the six-minute mark in the first half, and the Antelopes 
(3-0) held on to win a Golden League opener at home. 
The Cowboys (5-4) outshot Antelope Valley, 18-12. Goalkeeper Chris Sanford led 
the Antelope Valley defense -- which has allowed only two goals this season -- 
with five saves. 
Canyon striker Jeff Ferguson scored what would have been the tying goal, but 
the score was negated because Chris Thornhill was tripped after dishing off a 
pass to Ferguson. 
The Cowboys were awarded a free kick but were unable to score. 
Goalkeeper Luca Reni made 12 saves for Canyon. 
GIRLS 
Agoura 14, Santa Ynez 0 -- Striker Heidi Walters scored five goals and added an 
assist as the Chargers (13-1-2) rolled in a Frontier League opener at Santa 
Ynez. 
Midfielder Jill Gallegos scored three goals and striker Jennifer Holmwood had 
two for Agoura, which led, 7-0, at halftime. 
