STAGE WATCH: CIGARETTE WARNINGS POPPING UP AT LATC; 'MARRY ME,' 'MEETIN'S ON 
THE PORCH' TO OPEN 
"Cigarettes will be smoked during this performance." 
The lobby signs at Los Angeles Theatre Center warn playgoers that the actors on 
stage will light up during the action. Those who are sensitive to secondhand 
smoke should beware. 
The smoke signals are more and more common at LATC. They were spotted near the 
doors of the theaters housing the current "Once in Doubt" and the recent "Death 
of a Salesman." LATC artistic director Bill Bushnell said he believes the 
warnings began with last year's "Demon Wine," which included a lot of cigar 
smoking. 
The signs are "the result of audience concerns," said Bushnell -- which is to 
say, "a vehement feeling, on the part of a small group, that they want to be 
warned if they'll be in a closed room with smoke, even if the ventilation is 
pretty good." 
If playgoers see the warnings soon enough, they might be able to exchange seats 
near the front of the theater for seats near the rear, or even for seats at 
another show in the four-theater complex. Box-office treasurer Sarah Katz said 
she has made such ticket exchanges, but no one had ever requested a refund over 
the issue. 
Bushnell said he knew of no other theater that regularly warns playgoers of 
on-stage smoking. "Maybe nobody else listens to their audience," he speculated. 
Representatives of the Mark Taper Forum, the Ahmanson and Doolittle, Pasadena 
Playhouse and the Old Globe confirmed that they don't issue warnings about 
onstage smoking, as they often do regarding gunshots and strobe lights. 
La Jolla Playhouse posted a warning for "Nebraska" when it was at the 248-seat 
Warren Theatre last year, but it doesn't post smoking warnings in the larger 
Mandell Weiss Center. 
A South Coast Repertory representative reported that a few audience members had 
complained about the smoke rising from the set of "V and V Only" in 1988. But 
the theater does not post tobacco warnings. 
So LATC is the only major Southland theater where the warnings are routine. 
This is the same theater where nudity offended some playgoers during "Minimata" 
last year, and where graphic language often is heard, including explicit sexual 
talk in "Once in Doubt." But no signs are posted about nudity or language. 
"I don't think the human body does or should offend people," said Bushnell. 
COMING UP: A couple of shows open in often-dark mid-sized theaters this month. 
At the Coronet in West Hollywood, "Marry Me a Little," the Stephen Sondheim 
outtakes revue, will open an indefinite run Tuesday, produced by Norman Maibaum 
and Edward H. Davis. It will be their first production at the Coronet since 
they took over the lease in May; other shows seen there recently have been 
rentals. 
This version of the show adds three new songs "by special arrangement" with 
Sondheim and Craig Lucas, who conceived and developed the original show in 1980 
with Norman Rene. Actors Cynthia Gates and Kevin McMahon developed this staging 
at Theatre West, then did at two theaters into San Francisco. 
Patty Duke, Susan Clark and Carrie Snodgress will star in "Meetin's on the 
Porch," a play about three small-town women during the first half of the 
century, opening at the Canon Theater in Beverly Hills Jan. 24. Author Donald 
MacKechnie is co-directing with Richard Olivier, son of the late Laurence 
Olivier. 
"CHESS" CHECK: The producers of the touring production of "Chess," the Tim Rice 
musical about an international chess competition, have announced dates in Los 
Angeles (July 18-Sept. 2) and in Costa Mesa at the Orange County Performing 
Arts Center (Sept. 4-9). However, their publicist acknowledged that no theater 
has been booked for the Los Angeles dates. And while the publicist asserted 
that the Orange County dates were firm, an Orange County Performing Arts Center 
publicist said those dates, too, "are still in negotiation." Des McAnuff of La 
Jolla Playhouse is directing the touring production, which opens Wednesdayin 
Miami Beach. 
