RACISM BELOW SURFACE; 
JIM CROW'S GHOST LURKS IN NEW SOUTH 
It was the third or fourth time that Andy McWilliams had stepped outside the 
bar to see if the mechanic had arrived to take him to his car, disabled on a 
back road about 5 miles from town. McWilliams had called for help more than 
half an hour ago, but there still was no sign of the mechanic. 
"Hey, relax and enjoy your beer," said a friend, a visitor from Atlanta, as 
McWilliams returned to his seat once again. "The guy knows where to find you, 
right? Why don't you just sit tight and let him come in here for you instead of 
going outside to look for him all the time?" 
McWilliams gave his friend a bemused look and then, realizing that the big-city 
visitor did not quite grasp the situation, bluntly explained: " 'Cause he's a 
nigger, and he knows better than to step foot in here. This ain't no redneck 
bar, but niggers ain't exactly welcome." 
Vestiges of Past 
Old times are not forgotten in Dixie. The "Whites Only" signs have long been 
retired, "mean" racists are a dying breed and, throughout the region, blacks 
and whites are sharing their lives in ways that earlier generations of 
Southerners would find unimaginable. But, for all the dramatic progress in race 
relations below the Mason-Dixon Line, the South still is plagued by vestiges of 
its Jim Crow past. 
Here in the lush, cotton-growing Delta section of northwestern Mississippi, for 
example, many planters still refer to their black field hands as "my people" as 
they once might have said "my niggers" or "my slaves" -- as if they still 
bodily owned them. 
Last summer, when a West Coast reporter visiting the town of Sumner remarked on 
how spruce and prosperous it looked compared to other Delta communities he had 
seen, a prominent white resident unabashedly boasted: "It's because we're 70% 
white here -- and that's the way we want to keep it. You go over to the next 
town, where it's just the reverse, and you'll see what I mean." 
But the problem of the lingering color line in the South is notconfined to such 
rural and small-town areas as the Mississippi Delta. It can be found, to 
varying degrees, throughout the domain of the Old Confederacy. 
Atlanta, for instance, has long prided itself as "the city too busy to hate" -- 
a sobriquet it gave itself when other major Southern cities were torn by bitter 
racial strife during the turbulent era of the civil rights struggles. But, 
residentially, Atlanta today is split almost in half racially, with 90% of 
whites living north of downtown and 90% of blacks living to the south, and the 
city's public schools, with a 92% black student enrollment, are among the most 
segregated in the nation. 
What is more, on the scale of economic equality that Atlanta boasts about, 
blacks often fall woefully behind. For example, an investigative series by the 
Atlanta Journal and Constitution last year disclosed that the city's major 
financial institutions are five times more likely to give mortgage and 
home-improvement loans to whites than to blacks, even though two-thirds of the 
city's residents are black. 
"In 1989, we're still confronted with a deep character flaw in the Southern 
white," said Steve Suitts, executive director of the Southern Regional Council, 
an Atlanta-based organization formed in 1944 to foster better race relations in 
the South. "It is that whites, more than 30 years after the U.S. Supreme Court 
struck down the 'separate but equal' doctrine, truly do not believe that race 
is a burden in society. Even the 'city too busy to hate' is not too busy to 
discriminate." 
Form of Prejudice 
Economic discrimination is one of the most persistent forms of anti-black 
prejudice in the South. 
According to a recent report on the "worker climate" in the United States by 
the Atlanta-based Southern Labor Institute, black workers in New England and in 
several Midwestern states have shared substantially along with whites in the 
benefits of economic growth in their localities. But in many Southern states -- 
most notably Alabama, Arkansas and North and South Carolina -- blacks still 
suffer disproportionately from discrimination and poor labor market 
opportunities, despite the economic expansion in their region. 
Those four states -- Alabama, Arkansas and the Carolinas -- also are among the 
lowest in terms of the percentage of blacks employed in what traditionally have 
been better-paying, predominantly white-male occupations -- executives, 
administrators, managers and professionals, the report said. 
"All workers still have reasons to find the South a disappointing, poor place 
to work," said Ken Johnson, the labor institute's director. "But blacks, 
obviously, have even more reasons than whites." 
The economic disadvantage from which blacks suffer is perhaps most pronounced 
in rural and small-town Dixie. 
In a highly publicized 1987 incident in the southern Georgia town of Tifton, 
for example, a black college student was discharged from her job at a 
white-owned pharmacy the day after she started work because a co-owner feared 
that her race would cause him to lose white customers. 
The student, Tommie Faye Bateman, was then in her final year at the University 
of Georgia's pharmacy college and was considered by her instructors to be an 
above-average student. She had been assigned to the Cox-Ewing Northside 
Pharmacy as part of the college's program placing students in jobs for 
practical training. 
Robert F. Cox, the business partner who dismissed her, said that the university 
did not inform him beforehand that Bateman was black and that he had overheard 
several white customers complaining about her presence in the store. 
"I have no prejudice at all," he told a reporter at the time of the incident. 
But, he added: "We just don't know how to handle customers complaining. . . . 
It's hard for the small independent businesses to survive. You bend to what 
your customers say." 
John Ewing, Cox's partner, offered to rehire Bateman, but she chose 
reassignment to a pharmacy in her hometown of Ashburn, saying: "I never thought 
I would be denied the right to work . . . not after all these years in the 
1980s." 
Emerson Henderson, president of the Tifton chapter of the National Assn. for 
the Advancement of Colored People, said he fears that Bateman's dismissal may 
have created the impression among black youngsters that "regardless of how hard 
they work to get ahead, they're still going to be faced with blatant 
discrimination." 
As in the North, much of the continuing racism in the South stems from a 
deep-seated aversion to accepting blacks as social and cultural equals -- an 
aversion reinforced by generations of custom and tradition and, until the 
abolishment of legalized segregation, by the force of law as well. 
In Atlanta, says Lillian Lewis, wife of black Democratic Congressman John 
Lewis, the social hour is rigidly segregated, being either "black or white -- a 
black dance, a white party, a black ball, a white gala." 
Even in such supposedly enlightened environs as college campuses, with 
generations of young blacks and whites who did not grow up under Jim Crow, the 
color line is often strongly drawn. 
When black co-eds won the homecoming queen crown for two years in a row at the 
University of Alabama, for example, the student senate -- which is dominated by 
white fraternities and sororities -- reacted by voting to change the rules of 
the election of campus homecoming queen. 
Under the old rules, the homecoming crown was awarded to the candidate who 
obtained a plurality of the votes cast by the student body. Blacks had an 
advantage in voting because, even though they make up less than 10% of the 
student population, they tended to vote in a bloc for a favored black candidate 
among the 10 finalists selected by a screening committee. Whites, in contrast, 
were inclined to split their vote among the several white candidates. 
Under the new rules, which went into effect last fall, a candidate cannot win 
with a simple plurality of the votes; she must get a majority -- at least 50% 
plus one vote. If no candidate obtains a majority in the election, a runoff is 
held between the top two candidates. 
"In effect, what this did is to ensure that no black woman would ever win on 
this campus," said Lee McCarley, editor of the Crimson White, the student 
newspaper. "A black made it to the runoff this year, but she was beaten by an 
Asian-American who is in one of the more affluent white sororities. Once it 
came down to a runoff, the white fraternity and sorority 'machine' bloc simply 
voted for her. They're powerful enough to put in anyone that they wish under 
the new rules." 
The student senate's action supports studies by University of Alabama 
sociologist Donal E. Muir showing that white fraternities and sororities are 
"the real stronghold of prejudice against blacks on this campus." 
Muir's surveys have found that whites who belong to fraternities and sororities 
are far less willing than other white students to socialize with blacks and 
accept them as equals. Only 32% of white fraternity and sorority members are 
willing to room with a black, compared to slightly more than 50% of white 
independents, and only 8% of white fraternity and sorority members are willing 
to date a black, compared to about 60% of white independents. 
Part of Power Elite 
"What makes this even more of a problem," Muir explains, "is that the white 
fraternity and sorority members are the ones who, when they graduate from 
college, tend to go out into the general community and become part of the white 
power elite -- the leading business people, the bankers, the politicians. So 
they have an influence far beyond that of their proportionately small numbers." 
Public education, the focus of the landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision in 1954 
abolishing the "separate but equal" doctrine, remains another sore spot in the 
South's race relations. 
Over the last two years in Mississippi, for example, blacks have staged 
boycotts in about 15 different communities to protest alleged discrimination in 
public schools, and they have filed lawsuits against more than 20 of the 
state's 154 school districts. 
Although the grievances vary from district to district, the lawsuits generally 
include charges of discrimination in hiring and promotion of black teachers and 
administrators, as well as accusations that black students are unfairly 
concentrated in classes for slow learners as a result of abuses in standardized 
testing. 
More than half of Mississippi's 506,000 public school students are black, but 
only 35% of the 10,104 instructional personnel are black. And, although more 
than half of the districts have student populations that range from 70% to 100% 
black, only 22 of the total 165 district superintendents are black, according 
to figures from the state education department and the state NAACP chapter. 
White administrators reject charges of discrimination and cite what they term 
the progress in Mississippi since the days when blacks were confined to 
all-black schools with dog-eared textbooks and hand-me-down athletic uniforms 
discarded by white schools. 
But Morris Kinsey, director of the state NAACP's education committee, argues 
that white school officials seem intent on "returning to the days of 
segregation" in schools, thus forcing blacks to seek redress through protests 
and lawsuits. "Whites think it's progress if instead of no shoes you have one, 
but in some cases we don't even have one shoe," he said. 
In a 1987 incident in rural southeastern Georgia, the black community in Ware 
County was outraged when a white county school bus driver ordered 10 black 
students to sit at the back of the bus for a week because they had skipped 
classes to celebrate the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 
The bus driver claimed that she put the students in the back of the bus only to 
facilitate loading and unloading of passengers. 
Few Convinced 
That explanation did not convince many blacks in Ware County, where blacks said 
that they had long suffered indignities in the predominantly white school 
district. On one occasion, during a pep rally at the county high school, two 
cheerleaders reportedly wore blackface and mimicked with exaggerated clumsiness 
the football players from a predominantly black rival school with whom a game 
was set that day. In another incident, blacks said, two white county high 
school students donned sheets and hoods resembling Ku Klux Klan robes for an 
annual Toga Day event. 
The district school board rejected black demands that the bus driver be 
dismissed but voted to make King's birthday a school holiday. That may serve to 
mollify blacks, but it is unlikely to do much else to improve race relations, 
since Southern whites generally ignore King's birthday as a "black" holiday 
anyway. 
"One of the most difficult parts of our life in the South is that a lot of 
whites are living without a sense of history," said Suitts of the Southern 
Regional Council. "Anybody who understands the history of the South and thought 
for a moment would consider what sending blacks to the back of the bus 
symbolically says." 
But, he added: "That's the lingering difficulty in moving this region -- and 
the nation -- beyond the current stagnated state of race relations. The general 
view today -- you can hear it in every coffee shop in the morning -- is: 'I 
didn't create slavery, I didn't create segregation, I didn't create racism, so 
why do these folks want me to do something?' " 
One of the most disturbing aspects of the South's continuing racial dilemmas is 
the persistence of the Ku Klux Klan and its many latter-day offshoots, such as 
the White Patriots Party and the Mississippi-based Nationalist Movement. 
In the mid-1970s, a renewed growth of the klan and the other white supremacist 
organizations occurred nationwide, but the resurgence of the klan itself peaked 
earlier in this decade, and membership has dwindled from a high of between 
10,000 to 12,000 in 1981 to about 6,000 or 7,000 at present, according to 
various estimates. 
However, although the traditional klan has lost membership, there is strong 
evidence that membership in other white supremacist organizations has grown, so 
that the total figure for all white supremacist groups could be as high as 
20,000 or more, according to Eva Sears of the Atlanta-based Center for 
Democratic Renewal, which monitors hate group activity in the nation. 
More Sophisticated 
"What's even more disturbing is that the white supremacists have learned to be 
a lot more subtle and sophisticated, and they are concentrating on influencing 
young people," she said. "And, for our tastes, they're doing it much too 
successfully." 
The klan staged its 55th annual rally last September at its traditional spot 
near Stone Mountain in suburban Atlanta. The rally was held on land owned by 
klan leader James R. Venable. Earlier in the year, the Stone Mountain City 
Council had approved a proposal to name a local ballpark after Venable, a 
former mayor of the town, but it later repealed the action after incurring a 
flood of negative publicity. 
"The klan has lost force in that a lot of their illegal actions are no longer 
tolerated the way they used to be," Sears said. "But they still pose a threat 
because of their potential to polarize and terrorize communities far beyond 
what might be expected if you judged from their size alone." 
Another enduring source of racial division in the South is its Confederate 
heritage. In Montgomery, Ala., the self-styled "Cradle of the Confederacy," 14 
black state legislators were arrested for trespassing on state property last 
summer when they attempted to scale a chain-link fence and remove the Rebel 
banner that flies from the dome of the State Capitol. 
"When I see that flag, I see the banner of a traitor nation that wanted to hold 
my forebears in slavery," said seven-term state Rep. Alvin Holmes of 
Montgomery, who was among the lawmakers who were arrested. 
Noble Cause 
But to many white Southerners the "Stars and Bars" is a symbol of what they see 
as a noble cause and laudable heritage. "I'm glad they zapped those niggers 
when they tried to take that flag down. It's not anti-black," said a white 
Montgomery bartender. 
Clearly, racism remains a salient issue for the South -- as, in fact, it does 
for the nation. Many Southerners -- whites as well as blacks -- believe that 
the South is sliding backward in its efforts to achieve a truly biracial 
society and that neither the North nor the federal government provides the 
moral imperative they once did for change below the Mason-Dixon Line. 
"As long as white Southerners can look at Yonkers or Howard Beach or Chicago, 
it's going to be hard to solve the South's racial problems," said James Cobb, a 
University of Alabama historian, referring to Northern localities that have 
experienced severe racial conflict and violence in recent times. 
"Look at the Reconstruction era following the Civil War. Reconstruction plays 
out when it reaches a point where it tries to push the South to a point beyond 
where the nation as a whole wants to go." 
However, Cobb said: "We'll know that the South's race problem is solved when, 
as the Southern writer Walker Percy once said, a white Southerner hears about a 
racial problem in a Northern city and is sad about it instead of gloating." 
Times researcher Edith Stanley in Atlanta contributed to this story. 
