JURORS HEAR GOTTI BRAG HE HEADS MAFIA; 
GANGSTER: 'GOD'S GIFT TO UNDERWORLD' ON TRIAL FOR ORDERING THE SHOOTING AND 
WOUNDING OF UNION LEADER. 
Jurors wearing earphones listened today to a tape of John Gotti boasting that 
he is "boss" of the nation's most powerful Mafia family and that an admiring 
gangster called him "God's gift to the underworld." 
Gotti's description of his rise to power in the Gambino crime family is 
contained on some of the 1,001 hours of secretly taped conversations at his 
alleged Queens headquarters, the Bergin Hunt and Fish Club. 
Wearing large black earphones, the jury of seven men and five women in the 
assault case against Gotti, 49, and Anthony Guerreri, 60, an alleged Gambino 
soldier, heard the tapes in state Supreme Court in Manhattan. The jurors also 
were provided with transcripts prepared by the government. 
Gotti, wearing a red floral tie, matching pocket square and a black-on-black 
striped double-breasted suit, also was given a pair of earphones but he 
declined to wear them. 
Gotti is accused of ordering the May 7, 1986, shooting and wounding of a 
carpenters union leader, John O'Connor. The shooting was meant as a warning to 
the union, which had trashed a Gambino-linked restaurant in a dispute over the 
use of non-union labor. 
The tapes begin in 1985, when reputed Boss of Bosses Paul Castellano was gunned 
down outside a Manhattan steakhouse Dec. 16 and Gotti allegedly assumed his 
throne. 
In a Jan. 11, 1986, conversation with an unknown man, Gotti said his recent 
rise to power left him feeling obligated to socialize with a higher class of 
people. 
"Me and you may socialize, but I can't socialize with these guys, I can't bring 
myself down, I'm a boss, you know what I mean. . . . I gotta isolate myself a 
little bit," Gotti said, according to the transcript. 
On Jan. 18, 1986, Gotti boasted to another man about the compliments lavished 
on him by an admiring gangster. 
"He says, 'When they say God's gift to the underworld you are it,' " Gotti 
bragged. 
"He speaks with his heart, he means it, I tell ya somethin', I love the guy," 
Gotti continued. 
But apparently not everyone in organized crime revered Gotti and the reputed 
mob boss decided to demand some respect. 
In a Jan. 17, 1986, conversation, Gotti said his underlings had questioned his 
judgments. 
"And they come at me, and they say we're telling you now, what about this and 
what about that? Move this guy, are you gonna move us all? I said, 'Let me tell 
you fellers something. I'm right in what I just done. I could break every one 
of you captains right now, and not overstep bounds.' A new boss does that," 
Gotti said, according to the transcript. 
Most of the tapes played today were meant to prove that Gotti is the boss of 
the crime family and has the power to call all the shots for the Gambinos. 
Later in the trial, the jury is expected to hear a tape in which Gotti 
allegedly orders O'Connor shot, saying "Bust him up," according to prosecutors. 
