BOOK REVIEW; 
A SOCIETY SINKS IN ITS CORRUPTION 
The Execution of Justice by Friedrich Durrenmatt; translated by John E. Woods 
(Random House: $17.95; 216 pages). 
Swiss author Friedrich Durrenmatt, whose novels and plays have earned him 
international acclaim, has a gift for sharp and ironic observation of society, 
especially when it turns on itself and ceases to function. 
In "The Execution of Justice," his sarcasm is aimed at the judicial system. 
Crime becomes a reflection of the political and social climate, a cancer that 
arises from distorted values, from numbness and justification. 
"The Execution of Justice," written over a span of 28 years, was first 
published in 1985 in Zurich under the title "Justiz" ("Justice"). It begins 
with a voice that's charged with tension, a voice that belongs to Spat, a 
bright but poor attorney who is seduced into representing a powerful man who 
has killed and claims that he has no reason for his crime. 
Durrenmatt focuses more on politics than on the characters who play bizarre 
roles in the machinery of Swiss justice. He is highly critical of his country 
that "withdrew from history when it went into big business. . . . Our country's 
ideals were always practical ones . . . an immoral but healthy way of life." He 
looks at pompous manners and traditions, at corruption so smooth that it has 
worked its way into everyday life. 
Yet, in his disturbing observation of the struggle between law and justice, 
Durrenmatt touches on flaws in the legal system in a much more global way. 
Rules have become more important than the transgressions for which the rules 
were once set up. Questions about the nature of justice abound throughout the 
novel. Is justice a "private matter? . . . and why justice? For society in 
general?" 
Durrenmatt always has been drawn to the detective novel, and "The Execution of 
Justice" carries the suspense of a detective novel as it explores a crime 
performed at a Zurich restaurant. Dr. Isaak Kohler tells his chauffeur to wait 
outside the restaurant, walks in, greets Prof. Winter "amicably" and shoots him 
in front of many witnesses. 
No motive is found, and Kohler is sentenced to 20 years. He accepts the verdict 
with dignity and adjusts to the soft prison life, studying Esperanto and 
beekeeping. The warden considers him "either a saint or a devil." 
Kohler convinces the reluctant Spat to reinvestigate the case "under the 
presumption that (he) was not the murderer . . . to create a fiction, nothing 
more." He meets the young lawyer's confusion by assuring him that he is not 
"supposed to investigate reality . . . but rather one of the possibilities 
behind the reality." 
As the murder is reinvestigated, the act of violence is removed from theory, 
and only the theory is dealt with -- a clean, passionless residue that has less 
and less to do with the crime. And this is what happens to justice too -- it 
becomes detached from its source, loses its reason for being and exhausts 
itself in a game. 
Spat finally surmises the motive for the murder, the seduction of the game, the 
"calculation and the execution, the possibility each game presented . . . to 
play not just with balls but with human beings . . . equating himself with 
God." He is certain that Kohler is a murderer and that his "motive was too 
abstract for our system of justice." On the verge of murdering his client and 
killing himself, Spat recounts the events leading to his despair and his 
twisted belief that "justice can be restored only by a crime." 
Durrenmatt's novel ends with a different voice -- that of an editor who tries 
to make sense of Spat's manuscript and interviews the other players in this 
game of justice to verify the authenticity of the manuscript. "The author, a 
lawyer, was no match for his material. The present kept interfering . . . the 
work of a dilettante." 
This last section of the novel seems deliberately unclear with paragraphs that 
run for as long as 19 pages, fusing accounts of murder and suicide to the 
extent where they become jumbled, and making dreadful statements about the 
nature of rape: "A person was only truly free when being raped." 
Despite his focus on politics, Durrenmatt has the gift to create unforgettable 
characters within a few lines: a dwarf woman who lives her sexual fantasies 
through others; a private detective who killed his mother and her lover when he 
was a boy; old Prof. Karl Knulpe and his wife, eminent sociologists, "equally 
tall, equally emaciated, equally unkempt and dirty." Inseparable in their 
private relationship, the professor and his wife are "archenemies in science, 
doing nasty battle with each other in journals; he was a great Liberal of the 
old school . . . she an impassioned Marxist known under the name Moses 
Staehelin." 
According to Durrenmatt, he goes after the kind of humor that develops from the 
tragic, "ernst genommenen Humor" (humor that is taken seriously). One of the 
best-known contemporary authors who writes in German, he has written many radio 
plays and several novels. His work also has been performed on Broadway. 
