PEOPLE 
New membership chairmen and board members have been announced by the Centinela 
Valley YMCA. 
Chet Pipkin, president of Belkin Components of Gardena, will be chairman of the 
Centinela Valley YMCA Membership Campaign. The goal of the drive is to raise 
$160,000, which will be used to support youth programs throughout the 
Centinela-South Bay area. Pipkin is vice president of the YMCA's Metropolitan 
board of directors and served as the YMCA Camp Branch membership chairman 
during the past year. The kickoff and first report dinner will be held Jan. 30 
at the Hawthorne Family YMCA, 12500 S. Ramona Ave., Hawthorne. 
Inglewood Police Chief Ray Johnson will head the 1990 Sustaining Membership 
Campaign for the Inglewood YMCA. Assisting Johnson as unit managers are George 
McKenna, Henry Harris, Joe Sefcik, Rose Mary Benjamin, Clarence Warner, Dr. 
Frank Lewis, and Adeline Otto. The Advanced Gifts Unit is headed by Donald 
Eiesland, president of Inglewood Park Cemetery. The purpose of the Sustaining 
Membership Campaign is to underwrite local YMCA youth programs and provide 
sponsored memberships and camperships for needy boys and girls. The goal for 
the Inglewood YMCA is $56,000. 
Debi Wilson will head the 1990 Camp Branch Sustaining Membership Campaign for 
Centinela Valley YMCA. Wilson is a resource specialist for the Lennox School 
District, member of the Y Camp Support Group and Board of Managers. The drive's 
goal is $16,000, earmarked for local youth programs. 
The various fund drives will be held from Jan. 30 to Feb. 27. 
Richard F. Huhn has been elected president of Hawthorne Parks and Recreation 
Foundation, a nonprofit organization working to improve facilities and programs 
in human and leisure services for Hawthorne residents. Huhn succeeds Dick 
Miller, manager of personnel activities at Northrop Aircraft. This is Huhn's 
second time as foundation president. He was charter president in 1984. An 
employee of Hughes Aircraft Co., Huhn is immediate past chairman of the 
Hawthorne Parks and Recreation Commission. 
Assisting Huhn will be Dan Juarez, vice president, Jane Parker, secretary, and 
Don C. White, treasurer. White is a retired vice president of Crocker Bank. The 
foundation is an independent organization and is not affiliated with the 
municipal government of Hawthorne or any of its agencies. 
John Fidler has been named chief executive officer of Daniel Freeman Hospitals 
in Inglewood and Marina del Rey, it has been announced by Sister Regina Clare 
Salazar, president of the hospitals. Fidler comes to California from St. Mary's 
Medical Center in West Palm Beach, Fla. The hospitals are Catholic, nonprofit 
medical facilities under the direction of the Sisters of St. Joseph of 
Carondelet. 
Insurance consultant Frank G. Smetana has been elected to a second term as 
president of the Palos Verdes Peninsula Chamber of Commerce. Also re-elected 
were Ed Rea Jr. and Dave Hawkins, vice presidents, and David Diestel, 
treasurer. Newly elected chamber directors include Margaret Lopez, Eric Allan, 
Linda Elliott, Barbara Dorman and Mary Harris. Installation of officers and 
directors will take place at the Annual Citizen of the Year Awards Dinner on 
Feb. 16 at Palos Verdes Country Club. 
