BOXER'S DEATH STAGGERS FATHER WHO TAUGHT, NURTURED HIM 
William (Murf) Murphy, owner of a popular downtown boxing gym, has been down on 
the canvas before. Looking back on a career that included more than 200 
professional fights during the 1940s and 1950s, he is the first to admit, "I 
was never a great fighter." 
But somehow, "Irish Billy" Murphy -- as he was known in his fighting days -- 
always managed to get back on his feet and clinch or backpedal to survive the 
round, if not the fight. Murphy has not fought in decades, but today finds 
himself reeling from a blow delivered harder than any he received from the 
dozens of forgotten opponents he faced in the ring. 
Murphy, 62, would gladly relive the awful whipping he got from former 
middleweight champion Rocky Graziano more than 40 years ago, if someone could 
erase Oct. 23, 1988, from the annals of time. The old man's eyes filled with 
grief, and his voice choked as he told a visitor about that Sunday two months 
ago, when he carried the limp body of his 28-year-old son from the gym's 
dressing room to a rubdown table. 
Thomas (Spud) Murphy, a popular club fighter with the heart of a lion, 
collapsed from an aneurysm after a workout and lingered for 27 hours before his 
wife, Mary, gave doctors permission to pull the plug on the machine that was 
keeping him alive. Doctors told the family that Spud was brain-dead. 
Moments before collapsing into unconsciousness, the kid walked out of the 
dressing room, complaining of a headache and begged his father, "Dad, take it 
away." 
"Those were his last words. There was nothing I could do," said Murphy. The 
tone of his voice reflected his helplessness. 
Local boxing aficionados lament that Spud Murphy's ring career lasted less than 
two years. His professional lifetime record is listed as an unimpressive 7 
wins, 6 losses and 1 draw, but that does not reflect his fierce dedication to 
the sport. 
Stripped of License 
Although he had not fought since 1979, when the state boxing commission 
stripped him of his license, the mention of his name stirs memories in the 
minds of fans who remember the quiet Irish kid who used to sell out the old 
Coliseum at 15th and E streets. Spud was a crowd pleaser, a fighter willing to 
wade in and trade punches with an opponent until one or the other quit or 
dropped. 
His second fight with Sammy Meza was a typical brawl. After winning a decision 
over Meza on Oct. 21, 1977, the appreciative crowd showered the ring with more 
than $1,000 in coins, which was split between the two fighters. That bout was 
picked as the fight of the year by local sportswriters. 
Spud Murphy's fighting style was remembered by the San Diego Tribune, which 
reported a few days after his death that he lost his license because "he was 
the type of fighter who took so many punches while landing his own." People may 
have questioned his ring tactics, but nobody ever questioned his courage. 
Ringside physician Thomas Lundeen and Rob Lynch, director of the California 
Boxing Commission, said the aneurysm that killed young Murphy was not caused by 
any injuries he may have received in the ring. Lundeen reported to the 
commission that the aneurysm was caused by a congenital disorder. 
"To this day I don't believe that Spud's gone," said Murf. "Whenever I hear the 
(gym) door slam shut, I listen to the footsteps coming up the stairs. I always 
look to see who it is, and I still expect to see Spud standing at the top of 
the stairs, smiling at me." 
The gym is at the corner of 11th Avenue and Broadway, on the second floor of a 
building that houses a rundown bar on the bottom floor and a nationally known 
billiards hall across the hallway from the gym. The approximately 2 dozen 
fighters and others who train there in the evenings have to run a gauntlet of 
pimps, hookers, junkies and hustlers on the sidewalk before walking up the two 
flights of stairs. 
A small, hand-lettered sign on the door lists Spud Murphy as the gym's 
"assistant trainer." But Murf has already made plans to tear it down. The old 
man has renamed the place the "Spud Murphy Boxing Gym." 
Spud Turned Pro in 1977 
Spud Murphy won his share of amateur titles in the early 1970s, fighting 
throughout the United States, before Murphy moved his family to San Diego, 
where Spud turned pro in 1977. Spud fought as a professional featherweight 
while he was still in high school. 
"My dad, father-in-law and I would pay money to go see him fight. . . . He used 
to sell out the Coliseum when he was still in high school," said Rey (Cherokee) 
Inchaurregui. "Everybody looked up to the kid because he was so young and a 
pro." 
Inchaurregui, an ironworker who works out at the gym, turned out to be one of 
Spud Murphy's best friends. 
Murf nurtured Spud and guided his career, convinced that he was some day going 
to earn a title shot. In and out of the ring, the two were inseparable. Preston 
Easley, a local attorney and boxing fan, said the two shared a bond that went 
beyond that of a normal father-son relationship. 
"If you were looking for Spud, you'd ask where the old man was at that 
particular moment. One was an appendage of the other. The same was true if you 
were looking for Murf. You'd might as well look for Spud, and you'd find the 
old man," said 
Easley. 
Inchaurregui echoed Easley's comments. 
"You look at the old man, and you can tell he's hurting bad. Sometimes, when 
I'm working out I see him standing near the stairs, listening for the door to 
open. Just for a moment you can see him look quickly at the stairs, waiting for 
Spud to come running up. . . . If I had the power to do one miracle, believe 
me, I'd bring the kid back . . . for the old man's sake," said Inchaurregui. 
By all accounts, Spud Murphy's life outside the ring was a complete 
contradiction of a boxer's life. The family is devoutly Catholic, and Murf 
remembers a church retreat that he and Spud participated in when they were 
living in Colorado. 
"We were buddies. We went on a five-day retreat with the church at a monastery 
located in the hills of Colorado. Spud served as an altar boy at Mass every 
morning. . . . He was a good kid. He went to church," said Murphy. 
After the state stripped him of his license, Spud Murphy appealed to the boxing 
commission three times, in 1983, 1985 and earlier this year, commission 
officials said. The appeals were denied each time. 
"We retired him in 1979 because he collapsed in his dressing room after his 
last fight with David Madrid. He was flat unconscious," said Lynch. "Once you 
start blacking out, we don't want you licensed." 
Friends say that Murf told them that Spud collapsed from exhaustion. 
Never Gave Up Hope 
Despite the setbacks, father and son never gave up hope that Spud would one day 
be able to climb back into the ring. Anticipating that, he trained and kept in 
shape, with Murf supervising every move. 
"He worked out every day, ran 5 or 6 miles in the morning at Fiesta Island. I 
used to pick him up at 4 a.m. and drive him out there so he could do roadwork. 
Then I'd bring him back and take him to work," said Murf. 
"I want my boy back," he continued. ". . . I'll be driving down the highway, 
and I find myself talking to him. I drive by the cemetery just to say 'hello.' 
I drive that Cadillac slowly by the cemetery and look at him. His grave sits on 
a hill. . . . Spud and I were inseparable," said Murphy. 
After Spud's death, the family agreed to donate his organs. The kid's heart is 
now ticking inside a father of five. 
When Spud died, he left a young widow and three young daughters, ages 8, 6 and 
1, and a 6-month-old son, Thomas Jr., or TJ. After his brother's death, Rocky 
Murphy, a noted amateur boxer in his own right, moved to San Diego from Denver 
to be Murf's assistant trainer. Rocky, 23, was named after Murf's old nemesis, 
Rocky Graziano. 
Mary Murphy, the matriarch of the family, manages the gym and is known as "Mom" 
in local boxing circles. 
"My wife was the strong one during the funeral. . . . She's the one that kept 
the family together. But, since we buried Spud, she hasn't visited the 
cemetery. She hasn't brought herself to accept the idea that he's dead," said 
Murf. 
