A DAY IN THE LIFE 
Producer Dean Hargrove spent much of last Sunday at his home in Brentwood 
reading scripts -- so he faced Monday with that enthusiastic feeling of being 
caught up. But it never lasts very long. He woke about 6:30 a.m. Monday to 
confront his fitness trainer, Pete Steinfeld, who ran him through his sweats 
for 35 minutes. Then off to the office through the thick morning traffic to 
face a typical day. . . . 
 9:20 a.m. Phoned David Shapira, Raymond's Burr agent, to discuss "Perry Mason" 
overnight ratings of the previous night's show and possible writers for next 
year. 
Took a call from Julie Sommars, co-star on "Matlock," who told him about her 
experiences at the Golden Globe Awards. She was nominated for best supporting 
actress. 
Called Billy Campbell, ABC liaison executive on "Father Dowling Mysteries," who 
had notes on an upcoming script. Discussed preemptions on last week's "Dowling" 
in 10 key cities because of local sporting events. 
Called Carol Dudley, "Perry Mason" casting director, who said actor Tim Reid 
may be set in an episode. 
Maureen Arata, "Dowling" casting director, called to set up a casting session. 
10 a.m. Met with David Moessinger and Jeri Taylor, executive and co-executive 
producers on "Jake and the Fatman," for notes on a script and a story outline. 
11 a.m. Met with a writing team on a "Dowling" episode for next season. 
11:30 a.m. Met with Tim King, "Dowling" associate producer, and editor Mark 
Harrah to run a trailer on an episode. 
11:45 a.m. Called agent Norman Kurland on a second "Dowling" directing 
assignment for James Frawley. 
Returned call to actress Holland Taylor to set meeting on a project. 
Called "Max Monroe: Loose Cannon" story editor Bill Conway with notes on an 
episode. 
Called "Dowling" supervising producer Bob Schlitt on casting questions. 
1-2:30 p.m. Left office for lunch and running errands. 
2:35 p.m. Met with director Ron Satlof to discuss a key casting on the next 
"Perry Mason" shoot, "Case of the Silenced Singer." 
Called Carol Dudley on guest star casting for "Perry Mason." 
Spoke with partner Fred Silverman regarding moving "Loose Cannon" to a new CBS 
time slot in March (on Wednesday the show was put on hiatus) and the opening 
episode of "Matlock" for next fall. 
Met with Joel Steiger, co-executive producer on "Matlock," on locations for 
that opening show. 
Spoke with Carter DeHaven, "Perry Mason" editor, to set time for screening the 
second half hour of the upcoming "Case of the Paris Paradox." 
Met with "Loose Cannon" story editor Conway on his and Hargrove's changes for 
"Felonious Monk" episode. Put revised script into distribution for staff, 
network, etc. 
Called Bob Greenfield at Viacom business affairs to extend contracts with 
"Dowling" staff for the two additional episodes ordered for this season by ABC. 
Met with King at "Dowling" to rearrange air schedule. 
3:30-7:30 p.m. Met with Schlitt and Joyce Burditt, executive story consultant, 
to discuss rewrite on "Dowling" episode. Re-outlined script and split up the 
first three acts -- with each to rewrite an act. 
During this meeting: 
Spoke on phone to Dudley on "Perry Mason" "name" casting. 
Three calls to Arata on a single casting on "Dowling." 
"Loose Cannon" supervising producer Chris Hibler called from set to discuss 
script rewrites. 
Called Barry Steinberg, "Dowling" producer in Denver, on location for a stunt 
in an upcoming episode. 
Actor James McEachin called to clarify two script points and discuss wardrobe 
regarding his guest role in "Dowling." 
"Loose Cannon" producer David Solomon called to set up a screening of a 
rough-cut, two-part episode. 
Agent Dede Binder called to discuss using Nia rPeeples in "Perry Mason." 
Called Moessinger on revising a "Fatman" story outline before Kimmer Ringwald, 
the producer in Hawaii, starts the script. 
Called NBC executive Brian Pike to set up lunch meeting with Steiger and 
Burditt, also "Matlock" producer, to discuss plans for next season's "Matlock." 
7:30-8:30 p.m. Ran dailies for "Matlock," "Dowling" and "Loose Cannon." 
 Hargrove then departed for home to eat supper and put his feet up. He ran "The 
Detective," just released on videocassette, with Alec Guinness playing 
priest-sleuth Father Brown. "I figure that since we traffic in this (as in the 
"Father Dowling" intrigues), it would be useful to see," he said. Then to bed 
at 11 p.m. 
