CHURCHES, SALVATION ARMY OPEN DOORS FOR THE HOMELESS 
Orange County activists for the homeless expressed their thanks Wednesday for 
offers of shelter from local churches and the Salvation Army to replace 
armories in Fullerton and Santa Ana that have been taken over by the National 
Guard for training sessions this week. 
"The response has been tremendous," said Scott Mather, head of the Orange 
County Homeless Task Force. "The response is real generous. We've got the food. 
Everything is organized." 
The task force coordinates the opening of the emergency shelters when overnight 
temperatures are expected to drop below 40 degrees in dry weather, or to 50 
degrees when a 50% chance of rain is forecast. 
A meteorologist at WeatherData Inc., which provides forecasts for The Times, 
said the extended outlook for the weekend is for more rain and nighttime 
temperatures that could drop into the high 20s. 
The Orange County armories are among 15 throughout California that will not be 
available as homeless shelters this weekend because of training drills, Guard 
spokesman Maj. Steve Mensik said. 
Mather, who chairs the mainly volunteer task force, said the Salvation Army in 
Fullerton, which can house 150 in its building, is already in operation, 
housing the homeless. 
A Presbyterian church in Fullerton also is considering offering a facility 
capable of housing 130 people on Friday night and through the weekend, if 
necessary, he added. The National Guard armory in Fullerton can shelter up to 
125 people when it is available. 
Two churches in Santa Ana, which Mather declined to name, have promised to open 
their doors and kitchens through the weekend, he said. Another church in 
Mission Viejo also may be available if its board of trustees approves the plan, 
he added. 
"We can put 125 (people) into the (Santa Ana churches)," Mather said. "They're 
very comfortable, heated and have nice kitchens." The National Guard armory in 
Santa Ana can also house up to 125 people a night. 
The Salvation Army shelter was open Wednesday night and will remain open 
through Sunday night, Mather said. The Santa Ana churches will open their doors 
tonight through Sunday, he added. 
Mather's task force will have announcements on the shelter locations and bus 
transportation at the usual pickup points for the homeless, he said. 
"Everything is the same as we usually do for the armories; they're just 
different end points," he said. 
News of the armories closing for National Guard use caught county officials and 
volunteers for the homeless by surprise earlier this week. On Tuesday, they 
issued an urgent appeal for temporary shelter space in the event that cold 
rains or frigid night temperatures made the emergency accommodations necessary. 
