LANDING STRIP FOR SHUTTLE SINKING FROM USE OF WELLS; 
WATER: OFFICIALS SAY GROWTH IN ANTELOPE VALLEY HAS INCREASED PUMPING, WHICH HAS 
CAUSED THE LAKE BED AT EDWARDS TO SUBSIDE AS MUCH AS THREE FEET. 
The dry lake runways at Edwards Air Force Base, famous as the landing ground of 
the space shuttles, are cracking and sinking, apparently because the Antelope 
Valley's growing population is sucking ground water from beneath them, federal 
officials reported Thursday. 
During a hearing by the California Water Commission in Lancaster, officials of 
the Air Force and the U.S. Geological Survey said they believe development 
there and in nearby Palmdale had led to lower ground water levels, causing the 
soil under the air base to settle. 
"It's very obvious ground water pumpage throughout the Antelope Valley is 
having an impact on the subsidence at Edwards Air Force Base," said John Klein, 
district chief of the survey's water resources division. The agency is 
conducting a five-year, $6-million study of the problem and other water-use 
issues for the Air Force. 
Portions of the base's 44-square-mile Rogers Dry Lake bed, used by space 
shuttles and "The Right Stuff" test pilots, are believed to have subsided as 
much as three feet. Air Force officials said the lake bed is broken by fissures 
up to 3 feet wide, 2 feet deep and hundreds of feet long. 
Klein and Air Force officials told the commission that the subsidence problem 
at the base, as well as a related drinking water shortage there, could worsen 
unless, in Klein's words, "major steps are taken to limit further withdrawals" 
of ground water in the region. 
The problem is so serious that the Air Force has been able to continue using 
the clay runways only by using up to 10 people full time to fill in the cracks. 
"We're seeing severe cracks throughout the whole lake bed," but the Air Force 
will be able to continue using the lake bed as a runway as long as repairs are 
kept up, said Col. Peter Walsh, the base's civil engineer. 
Located about 35 miles northeast of Lancaster, Edwards is home of the Air 
Force's famed Flight Test Center and is the second-largest Air Force base in 
the continental United States, covering about 300,000 acres, officials said. 
The entire region gets its water from the same underground source. 
During the past decade, the population of the Antelope Valley has nearly 
doubled from 100,000 to almost 200,000 and water use has climbed. 
Air Force officials stressed that they were not calling for a slowdown of 
residential development in the region. Instead, they asked that the area's 
water agencies shift away from ground water and instead use more supplies from 
the California Aqueduct, which carries water from Northern California. 
The region already gets about 40% to 50% of its water from the State Water 
Project's aqueduct, said Wallace Spinarski, general manager of the Antelope 
Valley/East Kern Water Agency. But that supply has not been secure, 
particularly during droughts, and officials have also relied on local ground 
water. 
Klein said the ground water level at Edwards has dropped from about 10 feet 
below the surface in 1948 to a recent level of about 100 feet below. But Klein 
said it is difficult to tell how much of the decline is attributable to the 
rapid growth of recent years. 
Air Force officials first noticed the problem several years ago, Walsh said, 
and "the rate of subsidence is increasing . . . as the rate of withdrawal from 
the aquifer increases." 
In addition to ground water pumping, Klein said, massive development in the 
Lancaster-Palmdale area also appears to have contributed to Edwards' water 
problem by blocking rainfall from reaching formerly open areas, shifting the 
underground water flow away from Edwards, he said. 
Calling the base "a national asset," Walsh said the Antelope Valley region 
needs to develop a comprehensive water management plan that would address the 
need to preserve the area's ground water. That presumably would halt further 
damage to the base's dry lake bed, he said. 
But that is not the base's only problem. During the past summer, the facility 
was plagued by a drinking water shortage and had to adopt strict conservation 
measures because many of its ground water wells, the base's only water supply 
for now, had to be shut down, Walsh said. 
Nine wells have been closed, three because of natural arsenic contamination and 
the others because of aging equipment and declining water flow, Walsh said. 
Twelve remaining wells should carry the base through low water use months until 
this summer. 
