RAMPAGE THAT KILLED ESCONDIDO SAILOR A MYSTERY; 
NAVY: INVESTIGATORS KNOW NO MOTIVE FOR THE SLAYINGS AND SUICIDE BY A PETTY 
OFFICER AT A NUCLEAR SUBMARINE BASE IN WASHINGTON STATE. 
Navy investigators Friday were trying to unravel a bizarre murder mystery 
involving three young sailors, including one San Diegan, at a top-secret 
nuclear submarine base. 
Shyam David Drizpaul, 23, a petty officer assigned to the weapons system of the 
Trident submarine Michigan, allegedly shot and killed two crew mates and one 
civilian, and seriously wounded another civilian before committing suicide 
Tuesday. 
Among those found shot was Drizpaul's roommate, David Alan Parker, 21, of 
Escondido. Parker, a radioman second class, had planned to surprise his parents 
in Escondido on Friday with a visit. 
"I just don't understand. I guess the good Lord will provide answers," his 
mother, Ann Parker, said. "David was just beginning to really grow up and find 
his own way." 
None of the Parker relatives had met Drizpaul, but David Parker had spoken of 
him. 
"Every time he mentioned his roommate, it was all positive. He said they were 
getting along fine, doing things together, and that everything was OK," said 
his father, Arthur Parker. 
The bloodshed at the Naval Submarine Base, Bangor comes amid increased scrutiny 
of the Navy's psychological screening processes and has raised troubling 
questions about security at the highly sensitive compound on Puget Sound. 
Also unclear is whether the slayings late Monday and early Tuesday might 
involve military secrets, since the only suspect had top-security clearance. 
"We really don't have any idea about the motive," said Lt. Cmdr. Keith 
Arterburn, a Navy spokesman. "We're looking at everything in this 
investigation." 
He said a team of 35 to 40 Navy investigators -- including forensic specialists 
from San Diego and San Francisco -- was working on the case. 
Arterburn said none of the three sailors from the Michigan had any disciplinary 
record. Autopsy results were pending, so it was not yet known whether drugs 
were a factor. 
However, Navy authorities acknowledged that they confiscated an unregistered 
pistol from Drizpaul but -- unaware of the murder on the base -- let him go 
just hours after his crew mates were killed. 
Drizpaul then went into nearby Bremerton, where he killed a pawn shop clerk and 
seriously wounded her brother in obtaining another gun, Bremerton Police Chief 
Delbert McNeal said. 
"We figure, after having done his deed in Bangor, remorse set in and he 
believes there's only one thing to do -- kill himself -- and he had to get 
another weapon," McNeal said. 
Drizpaul's body was found Wednesday in a motel room about 100 miles away in 
Hazel Dell, Wash. Parker's car was outside and a gun taken from the pawn shop 
was in the room, McNeal said. 
Besides Parker, Drizpaul killed Fireman Recruit Scott Anthony Seely, 18, of 
North Ridgeville, Ohio, and pawn shop clerk Julie Lynn Tuscher, 24, of 
Bremerton. 
Tuscher's brother, Allan Michaels, 28, remained hospitalized in serious 
condition with a gunshot wound to the abdomen. 
In Escondido, Parker's parents struggled with the tragedy. 
"I know there has got to be a reason," said Ann Parker, his mother. "It's just 
getting real to me right now. I'm just numb." 
David Alan Parker, the second youngest of the couple's four boys, would have 
come home Friday for a two-week vacation. He was eager to meet his new nephew, 
Christian Nicolas, who was born two weeks ago. 
But he had another reason to come home. On Feb. 3, his younger brother, Doug, 
will be installed as an official of a local Masonic youth group that all four 
Parkers have taken part in. The four brothers and their parents had planned to 
attend the ceremony, in which Doug will become master counselor of the Agate 
chapter of DeMolay, which has 75 members. 
The family has decided to go ahead with the ceremony, Ann said. 
Parker, an athletic 6-foot-2, enjoyed basketball, graduated from Mira Mesa High 
School in June, 1986, and joined the Navy the following September. From the 
beginning, Parker loved Navy life and decided to make it his career. And he 
spoke to his parents of eventually applying for officer candidate school, a 
16-week program. 
"David was so proud of being in the Navy, particularly being on a Trident 
submarine -- this was the highlight of his life," Ann Parker said. 
David Parker, she said, also enjoyed the camaraderie of the military man, and 
he liked the other crew members. He had spoken of the other crew member killed, 
Scott Seely. 
"David mentioned the name Scott. He liked his barracks -- he liked the guys," 
said Ann Parker. She struggled to remember exactly what her son had said about 
his colleagues. 
"You try and reach in the back of your mind and remember," she said, her voice 
trailing off. 
For Parker's family, his death is a devastating mystery. Arthur Parker, who had 
been in the Navy 22 years before he retired in 1980, has asked to see the 
Navy's investigation report when it is released. 
"I just would like to know what they find out," he said. "I gave up on rumors 
and speculation." 
But Parker's friends and family say even the knowledge of what happened will 
not ease the pain of their loss. 
"He had everything going for him, everything in the world -- it chokes me up," 
said Bob Catalano, the adult leader of the Agate chapter of DeMolay. "It's just 
such a tragedy for a young man with his whole life in front of him to be blown 
away like that." 
The killings were discovered late Tuesday morning when the three sailors failed 
to report for duty, Arterburn said. 
A room-by-room search of bachelor enlisted quarters uncovered Seely's body in a 
television lounge. Parker was found dead in his bed. Both men had been shot in 
the head between 11:30 p.m. and midnight Monday, Arterburn said. 
He said Drizpaul had been stopped by gate security around 2:45 a.m. Tuesday 
while trying to enter the base. He was held on suspicion of drunk driving and 
an unregistered 9-millimeter Llama pistol was confiscated, Arterburn said. He 
said ballistics tests were being conducted to determine if that weapon killed 
Parker and Seely. 
"The officers did everything according to procedure," he said, adding that 
Drizpaul was turned over to his duty officer and told to report to superiors in 
the morning. 
Because of tight secrecy at the Trident base, little information was available 
about Drizpaul, a Guyana native who moved to Milwaukee with his family 15 years 
ago. He became an American citizen in 1980 and joined the Navy in 1987. 
Assigned to the Michigan in May, 1988, Drizpaul was a fire control technician 
who repaired and maintained some of the computer systems used in the Trident 
sub's missile-launching sequence. 
The Navy maintains that personnel in such sensitive positions are rigorously 
screened and are suspended if there are any indications of drug abuse, 
emotional instability or financial misconduct. 
Navy officials said that Drizpaul was not under any such suspicion. 
The case comes just six months after another Bangor sailor was arrested in the 
slaying of an elderly couple off base. 
The Navy's psychological screening process came under the most scrutiny last 
year after investigators contended that a suicidal sailor triggered an 
explosion that killed 46 other sailors aboard the battleship Iowa. But many 
have rejected that explanation for the explosion. 
A pair of Navy psychologists sharply criticized the screening process in the 
December issue of the U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings. 
The authors, Lt. Cmdr. Douglas Derrer and Lt. Michael Gelles, said sailors 
exhibit more severe personality disorders today than in previous years and that 
those with such emotional disturbances seem to be "more dangerous to themselves 
and others." 
Staff writers Nora Zamichow in San Diego and Melissa Healy in Washington 
contributed to this story. 
