MEX-AMERICA: A STATE OF MIND; 
MIGRANT SOULS BY ARTURO ISLAS (WILLIAM MORROW: $16.95; 224 PP.) 
There has been a lot of talk lately -- by no means all of it foolish futuristic 
speculation or 1960s-style Chicano nationalist wish-fulfillment -- about the 
birth of a new and original society along the United States-Mexican border. 
To the people who live there, cities like San Diego and Tijuana, El Paso and 
Juarez, seem for better or worse to become more intertwined every year. As 
their economic and cultural interdependency grows, the international boundary 
shrinks into irrelevence -- an increasingly hollow legal fiction in these 
binational metropolises that now resemble each other far more than they do the 
more fully American or Mexican cities farther north or farther south. 
The region has an ethos of its own, and, by now, a name: Mex-America. In Carlos 
Fuentes' marvelous dystopian novel, "Christopher Unborn," set in an anarchic 
Mexico of the near future, this Mex-America has become an independent buffer 
state. The future, of course, is unknowable, but even the present is very 
radical indeed. As Arturo Islas' new novel, "Migrant Souls," ably demonstrates, 
Mex-America may not yet exist juridically, but it is already well entrenched as 
a state of mind. 
It is not, by all appearances, a comfortable state to inhabit. "The truth is," 
laments young Chicano lawyer Rudy Angel during one of the many family 
gatherings that punctuate Islas' flawed, ambitious book, "we don't know what we 
are because we don't know who we are." The answer, he decides, with a certain 
gritty rue, is that families like his own reside "on the border between a land 
that has forgotten us and another land that does not understand us." 
Islas understands this world of loss and mixed allegiance perfectly, and some 
of the strongest moments in his book occur when his characters wrestle with 
their inchoate, painful destinies. 
"Migrant Souls" depicts the lives of several generations of the Angel clan in 
the border town of Del Sapo (both an anagram for Islas' native El Paso), and, 
as the narrative unfolds, in other parts of the United States, particularly 
California. Although Islas has one of the Angels say that they are not 
immigrants but migrants -- that is, that it is the border that is the alien 
construct and not their decision to move from one side of the Rio Grande to the 
other -- his book provides a humane and sensible look at what it is to be a 
Mexican immigrant in the United States, particularly in his evocation of the 
younger Angels, professional people in cities such as Chicago and Washington. 
As with the members of the family who have remained in Del Sapo, this 
generation also lives uncomfortably in two cultures and, if they at last have 
succeeded in belonging to either, it is only uncomfortably. When Rudy says, 
"Let's keep the border and give both lands back to the Indians," he is only 
half-joking. 
To a certain extent, Islas has written a sort of "pre-history" of Mex-America. 
Unfortunately, his novel is far less successful as literature than it is as 
sociology or (implicitly) social criticism. There are moments when Islas' 
considerable knowledge of the milieu of "Migrant Souls" seems to get in the way 
of his writing, as if, rather than give his characters a full measure of 
autonomy, he constantly feels the need to cram in one more accurate -- but 
unnecessary -- detail. 
There is, of course, a generic problem with the kind of multigenerational saga 
that Islas has attempted. ("Migrant Souls" is the second volume of a projected 
trilogy about the Angel family). Inevitably, the author must try to shoehorn so 
much into the narrative that characterization in depth is elusive -- probably 
the reason why most books of this type are very long. "Migrant Souls," by 
contrast, is only 249 pages; yet it stretches from the 1940s to the present and 
includes several dozen characters. Even if Islas were the most brilliant 
stylist around, there is simply no space to do his characters justice. He 
isn't, and he doesn't. 
Many of his descriptions are simply words, embodying little. Thus, one 
character marries "a decent man of Anglo-Mexican background." Not only is 
background a windy simplification; decent, meant to do all the work in the 
sentence, is in fact all but meaningless. "Migrant Souls" is full of these 
sorts of complacencies of style. Characters never are astounded, they are 
"truly astounded"; they are "overwhelmed by fear and pity" or "filled with pity 
and gratitude"; they erupt into "whoops of laughter" and are forever 
"consoling" themselves, "gasping" or becoming "beside themselves." Islas, so 
subtle when it comes to differentiating character, takes every shortcut where 
language is concerned. In fairness, it should be added that "Migrant Souls" has 
been praised by Denise Levertov and Adrienne Rich for both story and style, 
praise that I find incomprehensible; Islas is as wooden a writer as he is acute 
an observer. 
It's a pity, because Islas is concerned with subjects too rarely treated in 
contemporary American writing. We need a great realistic novel about the 
border. Had Islas written less self-indulgently, that book might have been 
"Migrant Souls." 
