ANATOMY OF A BULLET WOUND; 
PEOPLE ARE SHOT IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EVERY DAY. BUT, EXPERTS SAY, FEW OF US 
COMPREHEND A BULLET'S IMPACT. HERE, THE LAST 58 SECONDS IN THE LIFE OF A 
GUNSHOT VICTIM. 
Juan Antonio Mendez never felt what hit him. A bullet does that. The small lead 
plug moving close to the speed of sound shocks and deadens the tissue and 
organs it crushes. Fear and confusion heighten the torpor of a gunshot wound. 
And at this point in his armed robbery of an electronics store in Koreatown, 
Juan Mendez is in full panic. 
The plan has come apart. A young Brinks guard, Ramiro Garcia, isn't showing 
scared. Mendez's partner was able to grab the canvas cash sack from Garcia's 
left hand. But the guard isn't flinching, and that could mean he is ready to 
shoot it out. 
Mendez has no time to change moves, to control the next moments of his life, to 
run, to yelp, to back down or cancel his commitment to violence. 
He does have one moment to cock the hammer of his own gun, a museum piece -- a 
rusted, single-action, frontier-style .44 six-gun made by Remington in the 
1890s. 
But the guard is faster. Garcia's left hand sweeps the barrel of Mendez's 
handgun aside. His own revolver, a Brinks-issue Smith &amp; Wesson with a 
four-inch barrel and a full load of six .38 Special rounds, clears its black 
leather holster. 
Boom! Garcia's first shot hits Mendez high in the left chest. The range is so 
close that flakes of unburned gunpowder are forced through Mendez's brown 
sweater. They tattoo the edges of the chest wound. 
Boom! Mendez fires, but it is more of a reflex. The shot goes wild and slaps 
sideways into a store wall. 
Boom! A second bullet hits Mendez's chest, dead center. He stumbles, turning. 
Boom! A bullet in the right arm, from triceps through biceps and into the left 
knee. Mendez falls. 
Flat on his back, eyes fading, Mendez's dirty sneakers twitch against a display 
case of home security systems. "Double Entry Security" promises the sign. 
"Because Your Security And Peace of Mind Are Important." 
Mendez flops an arm across his bleeding chest. 
It is three days before Christmas. 
Juan Mendez has just 58 seconds to live. 
 Massad Ayoob is a former police officer and, as founder / director of Lethal 
Force Institute of Concord, N.H., a guru of combat competition shooters. 
 From South Africa to Long Beach, police departments seeking to improve their 
effectiveness -- and ordinary civilians afraid that police will never be able 
to do enough -- pay up to $500 per person for Ayoob's courses in self-defense 
by pistol and shotgun, knife, night stick and Kubotan baton. 
 He blames the media -- from George Peppard's fully automatic "A-Team" on 
television to Mel Gibson in gun-toting newspaper advertisements for "Lethal 
Weapon II" -- for fitting America with a "an insulating, subconscious callous 
that keeps us from recognizing the horror of it. 
 "The guy (on television) gets hit in the head with a club and he passes out. 
He never retches, never vomits, never sees double, never goes into grand mal 
seizures . . . all of which occurs with people who have been struck in the head 
with blunt instruments. If they don't die. 
 "With gunshot wounds, the guy swoons and falls to the ground. There is no 
blood. Probably the height of the bull was the old Mannix series. At one point, 
Mannix is shot in the shoulder with a .458 elephant rifle by the millionaire 
villain. In the next scene, Mannix has got his arm in a little black sling and 
is hugging his new girlfriend. 
 "In real life, nobody has been shot with a .458 elephant rifle. But we have 
one case where a subject with a 45/70 (hunting) rifle shot a police officer 
wearing a bulletproof vest. 
 "The rifle was so powerful that it carried the vest into the wound channel, 
halfway through the body. The bullet struck at the right nipple, and there were 
ruptured blood vessels in the brain just from the backed up shock waves through 
the cardiovascular system. 
 "Of course, death was instantaneous. This is a whole lot more in line with 
what happens when you get shot." 
 After Juan Mendez falls, there is a second of silence at ITC Electronics, 2772 
W. Olympic Blvd. Minds respond in the pause, trying to understand and deciding 
what might be next. The stench of gunpowder is everywhere. Then shouts and 
movement. 
Garcia is crawling and sliding toward the store's counter. His bravery has been 
expensive. While rapid-firing against Mendez, the armored car guard put one 
round through his own knee. Garcia desperately needs cover and time to reload. 
Mendez's partner, however, isn't waiting for a rematch. He has the sack holding 
more than $20,000 in cash and checks. He sprints and shoves through shocked 
shoppers to an open door and the crowded street. 
By this time, even the flutter of Mendez's breathing has stopped. 
The first bullet, a flat-nosed lead slug weighing 10.2 grams, or less than 1/2 
ounce, went into his chest angling down. It fractured the fifth rib on the way 
in, bored through both lobes of the left lung, and fractured the seventh rib on 
the way out. 
Not always a fatal wound. Not if the round avoids larger blood vessels. Not if 
the bullet hole seals itself and air doesn't enter the chest cavity and the 
lung does not collapse. 
The killer was the second shot. 
It hit the bone and cartilage of the sternum. That flattened the round a 
little, increasing its diameter and widening the wound channel it punched 
through the left ventricle chamber of Mendez's heart. The bullet left the 
heart, went into the left lung and exited Mendez's back. 
In its passage, the slug stretched and displaced for milliseconds the heart 
muscles, valves and chambers, forming what trauma surgeons know as the 
"temporary cavity." It created a temporary space the size of a baseball in 
Mendez's heart. 
But the heart continued to pump. 
Now it is squirting blood from the bullet holes in the heart wall, filling the 
pericardium and pouring into the chest cavity itself. At a rate of about five 
quarts a minute. 
But there is no pressure to carry blood through the aorta and a network of 
arteries to Mendez's brain. Not even to the blood vessels near the gunshot 
wounds in his right arm and left knee. So there is no bleeding there. 
No blood, no oxygen. No oxygen, no working body cells. Then veins collapse. 
Electricity and neuromuscular activities stop. 
Barely a minute after the first shot, the only movement connected to Mendez is 
a puddle of blood creeping from two exit wounds in his back. 
It shines like maroon glue on the store floor. 
As life finally leaves Juan Mendez. 
 Jim Monaghan is full of holes. He can close his eyes, point to arms, legs and 
chest, and finger-count 11 wounds from bullets and shrapnel. A former Green 
Beret captain and veteran of five combat tours of Vietnam, Monaghan, 51, now a 
technical consultant and scriptwriter to movie studios, has survived four 
gunshot wounds. 
 The worst, he says, was in 1966. 
 A Viet Cong soldier shot him in the left shoulder with an AK-47 assault rifle. 
 "Then I killed him," Monaghan says. "But his shot hit my M-16, blew the upper 
hand guard apart and pieces of the weapon were flying everywhere. One piece 
killed the man standing next to me, ripped his whole face off, and the bullet 
ricocheted and went into my shoulder. 
 "It smashed the clavicle, the thing that holds the muscle leads from the 
tendon and the biceps muscle . . . and as a result, the muscles, the biceps 
muscle and then the left chest muscle, the one that guards the heart, began 
falling down. 
 "And it burns. That's the first thing that happens to you. It's just like a 
red hot poker or an ice pick burning into you. Then it knocks you down. It is 
like somebody swinging at you with a baseball bat. As hard as they can. 
 "But the burning. I remember thinking that if I had time to pour a canteen of 
water on it, everything would be OK. But it didn't quite work out that way. I 
went for about 10 more minutes and then I just passed out from loss of blood 
and pain. 
 "I was out (in the hospital or convalescing) for eight months. And it still 
hurts. It's a private pain, but it ain't easy. There are times when I'm in bed 
and dreaming, and I'll begin jumping and I can feel those bullets hitting. If I 
move my arm the wrong way, that sudden, searing pain feels like the round is 
still entering, still moving in. 
 "I've been down to the (Long Beach) Naval hospital several times and up to the 
Presidio (Letterman Army Hospital), and they keep telling me that there will 
have to be operations done on the thing again. I'm postponing it. I'll take 
Advil or aspirins or, once in a while if it really hurts, I'll take some 
codeine. 
 "But I can just feel that fire in there. All the time." 
At 5:34 p.m., four minutes after death, official hands are attending Juan 
Mendez. A uniformed officer from LAPD's Rampart Division, who was patroling 
nearby and made it to the store while gunpowder smells are still hanging, 
touches his fingertips to Mendez's neck. No pulse. 
The six-gun -- a souvenir of a supposedly wilder West -- is recovered and taken 
to the trunk of a police car. "Who did he think he was going against?" an 
officer mutters. "Clint Eastwood?" 
Fire Department paramedics from Engine Co. 13 deliver their boxes and monitors. 
Some attend guard Garcia and his knee. Others stare down at Mendez. 
Scissors cut away his brown sweater. 
The red-black bullet holes are obvious. 
Especially one in the center of Mendez's chest. 
"Just the right place," says paramedic George Balleweg. "Great shooting." 
Three electrodes from a Lifepak 5 monitor are attached to Mendez's trunk. It is 
probably a formality. A six-inch strip of tape hisses from the machine and the 
line is quite straight. There is no electrical activity in the body. 
Balleweg crumples the tape and tosses it. 
Police officers -- lieutenants and sergeants and street cops from this volatile 
area of town -- peer at Mendez before a sheet is pulled over his body and face. 
"Anybody recognize this guy? . . . looks like a rock smoker, one of those dirt 
bags from down the street . . . nobody I know . . . probably an illegal . . . 
you want to look, Jim?" 
Yellow plastic tape is unrolled to seal the aisles and area where Mendez fell. 
There are blood smears here. Unspent cartridges there. Physical evidence that 
must be protected. 
Detectives Larry De Losh and Joe Getherall, partners from LAPD's 
robbery-homicide division, arrive from Parker Center downtown to build the 
foundation of another investigation. For these men, the end of Juan Mendez is 
only a beginning. 
Mendez's face is uncovered for Frank Giles. He's a city photographer. Giles has 
lost count of the bodies he's photographed. 
"I don't have many emotions about it," Giles says. "But sometimes I look at a 
guy like this one and I think that we probably got up about the same time 
today, in the same city, had breakfast and went our separate ways. Then we meet 
like this. 
"The big difference is, I get to take the pictures of him and he doesn't get to 
see the New Year." 
Coroner's investigator Tom Ratcliffe bends over Mendez. 
He stabs him lightly with a scalpel. On the right side, just below the rib 
cage, Ratcliffe inserts a thermometer, pushing it down and then hard up and 
into the liver, where its temperature will set the official time of death. 
Mendez is carrying no money, no identification. Just a comb, an empty leather 
billfold and a stainless steel digital watch. His name and Salvadoran 
citizenship will be established later through fingerprints. 
Yet there's no guarantee that he really is Juan Antonio Mendez. That's just the 
name he gave when arrested in June on two counts of possessing and selling 
crack cocaine. 
Ratcliffe grabs the cuffs of Mendez's pants. An assistant holds Mendez's 
wrists. The body is jackknifed and tugged onto a collapsed gurney, wrapped and 
strapped down, and wheeled through the store to an unmarked county van. 
A policeman says something. Very quietly. 
The words hold anger for an enemy. Yet their tone carries one fragment of 
empathy for the death of a human being. 
"Feliz Navidad, knucklehead." 
 Dr. Martin Fackler was a combat surgeon in Vietnam and is director of the 
Wound Ballistics Laboratory at the Letterman Army Institute of Research, 
Presidio of San Francisco. He also is an Army colonel who wages constant war 
against the mystique and misinformation surrounding weapons and wounds. 
 An AK-47 assault rifle, he states, is not as deadly as the public believes. 
And many more children might have died in a Stockton schoolyard last year had 
Patrick Purdy used a hunting rifle or a 12-gauge shotgun instead of an AK-47. 
 The severity of a gunshot wound, Fackler explains, has little to do with the 
velocity of so-called "high-powered rifles" but is heavily influenced by "the 
mass of the projectile (bullet), how heavy it was, the construction, the shape, 
the type of tissue it hits, did it hit the liver or the intestines, did it hit 
anything to disturb its path before it hit this person? 
 "Do you realize," he asks, "that the muzzle velocity of the AK-47 is less than 
the muzzle velocity of the weapon that was adopted by at least three European 
armed forces in 1891? 
 "There are simply two mechanisms, basically, as the bullet penetrates the 
body. It makes a bullet hole (permanent cavity); in other words, the bullet 
hitting the body tissues destroys, disintegrates and crushes what it hits. 
There is a second (mechanism) that is much more dramatic and has been 
emphasized far out of proportion -- the temporary cavity. 
 "This (temporary cavity) is the same thing as a splash in water. You toss a 
rock into water, the water parts momentarily and then comes back. 
 "The temporary cavity (inside human tissue) does increase with the velocity of 
the projectile (bullet), but (it) increases a lot more with changes in 
projectile shape. Think of a diver going off a 10-meter board . . . going into 
the water with an excellent dive. High velocity. Very little disruption of the 
water. 
 "Now, same diver, same mass and everything . . . but going off a two-meter 
board at much lower velocity. If he does a belly flopper, he makes a much 
bigger splash. And bullets do the same thing. 
"As long as they (bullets) are going through tissue . . . straight ahead, and 
not yawing at all, they make very little damage . . . after the bullet starts 
yawing (in tissue), it will go to 90 degrees and is likely to go to 180 degrees 
(tumbling). In other words, have its path exactly reversed. 
 "The (United States) M-16 projectile tends to yaw after about five inches. The 
AK-47 round, using the (7.62 millimeter) standard Chinese or Russian military 
ball ammunition, doesn't generally yaw until it goes about 12 inches. 
 "Some of the stuff that has been coming out of Los Angeles in the aftermath of 
this Purdy shooting (where Purdy used 7.62 mm military-type ammunition) has 
been really unbelievable. 
 "You've got (hospital) people that are quoted as saying: 'Assault rifles are 
so bad that if a person is hit in an extremity it must be amputated and if he 
is hit in the trunk he is dead.' And another guy saying: 'The chances of you 
dying if you're hit by an assault rifle are 50%.' These things are absolutely 
ludicrous, absolutely non-factual. 
 "Look at Mr. Purdy's kill rate. Thirty-five hits and five deaths. That's not a 
high kill rate. If you wish to add up massacres, not only of Mr. Purdy but of 
Mr. Wesbecker (Joseph T. Wesbecker) in Louisville and a few others, you will 
find that when an assault rifle is used as the primary weapon . . . you have 
more than twice as many wounded as are killed. 
 "When a shotgun is used, you have more than twice as many killed as are 
wounded. This summer there was a fellow over in France who used a shotgun and 
killed 14 and wounded seven. 
 "You don't want to be hit with a short-range shotgun. It takes a lot of tissue 
and makes mush out of it. And this tissue doesn't work very well afterwards." 
Juan Mendez has a new identity. He is 89-12450. 
That means he died in 1989 and is the year's 12,450th victim of an undetermined 
or violent end in which the Los Angeles County Medical Examiner's Office 
assumes physical jurisdiction over the body. 
Part of that authority is the decision to perform an autopsy. Ten thousand 
corpses were opened and examined by the county last year. It is decided Mendez 
will be one. 
Autopsy, by necessity, is a detached and indelicate process. But then, the 11 
physician-pathologists handling 800 autopsies each month have no time for 
surgical delicacies, fancy incisions or needlework. Nor need they work with 
post-operative concerns for those wheeled into these grim and smelly basement 
operating rooms between the Southern Pacific railway yards and County-USC 
Medical Center. 
In one room, all six stainless steel tables often are occupied. Dead by the 
dozens are waiting. Some incoming addicts, derelicts, traffic victims, male and 
female, the stabbed, beaten and shot of our county, must wait stiff and 
uncovered on gurneys in the hallways. 
Mendez, unwashed and naked but for the blue 89-12450 identification tag wired 
to his big toe, is brought in. 
Dr. Christopher Rogers, 31, will do the autopsy. 
Detectives De Losh and Getherall are observing. 
Doctor and detectives wear disposable masks, gowns and paper bootees. That 
wasn't always standard. But then came AIDS. 
Rogers says he is fascinated by the work. Sure, he could earn more in private 
medicine. But, he says, he enjoys the puzzle-solving of being a forensic 
pathologist. 
He starts work, and it is not subtle. 
An ordinary pair of pruning shears are used as rib cutters. A soup ladle 
collects blood samples from Mendez's thorax. Washing off instruments, not 
constant sterilization, is the rule. Then some are dumped in a cardboard box; 
the hand-written sign on it states: "Knives To Be Sharpened." 
This case isn't much of a puzzle for Rogers. Guided by X-rays, he finds a 
bullet in Mendez's left knee. The joint, quite bloodless, is opened and the 
slug pried out for De Losh. 
It is a flat-nosed .38 and clearly from guard Garcia's gun. 
Rogers measures the bullet holes in Mendez's chest. He marks their positions, 
their angles and their passages on a diagram of a man; the chart will become 
evidence. Then Rogers inserts a steel rod through each wound channel. 
"We have potential entrances one, two and three, and potential exits one, two 
and three, and one here in the knee . . . now, one through the sternum, right 
through the heart, through the left lung and exits . . . and that is the 
rapidly fatal wound. 
"This one here, left chest, came in at intermediate range because we see the 
(gunpowder) stipling . . . it fractured the fifth rib and then it goes through 
both lobes of the left lung, then out, fracturing the rib, left seven. 
"I guess we'll make the cause of death multiple gunshot wounds." 
It is a 90-minute task, and as with all daily routines, there is chatter 
unrelated to the work. Of whether the Vatican will give up Manuel Noriega. Of a 
Christmas gift of tickets for "Phantom of the Opera." Of old friends and new 
cars, living in Los Angeles and dead villains. 
When it is done, Mendez is sutured; the stitches are huge and made with waxed 
twine. His hair is given a final shampoo. He is wrapped in plastic with arms 
and legs trussed tight by lengths of rope. 
He is wheeled to a crypt, and in storage at 35 degrees, Mendez joins the 
county's permanent population of 300 corpses in processing. 
It has been a while since robbery specialists De Losh and Getherall have 
witnessed an autopsy. They say it doesn't bother them. 
"Unless it's a kid," De Losh says. 
"Or a cop," Getherall adds. 
 Evan Marshall was a homicide investigator and a Detroit cop for 20 years. He 
has shot suspects, had suspects shoot at him, and now directs the criminal 
justice program at Kirtland College, Ross Common, Mich. A columnist for Combat 
Handguns and Guns &amp; Ammo magazines, he sees himself as "a student of 
ammunition construction and effectiveness." 
 Marshall knows that poison-tipped rounds and explosive bullets are effective 
only in Ian Fleming novels. But he also knows the serious attention law 
enforcement agencies are giving two radical handgun bullets. 
 One, the Glaser, is a thin, copper-jacketed round that flies like a 
conventional bullet and bursts on impact. It releases miniature lead shot and 
creates broad penetration similar to a shotgun blast. 
 The other is a super-light, plastic plug weighing less than a quarter of a 
conventional .38 bullet. Muzzle velocity of the Thunderzap is more than twice 
the speed of sound -- faster than a bullet from an M-16 assault rifle -- but 
the light weight of the projectile allows total dissipation of energy at 100 
yards. Before that, however, the round fragments on impact and, according to 
current advertising, creates "vicious flesh destruction . . . shatters ribs and 
blows rib pieces into lung tissue." 
 Marshall has also studied the Army's Advanced Combat Rifle (ACR) program and 
its evaluation of a bullet embedded in a bullet, so-called "duplex rounds" that 
are relatively unstable and designed to tumble immediately upon impact. 
 Another ACR ammunition contender fires a small steel arrow, a flechette, and 
there's a French round of solid brass said to have penetrated 37 layers of the 
Kevlar used in bulletproof vests. 
 But their effectiveness is easily argued, Marshall says, and the truth of the 
ammunition matter hasn't changed much since the days of cannon and musket 
balls. 
 "I've seen instances where people were shot with a standard .38 Special, round 
nosed, lead ammo, and other people shot with a 125 grain, .357 magnum 
hollow-point. You dissect both wound channels and the differences are very 
subtle. You don't open up the person shot with a .357 magnum and their organs 
are all turned to jelly, and they don't all slide out of the body. It just 
doesn't happen. 
 "Bullet placement is really the key. As I used to tell my (police) academy 
classes: 'The three most important things to remember when talking about 
ammunition are -- bullet placement, bullet placement, bullet placement. 
 "I routinely tell people that anyone who takes any handgun to a lethal 
confrontation isn't very wise. Because handguns, by and large, don't stop 
people very well. Generally, with handguns, to produce incapacitation, we've 
got to produce death. 
 "We carry handguns because they offer concealability and portability, and in 
the area of law enforcement, police generally end up relying on handguns 
because people in this country have got used to seeing police officers carrying 
handguns. In other countries, police routinely walk around with submachine guns 
and nobody gets really excited about that. But I guess we're not quite ready 
for that yet. 
 "Law enforcement requirements are quite different from military attitudes. 
They (military) want to wound people because that ties up medics and many other 
support personnel. In law enforcement, the aim is to stop. 
 "There are only two ways to get what we (police) call 'instant 
incapacitation.' One is to sever the spine, which, of course, produces death. 
The other is a brain shot. 
 "But it is extremely difficult to produce incapacitation without producing 
death. What we have seen (with handguns) is countless instances where people 
have taken hit after hit after hit and not gone down. 
 "Once the adrenaline gets dumped in the system . . . (many) people don't feel 
getting hit the second, third or fourth time. We've seen instances where 
basically, in order to stop people who are bent on killing other people, you 
sometimes almost have to shoot them to pieces. 
 "That justifiably horrifies people. 
 "But as far as the technology of a bullet itself . . . the only humane bullet 
is one that is never fired." 
Several hours after death, Juan Mendez, 28, makes one contribution to life. His 
corneas are removed, sent to the Doheny Eye Bank and will be implanted to 
restore sight in others. 
But no one has asked for the rest of Mendez. 
His police record shows no address or names of family. He is presumed to be an 
illegal alien. Just in case, his description and fingerprints will be checked 
through the Veteran's Administration, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the 
Criminal Identification and Information office of the state Department of 
Justice and other official clearing houses. 
In about 60 days, if no leads are found, Mendez will be declared "Indigent 
Dead." 
He will be taken to the county crematory in East Los Angeles. His ashes will be 
held for two years. Then they will be scattered at a common site. 
The bullets that took his life will be sealed in plastic envelopes and held in 
LAPD's property room until no legal considerations surround the case. 
And a few small, impersonal, inanimate, valueless lumps of lead will outlive 
Juan Mendez by many years. 
FATAL PASSAGE 
The first shot fired at Juan Mendez was at close range, striking him high on 
the left side of the chest, angling down and fracturing the fifth rib. That 
bullet continued on, penetrating both lobes of his left lung before fracturing 
the seventh rib and exiting the back close to the spine. 
The bullet that killed Mendez entered his chest cavity through the sternum, 
striking downward through the left ventricle of the heart before exiting his 
back. It crushed and destroyed tissue by forming a wound channel known as the 
permanent cavity, which would likely be further widened if the bullet flattened 
out after striking the sternum. For milliseconds after passage of the bullet, 
the walls of the permanent cavity, including within the heart, are stretched 
outward. This lateral tissue displacement forms a temporary cavity that may 
have no effect on elastic muscle but can cause devastating disruption of soft 
organs. 
