FAMILY LIFE: THE SNIFFLES ALL AROUND BRING MISERY, CLOSENESS 
The kids and I took time out to stop and smell the flowers this week. The 
problem was, we couldn't smell anything. 
We hadn't exactly planned it that way. Our household calendar was cluttered 
with entries for the first days after the holidays: a consultation with my 
son's orthodontist, another with my attorney, carburetor work on the car. Then 
there was a belated holiday dinner with one friend and penciled-in lunch plans 
with another, not to mention a full schedule of work and school and a long list 
of errands that had already been put off too long. We were going to get a 
productive, fast-paced start on the new year. 
As it turned out, the only appointment we were able to keep wasn't even on the 
list: a group expedition to the doctor. 
"I might as well get a rubber stamp for these symptoms," said the nurse as she 
wrote down three separate lists of similar complaints: stuffy nose, fever, 
cough, headache and so on. "All our patients seem to have the same thing. I 
just hope we don't get it." 
"Hello, everybody," said the doctor as he strode briskly into the examining 
room. "Who's first?" 
No bickering, for once, about whose turn it was to go first for something. My 
daughter, by virtue of her 102-degree fever, won that contest without a 
struggle -- not that she or her brother could have put up much of a fight. 
"A very bad cold," the doctor proclaimed after the usual peeking and prodding. 
But before I could blurt out, "I could have told you that!" he went on. 
Bronchitis. An ear infection. Not good news, but at least I didn't have to feel 
guilty or embarrassed about bothering the doctor for something I could have 
handled myself. 
My son didn't have bronchitis. But he had two ear infections to make up for it. 
I was last. "Moms always go last," the doctor said. My problem was merely a 
stubborn sinus infection, come back to life like the villain in a horror movie 
despite our assault on it 2 weeks ago with a $67 round of antibiotics. 
After explaining the purpose of each prescription and reciting the usual 
instructions -- rest, fluids, more rest, more fluids -- the doctor wished us 
well and sent us off to fend for ourselves. 
We coughed our way to the car, which, thanks to the aforementioned carburetor 
problem, did some coughing of its own. "Listen, Mom," my daughter said. "The 
car has it too." We laughed, and coughed some more. 
I dropped the kids off at home, then hurried down to the drugstore with our 
prescriptions and the gold card I would need to pay for them. The usual 
20-minute wait was an hour and a half this time. "We're swamped," the 
pharmacist explained. Somehow I knew what he was going to say next. 
"Everybody has it," he told me. 
When I got home, the kids were parked under comforters on the couch, taking 
advantage of the unspoken suspension of household rules by sipping soda pop (In 
the living room! In the morning!) and watching the same TV shows my brother and 
I watched on our sick days 20-plus years ago. 
"What's wrong, little buddy?" asked a portly man in a nautical cap on the 
screen, looking somehow inappropriate in color. Oh, Skipper, I thought. Where 
do I begin? But Gilligan launched into his tale of woe before I could get 
started on mine. 
Gilligan's red shirt and rosy cheeks weren't all that had changed since I was a 
kid. Instead of lying down in front of the television, I was on my feet in the 
kitchen -- antibiotics or no antibiotics, we had to have Mom's Chicken Soup, 
and I was the only one around here who answered to "Mom." 
"This is really good, Mom," my son said politely as he sampled a spoonful an 
hour later. "I just wish I could taste it." 
"Me too," I said. 
They took naps; I rushed to meet a deadline. I don't know how my mother ever 
managed without a computer and a modem, not to mention videotapes and 
microwaves. And she went through many more episodes of this than I'll ever 
face. My brother and I got the measles -- both kinds. My children got vaccines 
instead. 
By 7 p.m., the doctors and nurses on "MASH" were rushing around trying to deal 
with another episode of emergencies, and so was I. 
"His leg is crushed. Get this one to pre-op, stat!" 
"Mom, I just barfed!" 
"Mom, my nose is bleeding!" 
"Incoming choppers!" 
I mopped and wiped and hugged and consoled as fast as I could. In between 
crises, I took a few self-indulgent moments to lie down myself -- but never for 
very long. Even after I tucked them in for the night, I listened for coughing 
and feeble cries for my attention, just as I'd done night after night when they 
were infants. Those instincts were rusty but still functioning, I discovered, 
at 1:18 a.m. and 2:37 a.m. and 4:02 a.m. 
Their fevers had broken the next morning, and as I put away the thermometer, I 
proclaimed with nurse-like cheer that the worst was over. 
"But my nose is still stopped up," one of them complained. 
"Mine too," said the other. 
"I didn't say it was over. I said the worst was over." 
"Oh." 
"There's nothing good about being sick," my daughter moaned. Yes there is, I 
thought, but I didn't contradict her out loud. We may have been miserable, but 
we were together, and paying closer attention to each other than we had in 
months. 
By the second evening, they were burned out on TV. "How about reading?" I 
suggested. But they said their heads hurt too much. 
"Let's try something with bigger type," I suggested. "Maybe that won't hurt." 
So we dug out an old favorite, a book that was long since supposed to have been 
handed down to their little cousins in Ohio. 
The sun did not shine, 
It was too wet to play, 
So we sat in the house 
All that cold, cold wet day.... 
 As my daughter read, I realized that I still knew the words by heart. 
 ... And then something went BUMP! How that bump made us jump! 
... We looked! And we saw him! The Cat in the Hat! 
 For a moment, I was 10 years younger, and so were they. Then my son broke the 
spell. 
"Isn't it interesting how the fish takes on the role of the parent?" he said, 
making it profoundly clear that he was no longer a 3-year-old. 
I almost started crying, but I blew my nose instead. Where had all that time 
gone? And why hadn't we spent more of it this close? 
We're better now, thank you -- still coughing and sniffling, but much better. 
And next week, we're going to be frantically busy. But in spite of everything, 
we seem to have started out the new year exactly as we should have. 
I just wish there was an easier way to clear the calendar. 
