TAMING THE WILD BEAST; 
BIRDS OF AN EXOTIC FEATHER NEED UNDERSTANDING, MANNERS 
Benay Karp's two guests from Guyana clearly weren't happy about being in her 
home. 
Perched in the corner of an empty room, both visitors hissed menacingly when 
she looked at them and let out bloodcurdling screams when she stepped in their 
direction. But Karp, obviously accustomed to such rude behavior, was not 
surprised. 
"Just give me a few days with them and you won't even know them," she said, 
turning her back to her shrieking house guests. "In no time, they'll be a joy 
to have around." 
Her optimism was based on experience. As owner of Tame Exotic Birds, an 
8-year-old business she runs out of her North Hollywood home, Karp has 
transformed hundreds of wild and ill-mannered exotic birds into pets their 
owners can be proud of. 
Surrounded by as many as 20 cockatoos, macaws and exotic parrots (all in cages) 
at one time, the 27-year-old animal trainer works with the birds several times 
a day -- talking to them, handling them or gently squirting them with water if 
they try to bite -- until she has won their confidence. 
"Exotic birds are starting to take on dogs and cats in terms of popularity, but 
there's not a lot of information," Karp said. "People plunk down hundreds or 
thousands of dollars and then assume that if they can train a dog to sit, they 
can tame a wild bird. But after awhile, the bird gets too obnoxious to have in 
their home and they can't stand it anymore. That's when they either sell it or 
start looking for help." 
Ingrid Rosen of La Canada Flintridge, who bought a yellow collar macaw last 
year for $600 -- a sum considered inexpensive by many, since some exotic birds 
can cost as much as $20,000 -- considered doing the former. "He was very 
high-strung and nervous when I got him, but I thought I could work with him. 
Instead, he actually got worse," Rosen said. "I finally made up my mind to sell 
him to a breeder because he was so awful." 
When a friend suggested she take the bird to Karp, Rosen's thoughts were 
somewhere between a wing and a prayer. Within a few days, though, the bird left 
his former personality far behind. "He's affectionate now, he walks right onto 
my arm, and he's fun to have around," Rosen said. "He's a completely different 
pet." 
For Stephen Kaplin of Woodland Hills, getting help for Kona, his $1,300 blue 
and gold macaw, was a medical necessity. "Every time I tried to take him out of 
the cage, he bit me severely," Kaplin said. "Macaws have beaks that are strong 
enough to break a broomstick. I had scars all over." 
Karp, Kaplin said, "was fearless from the start." When the bird tried to bite 
her, she gently squirted him with a water bottle. Within an hour, "Kona was 
going in and out of his cage and getting onto my arm." 
Karp isn't the only trainer of exotic birds in the Los Angeles area, but 
several veterinarians said they recommend her to bird owners. The price for her 
services? In most cases, she said, between $100 and $150. 
For birds that already have learned the fundamental social graces, Karp holds 
monthly classes on advanced bird etiquette. Up to 10 owners at a time are shown 
how to teach their pet to answer a play telephone, roller-skate or mimic an 
outstretched American eagle. 
Numerous feathered pupils, some of which can sing "I Left My Heart in San 
Francisco," have watched their careers take flight in movies and on television. 
"He did one commercial and it was fun, but I don't want to be a stage mom," 
said Becky Berryhill of Glendale, whose Amazon gray parrot rolls over, waves 
one foot and gives kisses on request. "I'd just like him to learn new things," 
she added. "They make him more human." 
Although Karp prefers to focus on her success stories, she knows that there 
have been, well, mishaps. One elderly woman, she recalled, bought a cockatoo 
for several thousand dollars and then tried for months to teach it to talk. 
After she gave up, she brought the bird to Karp's home. 
Several nights later, Karp said, she was walking through her dark living room 
when she stubbed her toe. She yelled an unprintable word. 
"Sure enough, that was the one word the bird learned," she said, smiling 
somewhat sheepishly. "Needless to say, this little old lady wasn't very happy 
when she came to get him and that's how he greeted her." (There was no charge 
for the training.) 
How do exotic birds learn to talk? Often, Karp and owners say, it is a random 
selection of words and phrases they like the sound of. Several studies have 
found that the intelligence and temperament of many exotic bird species is 
comparable to a 3-year-old child's, said Dr. Robert Clipshan, a Simi Valley 
veterinarian. Many birds can have vocabularies of more than 300 words. 
"And, just like a 3-year-old, they sometimes say things they shouldn't," said 
Azi Cohen, manager of It's a Dog's Life, a pet store in Studio City that allows 
customers to finance exotic birds the way they would an expensive car. "One 
woman came into the store and one of our birds said, 'You'd be cute if you 
weren't so fat.' " 
Cohen didn't make a sale that day. 
Not all exotic birds are hostile or aggressive because they lack proper 
training. Some, pet store owners say, have been abused or mistreated in the 
past. 
One pet store owner remembered a parrot that had been chased by children with a 
stick and then spray-painted green. Another pet store owner said a cockatoo, 
worth close to $3,000, had been plucked of its wing feathers by an ignorant 
owner who didn't want it to fly away. 
Other birds, breeders and pet store owners say, have been smuggled from Mexico, 
South America, Africa or Australia into the United States -- where a pair of 
some species, such as the endangered hyacinth macaw from Brazil, can bring as 
much as $60,000 on the black market. 
Customs officials work with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to halt the 
smuggling of exotic birds, but the problem is still widespread. "Los Angeles is 
a major bird import center and a lot of wildlife gets through illegally," said 
Mike Osborn, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service inspector. "It's a big problem." 
Of the about 200,000 exotic birds smuggled into the country each year, Osborn 
said, three out of four will die of disease or during transport. Each year, he 
added, about 800,000 exotic birds are imported legally into the United States. 
Two-thirds of them die before they arrive at a pet store. 
"I've had men drive up in a van and ask me if I wanted to buy some birds they 
had in the back, and it was obvious they had been smuggled," said Brenda 
Seymore, manager of Discount Bird Supply in Canoga Park. "If people buy a bird 
like that because they think they are getting a good price, there's no way of 
telling what they'll get." 
Exotic birds that have been legitimately bred always have an identifying 
unbroken band around one foot, Cohen said. 
But for owners who simply have ended up with an ill-mannered or wild bird that 
hasn't quite adjusted to culture shock, help is available. "Usually, you just 
have to convince them that you don't want to eat them," Karp said. "They're 
just scared." 
Karp, who owns a second house in Northridge that is inhabited by 180 exotic 
birds she breeds and sells, didn't set out to be a bird trainer. Instead, she 
said, it began as a lark. 
As a child growing up in Long Island, Karp said, she had several pets, 
including a ferret, a raccoon and rabbits. Each one, she said, did tricks that 
other people thought were unusual. "I didn't know that most rabbits don't 
fetch. Mine did." 
When a friend's mother saw how well-trained her pets were, she asked if Karp 
would work with her cockatoo. Shortly afterward, Karp went to work in a 
federally regulated quarantine station, where imported exotic birds are kept 
for 30 days before they can be sold. Eight years ago, after moving to 
California, she decided to start a bird-training business. 
"I'm very lucky, because I get to do what I love," Karp said, listening to the 
cacophony of birds, all trying to be center stage by singing "God Bless 
America" or holding their wings outstretched while yelling "Look at me, I'm an 
eagle." 
Karp sighed. "I really hate Fridays." 
 Mackey is a regular contributor to Valley View. 
