COMMENTARY; 
IN JAIL CRUNCH, COUNTY MUST REVIEW OPTIONS OTHER THAN MORE CAGES 
Jail overcrowding in Orange County continues to be a significant social problem 
as we move into the 1990s. It became a major challenge for local policy-makers 
in 1978, when the county and the sheriff were ordered by a federal court judge 
to reduce crowding in the main jail in Santa Ana. 
In 1985, the Board of Supervisors and the sheriff were held in contempt by the 
same federal judge for failing to comply with his 7-year-old order. Since then, 
the situation either has become worse or has not improved, depending how one 
looks at it. 
The proposed solution of adding jail cells at enormous taxpayer expense has 
divided the county into warring "NIMBY" (Not in My Back Yard) groups, causing 
unnecessary litigation, wasted time and additional cost, and has accomplished 
very little toward relieving jail overcrowding. In fact, the taxpayer expense 
is considerably more than the public is probably aware of, because the immense 
original construction cost doubles every seven years. 
The most recently suggested idea of joining Riverside County in building a 
regional jail in the desert, which would eliminate the need for the 6,700-bed 
facility planned for Gypsum Canyon, may, if nothing else, demonstrate that the 
best political strategy regarding the jail issue is "out of sight, out of 
mind." 
While the Orange County Board of Supervisors has focused its attention (and 
ours) on building new facilities as the panacea to jail overcrowding, efforts 
to resolve the problem could be moved in a different direction that would 
result in more serious thinking and realistic expectations regarding the use of 
punishment resources and the enhancement of public safety. 
Before embarking on a dramatic jail construction program, a detailed and 
balanced examination must be made not only of the incredible economic 
consequences, but also of other sentencing methods (for example, expanding and 
initiating such mechanisms as work furlough, community service, electronic 
monitoring and intensive supervision, to name but a few promising ones) and 
better coordination in the criminal justice system. 
The county simply cannot afford not to employ and expand on such alternatives 
to incarceration with selected offenders -- unless, of course, taxpayers come 
up with the hundreds of millions of dollars necessary to provide extensive 
incarceration. Even so, such extensive incarceration would come with no 
guarantee of an actual reduction in crime; in fact, the opposite has held true, 
as increasing incarceration rates have been accompanied by higher crime rates. 
In the past, the county has been denied state funding for failing to adequately 
develop and detail such creative, alternative proposals ("sent back to do their 
homework," as one official reported). It is such tunnel vision regarding 
punishment policy that has helped turn efforts to relieve overcrowding in the 
county into a political and financial fiasco, with the ultimate costs thrust on 
taxpayers. 
The first "radical" idea that must be injected into policy proposals is that 
the jail cannot and should not be considered as a separate entity in criminal 
justice, but rather as inexorably tied to other institutions, most notably 
courts and police. "Solutions" to overcrowding that focus alone on absolute 
capacity or the number of jail cells are thus doomed to failure from the start. 
Second, there must be strong leadership at both the county and state level to 
produce detailed criminal justice management proposals; thorough examination of 
the use of existing resources; a commitment to innovative sentencing options 
and their expansion when successful, and an increase in interagency cooperation 
and coordination among criminal justice agencies. 
Having a broad-based commission to produce such proposals is a much better 
route than continuing to allow the system to slowly self-destruct, leaving 
justice by the wayside for victims and defendants and spending hundreds of 
millions of taxpayer dollars on a non-solution to crime. 
This leads to a final point on which there already is a considerable degree of 
expert consensus: Serious attention to prevention and education will go a lot 
further in reducing crime than will incarcerating criminals. 
A crisis mentality regarding jail overcrowding will do more harm than good, 
both fiscally and socially, and should be abandoned. Only then will 
policy-makers be able to seriously consider crime and its punishment -- and 
develop effective long-term policies. 
