CYPRESS COLLEGE AWARDS DINNER GETS A MAGICAL KICKOFF 
For 70 North County movers and shakers, Disneyland's plush, members-only Club 
33 was a personal Magic Kingdom last week. 
They rode in an old-fashioned elevator copied from one Walt saw in Europe, 
walked past a crystal phone booth from the set of "The Happiest Millionaire," 
sipped wine by the buffet, and piled hors d'oeuvres onto tiny plates. 
Then they moved into the main dining area, which has dark wood, heavy green 
drapes and framed etchings -- the re-created Old World that Walt Disney dreamed 
to life. Unfortunately, he died five months before Club 33 opened in May, 1967. 
Gathering at Club 33 -- its discreet entrance off one of the streets in the 
park's New Orleans Square -- were organizers of the annual Americana Awards 
dinner staged by Cypress College. 
The dinner, slated for late February, has its own Disney theme this year. The 
$125-per-person fund-raiser will be at the Disneyland Hotel and its chief 
honoree is Ronald Dominguez, executive vice president of Disneyland. 
Guests at the kickoff party were escorted through the park at closing time for 
cocktail hour pep talks from dinner chairman Don Karcher, Cypress College 
President Kirk Avery and college foundation President Irv Pickler. 
But first -- a little eating and ogling inside the club. 
Etched and painted pirates and beasts fight for a spot on the crowded walls. An 
antique grandfather clock ticks in one corner, and in another, under a silk 
cover, sits a harpsichord that belongs to Lillian Disney, Walt's widow. In one 
dining room, the chandeliers are rigged with microphones -- Walt's idea for 
parlor games only he could imagine -- and in another, a fireplace mantel holds 
a spray of peacock feathers. 
Ned Fox grinned when asked about his impression of le club. 
"I've been here for other occasions," said the Cypress Chamber of Commerce 
executive director, "and I always feel the same. Any time you get to go to Club 
33, it's a special night." 
"Tell me where to sign up (for a membership)," said Christine Nelson, looking 
around. "I'm ready." 
"If we sign up now," joked her husband, Keith, "maybe our grandkids could get 
in, right?" 
Well, there is a waiting list. . . . 
"That's OK," said Nelson, a college foundation member. "We're just glad to be 
getting a look in here." 
So was Buena Park Councilwoman Donna L. Chessen. "I've been supposed to come 
here . . . and it's never worked out," she said. 
Guests munched on beef teriyaki brochettes, quiche Lorraine, duck pate on 
endive, and smoked oysters and cucumbers stuffed with lobster salad and topped 
with slivers of smoked salmon. 
Karcher, Avery and Pickler took turns at the podium discussing the upcoming 
awards dinner, which according to Pickler is expected to raise more than 
$100,000 for the college. 
