MEXICO ARRESTS POWERFUL BOSS OF PEMEX UNION 
In an unprecedented blow against organized labor, the Mexican government 
Tuesday arrested the powerful leader of the national oil workers union in a 
military raid that officials said netted hundreds of automatic weapons. 
Joaquin Hernandez Galicia, known as La Quina, was detained at his Ciudad Madero 
home in the coastal state of Tamaulipas after a shoot-out between his 
bodyguards and federal police backed by the army. A federal agent was killed. 
The government news agency Notimex reported that security forces blew down La 
Quina's front door with a bazooka. 
Atty. Gen. Enrique Alvarez del Castillo told reporters that 34 other union 
members were arrested or turned themselves in to authorities. He said Hernandez 
Galicia would be charged with arms trafficking. 
In a related case, the attorney general said prominent businessman Sergio 
Bolanos, a reputed front man for Hernandez Galicia, and several of his 
associates were detained on charges of evading $1.5 million in taxes. 
The arrest of Hernandez Galicia, a popular and reputedly corrupt union boss set 
off a demonstration by thousands of angry oil workers through the streets of 
Mexico City and wildcat strikes in at least half of the refineries of Petroleos 
Mexicanos, the national oil company known as Pemex. The army occupied two of 
the refineries. 
Mexico is the world's 6th-largest petroleum producer and the chief supplier of 
the United States' strategic oil reserves. The sagging Mexican economy is 
dependent on the dollars earned from international oil sales. 
On Tuesday afternoon, police surrounded the headquarters of the Mexican Workers 
Congress, the official labor umbrella group to which the oil workers union 
belongs. 
The congress is one of the pillars of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary 
Party, known by its initials as the PRI. Party sources said the politically 
charged decision to arrest Hernandez Galicia could only have been made 
personally by President Carlos Salinas de Gortari. 
A government spokesman, who declined to be identified, asserted that the oil 
workers were conspiring against the government. 
"This was a decision by the state for reasons of national security. The oil 
workers had a plan to take over strategic installations of Pemex to destabilize 
the country and show their force against the government," he said. "This 
decision ends the long history of blackmail and corruption on the part of the 
(oil union leaders) . . . a small group who acted outside the law." 
Union officials countered that their leader were framed for political reasons, 
a charge that Alvarez del Castillo denied. 
The attorney general said the army found more than 200 Uzi submachine guns, 17 
other high caliber weapons and 25,000 rounds of ammunition in the modest home 
that serves as the union leader's headquarters. The 66-year-old Hernandez 
Galicia is the power behind the union of almost 200,000 members, although the 
secretary general is Salvador Barragan Camacho. 
Barragan Camacho told reporters in Mexico City that he escaped arrest because 
he had left his suburban home for an early dental appointment before soldiers 
arrived for him. The union leader said Hernandez Galicia had been arrested in 
his underwear by soldiers who planted the weapons in his house. 
Barragan Camacho spent the morning at the headquarters of the Workers Congress 
and then disappeared. The attorney general said he had offered to turn himself 
in but had not done so yet. 
Among those detained with Hernandez Galicia were Jose Sosa Martinez, a former 
secretary general of the union, and J. Concepcion Ortega Kuri, coordinator of 
the political affairs for the union. 
Hernandez Galicia built the oil workers union into an empire and has been 
accused of running a parallel government in oil producing areas of the country. 
He turned oil workers into an elite among organized labor, with wages up to 
eight times higher than other workers, inexpensive union stores, subsidized 
housing and even union funeral homes. In exchange, he provided the government 
with stability in a strategic industry. 
He and Salinas are longtime foes. As secretary of budget and planning under the 
previous administration, Salinas issued an order to end the traditional 
practice of automatically granting 50% of oil company construction contracts to 
the union. However, the union retained its right to receive 2% of the value of 
all union contracts for "social works." Sources said the union is worth 
hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Hernandez Galicia has long urged Pemex to buy its own fleet of oil tankers, so 
that he could unionize those workers, too, and increase his already immense 
power. Salinas, meanwhile, has proposed breaking the giant oil monopoly into 
several companies, which potentially would diminish the union's power. 
Before Salinas was inaugurated, members of the oil union who hold seats in the 
federal Chamber of Deputies publicly accused former Pemex chief Mario Ramon 
Beteta of having embezzled $49 million in a 1985 deal to buy two Yugoslav-built 
oil tankers. The charge was seen as a power play and challenge to Salinas. A 
month later, the PRI-controlled chamber dropped the case. 
Union leaders viewed Tuesday's arrest as revenge. 
A source close to the union who declined to be identified said Hernandez 
Galicia had told oil workers at a meeting in Tampico on Sunday that he had new 
evidence against Beteta. The source said the arrest was a preemptive strike. 
