SAINTS WIN A GAME THEY NEED; 
HIGH SCHOOLS: THEY DOMINATE SHOWDOWN WITH CORONADO, 74-61, TO STAY IN HARBOR 
LEAGUE RACE. 
It was supposed to be a game matching equal talent, between two teams that were 
favorites to battle for the Harbor League boys' basketball title. 
But Wednesday's game between Coronado and St. Augustine was instead a mismatch, 
and St. Augustine won, 74-61. 
"They are the best team in the league," Coronado Coach Bob Stanton said. "Our 
kids underestimated them, and they beat us up out there." 
Coming off a loss to Christian last week, St. Augustine (1-1, 11-6) needed the 
victory to stay in the running for the league title. 
"This was a must-win situation for us," Coach Jeff Armstrong said. "You can't 
go down 0-2 in league and expect to win it. We talked about it all week. Now 
we're back in the hunt." 
Even though the victory was assured with a 10-point lead and a minute 
remaining, St. Augustine's Bryan Cantwell and Paul Mossuto kept shooting and 
scoring until the final buzzer. Cantwell finished with season-high 31 points, 
14 in the fourth quarter. Mossuto scored 19. 
"I have to stay intense all the time," Cantwell said. "We had three intense 
practices this week. We came in thinking we were the underdog, and Wastila was 
the man." 
The Saint' defense held Derek Wastila, who has been averaging 18.7 points a 
game, to seven. 
After a sluggish first five minutes, St. Augustine trailed, 12-10. But the 
Saints then turned it into a running game and five minutes later had a 27-16 
lead. 
"We wanted to create an up tempo and run against Coronado," Armstrong said. "We 
went up by 10, then wanted to play a deliberate game with high-percentage 
scoring." 
Coronado (0-1, 10-7) trailed, 38-33, at halftime and never got closer than that 
in the second half. The Islanders had a number of opportunities, but missed 
shots from long range prevented them from challenging. 
"It wasn't their press that hurt us," Stanton said. "Our kids were trying too 
many outside shots. When we came down the middle of court and got inside, we 
were scoring, but the kids just weren't doing it enough." 
James Stark led Coronado with 19 points, Adam Smith scored 17 and Paul Carter 
scored 11. 
