$97-MILLION SETTLEMENT OVER MALIBU LANDSLIDE; 
AGREEMENT REQUIRES COUNTY, CALTRANS, INSURERS TO PAY HOMEOWNERS FOR BIG ROCK 
MESA DAMAGE 
Attorneys for Los Angeles County, the California Department of Transportation, 
dozens of insurance companies and the attorneys representing 240 Malibu 
hillside homeowners reached a tentative settlement Tuesday that will pay the 
property owners $97 million for damage they suffered during a massive 1983 
landslide. 
The settlement was reached after 4 1/2 years of litigation over who was 
responsible for the damage from the Big Rock Mesa landslide, one of the worst 
in state history, in which 250 Malibu homes collapsed, cracked or slid off 
their foundations. Under the agreement, Los Angeles County will pay $35 million 
to the Malibu homeowners, Caltrans will pay $40 million and the insurance 
companies will contribute the remaining $22 million. The money will be paid 
over a three-year period. 
About $200,000 Apiece 
After lawyers' fees are paid from the settlement, the homeowners will receive 
about $200,000 apiece, according to the attorneys for the Malibu residents. 
Sixteen homeowners who declined to be part of the settlement are trying to 
reach a separate agreement. 
As a result of the settlement, none of the parties is to admit responsibility 
for the landslide and the homeowners agree to drop future claims against the 
county, the state and the insurance companies. 
The settlement will erase the need for a massive trial, with most of the 240 
homeowners as plaintiffs, that had been scheduled in Los Angeles next month. A 
special courtroom three times larger than any other in the United States was to 
have been built for that trial. It also will cancel a separate trial involving 
seven other Big Rock Mesa homeowners. 
"We're satisfied that this was the best agreement we could get," homeowners' 
attorney Ken Chiate said after the settlement was announced by Los Angeles 
Superior Court Judge Robert I. Weil. "The vast majority of the homeowners 
wanted out. It's been a long five years. No matter how much money we got, 
there's no way it could pay for the damage some of them suffered." 
Ed Edelman, chairman of the Board of Supervisors, announced the county's part 
of the settlement in the board's chambers after a closed session Tuesday 
afternoon. The county, which has spent more than $7 million defending the case 
and had been expected to spend $13 million more in the massive trial, had been 
the main recent stumbling block to a settlement. 
"This settlement will avoid enormous litigation costs for all parties, remove a 
continuing burden from the court calendar and uncertainty from the county 
budget," Edelman said. "It is also fair to the homeowners." 
Not all of the Big Rock homeowners agreed, however. Actor Pernell Roberts said 
the settlement does not punish the parties who were responsible for the 
landslide. 
"We will never have an opportunity to get at the real heart of the crime," he 
said. "This was a tragic situation where many people will never come close to 
being fully compensated for their loss and the people responsible for what 
happened will continue to make bad judgments involving innocent people. 
"What this case shows is that the judicial system is not equipped to handle 
events of this magnitude." 
The homeowners had sued the county and the state for more than $200 million in 
damages for approving development of the Big Rock Mesa area above Pacific Coast 
Highway with seepage pits and horizontal drains rather than with sewers. They 
claimed that the county's action contributed to a rise in ground water that 
triggered the September, 1983, landslide on Big Rock Mesa. 
The slide caused some homes to collapse, cracked walls, floors, driveways, 
tennis courts and the winding roads in the expensive neighborhood. About 30 
homes were condemned by the county as unsafe and the value of the others, many 
priced at more than $1 million, plummeted. 
The county filed more than 300 countersuits against past and present 
homeowners, arguing that they were to blame for the disaster because they did 
not drain water from the mesa and contributed to the slide by using septic 
tanks, showers and toilets and refused to allow the county to build sewers 
there. 
Caltrans agreed last year to pay $25 million to the homeowners to settle the 
lawsuits after the state was found liable by a Superior Court jury of 
contributing to the landslide by cutting through the hillside to build Pacific 
Coast Highway. Under Tuesday's agreement, Caltrans will pay an additional $15 
million. Those funds must still be approved by the Legislature and Gov. George 
Deukmejian. 
The $35-million county portion of the agreement is the same settlement figure 
suggested early last year by Chiate and Richard Norton, the homeowners' chief 
attorneys, and rejected by the the county's lawyers. The county had suffered a 
series of legal setbacks in the Big Rock litigation recently, however, and gave 
indications last week that it would settle. 
Suits Separated 
The state Supreme Court ruled last year that a case won by the county against 
one Big Rock Mesa homeowner was not binding on the rest of the lawsuits. An 
attempt by the county to have the case dismissed was rebuffed by Superior Court 
Judge Maurice Hogan Jr. 
Still, until last week, attorneys for the homeowners and the county were unable 
to reach any agreement or decide how the case should be tried. Chiate called 
the potential mega-trial a "mega-disaster," and he and Norton had accused the 
county of wasting taxpayers' money. 
Hogan was scheduled to preside over the huge trial next month, and it was 
expected to be one of the longest and most expensive civil trials in the 
nation. 
The trial would have involved more than 275 lawyers and was expected to last 
between two and five years. Attorneys' fees in the case were expected to be 
more than $100 million. 
Times City-County Bureau Chief Bill Boyarsky contributed to this story. 
