WHERE WAS U.S. IN NICARAGUA'S HOUR OF NEED?; 
DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN AID CLASHES WITH OPEN HEARTS TOWARD ARMENIA 
The sight of rescue teams from around the world ignoring politics and rushing 
help to victims of the earthquake in Soviet Armenia has been one of the bright 
spots of a holiday season dimmed by disaster. We in the United States can take 
pride in our contribution. 
The instinctive response to the plight of the Armenians sent forth a signal 
that the people of the world realize that we live in a global village. Leaders 
of the Soviet Union abandoned their policy of secrecy and isolation while 
long-time adversaries of the Soviet Union put aside past animosities. 
The lesson of Armenia is that politics is not an issue when human beings have 
suffered terrible loss. A notable example came from an Israeli rescue team, 
some of whom had emigrated from the Soviet Union with no thought of returning. 
Although the two nations have not had diplomatic relations for more than 20 
years, this did not hinder the mission in Spitak and Leninakan. The team stayed 
for more than two weeks, triumphing when a 15-year-old boy was pulled alive 
from the debris eight days after the earthquake. 
Unfortunately, there are children much closer to us geographically than those 
in Armenia who are homeless and hungry and whose parents have lost their lives 
or livelihoods in a natural disaster. These children and their families have 
not received aid through the government of the United States. They are the 
victims of Hurricane Joan in Nicaragua. 
While the disaster in Armenia was of much greater dimension, Hurricane Joan had 
a devastating effect on Nicaragua. It left 250,000 persons homeless. Almost 3 
million people lost crops or otherwise suffered economic loss. Hospitals and 
schools were damaged or destroyed. A team of United Nations economists has 
estimated the loss at $840 million. 
Despite appeals from members of Congress and private groups such as Oxfam and 
the American Friends Service Committee, the United States has refused 
assistance to Nicaragua. Jamaica and Costa Rica, hit by the same storm, 
received help from this country. There have been no explanations as to why 
Nicaragua was counted out. Politics is the only apparent cause. 
Historically, U.S. policy has been to provide disaster relief as a purely 
humanitarian gesture, independent of politics. This dates back to a successful 
program led by Herbert Hoover to restore Europe after World War I and has 
continued through the Marshall Plan until today. In 1988 such aid went to 
victims of floods in Bangladesh and the Sudan, monsoons in India and Nepal, 
Typhoon Ruby in the Philippines. 
These actions flow from the Foreign Assistance Act, which authorizes the 
President "to furnish assistance to any foreign country, international 
organization, or private voluntary organization, on such terms and conditions 
as he may determine, for international disaster relief and rehabilitation." The 
responsibility is clearly the President's. 
President Reagan, in a recent interview with David Brinkley, called Nicaraguan 
President Daniel Ortega a "shameless dictator" who "doesn't stand in the same 
box with (Soviet President Mikhail S.) Gorbachev." Has the politics of aid 
reached the point of distinguishing between avowed communists when giving or 
withholding humanitarian aid? Should we allow the behavior of the Sandinistas 
to keep us from responding to people stricken by disaster? 
While we are not in open conflict with either the Soviet Union or Nicaragua, 
the recent history of national enmity makes it imperative to maintain the 
principle of nonpolitical humanitarian aid to innocent civilians. To undermine 
this principle erodes the internationally accepted Geneva conventions that have 
enabled the Red Cross, the Red Crescent and other agencies to bring medicine 
and food to noncombatants in times of war. 
The only country in the world that could pose a serious, immediate threat to 
the United States is the Soviet Union. Yet, we have responded generously to 
innocent civilians in that country in their hour of need. Under Anastasio 
Somoza, whose regime was more brutal and repressive, the United States provided 
relief to Nicaraguan earthquake victims. 
Reporters have been told that the Nicaraguan government would not accept 
assistance if it were offered. The National Assembly did reject a portion of 
the Contra aid package intended for all children who had been injured by the 
civil strife. In mid-November Ortega clarified that the ban was limited to the 
Contra package. Shortly thereafter, the Nicaraguan charge d'affaires in 
Washington said publicly that U. S. aid would be accepted through international 
organizations. 
The new openness of the Soviet government, as it welcomes outside help and 
becomes more a part of the world community, is a sign to the incoming 
Administration to reverse a foreign policy that has too often put ideology 
above basic human needs, above values that transcend government or party. It is 
time to reaffirm the American tradition of generous response to need simply 
because the need exists. 
Providing humanitarian aid promotes the national interests of the United 
States. We must recognize, however, that such aid makes its greatest 
contribution to our credibility and our reputation in the world when it is 
delivered in a nonpolitical manner. 
