OFFICIALS SEE HOTELS AS ONE WAY TO CARE FOR HOMELESS; 
HOUSING: THE CONCEPT OF SINGLE-ROOM-OCCUPANCY FACILITIES WILL BE STUDIED BY 
ORANGE COUNTY. IT ALREADY IS HELPING SOLVE THE PROBLEM IN LOS ANGELES AND SAN 
DIEGO. 
Mike and Luann Mitchell pulled into Orange County six months ago and 
immediately knew they had a problem. 
Newly arrived from Michigan, Mike, without a job, and Luann, four months 
pregnant, had bright hopes of building a new future, but they had nowhere to 
go. 
After a week of sleeping in their cramped car, the Mitchells moved into a seedy 
Anaheim motel, joining thousands of other low-income residents who either 
remain homeless or are forced to live in poorly maintained, ill-equipped motels 
because they cannot afford the area's high rents. 
Residents such as the Mitchells, however, may soon be offered a significant new 
housing option if a plan being forged by Orange County officials is adopted. 
The officials want to build single-room-occupancy hotels, called SROs, a 
once-maligned type of low-income housing that is enjoying a renaissance around 
the country. 
Sixty or 70 years ago, they were a home to traveling salesmen or other 
wayfarers, gradually decaying into the dirty, paint-chipped, torn-furniture 
refuges of people with little hope of anything better. 
Until recently, they were the first target of the redeveloper's bulldozer. But 
now, in an ironic turnabout, many communities see them as an attractive, cheap 
source of housing for burgeoning numbers of elderly, homeless and working-poor 
residents. 
In Los Angeles, city officials have placed moratoriums on demolition of 
existing residential hotels. And San Diego has established a model SRO program, 
with 2,500 new units built or under construction. 
Orange County officials recently announced plans to form a task force that will 
explore the idea of developing SRO hotels based on the San Diego model. 
"If done with care and quality, we can put low-income housing in a community 
like Orange County where the cost of land is very expensive," said Santa Ana 
Mayor Daniel H. Young. 
Young and Orange County Supervisor Roger R. Stanton have been the key backers 
of the SRO concept in Orange County, visiting and talking with San Diego 
housing officials and trying to persuade colleagues that SROs are feasible -- 
even in traditionally conservative Orange County. 
But SROs are not without controversy. Orange County homeless advocates who 
favor SROs point to numerous recent instances of social service groups being 
locked out of communities by neighbors who fear increased crime and other 
disruptions. 
Some officials are likely to be reluctant to embrace the idea of building what 
are essentially hotels for homeless people. 
"A lot of cities will want to participate, maybe even provide funds, but the 
crux will be finding places for them to be built," said Susan Oakson, 
coordinator of homeless programs for the Orange County Homeless Issues Task 
Force. 
Young said he hopes to get support from all 29 cities in the county to build at 
least one 200-unit SRO in each city. But he acknowledged that many communities 
will initially be wary. 
"It will take a lot of education," he said. "But one of the secrets of the 
success is that these hotels will be located along commercial boulevards and 
not in residential neighborhoods. They will be as compatible with a community's 
profile as possible." 
Many housing officials are now realizing that they must persuade the public 
that low-income housing offers advantages to a community. 
If a city is faced with large numbers of homeless people who have nowhere to 
sleep but the local park, residents risk losing that resource, said Joe 
Carreras, a senior housing planner with the Southern California Assn. of 
Governments. "If a community doesn't address that problem, it won't go away," 
he added. 
Many developers and business owners have expressed interest in the concept of 
SROs for the same reason, said Bart Hansen, a partner in Shawntana Development 
and a board member of the Building Industry Assn. of Orange County. 
Substandard Housing 
Spurred by increasing numbers of immigrants, the stock of substandard housing 
has risen. At the same time, Orange County has developed virtually no 
subsidized low-income housing and is not likely to do so in the future, Hansen 
said. 
"I think SROs would hit the need where the need is," Hansen said. "This kind of 
concept goes hand in hand with business development." 
Young said successful development of SROs in Orange County is predicated on 
their being privately owned and funded. Many of the projects would probably be 
built by for-profit developers, he added. 
But many housing advocates and SRO experts say private ownership is fraught 
with the potential for problems. 
Some private owners have failed to maintain their buildings and have provided 
inadequate management, they say. And SROs built by for-profit developers tend 
to be priced too high for the tenants who really need them. 
"The benefit of nonprofit ownership is that it is set up for a social purpose 
to eliminate a social problem," Carreras said. 
"A for-profit developer will get whatever the market bears," said Andy 
Raubeson, executive director of the Single Room Occupancy Housing Corp. of Los 
Angeles. "If the rents average $420 a month and general relief is $220, then 
the person who must depend on general relief is not going to be able to live in 
SROs." 
The corporation is a nonprofit agency financed by the Los Angeles Community 
Redevelopment Agency and is one of the largest single owners of SROs. The group 
owns 12 residential hotels -- the oldest dates back to 1889 and most were built 
just after the turn of the century -- which have been renovated to meet the 
needs of the elderly, mentally ill and recovering alcoholics as well as other 
low-income tenants. The group also is involved in building new units. 
Raubeson said rents average $175 to $200. The SROs have been effective in 
taking people off the streets and in providing a safety net for those 
precariously perched on the edge of homelessness, he said. 
"They are people for whom one crisis, like losing a job or a serious illness, 
would mean the difference," he said. 
Young said that development of SROs would also benefit a broad range of Orange 
County's neediest residents and that participation of nonprofit organizations 
would be encouraged. 
"We are looking at a whole variety of ways of financing, owning and operating 
the projects," he said. "In Santa Ana, for example, we would hope to be able to 
work with the YWCA, which now operates a shelter for homeless women, and 
convert that into an SRO, a transitional facility." 
And Young noted that the San Diego SRO program, on which the Orange County 
project would be based, has had great success. 
The San Diego effort grew out of a desire to preserve existing SROs, but 
sponsors quickly realized that the problem was not one of preservation but of 
inadequate supply, said Judith Lenthall, director of the city's SRO program. 
Since 1987, about 2,500 privately owned SRO units have been developed in the 
city. Rents average about $275 a month. Occupancy rates have remained at or 
near capacity, Lenthall said. 
Each room is furnished and contains a built-in wall unit with a toilet and 
sink, a closet, refrigerator and television. 
In most of the hotels, tenants share shower facilities located on each floor. 
A survey of San Diego's hotel residents revealed that about one-third are 
elderly and on some sort of fixed income, another third are working poor and 
about 20% are disabled and dependent on disability payments. 
"We didn't solve homelessness, but people in the hotels would surely otherwise 
be out on the streets," she said. 
While there have been stigmas attached to SROs in the past, evidenced by such 
terms as "flophouses" or "fleabag hotels," Lenthall said most residents are 
grateful for -- and proud of -- their new quarters. 
'Nothing Negative' 
"There is nothing negative about this," she said. "It's not low-income housing 
that they are forced to live in by some government program. There's no stigma 
involved." 
Lenthall, who presented details of the San Diego project to members of the 
Orange County chapter of the League of Cities recently, said she is likely to 
become more intimately involved in local SRO development when she assumes 
duties as president of the organization Builders for People this month. 
The group, a nonprofit arm of the Building Industry Assn., will sponsor 
development of emergency housing, including SROs, in Southern California. 
The association already has endorsed the Orange County project, Young said. The 
new task force plans a general information meeting in February and will work 
this year to create a model SRO ordinance and to identify suitable locations 
for hotels in several cities. 
Young said the first building projects could begin in early 1991. 
