THEATER; 
'HOLY DAYS' AUTHOR LISTENS, DISCOVERS 'WHOLE WORLDS'; 
STAGE: SALLY NEMETH GETS HER IDEAS FOR CHARACTERS BY JOTTING DOWN MONOLOGUES 
THAT COME TO HER OUT OF THE BLUE. SHE'LL 'HEAR A VOICE,' RECORD THE WORDS AND 
THEN DECIDE WHETHER THEY'RE 'A SPEECH OR A WHOLE WORLD.' 
Sally Nemeth got a taste of the commuting life in Southern California last 
week, on the evening her play "Holy Days" had its U.S. premiere here on South 
Coast Repertory's Second Stage. 
"Friday on the 405," she said. "Nobody told me. I just didn't have a clue. It 
was a 45-mile-long parking lot all the way down. No lie. I come out to Los 
Angeles. I get a rent-a-car. Wow. They gave me a Mustang. They were out of 
Econoboxes. This Mustang has power everything. Then I pull onto the freeway. 
And stop." 
The 30-year-old playwright made it to the theater in time for the premiere but 
missed the appointment for this interview by an hour. 
"I hate being late," she continued by way of apology. "But I'm used to it. I 
mean, I live in New York. If you're on the subway, you get stuck between 
stations. The train doesn't move again for I don't know how long. You're late. 
Period. Now I know why people have car phones. I kept looking for one. I swear 
to God I was going to ask someone to dial for me. Bumper to bumper. No 
accident. No nothing. God knows why." 
Nemeth sounded as though she could have been inventing a monologue for one of 
her plays. Not that her characters speak even remotely as she does -- 
especially not Rosie, Gant, Will or Molly, the Depression-era farmers in "Holy 
Days" whose spare Kansas rhythms echo the dry wind of the Dust Bowl. 
But Nemeth does get her ideas for characters by jotting down monologues that 
come to her out of the blue. She will "hear a voice," she said, and she'll 
record the words "just for myself," then decide whether they are "a speech or a 
whole world." 
The entire opening of "Holy Days" -- Rosie's soliloquy about daffodils -- came 
to her precisely that way, Nemeth recalled. "I thought, 'This is a world. This 
is the Dust Bowl.' I don't know why. It just was." 
The pale, gray-eyed, auburn-haired writer had no direct experience of the era. 
She doesn't come from a farm family. In fact, Nemeth said with a combination of 
embarrassment and amazement, she had even managed to get through high school 
and college without reading "The Grapes of Wrath," John Steinbeck's classic 
saga of a Dust Bowl family. 
Still, if you come from the country's heartland -- Nemeth is a Chicago native 
whose father started out in the Indiana steel mills -- you can't help knowing 
of the period, she noted. Indeed, no matter where you live, you would have 
heard of it if only through a Woody Guthrie folk song or glimpsed it through a 
Walker Evans photograph. 
"The Dust Bowl is American myth," Nemeth said. "There is something very 
enduring about that time, very large in spirit. Perhaps it has become ingrained 
in the American psyche because it was not a time of me and mine." 
After her monologues plant the seeds for her plays, the research begins. Nemeth 
is the sort of writer who likes to investigate her material and afterward lets 
it steep for months. With "Holy Days," the method resulted in characters whose 
language sounds naturalistic but on the page looks like poetry. 
"People have told me my plays have the most minimalist writing they've heard," 
Nemeth acknowledged. "It is so stripped down in this one that Jeanne Paulsen, 
who plays Rosie, said the first time she read it she went: 'Oh, haiku!' " 
"Holy Days," written in 1984, was first produced in 1988 at a fringe theater in 
London, where the notices were so good "they were just absurd," Nemeth 
recalled. "It was kind of frightening. I thought, 'Will I ever get reviewed 
like this again?' " 
Her next effort, "Mill Fire," was finished in 1988 and reached the stage for 
the first time last year at Chicago's Goodman Studio Theatre, then was 
transferred to New York by the Women's Project. Another production will be 
mounted next month in London. The play unfolds during the late '70s in 
Birmingham, Ala., and revolves around a furnace explosion in a steel mill. 
"That one is the closest to my own experience," Nemeth said. "I don't mean the 
explosion. But I am very familiar with steel mills. My father used to put a 
hard hat on me and take me into the mills as far back as I can remember. When 
he moved up into management, we moved to steel mills all over the country. I 
spent most of my childhood in Delaware and my teens in Alabama." 
Nemeth, who was commissioned in 1989 to write a play for SCR, has already 
delivered a draft of her latest work, "Spinning Into Blue," which also takes 
place in Alabama, this time in the backwoods along the Tennessee Tom Bigbee 
Waterway. The title comes from the central motif of a falconer who trains her 
falcons by spinning a lure in the air, Nemeth explained. 
To familiarize herself with the material, she sought out a falconer about whom 
she had read in a newspaper article. "It was the neatest thing I've ever done," 
Nemeth said. "I called him up and said, 'I want to come see you.' He lives with 
his wife on 40 acres way out in the woods. They bathe in a stream. They garden 
organically. They eat what their falcon hunts. Definitely back to the land." 
The theme of "Spinning Into Blue," however, is actually about abortion. And, 
she added, "it's pro-choice." 
In the meantime, Nemeth has begun working on another play, about pornography, 
which she plans to complete in the spring. The research worries her, though. 
"It will be told from the woman's point of view," she said. "I'm a little leery 
of what I'm going to have to do for this one." 
The playwright said she lives alone on royalties in a one-bedroom apartment in 
Brooklyn, N.Y. Productions earn her on average about $3,000 each, she said, 
"and there are not too many productions." A recent $17,000 grant from the 
National Endowment of the Arts has tided her over "just barely." 
So how does Nemeth manage to keep up with the high cost of living in New York, 
where she arrived from Chicago slightly more than three years ago? Her 
apartment is "really cheap," she said. "Only $500 a month. And they didn't 
raise the rent this year." 
But the issue of "cohabitation (with her boyfriend) has begun to rear its ugly 
head." That could upset the delicate economic balance. "We're both going: 'I've 
got this really neat apartment,' " Nemeth said with a laugh. "And you know New 
York. You don't give up your lease until you have the ring on your finger." 
 Sally Nemeth's "Holy Days" continues through Feb. 25 on the Second Stage at 
South Coast Repertory, 655 Town Center Drive, Costa Mesa. Curtain times are 
8:30 p.m. Tuesdays through Saturdays, and 8 p.m. Sundays with Saturday and 
Sunday matinees at 3. Tickets: $20 to $27 (discounts available for students and 
seniors except on Friday and Saturday nights). Information: (714) 957-4033. 
