UPSTAGED BY ITS OWN NOTORIETY; 
THE MAPPLETHORPE PHOTO EXHIBIT THAT TOUCHED OFF SUCH CONTROVERSY LAST YEAR 
ARRIVES IN BERKELEY -- BUT WHO CAN LOOK AT IT OBJECTIVELY? 
Is this the show that launched a thousand quips? Is this the art that caused 
Sen. Jesse Helms (R-N.C.) to say its maker was no artist and his work was junk? 
Is this the cause of congressional consternation over the National Endowment 
for the Arts, the grounds to legislate against throwing taxpayers' dollars away 
to subsidize such junk? 
Can this possibly be the same exhibition that brought dismay and disgrace to 
the venerable Corcoran Gallery when it chickened out of presenting it in the 
nation's capital? Aesthetes were furious. Artists canceled exhibitions. The 
Corcoran's beleaguered director Christina Orr-Cahal was eventually forced to 
resign. 
Yup. This is the show all right. "The Perfect Moment," photographs and other 
works by the late Robert Mapplethorpe, is now on view at the University Art 
Museum, UC Berkeley, until March 18. It's hard to imagine it igniting any 
further fuss in puritanically liberal Berkeley, but you never know. 
It's not a particularly large show for a retrospective and certainly not in 
proportion to its notoriety. But it is a primo example of what happens to art 
when it becomes the focus of controversy. Its opponents damn so fervently that 
it starts to sound titillating. Mapplethorpe's enemies paint him as a scuzzy 
pornographer, a Marquis de Sade delighting in pain and torture. 
Gee, if it's that naughty, it might be a kick. 
Forgetting the time-honored principle of le succes de scandale, polarized 
supporters over-praise their hero's virtues. Mapplethorpe's admirers hymn him 
as a perfectionist who captured each subject at an instant of classic glamour, 
be it in a sculptural torso or the exquisite edge of a calla lily. Wow, this 
guy sounds like the greatest artist since Michelangelo met Aubrey Beardsley -- 
and a martyr to the Philistines to boot. Better check it out. 
The wearily predictable result is an exhibition that everybody looks at but 
nobody sees. 
How can anybody possibly concentrate on wafting nuances of artistic expression 
when the art has been so badly used that the only pertinent question seems to 
be: Why all the fuss? 
Clearly, if this culture was even fractionally as tolerant as it ought to be, 
none of this would have happened. 
Mapplethorpe was a homosexual who died of AIDS last year at age 42. He made the 
ramifications of his sexuality into a principal theme of his art. In one triple 
self-portrait he shows himself first as a hard-case street-corner hooker in 
leather, then as a winsome androgyne and finally as a '40s style glamour girl. 
The Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. In a late example, he looks ravaged 
with illness and holds a skull-headed cane. 
Writing in the New Yorker, critic Ingrid Sischy said that the real importance 
of this work is not in its aesthetic merit but in the liberating frankness of 
its homosexuality -- letting it also be known that she herself is gay. The 
observation was a significant reflection of a widespread current phenomenon in 
which art is used as a kind of cultural agit-prop promoting the attitudes of 
various special interest groups. 
In that context Mapplethorpe's work might be seen as having achieved something. 
But in an imagined world where every artist is out to promote a cause we are 
still faced with the questions: Which artists are we going to prefer and why 
are we going to prefer them? One obvious answer in a climate of social advocacy 
is that we are going to prefer the artist whose political and psychological 
point of view is closest to our own. 
Forgetting the suffocating egoism of such an aesthetic for the moment, let's 
ask if Mapplethorpe is an ideal representative of the gay point of view. The 
exhibition displays a portfolio of small prints that includes images of 
homosexual sadomasochism so extreme they cannot be reprinted or described in 
this newspaper. 
Some gay people might think this sort of thing gives them a bad name. 
As a social propagandist, Mapplethorpe's appeal is certainly too specialized to 
attract more more than a small cult following unless something else about his 
art speaks to larger human issues through empathy and excellence. 
The catalogue essays for "The Perfect 
Moment" leave the impression that Mapplethorpe was a fastidiously tasteful, 
classically refined, fashionably glamorous, formally astute artist who directed 
his subjects' fare-thee-well, choosing hair styles, cosmetics, pose and 
lighting with the care of a diamond cutter. The actual exhibition so regularly 
contradicts this image that one suspects the writers of having got too enamored 
of their own theme of perfection. 
On the upside there are images here far more humane than the artist's chilly 
reputation. A perfectly endearing portrait of his friend Sam Wagstaff shows him 
bright, kindly and amused. A brooding William Burroughs has the hard-bought 
wisdom and dignity of a man who survived the woozy purgatory of decades of 
drugs and turned the experience into important literature. An image of 
Katherine Cebrian has the regal maturity of Edith Sitwell. 
On the downside it seems Mapplethorpe's reputation for glamour is largely 
undeserved. He could get it when it was there, but a couple of female sitters 
look more like arriviste bimbos than ladies of fashion. When he poses the 
body-builder Lisa Lyon nude with a huge snake it manages only the kitsch 
exoticism of Sheena, Queen of the Jungle. He did not photograph like a man of 
taste, cultivation and refinement. He photographed a street urchin's fantasy of 
it. Anybody interested in the elegant decadence of the Vienna Secession gets a 
vulgar McDonald's version of it here. Mapplethorpe was better at getting close 
to fin de siecle lurking madness that shows up regularly in Lyon's eyes and in 
those of his friend Patti Smith. 
Mapplethorpe greatly admired Andy Warhol, sharing his auteur leanings to film 
and commercial work. He also apparently shared his tainted celebrity-worshiping 
naivete, but lacked his wit. There are flashes of it in the Magritte-like "Man 
in a Three Piece Suit" with its huge male member hanging like some silly 
elephant-trunk nightmare of exposure. There is mordant insight in a shot of a 
garden with a tiny Catholic cardinal in red sitting next to a fop in a lavender 
satin smoking jacket, but on the whole the artist was too rigid and obsessive 
to be funny or truly stylish. 
His reputation as a master of formal beauty is also fictionalized by the 
evidence. A diptych of a flower achieves its variety with a long shot and a 
close-up. A diptych of Smith shows inventiveness by having her stand up and 
then sit down. Warhol proved that playing dumb could be telling, but 
Mapplethorpe wasn't quite sharp enough to see the virtue of real dumbness. 
His "sculptural" photographs -- often symbolically loaded black male torsos -- 
work only occasionally, as in a shot of a ropey muscled arm. Usually such shots 
are impressive simply because the chosen model had a formidable body. 
Mapplethorpe relied enormously on subject matter; his own gifts -- while real 
-- were hampered by very limited expressive range and inventiveness. 
If there is any larger human lesson to be gleaned from Mapplethorpe's 
sensibility, it may have to do with religion. The artist was a lapsed Catholic, 
a fact that would not be worth mentioning if that influence did not show up in 
his art. The earliest work on view is an enigmatic assemblage called "The 
Rack." An image of a haloed female saint -- perhaps the virgin -- stands 
holding her outer garment open, her hands pierced by real needles suspending a 
crucifix. The sides of the box are draped with two black cravats. One senses 
this religious theme continuing in later works, like a pair of heart-shaped 
reliquary boxes containing stilettos. There is ample suggestion, as in Warhol's 
work, that a curdled religious impulse lies somewhere behind even his most 
outrageous sadomasochistic visions. 
The question of what happens in a culture when the religious impulse goes wrong 
lurks in the air these days. It turned up recently in a film by the Spanish 
director Pedro Almodovar. Called "Dark Habits," having to do with a group of 
nuns that have gone off the rails, becoming junkies, harboring murderers and 
generally leading cheerfully anarchistic lives. 
This film and Mapplethorpe's art really raise questions about how far humankind 
can go in throwing off the shackles of ancient taboos -- represented first by 
religion and then by the constraints of society -- before the whole tortilla 
crumbles. They are shouting "Freedom" in Eastern Europe these days. We all 
applaud and quietly worry about how far this can go before there is trouble. 
Dark romantics like Mapplethorpe or Jim Morrison seek freedom unto death and 
leave the rest of us wondering how much of it we really need, how much of it, 
really, we can stand. 
