FOOD AND COMMON SENSE: A NEW YEAR'S RESOLUTION AGAINST WORLD HUNGER 
A new year unfolds before us, aglitter with promise and hope. Perhaps the way 
to summarize the aspirations and realities of this time is to dedicate 
ourselves at the outset of 1989 to helping organizations that assist children 
in poor countries, especially the United Nations International Children's 
Emergency Fund, better known as UNICEF. 
In reviewing the situation of these children, James P. Grant, UNICEF's 
executive director, paraphrased Dickens and described it as "the best of times 
and the worst of times." Today it is indeed easy to find reasons both to hope 
and to despair. 
The Pluses 
On the good side: The world as a whole is becoming richer; knowledge of health, 
nutrition and agriculture is growing; and people in vast areas of the globe are 
becoming better fed and healthier. This is true in particular of the world's 
two most populous countries, China and India. India, written off by many 
Western writers in 1973 as a "basket case," now feeds itself and can even spare 
a little food for export income and relief of needy neighbors. It survived a 
difficult drought last year -- a triumph of the Green Revolution. 
On the other hand, UNICEF studies have shown that throughout the 1980s in at 
least 31 countries (16 in sub-Saharan Africa, eight in Latin America and seven 
in other regions) malnutrition has increased and educational levels have 
fallen. Close to 4.5 million children below the age of five die from 
undernutrition and associated infections as well as from preventable 
communicable diseases, including polio. UNICEF does what it can to reduce this 
catastrophe, and deserves our help. 
One important UNICEF program is oral rehydration therapy (ORT). This therapy 
prevents diarrheal diseases, frequent in malnourished areas, from killing 
infants. Oral rehydration salts are distributed in 93 countries. Packaged in 
premeasured packets, these salts can be mixed with water and administered to 
infants to keep them from becoming fatally dehydrated. Enough packets were 
produced last year to save at least half-a-million infants. 
A Modern Irony 
It is an irony of the modern world that at the same time that breast-feeding 
has regained status and popularity in developed nations, both duration and 
prevalence of breast-feeding have decreased in poor countries. The introduction 
of other drinks and foods, often of low-grade nutritional value, has gained in 
these areas to the detriment of both the finances of poor families and the 
health and survival of their children. UNICEF has subsidized information 
services and the training of health workers to encourage breast-feeding in 
countries such as Lesotho, Liberia, Swaziland, Uganda and Gambia on the African 
continent. 
In other aspects of nutrition, UNICEF has worked to improve methods of 
evaluating the state of nutrition in children, especially in villages; to beef 
up efforts in nutrition education; to improve the quality of foods sold in 
streets of cities; and to fight goiter in countries such as Vietnam, Bolivia, 
Ecuador and Peru, where it is still prevalent. UNICEF has succeeded in feeding 
millions of children in war-torn areas of the Sudan, Ethiopia, Mozambique and 
Angola, and helps in introducing unfamiliar but nutritious crops in many 
corners of the world. 
Other activities of UNICEF include the provision of pumps for safe water, basic 
sanitation, essential drugs, enhancement of the role of women as a facet of 
general development, and attempts to save children in areas of armed conflict. 
What Can Be Done? 
What can we do about the hunger and misery of children in so many areas of the 
world? As individuals, we can contribute to organizations like UNICEF that act 
as our conscience and our hands. As citizens, we can press for a solution of 
the current debt problem faced by many poor countries, whereby they send more 
money to the industrialized world as interest payments than they receive as 
aid. 
We can urge our national leaders to take the initiative in stopping the sale of 
"conventional" arms -- by the United States, the Soviet Union, France, Britain, 
Israel, Brazil, Czechoslovakia, Belgium, West Germany and others -- which drain 
the meager resources of already impoverished countries. 
You and your family, like ours, may have plenty to eat and much to look forward 
to in the year ahead. But until all children in the world are fed and 
protected, our happiness will remain strikingly incomplete. 
Botulism Is Rare in the U.S., but Improper Storage Still a Villain 
Question: Botulism food poisoning is well publicized as potentially deadly. I 
am curious: How common is it? 
Answer: We're glad to say that in the United States, botulism remains rare. 
Between 1976 and 1984, 124 outbreaks of food-borne botulism were reported, 
involving 307 individuals and resulting in more than 20 deaths. 
While botulism traced to canned foods had decreased, unusual foods have been 
identified as the source of the problem. For example, potatoes wrapped in foil, 
baked, held for a prolonged period and then used in potato salad were named as 
the culprit in two restaurant outbreaks. 
Another unusual source identified in an episode about five years ago that 
affected 28 people was sauteed onions. The butter they were cooked in 
apparently shut out oxygen, providing the environment in which the spores, 
which grow rather rapidly, could germinate. 
In yet another unusual outbreak of this potentially disastrous form of 
food-borne illness, 36 individuals were made ill from chopped garlic in soybean 
oil that had not been kept under refrigeration in the restaurant. Up to that 
time, both garlic in oil and cooked onions were thought to be incapable of 
supporting the growth of these microorganisms. 
In each of these cases, it is reasonable to conclude that if the food had been 
stored promptly in the refrigerator, the outbreak would never have happened. 
Q: Are nuts low in saturated fat? 
A: Most are quite high in fat, which provides about 70% to 90% of the calories 
in many varieties of nuts. In general, you might almost think of a nut as a 
tiny bag of fat. Fortunately, many are low in saturated fat. For example, an 
ounce of pecans contains 187 calories and 18 grams of fat. Less than half a 
gram of that fat is saturated. Several other types of nuts, among them 
filberts, almonds and English walnuts, present a similar profile, providing 
between 165 and 180 calories per ounce, but about half a gram of saturated fat. 
A second group includes nuts that contain slightly more saturated fat. An ounce 
of pine nuts, cashews or hickory nuts provides 145, 163 and 187 calories, 
respectively, but roughly 2 1/2 grams of saturated fat. Just how important the 
difference between these two groups is will depend on how many nuts you eat at 
one time and on how often you eat them. 
Beyond that, Brazil nuts, which have 187 calories per ounce, contain over 4 1/2 
grams of saturated fat. The largest source of saturated fat, however, is 
coconut. Calorically similar to Brazil nuts, it provides over 16 grams of 
saturated fat per ounce. 
A notable exception to the generalization that nuts are high-fat foods: 
European chestnuts. An ounce of chestnuts contains just a single gram of fat, 
little of which is saturated, and it contains only 105 calories. 
Q: I read in a magazine that fish is an excellent source of calcium. Is that 
true? 
A: Generally not, although there are exceptions. For purposes of comparison, 
we'll use some of the best dairy sources as our "gold standard." A cup of 
nonfat milk contains 300 milligrams, well over one-third of the adult 
recommended dietary allowance, or RDA, of 800 milligrams a day. An ounce of 
Cheddar cheese has 200 milligrams, and a cup of low-fat yogurt 415 milligrams. 
At least two types of fish compare quite favorably. Both canned salmon and 
sardines, if mashed with the bones, can contribute considerable amounts of 
calcium. In that case, two ounces of salmon would provide 110 milligrams of 
calcium; the same amount of sardines, 250 milligrams of calcium. A cup of 
oysters contains 225 milligrams of calcium. And certain other shellfish, 
including crab meat and clams, provide considerably less -- between 50 and 60 
milligrams in a three-ounce serving. On the other hand, two ounces of broiled 
flounder or halibut would provide only about 15 milligrams, hardly making it an 
excellent choice in the calcium department. 
Other than dairy products, there are few good sources of calcium. Exceptions to 
this generalization include tofu, or soybean curd, as well as several 
vegetables. One half-cup of chopped broccoli or kale provides almost 90 
milligrams; of chopped turnip greens, 125 milligrams; bok choy, 125 milligrams; 
and collards, 165 milligrams. If tofu is prepared with calcium sulfate, four 
ounces will contain 145 milligrams. And an ounce of almonds has 60 milligrams. 
Of course, it is important to keep in mind that while these are some of the 
better sources, small amounts from a variety of other foods -- including dried 
fruits, other vegetables and breads made with milk solids -- contribute to the 
total daily intake. 
