CHARGERS MAKE, PONDER COACHING STAFF CHANGES 
The Charger coaching staff is going through its first shakeup under Coach Dan 
Henning, and at least one move being considered is not his idea. 
It was announced Wednesday that Larry Pasquale, special teams coach of the New 
York Jets, will replace Joe Madden in the same position with the Chargers. 
Madden, whose kicking and kick-return teams were plagued by a series of miscues 
last season, will be reassigned as an administrative assistant. 
Henning said he agreed with that decision. But the next move would be the work 
of Bobby Beathard, the Chargers' new general manager, Henning said. 
Henning said Beathard wants to replace Larry Beightol, offensive line coach. 
Henning said he does not think that is necessary. 
"Larry Beightol is a fine offensive line coach," Henning said. "Bobby wants to 
start fresh in certain areas. We don't completely agree on all of that. But 
this is an area he wants me to consider making a change, and I am considering 
it." 
Henning said it was at Beathard's suggestion that Alex Gibbs, the Raiders' 
offensive line coach, was interviewed Wednesday as a possible replacement for 
Beightol. Gibbs is the last remaining appointee of former Raider Coach Mike 
Shanahan. 
Gibbs previously was interviewed by the Atlanta Falcons and might interview 
with one other team, Henning said. No final decision has been made with regard 
to hiring Gibbs or replacing Beightol, Henning said. 
Beathard could not be reached for comment. 
Madden and Beightol were two of three assistants who were also with Henning 
when he was coach of the Falcons in 1983-86. When he was named Charger coach in 
February, Henning brought with him four assistants -- Madden, Beightol, Ted 
Tollner (quarterbacks) and Ed White (tight ends). The rest of the staff was 
made up of holdovers from Al Saunders -- including offensive backs coach Bobby 
Jackson, who was also on Henning's Falcon staff -- or promotions within the 
organization. 
Henning said that while he might disagree with Beathard, with whom he served in 
Washington when he was an assistant coach and Beathard was general manager, he 
is open to suggestions. 
"We have tried to work together to come up with total organizational changes 
that will best befit the team," Henning said. "Everyone is working to try to do 
that." 
Henning said he sought out Pasquale earlier this month when Pasquale became 
available after the firing of Jet Coach Joe Walton. 
Pasquale, 48, begins his duties with the Chargers Feb. 1. He has 11 seasons of 
NFL experience, the past 10 with the Jets after one season with Detroit. He 
joined the Jets as receivers coach in 1980 and moved to special teams the next 
season. The Jets led the NFL in punt coverage from 1986-88 and in kickoff 
returns in 1984. 
"He is a first-class guy, and we felt if we wanted to make a change, we wanted 
to get the best," Henning said. 
Madden, 54, was hired by the Chargers last February after three years away from 
football. His most recent NFL job had been as administrative assistant to 
Henning in Atlanta in 1985-86. He previously was the special teams coach at 
Detroit from 1980-84, where he succeeded Pasquale. 
Henning defended Madden, saying some special teams problems were because of 
personnel. 
"During the course of the year, we started out poorly, settled down and then 
had an up-and-down-type performance," Henning said. "I don't think it's all the 
coaching." 
The suggested coaching changes are not all Beathard has been doing. He is 
continuing to build a staff with people who were with him in Washington. 
Dick Daniels, Redskin director of player personnel, was to have arrived in San 
Diego Wednesday night for a meeting today about a job as assistant general 
manager. 
Daniels, 45, is in his 12th year with the Redskins and first worked for 
Beathard as a scout when Beathard was director of player personnel in Miami. 
Earlier, Marty Hurney, Washington's director of public relations, interviewed 
for a job as an administrative assistant. 
The Chargers have not made an announcement concerning either because both must 
clear obligations with the Redskins, a Charger spokesman said. 
They would join Bill Devaney, a college scout with Washington who Tuesday was 
named Charger director of player personnel. 
