FOR FORD WORKERS, NEWS BRINGS RELIEF 
Ford Aerospace workers said the reports Friday that the company is up for sale 
left them feeling uncertain about their futures but also relieved that months 
of rumors and questions about the troubled defense contractor's fate were at 
least being partially answered. 
There was little doubt the sale was coming. Employees said management has been 
paring the work force and sprucing up the sprawling Newport Beach plant as if 
it were being prepared for the sales block. 
Concerns that a new owner might eliminate jobs or move the Newport Beach 
operation out of the local area have already prompted some employees to leave. 
"I'm concerned about the future. I've got a kid on the way," said Ken Hay, an 
engineer at the plant who said he gave notice Friday morning that was quitting 
the company for a job elsewhere. "There are other opportunities." 
Other employees said they plan to stick it out. "We're not completely worried. 
It's just business as usual," said one 25-year employee who was driving herself 
and a friend to lunch. "You hear these things for months. I'm not that 
surprised." 
For many of the defense plant's 2,700 employees, however, Friday was anything 
but a typical day. They clustered around TV sets to view videotapes in which 
Ford Motor Co. officials notified them of the sale and offered words of 
reassurance. 
Company supervisors handed out leaflets printed on crisp blue paper that tried 
to answer questions that employees might have about the sale. Workers seemed 
more concerned about keeping their benefits than losing their jobs. 
Engineer James D. Hynes and other longtime employees expressed concern about 
their retirement benefits. Ford spokesman Bill Selover said the pension plans 
are vested and the benefits are protected. 
Another concern was whether supervisors and certain high-ranking employees 
would be able to retain their discount leases on new Ford automobiles. Selover 
said that they won't be able to keep the cars on the same terms after the sale, 
but that the company will provide terms in which they can be returned. 
Engineer Gary Wood said the company has had a hard time making a profit on its 
government contracts and has been trying to cut costs in various ways. 
"The overall feeling is Ford got (news of the sale) out in the open. Now what 
is the next step? Do people start sending out resumes? Some already have," said 
Wood, who has worked at the plant for nine years. 
