STORM-BATTERED KING HARBOR SEEING SIGNS OF RECOVERY 
A year after the start of a series of storm and fire disasters, King Harbor in 
Redondo Beach is on the way to recovery, city officials and harbor business 
people say. 
More than $31 million in private and public improvement projects are completed, 
in progress or being planned to restore the harbor as a major South Bay 
recreational area before the city's centennial observance in 1992, said Harbor 
Director Sheila Schoettger. 
"When all the scars are gone, King Harbor will be even more beautiful," she 
said. 
Schoettger acknowledged, however, that the city has financial hurdles to 
overcome, including raising $6 million needed to reconstruct the 60-year-old 
Horseshoe Pier, most of which was destroyed by fire in May. 
The City Council voted in September to restore the pier after some contended 
that the pier attracted gangs and caused traffic congestion while others 
maintained that it was essential. 
Meanwhile, 32 shops and restaurants of the original 48 are still in business on 
the south section of the Horseshoe and the adjacent Monstad Pier. Merchants say 
the number of visitors has dropped substantially -- partly, they say, because 
many people think the pier area was wiped out by the fire and storms last year. 
"There are people living within six or eight blocks who have not checked yet to 
see whether anybody's left here," said Chuck Milner, owner of the Pier Import 
Shop. 
Milner and his wife, Judy, lost a cluster of four other shops in the Edge 
Restaurant building when two sides of the pier were damaged in the January and 
April storms and then finished off by the fire and more high waves in May. 
Some shop owners have lost more than half of their customers, he said, partly 
because there are fewer places to attract visitors to the pier area. 
The January storm also demolished the Blue Moon Saloon and heavily damaged 
Reuben's Restaurant and the Portofino Inn, all on the harbor shore north of the 
pier. 
Restoration of those restaurants is in the planning or construction stages, 
with Reuben's and the Portofino planning to reopen in June. 
To protect King Harbor, the U.S. Corps of Engineers plans to raise the south 
portion of the harbor's northern breakwater about 5 feet to the 20-foot-plus 
level of the rest of the barrier. The shorter southern breakwater will be 
doubled in length to 600 feet to head off waves at the harbor entrance. 
The $5.9-million breakwater project is expected to be completed in early 1991, 
with the city paying 35% of the cost and the federal government paying the 
rest. 
Schoettger said the city has applied for a loan from the state to cover its 
share of the breakwater project, but financing for the new pier "is much less 
clear." 
Possible avenues, she said, include a bond issue, a bank loan and contributions 
from businesses and individuals. She said those contributions have reached 
$30,000 without a major fund-raising effort. 
A design committee is scheduled to select a firm by early February to draft 
initial proposals. If all goes well, construction on the pier, possibly using 
steel or concrete pilings instead of wood, could start late this year or in 
early 1990, Schoettger said. 
