ACCUSED KILLER'S RELATIVES SAY HE IS A TRAGIC VICTIM 
Joseph Lynch, accused of killing his wife and infant daughter with a champagne 
bottle 2 weeks ago, is a victim in a family tragedy, not a murderer, according 
to his brother, who traveled from West Germany to be with him. 
John Lynch also said his brother's psychiatrist, who was treating Joseph Lynch 
for manic-depression, is partially to blame for the events of Jan. 17. "My 
brother is the most nonviolent man I know and he's ill and he needs help, not 
punishment," John Lynch said. 
Had the psychiatrist been able to see Joseph Lynch when he and his wife called 
for help, Joseph Lynch's wife might still be alive today, John Lynch said. 
Instead, police found Helen Lynch bludgeoned to death in the couple's Santa Ana 
home. Their 13-month-old daughter, Natalie, in her mother's arms, was also 
critically injured by blows to the skull with the champagne bottle. The infant 
died at Western Medical Center in Santa Ana 2 days later. 
When Joseph Lynch was brought before Municipal Judge James P. Gray on Friday 
morning to enter a plea in connection with two counts of murder, John Lynch and 
Joseph Lynch's sister, Mary Shard, sat in a back row and looked at him through 
moist eyes. But they smiled when he waved, and they waved back. 
Brief Hearing in Court 
In a brief hearing in the Santa Ana courtroom, Gray gave Joseph Lynch until 
Feb. 24 to enter a plea. Lynch's attorney wanted the time to enable his client 
to undergo a psychological evaluation. 
Afterward, Mary Shard and John Lynch said their brother should have received 
help from his psychiatrist as soon as he sought it. 
The day before she was killed, Helen Lynch called the office of Dr. Richard S. 
Rose, the psychiatrist, to make an appointment because the symptoms of her 
husband's manic-depression were again apparent, Rose has said. He could not be 
reached for comment Friday. 
Joseph Lynch was given an appointment for the next day, but his brother and 
sister said they wonder why he wasn't seen right away. 
Earlier this week, Rose and the family acknowledged that Joseph Lynch was 
hospitalized for mental problems more than 2 years ago, and had been on lithium 
for his illness until recently. 
"I would like to know why a doctor who's treating a patient for 
manic-depression for 2 years doesn't have time to see him within 24 hours, and 
in those 24 hours, things happened," John Lynch said. "I can't help but think 
that if he had seen him those 24 hours, we wouldn't be here and Helen would 
be." 
Rose said on Wednesday that a secretary, who took Helen Lynch's call, did not 
notice any urgency in her voice, and therefore Lynch was given an appointment 
for the next day. 
"I don't know if Helen made it sound urgent, but Helen wasn't a pushy sort of 
person," John Lynch said. 
"And when the appointment wasn't kept on Tuesday, why didn't anybody bother to 
find out why?" Mary Shard asked. 
"This is a tragedy," John Lynch said. "There are three victims here. My brother 
Joe is not a murderer, he's a victim." 
Relatives Life Abroad 
Joseph Lynch is from Scotland and his wife was from Australia. The family had 
lived in Santa Ana for 4 years. Most of their relatives live abroad, John Lynch 
said. 
Their parents, who are in their 70s, live in a tiny village near Dundee in 
Scotland, and the mother recently suffered a heart attack. 
"I broke the news to them," Shard said. "They found it very difficult to 
believe, to come to terms with any of this at all." 
Two other brothers live in England, but John Lynch said he and his sister were 
chosen to come to Santa Ana because "we may be the strongest in the family, 
though I didn't feel very strong today, I'll tell you." 
"Mary's practical. The most important thing is to protect my mom and dad," he 
said. 
John Lynch, a musician and singer, and Shard, a schoolteacher, arrived in Santa 
Ana on Sunday, and have visited their brother twice in Orange County Jail, 
where he is being held without bail. They said that in their visits, they let 
him do most of the talking. They said he spoke about "everything, mostly about 
the family." 
Not Act of Malice 
Shard and John Lynch do not deny that their brother may have struck the blows 
that ended the lives of his wife and child, but they said they will never 
believe it was an act of malice. 
"He knows that his body was there the night that it happened, but the entity 
which is my brother, that wasn't there," John Lynch said. "This wasn't a case 
of a man angry with his wife and having a fight. This was a case of two 
intelligent people who loved each other and were calling for help. 
"He tried to make an appointment, he and Helen together," John Lynch said. 
Shard and John Lynch said they saw their brother and his family every few 
years, when Joseph Lynch had to go to England for his work and could manage to 
bring Helen and the children with him. 
"He had a nervous breakdown 2 years ago, which he explained . . . to us as 
exhaustion from overwork, which we are just finding out now was something very 
different," Lynch said. "He called me and said things to me which at the time I 
thought were out of character for him." 
John Lynch said his younger brother had the reputation in the family of being 
the hard worker, the one who always did things right. John Lynch was the 
opposite. 
"He was always telling me I should change, well, not drink too much," John 
Lynch said. "When he called (at that time), he said, 'You were right after 
all.' He said that maybe the way I lived was not so bad after all. The fact 
that he said I was right in anything was out of character." 
Will Return Home 
The brother and sister, who have been staying with friends of Joseph and Helen 
Lynch in Santa Ana, say they will return to their homes Feb. 5, but will be 
back for the trial. 
As awkward as the situation has been for everyone, they said their brother's 
friends and neighbors have tried to make them feel better. And they say that is 
a sign of their brother's character. 
"Anybody who knows him would know it was impossible for him to hurt another 
person, not his wife and kids. That's impossible for a man like Joe," John 
Lynch said. 
The Lynches' church, First Presbyterian Church of Santa Ana, has set up a fund 
to help the family, especially the couple's two surviving children, Holly, 9, 
and Angela, 5. 
So far, said the Rev. Mike Pulsifer, the fund has collected $1,700, and offers 
of help continue to come in. The Tustin division of Crosfield Electronics, 
where Lynch worked, has told Pulsifer that employees are contributing to help 
the children. A spokeswoman for the company said both the Tustin division and 
the home office in Glen Rock, N.J., have organized efforts to help the family. 
The brother and sister said nothing has been decided about what will happen to 
the two children, who are now in the temporary custody of their maternal 
grandmother, Joan Stuart, who traveled here from Australia last week. Stuart 
and the Lynches have said there will be no disputes between them over what will 
happen to the girls. 
"Joan Stuart loves my brother like a son and still does," John said. "She said 
that to me. And for the mother of the victim, if you want to call her that, to 
tell you that, I think that's a hard thing and that means more than anything in 
this situation. 
"There are no skeletons in Joe's closet. The truth is his only and his best 
defense." 
