LAROUCHE GETS 15-YEAR TERM, IS DENIED BAIL 
A federal judge, bluntly rejecting claims that the government's prosecution was 
politically motivated, sentenced political extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. to 
15 years in prison on mail and tax fraud convictions Friday and refused to 
release him on bail while he appeals. 
District Judge Albert V. Bryan Jr. imposed prison terms and fines on six 
LaRouche associates and ordered their immediate incarceration also. 
In a courtroom exchange before sentencing, Bryan dismissed as "arrant nonsense" 
a charge by LaRouche legal coordinator Edward Spannaus that politically 
motivated prosecutors were seeking to "crush LaRouche's organization." 
The notion that LaRouche's organization posed a sufficient threat to warrant 
prosecution "just defies human experience," the judge said. 
LaRouche and his aides were convicted by a jury on Dec. 16 of bilking numerous 
supporters out of more than $30 million by deliberately defaulting on loans 
from them. 
The four-time independent candidate for President was also found guilty of 
evading federal income taxes since at least 1979. He was accused of 
fraudulently having all of his personal expenses paid by various corporations 
that he controls and then contending that he has no taxable income. 
LaRouche, a former Marxist, now embraces a number of causes on the far right 
and is noted for espousing bizarre conspiracy theories, such as one linking 
Queen Elizabeth II and Henry A. Kissinger to drug traffickers. 
LaRouche had no visible reaction when the sentence was imposed. He and the 
other defendants were handcuffed and led from the courthouse to a van, which 
took them to the Alexandria city jail, where they will remain until they can be 
assigned to a federal prison. 
At the same time LaRouche was being sentenced, federal prosecutors dropped all 
charges in a related case against LaRouche, six associates and five political 
organizations in U.S. District Court in Boston. 
That case, involving charges that LaRouche's 1984 presidential campaign had 
raised more than $2 million through credit card and loan fraud, ended in a 
mistrial last May. A new trial had been scheduled to begin on Feb. 23. But the 
U.S. attorney's office said that, in view of LaRouche's conviction in Virginia, 
further prosecution was not warranted. 
In a rambling statement before he was sentenced, LaRouche declared that he was 
"innocent of any wrongdoing." He said that a high-ranking British intelligence 
official had told him that he could influence the outcome of his trial by 
responding to certain "unknown conditions." However, LaRouche added, he refused 
to bargain for justice. 
LaRouche said also that his case "already has done great damage to the United 
States" and that "it is time for this evil and reckless prosecution to be 
brought to a halt before further damage is done." 
Assistant U.S. Atty. Kent Robinson shot back: "This is not a political case. 
This was a case of theft." 
LaRouche, 66, could have received 65 years in prison and fines totaling $3.25 
million for his conviction on 13 counts of tax and mail fraud conspiracy. He 
will have to serve about 10 years of his 15-year sentence before he is eligible 
for parole, according to a spokesman for the U.S. Parole Commission. 
After the sentencing, about 60 LaRouche supporters gathered outside the federal 
courthouse here and paraded with a bed sheet banner reading "Pardon LaRouche -- 
Kill Satan," the Associated Press reported. 
One demonstrator wore a large mask of Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and 
carried a Soviet flag, symbolizing LaRouche's belief that he is the victim of a 
Soviet secret police frame-up. 
Supporters had sought a pardon for LaRouche from President Ronald Reagan before 
he left office and said that they would continue their efforts with President 
Bush. 
LaRouche spokeswoman Dana Scanlon said that supporters planned to hold a 
round-the-clock vigil in Lafayette Park, across Pennsylvania Avenue from the 
White House, until LaRouche is released from prison. 
Until a few years ago, it would have been highly unusual for people convicted 
of white-collar crimes, such as LaRouche, to be denied bail while they awaited 
the outcome of their appeals. 
However, several defense attorneys said the practice has become relatively 
common of late for two reasons. 
One is a 1984 change in federal sentencing law that permits immediate jailing 
unless there is reasonable chance of success on appeal. The other is a growing 
sentiment among judges that white-collar criminals should be treated the same 
as others. 
LaRouche asked that his incarceration be postponed for 60 days so that he could 
undergo eye surgery, but Bryan denied the request. 
After the jury found him guilty on all counts last month, LaRouche called his 
conviction "a wrong, gross, disgusting, obscene miscarriage of justice" that 
was the result of a long "campaign of hate" by the news media and friends of 
the Soviet Union within the federal government. 
He said that he expected to be killed in prison. 
Bryan sentenced chief LaRouche fund-raiser William Wertz to five years in 
prison and an $11,000 fine. He gave Spannaus a five-year term and a $10,000 
fine. 
Each of four other fund-raisers -- Michael Billington, Dennis Small, Paul 
Greenberg and Joyce Rubinstein -- were sentenced to three years in prison and 
received lesser fines. 
