SCOPE: STUDENT PEER COUNSELORS LEARN TO LISTEN 
It is only a one-unit class that cannot be used for college credit, but 
students in peer counseling at Paramount High School say the course is more 
difficult than their academic subjects. 
But students say they enjoy the class because they are helping other 
teen-agers. 
"It is emotionally challenging," said Jill Zuidervaart, 17, a senior peer 
counselor. 
Another counselor, 17-year-old junior Tracy Dawson said: "This is harder than 
math." 
Shelly Massicotte, 17, an advanced counselor added: "We are dealing with 
real-life stuff." 
After completing a 20-week semester of classroom training, students during the 
second semester provide counseling to their peers. Of the 36 students now 
attending peer counseling classes, eight have advanced to the point where they 
can handle any type of problem. 
Troubled teen-agers place their request slips for counseling in a locked wooden 
box in the library. Peer counseling teacher Sandy Jacobs is the only one with a 
key to the box. 
Problems range from drugs to pregnancy, rape, suicidal thoughts and alcoholic 
and abusive parents. 
Other students who might be suspected of taking drugs or are having academic 
problems and are unwilling to talk with adult counselors or teachers are 
referred to the peer counselors. 
The peer counselors "help break the ice. They move the student to seek 
resources on campus," said Michael White, who heads the school student 
counseling services. 
The youths talk with the peer counselors in empty rooms, during lunch hours or 
after school. Sometimes the youth counselors might be dismissed from one of 
their regular classes to talk with a troubled classmate. 
The peer counselors listen, but they do not try to tell troubled students what 
to do. Everything they talk about is kept in strict confidence. However, they 
are required by state law to report cases of abuse or possible suicide or 
potential harm or threats to others. 
In the case of a 17-year-old male student who was sleeping with a gun under his 
pillow, peer counselor Olivier Contreras said she listened and was able to get 
the young man to talk about his problems. He was considering killing himself 
because of problems he was having with his girlfriend. 
"He was nervous. I held his hand," Contreras said. 
The young man's parents were told, school authorities were notified and 
professional counseling was recommended for him, Jacobs said. The youth has 
since dropped out of school. 
Girls who think they are pregnant are informed about their options, which 
include talking with their parents, seeking professional counseling and 
discussing the situation with the baby's father. They are also encouraged to 
seek a medical examination immediately. 
The peer counseling program was started as an after-school pilot project three 
years ago by Jacobs, who was a business teacher at the school. She is also the 
substance abuse coordinator. Jacobs has a BA and MA in business. She also has 
an MA in counseling psychology and is a licensed marriage, family and child 
therapist. 
Jacobs said she was hearing so many student problems that she thought it might 
be a good idea to start a peer counseling group. 
Many public schools have found peer counseling to be successful in dealing with 
student problems, said Michael Donnelly, president of the California Peer 
Counseling Assn. The association is a statewide volunteer organization composed 
of adult professionals counselors and student peer counselors. 
According to the most recent data based on a 1986 state Department of Education 
survey, 25% of more than 800 high schools had some type of peer counseling 
program, Donnelly said. 
"Good counseling programs work when students (counselors) are properly 
trained," said Donnelly, who runs a peer counseling program at San Gabriel High 
School. 
The Paramount Unified School District Board of Education approved the class for 
the one-unit elective credit last year and Jacobs began teaching it full-time. 
The students who sign up must have passing grades and be recommended by their 
teachers. The peer counselors are taught basic skills on how to be good 
listeners and how to communicate to troubled youths that they can seek 
alternatives to their problems. 
Jacobs said of the peer counselors: "While they may never use algebra in their 
adult lives," they will always be able to use their counseling skills. 
