IT'S AMERICA'S TURN TO SHIFT THINKING; 
WHILE TALKING WITH PLO, U.S. MUST SKIRT DETOURS BY ISRAEL, FRIENDS 
The much-heralded opening of contacts between the United States and the 
Palestine Liberation Organization made fewer waves than might have been 
expected. Indeed, it can now be seen that the enormous energy invested in this 
relatively minor issue blew it entirely out of proportion. In the cold light of 
morning, all parties can perceive that it was not quite what they expected. 
Opponents of these contacts here and in Israel will perhaps now accept that 
talking to a given party does not necessarily mean embracing its every 
principle, tenet and belief. Those in the PLO who favored these contacts may 
now understand that they have a long way to go before they can agree on much 
with the United States, let alone Israel. And all must realize that there is a 
long, hard road ahead before any progress can be made on the substantive issues 
of a Middle East settlement that were shelved over the many years while this 
farce was being played out. 
A few important things have happened, nevertheless. The most notable is that 
the lengthy campaign to demonize the PLO and put it outside the pale of 
civilized discourse has finally failed. Israeli diplomacy under the new team of 
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, Foreign Minister Moshe Arens and Deputy Foreign 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu -- representing the hardest line of Israeli hawks 
-- will undoubtedly try to resurrect it. But it is beyond resuscitation, 
interred by the actions of Israel over the past year of the Palestinian 
uprising, which has shown Americans that the Palestinians are a people who 
deserve to be free and independent. 
This change is rooted in an underlying shift in public opinion in this country, 
notably among the American Jewish community. After decades of seeing reality in 
the Middle East through Israeli lenses, Americans are beginning to see things 
for themselves. And, not surprisingly, the reality that they perceive is far 
more complex than before. This relates in part to the Palestinian uprising, but 
it began with the seemingly endless Israeli siege of Beirut during the summer 
of 1982. The Lebanon war had a powerful effect on public opinion, preparing it 
for the ugly images from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip five years 
later. 
The fact that there has been such a shift in American opinion, of course, does 
not mean that it cannot be reversed. Those who oppose contacts with the PLO may 
well try to exploit an incident instigated by Arab opponents of the settlement 
process -- the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 may prove to be just such an 
incident. With the hard-line Likud team well connected with influential 
commentators like William Safire, George F. Will, A. M. Rosenthal and Jeane 
Kirkpatrick, it is easy to envisage the outlines of such a counteroffensive. It 
would be yet another instance of the old Middle East pattern of the extremes, 
in effect, cooperating against the center. 
Yet another pitfall to be avoided is that of seeking a substitute for the 
Palestinians' own representatives. It is already clear that the "new" Likud 
peace plan will include several varieties of this old ploy. Whatever the 
ostensible objective, the aim is to avoid dealing with the real protagonist on 
the other side. Behind this lies the desire to avoid substantive negotiations 
about Israeli withdrawal, removal of settlements, Palestinian 
self-determination and a freely negotiated status for Jerusalem -- all 
anathemas to Likud. 
The danger is not that the new Likud foreign-policy team will put forth such a 
meaningless plan, but that the United States will fail to bluntly label such an 
approach a non-starter. If the Bush Adminstration handles whatever warmed-over 
ideas are produced by Jerusalem with the kid gloves customarily reserved for 
America's reception of Israeli proposals, the peace process will be in serious 
trouble. 
But more than American frankness with Israel is necessary if the peace process 
is not to stall at this early stage. The United States must also accept that it 
cannot single-handedly resolve the longest-lasting, most intractable and most 
many-sided of the world's regional conflicts. Cooperation over this matter is 
essential at least between the superpowers, for if a settlement is to be 
lasting and credible to all parties it must involve the guarantees, and perhaps 
the peacekeeping forces, of both Washington and Moscow. 
Finally, the United States must listen with an open mind to what Palestinians 
say when contacts with the PLO resume late this month, and it must take a fair 
but firm attitude toward Israel. After being ignored as a serious party to the 
conflict for so many years, the PLO deserves a hearing for its peace proposals. 
If the Palestinians can modify their long-cherished ideas, the Americans should 
be able to do the same. As for Israel, the old days of indulging its every whim 
should be over. There is no consensus in this country for forcing Israel to do 
things that it refuses to do. But there is one for no longer acquiescing in and 
subsidizing Israeli actions that are harmful to U.S. interests and that most 
Americans find abhorrent. Any other course of action would sabotage the 
prospects for peace and further damage U.S. credibility. 
