OPENING THE FLOOD GATEWAYS FOR ARTY IMAGES OF CIVIC PRIDE 
A Burbank official once suggested placing giant replicas of phonograph records 
and a giant "B" made of ersatz film along an adjacent stretch of the Ventura 
Freeway to let tourists (and perhaps some residents) know where they were. 
No doubt fearful of what Johnny Carson would say, the city rejected that idea. 
But now Burbank lawmakers are considering dressing up the town with smaller 
civic artworks depicting cameras, palm trees and airplanes as well as a sign 
spelling the city's name in pink and blue neon. 
The plan is titled the Burbank Gateway Study, not to be confused with Los 
Angeles' proposed West Coast Gateway over the Hollywood Freeway or the Gate of 
Angels, a losing entry in the Olympic Boulevard West International Design 
Competition. 
G-Word Onslaught 
Even before the G-word onslaught, civic symbols were becoming something of an 
art form in Southern California, which has seen the emergence in recent years 
of a "South Gate" water tank, a "Compton" obelisk (formerly Alameda Auto 
Supply), a "Monterey Park" signpost on a hill and an "East Los Angeles" arch 
(El Arco) across Whittier Boulevard. 
In addition, residents saved a blurred landmark along the Pasadena Freeway that 
for a few years had spelled out "City of South Pasadena" in weeds. 
Civic image-making impulses are particularly strong in a county where 84 cities 
are struggling for an identity separate from big brother Los Angeles, hoping to 
bolster local pride and local treasuries. 
"There's so much competition among cities these days that you have to 
differentiate," said Bill Kelly, assistant executive director of Burbank's 
Redevelopment Agency. "In our case, you can't really tell when you've left L.A. 
and entered Burbank. It's one long strip-shopping area." 
La Canada Flintridge's colorful wooden sign on its east flank, depicting an oak 
tree stretching across a mountain, symbolizes the sort of elegant horsy image 
that the city wants to present as well as the craftsman architecture (heavy on 
timber and stone) that dominates its business section. One underlying goal? 
"We're trying to encourage more shopping," said City Manager Don Otterman. "Our 
largest source of revenue is sales taxes." 
Hawaiian Gardens, like Burbank, recently hired an outside planner to suggest 
ideas for an attractive welcome mat. And West Hollywood, which set out banners 
calling itself "The Creative City" for awhile, is considering more permanent 
identifiers. 
"The problem with some cities is that they don't know who they are or what they 
are," said landscape designer Lawrence Moss, the man hired to tell people what 
Burbank is a gateway to. "Even L.A. has this phobia of competing with New 
York." 
Paying for civic monuments is also an obstacle. Whether Los Angeles' 
controversial Gateway deserves to be known as "Steel Clouds" (the designer's 
term) or "Broken Popsicle Sticks" (one critic's term) is academic unless an 
estimated $33 million can be raised for its construction. 
South Gate, which called itself "Gateway to the Ocean" long before Los Angeles 
came up with its West Coast Gateway scheme, at one time considered placing 
small archways at every entrance to the city. But South Gate dropped the idea 
because of the "exorbitant cost," said Patricia Elkins of the city engineering 
department. 
Less seriously considered was a proposal by a local restaurateur a few years 
ago to hang a huge clock over one entrance with his name on it. 
Thrifty Solution 
Instead, South Gate took the inexpensive step of slapping its moniker on the 
side of a water tank overlooking the Long Beach Freeway to emphasize its status 
as one of the few local cities that has its own water company and own wells. 
(The luster of that distinction has dimmed somewhat with the recent loss of 55% 
of South Gate's water supply due to the closing of contaminated wells.) 
In Culver City, where lawmakers have complained of the city's reputation as a 
freeway food stop, sculptor Natalie Krol was asked to fashion a work 
symbolizing the town's role in motion picture history. 
She proposed a 7-ton, 18-foot-tall stainless-steel strip of film. But her fee, 
$130,000, was a concern until the city hit upon the idea of having donors sign 
their names in tile around the work. Residents came up with the whole tab. 
"I've gotten a lot of letters from people telling me how much they enjoy it," 
Krol said. "It's used as a background for photographing graduation classes, 
it's a symbol of the industry and it's a heroic symbol, something larger than 
life that brings the viewer a sense of connecting to something imposing." 
Residents elsewhere chipped in to save the "City of South Pasadena" sign, a 
landmark dating back to 1940. 
The letters, originally made of flowers and plant material, had been ripped out 
and dug up over the years by two forms of pests: teen-agers and gophers. The 
city said it couldn't afford to make repairs. 
"It looked so awful for a while," remembered Doris Gertmanian of South Pasadena 
Beautiful, a civic group. 
$20,000 for Remodeling 
So after the sign had languished in weeds for six years in the late 1970s, the 
group raised $20,000 and installed a sturdier set of letters -- made of 
cobblestones. 
The civic effort is a statement "that we have a great deal of pride in our 
community," Gertmanian said. 
Lights have even been added, creating a new pest problem. 
"Children keep knocking them out with rocks," Gertmanian said. "But we hope to 
get some type of protective shields for them." 
The Burbank Gateway Study came about after City Council members noticed a "City 
of Glendale" sign made of polished granite on Brand Boulevard. 
"Glendale is somewhat conservative and that's what this sign says -- it's very 
solid, secure and substantial looking," said Moss, its designer. 
Of his Burbank assignment, Moss said: "The important thing is to create an 
attractive design, but one that isn't garish and won't be dated within a few 
years." 
So he avoided the giant-phonograph-records-along-the-freeway concept as well as 
a previous suggestion to place benches adorned with life-size replicas of 
celebrities around Burbank. 
Moss' monuments -- which would stand at city entrances as well as in front of 
the Civic Center -- would symbolize the city's role as a home of the 
entertainment industry and as the site of Burbank-Glendale-Pasadena Airport. 
Suggested materials range from concrete, polished marble and neon to tile and 
glass cubes. 
So far, city officials are noncommittal. 
Kelly, of the redevelopment agency, said: "We didn't put any constraints upon 
him (Moss). We said, 'You tell us what Burbank is.' " 
