THE TIMES SHOPPER: CRAZY GUNNAR IS NOT DISCOUNTED 
Galne Gunnar, which translates to Crazy Gunnar in English, is ruining Sweden's 
reputation as an expensive place to shop. It's a variation on the American 
discount store. 
Doors to the first Galne Gunnar (pronounced GAL-na GUN-nar) were opened about a 
year ago. The five-store chain is owned by Hennes &amp; Mauritz, a trendy 
Swedish clothing firm. It sells Hennes &amp; Mauritz fashions, usually from one 
season past, at a fraction of their original price. Stock changes daily. 
Although the idea for Galne Gunnar came from the United States, the store has 
Swedish style. Wares are displayed on counter-like tables, open racks and 
sometimes even in cardboard boxes. 
Although Galne Gunnar stores are not found on the tourist trail, they're in 
well-populated suburbs and can be easily reached by taxi or public 
transportation. 
In the Gothenburg area, on Sweden's west coast, Galne Gunnar is in the suburb 
of Kallered, at the Ljud &amp; Bildhuset shopping complex on Ekenleden. A taxi 
from the town center costs about $8 U.S. round trip between the hotel and the 
store. 
Public buses are about $1, but the trip is a bit more complicated. Get 
directions at the Gothenburg Tourist Office, Kungsportplatsen 2. 
The Gothenburg shop isn't the largest in the chain, but is well stocked with 
major brands at mini-prices. 
It has Adidas jogging suits for $24, Adidas terry-cloth robes for $41, Naf Naf 
velour shirts for $15, cozy down vests in colorful chartreuse and purple for 
$16, quilted down coats by Capri in sparkling snowman white for $94, and 
rain-resistant cotton coats with removable linings bearing the Hennes &amp; 
Mauritz label for $31. 
Cotton jerseys, $12, with modified turtlenecks, are offered in nine colors 
(including lavender, smoky purple and tarnished gold); pure wool sweaters with 
Scandinavian patterns cost $15 and hip-length sweaters with matching 
straight-line wool skirts in solid colors are $12 for the set. Baggy sweaters 
that cost $15 match slinky tube skirts that cost $7. 
Men's corduroy trousers sell for $15, leather jackets for $79, Adidas sweaters 
for $20 and down jackets $47. 
There is also a selection of clothing for toddlers and teen-agers. Jeans cost 
$26, single-piece snowsuits in cheerful colors are $39, two-piece snowsuits 
with pastel-colored quilted down pants and jacket are $26, infant-size 
snowsuits cost $24, sets of lavender-and-aqua cotton T-shirts and trousers for 
babies are $4.50 and little popcorn knit sweaters in pink and white go for $8. 
Purple cotton long-sleeve sweaters are sold with plaid wool overalls for $28 a 
set, and little denim or printed cotton dresses with smocking collars cost $8. 
Toys include $15 Puffalumps, which cost $63 apiece in other Swedish stores, 
Matchbox trucks for $6 and cars for $3.50. There are brightly-colored and roomy 
backpack/bookbags that fit onto a little luggage trolley for $9, and matching 
kid-size director chairs for $5. 
Sports enthusiasts will find a selection of top-label running and tennis shoes, 
plus Nordica and Weinmann ski boots for $79 and Atomic, Avantgarde and Fischer 
RC4 skis for $110. 
Household goods include cans of cream of asparagus soup (31 cents), wicker 
bread baskets lined with colorful cotton ($2), pound packets of strong Swedish 
coffee ($7) and battery-operated electric toothbrushes ($3). 
Galne Gunnar has additional shops in Stockholm's suburbs of Huddinge 
(Tangentvagen 2) and Taby (Arninge Centrum on Saluvagen) and in Jonkoping 
(Osterungens Centrum, Birkagatan 8) and Vasteras (Friledningsgatan 8). The 
Stockholm stores are accessible by public transportation. Get directions from 
the Tourist Information Center, Sweden House, Kungstradsgarden. 
Although all Galne Gunnar stores sell similar merchandise, there's a 
money-savings incentive for stopping in Gothenburg. The city offers weekend 
hotel rates from $30 a night, including a buffet breakfast. 
And Galne Gunnar offers Sweden's tax-free benefits to tourists who spend at 
least 100 Swedish crowns (about $15 U.S.) and export purchases. At most other 
stores the minimum purchase is 200 Swedish crowns, and you get a 23% tax 
rebate. 
Ask Galne Gunnar sales people for documentation to show, along with 
merchandise, at tax-rebate counters at the airport or border before leaving 
Sweden. Refunds are made on the spot in Swedish crowns, which can be exchanged 
for U.S. dollars. 
Prices quoted in this article reflect currency exchange rates at the time of 
writing. 
