ASSEMBLY LINE FLEXIBILITY SETS JAPANESE APART 
Masami Ishihara, the man in charge of building what is arguably the hottest car 
in the Western world, is about to beat a headache that has been bugging him for 
months. 
The kind of headache that his counterparts in Detroit would dearly love to 
have. 
For here in Hiroshima, Ishihara is the boss of Assembly Line No. 5 inside 
Mazda's giant U-1 plant, and that means that he is responsible for building 
Mazda's Miata two-seat convertible, the automobile that has evoked a kind of 
visceral lust among millions of Americans. 
The public clamoring for the cute little roadster has reached absurd heights -- 
which brings us back to Ishihara's quandary. 
Since the Miata was introduced last spring, Ishihara has been frustrated -- he 
has been able to build only about 20,000 of them, and demand has so far 
outstripped supply that Mazda's American dealers have been eagerly gouging 
their customers with astronomical sticker prices. 
Miata production has been severely restricted because the car must share space 
on its assembly line with Mazda's 323, 929 and RX7 models, all of which are big 
sellers. 
But now, Ishihara has figured out how to triple Miata production for 1990: He 
plans to shift production of Mazda's 323 subcompacts to another nearby line 
inside the same factory. That should free up more space for the Miata, enabling 
Mazda to build 60,000 this year -- including 40,000 earmarked for the United 
States. 
So, though it has taken a while, Mazda will thus catch up with its customers 
long before they start to lose interest in the Miata. 
"When we get a hot car, we can accommodate demand," Ishihara said. 
And Ishihara has Mazda's remarkably flexible approach to manufacturing to thank 
for that. 
Not only can Mazda build four, five or even six different cars on the same 
assembly line, it can also have two or three of those complicated lines running 
inside the same factory. Without sacrificing quality. 
That is unheard of in Detroit, yet it is commonplace in Japan, where the 
scarcity of available land long ago forced manufacturers to find ways to 
consolidate their operations. For Japan, that flexibility played a critical 
role in helping its auto industry retain its competitive edge over America's 
Big Three throughout the 1980s. 
It has also helped the Japanese adapt more readily to changes in the 
marketplace -- and provided them with a way to produce a wider assortment of 
new cars much more cheaply than is possible in Detroit. With the ability to 
plug new models into existing assembly lines, the Japanese can often avoid the 
prohibitively high costs of building new plants. 
Nissan, for instance, created its Infiniti line of luxury cars for only about 
$500 million -- much more cheaply than American observers thought possible. It 
saved money by building the Infiniti Q-45 at an existing assembly plant in 
Tochigi, Japan, sharing an assembly line with the Nissan Cedric and Nissan 
Cima, luxury cars sold only in Japan. 
Mitsubishi is following the same course with its new 1991 3000GT, which will be 
introduced next fall. The sleek, 300-horsepower sports car will be built at 
Mitsubishi's assembly plant in Nagoya, which also produces pickup trucks and 
the company's Sigma sedan. By thus holding down manufacturing costs, Mitsubishi 
will be able to offer the 3000GT for just $31,000, far less than comparable 
European and American sports cars. General Motors, by contrast, has gone in the 
opposite direction as it has tried to compete with the Japanese. GM has 
reportedly spent more than $3 billion on its new Saturn car, with much of that 
money going for a new manufacturing complex in Tennessee that will be dedicated 
exclusively to Saturn. 
Few Big Three plants, in fact, are capable of producing more than one or two 
different cars on the same line, unless they are nearly identical models hiding 
behind different nameplates. Ford's Wixom, Mich., luxury car factory builds 
just three models -- the Lincoln Continental, Lincoln Town Car and the 
Continental Mark VII -- yet it is still the most flexible plant in the domestic 
industry. It is the only Big Three assembly plant that can build both 
front-wheel-drive and rear-wheel-drive cars on the same line. 
By doing so much mixing and matching on their assembly lines, the Japanese are 
better able than Detroit to adapt to wild swings in consumer tastes. Unlike the 
U.S. Big Three, the Japanese do not have to shut down an entire plant just 
because the sales of one car line tail off, and that helps them live up to 
their no-layoff guarantees to workers. 
"If you build a plant for each model, you have problems when sales go down," 
Ishihara said. "Our system is much more cost-efficient." 
By concentrating their production, the Japanese can also get by with far fewer 
assembly plants than can the U.S. auto makers. 
Honda, for example, has just two assembly plants in all of Japan, producing 
more than 1.3 million cars between them. Honda's Suzuka plant, the largest in 
Japan, produces more than 800,000 cars a year on three assembly lines; the 
plant's 10,000 workers build nine different models, and both right-hand- and 
left-hand-drive versions of each. 
Toyota, which produces 4 million cars a year in Japan, has just five Japanese 
assembly plants; GM has 36 North American assembly plants producing 5 million 
cars and trucks a year. None of GM's plants produce more than about 250,000 
vehicles annually. 
To maintain their manufacturing flexibility in the face of a worsening labor 
shortage in Japan, the Japanese auto companies are starting to make massive new 
investments in robotics in a nationwide campaign to dramatically increase their 
use of new forms of automation. 
Detroit, which has worked hard throughout the 1980s to keep pace with the 
Japanese in robotics, seems destined to fall behind once more. 
Reinvesting the huge profits from their export boom, the Japanese are equipping 
some of their plants -- including their new ones in the United States -- with 
nearly twice as many robots as are installed in the typical Big Three factory. 
For instance, Toyota's Motomochi assembly plant in Toyota City has 435 robots 
in just its body shop, where 93% of all sheet metal welding for the Toyota 
Cressida has been automated. At GM's huge Lake Orion, Mich., Cadillac factory, 
by comparison, there are only 163 robots in the entire plant. 
"Everybody in Japan is trying to increase their automation," said Kaname Kasai, 
general manager of Honda's Sayama assembly plant, which already has 480 robots. 
"We are trying to get more automation in areas of our plant where we have had 
quality inconsistencies in the past." 
