ASSEMBLY DEMOCRAT REVIVES NO-FAULT INSURANCE LEGISLATION 
Despite voter rejection in November of a no-fault initiative, the chairman of 
the Assembly Finance and Insurance Committee on Wednesday introduced 
legislation that would enact a California no-fault auto insurance system 
modeled on a successful one operating in New York. 
The proposal has strong backing from Consumers Union. But its author, 
Assemblyman Patrick Johnston (D-Stockton), acknowledges that it faces an uphill 
battle in the Legislature where opposition from trial lawyers has stymied 
similar efforts for nearly two decades. 
Nonetheless, Johnston told reporters Wednesday that there is a new recognition 
among lawmakers of the need to control legal costs that drive up insurance 
premiums, which he contends was not accomplished by voter passage of the Ralph 
Nader-backed Proposition 103. 
"If we do not act in 1989," Johnston warned, "there will be another voter 
revolt in 1990." 
Johnston's proposal drew cautious support from the insurance industry, which 
spent tens of millions of dollars promoting Proposition 104, its own, less 
generous no-fault proposal that was overwhelmingly defeated on the November 
ballot. 
But while one insurance spokesman lauded Johnston's proposal as "on the right 
track," industry lobbyists stopped short of an outright endorsement and 
confided that they believe the bill does not go far enough to restrict lawsuits 
and clamp down on medical claims. 
Speaker to Offer Own Bill 
Meanwhile, Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco) said he will 
introduce his own insurance bill, and officials of the California Trial 
Lawyers' Assn. are unequivocal in their opposition to Johnston's measure. They 
contend that the legislation would increase costs rather than reduce them and 
is actually "an attempt to undermine Proposition 103." 
"We just had an election where the people were given an opportunity to choose, 
and they rejected no-fault by 75%," said Will Glennon, the association's legal 
analyst. "Now Pat Johnston and Consumers Union are saying, 'Let's look at 
no-fault again.' It's ironic, to say the least." 
In fact, Johnston's proposal offers far more generous benefits to motorists and 
is less restrictive of legal rights than the insurance industry's defeated 
ballot initiative. 
Under the traditional "tort liability" system used in California and 24 other 
states, the negligent driver's insurance company must reimburse the innocent 
party in an accident. 
With no-fault, motorists are compensated for injuries by their own insurance 
companies no matter who is at fault. Costs are reduced because lawsuits are 
prohibited unless injuries are particularly serious or medical bills exceed a 
certain limit. 
Johnston's legislation would provide up to $50,000 in medical benefits, $3,000 
for funeral costs and up to $2,000 per month for three years to compensate for 
lost wages. It also would allow "reasonable and necessary" payments for child 
care and other services up to a maximum of $50 daily for one year. 
To cut costs, the legislation would allow lawsuits only when the total loss 
exceeds the $50,000 maximum medical benefit or in the case of a "serious 
injury." 
By contrast, Proposition 104 would have allowed a maximum of $10,000 in medical 
benefits, $15,000 in lost wages and $5,000 in funeral costs, with no provisions 
for other expenses incurred by an accident victim. The insurance 
industry-sponsored initiative would also have made it much more difficult to 
sue, allowing a case to go to court only when an injury is "both serious and 
permanent." 
Voter passage of Proposition 103 does not prohibit the adoption of a no-fault 
system. Moreover, when combined with Proposition 103's stringent regulation of 
the insurance industry, Johnston's proposal would result in a system that 
closely mirrors New York's. 
New York Plan 
According to New York insurance officials, the adoption of that state's 
no-fault system prompted an 80% reduction in the volume of lawsuits and a 
significant increase in the amount of each premium dollar that goes to accident 
victims. Premiums also rise more slowly than in many other states although New 
York remains the seventh most costly state in which to buy auto insurance. 
Harry Snyder, West Coast director of Consumers Union, conceded that Johnston's 
proposal, like New York's system, is unlikely to actually reduce premiums. But 
he contended that it will keep rates from raising as rapidly as they might 
otherwise, "and that is very significant in itself." 
Although there are sharp differences between Johnston's proposal and the 
defeated no-fault initiative, the insurance industry's unsuccessful campaign to 
sell its ballot measure as New York-style no-fault may confuse some lawmakers 
and make it more difficult for Johnston to win support for his proposal. The 
trial lawyers, whose fees from lawsuits would be jeopardized by any no-fault 
system, were quick to capitalize on that point. 
"The insurance industry spent $70 million, mostly aimed at selling Proposition 
104 as New York no-fault," said the association's Glennon. "(Johnston's) 
proposal will be washed out by that campaign." 
Johnston will also not be able to count on support from Speaker Brown, a trial 
lawyer loyalist. The plan Brown said he will introduce would continue the 
present system but would require that injury claims for less than $50,000 be 
submitted to arbitration rather than allowed to go to court. 
Another major hurdle faced by Johnston is the vocal opposition of Harvey 
Rosenfield, the primary author of Proposition 103. On Wednesday, Rosenfield 
said the Legislature should take no steps to modify the insurance system until 
Proposition 103 is fully implemented and the insurance industry is forced to 
open its books and justify the need for further cost-cutting measures. 
