U.S. UNIT OF CAMPEAU GETS NEW CHAIRMAN 
Campeau Corp.'s U.S. subsidiary today appointed G. William Miller, former 
Federal Reserve Board chairman and Treasury secretary, as its chairman and 
chief executive officer, one day after putting its department stores under 
bankruptcy protection. 
Miller, 64, steps into a job created when Toronto-based Campeau last week split 
its U.S. operations from the parent company, giving them operating 
independence. 
The U.S. unit is the parent of Federated Department Stores Inc. and Allied 
Stores Corp., which own such department stores as Bloomingdale's, Jordan Marsh, 
Abraham &amp; Strauss and Lazarus. 
They were placed under protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the 
federal bankruptcy law on Monday, enabling the stores to continue operating 
while Campeau tries to work out its financial troubles. 
The Chapter 11 filing was the largest by a U.S. retailer, affecting about 
100,000 employees and 258 stores in the United States, and the second-largest 
by a non-financial company after Texaco Inc., which sought court protection in 
1987. 
Campeau's U.S. subsidiary also announced today that it will change its name 
from Campeau Corp. (U.S.) Inc. to Federated Stores Inc. and that John W. Burden 
III, chairman and chief executive officer of Federated and Allied, has quit 
effective Jan. 31 "to pursue other interests." 
Miller, chairman of G. William Miller &amp; Co., a Washington-based merchant 
banking firm, has served on the boards of Campeau, Federated and Allied since 
1987. He became Fed chairman in 1978. From 1979 to 1981, Miller was Treasury 
secretary under President Jimmy Carter. 
Miller said the moves announced today represent significant developments in the 
company's effort to reorganize under bankruptcy court supervision. 
"The company is now positioned with a strong and experienced management team at 
all levels to manage what has always been a highly successful group of American 
retail businesses -- with a new name that reflects our retailing orientation," 
he said in a statement. 
