YAROSLAVSKY DUCKS ONE FIGHT BUT FACES SECOND IN BID FOR REELECTION 
When Zev Yaroslavsky backed out of one political fight, he ran into another. 
Deciding against a race for mayor of Los Angeles because he thought he would 
lose, he announced that he will seek reelection as a councilman in the 
traditionally friendly 5th District, which covers much of the Westside. 
But Friday, as he was bowing out of the mayoral election, it was clear that he 
will have opposition in the council race. Three candidates for his seat -- 
including a co-chairman of his 1985 reelection campaign -- said that 
Yaroslavsky is vulnerable and they will run against him. A fourth candidate, 
Yaroslavsky ally Lisa Specht, said she will drop out. 
All the candidates had entered the council contest thinking Yaroslavsky would 
be running for mayor in the April city election. 
Despite the determination of most of the candidates to stay in the race, 
incumbents traditionally are difficult to unseat in city races because they 
have access to large amounts of campaign contributions and their names are well 
known. However, two years ago, entrenched incumbent Pat Russell was beaten in 
the adjoining 6th District on a wave of homeowner discontent similar to that 
beginning to emerge in parts of Yaroslavsky's district. 
"The overwhelming message I've gotten in the last 18 months has been that the 
people of the 5th District believe the quality of their lives has deteriorated 
over the last four years," said candidate Steve Saltzman, a former aide to 
Mayor Tom Bradley and co-chairman of Yaroslavsky's 1985 campaign. 
Slow-growth advocate Laura Lake and transportation planner Ryan Snyder also 
said they are still in the running. Lake, president of Friends of Westwood, 
said that as word of Yaroslavsky's decision spread on Thursday, supporters 
urged her to "keep going." 
"He has let everybody down," Lake said. "There has been chaos and gridlock. . . 
. The people want somebody who will be their advocate, who has the interest of 
the community at heart." 
Specht, who had been considered the leading contender to succeed Yaroslavsky, 
said she would support the councilman's reelection. Specht bought a condominium 
in Century City last year and moved into the district to become eligible for 
the contest. 
Saltzman and Lake, both of whom have been raising money and walking precincts 
for months based on Yaroslavsky's assurances that he would run for mayor, said 
the councilman has lost touch with his constituents. Saltzman accused 
Yaroslavsky of spending "the past two years as a candidate almost full-time for 
mayor." 
Saltzman said he hopes to capitalize on a comment by Yaroslavsky's wife, 
Barbara, that the councilman "is getting really bored" with his council job. 
At a City Hall press conference Friday, Yaroslavsky said he is confident of 
winning reelection. 
"If you think I'm bored, then you've got to have your head examined, and that 
includes Barbara," he said. 
The 40-year-old Yaroslavsky, who was elected in 1975, was unopposed for 
reelection in 1981 and 1985. He needs 50% of the vote plus 1 to win the April 
11 primary. Otherwise, the top two vote-getters will meet in a June runoff. 
The 5th District includes the Beverly-Fairfax area, Century City, Bel-Air, 
Westwood, West Los Angeles and parts of Sherman Oaks, Van Nuys and North 
Hollywood. 
Despite easy reelection victories in the past, Yaroslavsky is vulnerable this 
time, Lake said, because he has been "on the wrong side" of several important 
growth battles in in his district, ranging from a struggle over how many hotel 
rooms to allow in Westwood Village to parking requirements at the Ma Maison 
Sofitel Hotel. 
Lake predicted voters will be looking for a council member with a strong 
environmental background who will be tougher on development issues. 
Several other homeowner leaders who have clashed with Yaroslavsky over specific 
projects in his district also said the 14-year incumbent could face a tough 
reelection. Harald Hahn, vice president of the Westside Civic Federation, a 
coalition of 15 homeowner groups, said Yaroslavsky has alienated many 
homeowners in two crucial parts of his district: the Beverly-Fairfax area, 
where Yaroslavsky lives, and Westwood. 
In the Beverly-Fairfax area, Yaroslavsky was harshly criticized by Hahn and 
others for not pushing the developer of the Ma Maison Sofitel Hotel to provide 
more parking. In Westwood, Lake and others have accused Yaroslavsky of going 
easy on the developer of a proposed expansion of the Westside Pavilion shopping 
mall. 
"There is a lot of dissatisfaction in the district," Hahn said. "I think he is 
going to have a hard time now. He has to convince us that he does mean well." 
But other homeowners disagreed. Sara Berman, who lives near the Westside 
Pavilion, said many residents in that area view Yaroslavsky as a hero, not a 
villain, and Richard Close, president of the Sherman Oaks Homeowners Assn., 
said homeowners there were elated to learn that Yaroslavsky will not be leaving 
the district. 
"He is the best thing to hit Sherman Oaks in years," Close said. "We are happy 
with his decision. It was good news from our part." 
Yaroslavsky's decision to seek reelection has placed some of his supporters and 
allies in awkward positions. Venice-area Councilwoman Ruth Galanter, who 
endorsed Lake in September but has worked with Yaroslavsky on the council, 
would not comment Friday on Yaroslavsky's announcement, nor would she say 
whether she will continue to support Lake. 
Bradley said he will endorse no one in the race. 
"I expect there's going to be a contest in that district, and I would prefer to 
stay out of it and let the people of the 5th District make that decision," he 
said. 
Filing for the odd-numbered council seats and city attorney, controller and 
mayor's offices begins Wednesday and ends Jan. 14. 
