STEROID REPORT A REVELATION TO CIF HIERARCHY; 
'EPIDEMIC' SURPRISES ADMINISTRATORS, COACHES 
The heads of 2 commissions that oversee athletics in all public high schools in 
Southern California said that they were surprised by the findings of a recent 
national survey indicating that 1 of every 15 boys in 12th grade has used 
anabolic steroids. Both said that they have never received a report of a 
student using the muscle-building drug. 
But a national expert on drug abuse said that steroid use among high school 
students is rising sharply and is at epidemic levels in some Southern 
California communities. 
"It's a frightening situation," said Dr. Forest S. Tennant of West Covina, a 
leader in the treatment of substance abuse. Tennant has treated many 
professional athletes for cocaine dependency, including former Dodger pitcher 
Steve Howe and NBA star Walter Davis. "I have seen blood-test results from 
users of anabolic steroids. I have been shocked to see the dramatic effects 
they have on the human body." 
Tennant, who operates a drug abuse treatment center in Van Nuys, said that his 
studies have shown steroids to have a dramatic impact on the adrenal gland and 
the immune system and to cause cholesterol levels to soar in most users. 
A study published last month in the Journal of the American Medical Assn., 
purported to be the first nationwide survey of steroid use among high school 
boys, found that of the 3,403 seniors interviewed at 46 schools, 6.6% of them 
said that they were using or had used steroids. Most said that they took the 
drug to enhance their athletic performance, but 26.7% were non-athletes who 
said that they used steroids to build muscles and improve their physical 
appearance. 
Stan Thomas, the commissioner of the of the California Interscholastic 
Federation Southern Section -- which oversees more than 500 schools -- said 
that his organization has never had a report of steroid use by a local high 
school athlete. 
"None. Not a single report," Thomas said. "But I am certain it goes on. It's 
like marijuana use in your high school. You'd be crazy to say it doesn't go on. 
It's the same thing with steroids. 
"But I am just overwhelmed to hear those numbers. The numbers are scary." 
Hal Harkness, the director of interscholastic athletics for the City Section -- 
which oversees 49 Los Angeles School District programs -- said that he knows of 
no incidents involving steroid use by athletes in city schools. 
"I have had no calls about it, ever," he said. "I have heard absolutely no 
comments in over two years in this position from anyone in our schools 
regarding steroids." 
Tennant said that the reason for the lack of reports on steroid use by students 
is that coaches and administrators don't know what they're looking for. 
"If they are waiting to get reports on steroid use like they get reports of 
kids using marijuana or cocaine, then they will never get any reports," Tennant 
said. 
"Steroids are not taken in that manner, at lunchtime or at smoke break at 
school. Steroids are taken in a very programmed way, at a very intentional time 
and place, most likely away from the school. Users of cocaine and marijuana 
take those drugs when they are passed to them." 
The study reported that more than one-third of the seniors who said they have 
taken steroids took them both orally and by injection. Only one-fifth of those 
who claimed to use steroids said they got the drugs from a health-care 
professional. The majority obtained the steroids from other athletes, coaches 
and people who frequent gyms, the study said. 
Tennant said that he began to see widespread steroid use among adolescents 4 
years ago. 
"The figures in the national study just released are not only believable, but 
in Southern California I think they are higher than that," he said. "It is 
spotty. In some communities people have never seen or heard about anabolic 
steroids. In others, it's an epidemic. As long as four years ago, I had 
substantiated reports of parents and coaches giving steroids to Little League 
baseball players and Pop Warner football players. 
"This study is a validation of something I have seen for the last four years. I 
support what it said and I agree with its findings." 
Tennant was especially alarmed at the reasons some steroid users gave for 
taking the drug. 
"The most frightening aspect of steroid use is that adolescents are using them 
to alter their basic physical appearance," he said. "They perceive that doing 
that will make them more sexually attractive or give them some success in life 
that they can't achieve otherwise. It symbolizes something that has gone sour 
in our society, that our natural body and our natural talents are not worthy 
anymore." 
Bill Redell, a veteran high school football coach who recently resigned from 
his post at Crespi High, said that he encountered only 1 player at Crespi whom 
he suspected of using steroids. But he said that the results of the national 
study are not unexpected. 
"It didn't surprise me a bit to see those numbers," said Redell, who also 
played and coached in the defunct U. S. Football League. "The pressure on the 
kids today to win, and to perform well, is greater than ever. There are parents 
who pressure their own kids into taking steroids, not only not condemning 
steroid use but actually encouraging it. The pressure is to gain major college 
scholarships." 
Canyon High Coach Harry Welch, who has run the Valley-area's most successful 
football program for the past 7 years, said that he has never encountered 
steroid use among his players. 
"We discuss drugs but I haven't discussed steroids because I've never seen the 
need," he said. 
Welch added that he condemns steroid use, equating it with so-called 
recreational drugs. 
"It really scares me," he said. "I've read that it affects the reproductive 
system. To even flirt with using something that could affect your sexual 
identity or the future of your children . . . I would condemn it in the 
harshest way." 
Cleveland High Coach Steve Landress found it difficult to believe the 
statistics, saying that he has never heard of high school athletes -- or 
students -- using steroids during his 13 years of coaching. 
He especially ruled out athletes, saying top players have no need for such 
drugs at the high school level. 
"Guys who are Division I-type players are so much better than other players 
they don't need it," he said. "Even a few years ago when it wasn't such a big 
thing to say you used steroids, I never heard anyone talk about it." 
Thomas said that the Southern Section has never discussed the issue of steroids 
with coaches and has never sent memos to coaches informing them of indications 
of steroid use by players. 
"I guess we felt it should be common sense," Thomas said. "If a kid goes from 
165 pounds to 205 pounds in six months, a coach should have a clue that 
steroids might be involved. I guess we assumed they would know. But I'm not 
satisfied anymore with where we are with this issue. We have to do more." 
Thomas, however, said that the Southern Section has no firm plan to deal with 
steroid use. He said that the organization is involved in an educational 
program sponsored by the Los Angeles Amateur Athletic Foundation and is 
participating in another steroid awareness program sponsored by the Orange 
County Sheriff's Deparment. 
"We have run articles about steroid use in our football game programs," Thomas 
said. 
Testing players for steroids has never been seriously considered, he said. 
"I honestly have to admit we have been remiss in the world of drug abuse," 
Thomas said. "Drugs are a problem in our high schools in general, but the CIF 
Southern Section should take a leadership role (against) drug abuse, including 
the use of steroids." 
Harkness said that the City Section may implement a steroid awareness program 
early next year. There will be no drug testing, however. 
"We will not even consider voluntary drug testing," he said. "To begin with, 
voluntary testing is not effective. Those individuals who even think they might 
test positively for steroids simply won't volunteer for the testing. And 
mandatory testing is absolutely out of the question. We just don't have the 
right to do that and it wouldn't even be considered." 
Tennant said that the solution is a massive and immediate educational program. 
"The educational pitch is simple," he said. "No. 1, sports are here only to 
spend a little time in your young years competing, learning team spirit and 
discipline and fitness and competition. Anabolic steroids just don't have a 
place in that. They don't belong, and don't use them. Ever. They will hurt you. 
"And we have to repeat that message to our kids, over and over. Repetition. 
That's how we got people to wear seat belts and to brush their teeth and to 
lose weight. You keep giving them this message, again and again: Don't use 
steroids." 
