WILL WALL ST.'S NEW COP KEEP HEAT ON FRAUD?; 
SECURITIES: U.S. ATTORNEY OTTO G. OBERMAIER HAS DOUBTS ABOUT USING RICO IN 
INVESTMENT FRAUD CASES. AND HE HAS REPRESENTED WHITE-COLLAR DEFENDANTS HIMSELF. 
Otto G. Obermaier, the new U.S. attorney in Manhattan, bristles at suggestions 
that his appointment will mark a letup in the 4-year-old crackdown on Wall 
Street fraud. 
Before a reporter can even finish asking him what his new reign will mean for 
criminal prosecution of insider trading and securities fraud, Obermaier, 53, 
jumps in: 
"Nothing. It means nothing." 
Obermaier is filling the shoes of Rudolph W. Giuliani, a zealous and 
publicity-hungry prosecutor who launched an unprecedented wave of criminal 
cases against major Wall Street figures before he stepped down last year to 
make a losing run at becoming New York City's mayor. 
Giuliani won praise for bringing law enforcement into an area that had become 
corrupt and for raising the standards of conduct on Wall Street. But by the end 
of his five-year tenure, Giuliani was also reviled by interests as diverse as 
the conservative Wall Street Journal editorial page and the American Civil 
Liberties Union. The accusations included making promiscuous use of the harsh 
racketeering law, known as RICO, bringing criminal charges for offenses that 
previously had been handled only under civil law and ordering highly publicized 
arrests even though his office wasn't fully prepared to bring a case. 
Obermaier, by contrast, is regarded as a thoughtful, intellectual lawyer 
without political ambitions, described by one friend as more a diplomat than a 
crusader. He comes to the job after 19 years in private practice, much of it 
spent representing the type of white-collar defendants he now must prosecute. 
He is on record criticizing the use of RICO -- the Racketeer Influenced and 
Corrupt Organizations Act -- in securities fraud cases. In published articles, 
he has expressed doubts about whether insider trading cases should be 
prosecuted as criminal offenses. And his appointee to head the criminal 
division in his office, Gerard E. Lynch, 38, a former Columbia University law 
professor, was one of the most prominent scholarly critics of RICO, 
particularly its use in white-collar crime cases. 
Despite Obermaier's long tenure as a defense lawyer, current and former 
prosecutors praise him as a first-rate lawyer and say they don't doubt his 
commitment to tough prosecution. They note that, before he went into private 
practice in 1970, he was the chief trial lawyer in the Securities and Exchange 
Commission's New York office, and before that he was an assistant U.S. 
attorney. 
Nevertheless, many white-collar defense attorneys and other legal authorities 
in New York say they expect a change in approach under Obermaier. They expect 
more thoughtful consideration of specific charges before an indictment is 
brought. They also say it is probable that there won't be any flashy arrests 
designed for television cameras and that leaks about pending investigations may 
be less likely. 
John C. Coffee Jr., a Columbia law professor and friend of Obermaier's, said he 
expects that under Obermaier there will be "a greater willingness to recognize 
that some kinds of misconduct are best dealt with through injunctions and civil 
penalties" rather than criminal indictments. 
Giuliani was widely criticized for bringing major felony charges against 
individuals who some claimed were guilty only of marginal infractions, and 
Coffee says that under Obermaier this may be less likely. But he predicts that 
Obermaier's term won't bring any relief for big-league crooks. Referring to 
former stock speculator Ivan F. Boesky and former investment banker Dennis B. 
Levine, both of whom pleaded guilty to insider trading-related charges, Coffee 
says: "I have no doubt that if you catch a new Boesky tomorrow, or a new Dennis 
Levine, he would indict them in a moment." 
Obermaier himself, as the man whose many duties include being the top federal 
cop on Wall Street, asserts that he is, in fact, contemplating no big changes 
at all. 
In an interview, Obermaier seems slightly ill at ease and reveals little about 
himself. He says that his office, the second-largest U.S. Attorney's Office in 
the country after the District of Columbia's, is a "proud institution." He 
adds: "One doesn't come into an institution and make dramatic changes." Asked 
what his personal priorities are as U.S. attorney, Obermaier asserts: "I don't 
have any." 
Obermaier also declines to respond in any detail to the main criticism of him 
as U.S. attorney -- the fact that his old law firm, Obermaier, Morvillo &amp; 
Abramovitz, represented so many prominent defendants in matters under 
investigation by the U.S. Attorney's Office that he will have to "recuse" 
himself from a long list of cases -- that is, disqualify himself from having 
anything to do with them and turn supervision over to a subordinate. These 
include some of the office's biggest pending prosecutions. It was because of 
this that Giuliani initially opposed Obermaier's nomination. 
Obermaier maintains that the recusals won't have any impact at all on how cases 
are managed. But the impact is unclear because Obermaier refuses to disclose 
how many cases he has recused himself from. A spokeswoman said: "It's not 
something he chooses to make available." 
It is known that Obermaier has disqualified himself from the big case pending 
against former Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. junk bond chief Michael Milken, as 
well as from the pending real estate racketeering case against Imelda Marcos, 
wife of the late former Philippines president. One of his law partners had 
represented her co-defendant, Adnan M. Kashoggi. Obermaier himself for a time 
represented John A. Mulheren, who is due to go on trial soon on criminal 
securities fraud charges. 
Pete Romatowski, a Washington securities lawyer who spent six years as an 
assistant federal prosecutor in New York, says Obermaier's recusals inevitably 
will hurt. Romatowski praises Obermaier but said the recusals mean he won't be 
able to have final say on which charges are brought, or negotiate plea 
agreements. "It's going to be a handicap," Romatowski said. "The public 
interest would be better served if Otto were in a position to participate." 
Most of the cases from which Obermaier has disqualified himself apparently will 
be supervised by Roger S. Hayes, who joined the office in November as chief 
deputy U.S. attorney after serving as a state court judge. Before he was a 
judge, Hayes worked in the Manhattan district attorney's office, and he served 
for a time as head of the trial division. But his only experience in the 
federal system was during law school, when he worked as a student intern in the 
U.S. attorney's office in 1967. 
Knowledgeable sources said Hayes was given his new high-ranking job because his 
long association with the office of Manhattan District Atty. Robert Morgenthau 
will help Obermaier avoid turf battles with the city prosecutor. Such disputes 
had plagued the Giuliani years. 
Although Obermaier insists that he intends to change nothing about the office, 
at least one difference is already apparent. Obermaier has made clear that he 
has little interest in cultivating the press. Whereas Giuliani at times held 
two press conferences a day as U.S. attorney, Obermaier, who took office more 
than two months ago, has held none. 
Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, says of 
Obermaier: "I don't see early on the same sort of taste for splashy stuff that 
Giuliani displayed almost from the beginning." 
Both Obermaier and Morvillo, his former partner, are on record challenging 
aspects of RICO, including the financial forfeiture provision, which they have 
suggested gives prosecutors too much power. And Obermaier, in a column on 
white-collar crime that appeared in the New York Law Journal in 1986, openly 
questioned the filing of criminal charges in some insider trading cases; he 
seemed to indicate that he wasn't personally convinced that insider trading 
should be considered a crime. 
Although he didn't take an explicit stand in the article, he noted that 
"insider trading is unique among crimes . . . in that responsible and respected 
scholarly opinions are held that it has no harmful effects on the securities 
markets." 
Obermaier asserts that whatever views he may have expressed earlier won't have 
any effect on how cases are handled. But on RICO, he does allow that "I think 
that every thinking person probably believes that the statute is a little bit 
on the broad side." 
The RICO controversy came to the fore in the Giuliani years because of its use 
in the case against Drexel Burnham and in a related case against a much smaller 
securities firm, Princeton/Newport Limited Partners. In the Princeton/Newport 
case, criticism centered on whether the racketeering law, originally enacted by 
Congress as a means of fighting organized crime, should be applied to what 
Giuliani's critics contended were only relatively minor tax law violations. 
In the Drexel case, some legal authorities raised the issue of whether the 
pretrial forfeiture of assets allowed under RICO forced the firm to settle the 
charges by pleading guilty to six criminal charges rather than by trying to 
exonerate itself in a trial. RICO, they charged, was being used as a bludgeon 
to force a company to plead guilty, since the forfeiture provision meant that 
the firm might go out of business even before a trial could be held. 
In the Princeton/Newport case, six defendants were ultimately convicted of 
racketeering offenses for temporarily transferring the ownership of stocks and 
bonds to claim illegal tax benefits. As it happened, Obermaier's firm 
represented one of the defendants. 
Princeton/Newport did go out of business before a trial was held. Defense 
lawyers attributed this to the fact that prosecutors were able to freeze much 
of the firm's assets under RICO. But prosecutors received what was widely 
viewed as a sharp de facto rebuke when the judge who presided over the case 
sentenced the defendants to just a few months in prison and ruled that four of 
the defendants wouldn't have to forfeit any of their salary or profits from the 
partnership. This was in contrast with the lengthy sentences and heavy 
financial forfeiture permitted under RICO. The judge found that given the 
relatively minor nature of the offenses, anything harsher would have amounted 
to cruel and unusual punishment. 
Lynch, the new head of the criminal division, in a lengthy law review article 
published in 1987, challenged recent uses of RICO. In the article, titled 
"RICO: The Crime of Being a Criminal," one of his main criticisms was that the 
law could be interpreted so broadly that even minor offenses could be 
considered a pattern of racketeering activity. "Within the white-collar area, 
virtually any securities fraud or mail fraud case can be made as a RICO case," 
Lynch said in an interview. "There's nothing that prevents you from using it in 
fairly trivial, run-of-the-mill cases." 
But Lynch also said that his criticisms were based mainly on academic concerns 
and that, if anything, he has to be on guard against a personal bias against 
white-collar criminals. He also said it would be wrong to assume that, as a 
prosecutor, he won't make use of every available tool, including RICO. "It 
would be wrong to think that anybody, including me or Otto, is going in there 
with the attitude that we're going to do something different with RICO," Lynch 
said. 
Meanwhile, outward appearances indicate that the pace of major securities fraud 
indictments has slackened considerably since the heady days of 1987 and 1988. 
Then, using information obtained from Boesky, Giuliani and his staff brought 
charges against former Los Angeles brokerage chief Boyd L. Jefferies, 
investment banker Martin A. Siegel, corporate raider Paul A. Bilzerian, GAF 
Corp., Drexel and a slew of others. Lynch says that more than anything else, 
the pace of prosecutions has and will depend on what wrongdoing rank-and-file 
prosecutors stumble onto. 
As mandated last year by Congress, the U.S. attorney's securities fraud unit 
will soon receive several additional assistant prosecutors. For his part, Alan 
Cohen, head of the unit, said: "Whatever the numbers show, the fact is that we 
are investigating and prosecuting criminal activity in the securities and 
commodities markets as vigorously as we ever have." 
Obermaier and his former partner are on record challenging aspects of RICO, 
including the financial forfeiture provision, which they have suggested gives 
prosecutors too much power. And Obermaier has openly questioned the filing of 
criminal charges in some insider trading cases. 
