FOOTLOOSE IN FRANCE: COLORFUL BASQUE FISHING VILLAGE WAS A FAVORITE OF THE SUN 
KING 
One look at the azure crescent bay, colorful harbor and cloudless skies makes 
you realize why this place has remained the perfect little Basque fishing 
village, one favored by Louis XIV for the Sun King's marriage to the Spanish 
infanta in 1660. 
Basques have always been great fishermen, claiming to have discovered 
Newfoundland in pre-Columbian 1372 as their ships roamed the Atlantic Ocean in 
search of cod. 
Fishing, however, wasn't the only pursuit of intrepid Basque mariners, who also 
did more than their share of privateering. The Basques were described by a 
16th-Century Spanish author as "very bellicose, especially at sea." 
Bellicose or benign, the British have always had a covetous eye for southwest 
France, at least since Henry II in the 12th Century. Wellington camped out here 
in 1814 on his way to finish off Napoleon at Waterloo. And half a century later 
it was a preferred watering hole for upper-crust Britons. 
St. Jean de Luz is still a preferred spot for French and foreign visitors, 
having the climate, lovely beach, fine old architecture and clutch of tempting 
Basque restaurants that add up to a memorable holiday. 
Getting here: Fly Air France nonstop to Paris. Or Air Canada, American, TWA Pan 
Am, Delta or Continental with changes. Take Air Inter on to Biarritz in an 
hour. From there it's nine miles down the coast to St. Jean de Luz. 
How long/how much? Europeans and the British usually stay a fortnight. But two 
or three days will do for the town, another for forays into the surrounding 
Basque country. Accommodations are very reasonable, dining moderate to 
expensive. 
Few fast facts: The French franc recently traded at 16 cents, 6.25 to the 
dollar. Late May until late autumn are the best times for a visit, but August 
is the month all France hits the road for vacations. You need good walking 
shoes. You also need a visa. 
Getting settled: Hotel Basque (Rond Point de Sainte-Barbe; $46 to $65 U.S. 
double) is on the edge of town on a cliff above the Atlantic. Above prices are 
for rooms in the main building; other two-room bungalows with kitchens, also on 
the beautiful grounds, $88. 
The buildings and all furnishings are in Basque style, with fig trees around 
the property and a three-hole golf course outside your room. La Reserve 
restaurant is where you may take full or half-pension. 
Ohartzia (28 Rue Garat; $44 to $49 double) is a 17-room hotel at town center, 
modest but very neat and close to the harbor, beach and main shopping street. 
Bedrooms are on the small side, baths are fine. In a private little garden in 
the rear you may take breakfast, the only meal served. Off the minuscule lobby 
you'll find a bright living room with fireplace, games and lots of magazines. 
La Deviniere (5 Rue Loquin; $57-$106 double) also enjoys a good central 
location. It's an enchanting little place completely done over by the owner, a 
former antiques dealer. Floors are of tile, with museum-quality rugs and 
furniture throughout. There's a small library with grand piano and fireplace, 
and a grassy courtyard with white lawn furniture and lots of flowers. 
Bedrooms are furnished differently, with traditional fabrics and fine antiques. 
La Deviniere will capture your heart immediately. 
Regional food and drink: Basques like to start a meal with an hors d'oeuvre or 
first course of piperade, a melange of peppers, tomatoes and onions cooked with 
eggs, often served with ham or cipolatas, small local sausages. Tuna, anchovies 
and sardines are grilled simply, or figure into other local dishes, while merlu 
(a type of whiting or hake) is a Basque favorite. 
Bayonne's ham is world renowned, the gateau Basque (a flat almond cake) almost 
so. As St. Jean de Luz is only a few miles from Spain, many locals drink 
sangria in the summer, which is made here with wine, fruits and cognac. 
Irouliguy is a hearty Basque wine, with the red version much favored here. 
Moderate-cost dining: Le Kayola (18 Rue de la Republique) is an indoor-outdoor 
place on a street with many similar restaurants. After entrees of piperade with 
ham, we had the fruits de mer en papillote and merlu koskera (in the manner of 
a fisherwoman). The last is a town specialty, a generous fillet of merlu under 
a sauce of peas, asparagus and mussels. Delicious. 
The kitchen also does an excellent chicken basque (with a piquant sauce of 
peppers, tomatoes and onions) and chipirons (cuttlefish) in its own ink, very 
black, but again delicious. A pair of young men come along the street with 
guitar and flute to entertain during lunch and dinner hours. Very festive. 
Just down the street at No. 17 you'll find what many consider the best seafood 
restaurant in town, Kaiku. Step down into a cellar room with stone walls and 
tile floors and you're sure to see the town trenchermen holding forth over 
oysters, sole, lobster, barbue (a type of brill or sand dab) and rouget (red 
mullet), all prepared and served simply. Lobster soup is a specialty. About $31 
for a huge lobster-shellfish lunch or dinner for two at Kaiku. It's worth every 
sou. 
La Reserve (Hotel Basque) has a classic French kitchen with Basque overtones. 
Dine on a broad terrace with views of the ocean and hills, or inside where the 
room is done in shades of peach, with lots of crystal and flowered china. 
A three-course luncheon costs about $18, including perhaps a fish soup or 
crudites as a first course, followed by young rabbit sauteed in a pesto sauce, 
grilled salmon or steak au poivre, finishing with the cheese board or a 
dessert. 
Going first-class: Le Grand Hotel (43 Blvd. Thiers; $106-$147 double low 
season, $147-$180 high) lives up to its name. It's a formal place with marble 
floors and walls, Edwardian-style winter garden, lovely rooftop pool and 
handsome bedrooms in soft pinks and grays, and fresh roses by beds. 
The Grande Carte dining room is a huge Edwardian rotunda with marvelous views 
of the bay and mountains. 
On your own: Start with a stroll down Rue Gambetta, a pedestrian street with 
the best shops. Then have a cafe filtre or cooling drink at a table beneath 
plane trees on Place Louis XIV. This is the heart of St. Jean de Luz, opposite 
the port, where band concerts and Basque dancing groups hold forth in summer. 
Visit the 14th-Century John the Baptist Church, said to be the most beautiful 
in Basque country, where Louis and the Spanish princess were married. Then haul 
your clubs to one of the two 18-hole golf courses for a round. 
Take your pick of water sports: surfing, lazing on the beach, diving, 
windsurfing. Or sign up for deep-sea fishing in the Atlantic in one of the 
boats that sail regularly from the harbor. 
One of the real joys of visiting Basque country is a sojourn to the villages in 
the Pyrenees foothills southeast of St. Jean. We always stop in at Ascain (four 
miles) to watch an informal but spirited game of pelote that is usually going 
on in the square. Ainhoa (14 miles) is noted for its colorful main street, with 
17th- and 18th-Century Basque architecture. 
For more information: Call the French National Tourist Office at (213) 271-6665 
or (213) 272-2661 for a brochure and map on southwest France, another on 
accommodations in the region. Ask for the St. Jean de Luz package. French 
National Railroads at (213) 274-6934 will send information on French rail 
passes. 
