HE'S OPENING NCAA'S DOOR; 
SCHULTZ CLOSES GAP BETWEEN MEMBERS AND ORGANIZATION 
Richard Schultz, a former coach and athletic director who holds a commercial 
pilot's license, has manned the controls for 1 1/2 years as executive director 
of the National Collegiate Athletic Assn. 
His mission is to make sure that the NCAA flies right. 
He has attempted to do so with an open-door policy that is in direct contrast 
to that of his predecessor, Walter Byers. Until Schultz took over on Sept. 1, 
1987, Byers had been the NCAA's only executive director since the position was 
established in 1951. 
Under the reclusive Byers, a faceless figure who was heard but seldom seen, the 
NCAA was often portrayed as a mysterious, unbending organization that confused 
the public and created animosity between the office and its members. 
The engaging Schultz, 59, has moved to demystify the NCAA by maintaining a more 
public profile and by making himself available to the members and to reporters. 
Last year, Schultz said, he spent 163 days on the road, 59 of them on college 
campuses. 
Said Dave Cawood, an assistant executive director for the NCAA: "Walter was an 
outstanding administrator, but it was not his personality to be visible, be out 
front or to spend a lot of time away from the office. Dick's personality meshes 
with what was needed at the time he took the job. 
"He's been totally encouraged by his predecessor, by the staff and by his 
superiors to do what he's doing. And I think it's been proven in the last year 
that the executive director needed to be more visible." 
Schultz's personality has won new friends for the NCAA. 
"I've never felt that I ever had a voice within the NCAA," Dale Brown, 
Louisiana State's basketball coach and a longtime critic of the organization, 
told the New York Times. "That's why I chose the public platform, because I 
felt that I wasn't one of the boys. 
"Now with Dick Schultz, I feel totally different. I think he just knows what's 
going on. I would like to see a new organization formed, and I would like to 
see Dick Schultz be the head of it." 
Schultz believes that coaches and athletic directors have been quick to accept 
him because he is one of them. 
Unlike Byers, whose background was in sports journalism and whose outlook was 
said to be more idealistic than realistic, Schultz brought experience at all 
levels of college athletics. 
Born in Kellogg, Iowa, a town of about 1,000 between Des Moines and Iowa City, 
he played basketball and baseball in high school, earning an athletic 
scholarship to Central College in Pella, Iowa, where he earned 10 varsity 
letters. 
He was married while in college, and he and his wife, Jackie, have raised two 
sons and a daughter in almost 40 years of marriage. 
Until they moved to Kansas City, Mo., for the start of Dick Schultz's 5-year 
tenure as executive director of the NCAA, the couple had designed and built 
their last six houses, with Dick doing the building either by hand or as 
general contractor. 
Also, Schultz supplemented his income as a corporate pilot. 
But, first and foremost, he was a basketball and baseball coach, beginning his 
career at a high school in Humboldt, Iowa, where he spent 10 years. In 1960, he 
took a job as assistant baseball coach and freshman basketball coach at the 
University of Iowa and later served 8 years as head baseball coach and 4 years 
as head basketball coach. 
After giving up coaching in 1974, Schultz spent 2 years as an assistant to the 
university president before moving to Cornell University as athletic director. 
At Cornell, and later at Virginia, he spent 11 years as an athletic director 
and also served as chairman of the NCAA basketball committee, negotiating the 
most recent contract with CBS, which reportedly is worth about $150 million to 
the NCAA. 
He left behind a good life at Virginia, where his home had a majestic view of 
the Blue Ridge Mountains and his perks reportedly included membership in a 
country club, use of a university-owned plane and a $360,000 annuity that would 
have matured next year. 
And, in signing on with the NCAA, he accepted what basically is a thankless 
job. 
Violations among member schools continue to tarnish the image of the 
organization, which in the last 6 months has put 7 schools on probation. 
Sanctions against the Kentucky basketball program have yet to be announced. 
However, Schultz believed that he was somehow obligated to serve the NCAA in 
the interest of returning integrity to intercollegiate athletics. 
Last week, on the eve of the NCAA convention in San Francisco, he discussed a 
variety of topics, including the changing role of his job, NCAA enforcement 
policy, integrity in college athletics and cases involving the Kansas 
basketball program and Oklahoma State football player Hart Lee Dykes. 
Question: You seemed to have it pretty good at Virginia. What prompted you to 
take this job? 
Answer: That's an interesting question. I had absolutely no interest in this 
job whatsoever. I liked Virginia. I thought I'd be there the rest of my life. I 
enjoyed being involved with the NCAA basketball committee. 
I was really caught off guard when the search committee contacted me in the 
first place and said I'd been recommended. I think it was late October, and it 
was not until January that I finally told them I would go the first step, but 
that I wouldn't be available until after the Final Four (in April). I had to 
give it a lot of thought. 
I wanted to be sure that if I were the executive director, I would be in a 
position to make some positive contributions to intercollegiate athletics, so I 
talked to a lot of colleagues and a lot of people involved in the NCAA. They 
assured me that would happen and that I really ought to be interested in it. 
As the process went on, I had so many people say to me, 'You know, we really 
need somebody who has a strong sports background. You just have to do this.' So 
it kind of got to the point where I felt I had to do it, but I might not enjoy 
it. 
I have to say that I've enjoyed it more than I thought I would. It's like any 
job -- it has its good days and its bad days. But, so far, it's had more good 
days. 
Q: What is your perception of the role of executive director? 
A: The NCAA is an association, so I'm not a commissioner. I'm not like a 
Ueberroth or a Rozelle. A commissioner has the power to make penalties, make 
rulings on specific things. As the chief operating officer of the association, 
I don't have that authority. 
I think my responsibility, first of all, is to oversee the national office, 
which is a good-sized group of people, and make sure that the business of the 
association is carried out the way the members want it to be carried out. The 
NCAA's primary function is to be the governing organization for the member 
schools, but we're also a service organization. We do a lot of things other 
than interpret the rules. 
Q: How have you changed the role of executive director? 
A: I think it's changed the way the members have wanted it to change. In the 
search process, it became very evident that they wanted an executive director 
who would be more visible to the membership. 
I spent 37 or 38 years as a coach and as an athletic director, so I feel 
comfortable with that group of people. This is why I've tried to be open. I 
think the major changes you've seen have been in the availability of the 
executive director and the attempts to make the organization more open -- take 
it out of the closet, so to speak. 
People don't really understand the NCAA, or how it works. They view the NCAA as 
this bureaucratic organization in Mission, Kan., that makes all these 
controversial rules and puts your school on probation, and nothing could be 
further from the truth. 
We don't make rules and we can't change rules. Every rule that we have is 
something that six institutions have proposed and the convention has voted 
upon. 
So we've tried to take some time to explain that. The NCAA is the member 
institutions. It's not Dick Schultz. And we're trying to get people to 
understand that. 
I think the responsibility of the executive director is to provide leadership 
to the members, to take a look at the problems they have, help them solve those 
problems, present new ideas for doing things better. And then, of course, they 
have to react. So it's a leadership role, a management role, a public-relations 
role. 
Q: What further changes would you like to make? 
A: We need more flexibility in the way we administer our rules, especially as 
they deal with the student-athletes. I think too many times, because of the 
size of the organization, we pass a rule and we pass it in such a way that it 
covers a broad area, but there are individuals that fall through the cracks. 
I've always felt that, if things were 50-50, the benefit ought to go to the 
athlete. So we're trying to promote more flexibility in the rules that apply to 
the athlete -- but, at the same time, be very firm with the rules that involve 
recruiting and be very firm with people who willfully violate those rules to 
gain a competitive advantage. 
Q: There seems to be a stepped-up vigilance toward some of the bigger-name 
schools. Is that reflective of your thinking? 
A: What that's reflective of, I think, is a commitment to make sure our 
enforcement staff is up to its full complement, and that we are doing things to 
make sure that we keep good, qualified people in those positions. 
One of the problems has been the high turnover rate of our enforcement staff. 
Most of our enforcement people -- not all, but most of them -- have law 
degrees, and they get a year or two training with us and they become very 
attractive either for universities to hire as compliance people, or to law 
firms that want to specialize in sports law. 
So we need to be competitive in our ability to keep those people. We have done 
that, and for the first time in a long, long time, we have a full complement of 
people. And now we've gotten rid of a big backlog of cases that had been there 
for 2 or 3 years. 
Q: Cases tended to drag on? 
A: For a lot of different reasons, one of the reasons being that the 
enforcement staff is not a police department. They don't have police authority. 
They can't subpoena records, so it becomes a very laborious process to run 
people down and to be able to have access to people to interview. 
The enforcement process, if it works properly, is a cooperative effort between 
the institution and the enforcement staff. Occasionally, institutions don't 
cooperate, and that slows the process. And even changeovers at the institutions 
will slow down the process. 
But in meeting with the enforcement staff a few weeks ago, I told them that our 
goal, now that we were caught up and had a full complement of people, had to be 
to deal with these cases within 1 year. That's not going to be easy, simply 
because of the way the process works, but if we don't make that a goal, we'll 
never come close to it. 
I think it's obvious from what's happened that there aren't any sacred cows out 
there. One of the complaints throughout the years has been (about) selective 
enforcement. I personally don't think that's happened, but that's been the 
perception. There isn't anybody that can say that now -- not with some of the 
penalties that have been handed down lately, and to whom. 
I think a point needs to be made -- and it's very important, because all these 
cases that have come to a head in the last 30 days give the impression that 
there's a myriad of problems out there and everybody's cheating -- that's 
really not what's going on. 
You're seeing us get caught up. Our enforcement people feel this way. I talked 
to coaches and athletic directors; they feel the same way. They think we're 
really over the hump on the integrity thing and the enforcement issue. 
Violations are way down. And now that we've got these cases cleaned up -- other 
than the Kentucky case -- you're not going to see a lot of those kinds of 
cases. 
Q: Do you really believe that? Why would that be? 
A: A lot of reasons. I think the convention in 1985 that dealt strictly with 
integrity put more teeth into the penalties -- the death penalty at SMU was a 
great attention-getter; efforts that I've made; efforts that the membership 
have made to put integrity back into intercollegiate athletics; the 
establishment of a compliance department, the conference grants that we're 
awarding to help conferences set up compliance programs. 
We've just got a better system of checks and balances. But, most importantly, 
we have tremendous interest on the part of presidents and athletic directors 
and coaches to, quote, clean up the act. 
Q: What are your personal views on cheating? 
A: I don't subscribe to the fact that everybody's doing it. You have to 
remember that, in intercollegiate athletics, we have some problems, but we 
don't have any problems that are unique to athletics. 
A lot of people want to say that drugs are unique to athletics or that cheating 
is unique to athletics. Every problem that we have is societal. You can look at 
society and you can see the same things. In fact, we have probably done a heck 
of a lot better job in solving our drug problem than society has. We've 
probably done a lot better job of solving most of our problems than society 
has. 
I'm not going to say that we don't have problems -- we do have -- but about 97% 
of everything that's going on today in intercollegiate athletics is very good 
and very positive. 
But because of the tremendous visibility of athletics, a prominent school goes 
on probation and the impression is, everybody's doing it and it's widespread. 
Or if we have one athlete that tests positive for drugs -- even though maybe we 
tested thousands and that the rate is like 1 1/2%, which is unbelievably low in 
today's society -- people will get the impression that everybody's doing it. 
That's just not the case. 
I feel very good about what's going on out there, but at the same time I know 
that, just like society, we're going to have people who feel pressure, and 
because of that pressure, they're going to step across the line because they 
think they have to. 
We can't be so naive to think that's not going to happen. But the important 
thing is to be sure that we're doing the best job we can to control it and that 
we've got it at a very low level. And I think we're approaching that. 
Q: It was recently reported that Hart Lee Dykes, a football player at Oklahoma 
State, was given immunity by the NCAA for testimony that led to sanctions 
against Oklahoma, Oklahoma State, Texas A &amp; M and Illinois. Do you approve 
of giving immunity? 
A: It isn't any different than plea-bargaining, which you see go on all the 
time. It depends on the circumstances and the situation. 
It's not unusual for our investigators to tell student-athletes that if they 
don't cooperate and we find that they're in violation, they could be declared 
ineligible. So, by the same token, if you get the right cooperation, then 
perhaps there should be some type of immunity. 
I think there are probably degrees in that, just like there are degrees in 
plea-bargaining. But that isn't anything new. That's been going on for a long 
time. 
Q: Last November, the Kansas basketball program was put on a 3-year probation 
for violations involving a player who never attended the university and a coach 
who is no longer there. Is penalization of schools more of a priority than 
penalization of individuals? 
A: Intercollegiate athletics work on the premise of institutional control. The 
institution has to be in control of the program. Every year, the president or 
chief executive officer has to sign off, as do all the coaches, that their 
programs are in compliance and that they haven't violated any rules. 
Now, if you strictly limited the enforcement process to individuals -- you can 
play this out in your own mind -- and individuals could be penalized while the 
institution went scot-free, think of the temptation to take people and make 
them scapegoats for the penalties so that the institution could go off and play 
in the bowl game. 
The institution itself cannot escape the responsibility for its program, and if 
the people who caused the problems are gone, somebody has to be responsible. 
You can't let them walk away from their lack of control because some people 
aren't there anymore. 
Q: What have you learned from visiting college campuses? 
A: The idea of visiting the schools was, of course, to follow through on the 
promise that I would be more visible and that I would be available. Also, it 
gave me an opportunity to get started on one of the major challenges that had 
to be dealt with, and that was the integrity issue. 
One of the problems we had over the years is that we tried to legislate 
integrity, and we ended up with a very complicated rule book that no one 
understood. My personal feeling was that we could pass a lot more rules and we 
could double or triple the size of our enforcement staff, but we still would 
not have integrity. 
Solving the integrity problem is very simple: If we can get each institution to 
have complete integrity in their programs, we could solve the problem. 
So, part of the reason for getting out on college campuses is to spend time 
with chief executive directors, faculty reps and athletic directors, and try to 
emphasize how I see this process working. 
The governing board has the responsibility for the integrity of everything that 
goes on at the university. They have to make sure they make the unpopular 
decisions, even if they involve a popular program or a popular individual. 
They can't waffle to alumni or booster pressure. They've got to stand firm and 
say, "This is what we believe in. This is the way it's got to work." 
