'89 NAHB HOMEWORK; 
TAX EXCLUSION IN HOME SALES SAID TO BE VULNERABLE 
The war between housing trade groups and some federal lawmakers over reducing 
tax breaks for home ownership appears to be shifting to a new battleground. 
For months, the nation's major realty trade associations -- from realtors to 
lenders -- have been publicly fretting that Congress may try to reduce the 
amount of deductions that homeowners can take for their mortgage-interest 
payments. 
Just last week, builders meeting here for their annual convention were saying 
that the deduction -- which costs the Treasury an estimated $35 billion 
annually -- is a tempting target for lawmakers who want to reduce the nation's 
huge budget deficit. 
Now, a growing number of Capitol Hill insiders are saying this sacrosanct 
deduction will emerge unscathed from any budget-reduction efforts. But its 
place on the bargaining table of Washington budget-cutters has been taken by 
another cherished tax write-off: The $125,000, one-time exclusion on resale 
profits for sellers who are 55 or older. 
'Put Into Play 
The exclusion "has definitely been put into play" by lawmakers looking for ways 
to cut the deficit, says a lobbyist from one major trade group. 
"We're pretty sure that (Congress) won't mess with the mortgage-interest 
deduction, because they've gotten a lot of negative feedback from the public," 
said the lobbyist, who asked not to be identified. "It helps everybody, and a 
lot of people couldn't afford to buy a house without it. 
"But the exclusion doesn't help anybody buy a home -- it just lets them keep 
more of the profits when they sell. It would be hard (for lawmakers) to say, 
'We don't have any money for housing programs, but we're going to keep giving 
equity-rich property owners this huge tax break.' " 
The lobbyist's comments essentially echoed remarks made by Congress' top expert 
on tax policy at a little-noticed conference a week earlier in Washington. 
Ronald A. Pearlman, whose Joint Committee on Taxation advises both the U.S. 
Senate and House, said he was "not aware" of any serious discussion on Capitol 
Hill about reducing mortgage-interest write-offs. 
"If anything is vulnerable" to cutbacks this year, Pearlman said, it's the 
$125,000 exclusion. Eliminating the exclusion would pump an estimated $4 
billion a year into the Treasury. 
However, Pearlman added, both the mortgage-interest deduction and the $125,000 
exclusion will probably emerge untouched from this year's budget-cutting 
efforts. 
Stephen Driesler, top lobbyist for the National Assn. of Realtors, said in a 
telephone interview from his Washington office that he, too, is now "cautiously 
optimistic" that the mortgage-interest deduction would be spared. 
'Kind of Surprising' 
"We're stopping a little bit short of saying that it's been taken off the 
bargaining table, but I must say it's looking good at this time." 
Driesler said Pearlman's remarks that the $125,000 exclusion may be vulnerable 
to budget-cutters "was kind of surprising, because it was the first time I 
heard it. But Mr. Pearlman is rather well-connected, so we'll have to keep our 
eyes open to see what happens next." 
If federal lawmakers make a serious attempt to eliminate or scale back the 
exclusion, Driesler said, they may have another fight on their hands with 
realtors and other trade groups. 
"There's a substantial number of people who are depending on their home equity 
to help them through their retirement years," Driesler said. "If you take a big 
chunk of that away in taxes, a lot of people are going to have a tough time 
making it on just their Social Security payments and maybe a private pension." 
