ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: MISSION VIEJO; 
PROPOSED BUILDING FREEZE OPPOSED 
A proposed temporary building freeze here would violate the Mission Viejo Co.'s 
developer agreement with the county, a top corporate officer of the company 
said Tuesday, adding that the company is firmly opposed to the proposal. 
"That agreement says that in exchange for certain public benefits, we get the 
right to develop," David A. Celestin, vice president for planning and 
governmental relations, said in an interview. "We would definitely oppose" the 
moratorium. 
Celestin's comments marked the first direct response from the company to the 
controversial building moratorium proposal introduced last year by City 
Councilman Robert A. Curtis. Although company officials have previously 
downplayed the proposal's importance, they had never indicated the company's 
position or suggested that the proposal could represent a violation of the 
agreement. 
Later, Curtis rejected Celestin's argument, saying that local ordinances 
temporarily halting new development have been upheld elsewhere in California. 
Santa Clarita, for instance, enacted a building freeze in 1987, and it remains 
in effect today. 
Under Curtis' proposal, all new residential building inside the city limits 
would be halted until the city's General Plan is complete. 
That would mean a building freeze of at least several months, and possibly as 
much as a year, said Curtis, who is the subject of a recall effort backed by 
the Mission Viejo Co. 
"We need a timeout in this building frenzy," Curtis said. "The company is 
trying to divest itself of its remaining acreage, and we need to make sure that 
we protect our open space and parkland." 
Celestin, however, said the company has no intention of building more than 
1,400 more residential units, consistent with its original plans for the 
community, created in 1965 and scheduled for completion within the next several 
years. 
"We don't want any higher densities," Celestin said. "We want to complete this 
community just the way we originally set out to." 
After heated City Council debate last week, Curtis' proposal was referred to 
the city staff for its recommendations. The staff was asked to complete its 
review in time for the council's meeting Monday. 
At that time, the council could vote on the freeze or on any other suggested 
measures to regulate growth in the city. JIM NEWTON 
