TIBET'S HUNGER TO BE FREE SYMBOLIZED BY DALAI LAMA 
"Dalai Lama picture? Dalai Lama picture?" was the incessant request that 
foreign tourists visiting Tibetan monasteries in recent years heard from 
maroon-robed monks and nomadic yak-herder or peasant pilgrims. 
But these days Tibetans no longer need to beg foreigners for the pictures. The 
once-banned photographs of their exiled leader are being openly sold at stands 
in front of central Lhasa's Jokhang Temple, the holiest site of Tibetan 
Buddhism. 
"The Chinese say we have religious freedom," said a Tibetan man, who declined 
to give his name, "so the Tibetan people are taking such freedom. They can 
always say, 'The Dalai Lama is our religious leader. This has nothing to do 
with politics.' " 
The Dalai Lama, however, has a great deal to do with politics. 
Little more than a month ago, his supporters staged a demonstration near the 
Jokhang Temple calling for Tibetan independence from China. Paramilitary police 
fired on the protesters, felling several. 
Western tourists who witnessed the Dec. 10 incident said at the time that a 
monk carrying the banned mountain-and-snow-lion flag of Tibetan independence 
had been killed, and that one or two other people also appeared to have died. 
The man carrying the flag was a monk from Drepung Monastery who died 
immediately from a bullet to the head, according to a young monk from another 
Lhasa area monastery. The monk spoke Thursday with this reporter, the first 
foreign journalist allowed to visit Tibet since the incident. He said that two 
other people were seriously injured in the police firing, but that as far as he 
knew they had not died. 
The martyrdom of colleagues in this and two earlier protests has fueled a 
fervent sense of Tibetan nationalism among young Buddhist monks, and the harsh 
Chinese tactics in suppressing those pro-independence demonstrations have done 
nothing to upset a trend toward increased religious activity. 
But for now, an appearance of calm has been restored in the Jokhang area. There 
are larger quantities of religious artifacts and Tibetan handicrafts for sale 
in the temple area market than has been the case for years. A year ago it was 
difficult to buy even a tiny pin bearing the Dalai Lama's picture. 
Acts of Worship 
Now, every day several thousand pilgrims wind their way through the temple. The 
women clad in black robes with brightly colored aprons, the men in sheepskin 
coats, they pour melted yak butter into flaming lamps as acts of worship before 
Buddhist icons enshrined in side halls of the main temple. 
Outside the temple, hundreds of worshipers perform prostrations that they hope 
will bring them a better life in a future reincarnation. 
Stalls in the market area around the temple offer woodblock-print Buddhist 
scriptures; bright red, green or yellow prayer flags; fragrant leaves that are 
burned as incense; a variety of Buddhist artworks, and a wide range of Tibetan 
handicrafts. 
There are two police stations in the immediate temple area, and plainclothes 
officers mingle with the crowd, but the uniformed police presence near the 
temple and throughout the Tibetan quarter of the city is very light. 
This reporter saw two truckloads of police pass through the city Thursday, 
however, and in the western half of Lhasa, where most Chinese live, uniformed 
police or soldiers are seen frequently. 
The Dec. 10 incident was preceded by two bloody clashes, on March 5 of last 
year and Oct. 1, 1987. On each of those occasions, pro-independence protests 
were put down by paramilitary police firing into angry crowds. 
Each demonstration has been followed by a sweep of arrests of suspected 
activists and a period of denial of access to Tibet by Beijing-based 
correspondents. 
The March 5 protest, which came at the end of the annual Monlam festival, is 
believed to have left at least eight people dead, including protesters and a 
Chinese policeman. As many as 14 people died in the 1987 clash. 
The official New China News Agency reported Thursday that two Tibetan men 
accused of killing the Chinese policeman in March have been convicted. One was 
given a suspended death sentence, which could be carried out in two years 
unless commuted to life imprisonment for good behavior, and the other was 
sentenced to life imprisonment, the news agency reported. 
The news agency said that 22 other participants in the March 5 uprising also 
were given prison terms. 
Lhasa remained calm late into the evening Friday. It was not clear what sort of 
reaction there might be to the sentences, or even whether news of them was 
widely known. 
Limited Religious Freedom 
The policy that Beijing is attempting to carry out in Tibet is quite clear: a 
limited revival of religious freedom, combined with an absolute ban on 
pro-independence activities, which are viewed as treason. 
In keeping with this policy, which began about a decade ago, major monasteries 
destroyed during the 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution have been gradually 
restored. For instance, the official newspaper China Daily reported that the 
mummified remains of five high Tibetan lamas, desecrated by Red Guards during 
the Cultural Revolution, have been returned to their sacred resting place, the 
Great Stupa of the Pashi Lhunpo Lamasery in Xigaze, Tibet. That structure, 
wrecked by the Red Guards, has been rebuilt and is scheduled to be reopened 
Sunday. 
Although the number of monks at each monastery is still limited to several 
hundred, the Chinese policy has been flexible enough that strong centers of 
monastic life have revived at the three great monasteries of the Lhasa area: 
Sera, Drepung, and Ganden. 
Occasional Independence 
Despite the placing of what activist monks allege are spies within these 
monasteries, the Chinese have been unable to control ideological life in them. 
"Sera, Drepung and Ganden are all the same," a young monk said Thursday at Sera 
Monastery. "They want independence for Tibet. But the Chinese have guns, and 
the Tibetan people have no guns. All they can do is demonstrate." 
Over the centuries, Tibet has sometimes been part of China and sometimes 
independent. The Qing Dynasty incorporated Tibet into its empire. But Tibet 
enjoyed de facto independence from the fall of the Qing Dynasty in 1911 until 
the Chinese Communists established control of the region in 1951. 
Activist Tibetans believe that the protests of the past 16 months -- together 
with the opening of Tibet to Western tourists, who serve as witnesses -- have 
created momentum for their cause. 
Many also seem to believe that the Chinese authorities have no choice but to 
allow gradually increased religious freedom, because a Cultural 
Revolution-style crackdown on religious activity would only increase 
anti-Chinese sentiment and add to Beijing's difficulties in controlling the 
region. 
Anniversaries coming up in February and March may prove to be occasions for 
further protest. 
This year's Monlam Festival begins next month. Some monks say they are afraid 
to attend, while others say they may use the occasion for another 
demonstration. 
"If we go, we'll demonstrate," a monk at Sera Monastery said Thursday. "Even if 
they shoot, we're not afraid." 
Some activists, however, predict that March 17, the 30th anniversary of the 
Tibetan uprising that led to the Dalai Lama's exile, is the most likely date 
for another major demonstration of pro-independence sentiment. 
