DARMAN HITS 'WONDERLAND POLITICS' OF DEFICIT; 
BUDGET NOMINEE SAYS HE WANTS TO END 'GAME' WHERE 'CUTS ARE INCREASES' 
Richard G. Darman, nominated as George Bush's budget director, told Congress 
today that he hopes to replace the "wonderland politics" that brought about 
huge federal budget deficits with realistic deficit reductions. 
Darman, in prepared testimony for his Senate confirmation hearing, said it was 
essential that the federal deficit be reduced. 
"We must end the game of wonderland politics where cuts are increases and going 
down means going up," Darman said. 
Under questioning by the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, Darman said the 
President-elect does not plan to weasel out of his pledge not to raise taxes by 
calling a tax increase something else. 
He said he expects Bush will abide by the "duck test" -- if it looks like a tax 
increase, it is a tax increase. 
Bush "meant 'no new taxes' as it would ordinarily be understood by ordinary 
Americans and the duck test should be applied," Darman said. "If ordinary 
people think it is a tax increase, it is a tax increase." 
He specifically included in Bush's "read-my-lips" pledge against tax increases 
a boost in the gasoline tax, higher levies on alcohol and tobacco, removal of 
home mortgage interest deductions and taxation of currently exempt employee 
fringe benefits like health insurance. 
Concerned that Darman was opening the door to tax increases by some written 
answers to advance questions, several members of the committee questioned him 
about possible new taxes. 
In his written responses Darman had said that under some circumstances a boost 
in taxes on gasoline, cigarettes and liquor could be viewed as "user fees." He 
had also suggested that higher taxes on Social Security benefits might be 
described as a "benefit reduction." 
Serious Calamity 
During the questioning today, Darman said that a serious economic calamity 
caused by the huge budget deficits might force him to recommend that Bush 
violate his pledge. 
But he emphasized that he did not foresee such a recommendation, in large part 
because it is important that a new President not lose his credibility by 
reneging on a campaign promise. 
Asked how many years Bush's no-tax pledge was good for, Darman replied, "We 
might as well assume forever -- certainly for some extended period of time." 
Darman, the point man in Bush's battle to reduce the deficit, was widely 
praised by committee members for his government skills and is expected to win 
confirmation easily as director of the Office of Management and Budget. 
Darman is in many ways similar to David Stockman, President Reagan's first 
budget director. Both men have been described as brilliant political 
strategists, but they have also been accused by critics of being abrasive and 
intellectually arrogant. 
Darman's role as head of management and budget will put him more in the 
spotlight than he was during the Reagan years, when he served as one of the 
Administration's top behind-the-scenes strategists, first as a top White House 
aide and then as deputy Treasury secretary. In both posts, he worked closely 
with James A. Baker III, nominated by Bush to be secretary of state. 
Darman resigned from the No. 2 job at Treasury in April, 1987, to take a job 
with the investment banking division of Shearson Lehman Bros. He was lured back 
into politics last year when he joined the Bush campaign. 
