PREP SOCCER ROUNDUP; 
ESPERANZA DEFENSE STIFLES CYPRESS IN TOP 10 MATCH 
In recent years, the Esperanza High School boys' soccer team has had things 
pretty much its own way in the Empire League. 
The Aztecs had won five of the past six titles. 
This season was to be different, though. With two other teams ranked in the top 
10 of the Southern Section 2-A poll, the rest of the league appeared to be 
catching up with the Aztecs. 
Well, things haven't changed all that much. Esperanza kept the tradition alive 
a little longer with a 1-0 victory over Cypress Friday at Esperanza. 
It was a match that featured two of the top teams in the 2-A. Cypress was 
ranked third and Esperanza sixth. But, for the most part, there was only one 
dominant team on the field Friday. 
The Aztecs (11-2-3 overall, 3-0 in league play) controlled the match with their 
defense. They allowed the Centurions few opportunities around goal and kept the 
pressure on the Cypress side of the field. 
"I told the kids that to win the league this year, they were going to have to 
shut out some of the teams," Esperanza Coach Kino Oaxaca said. "They told me 
today that I would see them play a different kind of defense." 
Esperanza smothered the Cypress attack for its third shutout of the season. The 
Centurions (11-2-3, 2-1) had only two shots on goal and rarely pushed the ball 
deep into Aztec territory in the first half. 
Although Esperanza's defense is young and inexperienced, the group has matured 
quickly. 
The Aztecs start two juniors, a sophomore and a senior on defense, none of whom 
were on the varsity last season. Yet, the team has allowed only 14 goals in 16 
games. 
"Our defense has come along faster than I expected," Oaxaca said. "Since league 
began, they've become more aggressive and are working together better." 
The match was scoreless in the first half, although Esperanza had seven shots 
on goal. 
Cypress goalie Ray Arvizu made two brilliant saves to keep the match tied. 
Early in the half, he dived to his left to block a shot by Trent Wise. A few 
minutes later, Arvizu tipped away Wise's header. 
Mike Voss broke the tie 12 minutes into the second half when he took a pass 
from Jason DeLucca and beat Arvizu to the right. The goal was Voss' 16th of the 
season. 
The defense did the rest. The Centurions had five chances around the Aztec 
goal, but were turned away each time. 
"We had to win this game because we were at home," Oaxaca said. "We haven't 
lost here in almost two years. And who knows what will happen when we play 
Cypress at their house." 
But, for now, tradition has been maintained. CHRIS FOSTER In other Empire 
League boys' matches: Los Alamitos 5, Loara 0 -- Claudio Boggio had two goals 
for host Los Alamitos (6-5-5, 1-1-1). Ted Watson, Jay Willemese and John 
Sansour also scored. El Dorado 3, Katella 0 -- Todd Gibson, Derek Dean and 
Damien Tellez scored for visiting El Dorado (7-4-5, 1-2). In a Century League 
boys' match: Foothill 2, El Modena 0 -- Daren Jacobs scored both goals to lead 
visiting Foothill (15-2-1, 2-0). David Lough had 11 saves for El Modena, and 
Lance Anderson had seven saves for Foothill. In a Garden Grove League boys' 
match: La Quinta 0, Santiago 0 -- Praseuth Sotakoun had seven saves for La 
Quinta (7-6-4, 3-0-3). Santiago is 10-3-2, 5-0-1. In an Orange League boys' 
match: Valencia 4, Brea-Olinda 1 -- Mario Torrez had two goals and Uli Perez 
and Gary Thompson each had one for host Valencia. Marco Hernandez scored for 
Brea. In Pacific Coast League boys' matches: Laguna Hills 7, Costa Mesa 0 -- 
Juan Strutton had three goals (he scored five for the week) to lead visiting 
Laguna Hills (13-3, 6-1). Brian Slayback, Scott Clark, Jeff Cook and Chris 
Kannenberg also scored for Laguna Hills. Kirk Brown had his fourth shutout of 
the season and had five saves for Laguna Hills. Costa Mesa is 1-8, 0-7. Orange 
1, Woodbridge 0 -- Sal Anaya scored in the second half for host Orange (10-0-2, 
7-0). Freshman Jason Vlcek had two saves. Woodbridge is 2-4-1 in league. In Sea 
View League boys' matches: Corona del Mar 1, Saddleback 0 -- Chris Smith scored 
with 10 minutes remaining to play after the ball was deflected by the 
Saddleback goalkeeper to lead visiting Corona del Mar (8-8, 1-1). Chris 
Connelly had 11 saves for Corona del Mar. Estancia 2, University 0 -- Carlos 
Alcazar scored both goals in the second half to lead visiting Estancia (5-6-1, 
2-0). Will Bohuslaviski had 13 saves, eight in the first half for Estancia. 
University is 6-4-2, 0-1-1. Newport Harbor 1, Tustin 0 -- Todd Tift scored 15 
minutes into the second half to lift Newport Harbor (14-3-1, 2-0). Tim Wilson 
had 14 saves for Tustin (5-10, 0-1-1). In South Coast League boys' matches: 
Mission Viejo 2, El Toro 1 -- Frank Pace and Darren Wittenmeir scored for 
Mission Viejo (7-5-4, 1-1-1). Kevin Collins scored for El Toro. El Toro goalie 
Kevin Rowe had five saves, and Prespon Cubel had six for Mission Viejo. Irvine 
3, Capistrano Valley 1 -- Keith Rosenberg scored all three goals for visiting 
Irvine (3-5-3, 1-1-1). Capistrano Valley is 2-1 in league play. In Freeway 
League girls' matches: Sonora 2, Fullerton 1 -- Roz Schiefelbine and Lisa Knott 
scored for host Sonora (7-6-1, 1-1). Courtney Hunt scored for Fullerton (1-1). 
Sunny Hills 2, Troy 1 -- Leah Russell and Stacy Thurber scored for host Sunny 
Hills (10-1-2, 2-0). Kristan Foley scored for Troy (6-3-2, 1-1). 
