EGYPTIAN OFFICIAL FIRED FOR ANTI-EXTREMIST STAND 
Egypt's powerful interior minister was dismissed Friday after reportedly urging 
the violent elimination of Muslim extremists, who represent one of the 
strongest challenges to the moderate government of President Hosni Mubarak. 
Mubarak's dismissal of Zaki Badr, the tough, outspoken director of Egypt's 
internal security forces, followed two days of controversy over remarks, 
reported in opposition newspapers, that Badr allegedly made at two recent 
rallies. 
Badr reportedly said he wanted to kill Muslim fundamentalists who have opposed 
Egypt's moderate government and have urged the implementation of conservative 
Islamic laws and strict social controls. 
"I want to kill only 1% of the population," Badr was quoted as saying, 
apparently including in his remarks even members of the Muslim Brotherhood, 
which holds several seats in Parliament. 
His remarks reportedly were recorded on tape by the Socialist Labor Party 
newspaper Al Shaab. 
Badr was said to have unleashed a stream of abuse at Egyptian journalists, 
opposition politicians, lawyers and Muslim scholars, including some of his 
colleagues in the Cabinet, calling them sons of dogs, thieves, homosexuals and 
cart drivers. 
In other comments, published by the Paris-based newspaper Al Watan Al Arabi, 
Badr said of the Islamic extremists, "I see them as mad dogs -- with all 
respect to dogs." 
Mubarak's decision to fire Badr follows months of controversy over the Interior 
Ministry's tough crackdown on fundamentalists in Egypt, resulting in thousands 
of arrests, tear-gas assaults on mosques and reports by human rights 
organizations of political prisoners being tortured. 
Last month, Badr, 63, survived what appeared to be an assassination attempt 
when a car bomb exploded just before he arrived at a police recreational 
facility. 
The incident followed the arrest of 500 Muslim fundamentalists a week earlier 
in the southern province of Assiut, a hotbed of Muslim extremism for years. 
Opposition politicians for months have been calling for Mubarak to rein in the 
Interior Ministry, which recently has detained large numbers of journalists, 
writers and university professors based on allegations that they were 
Communists. The arrests sparked outcries from human rights groups around the 
world. 
Western diplomats here say that, while it is not surprising that Mubarak 
dismissed the controversial minister, it is widely believed that Mubarak 
quietly supported Badr's tough approach toward Islamic fundamentalists, who 
many believe represent a growing threat to stability in Egypt as economic 
conditions steadily worsen. 
Appointed to replace Badr was Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa, a career police 
officer whose approach has been more conciliatory than confrontational. 
