SLAIN BRAZILIAN BECOMES SYMBOL; 
BATTLE FOR HUGE AMAZON FOREST IS TURNING DEADLY 
Francisco Mendes, 44, grew up in the forest and spent most of his life plying 
its shaded paths, gathering natural latex and Brazil nuts to earn a meager 
living. 
Like thousands of other rubber tappers in the Amazon basin, Mendes loved the 
peace and tranquillity of forest life. His conservation efforts earned him an 
international reputation -- and perhaps caused his death. 
When a 20-gauge shotgun blast killed Mendes last Dec. 22, Xapuri rubber tappers 
lost their leader -- and the Amazon conservation movement lost one of its most 
effective spokesmen. But here in Mendes' native state of Acre, rubber tappers 
and conservationists have much cause for hope. 
Contrary to what is happening in some other parts of the Amazon, where the 
forest is being slashed and burned at an alarming rate, those who want to save 
Acre's forest seem to be winning. 
In the 3,000 square miles of Xapuri township, for example, only 133 acres of 
forest were destroyed last year. In some cases, demonstrations organized by 
Mendes' Rural Workers Union stopped chain-saw crews before they could start 
cutting. 
Statewide, the rate of deforestation has declined sharply in recent years, and 
the state government has adopted a policy that strongly discourages the 
conversion of forest into ranchland. Some officials in Rio Branco, the state 
capital, say that increasingly successful conservation efforts in Acre could 
serve as a model for the rest of the Amazon basin. 
The basin is drained by the biggest river system in the world and is blanketed 
by the Earth's largest tropical rain forest. Scientists say the forest plays a 
vital role in atmospheric and climatic conditions around the globe. 
In Brazil, the Amazon basin covers 2 million square miles, a region 12 times as 
large as California. According to rough estimates based on satellite surveys, 
as much as 30,000 square miles of virgin Amazon forest are being destroyed in 
Brazil every year as roadways, cattle ranching, farming, logging, mining and 
hydroelectric projects spread through the region. 
Isolated Area 
Acre, remote and isolated in Brazil's far west, has lost only 6% of its forest, 
which once virtually covered the state's 59,000 square miles. Most of Acre's 
deforestation has been on the eastern wing-tip of the butterfly-shaped state, 
around Rio Branco and along the road to Xapuri and Brasileia near the Bolivian 
border. A road network that was planned to lace the rest of Acre has not been 
built because of lack of funds. 
About 80% of the state's territory is privately owned, and pressure is strong 
for spreading pastureland into the wilderness. It was this kind of pressure 
that Francisco Mendes was resisting. 
Known by the nickname Chico, Mendes was the son of a rubber tapper and began 
tapping rubber trees himself at age 9. He never went beyond fourth grade in 
school but received an informal education from a Communist and one-time army 
lieutenant who had participated in a ragtag rebel army's long march through 
Brazil's hinterlands in the 1920s. 
"He had a very good ideological base from that guy," said Gumersindo Rodrigues, 
29, who worked closely with Mendes in the union. Mendes helped found the union 
and served on the Xapuri municipal council in the late 1970s. He also founded a 
local branch of the Marxist-oriented Workers' Party. For Mendes, the causes of 
socialism, unionism and ecology all placed him in direct opposition to the big 
landowners and ranchers. 
When the Rural Workers Union heard that a landowner had sent a crew to clear a 
piece of forest, the union would muster its members and their families to 
create an empate, or standoff. Dozens, even hundreds, of men, women and 
children would gather around the cutting crew and prevent it from starting the 
job. 
Killing Threatened 
In one such action last year, the union prevented brothers Alvarino and Darly 
Alves da Silva from starting work on a road into their isolated ranch outside 
the town of Xapuri. The ranchers had threatened to kill the union leader, 
Xapuri residents say. 
Mendes did not take it as an idle threat. He and Rodrigues, his friend and 
union associate, had learned of an outstanding warrant in the southern state of 
Parana charging the Alves da Silva brothers with ordering the killing of two 
rural workers there. Mendes and Rodrigues had the warrant transferred to 
Xapuri, and the brothers went into hiding. Mendes was put under police 
protection. 
Two police guards were eating a fish dinner in Mendes' rustic Xapuri home Dec. 
22 when Mendes opened the door on his way to take a shower in an outbuilding. 
Mendes was shot in the chest; he staggered back into the house and died. 
The police began looking for members of the Alves da Silva family. Darly and 
two of his sons turned themselves in. One of them, Darcy, confessed to pulling 
the trigger. The police are still searching the jungle for Alvarino Alves da 
Silva and three hired pistoleiros said to be with him. 
Brazil Nut Trees Survive 
Xapuri is about 50 miles from the border by the BR-317, a rutted, red-dirt road 
that becomes impassable after heavy rains. Most of the road from Xapuri to Rio 
Branco, a stretch of about 110 miles, is paved. It is flanked by ranches on 
rolling land, grassy pastures dotted with stumps and, occasionally, a 
green-topped castanheira, a Brazil nut tree. 
The castanheiras were left standing because government regulations prohibit 
their being cut down. But in isolation from the forest they are usually sterile 
-- towering but useless reminders of an ineffectual official gesture. 
Xapuri (pronounced shah-poo-REE) was once the capital of Acre, long before the 
territory became a state. Its brick and asphalt streets are lined with wood 
houses, many of them on stilts. One of the biggest buildings in town has been 
preserved as a landmark. It was the headquarters of the Bolivian provincial 
government before Brazil bought Acre in 1903. 
Rubber Barons 
That was at the time of the rubber boom, when Amazon latex fed burgeoning tire 
industries in the United States and Europe. Rubber barons made huge fortunes 
from the sticky sap that jungle workers painstakingly tapped from the trees, 
cutting groove after groove in a slanting pattern down the stout trunks. 
Tappers made their rounds on forest paths just as they do today. During the 
rainy season, they gather pods of Brazil nuts, and between seasons they 
cultivate corn, beans and cassava in small jungle clearings. Most tappers still 
live in thatch-roofed shacks deep in the forest, far from civilization. 
After the BR-317 came to Xapuri and cattle ranches began spreading out from the 
road, hundreds of rubber tappers were forced to abandon their source of 
livelihood, the forest. Others sold their tapping rights, discouraged by 
depressed rubber prices. Today, many former tappers live in the slums of Rio 
Branco, trying to make a living as unskilled laborers, but an estimated 120,000 
of the state's 380,000 people are still rubber tappers and their dependents. 
Resisting Ranchers 
The Rural Workers Union of Xapuri was formed to resist the encroachment of 
cattle ranching and to improve the lot of rubber tappers as well as ranch 
hands. Many of the tappers have little opportunity to participate in union 
activities. 
"The most distant ones stay out years and years without coming into town," 
Rodrigues said. But he said 600 of the estimated 3,000 rubber tappers in Xapuri 
township are active union members, dedicated to preserving the forest. 
"Between death from hunger in the city and death from fighting for the forest, 
we will die fighting for the forest," he said. 
Rodrigues and others who lived and worked with Mendes are clear about who their 
enemies are: the ranchers. 
"They meant to finish off the forest, and Chico defended it," said Mendes' 
widow, Ilzamar. "They didn't accept that." 
Gilson Pescador, a Xapuri labor organizer and former priest, said that Mendes' 
killing was planned as an attack on the conservation movement. 
A Tree in the Cause 
"That was the motive, to end the movement, to end the resistance," Pescador 
told a visitor in the offices of the Workers' Party. 
Pescador wore a new T-shirt that said, "They cut down one of the leafiest trees 
in the Amazon cause and the union movement. Chico Mendes, from your example 
other bold plants will spring, until the entire Earth is green." 
In Rio Branco, landowner Sergio Figueiredo argued that there can be forest 
conservation in Acre along with the development of ranching and farming. 
"There is room for everyone here," he said. 
The law limits landowners to clearing the forest from no more than 50% of their 
property, but Figueiredo said that an average of only about 20% of large 
ranches have been deforested. 
Figueiredo, 36, said that most Acre residents want new roads and increased food 
production, which would reduce the remote state's high cost of living and 
provide new jobs. 
People 'Need to Be Fed' 
"We believe that Acre, one of the most fertile parts of Brazil, cannot be kept 
just to be admired when there are residents who need to be fed," he said. 
According to Figueiredo, the slaying of Mendes was the result of a "strictly 
personal" dispute between Mendes and the Alves da Silva family. Mendes' friends 
and associates say it was part of a violent conflict between rubber tappers and 
others who want to preserve the forest and ranchers who want to destroy it. The 
struggle has cost several other lives in Acre, they say. 
But Figueiredo said that when a rubber tapper is killed in a personal quarrel, 
"ranchers are always seen as the guilty ones. . . . There is a political 
interest in throwing the working class up against the landowner class." 
The ranchers' point of view was supported by the Acre state government until 
1986, when Flaviano Melo was elected governor. Melo, a member of the centrist 
Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, is the first governor in the Amazon region 
to adopt a clearly conservationist policy. His main adviser on economic 
development, Gilberto Siqueira, heads the Acre State Technological Foundation, 
which has drawn up a plan for exploiting the forest while preserving it. 
22 Research Projects 
The foundation is conducting 22 research projects on forest management, use of 
forest products and technology for extraction. In addition to latex and Brazil 
nuts, Siqueira said, Acre's forests abound with valuable woods, oils, resins, 
fruits and medicinal plants. 
Despite the ranchers' contention that Acre's soil is fertile, Siqueira said 
studies have shown that it is weak and not suitable for agriculture. He said 
much pastureland cleared in the 1970s will no longer support grass and is being 
taken over by weeds. 
The key to preserving the forest, according to Siqueira, is to make it 
economically productive. The state has recently created four "extractive 
reserves" totaling more than 700,000 acres that cannot be deforested. More 
reserves will be set aside, he said. At the same time, Siqueira's foundation is 
trying to bring about the creation of industries in Rio Branco that will use 
rubber, selected hardwoods and other forest products for manufacturing. 
"I don't believe in any ecological proposal that doesn't translate into an 
economic answer," he said in an interview. "You cannot preserve the forest and 
let it sit static." 
