SPECIAL SCREENINGS: 'HERE IS YOUR LIFE' LAUNCHES UCLA JAN TROELL RETROSPECTIVE 
Sweden's Jan Troell is known for two splendid, straightforward epics: "The 
Emigrants" (1971), and its sequel, "The New Land" (1972), which compose the 
sprawling saga of a group of Swedes coming to America, and "Flight of the 
Eagle" (1982), about a gallant but foolhardy attempt to reach the North Pole by 
balloon in 1897. 
As fine as these films are, they do not prepare you for the sheer 
distinctiveness and dazzling impact of the heretofore unknown pictures that 
launch the UCLA Film Archives' "Jan Troell Retrospective." 
"Here Is Your Life" (1965), which screens Thursday at 7:30 p.m. in Melnitz 
Theater, is one of the great coming-of-age films, based on Nobel Prize-winning 
Eyvind Johnson's semi-autobiographical novel and telling of the flowering of an 
impoverished but brilliant and persistent youth, born at the turn of the 
century. The way in which Troell expresses the imagination of Eddie Axberg's 
Olof, as he matures from 14 to 18, is never less than magical; "Here Is Your 
Life" is a less-harsh "Pelle the Conqueror." 
The film is preceded by the half-hour "Stay in the Marshland" (1964), another 
adaptation from Johnson, which is, in its way, as sly and witty as Roman 
Polanski's famous short, "Two Men and a Wardrobe." Max Von Sydow stars. 
Screening Sunday at 6 p.m. is the documentary-like "Eenie Meenie Minie Moe" 
(1967), in which the intense Per Oscarsson gives a thoroughly harrowing 
performance as a contemporary schoolteacher losing control of himself and his 
class. 
Never has the plight of the teacher in the era of permissiveness been 
dramatized with such disturbing insight. That this teacher is miscast in his 
profession -- he privately acknowledges that he "sides with his pupils againt 
himself" -- throws in relief the love-hate that characterizes so many 
relationships between children and adults, yet Troell, himself a former 
teacher, leaves us with the sense that human nature at any age is finally an 
enigma. The second feature is "The Emigrants." 
Also commencing this week at the UCLA Film Archives is "New Hungarian Cinema," 
which begins Saturday at 7:30 p.m. with Sandor Simo's "Farewell to You" (1987) 
and Peter Bacso's "Banana Skin Waltz" (1986). 
The "Farewell" is a handsome, acutely perceptive, deeply sensual psychological 
drama centering on the residents of a fine old Budapest apartment house as they 
struggle to survive the ever-darkening war years. As a study of human nature 
under pressure, the film offers a cross-section of behavior, ranging from the 
heroic to the cowardly to the cruelly ironic. The film is marked by steamy 
sexual encounters, borne of desperation, and also by an unflinching depiction 
of a poisonous, ever-expanding anti-Semitism and a hysteria-charged Nazism. 
A Yasujiro Ozu series starts Friday at the Little Tokyo Cinema 2 with a perfect 
double feature, "Early Spring" (1956) and "The Record of a Tenement Gentleman" 
(1947). 
The first is one of Ozu's many compassionate studies of the lives of office 
workers, in this instance focusing on a decent, nice-looking young man (Ryo 
Ikebe) whose brief fling with the secretarial pool flirt (Keiko Kishi) 
endangers his marriage, already haunted by the loss of an only child. 
As Ikebe and his wife (Chikage Iwashima) struggle with their feelings, Ozu 
offers an unusually bleak view of the company man's existence. The very adult 
"Early Spring" is not downbeat, nor is "The Record of a Tenement Gentleman" 
even though it is set in the harsh aftermath of World War II. It is in fact an 
amusing yet poignant encounter between a blunt, even tactless middle-aged widow 
(Choko Iida) and a little lost boy as stolid and stubborn as she is. 
Information: (213) 687-7077. 
