RX FOR ILLNESS: STUDIES FIND THAT LAUGHTER CAN BE GOOD MEDICINE 
Ina Carlson still laughs at life despite two heart attacks and quadruple bypass 
surgery. "Why not?" she asks with a chuckle. "That's what keeps me going. 
Wouldn't it be awful if I sat back and cried?" 
No wonder she is the poster patient and spokeswoman for one of a growing number 
of hospitals putting humor into health care amid new evidence suggesting that 
laughter may benefit the ill as well as the healthy. 
"Laughter indeed may be like a good medicine," said Dr. Lee Berk, of the School 
of Medicine at Loma Linda University. 
"Those patients who had the will to live had a sense of humor and were able to 
use their humor in fighting their illness," said Kathy Knight, a nurse at 
University Hospital in Albuquerque, N.M., who founded "Humor And Hospitals Are 
Healthy Allies," -- "HAHAHA" -- the program that Ina Carlson represents. 
"I forget about myself when I can laugh with somebody or at somebody," said 
Carlson, an 80-year-old widow, adding that a good joke "makes me feel better. I 
forget that I'm just living on pills." 
Carlson, who has been a patient at University Hospital, was having a serious 
picture taken with three doctors for a medical school recruitment brochure when 
Knight decided to have some fun. She put Minnie Mouse ears on Carlson, and 
Goofy, moose and chicken hats on the doctors. "Today, cheer someone up," her 
poster says. 
"You can't help but look at that picture and laugh," Knight said. 
Programs such as University Hospital's are spreading, bringing humor to 
patients on their walls and on wheels -- special carts loaded with everything 
from balloons to bubbles, from comic books to comedy videos. 
"Research findings are beginning to accumulate that suggest . . . laughter 
might be therapeutic and could be used to reduce disease symptoms," said Lars 
Ljungdahl, of the Lyckorna Primary Health Care Center in Motala, Sweden. 
Preliminary findings in a study of six women suffering painful muscle and bone 
disorders suggested that humor therapy can increase quality of life and relieve 
some chronic symptoms, said Ljungdahl, whose findings were reported in a 
January letter to the Journal of the American Medical Assn. He noted that 
clinical evaluation still is lacking and that further studies are needed. 
A new study of 10 people who watched a humor video for two hours and had blood 
samples taken every 10 minutes found decreases in the hormones cortisol and 
epinephrine, or adrenaline, which are released during stress, Berk said. The 
overall effect was a healthy drop in blood pressure, heart rate and stress. 
Those hormones also can weaken the immune system and counter the "good" hormone 
endorphin, a painkiller and mood elevator, Berk said. By reducing the flow of 
cortisol and adrenaline, laughter counters the weakening of the immune system 
and allows endorphins to work on pain unopposed. 
Joseph K. Neumann, a psychologist with the Veterans Administration in Johnson 
City, Tenn., said more controlled studies are needed. "A lot of people who have 
published in this area have reported on case studies or studies with groups of 
people who haven't had an experimental control group." 
While agreeing that humor is therapeutic, Neumann said it may not be more 
effective than anything else that would induce a pleasant experience, such as 
relaxing music. He studied two groups of patients who underwent surgery under a 
local anesthetic while awake. One group listened to a tape of an old Jack Benny 
radio show and the other group listened to relaxing ocean sounds. "Basically 
there weren't any consistent or significant differences." 
Humor is serious business to people such as Joyce Anisman-Saltman, assistant 
professor of special education at Southern Connecticut State University in New 
Haven, and Joel Goodman, head of The HUMOR Project in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. 
Their message on why it is healthy to laugh and how to bring more humor into 
work and life is taken so seriously that they are in big demand by 
organizations ranging from IBM to the Massachusetts Turf Growers Assn. 
Major corporations are putting humor into training programs, believing that it 
sparks creativity. "When the world is closing in, you've got to do something to 
change your mood so you can function creatively by looking at a favorite 
cartoon, remembering some silly line, trying to find something silly going on 
in daily life," said Monsanto Co. researcher Robert Z. Greenley in St. Louis. 
Anisman-Saltman, who gives five to 10 lectures a week across the country, tells 
audiences to avoid "energy suckers, people who grab you in the hall and only 
have terrible things to tell you about that drag you down. Surround yourself 
with positive people." 
Problems can be handled when they are in perspective, she said. "A sense of 
humor helps you take a step back from the problem that looks really terrible up 
close. When you have a little distance from it, it looks less terrible." 
"I think people are really coming to their senses of humor," said Goodman, who 
has a network of 100 people across the country working with The HUMOR Project. 
"People are realizing humor is not just kid stuff. People are realizing humor 
can do many good things for us." 
Anisman-Saltman, a funny teacher and briefly a stand-up comic, got on the 
lecture circuit six years ago when the library in her hometown of Cheshire, 
Conn., was running a series on healing and invited her to speak. 
But stark reality nudged Goodman into a life of humor. In 1977, his father was 
stricken with a life-threatening aneurysm and facing surgery in Houston. A 
funny thing happened to him on his way to the hospital to visit his father: The 
driver of the hotel van, a man named Alvin, made him laugh, easing the stress. 
"A couple of months later when Dad was successfully recovering, I got to 
thinking what a wonderful gift Alvin had given us. I began to wonder, 'Do we 
have to wait for the Alvins of the world to cross our paths just when we need 
them by luck or should we be more intentional about this thing called humor.' 
"I began to think it was too good to leave to chance so in 1977 I started The 
HUMOR Project, which was not designed to analyze humor to death but to answer 
my own curiousity about whether there are practical ways of bringing humor to 
life." 
In the last dozen years, more than a quarter of a million people have attended 
HUMOR Project programs, Goodman said. In the last three years, the project also 
has given grants to 36 hospitals and groups to help develop their own programs. 
Goodman, the author of eight books, tells audiences to look for humor in 
reality and in very serious places such as newspapers and church bulletins. 
"That is where humor is most absent at first glance and where it's most 
needed." 
