TOO MANY COOKS SPOIL THE COUNTY 
Imagine if New Jersey did not have a governor. 
Imagine if companies like Coca-Cola and Pacific Telesis had no chief executive 
officer. 
Impossible. 
Now imagine an enterprise with 75,000 employees, serving 8 million people, with 
a $9-billion budget -- and no chief executive. Unbelievable? Not for Los 
Angeles County. 
Today there are more residents in Los Angeles County than in 41 states, yet 
there is no single elected official who can speak for this entity here at home 
or in Sacramento or Washington. 
Today the County of Los Angeles has an annual budget higher than those of 31 
states. It provides services to the public through 35 independent departments 
and takes the advice of nearly 200 citizen commissions, yet there is no single 
elected official who is accountable for the executive functions of county 
government. 
This is no way to run a company, or a government. And, as our county's growth 
accelerates, the situation deteriorates every day. 
Hundreds of millions of dollars are wasted in inefficiencies instigated by an 
administrative system rife with bureaucratic end runs to five different 
supervisors divided as often by personal animosity as by political philosophy. 
Human tragedies occur daily because of the bureaucratic paralysis. A pathetic 
example is the inexplicable division of the domestic-violence and child-abuse 
administrative functions between two entirely separate departments. 
The system is broken, and it needs fixing. In Los Angeles County, five 
supervisors -- each of whom represents 1.6 million people -- hold executive, 
legislative and quasi-judicial power in their collective hands, contrary to the 
system of checks and balances that is the hallmark of American democracy. They 
have been called kings, and they preside over their districts as if Los Angeles 
County were a collection of five fiefdoms. And, in defiance of our country's 
most cherished principle and a Justice Department order, the five are refusing 
to revise their boundaries so that the county's Latino population, which is 
fast growing toward majority status, might have representation. 
A decade ago the voters of Los Angeles County narrowly defeated an initiative 
to establish a county executive, or mayor. Given that the reform-minded 
proponents of the initiative -- supported by Common Cause, the League of Women 
Voters, the Bar Assn. and the Los Angeles Times, among others -- spent only a 
few thousand dollars and came so close to their objective, it seemed only a 
matter of time before the status quo crumbled. 
Unfortunately, the entrenched interests held fast, and the prospect for 
efficient government is bleaker today than ever before. Our problems mount, and 
regional solutions are demanded, yet the supervisors go about their business as 
usual. 
The county budget is twice the size that it was in 1978, 20 times the size of 
the 1960 budget. Our transportation system is gridlocked -- in fact, held 
hostage by one supervisor determined to control every bus in his district. Our 
solid and toxic wastes accumulate while the supervisors lack the political will 
to find a suitable site to locate a new disposal zone. The numbers of homeless 
and AIDS victims increase. Yet the Board of Supervisors cannot even agree on a 
simple efficiency like consolidating some of the county's 50 warehouses, let 
alone make the tough decisions to improve -- or even maintain -- our present 
quality of life. 
More distressing still, there appears to be no "light at the end of the 
tunnel." As recent elections demonstrated, it is nearly impossible to unseat 
incumbent legislators at any level of government, most of whom have stockpiled 
campaign funds to insulate them effectively from electoral challenge. Despite 
the widespread concern about the inadequacies of the present system, the cost 
of mounting a county executive initiative today would be prohibitive. Even to 
get the measure on the ballot, before the voters, would require incalculable 
resources to neutralize the supervisors' political and financial power to block 
it. 
So Los Angeles County seems destined to face the future without an independent 
and organized executive branch of government, and without a single spokesperson 
for the interests of all the people of the county. 
There is a political adage that "all politics is local." We in Los Angeles 
County suffer daily because of the dilemmas created by parochial politics. In 
the decade since the voters last had the chance to speak, Proposition 13 has 
squeezed local governments, and the problems associated with an aging and 
overburdened infrastructure have escalated. Still, our "local" supervisors, 
each of whom represents a population equal to that of almost 20 of our nation's 
states, wield unchallenged authority, turning one problem after another over 
for "further study" without accountability to any other branch of government or 
to the people. 
Los Angeles County is all but immobilized. What kind of crisis will it take to 
energize our community to bring county government into the 21st Century? 
