LEAVE MARXIST ROOTS, POPE URGES GUINEA-BISSAU; 
AFRICA: JOHN PAUL II ADVISES THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT TO AVOID CORRUPTION 
AND ABUSE OF POWER AS IT MOVES TOWARD A MORE OPEN SOCIETY. 
Preaching brotherhood in the dusty capital of one of the world's poorest 
nations, Pope John Paul II on Saturday urged a revolutionary government to move 
firmly away from its Marxist roots. 
The Pope told leaders of this West African country of 1 million to shun 
corruption and the abuse of power as they continue on a path to a more open 
society after a decade of Marxist failure. 
A former Portuguese colony that won independence in 1974 after a sapping 
guerrilla war, Guinea-Bissau, the size of Massachusetts and Connecticut 
combined, is the poorest of the five countries on John Paul's tour of 
sub-Saharan Africa. Once firmly Marxist, Guinea-Bissau has moved in the past 
few years away from Soviet and Cuban sponsors toward a market economy and 
greater friendship with the United States. 
Cheering Roman Catholics, a 7% minority nationwide, gathered along the roadside 
as the papal motorcade swept past banana trees and tin-roofed shacks to the 
ramshackle capital of a country where 80% of the people are illiterate and the 
average yearly income is less than $200. 
One-third of all children die before age 5 in a green and swampy land of 
subsistence agriculture, mostly rice, where life expectancy is just 40 years, 
according to figures of the World Bank. It lists Guinea-Bissau as one of the 
world's 15 poorest countries. 
Arriving from a rainy two days in the normally drought-stricken island nation 
of Cape Verde, the Pope appealed in his homily at a soccer stadium Mass for 
full respect for human rights in a one-party state. 
Such respect, he said, must be a fundamental ingredient in "a common aspiration 
for authentic solidarity and social and economic cooperation as the fruit of 
overcoming static and conditioned ideology." 
In an arrival address to President Joao Bernardo Vieira and members of his 
government, the Pope called for a broadly based national education system shorn 
of ideological bias. 
"I pray that educative programs enjoy full success, beginning with genuine 
literacy," the Pope said. 
Vatican officials traveling with the pontiff said that his reference was to the 
strong, lingering Marxist content of the national syllabus and a continuing 
resentment against public education. 
John Paul asserted that individuals must be masters of their own destiny. They 
must resist "all that would seek to crush the individual or cancel him in an 
anonymous collectivity by institutions, structures, or a system," he said. 
The Roman Catholic Church, as a colonial symbol, was one of the principal 
enemies in the revolt by Vieira and others against Portugal in the 1970s. Their 
struggle was strongly supported by the Soviet Union and Cuba. 
The church had little influence in the independent Marxist state that was 
formed when a beaten Portugal withdrew. After a decade of economic failure, 
though, Guinea-Bissau today welcomes both Western aid and foreign investment in 
a belated quest for modernization. 
Now the Catholic Church is respectable again and so is the United States, whose 
modest $4-million aid program, which funds small Peace Corps contingents, is 
still dwarfed by a massive Soviet presence. 
This morning, to mark World Leprosy Day, John Paul will visit a modern 
leprosarium on the outskirts of the capital. Run by Franciscan priests and 
funded by the Italian government, the center has become a continental model for 
an Africa where leprosy is only one of innumerable uncontrolled afflictions. 
Later today, the papal cavalcade flies to landlocked, French-speaking Mali, the 
third stop on an eight-day African odyssey that is John Paul's 45th foreign 
trip. After further stops in Burkina Faso and Chad, the Pope returns to the 
Vatican next Thursday. 
Pope's Trip to Africa 
Jan. 25-Feb.1 
1. Cape Verde I.: Jan. 25-27 
2. Guinea-Blssau: Jan. 27-28 
3. Mall: Jan. 28-29 
4. Burkina Faso: Jan. 29-30 
5. Chad: Jan. 30-Feb.1 
