NOW HERE'S A REAL WHITE-HAT ISSUE; 
FAMILY PLANNING: DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS ALIKE VOTED TO RESTORE CLINIC 
BUDGETS. GOV. DEUKMEJIAN SHOULD RESTRAIN HIS VETO PEN. 
Even partisan legislators will admit that there are two sides to most 
controversial issues, with more shades of gray than of black and white. An 
exception, however, is the funding of California's family planning clinics. 
Both houses of the state Legislature voted overwhelmingly last week to restore 
clinic funding that had been slashed by Gov. Deukmejian. Those cuts, reducing 
state funding from $36 million to just $12 million, forced 13 clinics in Los 
Angeles and 37 others throughout the state to close. Tens of thousands of needy 
women were left unserved. 
Despite the broad support among both Democrats and Republicans in the Assembly 
for restoration of the funding, Deukmejian may still veto the measure: His 
public statements have been far from reassuring. There are good reasons for 
both liberals and conservatives to override such a veto. 
Liberals support family planning because, in addition to birth-control 
services, the clinics provide vital health care to low-income women. In 
California, one-fifth of our population has no health insurance. Uninsured 
working people often have no better access to health care than those who depend 
on MediCal, which itself serves far fewer people than the number who need help. 
As a result, poor and uninsured women go to family planning clinics for 
services otherwise unavailable to them, such as comprehensive examinations that 
can detect cervical and breast cancer, diabetes and sexually transmitted 
diseases. At a legislative hearing last November, Dr. Marcus Conant, co-chair 
of the Governor's Leadership Task Force on AIDS, testified that the clinics 
also provide life-saving AIDS testing and counseling to high-risk sexually 
active young women. He predicted an increased incidence of AIDS unless the 
clinics' funding is restored. 
There are good fiscal, social and political reasons for conservatives, 
including Deukmejian, to support family planning, too. A recent study by UC San 
Francisco established that the state saves $12.20 for every $1.00 it spends on 
family planning. Because of the funding cuts, the same study estimates that 
more than 57,000 additional unwanted pregnancies will occur this year, 
resulting in $190 million in avoidable MediCal and other social services costs. 
Family planning is therefore one of the most cost-effective state programs. 
Neither side of the abortion debate gains from family planning cuts, since no 
state Office of Family Planning funds may be used to perform abortions. Indeed, 
the goal of abortion opponents is actually furthered by the program. Simply 
stated, you don't need an abortion if you're not pregnant. 
Through their counseling services and the birth-control devices they offer, 
family planning clinics help women, especially teen-age girls, avoid pregnancy. 
History and common sense convincingly prove that whether or not women have the 
legal right to choose abortion they will risk their lives to have illegal 
abortions. Therefore, the rational anti-abortionist has no reason to oppose 
family planning. 
It is also good politics to support family planning. There is no visible public 
constituency urging closure of the clinics. Quite the contrary, they enjoy 
broad, bipartisan support. Many anti-abortion Republicans now face serious 
political challenge, demonstrated most recently by Democratic State Sen. Lucy 
Killea's upset victory in a conservative San Diego district. 
Understandably, many anti-abortion legislators will not alter their positions 
on an issue fraught with such deep religious and moral overtones. For such 
politicians, support for family planning offers an intellectually consistent 
way to demonstrate concern for women's reproductive health to pro-choice 
voters. 
Family planning ought to be a motherhood and apple pie issue. It saves lives 
and money, reduces abortions and is good politics. Despite this, for no 
apparent rational reason, Deukmejian last week suggested that the clinics 
should provide only information about birth control -- no services, no health 
care -- and therefore $12 million is sufficient. In fact, his 1990-91 budget 
would maintain the cut for another year. 
But why go to the mat with a veto? Saving family planning would be a good way 
for the Legislature and the governor to start off the new year harmoniously. 
And by signing the funding restoration bill now, Deukmejian would avoid a nasty 
and politically risky fight. 
