GOVERNOR CALLS FREEWAY 'SUMMIT'; 
SEEKS HELP DEVELOPING PLAN FOR FINANCING NEW HIGHWAYS 
Calling for "bold action to unlock the gridlock on our freeways," Gov. George 
Deukmejian on Thursday invited 27 leaders of business, labor, government and 
the Legislature to a "transportation summit meeting" to begin developing a plan 
to raise more money for highway construction. 
Deukmejian said his goal is to draft a proposal to offer voters in 1990. The 
plan seems likely to include a combination of bond funding, which the governor 
favors, and a gasoline-tax increase, which is gaining support in the 
Legislature. 
But Deukmejian, speaking at a Los Angeles press conference, vowed unequivocally 
to veto any legislation that would raise the gasoline tax without the voters' 
approval. Such a measure, to raise the gas tax by 10 cents per gallon, was 
proposed in Sacramento on Wednesday by Senate leader David A. Roberti (D-Los 
Angeles) and Sen. Quentin Kopp (I-San Francisco). 
While acknowledging a serious need for more highway construction money, 
Deukmejian said the "summit" in his office on Feb. 8 should also consider how 
to "make better use of the existing transportation system." He mentioned more 
car-pooling, use of mass transit, staggered work hours and "restricting 
commercial truck traffic on our freeways during peak hours in urban areas." 
Elaborating on why he believes trucks should be banned during rush hours, 
Deukmejian said that "whenever there is a major accident involving a large 
commercial-type vehicle, it takes much longer to remove the vehicles that are 
blocking the traffic." Also, he continued, "we should try to get more of a 
24-hour use of the existing system" by running big rigs at night when commuters 
are at home. 
But the idea of truck bans needs to be discussed "very thoroughly" with truck 
owners and with businesses that send and receive goods, he added. Any such plan 
must be "feasible" and will require legislation, he said. 
There already are rush-hour truck bans in some parts of the state, including 
the Pasadena Freeway north of downtown Los Angeles, California 1 in Ventura, 
California 163 through Balboa Park in San Diego and Interstate 580 in Oakland. 
A Caltrans spokesman said that trucks make up an average of 8.3% of the total 
vehicles on Los Angeles freeways. But he added that one-fourth of the hours of 
congestion in the state's major metropolitan areas -- Los Angeles, San 
Francisco and San Diego -- is caused by truck accidents. 
Deukmejian sent invitations to his "summit" to representatives of regional 
transportation commissions and local governments, highway user groups, business 
associations, organized labor, his own Administration and legislative leaders 
of both parties. 
Last year, Deukmejian proposed a $1-billion transportation bond issue that 
voters narrowly rejected. The governor said on Thursday that he still favors 
bonds -- which never before have been used to build California highways -- 
because they "spread the cost throughout the entire state and I think everybody 
benefits from an improved transportation network." 
Deukmejian said he generally opposes increasing the gasoline tax because it 
"falls most heavily on low-income individuals." He added that "people already 
have very high transportation costs -- whether it's for car payments, whether 
it's for insurance, maintaining the vehicle, buying the gasoline. . . . It's 
already a very large percentage of a family budget." 
But, emphasizing his willingness to compromise, the Republican governor said: 
"I'm going to be willing to sit down and I'll argue my point. Others will argue 
their point. And I hope we'll be able to come together and reach some kind of 
accord." 
The state is facing a deficit of at least $3.5 billion in its five-year, 
$14-billion transportation improvement plan. If new funding sources are not 
found within 18 months, official say, the result will be delayed projects and 
reduced highway maintenance. 
On another subject, Deukmejian defended his proposed budget cutbacks in 
programs that serve the poor and women, including a freeze in welfare benefits 
and elimination of state funding for family planning. He reiterated his 
complaint that money that ordinarily would have gone to these programs now must 
be spent on public schools because of Proposition 98. 
Anyway, he said, California recipients in the Aid to Families with Dependent 
Children program receive "the second-highest level of benefits in the nation." 
And family planning programs can "get funds from other sources," he said. 
Deukmejian also explained why he advocated in his State of the State address 
Monday that the governor and lieutenant governor run as a ticket, as the 
President and vice president do. Twice recently, Californians have elected a 
governor from one party and a lieutenant governor from another. 
While he has "had a good professional relationship" with Democratic Lt. Gov. 
Leo T. McCarthy, Deukmejian said: "We're poles apart philosophically and 
politically. It's not unexpected that I would not turn to him to help us carry 
out some of our policies and programs. I just think it would be so much more 
beneficial to the public to have a person holding that (lieutenant governor's) 
office who was far more involved. . . ." 
Deukmejian said candidates should run separately for their party's nominations 
-- as they do now -- and then join as a ticket in the general election. 
On another matter, the governor said he changed his mind and decided to support 
moving upthe date of California's presidential primary because "political 
leaders feel California should play more of a role" in selecting the nominees. 
Deukmejian said he assumed that during presidential campaign years there would 
be three state elections -- an early presidential primary, a regular June 
primary for state candidates and a November general election. But the governor 
said he would prefer holding the state primary closer to the November election, 
perhaps in September. "It might cut down on some of the campaign costs," he 
said. "Our whole election period is much longer than it needs to be." 
