COMMODITIES; 
GRAIN FUTURES PLUNGE ON REPORT OF JUMP IN SUPPLIES 
Prices for future deliveries of corn, oats and soybeans plunged their permitted 
daily limits Monday on the Chicago Board of Trade after a government report 
showed larger supplies of corn and soybeans than most experts had expected. 
On other markets, energy futures surged, livestock and meat futures declined, 
copper was sharply higher, precious metals were mixed and stock index futures 
advanced. 
Wheat settled 10.25 cents lower to 3 cents higher, with the contract for 
delivery in March at $4.3075 a bushel; corn was 10 cents lower across the 
board, with March at $2.7825 a bushel; oats were 9 cents to 10 cents lower, 
with March at $2.33 a bushel, and soybeans were 19 cents to 37 cents lower, 
with January at $7.6675 a bushel. 
The Chicago Board of Trade limits corn and oat futures to daily moves of 10 
cents a bushel, wheat to 20 cents a bushel and soybeans to 30 cents a bushel. 
The limit on the January soybean contract has been lifted pending the 
contract's expiration. 
Analysts said they had expected the sharp declines, especially in the corn 
market, in reaction to an Agriculture Department crop report released after the 
close of trading on Friday. 
The report's final 1988 U.S. corn production figure -- 4.92 billion bushels -- 
was nearly 6% higher than the average estimate of market analysts and more than 
5% above the USDA's last projection, which it made in November. 
The USDA pegged the nation's corn stockpile as of Dec. 1 at 7.07 billion 
bushels, more than 6% higher than the average pre-report estimate. 
The government's numbers for soybean production and soybean stocks also were 
higher than expected. 
The USDA's wheat numbers were considered bullish but analysts said the corn and 
soybean markets pulled down wheat prices for near-month delivery. 
The sharp drop in prices may force some corn producers to reconsider their 
strategies for the new growing season, said Cathy Leow, a grain market analyst 
with Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. in New York. 
She said corn's recent rise to levels near $2.80 a bushel may have prompted 
some farmers to consider dropping out of the government's price-support 
program, in which they agree to limit their corn acreage in return for a 
guaranteed selling price. 
But now, she said, "I think a lot of them will think twice about dropping out 
of the program, given current price levels. It will affect planting decisions 
but we don't know how much." 
Oil futures prices surged to their highest levels since November, 1987, pumped 
up by market speculation that OPEC nations would be able to keep a cap on their 
output. 
Analysts said they did not expect the spike in prices to have much effect on 
prices of home heating oil and gasoline unless it lasted for a considerable 
period of time. 
The February contract for West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark grade of U.S. 
crude oil, jumped 40 cents to settle at $18.88 a barrel on the New York 
Mercantile Exchange. 
The last time the near-month contract settled higher was Nov. 20, 1987, amid 
hostilities in the Persian Gulf in the Iran-Iraq war. It settled that day at 
$18.93. 
Although Persian Gulf troubles no longer are an issue, the price of the 
near-month contract for West Texas Intermediate has soared 50% since an 
intra-day low of $12.28 a barrel on Oct. 5. 
