STORE OF HOMEY WISDOM IS LOST; 
PRIZED MONTEREY PARK PHARMACY LEAVING 
This is one of those old-fashioned neighborhood drugstores with a chipped 
plaster Venus de Milo on the cosmetics case, a couple of racks of greeting 
cards in one corner and a pharmacist in a white jacket who, stepping out of his 
cluttered work space, personally takes your prescription slip. 
"Flu?" said Sam Perlman, 63, a balding man in oversized bifocals, dolefully 
considering the piece of paper he's holding. "Yeah, it's going around." 
There aren't many places left like the Midtown Pharmacy in Monterey Park. In an 
age of mega-pharmacies that can spit out 600 or 700 prescriptions a day, 
Perlman and his customers at the Midtown still address each other by their 
first names. 
A lot of them were there the other day -- talking with an easy, joshing 
familiarity bred from Perlman's gentle influence during countless bouts of 
bronchitis and tooth extraction and rubella -- when Perlman dropped a 
bombshell. After more than 30 years at Garfield and Garvey avenues, he said, 
the Midtown is closing. 
"You're kidding!" said Celia Arcos, wide-eyed with disbelief. "Nothing can be 
done?" 
"It's the point of no return," Perlman said soberly. 
"Sam, this is ridiculous. I'm so mad." 
Perlman's landlords, maintaining that the pharmacist is paying a fraction of 
the prevailing rate for downtown Monterey Park commercial space, have almost 
doubled his rent, from $3,100 a month to $6,000. They have given him until the 
end of February to sign a new lease or vacate the store, an unreinforced 
concrete structure that needs to be bolstered against earthquake stresses. 
"We can't do anything on earthquake reinforcement until he moves out," said a 
spokeswoman for the Lancet Investment Co., the Chinese partnership that bought 
the building last year. "It's the main reason we want him out." 
But Perlman said that, besides raising the rent, the landlords want to shut his 
business down for three months while the building is under repairs. "And they 
wanted me to sign a release, absolving them of any responsibility for anything 
that might happen in the store," he said. "How can I do that?" 
Many of the customers see the demise of the Midtown as part of the radical 
transformation of Monterey Park in the last decade from a sleepy, ethnically 
diverse small town to a bustling San Gabriel Valley dynamo where a majority of 
the population is Asian, the nation's first suburban Chinatown. 
"We've been inundated with Chinese restaurants, inundated with gift shops," 
said longtime resident Joy Rowe. "That's OK. But now the merchants who have 
been here so long are being pushed out." 
"What can you do?" asked DeEtta Roberts, a retired retail clerk, shrugging her 
shoulders. "If you don't like it, move to Alaska." 
"It's a real touchy situation," said Mayor Patricia Reichenberger, who last 
week was working to relocate the Midtown. "For the past six or eight years, 
investors have been coming in, raising rents, forcing people out. Or refusing 
to renew leases. It's a long sad story." 
Perlman's store has been especially coveted, Reichenberger said. "It's the best 
spot in town," she said. 
Though some whites were quick to broadly implicate "the Chinese" for the 
closing of the Midtown, Perlman denied the issue was racial. Almost a third of 
his clients are Asian, Perlman said. "They're hard-working people, 
family-oriented," he said. "Their checks don't bounce. They're very honorable 
in business." 
But the headlong rush to buy real estate in Monterey Park has wiped out the 
small-town business district, he said. Perlman will be one of the last to go. 
Gone are the haberdasher, the shoe repairman, the barber and, 14 months ago, 
Paris' Restaurant, the Garvey Avenue gathering place of politicians and 
businessmen for 37 years, which has been turned into a Chinese restaurant. 
"You start feeling like a stranger in a strange land," Perlman said. "Even the 
taco stands are Chinese now." 
In the 37 years since he got his license from the State Board of Pharmacy, the 
soft-spoken druggist has seen some big changes in the drug-dispensing business, 
too. 
When Perlman took over the Monterey Park store in 1959, he became part of a 
vast network of neighborhood pharmacists, dispensing medication to American 
families. That was a more innocent time, Perlman said. "We used to keep the 
condoms under the counter, and sanitary napkins were wrapped in plain brown 
paper." 
But the biggest changes since then have been in the industry's economics, he 
said. "Suddenly there were prepaid health care plans directing patients to 
their own pharmacies," he said. "Or patients were sent to the chains, where 
there were fee arrangements. The community pharmacist is gradually being forced 
out." 
The Monterey Park real estate boom couldn't have come at a worse time for him. 
"Overhead is increasing just as the margin of profits is decreasing," Perlman 
said. 
The real danger of the closing of pharmacies such as the Midtown, civic leaders 
say, is the loss of the resources and personal touch from people such as 
Perlman. After so many years in one store, Perlman has a fix on his patients' 
chronic maladies and an old pro's understanding of medical side effects. 
Joy Rowe, a registered nurse, gives an example. "One of my neighbors has been 
taking a heart medication called Inderal for years," she said. "She goes to a 
new doctor, a hematologist, who tells her to stop taking all medication. Now, 
you don't just suddenly stop taking Inderal. It can trigger a reaction. You 
have to be weaned." 
Fortunately, Rowe's neighbor had enough confidence in Perlman to ask him about 
it. "Sam told her she had better go back to her cardiologist, who told her not 
to stop the Inderal," Rowe recounted. "You don't get that in the big 
pharmacies. All they're doing is filling a prescription. You go to one window 
with your prescription slip and another window to pay." 
Perlman takes what he calls his "pro-active role" seriously. He warns his 
customer about side-effects from medication or drug interactions. "For example, 
you don't take aspirin together with Coumadin (an anti-coagulant), because it 
can cause internal bleeding," he said. 
He also steps out of his work space to explain how to administer medications. 
You don't take a particular anti-inflammatory drug on an empty stomach, for 
instance, and you avoid dairy products when taking an antibiotic. 
"Many times, the physician doesn't have enough time to explain things," Perlman 
said. "Or else, the patient doesn't listen. You're in the doctor's office, and 
your mind is going in so many different directions. Anybody can forget what the 
doctor told them." 
The task is made more difficult because of the diversity of languages. 
Perlman's clerk, Hortensia Zaldivar, talks to the Spanish-speaking customers. A 
pair of Vietnamese students who work part-time handle the non-English-speaking 
Asians. 
Occasionally, Perlman digs out a well-thumbed copy of "Say It in Chinese," a 
phrase book that can lead him haltingly through such questions as, "Do you have 
a cold?" 
"The real problem is with my pronunciation," Perlman said. 
The pharmacist, whose wife, Myrna, and two daughters have occasionally staffed 
the store, had to give up his delivery service a few years ago. But he himself 
still delivers medicines to homebound customers. 
"He's been over on our street several times this year," Rowe said. 
Mostly, though, the patients in Perlman's store last week were lamenting the 
prospect of losing a friend. "I'll tell you what kind of a pharmacist Sam has 
been," said the recently widowed Gwen Bacon, standing near the prescription 
counter. "He told me to call him whenever I needed him. When my husband was 
running a temperature of 104 one night and he needed some medication, I called 
Sam. He said, 'Meet me at the store,' and he came down and met me here at 9 
o'clock at night." 
She wiped away some tears. "Where are we going to find another pharmacist like 
that?" 
Perlman said it's too late to think of relocating. "It's the 12th hour, so to 
speak," he said. He has sold his inventory and records to another druggist and 
made plans to retire. "I didn't expect to be going out this way," he said. 
Celia Arcos picked up her prescription and headed for the door. "Now, you take 
care," she said, giving Perlman a last appraising look. 
She stopped near a case of toothpaste and deodorants and turned back. "It's 
funny," she said. "I'm telling you that now. It used to be you telling me." 
