COPTER PILOT EN ROUTE TO EXAM SURVIVES REAL-LIFE TEST 
Pilot Ed Mauldin was flying to Van Nuys Airport to take a test for his flight 
instructor's certification Friday when his rented helicopter lost power and 
dropped 600 feet to the ground. 
In a maneuver called the "full down auto rotation," Mauldin, 36, of Lancaster 
safely landed the craft on a construction site in Panorama City. Uninjured, he 
was driven to Whiteman Airport in Pacoima where he rented another helicopter 
and flew to Van Nuys to take the test. 
He didn't pass. 
"My nerves were shot," Mauldin said. "My flight test was rescheduled. I took 
the orals and did well but not enough to pass. I'll have to go back on a better 
day." 
Flight Test Maneuver 
Ironically, the full down auto rotation maneuver is included in the flight test 
for instructor certification by the Federal Aviation Administration, Mauldin 
said. 
"Maybe this one will count," he said of the maneuver he used to put down the 
ailing copter. 
"He did it, but it will be up to his test instructor" to determine whether the 
maneuver counts toward his certification, FAA investigator Lenny Schaustal 
said. 
Mauldin, a commercial helicopter and fixed-wing pilot, said he rented the 
copter at Whiteman. While on the way, an engine problem developed, and the 
craft lost power to its top rotor about 8:30 a.m., he said. 
The helicopter started to drop. Mauldin said he used the rotation maneuver, in 
which the craft is pointed forward as it drops, to allow wind to turn the top 
rotor and provide enough lift to glide the craft to a landing. 
Mauldin, who had never made an emergency landing, said the copter dropped to 
the ground in about four seconds. 
"It's a very safe maneuver," he said. "You just have to have a spot to land. It 
is pretty well straight down. You don't have much of a choice of where to go." 
Mauldin landed the copter on a lot cleared for a construction project near 
Woodman Avenue and Terra Bella Street. 
The helicopter, rented from Watson Helicopters, was not damaged, Schaustal 
said. A preliminary investigation concluded that an engine belt failed, cutting 
off power to the rotor, he said. 
