TOWER PRESSED TO PULL OUT BUT BUSH VOWS TO WIN; 
VOTES OF CONSERVATIVE DEMOCRATS SOUGHT FOR SHOWDOWN IN SENATE 
President Bush vowed Friday to "win the battle" to save the endangered 
nomination of John Tower as secretary of defense, but pressure mounted from 
Democrats to have Tower withdraw and avoid a bruising Senate showdown next 
week. 
"I do not believe he (Tower) is going down the drain," Bush told reporters in 
Tokyo after attending the funeral of Japanese Emperor Hirohito. Despite 
Thursday night's rejection of Tower by the Senate Armed Services Committee, "I 
will do whatever I can to talk to individual members (of the Senate) and have 
them know how strongly I feel about it," the President said. 
Quayle Meets With Tower 
At the White House, Vice President Dan Quayle and Senate Minority Leader Bob 
Dole (R-Kan.) met with Tower to plan strategy. The GOP plan will depend heavily 
on a series of one-on-one sessions between Bush and conservative Democrats, 
whose support is crucial to Tower's chances. 
Although disappointed, Dole said, Tower is "optimistic. He's still hopeful." 
However, one influential conservative Democrat, Sen. David L. Boren of 
Oklahoma, delivered a blow to White House hopes by calling on Tower to withdraw 
for the sake of the country and of President Bush. 
And well-placed members of both parties agreed that Tower's nomination now 
faces long odds in a Senate floor fight that is scheduled to begin Wednesday. 
Rejected on Party Lines 
"We need a defense secretary that can garner more unified support. Polarization 
on a nominee of this importance is not good for the country," Boren said in a 
statement. The Armed Services panel's vote against Tower was 11 to 9, along 
party lines. 
Dole, directing the uphill effort to get Tower confirmed, said that he would be 
satisfied with a one-vote victory. 
"If you win, nobody remembers the score," he said. 
In the Senate, composed of 55 Democrats and 45 Republicans, it would require 
only 50 votes to confirm Tower because the vice president could break a 50-50 
tie by voting for the nomination. 
Counting on All Republicans 
Dole said he is counting all 45 Republican senators as pro-Tower votes and 
noted that Bush will meet personally with a dozen Democrats in hopes of winning 
the needed number of converts. 
Other Senate sources said, however, that a few GOP lawmakers might vote against 
Tower, including Sen. Larry Pressler of South Dakota, who has said in the past 
that Tower's name should be withdrawn because of the potential for conflicts of 
interest involving the nominee's lobbying work for defense firms. More 
recently, Pressler has said that he would "reserve judgment" on the nomination. 
Senate Democratic Whip Alan Cranston of California, a member of the official 
U.S. delegation traveling with Bush, told reporters in Tokyo that the 
nomination was doomed by the committee's negative vote. 
Another Democratic leader, who asked not to be identified, added: 
"I can't imagine the Administration trying to get more votes in a losing cause 
when it will be just an embarrassment for the President and further beating up 
of Tower." 
Sees Tower Withdrawing 
A Democratic congressional leader, who also requested anonymity, said he was 
convinced that Tower would relent and withdraw his nomination. "Our crowd 
thinks the way this will work is that Bush can be seen as standing up for Tower 
while Tower can say he has decided not to put all the senators and the 
President to any more travail," he said. 
Several Democrats said that Bush should now concentrate on nominating someone 
previously confirmed for the post -- such as former Defense Secretaries Donald 
H. Rumsfeld, a Republican who served during the Administration of Gerald R. 
Ford, or James R. Schlesinger, a Democrat who served under Richard M. Nixon. 
But Bush insisted that he will not give up on Tower, declaring that his 
last-ditch push for his nominee is "not too little and not too late." 
" . . . I'm going to fight it right through to the end," he said in a press 
conference before leaving Tokyo for a state visit to Beijing. 
Bush said that he is looking forward to talking with senators "who still have 
an open mind" and would make his case for the nomination "as forcefully as I 
can." 
Bush Calls Bentsen 
In a direct appeal to one key conservative Democrat, Bush called Sen. Lloyd 
Bentsen of Texas and asked him not to make up his mind yet. Bentsen said late 
Friday that he told Bush he would wait until he sees the FBI report on Tower. 
However, a few Democrats began disclosing plans to vote against Tower. Sen. Max 
Baucus (D-Mont.) announced that he could not support Tower, saying that the 
public deserves a defense secretary of "unquestionable integrity." Tower, who 
has been besieged by allegations of heavy drinking, womanizing and close ties 
to the defense industry, should withdraw and avert the brutal floor fight, 
Baucus said. 
Like many other senators, Boren said that the opposition of Sen. Sam Nunn 
(D-Ga.), chairman of the Armed Services Committee, has influenced his stance on 
the Tower nomination. 
Accused of 'Partisan Binge' 
Although Dole accused Nunn of going on a "partisan binge" by turning his 
committee against Tower, Boren asserted: "There is no other member of the 
Senate who has greater integrity than Sen. Sam Nunn. Time and time again he has 
been criticized by Democrats for not being partisan enough, and I am absolutely 
convinced that his vote accurately represents what he feels is best for the 
country." 
Others -- including many members of both parties -- said that they would 
reserve a decision but would insist on reading the massive, seven-chapter FBI 
report on allegations concerning the 63-year-old former Texas senator, who was 
once chairman of the committee that voted to deny him the top defense post. 
No one looked forward to the Senate debate, which promised to be bitter, 
sharply partisan and intensely personal. 
"It'll be unpleasant for everyone," Nunn said. "But it will be part of the 
democratic process . . . . I would have preferred that we never had this agony 
to begin with." 
Sen. Howell Heflin (D-Ala.), one of the Southern conservatives invited by Bush 
to a White House meeting to discuss the embattled nomination, said that he 
would approach the issue with an open mind. 
In his Senate dealings with Tower, he never saw him consume too much liquor, 
Heflin noted, and he added: "I liked him. He was a friend of mine." 
Influenced by Nunn 
But he said also that he has great respect for the judgment of Nunn, who said 
that Tower's drinking problems ruled him out for a post in which he would be 
equivalent to "deputy commander in chief" with a key role in any use of nuclear 
weapons. 
Sen. Trent Lott (R-Miss.), addressing the Conservative Political Action 
Conference, declared that he sees a conspiracy at work among anti-Tower forces. 
"Do you think this thing with John Tower hasn't been orchestrated?" Lott asked. 
"The real plan is to get John Tower out of the way so, hopefully, they can 
bring along a weaker secretary of defense. . . . They want John Tower out of 
the way because he has been strong on defense, because he has been a 
conservative and because he is a friend of the President. 
"The President . . . knows he's not a saint, he's not asking that we canonize 
him," Lott added. "He's asking that we give him the man he chose." 
However, Nunn rejected the Republican criticism, saying: "I've noticed that, 
when I agree with the Republicans, I'm called a statesman. When I disagree, I'm 
called a partisan." 
Bentsen, the former Democratic vice presidential candidate and one of the 
Democrats Bush invited to the White House, is regarded as a likely pro-Tower 
vote because he praised the nominee during the opening hearings before the 
Armed Services Committee. 
The two men represented Texas in the Senate together for 14 years and often 
teamed up to advance the state's interests but never had a warm personal or 
social relationship, a Bentsen aide said. 
Could Save the Day 
Although some Republican sources said that Bentsen's backing of Tower could 
save the day for his fellow Texan, Bentsen's spokesman said that he is 
undecided. 
Sen. J. James Exon (D-Neb.) said after the committee's vote that Bush could 
salvage a victory on the Senate floor if he "puts on a full-court press." 
Jack Nelson reported from Tokyo and William J. Eaton reported from Washington. 
