MUSIC; 
DEAR PUCCINI: MY LOVE LIFE HAS GONE TO POT; WHAT DO YOU SUGGEST?; 
OPERA: ALTHOUGH NOT BILLED AS AN ADVICE-TO-THE-LOVELORN PIECE, 'TURANDOT,' 
WHICH OPENS FRIDAY AT THE PERFORMING ARTS CENTER, CONTAINS A STRONG MESSAGE 
ABOUT RELATIONS BETWEEN THE SEXES. 
Opera generally isn't regarded as a place to turn for Advice to the Lovelorn. 
But it's long been a pet theory of this writer that Puccini's "Turandot" has 
something vital to say about power relations between the sexes. 
On the surface, "Turandot," which opens Friday at the Orange County Performing 
Arts Center in Costa Mesa, might not appear to offer contemporary audiences 
much in the way of serious commentary on love relationships. 
After all, the work is based on a fairy tale about a beautiful-but-cruel 
princess who kills those who would love her. 
But as with all enduring myths, beneath the entertainment-oriented particulars 
of the story lie some universal truths. 
Other composers had tackled this subject before Puccini began composing it in 
1921. Antonio Bazzini, Puccini's professor at the Milan Conservatory, wrote a 
"Turanda" in 1867, and Ferruccio Busoni wrote a "Turandot" in 1917. (Elements 
of the Busoni opera reappear in Puccini's, but greatly transformed.) 
Puccini had been hunting for new material and new heroines who were not in the 
passive Butterfly or Mimi mold. Turandot, the icy princess, fit the bill. 
As it turned out, the work would be the composer's swan song. In fact, he did 
not live to finish it. But more of that later. 
The story has basically a mystery plot: 
Wooers for the Princess's hand must submit to a trial in which she poses three 
Sphinxian riddles. If they can answer them, they win her hand and the throne of 
China. If they fail, they must accept the penalty, which is beheading. 
Turandot is so beautiful that there is no end of suitors. But all fail the 
test. Then, one day, an Unknown Prince arrives; his encounter with Turandot is 
the subject of Puccini's opera. 
But the real mystery extends beyond the answers to the riddles or the name of 
the Unknown Prince. 
To understand the point, some background information is provided in Turandot's 
cruelly demanding Act II aria, "In questa Reggia." She explains that thousands 
of years ago, one of her ancestors -- the Princess Lou-Ling -- was carried off, 
ravished and murdered by an invading warlord. In revenge, Turandot, who now 
embodies the spirit of Lou-Ling, will take the life of any man who desires her. 
One must accept the legitimacy of her claim. There has been a terrible crime of 
aggression and misused power against a woman by a man. The question is: How can 
such a brutal crime be expiated? 
The opera will propose various solutions, rejecting each one until posing the 
answer. 
First is Turandot's solution: blood for blood, revenge through more murders. 
But how many will it take to pay for the original crime? An endless series of 
executions have turned China into a charnel house, as the three court 
ministers, Ping, Pang and Pong, lament. Revenge, obviously, is not the answer. 
Nor, interestingly, is turning the tables on Turandot by solving the riddles. 
The Unknown Prince gives the right answers, thereby winning power over 
Turandot. But he wants more than that, and the opera proposes that trading one 
kind of power for another is not the solution. 
When Turandot protests that no man will take her willingly, the Unknown Prince 
rejects the path of repeating the original rape. He wants her to love him. 
He proposes a new riddle: If she can find out his name before dawn, she may 
kill him. 
Turandot agrees and orders that no one in Peking is to sleep until his name is 
discovered. 
In desperation, the three ministers and the people seek out the prince and 
offer him bribes, threats and entreaties to flee. Ping conjures up horrifying 
images of soldiers roving through the streets, banging at doors, demanding the 
prince's name and killing those who cannot give it. Of course, no one can. 
Still, the prince refuses to reveal his identity. 
At this point, soldiers drag in the prince's father and the servant Liu who 
secretly loves the prince. Sizing up the situation quickly, she swears that 
only she knows his name. 
Turandot orders the girl tortured until she reveals it. 
After great agony, Liu stabs herself to death to keep the secret but not before 
predicting that Turandot will love the prince as much as she does. 
Here Puccini and his librettists, Giuseppi Adami and Renato Simoni, take an 
enormous gamble and -- for many people -- lose it. Liu is sacrificed for 
Turandot and quite frankly many don't feel that the icy princess is worth it. 
But her death serves as the turning point. 
Liu is as innocent as Lou-Ling was. Her act of self-sacrifice at long last 
calms the bloodthirsty, superstitious people, transforms the three cynical 
ministers and even prompts Turandot to realize that she loves the prince. When 
she declares her love for the prince, he, in a transport of emotion, reveals 
his name: Calaf the son of Timur. 
At first, Turandot is intoxicated with the knowledge and summons everyone to 
announce her triumph. But she quickly abjures the power, the two are united and 
the kingdom rejoices in the promise of the future. 
Both have rejected the solution of power over one another by willingly giving 
the power of life and death to the other. 
At this point in the opera, one longs to hear the crowning love duet between 
the two. But it will never come, at least not as Puccini would have written it. 
Puccini died after composing the music for the scene of Liu's death. Conductor 
Arturo Toscanini, Puccini's longtime friend, assigned opera composer Franco 
Alfano the unenviable task of completing the opera from Puccini's sketches. 
For the climactic love duet, Puccini had indicated what he wanted: "Find here 
the characteristic, lovely, unusual melody." 
He did not live to find it. Alfano also did not find it. Alfano has been 
criticized for not being a Puccini. But then, who else was? 
Conducting the premiere at La Scala, Milan, on April 25, 1926, Toscanini went 
so far as to put down the baton after the last measures that Puccini wrote, 
turn to the audience and declare that the opera was over. In subsequent 
performances, he conducted the rest of the act as completed by Alfano. 
Perhaps the melody could never be found, and perhaps this adds even more to the 
mystique of "Turandot." It remains a dream as is, for many, the ideal 
relationship between the sexes. 
 Opera Pacific will present Puccini's "Turandot," Friday through March 4, at 
the Orange County Performing Arts Center, 600 Town Center Drive, in Costa Mesa. 
Tickets: $20 to $55. Information: (714) 546-7372. 
