ORTEGA CALLS A CEASE-FIRE; 
PRESSES FOR CONTRAS TO DISBAND 
President Daniel Ortega today ordered a unilateral halt to all offensive 
military operations and said the U.S.-supported Contra rebels should disband so 
Nicaragua can peacefully change governments. 
Late Tuesday, President-elect Violeta Barrios de Chamorro also told the 
Honduras-based rebels to lay down their weapons immediately. 
"The causes of the civil war in Nicaragua have disappeared. There is no reason 
for more war," the leader of the National Opposition Union said in a radio 
address. 
In a statement issued by his press office, Ortega said the unilateral halt to 
military activity is aimed at encouraging the 10,000 Contras to demobilize 
quickly and quietly. 
Ortega also urged the Honduran government to dismantle Contra base camps near 
the Nicaraguan border and asked the Bush Administration to end all U.S. aid to 
them. 
In Washington, Secretary of State James A. Baker III told lawmakers today that 
conditions for the Contras' safe repatriation were "rapidly being created." 
He acknowledged the bitterness arising from the prolonged guerrilla war but 
said: "This issue can be resolved, and we think it will be resolved. The war is 
over in Nicaragua." 
The Contra war against the Sandinistas, who came to power in a July, 1979, 
revolution, has claimed 30,000 lives. The rebels' refusal to lay down arms has 
been an obstacle to regional peace initiatives. 
In Honduras today, rebel spokesman Alejandro Acevedo said the Contras had 
informed Chamorro's UNO that they hope to meet soon about disbanding, although 
they would prefer to remain a fighting force to ensure that Ortega steps aside. 
"Without us here, there is no one to insist that Ortega step down," he said. 
"But under the right conditions, we would demobilize sooner." 
Honduran President Leonardo Callejas this week said the opposition's victory in 
democratic elections in Nicaragua means that the Contras should leave promptly. 
He acknowledged that Nicaragua is "in a period of political transition" but 
said, "The insurgent forces of the Nicaraguan counterrevolution should not 
continue on our national territory." 
The Sandinistas and the Contras had agreed on a cease-fire in early 1988, which 
was later extended. But the Sandinistas lifted it last Nov. 1, after a spate of 
Contra attacks. 
The war, and the accompanying economic devastation, played a large part in 
popular discontent and contributed to the Sandinistas' election defeat. 
Five Central American presidents called last August for dismantling the rebels, 
but the Contras had been able to resist such moves because Washington 
maintained humanitarian aid until the elections. 
The Bush Administration has said it will soon lift its economic sanctions 
against Nicaragua and grant financial aid to the new government. 
Meanwhile, in Havana's first official comment on the Sandinista defeat, Cuban 
Vice President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez today said the defeat of the Marxist 
Sandinista's "hurt . . . but does not humble" Cuba. 
