FADE TO BLACK; 
MEMORABLE MOVIES THAT DIDN'T MAKE THE CUT AT THE ACADEMY NOMINATIONS 
With the official slate of Academy Award nominations announced, a lid was shut 
on the film year of 1989. Movie lovers of the future will squint at these 
lists, whittled down further by the awards themselves on the 29th of March, to 
get the shape of the year cinematically. 
So, before the films that didn't make the cut fade away entirely, before they 
go into the video vault and emerge with a little something ineffable missing, 
let us remember a handful of the special ones a final time, commend them to 
memory like a filmic "Farenheit 451" so that we stretch out their time with us 
a little longer. 
From the murmurs I've heard around, there are more than a few people wistful 
that Reizl Bozyk wasn't nominated in the Best Supporting Actress category. It's 
always fun when, in all cheerful naivete, American movies "discover" a 
performer who's been an open secret in another country or in the theater -- 
which might as well be another country to most Americans. Those who fall into 
this category this year include: Klaus Maria Brandauer (back this year in the 
foreign film nominee, "Hanussen"); Alan Rickman, "Die Hard's" suave villain; 
last year's big noise, Olympia Dukakis (who has one scene in "Working Girl"); 
and the Yiddish theater's Bozyk, who wrapped up "Crossing Delancey" and tucked 
it into her apron pocket. 
There are favorite scenes and favorite scenes in "Crossing Delancey" between 
Bozyk as this sturdy grandmother and Amy Irving as her adoring granddaughter. 
One of my own is the self-defense class, which pairs off a dozen or so of these 
feisty Lower East Side bubbies, practicing being victim and attacker. Heaven 
help the misguided purse-snatcher who mugs one of these one-woman burglar 
alarms; he'll deserve what he gets. Bozyk is sparrow-bright and not what you 
might call unschooled in matters of scene-stealing, yet her heart seems as vast 
as her craft and her creation of a universal, nurturing grandmother (Jewish has 
only a little to do with it) is a classic. 
That supporting actress category this year was a melee; there were probably 
more deserving performers left out at the cut here than in any other group. 
Apparently, not enough Academy members got to see the year's only bona fide 
sleeper, "Bagdad Cafe," writer-director Percy Adlon's off-beat observations 
about the triumphs of tenacity. If they had, you might have expected a 
nomination for Marianne Sagebrecht, one of its two electrifying stars. 
Fortunately, the music branch was alert to the film and because of the 
nomination of its haunting song, "Calling You," (one of only three selected 
this year) "Bagdad Cafe" will turn up again during the membership screenings. 
Voters can then see what they overlooked, although Sagebrecht's unique and 
delicate comedic talent may yet have its day, since she and Adlon are finishing 
a third film together right now, "Rosalie Goes Shopping" for which Bob Telson 
will again do the music. 
In its gentle, uninsistent way, "Bagdad Cafe" is about communication among 
strangers and about finding and building on one's bedrock talents, no matter 
how humble. Affluent Austrian traveler Sagebrecht (whom some may remember as 
the love-besotted star of "Sugarbaby") is stranded in the Mojave desert; she 
speaks no English, through a suitcase mix-up she has only her husband's clothes 
and, seemingly, her only useful talent is for cleaning and orderliness. From 
those simple-enough beginnings, she creates magic, spreading a bounteous and 
enveloping warmth and love around her. CCH Pounder, her co-star, is formidable 
as the stressed-out young grandmother who owns the Godforsaken motel where 
Sagebrecht lands. But, the tremulous delicacy and inventiveness of performance 
artist Sagebrecht, making love bloom in the desert, is the film's most powerful 
memory. 
Among the notable errors of omission this year was "Dead Ringers," which failed 
to show in any category -- not even its profligately beautiful art direction or 
its seamless special effects. It's another hint that anything un-cheerful may 
have a rough time of it today, and David Cronenberg's exploration of the darker 
recesses of twin souls was far from light. But the non-nomination of Jeremy 
Irons' dual performance is the real shocker. Perhaps he did it with too much 
ease, with a brilliance that was almost offhand, creating two identities so 
subtly and so surely that without clues from clothes or haircuts, that only 
from seeing the face or the body of one of his twin doctors, you knew which 
brother you had before you. 
In another case of avoidance of serious subjects, the complete shutout of "A 
World Apart" left three exceptional performances unnoticed, as well as the 
direction of Chris Menges and the screenplay of Shawn Slobo, writing with 
eloquence about South Africa and her murdered mother, Ruth First. Barbara 
Hershey as the indomitable First, called Diana Roth in the screenplay, the 
first white woman jailed under South Africa's infamous 90-day detention law, 
was perhaps not a showy enough role for the taste of the voters. (Or, 
pragmatically, perhaps the fact that, like "Bagdad Cafe," it was not a widely 
screened film during "for your consideration" time had something crucial to do 
with its fate.) But it was a brilliant, controlled and biting performance, 
another in the growing sequence of achievements by Hershey. 
Johdi May, who played her daughter, Molly, was another of those bitter 
disappointments among no-show supporting actress nominations. Sweet-shy, 
translucently true, May's slow maturing from sheltered little girl to 
clear-eyed knowledgeable teen-ager was exquisitely calibrated. 
And finally, "A World Apart" had Linda Mvusi, as the Roth family housekeeper, 
second-mother to the lonely Molly and one of her conduits to understanding the 
real horrors of life in one of South Africa's segregated townships. It is 
perhaps a tribute to director Menges that Mvusi, a working architect in 
Zimbabwe, who unlike young Jodhi May, had no acting training before this film, 
was as wrenchingly effective as she was as the sister of a young slain African 
National Congress leader. 
Like Reizl Bozyk, Barnard Hughes went beyond the stereotype of "the Irish 
father" to create a parent everyone could identify with in "Da." Garrulous, a 
master of platitudes, a political Neanderthal and a barroom blowhard, this is 
the sort of father you honor because you must, but whose biggest roadblock to 
letting himself be loved is the man himself. What gave the film its undeniable 
tug were the complexities with which Hughes colored this dear, trying man -- 
that and the marvelous interplay between Hughes and Martin Sheen as his 
exasperated Americanized son, left struggling to sort out his emotions about 
his "da." 
Perhaps "Bird's" single nomination (for sound), a shameful omission on any 
number of other levels, will at least spotlight the sweet power of Forest 
Whitaker's Charlie Parker and the utter fascination of Diane Venora as Chan. 
The meeting of these two was one of 1988's high points of subliminal erotic 
tension, along with the triangle set up by Keith Carradine, Linda Fiorentino 
and John Lone in "The Moderns." It's as sad that Christine Lahti's 
magnificently moving performance as the ex-activist mother in "Running on 
Empty" went ignored as it is appalling that its imprecise and superficial 
screenplay was nominated. (Over the screenplay of "Bagdad Cafe," or "Married to 
the Mob," over "Punchline," or "Working Girl"? Please!) 
There's one reference point to use in considering this year's list of 
nominations: David Lean's restored "Lawrence of Arabia." It's the hottest 
ticket on both coasts. When you can get in, you hear more talk about its 
freshness, its grandeur than a single other film in recent memory -- and that, 
despite the fact of its serious subject and its all-male cast, two of today's 
supposed anathemas. Which movie from 1988 can you possibly imagine resurrected 
or even watched, 27 years down the line? A film if not of grandeur, at least of 
authoritative inventiveness? You might put your money on "Who Framed Roger 
Rabbit." 
