A SHATTERED AFGHANISTAN FINDS NOTHING TO CELEBRATE 
We always knew the Soviets would leave, my Afghan friends and I, but we never 
thought it would be like this, with bloody anarchy stalking 2 million civilians 
in the winter-bound capital of Kabul. Somehow our naive idealism envisioned a 
joyous triumph, a liberation, a clear victory. We joked about being "on the 
first jeep into the liberated city of Kabul," a homecoming to a city I left 
days before the Soviet invasion. Noor Jehan, a fiery-tongued, widowed refugee, 
expressed the passion of millions when she cried, "If God wills, we will run 
toward Afghanistan, we will run barefoot as fast as we can, as soon as we hear 
that our homeland is free." 
In the darkest years of the war, few foreign analysts believed the Soviets 
would ever leave. There were grim predictions of Afghanistan becoming another 
Soviet republic, or the country being split. The Soviets had never retreated 
once they invaded, pundits pointed out, so we might as well accept Afghanistan 
as lost and control the damage. 
But there was a factor that simply would not fit into statistical calculations 
and political projections: the faith of the Afghan people. They truly believed 
they could repulse the Soviets, as the people of Afghanistan had sooner or 
later repulsed every invader in their history. Those who knew the Afghans well 
knew that they really would fight "till the last breath, till the last drop of 
blood," an oft-quoted phrase. No one ever "died" in the war; he or she "was 
martyred," and thus reserved a special place in Paradise. Yet Afghan faith was 
rarely fanatical. Most fighters wanted to live to fight another day, but 
bravely accepted the possibility of martyrdom. 
Certainly the advent of Mikhail S. Gorbachev and glasnost created a favorable 
climate for Soviet withdrawal, as the venture could be blamed on his 
predecessors. But it was the proud and lonely faith of the Afghan people that 
enabled them to go on fighting for nine years, like someone hoping to stay 
alive long enough to find a miracle drug. 
As the Soviets left, there were no jeeps rolling triumphantly into the besieged 
city of Kabul, no flowers for the moujahedeen freedom fighters, little enough 
celebration. Many mourned, for the Soviets had bombed civilians near the 
strategic Salang Tunnel just before the pullout began. The moujahedeen, not 
party to the Geneva Accords, were still fighting, tightening the noose around 
an ill-supplied city of frightened, cold, hungry civilians, many their 
supporters. 
Nor will there be a mass return of the 5 million refugees in Pakistan and Iran. 
Noor Jehan will not lead her family back to her broken village, barefoot on the 
cold stones, for the Soviets have left 10 million to 30 million land mines as a 
legacy to the people of Afghanistan. 
Still, the Soviets really are leaving. Western news coverage in recent months 
has been less of heroic Afghan resistance fighters and more of anxious young 
Soviet boys in Kabul, waiting for their numbers to come up in either the death 
lottery or the home lottery. The parallels with Vietnam are chilling. 
A messy war is now turning into a messy civil war. Communists and collaborators 
scramble for available visas, as Najibullah's government stumbles without its 
Soviet prop and Afghan soldiers, mostly reluctant conscripts, are caught in the 
middle. While Najibullah continues to insist that the People's Democratic Party 
is "a major power" in Afghanistan, moujahedeen representatives are equally 
insistent that there is no place for communists in a postwar government. 
The moujahedeen and their supporters are unlikely to be forgiving toward those 
whom they hold responsible for the deaths of a million Afghans. Unfortunately, 
it may be hard to tell who was really a collaborator and who a "good Muslim." 
Many high party officials will have the cash and connections to get out, while 
ordinary party members and young conscripts will be left to face a violent and 
unforgiving populace. 
A period of anarchy may follow the fall of Najibullah's government, as there is 
no nationally accepted leader. The Pakistan-based moujahedeen leadership 
remains fractured, despite plans to elect a transitional government. A few 
battle-proved commanders are much admired, but none universally. Many educated 
Afghans, particularly women, fear that the extreme fundamentalist faction, 
supported by the United States all these years, could establish a government 
based on an intolerant brand of Islam. Without U.S. guns and money, however, 
they are not likely to maintain the loyalty of the majority of non-fanatical 
Afghans for long. Factions may battle one another, as they have with varying 
degrees of hostility over the past nine years. The one hope is that, as the 
late poet Ustad Khalilullah Khalili said to me a few years ago, "People will 
soon tire of civil war. They have seen enough fighting and death." 
Another uncertainty is the fate of 20,000 children who were taken forcibly from 
their parents for "education" in the Soviet Union. Will they be returned to 
their families, or are they the seeds of future communist cadres? And what of 
several hundred Soviet prisoners ofwar? Will the moujahedeen release them, and 
if so, will these soldiers dare return home? 
Strangely, in all these years of covering the war and the refugees, no one I 
knew well had been killed. On my last visit to Pakistan, in December, I 
apprehensively asked about the moujahedeen who had escorted me on my two trips 
into the war zone, patient with my plodding pace, understanding of my fears. I 
sighed with relief when told they were all fine and still fighting. Then one 
night someone came and said, "I have bad news about Azim. He was martyred a few 
months ago." 
Azim Zarbakhsh, our wonderful flute-playing friend, our ecstatic Sufi with the 
long hair and the Rasputin beard. He would spout Pashtu and Farsi poetry on the 
spot, then launch into Afghan folk songs on his homemade wooden flute. He 
played in the houses of the wealthy and the rooms of the poor, preferring 
kebabs and tea to the fancy buffet dinners where he was embarrassed because he 
didn't know how to use a knife and fork. He was a wandering minstrel, a free 
spirit, a freedom fighter who died in the last months of the war. 
For the Afghans, this has been a righteous war, one they had no choice but to 
fight. Afghanistan has not known such destruction since the time of Genghis 
Khan. Observers estimate that 50% of the villages are in ruins and that roads, 
wells and irrigation systems are destroyed or fallen into disrepair. Now that 
the war is "over," now that the Afghans are no longer fighting the Soviets, but 
among themselves, the United States must support this nation of survivors in 
its efforts to rebuild. Ironically, the Soviet Union has pledged the largest 
amount so far toward reconstruction. 
