GOOD OR BAD, PAYTON IS TOO MUCH FOR TROJANS; 
HIS SHOOTING IS OFF, BUT HE HELPS OREGON STATE KEEP USC WINLESS IN PAC-10 
After scoring 17 points and getting 11 assists in a 74-65 victory over USC 
Thursday night at the Sports Arena, Oregon State guard Gary Payton was asked to 
evaluate himself. 
"I think we all played bad, especially me," Payton said. "I played terrible." 
Payton, the leading scorer in the Pacific 10 Conference, was as cold as an 
Alaskan night, missing 10 of 15 shots. 
George Raveling, USC coach, thought Payton was too hard on himself. 
"I didn't think Payton played terrible," Raveling said. "Maybe he said that 
because he didn't shoot well. 
"I think Gary Payton is a great player. He's taken average players and made a 
great team out of them. If he did play a bad game, he did contribute in other 
areas. 
"I would have liked a trade tonight. He could have played for me. The reality 
of it is, put him on either team and that team wins." 
The struggling Trojans, who fell to 7-13 overall and 0-9 in the Pacific 10 
Conference and have lost nine straight, certainly could have used Payton, one 
of the nation's best point guards. 
Guard Anthony Pendleton, USC's leading scorer, was hampered by a back injury, 
which limited him to just 4 minutes. With Pendleton sidelined, the Trojans 
lacked firepower. 
Rich Grande started in place of Pendleton, and Raveling made two other lineup 
changes in an effort to pump some life into the Trojans. Alan Pollard replaced 
Chris Munk at center, and guard Andy Olivarez started in place of forward Chris 
Moore. 
"I just decided that at this point in the season, we have to do something 
different," Raveling said. 
But the revamped Trojans didn't play any better than the old-look Trojans. 
USC was unable to handle Oregon State's pressure defense. The Trojans had 21 
turnovers and forced just 3. 
With the score tied, 48-48, USC committed 7 turnovers in its next 9 
possessions. 
Raveling said: "I feel bad for you guys (the media). It must challenge your 
literary ability to keep writing these stories, just as it challenges my 
coaching ability. 
The Beavers (14-4, 7-3), playing without forward Will Brantley, who was out 
with the flu and bronchitis, looked inconsistent against the Trojans. 
"I didn't know how we'd play without Will," Oregon State Coach Ralph Miller 
said. "Sometimes we played well and sometimes we played bad. We didn't have any 
consistency. We would get up by 10 and then they would come right back. And I'm 
not talking about once, but four or five times. 
"I think we'll need Will back (for Sunday's game at UCLA). We need his 
experience. Hopefully, he'll be back by Sunday." 
Earl Martin, who started in place of Brantley, had 14 points and 6 rebounds, 
and guard Eric Knox had 17 points. 
Trojan Notes 
Forward Ronnie Coleman led USC with 18 points and 8 rebounds and Chris Moore 
had 16 points off the bench. Guard Tyrone Fuller had 11 points. Oregon State 
Coach Ralph Miller, who is ending his 38-year coaching career, was honored in a 
pregame ceremony. USC gave Miller a trip to San Diego, a record album of the 
Trojan band and a videotape of the USC song girls. Miller also received his 
666th victory. . . . The Trojans play Oregon Saturday at 3 p.m. at the Sports 
Arena. 
