HEART ASSN. GALA: FUN, AEROBICS, DONATIONS 
It was the high society workout of the season, a cardiovascular romp-and-stomp 
and cash-flow bonanza for the local chapter of the American Heart Assn. 
We give it a 10, and you could definitely dance to it. 
As they have for the past 2 years, organizers of this season's "Heart to Heart 
Gala" imported a New York dance troupe to entertain during dinner on Saturday 
at Meridien Hotel in Newport Beach. 
But entertain isn't quite the right word -- although the dancers put on an 
elaborate show between dinner courses that included five costume changes and 
choreographed routines to songs ranging from Gershwin to Andrew Lloyd Webber. 
What they did was entreat, invite, cajole and otherwise hijack members of the 
fancy-dress audience onto the dance floor for aerobics. 
"This is a group that just wants to have fun," said gala chairwoman Tina 
Schafnitz, who wore a red-and-black Gildas gown made especially for the party, 
with one black and one red opera-length glove and one black and one red shoe. 
After cocktails and a browse around the silent auction room, the 350 guests 
entered a darkened dining room filled with billowing smoke and a full-blast 
recording of the theme from "2001." 
Within minutes, the dance floor was packed -- the tuxed and gowned party-goers 
doing the boogie-woogie with dancers in Spandex. 
"This is so much better than most of these kinds of parties, which are so 
boring," said Diane Clark, slightly winded from an energetic bop with her 
husband, Jim. "Usually by halfway through the meal, you're wondering how 
everybody at the table can get up and leave without making a scene." 
Halfway through a dinner that included salmon en croute, vichyssoise, filet 
mignon and white chocolate mousse, guests were hitched together in a rumba line 
shimmying through the tables to the tune of "Locomotion." 
The $200-per-person benefit was completely underwritten by Tom Siffermann and 
Dirk De Young of Woodview Development Corp. Lee Ann Siffermann, Tom's wife, was 
vice chairwoman of the event. 
Net proceeds, including money from the silent and live auctions, were estimated 
at $85,000, according to Schafnitz. Mingling with local notables were "L.A. 
Law" stars Michael Tucker and Jill Eikenberry. Tucker's cousin, Mark Miller, is 
president of the Orange County chapter of the American Heart Assn. 
