PRIEST ARRESTED DURING ANTI-ABORTION PROTEST SENTENCED TO 2 YEARS' PROBATION 
Father Edward (Bud) Kaicher, the first Catholic priest in San Diego County to 
be arrested during an anti-abortion protest, pleaded no contest Wednesday to a 
charge of criminal trespassing. 
Kaicher was sentenced to two years' probation for his part in the Sept. 30 
demonstration and ordered to stay at least 10 feet away from the entrances of 
the Family Planning Associates Medical Group in La Mesa. But El Cajon Municipal 
Judge Larrie R. Brainard was careful to note that Kaicher was not prohibited 
from continuing to participate in anti-abortion demonstrations. 
"Every citizen has the right to beat their own drum, to carry their sign," said 
Deputy Dist. Atty. David Rubin after Wednesday's hearing. "We're just saying do 
it in a legal fashion." 
The attorneys on the case were halfway through picking a jury for Kaicher's 
criminal trial when the priest decided to change his plea. The change of heart 
came about when he and lawyer Timothy Treadwell, a deacon in the Catholic 
Church, realized they would not be able to make the trial a forum for their 
anti-abortion views. 
Before the trial, Judge Brainard told the lawyers that criminal trespassing was 
the issue -- the only issue -- that would be addressed during the trial. Even 
so, the judge quizzed potential jurors on their views on abortion, and several 
asked to be excused, saying they could not overlook their strong feelings. 
"It was my desire and intent to use the trial as an opportunity to try the 
issue of abortion," Kaicher said after his sentencing Wednesday. "But, when the 
judge determined that the parameters within which the defense could operate 
would be strictly limited to the issue of trespassing, that made it 
impossible." 
"We were really there to discuss trespass. . . . If that was what they wanted 
to do, the law didn't really allow for that," said prosecutor Rubin. "Father 
Kaicher's beliefs, as a matter of law, really aren't relevant to that, although 
I know they are important to him." 
Rubin said he felt the judge's sentence was fair. "He's not being prevented 
from expressing his views. We're just interested in keeping the peace." 
Anti-abortion demonstrators have frequently targeted the Family Planning 
Associates clinic on Fletcher Parkway. The assemblies are usually peaceful, 
according to prosecutor Rubin. 
The demonstration on Sept. 30 was not much different. A group of about 25 
churchgoers from Catholic parishes in Santee and Lakeside gathered in the 
parking lot of the clinic and knelt to pray. Kaicher took his demonstration a 
few steps farther, right up to the double doors of the clinic, where patients 
were entering for abortions and other medical services. 
Held 'Choose Life' Sign 
Kaicher said he sat quietly with his back to the doors, holding a sign that 
read "Choose Life." The priest said he did not obstruct the door, and that a 
number of people did in fact pass him to enter the building. "My motivation was 
to be a sign to them that there's another option," he said. 
But clinic officials took a dim view of the priest's activities, and he was 
arrested by a security guard and turned over to La Mesa police. 
Kaicher, the 34-year-old director of the San Diego diocese's Youth Ministries 
program, is a seasoned protester. While an assistant pastor in Calexico, he 
demonstrated a number of times at the federal immigration detention facility in 
El Centro. Kaicher said he was protesting the way in which the government was 
handling Central American refugees and the way the refugees were treated inside 
the facility. 
But, Kaicher said, he has never been arrested before. In fact, the La Mesa 
incident was Kaicher's first anti-abortion protest. 
'Still Have an Uphill Battle' 
On Dec. 15, the bishop of the San Diego Diocese sent a letter to all priests 
outlining the status of the 1973 U.S. Supreme Court decision legalizing 
abortion. In the letter, Bishop Leo T. Maher wrote that, although the Supreme 
Court may agree to rehear Roe vs. Wade soon, "we will still have an uphill 
battle in the future." 
The letter reiterated the Catholic Church's strong anti-abortion stance and 
concluded with a call for action: "Let us continue to pray for the conversion 
of hearts, work for the repeal of anti-life legislation and support the efforts 
of pro-life groups." 
Although defense attorney Treadwell said the letter could be construed as 
official encouragement to priests to get involved in anti-abortion issues, 
Kaicher said: "I don't think it would be fair to say that he in any way was 
encouraging us to become any more actively involved in protests." 
Kaicher said he was acting out of his own personal commitment and said he 
didn't set out to be arrested. "But, quite frankly, I was willing to risk that 
to make the statement." 
Kaicher said he will continue to participate in local anti-abortion 
demonstrations, while abiding by the terms of his probation. "The judge has 
said that I have every right to exercise my First Amendment right of freedom of 
speech and the freedom to protest," he said. "I will continue to be involved in 
speaking on behalf of the unborn at every opportunity I have." 
Declined to Discuss Case 
Officials at the Family Planning Associates in La Mesa repeatedly declined to 
discuss the case, citing a strict "no comment" policy at the clinic. 
Planned Parenthood spokeswoman Lenore Lowe said Family Planning Associates 
clinic has always tried to remain out of the public eye, especially in abortion 
debates. Planned Parenthood and Womancare, another local clinic, have 
historically been more active in fighting anti-abortion forces. 
"We have a very strong advocacy program for reproductive health care, which 
includes a platform on abortion rights," Lowe said. Anti-abortion protesting 
has been common in San Diego for quite a few years, and Womancare has been the 
recent target of a variety of harassment, she said. 
1984 Firebombing 
Most notable in the history of anti-abortion activity in the county was the 
1984 firebombing of the now-closed Birth Control Institute on El Cajon 
Boulevard. Last year, the Rev. Dorman Owens of the Bible Missionary Fellowship 
Church in Santee and several of his associates were convicted of crimes linked 
to an attempted bombing of the Alvarado Medical Center. 
With those exceptions, anti-abortion activity in the county has been peaceful 
and somewhat sporadic, Lowe said. 
