CENSUS WILL COUNT 'UNMARRIED PARTNERS' FOR FIRST TIME 
In a move that reflects the changing definition of the American family, the 
Census Bureau for the first time will attempt in its 1990 population survey to 
count the number of people who consider themselves "unmarried partners." 
The new designation will be added to such traditional categories as "single," 
"married," "roommate" and "boarder," Donald Hernandez, chief of the bureau's 
marriage and family statistics branch, said in an interview Wednesday. 
The new category will give government officials -- as well as policy makers, 
marketers and others who rely on census data -- a better handle on the number 
of unmarried couples in committed relationships, both heterosexual and 
homosexual. 
"This is an important milestone," said David Link, a member of the city Task 
Force on Family Diversity in Los Angeles. "It marks the first step by the 
federal government toward recognizing the concept of domestic partnership." 
Hernandez said the main purpose of the new category is to identify unmarried 
persons of the opposite sex. 
"We already know that half of the people who get married today were living as 
unmarried partners before they got married," he said. "It's a major change in 
the family formation process, and it's important that we get a handle on this 
group. As a byproduct, we will also be able to identify unmarried partners of 
the same sex." 
An accurate count of unmarried couples is important because many public and 
private initiatives are launched on the basis of census data. For example, the 
number of unmarried partners will probably be seized upon by both advocates and 
opponents of local "domestic partnership" ordinances. 
That in turn could affect the growing debate on whether to grant such spousal 
benefits as health insurance coverage, hospital visitation rights and 
bereavement leaves to unmarried partners. 
The "unmarried partner" designation on the census questionnaire reflects the 
growing acceptance of the concept of family diversity. A poll last fall by 
Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co. found that only 22% of those surveyed 
defined families in a legalistic way as "a group related by blood, marriage or 
adoption." 
In contrast, 74% defined the family in more emotional terms, such as "a group 
who love and care for each other." 
A Time Magazine/Cable News Network poll last November found that, by a margin 
of 54% to 37%, Americans thought that homosexual couples should be permitted to 
receive medical and life-insurance benefits from a partner's policy. However, 
they opposed the concept of homosexual marriage by 69% to 23%. 
Gary L. Bauer, president of the Washington, D.C.-based Family Research Council, 
a conservative think tank that aims to preserve the "traditional" family, said: 
"While we are troubled by the phenomenon of unmarried couples living together 
in a sexual relationship, that does not mean we are vehemently opposed to 
learning how many people are engaged in such a life style." 
Bauer, a White House domestic policy aide during the Reagan Administration, 
added that "it might be useful to see the figures because they may in fact show 
a lot fewer people in such relationships than is commonly believed." 
In a rough calculation based on a 1988 population survey, census officials last 
year estimated that of the nation's 91 million households, 2.6 million are made 
up of unmarried couples of the opposite sex, while 1.6 million involve 
unmarried couples of the same sex. 
Ivy Young, director of the Families Project of the National Gay and Lesbian 
Task Force, applauded the inclusion of the new category, but she criticized the 
Census Bureau for failing to alert affected groups that the question exists or 
to explain what "unmarried partner" means. 
"There has been no outreach effort, no community education, no discussion with 
lesbian and gay activists about how to best ensure that the question is 
understood and answered accurately," she said. On the other hand, the bureau 
has developed outreach programs for such undercounted groups as blacks, 
Latinos, the homeless and illegal immigrants. 
Moreover, Young added, "fear and apprehension" of government intrusion among 
gay men and lesbians -- unless countered by explicit promises of 
confidentiality -- "could lead to a serious undercount of same-sex couples." 
