GREEK COURT DROPS WEAPONS CHARGE ON ARAB WANTED IN U.S. 
A Palestinian sought by the United States in the 1982 bombing of a Pan American 
jetliner was cleared Monday of illegal weapons charges after a homemade knife 
was found in his prison cell. 
The court decision came after an anonymous telephone caller said a bomb had 
been planted in the heavily guarded courthouse. 
Bomb squad units with dogs searched the court in Piraeus, Athens' main port, 
for two hours but failed to find any explosives. 
The trial then resumed and Mohammed Rashid, 39, was cleared of the misdemeanor 
weapons charges. He was returned to Korydallos prison, where he has been jailed 
since his arrest in Piraeus in May. 
"I had it (the knife) because I fear for my life. I also fear they may 
extradite me to the United States," Rashid told reporters in the courtroom. 
Found During Jail Search 
Prison guards found the knife and a file in Rashid's cell during a random 
search on Friday. 
"I don't think the objects found in his cell could really be used to harm 
anyone," prosecutor Zacharias Kokkinakis told the court. 
The three-member panel of judges acted on the prosecutor's suggestion and voted 
2 to 1 in favor of acquitting Rashid. 
Rashid is wanted by U.S. authorities on charges of planting a bomb that 
exploded aboard a Pan Am jet over Hawaii. A Japanese teen-ager was killed and 
15 people were injured in the blast. The explosion blew a hole in the fuselage, 
but the plane was able to land safely in Hawaii. 
The Greek Supreme Court twice has delayed a decision on whether to extradite 
Rashid. The case was further delayed last month when three Supreme Court judges 
resigned after a terrorist group responsible for killing a Supreme Court 
prosecutor threatened to act against court officials if Rashid were extradited. 
Washington has called the case a test of Greek willingness to cooperate in the 
fight against terrorism and warned Athens that relations could be damaged 
unless Rashid is handed over. 
Rashid was arrested after a U.S. tip last May when he was in Greece on a 
four-day transit visa. He served five months in jail for using a false Syrian 
passport and has been held since, pending a decision on extradition. 
