WESTERN EMPIRE S&amp;L SEIZED; SUIT THREATENED 
Federal regulators seized Western Empire Savings &amp; Loan in Irvine on 
Friday, prompting angry threats from the New York investment group that bought 
the S&amp;L 13 months ago that it will sue the federal government. 
Regulators took over the thrift after deciding that it was operating in an 
unsafe and unsound manner and had inadequate capital with no prospects for 
obtaining more. They put the S&amp;L in receivership and transferred its assets 
to a newly created thrift called Western Empire Federal Savings &amp; Loan. 
The new S&amp;L will open Monday for business as usual under control of the 
Resolution Trust Corp., the federal agency that handles failed banks and 
thrifts. The S&amp;L has $491 million in assets and $312.4 million in 8,205 
deposit accounts, which will continue to be federally insured. 
Castle Harlan Inc., a New York investment group that paid $15.8 million in cash 
to purchase Western Empire in December, 1988, disputed the regulators' view of 
the S&amp;L's capital base and called the takeover "an unconscionable abuse of 
power that attacks the very foundations of our economic system." 
The New York investors charged in a prepared statement that regulators "have 
confiscated our investment, which they urged us to make, without due process." 
The group called it "expropriation, pure and simple." 
Castle Harlan said it plans to sue the government for breach of contract and 
unconstitutional seizure of its property. Rob Wages, an executive with the 
group, said legal action is one of several options that the investors are 
considering. 
Western Empire is the second Orange County thrift that regulators have seized 
this month. A week earlier, they seized Huntington Savings &amp; Loan in 
Huntington Beach. 
Without government assistance or guarantees, Castle Harlan purchased the 
insolvent Western Empire, and came up with a rescue plan that was approved by 
regulators. 
That plan relied on securities trading, including a concentration of high-risk, 
high-yield corporate securities known as junk bonds. At the end of September, 
Western Empire had $191.8 million, or 33.8% of its $567.8 million in assets, in 
junk bonds. In addition, it had about $220 million in mortgage-backed 
securities, usually considered a much less risky investment. 
But Congress changed the rules in August when it passed comprehensive 
legislation to bail out the ailing S&amp;L deposit insurance fund. The law 
requires thrifts to sell their junk bond portfolios within five years, a 
last-minute provision that started the huge slide in the value of junk bonds. 
Thrifts nationwide held about 10% of all junk bonds in December. 
The junk bond market continued to take a beating as even healthy S&amp;Ls wrote 
down the value of their junk bonds to reflect falling market prices. Western 
Empire attributed its $2-million, third-quarter loss to junk bond losses. It 
lost $3 million during the first nine months of 1989.. 
The junk bond tumble eventually led to the collapse earlier this week of Drexel 
Burnham Lambert, the New York investment banking firm that pioneered the 
market. 
