AS CALIFORNIA AGONIZES, OTHERS LIVE WITH MEDFLY 
While California debates how best to attack a stubborn infestation of the 
Mediterranean fruit fly, the option of eradication already has bypassed this 
tropical state and most other agricultural producing regions of the world, 
forcing farmers to find ways to coexist with the feared pest. 
In Hawaii, Central America, Israel and elsewhere, the permanent establishment 
of the Medfly has not meant wholesale destruction of farming. And in some 
cases, agriculture actually has prospered alongside the pest. At the same time, 
the pest has brought hardships for both farmers and consumers: increased, 
regular applications of pesticides, marketing difficulties that can both raise 
prices and trim profits, and the everyday presence of worms in certain 
home-grown fruits. 
On these tropical islands, the Medfly is cited as one of several reasons for 
agriculture's failure to diversify into crops other than pineapple and sugar 
cane, which are not susceptible to the fruit flies. Residents also lament the 
difficulty of growing soft fruits without pesticide. 
Oki Matsuura, 69, who was born and reared on this largest of the Hawaiian 
islands, remembers going into the highlands as a boy to gather wild fruit: 
mangoes, mountain apple and guava. "Oh, it was so sweet and delicious," he 
recalled, smiling at the memory. Now the fruit is so wormy that Matsuura no 
longer bothers to pick it. 
The experience of Hawaii and other Medfly-plagued regions might prove valuable 
to California. Some scientists believe that California must begin to learn how 
to live with the pest: Not only have new infestations occurred regularly over 
the last decade, but the public seems to be growing weary of the pesticide 
spraying programs that have been needed to eradicate the pest. 
When it comes to California farming, comparisons to other regions can be 
tricky. There is no infested nation with agriculture as large or as varied as 
that of California, which produces more than half the nation's fresh fruit and 
vegetables. Officials of the California Department of Food and Agriculture and 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture have warned of devastation to agriculture 
and serious economic ramifications should the pest become established in the 
state. 
Nonetheless, the experiences of other infested regions suggest that the dire 
predictions might be overstated. 
In Central America, for example, the Medfly is merely one of many problems, and 
not the worst, facing agriculture, concluded a 1977 study of the pest's impact 
there by university scientists and officials of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. Coffee, grown in many Central-American countries, is a prime 
Medfly target, but coffee beans are largely unaffected by the pest because it 
infests the blossom rather than the bean itself. 
"While this ubiquitous insect has a bad reputation and occurs in over 90 
countries, people have learned to live with it," the team of researchers said 
in their report. "Some of these countries export fruit with prescribed 
treatments to the United States. 
"Perhaps the villain's reputation has been both overstated and overrated." 
The experience of Israel, too, can offer some reassurance. A centrally run 
aerial pesticide spraying program has minimized damage to citrus and stone 
fruits such as peaches and plums. Fortunately for Israel, its major export 
market, Europe, does not require post-harvest treatment to guarantee pest-free 
fruit because the Medfly already exists on the continent. 
"We have been living with the Medfly since the beginning of the century, and we 
have agriculture," said Yoram Roessler, chief of Citrus Agro-Technical 
Services, a subsidiary of the Citrus Marketing Board of Israel. "It's just 
another pest, a very serious pest, but it's controlled to the level that we 
have almost no infested fruit in the market." 
Israel exports citrus, a Medfly host, to the United States and Japan, as well 
as to Europe. To meet U.S. quarantine requirements, the fruit is subjected to 
cold temperatures during shipping. Roessler estimates that the Medfly increases 
citrus growers' costs by about 2%. 
Israel's citrus orchards are treated an average of six times a year with a 
malathion bait spray, he said, while stone fruits are sprayed as many as eight 
times. He added that virtually "nothing" is lost in yields in sprayed orchards. 
"We control it quite nicely, but it's still a pain in the neck," Roessler said. 
The pesticide, he said, can be applied selectively to prevent destruction of 
natural pest control programs, which include the use of beneficial insects. 
"But of course there must be some disruption," he added. "No question about 
that." 
Here in Hawaii, the experience of growers have been both problematic and 
promising. The Medfly was introduced here at the turn of the century and 
rapidly proliferated. But then another pest, the Oriental fruit fly, invaded in 
the mid-1940s and pushed the Medfly out of its niche and into higher 
elevations. Today the Oriental and the melon fly pose greater threats to 
agriculture than does the Medfly. 
"Economically, the Medfly is not of immediate concern" because the other flies 
do most of the damage, said Po-Yung Lai, plant industry administrator for the 
Hawaii Department of Agriculture. 
In addition to population density and shipping and labor costs, the various 
fruit flies are blamed for this state's need to import most of its produce. 
"Of course you can adjust to anything. . ," said Gene Gilmore, director of the 
USDA's tropical fruit and vegetable research laboratory in Honolulu. "But run 
down and take a look at Safeway and some of the fruit prices." 
In an attempt to keep out the fruit flies, the U.S. mainland requires all 
susceptible commodities imported from infested regions either to be picked at 
certain times or to undergo post-harvest treatment or both. In some fruit, 
these requirements can diminish quality. 
Because export-bound papayas must be picked hard and green, before the fly can 
lay its eggs in them, the fruit that leaves here is not as sweet or as 
flavorful as the papayas grown for domestic consumption. Moreover, the hot 
water treatment required for exporting papayas has driven up costs by at least 
15%, according to a spokesman for a major tropical fruit company here. 
Although papayas are an important export fruit, Hawaii's soft fruits are more 
susceptible to the fly. Some residents complain that they typically lose half 
of their back-yard peaches to the pest. 
"If you bite into a peach, you can expect maggots pretty much," said Clark 
Hashimoto, a county agricultural extension agent on the island of Maui. "(The 
Medfly) loves peaches more than anything else." 
Unlike peaches, locally grown persimmons are sold in markets here. But 
malathion is not registered for use on the Hawaiian crop, and the Medfly will 
destroy as much as 25% of it before harvest, Hashimoto said. 
Even when the fruit is not destroyed, growers must contend with embargoes 
imposed by importing nations that want to keep out the pest. Agricultural 
officials tend to agree that the Medfly's most serious repercussion in Hawaii 
is not peach or persimmon losses, but the inability of the state to develop a 
potentially lucrative export market on the U.S. mainland for tropical fruit. 
There are no approved post-harvest treatments for many of them. 
"The fruit fly isn't the problem," said farmer Eric Weinert, who grows such 
exotic fruits as star fruit, longan, lychee, rambutan, cherimoya and atemoya. 
"I don't spray anything. I harvest at the appropriate time, and I keep clean 
fields. If we could export, I think the fruit would be widely grown." 
Weinert, who grew up in Newport Beach and still shows his allegiances in the 
Los Angeles Laker T-shirt he wears, maintains that Hawaii's climate is so ideal 
for tropical fruit that the state would have a strong advantage over other 
sellers. Export restrictions, however, have forced him to sell primarily to 
luxury hotels that cater to tourists hankering for a taste of the tropics. 
Because of its pests, Hawaii is a hotbed of research into fruit flies, and some 
of this research may soon resolve Weinert's export problems and also provide 
answers for California if it is forced to live with the Medfly. 
In long, low buildings covered with metal roofs, researchers in Hilo inject 
various kinds of fruit with fly eggs and then try to kill off the pests inside 
by exposing the fruit to extreme temperatures or wrapping it in plastic to 
smother the insect. The challenge is to kill off the bugs without pesticide and 
without severely damaging the fruit. 
John Armstrong, an entomologist with the USDA's research service here, believes 
treatments that will enable growers to ship more tropical fruit to the mainland 
are only a few years away. 
"Within the next two or three years, we will have developed a number of 
different quarantine treatments, hopefully for lychees, longan, rambutan and 
atemoya, " Armstrong said. 
Post-harvest treatments would be vital to California's ability to export many 
types of fruit and vegetables should its farmlands become infested. According 
to the California Department of Food and Agriculture, which is managing the 
aerial spraying program in Southern California, the state's Medfly-susceptible 
products would be barred from the nation's warmer, fruit-growing states, 
including Florida, Georgia, Arizona and Texas, unless the commodities underwent 
USDA-approved treatments. 
Most agricultural specialists said such a barrier would come down fairly 
quickly -- in one to three years -- because the best of measures would not be 
able to contain the infestation in California, and other states soon would be 
visited by the pests. 
The longer-term challenge would be in treating products exported to nations 
such as Japan, which requires special treatments for commodities coming from 
infested regions. The United States and New Zealand are now the only major 
commodity exporters without fruit fly problems. 
Developing adequate post-harvest treatments that would kill the pest and still 
protect the quality of California's exports could be costly and take time. 
Treatment can damage some fruit and vegetables and reduce their shelf-life. 
Unlike farmers in most other nations, California growers might also face 
greater restrictions on pesticide use because of relatively stringent state 
environmental regulations. 
Rather than switch to varieties of crops that would be less susceptible to the 
Medfly and less vulnerable to the effects of post-harvest treatments, 
California growers are looking to Hawaii for the weapons they believe will head 
off the much-dreaded infestation of California farmlands: sterile Medflies and 
Medfly parasites. 
On the island of Oahu, the California Department of Food and Agriculture pulled 
former USDA entomologist Nori Tanaka out of retirement in 1982 to produce 
sterile Medflies. Sterile flies have been effective in eradicating relatively 
small Medfly infestations with only minimal pesticide spraying. 
Tanaka, who is widely praised for his "green thumb with flies," breeds 100 
million of the insects a week in a cluster of ramshackle buildings in an 
industrial park in Honolulu. The flies' sexual "perfume" and the decomposing 
protein the flies are fed permeate the buildings -- and even the parking lot -- 
with an overpowering, nauseating stench of rot that clings to clothing after 
only minutes and causes some visitors to faint. Radiation is used to sterilize 
the flies. 
Despite Tanaka's prideful ministerings, his warehouses are too small to produce 
enough flies to combat the current Southern California infestation. California 
agricultural officials are hoping that public opposition to aerial spraying 
will not halt the eradication effort before two new rearing laboratories on 
Oahu are put into full production, including a much larger, high-tech facility. 
That lab, which looks like a palace next to Tanaka's humble warehouse, opened 
last month and will be able to produce 500 million flies a week later this 
year. 
In addition to sterile flies, parasites offer promise. In a recent 
demonstration project on the island of Maui, small wasps that are harmless to 
humans but deadly to Medfly larvae were credited with helping reduce twentyfold 
the population of an isolated pocket of Medflies. 
Hawaii will soon embark on an even more ambitious demonstration project to 
eradicate the fruit flies with sterile insects from the island of Kauai. Public 
opposition has prevented aerial malathion spraying in Hawaii, and several 
skeptical scientists believe the state's infestation is too entrenched ever to 
be eradicated from the islands, with or without spraying. 
In the absence of much hope that the Medfly can be driven out, residents have 
resigned themselves to its vagaries. Tanaka, for example, says he regularly 
eats home-grown fruit. 
"Oh yes," he said, matter-of-factly. "Worms don't bother me anymore." 
