DOZENS MAY HAVE BEEN ABUSED AT CARE HOME 
The police investigation into alleged abuse at a Mira Mesa care home for foster 
children has widened, and detectives now fear that more than 5 dozen children 
may have been tortured after being placed there since the home was licensed six 
years ago. 
An affidavit filed Monday also shows that a second police search of the home 
has turned up almost 700 separate items of new and unwrapped clothing that were 
allegedly denied the foster children. 
Also recovered from the home were two buckets reportedly used as makeshift 
toilets for the children. 
'A Major Investigation' 
"This is what we would consider a major investigation," said police child-abuse 
Detective Rick Carlson. He said the case has expanded as new allegations of 
neglect have been reported as a result of interviews with some of the foster 
children. 
"It's complex. And it has a scope that encompasses a lot of people, a lot of 
witnesses and a lot of victims," Carlson said. 
Police originally believed that only 17 children had been placed in the foster 
home, run by Henri Dyson and her son, Harold. But Monday, Carlson said police 
have learned that the county Department of Social Services has placed as many 
as 62 children in the home. 
Asked if it was possible that all 62 children were abused, Carlson said: "I 
don't know that I could confirm that. But there certainly is that possibility." 
He also said that, although he and Detective Dan Dennis were originally 
assigned to the case, a group of investigators is now working to determine how 
widespread the abuse was. 
"Different people are being assigned to do different interviews," Carlson said. 
"We're trying to see how many are victims. And we're corroborating some of the 
interviews were getting." 
Pleaded Not Guilty 
The Dysons were arrested Jan. 19 at their home in the 8700 block of Pagoda Way 
and have since been charged with multiple counts of child abuse and child 
endangerment. They have pleaded not guilty to the charges. 
Henri Dyson was released last week from County Jail at Las Colinas on $200,000 
bail. Harold Dyson was being held Monday on $125,000 bail in the South Bay 
Detention Facility. A preliminary hearing in the case has been set for Feb. 28. 
An original search of the home by Carlson and Dennis uncovered many belts and 
sticks reportedly used to whip some of the children, as well as a post in the 
kitchen that 
one boy said he was tied to while beaten. 
Police said they also found equipment used to perform enemas. One of the 
children, a 17-month-old, nearly died after apparently being tortured with a 
water enema, they said. 
The detectives said they also found that some of the children were sleeping in 
a bathtub and on thin pads in the garage, and that others were sleeping without 
covers, sheets or blankets in upstairs bedrooms. 
Some of the children also said they were forced to eat hot sauce and hot 
peppers and they were given pills that made them fall asleep, police said. 
Clothing Found 
In a second search of the home, last Friday, police found 681 separate sets of 
new children's clothing stored throughout the house, including 36 girls' 
dresses in an upstairs bedroom and 99 items of clothing in a brown wicker 
chest. 
"It was in closets, cupboards and drawers," Carlson said. "There were tags on 
them. They'd never been opened." 
According to the affidavit signed by Dennis and filed in San Diego Municipal 
Court on Monday, foster parents are reimbursed for clothing they purchase for 
children under their care. To obtain this reimbursement, receipts must be 
shown. 
But, according to the affidavit, "one child related that she was told that new 
clothes were bought for her but that she could not wear them." 
The affidavit says police are now trying to determine whether the Dysons were 
being reimbursed for the clothing, then reselling the items. 
The detectives said they were told by several children at the home that they 
were forced to sleep on a thin pad in the garage, with no mattress coverings or 
blankets, or were made to sleep in upstairs bedrooms without sheets or 
blankets. 
Buckets Recovered 
During their first search of the home, the detectives saw several children 
sleeping in beds without covers, according to court records filed Jan. 24. But 
the second search last Friday turned up eight unopened packages of blankets, 
found in a hall closet, along with five unopened sets of sheets and two 
unopened sets of pillowcases. 
The detectives also recovered two white plastic buckets in the garage, which 
they believe some of the children were forced to use rather than being allowed 
to visit any of the four bathrooms in the house. 
According to the affidavit: "A bucket was observed previously, but not seized, 
which has been described as being used by the children as a makeshift toilet." 
The affidavit also says that some of the children told police they were given 
various medications, even if the drugs had not been specifically prescribed for 
them. However, although foster-care records, logs and receipts were taken from 
the Dyson home Friday, the "receipt and inventory" accompanying the affidavit 
do not list any medications found in the home. 
