MOSCOW DROPS ARMS PACT LINK TO 'STAR WARS' 
As both sides offered new ideas to speed arms control talks, the Soviet Union 
appeared Thursday to remove one of the last major obstacles to a U.S.-Soviet 
strategic nuclear arms reduction treaty by eliminating linkage between the 
treaty and the U.S. "Star Wars" program. 
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze told visiting Secretary of State 
James A. Baker III that Moscow is willing to sign and implement a new Strategic 
Arms Reduction Talks (START) agreement to cut offensive weapons by about half 
without any declared linkage to how each side must conduct research work on 
defensive systems, according to a senior U.S. official. 
For years, Moscow insisted that the START treaty could not be signed until the 
United States gave up its plan to develop a space-based anti-missile defense 
system, known as "Star Wars." Then, the Soviets edged away from that position 
step-by-step; now they have provided what the U.S. official termed "the 
important clarification on this longstanding question." 
However, Democrats in Congress may still insist on linking the offensive and 
defensive issues in their continuing effort to curtail the "Star Wars" program, 
another U.S. official said. But this official noted that, with or without such 
linkage, Congress would always have the power to enforce its policy on the 
program through the budgetary process. 
For its part in the joint attempt to complete new nuclear and conventional arms 
treaties by the end of the year, the U.S. side brought new proposals on how 
air-launched cruise missiles should be counted within the total of 6,000 
nuclear weapons to which both nations would be limited under a new START 
agreement. Essentially, the new U.S. proposal offers a compromise on such 
issues as missile range and bomber carrying capabilities, U.S. officials said. 
Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander A. Bessmertnykh said the new U.S. 
position on the cruise missiles "could promote the solution to this problem." 
The U.S. negotiators also provided new ideas on how to monitor spare and stored 
missiles that are not deployed -- and how to broadcast openly the in-flight 
data from a missile test so that the other side will be aware of the missile's 
various characteristics. 
"We gave them an awful lot to chew on," another senior U.S. official said. The 
initial Soviet reaction was positive, he added, and detailed replies are 
expected before Baker's visit ends Saturday. 
Soviet spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov also said that the Soviet side will 
continue to call for new arms talks to limit naval forces, as well as for 
limits on sea-launched cruise missiles. The United States is opposed to both. 
Baker's team also presented President Bush's new proposal to cut U.S. and 
Soviet troops on the ground in Central Europe to 195,000 for each side, as well 
as new ideas on how to count aircraft and tanks for any agreement to reduce 
conventional forces in Europe. 
The same proposals were presented Thursday by North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization nations to the Warsaw Pact at the 23-nation conventional forces 
negotiations that are under way in Vienna. 
Essentially, NATO's new aircraft proposal lowered its previously proposed 
ceiling on ground attack aircraft from 5,700 to 4,700 for each alliance and 
would exclude "primary trainers" -- jet training aircraft -- while allowing an 
additional 500 air-to-air fighter interceptors above the ceiling, according to 
reports from Vienna. 
A senior NATO official in Brussels was quoted by the Associated Press as saying 
that the NATO side also agreed to narrow the definition of combat helicopters 
to resolve a difference with the East. 
The new NATO position on counting tanks seeks to distinguish between large, or 
"main" battle tanks, on the one hand, and light tanks and armored personnel 
carriers on the other, within the 20,000 tanks and 28,000 personnel carriers 
that both sides have agreed to set as ceilings in these categories. 
The new troop ceiling being proposed was first announced Jan. 31 by President 
Bush. It represented an 80,000-soldier reduction in the previously proposed 
ceiling. 
The Soviet Union has an estimated 565,000 troops stationed in Europe outside 
its borders, with well over 500,000 of them within the central zone. There are 
about 305,000 U.S. troops in Western Europe, with approximately 250,000 of 
those stationed in the area of application, according to Western estimates. 
The Warsaw Pact offered no reaction Thursday to the formal NATO presentation. 
The senior NATO official told the Associated Press that the West expects a 
response at a meeting next week of the two alliances in Ottawa. The "Open 
Skies" gathering there is officially being held to review a plan for unarmed 
reconnaissance flights over rival alliance territories, a proposal designed to 
reduce East-West tensions. 
The Soviet side's apparent concession on anti-missile defenses Thursday was an 
advance on its position in September. Back then, according to U.S. officials, 
it was demanding that the START treaty include a provision specifically giving 
either signatory the right to withdraw from the treaty if, in its judgment, the 
1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty was being violated. 
The demand was aimed at giving the Soviet Union leverage with which to curb 
"Star Wars." It could contend that any project being conducted in the program 
is a violation of the ABM agreement and threaten to withdraw from the START 
treaty unless it were stopped. 
The Soviets now say they would still prefer such a clause, "but not as a 
precondition for signing and implementing the START agreement," the senior U.S. 
official said. 
Under the new Soviet position, each side will have the right to withdraw from 
the treaty if its "supreme national interests" are jeopardized -- a standard 
phrase in arms agreements -- but the START treaty will not be directly tied to 
the ABM treaty. 
