JAMES FLANIGAN: HEAT IS ON IN WORLD MARKET FOR LIGHT BULBS 
You hear it everywhere these days, talk of the "global economy." It's the 
latest buzzword of business, and even Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev 
referred to a "single" world economy in his speech to the United Nations last 
December. 
That sounds good, but what does it mean? Is the "global market" anything more 
than hype? Does it benefit anybody? 
The answer is as near at hand as your light bulb -- the everyday product of an 
industry suddenly stirring with competition. 
General Electric, the leading U.S. producer of light bulbs, has just formed a 
joint venture with Toshiba of Japan that will increase GE's business in the Far 
East. Philips Industries of the Netherlands is intensifying its assault on the 
U.S. lighting market. The Sylvania division of GTE is battling for market share 
as light bulbs flood in from West Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, Hungary and 
Poland. 
Everybody, it seems, is reaching out for a piece of a world market that totals 
$8.5 billion in lighting sales. And the best part is that their competitive 
battles work for you. 
Competition is bringing light bulb prices down and new products to market in an 
increasing stream. 
GE is pooling research efforts with Toshiba, Japan's light bulb leader, and the 
two are building a $25-million plant near Cleveland to make fluorescent lights 
-- half of which will be exported to Japan. GE also has an energy-saving light 
bulb so impressive that Southern California Edison is recommending and 
distributing it to customers. 
Meanwhile Philips -- which leads in Europe and sells in Japan through a joint 
venture -- is pushing light bulbs here with a $12-million ad campaign, 
incentives for supermarket operators, and a special-offer bulb that lasts 
one-third longer than standard light bulbs. 
Sylvania is responding with advanced technology long-life bulbs, and 
fluorescent lights that screw into lamps as incandescent bulbs do -- providing 
an easier-to-use product for business customers. (Residential customers 
generally prefer softer, incandescent light.) 
'Such a Wonderful Business' 
So, clearly, global competition is the mother of invention. But the business 
wasn't always so competitive. Legend has it that GE and Philips long ago had an 
informal agreement to split the world, Philips selling in Europe and GE selling 
here. But legends aside, the reality was that distance and war kept markets 
separate until five years ago when Philips bought Westinghouse's lighting 
business. 
"It's such a wonderful business," a GE vice president mused at the time, "I 
don't see how Westinghouse could have let it go." The Dutch giant has since 
built U.S. lighting sales to roughly $500 million -- which trails GE's roughly 
$1.5 billion U.S. sales. 
Light bulbs are a highly profitable business -- with automated, volume 
production. "GE's operating profit margins are over 20%," estimates analyst 
Albert Turner of Chicago's Duff &amp; Phelps research firm. That means that the 
humble light bulb, invented 110 years ago by Thomas Edison, is as profitable as 
the newest gee-whiz computer. 
But the technology didn't stop with Edison, and that's the key to lighting's 
potential today. Look no further than the fluorescent lights that glow in 
offices, but not in American homes. Homes in Europe and Japan use more 
fluorescent lighting than American houses do because it's a big energy saver. 
A fluorescent bulb lasts 20,000 hours, compared to 1,000 for an incandescent 
bulb, and provides three times the light for the same amount of power. The only 
problem is that fluorescent light is harsh to the eye and makes people look 
funny. But bulb makers are working on the problem, and Americans will see new 
types of light on to market. 
And there is opportunity elsewhere as others begin to light up their lives as 
Americans have. (U.S. light usage, 37% of the world's total, is greater than 
all of Europe or Asia.) For most of this century, the business has grown 
through the introduction of artificial light -- a thought put poetically by an 
old man in Ireland's remote Aran Islands who, when asked the most important 
change he had seen in fourscore years, replied: "Oh, the coming of the sudden 
light." 
In the 1990s, the global market will spread that light. 
