STATE OF UNION -- AND WORLD 
In most years, a U.S. President might touch base with key members of Congress 
before making surprise announcements in his State of the Union address. On 
Wednesday, President Bush called Mikhail S. Gorbachev before giving his first 
State of the Union speech. And in that address, Bush even worked in a political 
plug for the Soviet boss, pledging to support the movement toward democracy and 
economic opportunity there. 
How times are changing. Who can remember when dramatic events raging across the 
world have meant potential benefit for the state of the American union rather 
than fear and foreboding? 
Bush did the courtesy of telephoning Gorbachev to alert him that the White 
House now is prepared to negotiate a reduction of troop strengths in Europe far 
below any level previously proposed, down to 195,000 for each superpower. This 
must be welcome news for Gorbachev, who is eager to demonstrate to his critics 
that his reforms are paying dividends, and who is facing growing pressure from 
the emerging democratic governments in Eastern Europe to take his Soviet troops 
home. The proposed withdrawals provide good news for Americans, too. The sooner 
that conventional armed forces can be cut, the sooner the nation can begin to 
reap the fruits of any peace dividend -- the sort of benefits that did not 
appear in Bush's new budget on Monday. 
At the speech's start, Bush said he didn't intend to detail every new domestic 
initiative he plans in 1990. But then he ticked off his proposals pretty much 
like a laundry list. The general goals are good ones -- who can argue with 
proper child care or getting youths off drugs? -- but Bush pushed it by 
claiming that his budget provides adequate funding for those programs. It 
simply does not. 
The magnitude of those domestic needs is scarcely diminished by the dramatic 
intensity of the changing U.S.-Soviet relationship. But somehow all 
contemporary history right now is overshadowed by the astonishing and 
unpredictable developments in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. The Bush 
telephone call to Moscow was vivid confirmation of the extreme importance of 
close and mutually informative superpower communications. Perhaps Bush wished 
only to reach out and touch someone. One hopes he succeeded. 
