DISABLED STUDENTS WORK TO LEARN, LEARN TO WORK IN SCHOOL PROGRAM 
Like many high school students, Andy Bell likes the purchasing power an 
after-school job promises. Every weekday afternoon, he rides a bus from Reseda 
High School to Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in Woodland Hills. There, for 
the next two hours, the 18-year-old senior helps sweep floors, dump trash and 
clean conference rooms. He earns about $200 a month -- money he can spend on 
clothes or tuck away in his bank account. 
Bell works hard to fit in. And, at first glance, he seems like a typical 
teen-ager -- interested in hanging out with his friends, thinking about girls 
and earning money. But Bell is not typical. He is, according to the Los Angeles 
Unified School District, "high functioning educable retarded." And if it 
weren't for a special program set up by the district to help disabled students 
find work, he would probably be sitting at home every afternoon watching 
television reruns. 
The 6-year-old program, called Project Work-Ability, is designed to teach 
physically and mentally disabled students -- as well as those suffering from 
learning disabilities such as dyslexia -- the skills they need to function in 
the workplace. It offers classroom credit, and students are paid for their 
work. 
About 300 San Fernando Valley-area students from 17 schools and two 
occupational centers participate in the $1.2-million-a-year program, which is 
funded partly by the state Department of Rehabilitation and partly by the 
school district. Project Work-Ability has assisted more than 3,000 students 
since its inception. 
"For most of these youngsters, the gains in growth and confidence are 
phenomenal," said Mark Stephens, Project Work-Ability director and coordinator 
of vocational education for the handicapped for the school district. "It's a 
chance for them to get their first work experience and learn the proper work 
habits." 
Added Arnie Mates, a Project Work-Ability vocational counselor who has worked 
with Bell: "You see tremendous results from this program. It really helps these 
kids to gain work experience before they leave school." 
Employment for the disabled is not an insignificant problem. According to 
Stephens, the unemployment rate for both physically and mentally handicapped 
people consistently hovers between 50% and 80%. 
"The handicapped have been grossly under-represented in the workplace," he 
said. "But it's not because they are unable to function. Many of them are 
entirely capable of doing a job as well as anyone else, if they get the 
chance." 
Work experience programs now exist in several states. According to Pat Dougan, 
a program coordinator for the state Department of Education, 146 Work-Ability 
programs have been set up in California's 1,000 school districts; 15,000 
students are involved. A similar program is available at some regional 
occupational centers and community colleges. 
Locally, more than 100 companies have become involved in the program, including 
Burger King, Kaiser Permanente, Marriott Hotels, McDonald's, Pizza Hut and 
Universal Studios Tour. Jobs range from cashier and janitor to mechanic and 
records clerk. 
The important thing, Stephens noted, is to find the right match, since "even 
the most severely handicapped individuals can perform certain jobs." He pointed 
out that several quadriplegic students who are confined to wheelchairs -- some 
of whom cannot speak -- are holding jobs. One student works as an interoffice 
messenger for a large insurance company and uses a special computer that he can 
program to say various phrases. 
Employers Receptive 
"Most of the employers have been very receptive once they get involved in the 
program," Stephens said. "They generally like it and request more students. 
There are employers who have chosen not to participate, which I believe is due 
largely to a lack of understanding about what the disabled can do." 
Bob Stanley, an employment interviewer for Universal Studious Tours, has hired 
dozens of disabled students through the program to fill a wide array of jobs. 
"We have gotten some good employees out of the program. These are good, 
qualified kids who want to work. I've found their attitude a lot better than 
some of the kids who weren't disabled. Often, they feel they have something to 
prove." 
Maryanne Malzone, an employment specialist who has been responsible for hiring 
several students, including Bell, for Kaiser Permanente said: "They are 
productive and a benefit to the company. Most of these kids are real nice and 
they appreciate the fact that they are getting a chance." 
During the three years Bell has worked at Kaiser -- first handling clerical 
duties in personnel before moving to housekeeping -- he has blossomed into an 
excellent employee, Malzone said. At first he required a fair amount of 
supervision but he is now able to work almost entirely on his own. In addition, 
he has learned to take buses to and from work and has become far more 
self-dependent. 
Special-education high school students -- there are about 5,000 in the L.A. 
School District -- are offered optional classes to help them learn about 
vocational possibilities. Advisers, who are not involved in everyday teaching, 
work with the students in small groups or on a one-to-one basis, teaching them 
how to fill out job applications, prepare for an interview, and enroll in 
various classes and find potential jobs in the community. The advisers then 
regularly check with the employer to see how the student is doing. 
All the students are paid. Most are put on the company payroll; when employers 
cannot afford the wages the school district covers the cost. Most of the 
students earn $4.25 an hour, with a few making as much as $8 or $9 an hour. 
Stephens hopes some will be able to move into full-time work at the same firm 
when they graduate. 
Some Decline Offer 
Some special-education students who believe they can better deal with 
employment on their own choose not to participate in the program. Stephens is 
comfortable with their decision: "A lot of them get by very well and don't need 
our support. They don't want to be identified as having a disability. And 
that's completely understandable. Many adults who had learning disabilities in 
school are out in the workplace right now and are succeeding very well. Once 
they left high school and had the label removed, they learned to function just 
fine." 
Of course, not every student works out for every job. "We have had situations 
where kids have been fired from jobs," Stephens said. "But that's part of life 
-- and we have a support system within the program to deal with that. A lot of 
times the firing has been completely justified. There have been only a few 
isolated cases where the youngster may have been terminated because of the 
disability. It's illegal, but it still happens." 
Parental satisfaction seems high. Bell's mother, Rosalie Bell, said the program 
has made her son "more responsible and taught him a work ethic. Children who 
are handicapped have to have a way to become part of society without being a 
burden." 
Gail Slater, whose son, Brian, has a learning disability, said: "He never would 
have made it without the help." Today her son attends community college, works 
and lives on his own. 
Parental Concern 
Although some parents of more severely disabled youngsters have expressed 
concern and apprehension at first, Stephens said that "after they see the 
success the youngster experiences, after they see the change in self-image and 
confidence, they generally become very supportive of the program. 
"These people have always wound up in the work force," he added, "but usually 
not as a stable part of it. They might have gone from job to job and gotten 
terminated a few times before they made the adjustment. And a few years ago, 
the really disabled stayed at home. They collected their Social Security checks 
and sat in front of the television set most of the day. . . . We're helping 
them become useful members of our society. Most of them only need a chance." 
