UC IRVINE NOTEBOOK / JOHN WEYLER; 
FLORENTINE REALIZES WINNING ISN'T THE ONLY THING 
Steve Florentine figures he's an expert of sorts on sports psychology . . . at 
least if firsthand knowledge counts for anything. 
In the past year, Florentine has experienced his own emotional version of the 
Wide World of Sports. And he has discovered the agony of victory and the joy of 
defeat. 
The agony of victory: Last season, Florentine was a forward on the UC Irvine 
basketball team. He appeared in 22 of 30 games and started five conference 
games. Florentine, a 6-foot-6 sophomore, was a designated defensive player and 
he drew more than a few difficult assignments, such as: Stop Brian Shaw. Stop 
Ricky Berry. Stop Gerald Paddio. 
He was moderately successful in that role -- of course, he might have been the 
defense-weak Anteaters' best defender this season -- and he averaged two points 
and a rebound per game. 
Coach Bill Mulligan admired Florentine's athletic talents, but he questioned 
his dedication and was angered by his concentration lapses on the court. 
"I thought I was doing a pretty good job," Florentine said, "but Mulligan was 
almost more concerned about what you were doing off the court than on the 
court. I couldn't understand why he benched me near the end of the season. It 
was head games and more head games." 
Before the conference tournament began, Mulligan held a lengthy team meeting on 
a Sunday afternoon. He had decided that 10 players would be in uniform for the 
tournament. There were 11 players at the meeting. Florentine was the odd man 
out. 
Florentine was openly upset and Mulligan threw him out of the meeting and off 
the team. Later, Mulligan said Florentine had been suspended for attitude 
problems. 
"He had a bad team meeting," Mulligan explained. 
Irvine upset Nevada Las Vegas in the semifinals and lost a lead in the second 
half of the tournament final to Utah State. The Anteaters were a few minutes 
shy of a spot in the National Collegiate Athletic Assn. playoffs. 
Florentine didn't get to share in the glory, fleeting as it was. He had to buy 
a ticket to watch. 
"Florentine could have been a good player if he had worked at improving," 
Mulligan said, "but all he wanted to do was go to the beach, play volleyball 
and pick up girls." 
Mulligan certainly was right about that. 
The joy of defeat: Florentine did not play volleyball at Redondo (Beach) Union 
High School, but his reputation as a beach player was enough that Bill Ashen, 
the Irvine volleyball coach, had asked him to come out for the team, even if it 
meant just playing in the last few matches after the basketball season ended. 
So, instead of transferring and playing basketball somewhere else, Florentine 
changed uniforms instead of schools. 
Irvine's men's volleyball team is a member of the Western Intercollegiate 
Volleyball Assn., along with most of the best teams in the country. The 
Anteaters don't win often -- they're 0-2 so far -- but, boy, do they have fun. 
"We're definite underdogs in the WIVA," Florentine said. "Sometimes we'll be 
getting totally worked, just pounded, but everyone is having a great time, 
kidding each other, making the best of it, enjoying the game. 
"I've never seen a college sport so relaxed. I look forward to volleyball 
practice. I used to dread basketball practice, but this is a much more 
comfortable environment." 
Ashen is glad Florentine feels at home because his presence at middle blocker 
has elevated the team to a new level. Even though the Anteaters are on the 
bottom of the WIVA totem pole, they are ranked No. 18 in the national poll. 
"His footwork is a nightmare," Ashen said, laughing, "and he sometimes knocks 
our outside hitter into the bleachers while making a block, but the point is he 
makes the block. 
"He has a lot to learn about positioning, but what he doesn't know he makes up 
for in athletic ability and instinct." 
Florentine admits he may not be the fastest learner around, but he's making 
progress under Ashen's low-key guidance. 
"Coach Ashen doesn't get frustrated," Florentine said. "He's calm and patient 
and he doesn't mind telling you something over and over." 
So Florentine has been transformed from a forgotten forward in one sport to the 
center of attention in another. 
"With Steve in there, we block a whole lot better as a team and that's the 
quickest way to get points," captain Dave Pettker said. "We may not be real 
competitive in the WIVA yet, but we're not horrible." 
Florentine's future might be on the beach, anyway. 
"With a couple of years of sand under his belt, he could make an impact on the 
pro tour," Ashen said. "He's got the talent." 
Florentine's beach volleyball experience so far has been limited to playing 
with a friend -- instead of a highly skilled player -- as a partner. Still, he 
has had some success. 
"I'm definitely going to pursue it," he said. "I'm going to go all out this 
summer." 
The key to making a living playing beach volleyball is securing a sponsor. 
Florentine's blond, beach-boy good looks can't hurt in that department. 
"Getting kicked off the basketball team was a blessing in disguise," he said, 
smiling. "Basketball wasn't going to take me anywhere." 
Mulligan had a question for his team this week: 
"Why do you think (Cal State Long Beach guard) Walker Moore is playing instead 
of (second-leading scorer) Darrell Faulkner?" 
Mulligan thinks he knows. 
"Because Moore throws the ball to (No. 1 scorer, center John) Hatten." 
Mulligan hoped the analogy would sink in, but just in case it didn't, he made 
his point clear. 
"That could happen to a couple of our guys real soon," he said. "(Guard) Kevin 
Floyd is shooting 40% in conference games. (Guard) Rod Palmer is shooting 38%. 
Doesn't it make sense that (center) Mike Doktorczyk, who's shooting 58%, should 
be taking more shots than Floyd and Palmer?" 
Floyd has taken 102 shots in Big West Conference play and Palmer 106. And 
Palmer is 14 of 46 on 3-pointers in conference games. 
Doktorczyk is second in the nation in 3-point field-goal percentage (.587) and 
is shooting 58% from the floor. He has attempted 79 shots in Big West action. 
"I had a rule when I had (Kevin) Magee," Mulligan said. "It was, 'Throw the 
ball to Magee or come sit with me.' We may start something like that again." 
Anteater Notes 
Coach Bill Mulligan pointed out that there's one good thing about Irvine's 
basketball schedule this season: The Anteaters, who will take a bus to Fresno 
and Stockton for their last two road games, have no more airplane trips. An 
optimist might point out that there's a chance for another air excursion if the 
Anteaters win the Big West tournament and the automatic NCAA berth. Mulligan: 
"Like I said, no more plane trips." . . . Opposing inside players have been 
scoring with relative ease against the Anteaters recently. When asked who would 
guard Cal State Fullerton's Cedric Ceballos tonight (who is averaging 21 points 
a game), Mulligan said, "I don't have anyone who can guard Ceballos. Hell, I 
don't have anyone who can guard (Irvine sports information director) Bob 
Olsen." 
Kris Roberts was named outstanding player of the year and Ali Wood was honored 
as most improved at the women's volleyball annual banquet. Roberts, who set six 
school records this season, and Wood tied for the school record with 381 kills 
this season. . . . Freshman Ken Cooper won the 100-meter breaststroke, the 200 
breaststroke and the 200 individual medley to lead the Anteater men's swimming 
team over Pomona-Pitzer Saturday. 
