LEGISLATIVE ANALYST CALLS FOR REPEAL OF CAP ON SPENDING 
Legislative Analyst Elizabeth G. Hill called Wednesday for repeal of the 
voter-approved state spending limit and an increase in the gasoline tax. She 
also sharply criticized Gov. George Deukmejian's budget-balancing proposals. 
The Legislature's nonpartisan budget analyst, in adding her name to a growing 
list of officials calling for repeal of the limit, said the expenditure cap 
will "hamper the state's ability to provide the services needed to keep 
California's economy running efficiently and economically." 
Hill's comments on the limit and other issues came with release of her analysis 
of Deukmejian's proposed $47.8-billion state budget for the 1989-90 fiscal year 
that will begin July 1. Each year, the analyst's exhaustive survey becomes the 
"Bible" that legislative budget committees use in their own review of the 
governor's spending plan. 
Hill recommended that the Legislature submit to the voters a constitutional 
amendment that would repeal the spending limit. Such an amendment would be 
required, because it was the voters who originally placed the spending limit in 
the California Constitution in 1979. 
Hill also recommended that the Legislature raise the gasoline tax six cents a 
gallon to correct what transportation officials say is a $4.5-billion deficit 
in the five-year State Transportation Improvement Program. Hill said the only 
alternative to raising the tax is cutting back on highway construction and 
maintenance, which she said would hurt the state. 
In addition to criticizing various Deukmejian spending proposals, Hill's budget 
review also accuses Los Angeles County officials of mishandling collection of 
child-support payments. 
The budget review says the state could have recouped more than $22 million that 
it paid out in welfare payments to impoverished children if Los Angeles County 
had done even an average job in collecting support payments. The county also 
deprived children who do not receive public assistance of $25 million in 
support payments they should have received from non-custodial parents, the 
analyst says. 
Hill says the state should step in and devise a three-year plan to improve the 
county's performance, which she said was the worst in the state. 
In all, Hill recommends a combination of cuts and increases in the governor's 
budget that would provide the Legislature with an additional $244 million to 
spend. Included in the recommendations are proposals to reduce expenditures by 
$191 million. 
"It's a very tight budget," Hill said. 
Gloomy Analysis 
Overall, this budget analysis is decidedly gloomier than those issued in recent 
years, with Hill saying state finances are in their worst shape since the 
recession wreaked havoc on government finances 1982. 
During a Capitol press conference, Hill repeated past warnings that the state 
would need an additional $1.6 billion in tax revenues if it wants to continue 
services it provided this year and rebuild the budget reserve to $1.1 billion. 
Deukmejian is insisting on a "prudent" budget reserve. 
The analyst said the state finished the last budget year on June 30 with a 
deficit of at least $200 million and added that "our current estimates indicate 
that a second deficit is now likely" during the current budget year. 
Deukmejian so far is the only major player in the budget process who has not 
acknowledged the deficit in last year's budget. Others who agree that there was 
a deficit, while disagreeing on how large it was, are state Controller Gray 
Davis, Treasurer Thomas W. Hayes and the state auditor general. 
Hill criticized many of Deukmejian's proposed budget moves, saying the governor 
and his advisers balanced the budget by making decisions that ultimately could 
prove costly to the state. 
She noted that Deukmejian's budget defers "virtually all preventive 
maintenance" on state highways for two years. Preventive maintenance costs 
about $5,000 per lane-mile, but it heads off "rehabilitative work which costs 
about $100,000 per lane-mile," Hill said. 
Prison Criticism 
The analyst also said the governor's proposal to save money by delaying the 
opening of two new state prisons will intensify overcrowding at other prisons. 
Even Deukmejian's plan to partially finance county trial courts will end up 
costing counties more, Hill said, "because the increase in costs for 
state-required programs will outpace the increase in funding to be provided 
under the program." 
In addition, the analyst criticized a Deukmejian Administration proposal to 
save $163.5 million in budget-year retirement costs by making a trade-off that 
will eventually commit the state to an additional $400 million a year in annual 
expenditures. 
Deukmejian's proposed elimination of the Office of Family Planning, which 
provides abortion counseling and birth control information, would also be 
penny-wise and pound foolish, Hill said. By eliminating the agency, the state 
would save $36 million annually. But Hill said the program is cost effective in 
eliminating unwanted pregnancies, particularly for poor women who have to rely 
on the state for medical and other health and welfare services. 
Hill also warned that Deukmejian's decision to finance a state health-care 
program for poor Californians from cigarette tax receipts raised as a result of 
Proposition 99, the tobacco tax initiative, could backfire because the higher 
tax may discourage people from smoking. The initiative imposed a 25-cent-a-pack 
increase on cigarettes and comparable increases on other tobacco products. 
