LATE TAKEOFFS BANNED OVER TOPANGA AND CALABASAS 
Residents of Topanga Canyon and Calabasas have won a partial victory in a 
five-year campaign to keep noisy jets taking off from Los Angeles International 
Airport from flying over their communities. 
The Federal Aviation Administration said Wednesday that it has halted 
late-night flights over the two communities by airliners heading from LAX to 
Northern California. 
Jetliner pilots will be prohibited from flying over the area between 9 p.m. and 
midnight, said FAA spokesman Fred O'Donnell. There are no commuter flights 
between midnight and 6 a.m. 
After 9 p.m., planes taking off from LAX are being required to fly farther west 
over the Pacific Ocean to climb in altitude before turning north. 
Dozens of Aircraft 
As many as 70 jetliners a day have been flying over Topanga and Calabasas on a 
takeoff path known as "Gorman Five." 
The new procedures went into effect over the weekend, O'Donnell said. 
The change in takeoffs represents the FAA's first acknowledgment that jet noise 
is a problem for residents of the two communities at the southwestern edge of 
the San Fernando Valley. 
Last year, FAA officials brushed aside complaints by comparing jet noise over 
the area with the sound of birds, dogs, cars and wind. 
At the same time, the FAA removed an LAX administrator assigned to investigate 
noise complaints who had criticized an FAA report that concluded that "there is 
no appreciable difference between the aircraft noise and ambient noise for the 
area." 
Report Conclusions 
The report stated that "ambient noise (bird/dogs/cars/wind)" registered at 65 
to 80 decibels. Departing jets peaked in the 50- to 65-decibel range, the 
report said. 
That prompted angry community leaders to seek help from Rep. Anthony C. 
Beilenson (D-Tarzana), who called for a formal FAA investigation into the 
dispute. 
Barry Glaser, president of the Topanga Town Council and one of the most 
persistent critics of the over-the-canyon takeoffs, credited Beilenson's 
intervention with prompting the ban. 
"It's fantastic, just wonderful. We're already noticing a difference," Glaser 
said. "We understand the airlines don't like it and it was difficult to do, but 
we feel it's a good first step. Congressman Beilenson has taken a good, strong 
position." 
The takeoff change was announced by Jeffrey Thorstenson, manager of the FAA's 
air space and procedures branch. 
He declined further comment Wednesday, however, and O'Donnell said he did not 
know how many nighttime flights were affected. 
O'Donnell said he did not know if it is possible to route other Gorman Five 
takeoffs farther west to avoid Topanga and Calabasas. 
"If we can safely reroute traffic without impeding safety, we most certainly 
would do that," O'Donnell said. "Noise abatement is an important issue with the 
FAA. Until further notice, they will be directed to a Ventura departure." 
Hope Change Is Permanent 
Opponents of the noise said Wednesday that they hope the change is permanent. 
Virginia Hatfield, a field representative for Beilenson, said her office in 
December appealed to FAA officials in Washington for a 60-day test period to 
study the noise situation. 
She said her office has not received official notification from the FAA of the 
takeoff ban. 
But blissful nighttime quiet the past few days has been notification enough for 
such homeowners as Margaret Rawls of Calabasas. 
"We can sleep now. It's a definite improvement," said Rawls, who has fought the 
jet noise since 1984. 
"There weren't that many jets flying over late at night. But those that did 
were enough to wake you up." 
