DEEP FEELINGS; 
NEIGHBORS VOICE RESENTMENT, OIL OFFICIALS DISAPPOINTMENT OVER WELL 
In 1982 Chevron USA had high hopes for the San Fernando Valley's first urban 
commercial oil well, which the oil giant had just finished digging in a 
residential section of Pacoima. 
Neighbors, some of whom lived as close as across the street from the drill 
site, were not as enthusiastic. They feared that the Paxton Street well would 
be a safety hazard, alter the neighborhood's character and lower their property 
values. 
Seven years after drilling started, neither Chevron officials nor area 
residents are satisfied. 
Chevron's hopes for a significant oil find have been dashed -- production 
levels at the site are a fraction of what was expected. And neighbors are upset 
with Chevron. Mostly, they resent the oil company's actions because they felt 
powerless to stop its intrusion into their neighborhood. Some still have 
nagging concerns about the danger posed by the operation and others say it 
scars the community. 
Doubly irritated are those who opposed the drilling and refused to sign oil 
lease agreements with Chevron. The company ended up taking the oil anyway and 
paid nothing for it, all of which city officials say is completely legal. 
The site yields an average of 268 barrels of oil and 5 million cubic feet of 
natural gas per day, far below the daily 2,400 barrels of oil and 24 million 
cubic feet of natural gas that Chevron officials had predicted. 
"It's been very disappointing," said Margo Bart, Chevron's district supervisor 
of lands. "It's a wonderful facility and it's capable of handling far greater 
volumes than we have been able to produce." 
Looming over neighboring homes, the main oil drilling tower is on Paxton Street 
just south of the intersection of the Golden State and Simi Valley freeways. 
The drilling district holds 10 wells in a 700-acre area between Burnet Avenue 
and Whiteman Airport. Only six of the 10 wells, however, have yielded any oil, 
Bart said. 
Despite the disappointing output, Chevron officials say they have paid more 
than $10 million in royalties to mineral rights owners since drilling began, 
distributing $1.3 million of that last year. 
Property owners do not necessarily hold the mineral rights to their land. The 
rights may be held by a previous owner or developer who did not sell them along 
with the land. The mineral rights entitle the holder to profits generated from 
valuable minerals, such as gold or oil, discovered underneath the property. 
Chevron refused to say how many area residents receive royalties from 
production at the Paxton Street site or to provide a breakdown of its royalty 
payments. 
City officials, however, said the city Department of Recreation and Parks, 
which owns a park in the drilling district, collects about $36,000 annually, 
and Los Angeles County officials said the county Division of Public Works, 
which has a flood control channel there, receives about $150,000 a year in 
royalties. 
The state Department of Transportation also owns freeways in the district, 
although representatives were unable to provide estimates of their annual 
royalty collections. 
Quarterly Checks 
Some residents who get royalties say their checks average from $52 to $200 per 
quarter, a sum that amounts to their share of one-sixth of the value of the oil 
produced in the Paxton Street district. 
Michael Kmet is among those who are content with their checks. 
Kmet, 70, who has lived in his Pacoima house for 35 years, said it was as if 
the money was "just falling from heaven." 
But some neighbors believe that they are not receiving fair compensation for 
the oil drilling taking place against their wishes right under their back 
yards. 
Arthur Savage, 71, a retired systems analyst, has lived for 30 years in a house 
virtually across the street from the drill site. He gets no royalties even 
though he owns the mineral rights to his land because he opposed Chevron's oil 
drilling plan from the beginning and refused to sign a lease. 
Savage refused to consent to the company's request to tunnel under his 
property. He believes that Chevron secretly takes oil from under his house, 
using wells drilled through neighbors' properties. 
'We Are Losing' 
"We have no guarantee that they are not drilling under our house," he said. 
"How do we know precisely how they are drilling? We are losing." 
Other residents have grumbled that Chevron is drawing oil from beneath their 
properties without their permission and without paying them. 
Bart said Chevron officials indeed presume that they are drawing oil from 
beneath every property in the drilling district. 
Chevron and city officials, however, say such practices are legal. Under city 
and state law, oil companies are allowed to draw oil from beneath a property in 
a designated drilling area if that property is smaller than an acre and if 75% 
of the other mineral rights owners in the area have already signed oil leases, 
said Jeff Druyun, senior legislative analyst for the city and former city 
petroleum administrator. 
Thus many Pacoima residents who decided not to lease their mineral rights to 
Chevron and thought that they had denied the company permission to draw oil 
from their land may actually be supplying Chevron, he said. Chevron refused to 
disclose how many residents may be in this position. 
Back-Yard Wells 
Druyun said the city and state regulations were designed to ensure that oil is 
pumped efficiently in residential neighborhoods. Unlike the 1930s and '40s, 
when many people drilled oil wells in their back yards, Los Angeles residents 
are prohibited from operating their own wells, he said. 
"Our city rules are in the best interests of all the property owners," he said. 
City law does not ignore the needs of those who refused to sign agreements 
consenting to the drilling. The law stipulates that mineral rights holders can 
collect royalties as soon as they sign the agreement leasing their oil rights 
to a company, Druyun said. If they sign during the first five years of 
drilling, they can even collect the back royalties. 
The agreement with the oil company is essentially a consent form and specifies 
the terms of drawing the oil and natural gas, and the method of calculating the 
royalties. 
Residents may be unaware of this opportunity to collect royalties, but Bart 
said she believes that the company did a fair and thorough job of educating 
property owners about their rights. "Efforts were made to re-contact people. We 
had people out there knocking on doors. But they don't get the royalty if they 
don't sign the lease." 
But Miriam Savage, Arthur Savage's wife, said no one contacted them either in 
person or by letter to tell them that they were eligible for royalties despite 
their initial refusal to consent to drilling. 
"They never came around and told us that," she said. "When they first came, we 
told them we weren't going to sign because we didn't want to be a party to the 
oil drilling. They never came back afterwards to tell us. 
"What would we have to do now to collect the royalties?" she asked. 
Chevron does not profit from withholding royalties from people because any 
unclaimed money is divided and redistributed to the other mineral rights 
owners, Bart said. 
Bart said there is no question that Chevron pays the people who signed leases 
if the company takes oil from their property. However, no government agency 
monitors the oil production to ensure that mineral rights owners receive the 
full royalties to which they are entitled. 
Royalties are not the only sore point among neighbors of the Paxton Street 
drill site. 
Many of those interviewed, even those who are happy with their royalties, said 
they are concerned that the well may be unsafe. Those fears have loomed larger 
since September, 1987, when a refinery worker was killed and two others were 
injured after a spark inside an oil tank caused an explosion. 
"There is no guarantee of safety. Emergencies do happen, unforeseen mistakes, 
blunders," Savage said. "When you are in a residential neighborhood, you are 
playing with dynamite before you even begin." 
Chevron officials and experts said the neighbors' fears are unfounded. They say 
urban oil drilling accidents are rare. 
"There is nothing terribly unique about these urban drill sites. They are 
relatively benign," Rod Spackman, public affairs manager for Chevron, said, 
noting that the company has eight other urban drill sites throughout Los 
Angeles. The accident, he said, was "unrelated to the operations of the plant," 
which he called "one of the safest, most well-operated sites of its kind." 
Tom Heaton of the U.S. Geological Survey said: "The biggest problem is that 
something could break and cause a fire, but those residents all have natural 
gas pipes in their houses, and you have the same risk with those pipes." 
Still, neighbors are unfazed by those assurances. 
Earthquake Fears 
Tennie White, who has lived in her home on Paxton Street for more than 20 
years, is worried that an earthquake could cause the ground to collapse because 
of the underground space left by oil drilling. Others said they fear explosions 
or fires. 
"We have heard a lot of things that have happened in other places with oil 
wells, like explosions," said Mercedes Carlon, 62, who lives across the street 
from the site. "We are senior citizens already and we can't run as fast as we 
used to." 
Despite the discontent of many neighbors and the disappointment of Chevron 
officials, the company insists that it made the right decision to drill for oil 
on Paxton Street. 
"It's not a gold mine, but it is an economically productive site, and that's 
the bottom line," Spackman said. "It's a decent field." 
