BUSH HAS NO PLAN TO LIFT SANCTIONS AGAINST S. AFRICA 
The Bush Administration has no plans to lift U.S. sanctions against South 
Africa, President Bush indicated Monday, deflecting pressure from some 
conservatives who argue that the Pretoria government deserves a concrete reward 
for its racial policy reforms. 
"I'm bound by the law" to maintain the sanctions until the South African 
government meets additional conditions, Bush said in a press conference. 
Although he could ask Congress to change the law and repeal some or all of the 
sanctions, he showed no inclination to do so. 
"I think we ought to give Mr. De Klerk certain credit," Bush said, referring to 
South African President Frederik W. de Klerk. The South African leader, Bush 
said, has proven that he is able to "look much more realistically about 
political change." 
But, when asked if he thinks he needs to make a "gesture" to De Klerk to 
respond to the release of activist Nelson R. Mandela, Bush said he believes his 
invitation to De Klerk and Mandela to visit Washington will suffice. 
Some Administration officials, as well as conservatives here and abroad, have 
advocated a rapid removal of at least some sanctions. Monday morning, for 
example, Herman Cohen, the assistant secretary of state who oversees policy 
toward Africa, said the United States should "make some gesture" to reward De 
Klerk. 
"What we really care about is encouraging further progress," said Cohen. "If 
that means relaxation of sanctions, fine." 
Over the weekend, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher sent a letter to 
about two dozen world leaders advocating an end to international sanctions 
against the De Klerk government. 
"When people are doing the right thing as boldly and courageously as President 
De Klerk," Thatcher wrote, "it seems quite absurd to still use sticks to beat 
them with, however small those sticks may be." 
So far, Thatcher, who has long been the most outspoken Western leader in 
resisting sanctions against the South African regime, appears to be alone in 
her call. 
Bush in the past has opposed the sanctions, which were adopted over 
then-President Ronald Reagan's veto in 1986. He repeated that philosophical 
leaning Monday, saying, "Frankly, I think some (sanctions) are 
counterproductive." 
For now, however, Bush seems disinclined to back his philosophy with action, 
perhaps wary of the strong domestic opposition he would face. Democrats made 
opposition to South Africa a popular issue when Reagan vetoed the sanctions 
bill. An active campaign by Bush to remove sanctions would, at minimum, 
undermine the efforts his Administration has made to improve relations with 
black voters. 
Bush said he would consult on the issue with Mandela, who supports continued 
sanctions, when the black leader visits Washington. So far, no date has been 
scheduled for the visits of either Mandela or De Klerk. 
The President also seemed determined to minimize differences between Mandela 
and the United States. He brushed aside questions about Mandela's statements 
supporting continued armed struggle against the white minority-led government 
and praising the South African Communist Party, a long-time ally of Mandela's 
African National Congress in the anti-apartheid fight. 
"We've always advocated nonviolence," Bush said, but "I read (Mandela's) 
statement to be more on the defensive side" -- an advocacy of self-defense, 
rather than aggressive violence. 
Mandela, in a press conference Monday in Johannesburg, defended in theory the 
use of force, saying "the armed struggle is a defensive act against apartheid." 
And on Sunday, in his first speech after his release from prison, Mandela had 
said, "I salute" the Communist Party for "its sterling contribution to the 
struggle for democracy." 
"The alliance between ourselves and the party remains as strong as it ever 
was," Mandela added. 
In the past, U.S. administrations have often raised concerns about ties between 
the Communists and the African National Congress, the principal guerrilla group 
in the struggle against apartheid. This time, however, Bush played down any 
such worry. 
"I think these Communist parties are for the most part sliding down hill. 
What's coming uphill is democracy and freedom," he said. If Mandela pushes 
plans to nationalize privately held businesses, Bush said, "if we have a 
difference there, that's fine -- we'll discuss it with him." 
While Bush advocated maintaining the status quo on sanctions, several 
congressional Democrats on Monday pushed ahead with plans for bills that would 
strengthen the sanctions still further -- imposing what would amount to a 
virtual trade ban with South Africa. The move drew support from a spokeswoman 
for the ANC. 
"While we welcome Mandela's release with great concern, we note that 2,500 
political prisoners remain in jail," Lindiwe Mabuza, the ANC's U.S. 
representative, said at a Washington press conference. Until further changes 
are made in South African government policy, Mandela and other anti-apartheid 
activists cannot participate in political debate "without fears of arrest, 
detention, tear gas or clubs," she said. 
Times staff writer Shawn Pogatchnik contributed to this story. 
