GREENSPAN SAYS HE'LL KEEP PUSHING INTEREST RATES UP; 
DIFFERS WITH BUSH OVER INFLATION 
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan today said that inflationary pressures 
are unacceptable and that the central bank would continue fighting higher 
prices by driving up interest rates. 
Greenspan's remarks could spell bad news for the Bush Administration, which is 
counting on robust economic growth to reduce the federal budget deficit without 
increased taxes. 
Greenspan released an economic forecast prepared by the central bank that 
showed growth significantly lower than the Bush Administration's estimate. 
Greenspan's comments were made in testimony to the Senate Banking Committee as 
part of the requirement that the central bank reveal its economic assumptions 
and monetary policy targets twice a year. 
The central bank has been pushing interest rates higher in an effort to 
restrain domestic demand since March of last year, an effort that has sent a 
variety of short-term interest rates climbing by about 3 percentage points. 
'Restraint' Cited 
In his testimony, Greenspan discussed this effort and said the central bank 
"remains more inclined to act in the direction of restraint" on the supply of 
credit. 
For the last two years, consumer prices have increased 4.4% annually, a rate of 
increase that Greenspan said is worrisome. 
"The wage and price process may have developed some momentum," Greenspan said, 
citing reports showing that wage increases are rising at a faster clip because 
of the tight labor markets. 
"Let me stress that the current rate of inflation, let alone an increase, is 
not acceptable, and our policies are designed to reduce inflation in coming 
years," he said. "This restraint will involve containing pressures on our 
productive resources and, thus, some slowing in the underlying rate of growth" 
of the overall economy. 
Since taking office, President Bush has on several occasions said he believes 
that the Fed's worries about inflation are misplaced, saying he sees no need to 
push interest rates higher. 
The central bank has so far ignored those comments, however, launching its 
latest credit tightening effort just last week after a report on prices at the 
wholesale level that showed an unexpectedly sharp 1% increase in January. 
Conflicting Forecasts 
In his report to Congress, Greenspan said the Fed is predicting that the 
overall economy, as measured by the gross national product, will expand by 
between 2.5% and 3% in 1989. The Administration, however, is basing its budget 
on a forecast that expects growth to be a more robust 3.5% this year. 
To support its move to restrain inflationary pressures, Greenspan said the 
central bank policy makers reaffirmed a decision made last summer to lower 
money growth targets for 1989. For M-2, the measure of the money supply that 
includes currency in circulation and interest-bearing checking accounts, the 
Fed said it would aim for an increase of between 3% and 7%, down a percentage 
point from the 1988 growth target. 
Greenspan said he understands that moves toward tightening the availability of 
money and driving up interest rates could have an adverse effect on the savings 
and loan crisis, the Third World debt situation and the debt problems of some 
American businesses. 
