RANDY LEWIS: THE NEWS AS SEEN THROUGH SOVIET UNION'S EYES: FILM AT 11:30 
Yes, it's February once again. Which means that out there in the vast 
wasteland, it's ratings sweeps time, and TV newscasts are at their, er, best. 
It's as though, between sweeps periods, the world spins along in suspended 
animation but now, suddenly, it has come alive: "The planet is in danger and by 
tomorrow it may be too late. Tune in Thursday!" 
Or, "Action News 2" and its "Home Sick Special" -- "Your own house could be 
poisoning you!" 
Sick of the fright-night tactics? Bored silly by yet another "Eye On L.A." 
excursion to Tahiti? Yearning for a news report that actually has some news? 
Try "Vremya," the Soviet Union's official daily national newscast, currently 
airing on Orange County Public Broadcasting System station KOCE (Channel 50) on 
a two-week trial run. "Vremya" made its debut Monday night in the 
less-than-prime-time 11:30 p.m. slot, but given that the best Los Angeles PBS 
station KCET (Channel 28) could do was the midnight time slot,we should be 
thankful. 
In many ways, even though it's a show that most people probably won't find 
habit-forming, "Vremya" is a real eye-opener. For the unprecedented chance it 
offers -- to look through the same lens that filters the world for millions of 
Soviet citizens -- it's a must-see. 
"Vremya" is airing in dozens of U.S. cities, yet another tangible sign of the 
much-ballyhooed "new openness" between the two countries. Presumably, the 
Soviet people will be given a look at American television in exchange. Let's 
just hope -- for our sake and theirs -- it's not Geraldo's special on "When the 
Other Woman Is a Man." 
Monday's first 30-minute installment of "Vremya" was highly revelatory, more 
for what you could read between the lines than for actual information gleaned. 
What is most apparent is that production values, and even basic competence, are 
nowhere near the same as with national network news here. As Times Television 
Critic Howard Rosenberg pointed out, stories on "Vremya" sometimes "appear to 
have been edited (or censored) by chain saw." In that respect, "Vremya" more 
closely resembles the products of first-year college broadcasting students, or 
one of the slapdash local news shows that often pop up on public-access cable 
systems. 
Far more significant than the technical shortcomings of "Vremya," though, are 
the differences in content between Soviet and U.S. newscasts. Monday's top 
story was a lengthy profile of a Soviet Buddhist leader running for political 
office, newsworthy because only recently have the Soviet Union's Buddhist 
communities been allowed by the Communist Party leadership in Moscow to 
participate in elections. The story itself suggested no illicit sexual liaisons 
with buxom secretaries; unearthed no private bouts with alcoholism, drug 
addiction or depression; and included no sideswipes at rival candidates. 
On one hand, that approach may paint a falsely rosy picture of the Soviet 
political process, which certainly must suffer some of the same ills that 
plague ours. Still, it was downright refreshing to see a political piece that 
concentrated on issues and a candidate's positions and qualifications, not on 
his personal habits. 
The second story of the evening was a feature on a new electrolyte copper 
factory in the Ural Mountains. Reflecting the traditionally heavy Soviet 
emphasis on productivity and technology, much was made of the fact that this 
factory now is capable of turning out electrolyte copper film only 18 microns 
thick, where previously the thinnest it had been able to produce was 35 
microns. 
I suppose inquiring minds want to know. 
Again, hardly earth-shattering stuff in and of itself. But highly revealing for 
what the show's powers-that-be consider to be big news. The only time we're 
likely to see a major national news story on a manufacturing plant is if it 
explodes, closes and lays off thousands of workers, or if its operators have 
bilked the government on a multimillion-dollar defense contract. 
The specter of glasnost may hover over the Western world like Casper the 
Friendly Ghost, but "Vremya" is still filled with propaganda. Undoubtedly, 
though, it now is a more subtle brand than it must have been in the 
pre-Gorbachev era. Stories are laced with editorializing, praising the Soviet 
government and the character of the people. When mention is made of the 
U.S.S.R.'s less-enthralling accomplishments, clumsy attempts are made to 
ameliorate tragedies past. 
In one report, for instance, there was a reference to the Stalin era, now 
officially sanctioned as fair game for criticism. It was brought up as an 
example of "the terrifying pages of our past, which," we were quickly informed, 
"have passed forever. . . ." 
The choice of two stories "Vremya" picked up about the United States was 
especially interesting. 
The first was about our very own oil spill off Huntington Beach. The snippet 
showed footage of waves crashing on Newport Beach as a voice-over explained 
that "as a result of an oil spill, the coastal waters of that state were 
contaminated." The whole state? "Due to precise work of the coastal service, 
the uses of cleaning services and volunteer assistance rendered by the 
population, it becomes possible to partly eliminate the consequences of the 
contamination." OK, so they won't win any Emmys for newswriting. 
The next segment was a report on last weekend's prison break from the Joliet 
Correctional Center in Illinois, complete with pictures of armed guards and 
German shepherds searching surrounding areas for the six escapees. 
Both were legitimate news stories, but given that they were the only stories 
about the United States shown by "Vremya," it would be easy to get the 
impression that this country is nothing but a polluted wasteland overrun by 
criminals. . . . 
Film at 11:30. 
