'WORST PILLS, BEST PILLS'; 
GUIDE WARNS OLDER ADULTS OF HAZARDS IN EXCESS DRUGS 
Millions of older adults suffer adverse drug reactions each year as a result of 
misprescribed drugs, and many people mistakenly believe drug-related woes are 
just part of old age, a consumer health advocate says. 
The advocate, Dr. Sidney Wolfe, has written a new consumer guide aimed at 
changing doctor-patient relations and deflecting the marketing of drugs to 
doctors for the elderly, who make up a big share of the drug-consuming market. 
"The drug industry is aware of the fact that for millennia, the doctor-patient 
relationship is one in which the doctor has the upper hand," Wolfe said 
recently, adding that 9 million adults over 60 suffer unnecessarily every year 
because of prescription drugs. 
A physician, Wolfe is the outspoken director of the Washington-based Public 
Citizen Health Research Group, which he co-founded with consumer advocate Ralph 
Nader. 
"Only recently has the patient said, 'Hey, maybe I'd be getting better care if 
I work with my doctor,' " Wolfe said shortly before the September release of 
the book, "Worst Pills, Best Pills," distributed by Pantheon. 
The book's subtitle, "The Older Adult's Guide to Avoiding Drug-induced Death or 
Illness," emphasizes the severity of the problem, which Wolfe considers "an 
epidemic" for those over 60, who in this country number about 40 million. 
The book lists the 287 most prescribed drugs and their possible good and bad 
effects for Americans over 60. Included are 104 drugs the book said should not 
be used at all and 183 safer alternatives, some of which do not involve taking 
drugs. 
"Although older adults do have more chronic diseases than those who are younger 
. . . there is mounting evidence that many of our older citizens are getting 
prescription drugs which are entirely unnecessary . . . " or could be used at a 
lower dose or in a safer form, the book says. 
Over-drugging of the elderly is commonplace, other geriatric health experts 
agree. 
"The way I make my living basically is by taking people off of drugs," said Dr. 
William Burke, director of geriatric psychiatry at the University of Nebraska 
in Omaha. 
He agreed with the book's warnings about the widespread use of addictive drugs 
called benzodiazepines -- so-called minor tranquilizers like Valium, Librium, 
Xanax -- in addition to sleeping pills like Halcion. 
Heart and blood pressure medications and gastrointestinal drugs also are 
over-prescribed, the book concludes. 
Even before seeing the book, the American Assn. of Retired Persons in 
Washington welcomes Wolfe's contribution, said Judith Brown, a health analyst 
for the group. 
She said AARP has been disappointed by the failure of the Food and Drug 
Administration, which licenses all drugs and controls their labeling, to make 
more drug information available to consumers. 
Wolfe's book offers the kind of understandable information that was to have 
been required in the packaging of all prescription drugs, but the FDA dropped 
the proposal at the conclusion of the Jimmy Carter Administration. 
