BUSH PROCLAIMS 'ANTI-DRUG CARTEL'; 
SUMMIT: FOUR LEADERS ANNOUNCE NO SPECIFIC NEW STEPS TO FIGHT TRAFFICKING. THE 
NEED FOR FINANCIAL AID TO ANDEAN NATIONS IS STRESSED. A ROLE IS SEEN FOR ARMED 
FORCES. 
President Bush flew here for his much-heralded summit with three Latin American 
presidents Thursday and proclaimed after about three hours of meetings that the 
four nations have formed "the first anti-drug cartel." 
An 11-page "Declaration of Cartagena" signed by Bush and the presidents of 
Colombia, Bolivia and Peru said that fighting drug traffic requires effective 
efforts to reduce demand for drugs in consuming countries and to stimulate 
economic development in producing countries. 
Bush promised in the document to seek congressional approval of new funds to 
"counteract the short and long-term socio-economic impact of an effective fight 
against illicit drugs." 
The communique also pledges the four governments to control chemicals used in 
refining cocaine, share money and properties seized from traffickers, exchange 
intelligence information and control weapons, planes and other equipment used 
in drug trafficking. 
However, the presidents -- Bush, Peru's Alan Garcia, Bolivia's Jaime Paz Zamora 
and Colombia's Virgilio Barco Vargas -- did not discuss extradition of drug 
criminals, specific levels of American economic aid or the use of the U.S. 
military to fight the drug traffic, according to Bush's spokesman, Marlin 
Fitzwater. 
U.S. and South American officials negotiated details of the document until 
Wednesday night before coming to final agreement. A source close to the talks 
said that the American negotiators wanted to put the major emphasis on police 
and military repression of drug trafficking, but they yielded to the South 
Americans' insistence that greater emphasis should be put on the need for 
financial aid and economic development as necessary conditions for controlling 
the traffic. 
The South American governments reluctantly acceded to a U.S. demand for a 
clause specifying that the armed forces of the three South American countries 
may participate in the fight against trafficking, the source said. The 
Colombian military already is involved, but the military leaders of Peru and 
Bolivia have balked at joining police in anti-drug efforts. 
Fitzwater described the meeting as "cordial and businesslike . . . very 
complete." 
Others took a somewhat more skeptical view. 
"As they say in the United States, 'Where is the hamburger?' " asked Peru's 
Garcia during a joint press conference at the end of the summit. 
Despite the question, the four participants each pronounced themselves 
basically happy with the meeting. While no specific new steps were agreed upon, 
they said, the fact that the four presidents met at all was an important 
advance. 
"We have begun a form of perestroika," Paz said at the joint press conference, 
adding that he was "fully satisfied" with the results. 
"For the first time," said Garcia, "we have come together with the President of 
the United States." That fact, he declared, marks the beginning of "a new 
collaborative approach" and a "new chapter" in relations between Latin America 
and the United States. 
The meeting, said Bush, "demonstrates solidarity" between the United States, 
the world's largest consumer of cocaine, and the three nations that are the 
chief sources of the drug. "In signing the document, we've committed ourselves 
to the first common, comprehensive international drug control strategy. We, in 
fact, created the first anti-drug cartel," he said. 
Paz said the communique shows that the United States now accepts the idea that 
coca leaf production cannot be curtailed without major economic support for the 
economies of the coca-growing countries, Bolivia and Peru. 
The document states, "The United States is also prepared to cooperate with the 
Andean Parties in a wide range of initiatives for development, trade and 
investment in order to strengthen and sustain long-term economic growth." 
But Paz said the South American presidents recognized that U.S. budget problems 
make it difficult for Bush to promise all the aid needed. 
"We indicated that we do not expect it to come only from the United States," he 
said, but other developed countries should also help with financial support. 
In the communique, the United States also pledged "increased cooperation in 
equipment and training to the law enforcement bodies" of the three Andean 
countries. It agreed to work with them "to stem weapons exports from the United 
States to illegal drug traffickers." 
But the presidents' declaration left several major questions unresolved. 
Barco, for example, denied news reports that his government had made a deal 
with traffickers. 
"These rumors are completely and totally false," he said. "Colombian law cannot 
be negotiated." 
Barco did not, however, mention the word "extradition." And although he 
insisted that drug traffickers must "give everything up, including themselves," 
he made no commitment that the Colombian government would continue to send at 
least some of those who did surrender to the United States to face trial. 
Extradition is the fate that members of the Colombia drug cartels apparently 
fear most. When the assassination of a popular presidential candidate by 
traffickers last August prompted Barco to revive an extradition treaty with the 
United States, the cartels fought back with a campaign of terror. Recently, 
messages from the traffickers have indicated that they would end their war with 
the government and get out of the illicit drug trade. Observers say their aim 
is to persuade Barco to drop extradition. 
Separately, the United States and Peru agreed to make a separate exchange of 
diplomatic notes reinforcing their commitment to the extradition of accused 
drug traffickers. 
Bush, for his part, pledged to continue to seek economic aid to help wean the 
economies of the three Andean nations from cocaine. But he made no commitment 
to a total amount and specifically said that the United States would not try to 
match the loss of cocaine revenue "dollar for dollar" or "job for job." 
"I don't think we can do that," he said. The South American nations should try 
to end coca production, despite the economic costs, because "growing drugs for 
the international market" is "immoral." 
Bolivia's President Paz, however, painted a picture of how difficult that will 
be for his impoverished country. He said upon his arrival Tuesday night that 
coca accounts for half of its national economy. In a separate, bilateral 
agreement with Colombia, the United States pledged to try to open the U.S. 
market to additional Colombian exports that would replace drugs, but, again, 
Bush made no specific promises. American consumers "do not want to pay higher 
prices," he said when asked about efforts to increase the international price 
of coffee, one of Colombia's largest legal exports. 
The United States and Peru also signed an agreement permitting the exchange of 
tax records, bank statements and other information to uncover illicit drug 
profits and trace drug money-laundering. 
Bush also repeated his pledge to continue efforts to reduce demand for drugs in 
America, an important symbol for South American leaders, who for years have 
bridled at what they argue is unfair American pressure to destroy coca crops, 
the main source of income for hundreds of thousands of otherwise impoverished 
peasants, while United States does little to reduce the demand that fuels the 
drug trade. 
Next to demand reduction, "all other tactics pale into insignificance," 
Colombia's Barco said as he welcomed the three other leaders to the summit 
site, a Colombian navy base on a small peninsula jutting out into the placid 
waters of Cartagena Bay. 
"The only law the narco-traffickers do not violate," he said, "is the law of 
supply and demand." 
The aspect of the summit that was almost certainly the most carefully watched 
in the United States was a question answered before the meetings even began: 
Bush proved he could travel to Colombia safely. 
For weeks, the question of the President's security here has dominated 
discussions of the meeting. Despite qualms by his security staff and worries of 
many Americans, Bush insisted on traveling here, saying that to do otherwise 
would send a message of no-confidence in the Barco government. 
Administration officials Thursday continued their conflicting messages about 
the degree of danger. White House officials warned reporters and staff members 
not to wander from "secure areas" and not to accept any packages or gifts. 
Other Administration officials, however, said they thought the concern over 
security, which had led the White House to keep the bulk of the press corps in 
Barranquilla, about 60 miles from the meeting site, had been overstated. 
The worries were "overblown," Assistant Secretary of State Bernard Aronson told 
reporters on Air Force One as Bush flew south before dawn Thursday morning. 
Although security was tight, few unusual precautions were apparent. Air Force 
One made a fast, low approach to the airport at Barranquilla. Bush spent a few 
minutes greeting dignitaries at the airport, then boarded a Marine helicopter 
which sped off for Cartagena. Accompanied by three other helicopters carrying 
press, staff and Secret Service agents, the President's helicopter flew at high 
speed and low altitude along the coast, sending flocks of egrets swirling into 
the air from the marshes below. 
Peru's President Garcia had threatened to not attend the summit because of the 
U.S. invasion of Panama. He changed his position only after the United States 
announced that all invading troops would be withdrawn by the end of February. 
Arriving Thursday morning in Cartagena, Garcia indicated that the invasion was 
not be a subject for discussion. Panama "is a separate chapter," he said, but 
added: "We continue to reject the intervention; we continue to reject the 
invasion." 
"Glad to meet you at last," Bush said to Garcia as the two were introduced. 
"You're a big man, a big guy," he added to the Peruvian president, who, even 
without the elevator shoes he wore is a couple of inches taller and quite a few 
pounds heavier than the six-foot two-inch Bush. 
Taking a brief stroll in the humid ocean breeze before their meeting, Bush 
chatted with the three other heads of state in a small courtyard of an old fort 
located on the peninsula as raucous tropical birds crowed nearby and flocks of 
small yellow warblers darted between branches of bright pink bougainvillea. 
"I love it, beautiful," said Bush "I just wish we had more time for fishing." 
BACKGROUND Cartagena was once a major storage port for the treasure-laden 
galleons of the Spanish Main. An extensive network of fortresses and ramparts, 
with walls 50 feet thick in places, was built by Spain to protect hoards of 
gold and jewels from pirates and privateers, who attacked the city repeatedly. 
Sir Francis Drake captured Cartagena in 1586 but, for a payment of 10 million 
pesos, did not burn it down. The French sacked it in 1697. But in 1741, its 
mightiest fortress, San Felipe -- honeycombed with tunnels and passages -- 
resisted a massive assault by 27,000 men and 3,000 pieces of artillery led by 
the English buccaneer Edward Vernon. Well-restored and well-maintained, 
Cartagena's Old City today is one of the best preserved colonial-era districts 
in South America. It has often been used as a set for films seeking to recreate 
authentic period locales, including that of "The Mission," starring Robert De 
Niro. 
THE TALK OF CARTAGENA 
The anti-drug war brought the leaders of the United States, the biggest 
consumer of illegal drugs, and the major producing nations, Colombia, Peru and 
Bolivia, together at a summit in Cartagena, Colombia. Some facts and figures 
about the drug trade and the participating nations: 
COLOMBIA 
Colombian farmers grow about 10% of the coca leaves for U.S.-bound cocaine. 
The Medellin and Cali drug cartels refine 80% of U.S. cocaine. 
Illegal cocaine brings in an estimated $500 million to $1.2 billion. 
BOLIVIA 
Bolivia raises about 30% of the coca for U.S. cocaine. 
Cocaine trafficking brings in an estimated $200 million to $300 million. 
PERU 
60% of U.S.-bound cocaine is derived from coca grown in Peru. 
About 200,000 Peruvians earn their living growing coca. 
Drugs bring in $1.2 billion a year. 
UNITED STATES 
President Bush's national drug control strategy for 1991, if approved, will 
cost $10.6 billion. Of the total spending, 42% would be for domestic law 
enforcement, 29% for interdiction and 29% for prevention and treatment. The 
plan includes $423 million in drug law enforcement and economic development aid 
to Colombia, Peru and Bolivia. 
Source: Associated Press 
DRUG SUMMIT 
President Bush met with the presidents of Colombia, Peru and Bolivia to devise 
a strategy against the cocaine trade. 
CARTEGENA 
A coastal resort city of 350,000 population that was a key port of the Spainish 
Main from the 16th to the 18th centuries. 
Meeting Site: At colonial style guest house on a naval base. 
