30 HOLD SIT-IN TO DEMAND UCI HOUSING FOR GAYS 
About 30 students held a peaceful sit-in Monday at the office of UC Irvine 
Chancellor Jack W. Peltason, demanding that the university alter its housing 
policies so gay and lesbian couples can qualify for student family housing. 
The sit-in at the chancellor's office, which came after about 100 protesters 
staged a noontime demonstration in the administration building, was the first 
on campus since the Vietnam War era, university police officials said. There 
were no arrests. 
Peltason held two separate meetings with the demonstrators, who at various 
times chanted slogans, wielded placards and ate several pepperoni-and-cheese 
pizzas rushed in about two hours after the group moved into the building. 
While the chancellor acknowledged under questioning from the students that he 
does not consider homosexuality immoral and would not retaliate against 
students or faculty involved in the protests, he offered little else to assuage 
their frustration and anger. 
Instead, Peltason said that the protesters should pursue the issue "through the 
civil process" to change California's legal definition of marriage, which does 
not apply to homosexual couples. 
"We recognize that this demonstration is more than a political demonstration," 
Peltason said in a written statement Monday. "It is a genuine and courageous 
expression of a need to be recognized -- a need for acknowledgement that gay 
and lesbian partnerships are as meaningful to them as marriages are to those 
persons who have the option of getting married." 
He also said the university has never had a policy exception that allowed 
homosexual or other unmarried couples to room at the university's family 
housing quarters, even though at least three lesbian couples are now living at 
the 860-unit Verano Place apartments. None of the couples is being asked to 
leave. 
Other university officials said sympathetic campus housing authorities had 
allowed several homosexual couples to rent low-cost family units, citing a 
policy exception that permits "non-traditional families." Under that exception, 
students can claim that their ability to attend the university might be 
jeopardized if they are not allowed to live with adults not related to them by 
marriage. 
Most of the demonstrators, whose numbers included both homosexual and 
heterosexual students, came away from the day ready for a drawn-out fight. 
The rally and sit-in were the start of a week of protests to spotlight the 
university's reluctance to make family housing available to homosexual and 
other "non-traditional" couples. 
Students are planning to set up a "shanty town" outside the administration 
building Wednesday and hold a noon rally on Thursday. Organizers also said they 
have been in contact with peers at UC campuses throughout the state in hopes of 
sparking similar protests. 
"If (Peltason) gets enough pressure on him, he'll buckle," Nicolas Martinez, a 
co-chairman of the Gay and Lesbian Student Union, said during the noon rally, 
which drew dozens of students armed with placards carrying slogans such as 
"Destroy Homophobia, Not Homes." 
While unmarried heterosexual couples can become eligible for resources such as 
student family housing simply by being married, Martinez noted that homosexual 
couples "don't have that option." 
The sit-in occurred after a 90-minute demonstration in the administration 
building's lofty inner atrium broke up. As the crowd dispersed, more than two 
dozen students, many of them undergraduates, huffed up several flights of 
stairs to Peltason's fifth-floor office, chanting the entire way. 
Peltason said the issue surfaced in December when he read a news account of a 
demonstration in Berkeley that quoted protesters who suggested that UC Irvine 
was already allowing "non-traditional couples" to room together in family 
housing quarters. 
Surprised by the story, he asked administrators to clarify the matter. Only 
then, campus officials said, was it discovered that homosexual couples were 
inappropriately being allowed into family housing under the hardship exception, 
which was designed for situations involving handicapped students or other 
extreme cases. 
Student leaders, however, have contended that Peltason buckled under pressure 
from administrators of other UC campuses. Peltason denies that charge. 
When gay and lesbian student leaders learned of the shift, they began mustering 
their forces and held several protests in late January. The demonstrations are 
happening just three months after Irvine voters narrowly approved a ballot 
measure that stripped gay rights protections from city anti-discrimination 
laws. 
