TOWER EFFORT BUNGLED BY WHITE HOUSE, CRITICS SAY 
Two weeks ago, when Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) 
complained that the White House had failed to deliver promised documents about 
John Tower's nomination as defense secretary, White House spokesman Marlin 
Fitzwater blamed the minor snafu on "confusion and incompetence" in the 
fledgling Bush Administration. 
Administration critics say he might have been describing the White House's 
entire handling of the crippled Tower nomination, which after Thursday night's 
negative vote in the committee now appears in danger of defeat by the full 
Senate. 
An Administration lobbyist assigned to guide Tower's nomination through the 
Senate said Friday: "I don't know what the White House could have done" to 
prevent the 11-9 party-line vote against Tower. 
But the record of the Tower nomination is littered with missed warnings, blown 
opportunities, faulty intelligence and inept relations with key lawmakers. 
Even before the November election, Nunn and Sen. John W. Warner (R-Va.), the 
Armed Services panel's senior Republican, warned President Bush in a letter 
that whomever he chose to head the Pentagon would be subjected to unprecedented 
scrutiny. 
At that time, both already had strong doubts about Tower, a 24-year Senate 
veteran whom they knew to be Bush's top choice for the post. Nunn, coming from 
a tradition of Southern reverence for the military and a deep sense of 
senatorial privilege, was concerned by Tower's reputation for hard drinking and 
womanizing. Warner, a former secretary of the Navy, was deeply troubled by the 
example Tower's past conduct would set for American men and women in uniform. 
Indeed, Warner was prepared to vote against Tower as late as Thursday morning, 
when he was browbeaten by GOP colleagues and relentlessly lobbied by the White 
House to "stick with the program" and vote to confirm Tower, several Republican 
Senate sources said Friday. 
Longtime Washington operatives, from both sides of the aisle, said Friday that 
Bush and his aides had been slow to recognize the problem he faced and inept in 
handling it. 
"The thing that's bothersome is where the heck have these guys been since Nov. 
8," one longtime Republican adviser said. "They brought this on themselves." 
Cabinet Member Cites Enmity 
One Bush Cabinet member, who asked not to be named, suggested that it was crazy 
to have chosen Tower in the first place because of questions about his private 
behavior and the wide swath of enmity he had created by his brand of 
body-contact politics. 
In the end, Bush, who has long trusted and admired Tower, may have been lulled 
into a false optimism by Tower's assurances that he had conquered earlier 
drinking problems, and he accepted his friend's word that the many allegations 
against him were groundless. 
Now, the Bush Cabinet officer said, the Tower appointment is dragging the 
President down like "an anchor around his neck." 
Other critics list several missteps, each of which gradually brought disaster 
closer for Tower. 
First, they argue, lengthy and public airing of Tower's problems for five weeks 
between Bush's election and the announcement of Tower's nomination Dec. 16 made 
defending him more difficult. 
After Bush aides had taken more than a month to review Tower's qualifications 
and controversial background, they could hardly complain when the committee 
took a similarly deliberate pace, critics noted. 
Once the nomination had been made and the committee's investigation began, the 
Administration made its problem worse by underestimating the opposition to 
Tower and the degree to which the rules of the game have changed. 
"They were counting on the honeymoon carrying them through," said a former 
longtime Bush aide. In addition, he said, Bush advisers believed that the 
Senate's traditional deference to its former members would protect Tower. 
Then, when the committee moved from investigating into the crucial phase of 
rounding up votes, the Administration appears to have misjudged the one person 
who was held to be the key to the proceedings -- Nunn, the Senate's most 
influential force on defense issues. 
"It was pretty inept," said one longtime congressional lobbyist, a Democrat who 
has worked on controversial nominations in the past. Administration officials 
antagonized Nunn by being tardy in delivering documents and pressing him for an 
early vote. 
Even when Nunn told them two weeks ago that he was leaning against Tower, one 
GOP adviser said, White House officials did not recognize the gravity of the 
situation. And until as late as the night before the vote they still assumed 
that Tower would survive. They devoted little effort to lobbying the Democratic 
votes he would need. 
Richard C. Shelby, a conservative Democrat from Alabama and a prime candidate 
for suasion, said Friday that the White House never even contacted him. 
Sometime Wednesday, Shelby, previously leaning toward Tower, decided to vote 
with his party colleagues after he changed his mind, or as one Senate staffer 
said: "Somebody broke his knees." 
Defections Held Surprising 
Minority Leader Bob Dole (R-Kan.) said the defections of Shelby and two other 
committee Democrats that the White House was counting on came as a surprise. 
"Our intelligence wasn't very good," he acknowledged Friday. 
The most the Administration could do was try to ensure that it kept the 
committee Republicans in line by "putting the screws to Warner," one source 
said. Bush himself called Warner on Tuesday afternoon to insist that he remain 
loyal. 
Working against them was Nunn, who made a solid Democratic vote against the 
nomination "a test of his loyalty to himself, to his party, to his 
chairmanship," one Republican Senate aide said. 
John M. Broder reported from Washington and Jack Nelson from Tokyo. Staff 
writers David Lauter, Melissa Healy and William Eaton also contributed to this 
story from Washington. 
President Bush vows to save the Tower nomination. Page 16. 
