MUSIC REVIEWS ; 
VIOLIST CYNTHIA PHELPS IN PRO MUSICIS RECITAL 
It is always satisfying to attend a well-planned program delivered with 
technical accuracy, emotional feeling and precision of ensemble. Listeners 
heard all of these qualities at the County Museum of Art Wednesday evening as 
violist Cynthia Phelps and pianist Kirsten Taylor presented the latest recital 
in the Pro Musicis series. 
Hindemith's unaccompanied Sonata, Opus 25, No. 1, testified convincingly to 
Phelps' fine control and wide range of expression. The Los Angeles-born 
musician, currently the Minnesota Orchestra's principal violist, produced a 
full, penetrating sound in all registers of her instrument; she contrasted that 
with spellbinding pianissimos. Exhibiting unshakable accuracy, the former 
student of Primrose and McInnes made the 1923 work a powerful, dramatic 
statement. 
Taylor joined Phelps in the other works on the program. The two provided a 
model of teamwork in a well-balanced, rhythmically secure and consummately 
polished reading of Brahms' Sonata in E-flat, Opus 120, No. 2. Both proved 
alert to subtle nuances and implied rubatos; both brought arching lyricism and 
probing expressivity to their playing. 
The premiere performance of Stephen Paulus' "Seven for the Flowers Near the 
River" preceded the Brahms. Conservative without being reactionary, episodic 
but logically constructed, the evocative work exhibits captivating rhythms and 
interesting counterpoint. The Atlanta Symphony's composer-in-residence, Paulus 
shows a sure understanding of the viola's expressive capacity during the many 
moments of rhapsodic lyricism, on which Phelps artfully capitalized. The work 
is less successful in the fast passages, which seem to spin around aimlessly, 
but these moments do not last very long. 
The pair opened the program with a crisp, clean, and for the most part 
historically accurate (the piano notwithstanding) account of Bach's Sonata in 
G, BWV 1027. Only a slight degree of rhythmic disunity occasionally detracted. 
Beethoven's relatively insubstantial Variations in E-flat (WoO 46), in a 
refined, elegant reading, followed.TERRY McQUILKIN 
