U.S. LEADERS HAIL NEWS BUT STORM IS BREWING OVER LIFTING OF SANCTIONS 
While President Bush joined other U.S. leaders Saturday in hailing the imminent 
release of black activist Nelson R. Mandela, a political storm already was 
brewing over whether the move warrants relaxation of U.S. sanctions against 
South Africa. 
From his retreat at Camp David, Bush telephoned South African President 
Frederik W. de Klerk and "pledged U.S. willingness to help create a climate for 
negotiations" between the nation's white minority leadership and its black 
majority. 
Bush also invited the South African leader for talks at the White House, adding 
that Mandela would also be invited after his scheduled release today from 27 
years of imprisonment. 
In a separate statement, Bush praised De Klerk for showing "bold and 
imaginative leadership in recent days, which has earned the admiration of many 
of us who hope for swift and peaceful evolution in South Africa." 
Under De Klerk, South Africa has legalized the African National Congress and 
about 60 other banned political groups, freed leading black prisoners and 
pledged to negotiate a new constitution. In his dramatic announcement Saturday, 
De Klerk also said that a nationwide state of emergency would be lifted if no 
further violence accompanied Mandela's release. 
Although Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Herman J. Cohen said 
De Klerk's initiatives could lead to the lifting of U.S. sanctions "within the 
next few weeks," black leaders and key lawmakers cautioned the Administration 
not to move too fast. 
California Rep. Ronald V. Dellums (D-Berkeley), chairman of the Congressional 
Black Caucus, said the United States "should continue to use the moral and 
economic lever of even more stringent sanctions as a vehicle for helping to 
accelerate the end of apartheid in a nonviolent context. 
"While I welcome the release of Nelson Mandela from almost three decades of 
imprisonment for his political beliefs," Dellums said, "I am concerned that no 
mention has been made about the release of more than 2,000 other black South 
Africans still in prison because of their struggle to end apartheid." 
The issue of imprisoned blacks has been controversial because many held on 
criminal charges are considered by black opposition leaders to be political 
prisoners. 
Sanctions imposed by Congress in 1986 over President Ronald Reagan's veto 
prohibit new U.S. investment and bank loans in South Africa; bar imports of 
South African iron, steel, coal, uranium and agricultural products; outlaw 
sales of computers to South Africa, and prohibit U.S. landings by South African 
Airways. 
Under the terms of the law, Bush is empowered to modify or suspend the 
sanctions if political prisoners are freed and if South Africa meets any three 
of four other conditions. 
The four conditions are: 
 -- Repealing the 1986 state of emergency. 
 -- Lifting a ban on democratic political parties and allowing all races to 
participate in the political process. 
 -- Repealing the Group Areas Act, the apartheid law dictating where blacks can 
live and work. 
 -- Negotiating with the black majority without preconditions. 
The 3 1/2-year-old state of emergency allows South African police to detain 
suspects for up to six months without charging them or bringing them to trial. 
It also allows the government to restrict protests and to bar the press from 
areas of unrest. 
Rep. William H. Gray III (D-Pa.), House majority whip and author of the 1986 
sanctions legislation, also indicated his opposition to a quick lifting to 
sanctions. 
"Just because we freed one man doesn't mean that we freed an entire nation," 
Gray said. 
Randall Robinson, executive director of TransAfrica, an anti-apartheid group, 
also argued against lifting sanctions. 
"Clearly, the U.S. has played a significant role in bringing the South African 
government to this historic point," Robinson said. "Progress could be seriously 
stalled by the failure of the U.S. and European governments to maintain 
sanctions and continue pressure for further reform." 
Robinson termed Mandela's release "a tiny step on a long road to dismantling 
the apartheid system." 
Last week, President Bush hinted that he was interested in lifting sanctions. 
"I think when people move in the right direction, it is certainly time to 
review all policy," he said. 
Administration sources stressed that Bush would not move precipitously without 
consulting Congress. But a congressional source involved in the issue expressed 
concern that the White House might try to loosen sanctions before serious 
negotiations between South Africa's blacks and whites are under way. 
Among the possible first steps would be lifting the ban on landing rights for 
South African Airways, the source said. 
Sen. Paul Simon (D-Ill.), chairman of a Senate subcommittee on African affairs, 
announced that he was "indefinitely suspending" further action by his 
subcommittee on a bill that would expand existing sanctions. But Simon also 
noted that Mandela's release and the conditional pledge to lift the state of 
emergency in South Africa "still fall short of an end to apartheid, and it is 
premature for the United States to begin lifting sanctions at this point." 
Rep. Howard Wolpe (D-Mich.), chairman of a House subcommittee on Africa who met 
with De Klerk in South Africa last month, urged the Administration to be "very 
careful" in handling the issue. 
"There are still hundreds upon hundreds of political prisoners in South African 
jails, and the emergency is still in effect," Wolpe said in an interview. "The 
situation must be created in South Africa where anti-apartheid activists are as 
free as the government party to organize, to move about the country and to 
speak freely. Then we can talk about beginning negotiations." 
Wolpe also called on the White House to use as a model America's recent 
approach to events in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. 
"We did not move prematurely in relaxing pressures in place (in Eastern Europe) 
until we believed that the process of change was irreversible and that 
fundamental change was occurring," he said. "I hope we do not have a double 
standard as we approach South Africa." 
