BOARD VOTES TO MOVE CONTINUATION SCHOOL TO FOUNTAIN VALLEY HIGH 
Despite the protests of about 100 angry parents, the Huntington Beach Union 
High School district board voted unanimously Tuesday to move Wintersburg 
Continuation High School onto the campus of Fountain Valley High School. 
The parents who turned out for the board meeting said they feared increased 
crime and vandalism at Fountain Valley High and the surrounding community if 
the school was moved onto the campus. Many of those who addressed the board 
characterized the Wintersburg students as troublemakers, drug users and gang 
members. 
Charmayne Bohman, a board member, criticized the audience for judging the 
students in such harsh terms. "I feel very frustrated and very opposed to the 
bigotry that has been shown here tonight," Bohman said. 
After making a lengthy presentation supporting his proposal to relocate the 
continuation school, Supt. Lawrence Kemper also took exception to the 
opponents' characterization of Wintersburg students. 
"As far as the kids who attend this school are concerned, they are regular 
kids. Any parent that doesn't have some problem with their teen-ager doesn't 
have a teen-ager." 
Under the proposal, first presented in December, the continuation school would 
move from its present location on Golden West Avenue in September. About 177 
students with behavioral, academic and attendence problems are enrolled at the 
school. 
Those opposed to the move had worked feverishly, posting signs and circulating 
petitions in an effort to dissuade board members from carrying out the plan. 
"We know of eight different gangs that attend that school, and they'll come 
with it when it moves into the community," said Corli Guild, head of the 
30-member opposition group in Fountain Valley. "Of course, no one will confirm 
this, but we know it's true." 
Wintersburg Principal Dick Maynard, Huntington Beach police and residents in 
the area where the school is located say they haven't experienced any problems 
with the students. 
