OIL SPILL BLACKENS DAY FOR FISHING, WHALE BOATS 
Although it is the height of the whale-watching season and the weather is 
superb, boats that take sightseers to sea to hail the gray behemoths on their 
southerly swim to Baja California will probably remain moored this weekend in 
Newport Harbor. 
They are blocked from entering the ocean by the same booms that have been 
placed at the mouth of the harbor to keep the oil out. 
Fishing, whale-watching and excursion boats stranded inside Newport Harbor so 
far seem to be the only casualties that the local tourism industry has 
sustained from this week's major oil spill off Huntington Beach. Otherwise, the 
spill is having virtually no impact on beach tourism, part of the county's 
$5.5-billion-a-year tourist industry. 
Nevertheless, the disaster has "completely shut down" Jim Watts' sportfishing 
and whale-watching business since Wednesday evening, when access from the 
harbor to the sea was closed off. Watts, owner of Newport Landing Sportfishing, 
said Friday that he is concerned about losing business on what promises to be a 
sunny weekend. 
"We can survive losing a few days during the week. But we can't survive losing 
weekends," he said. "All we are doing is holding our breath and wondering how 
long it is going to last." 
Bob Black, president of Catalina Passenger Service -- the only Catalina Island 
excursion operation in Newport Harbor -- said the company's 500-passenger 
catamaran, the Catalina Flier, also is grounded. He figured that he had lost 
about $15,000 in business Thursday and Friday and would lose about $12,000 more 
if he had to remain closed today. 
Meanwhile, an Orange County Harbor Patrol spokesman said it is likely that the 
oil-containment booms would remain in place over the weekend, because some oil 
had been spotted just outside the harbor's west jetty. 
While the boat concessions in Newport Harbor are suffering, it is business as 
usual at hotels along the Orange County coast. 
Diane Baker, director of the Huntington Beach Conference and Visitors Bureau, 
is hoping there will be a bright "flip side" to the oil spill disaster. 
The oil slick does not seem to be harming the city's tourism industry, she 
said, and in fact the national exposure could give it an unexpected boost. 
"I saw the pictures on television and Huntington Beach has a beautiful 
shoreline," she said. "It is gorgeous." 
Baker said she contacted the city's 18 hotels on Thursday to see if they had 
received any cancellations due to the spill. The hotels, she said, reported 
they were busier than usual trying to accommodate curious sightseers and an 
onslaught of news reporters from around the country. 
Steve Bone, executive director of the Robert Mayer Corp., said he expects the 
oil spill to be just a memory by the scheduled July opening of the Waterfront 
Hilton hotel that the company is building as the first stage of a $600-million 
oceanfront commercial development in Huntington Beach. 
"You can go to the beaches now and see a marginal sheen at the shoreline, but 
there is no depth to it," he said. "It is a serious spill. But it is not a 
disaster. We have every confidence that any oil that does hit the beaches will 
be rapidly cleaned up." 
Hotel representatives in Newport Beach and Laguna Beach also were optimistic 
about their chances of escaping virtually unscathed from the oil spill, which 
they expected to be cleaned up from the beaches well before the summer tourist 
boom. 
In the winter, they said, most of their clientele consists of business 
travelers and local recreational travelers looking for a getaway that does not 
include the beach. 
"Assuming that they get it (the oil) cleaned up in a timely fashion, I can't 
see that it will affect anybody in this area," said Greg Smith, marketing 
director for the Newport Beach Marriott Hotel and Tennis Club. 
Tom Dusing, marketing director for the Hyatt Newporter, a 410-room resort hotel 
in Newport Beach, said, "My understanding is that it should be under control in 
a week and that a month from now it should be to the point that no one will 
realize anything happened." 
Like many others in the hotel business, Dusing said he is grateful that the oil 
spill was not as huge as the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska last spring. 
"I'm thankful it didn't happen in July and August," during the peak tourist 
season, he said. "Then it would have had an effect on us." 
