S.D. SHERIFF OFF THE HOOK IN JAIL PROBE 
The San Diego County Sheriff's Department was cleared Tuesday of any criminal 
wrongdoing in an FBI investigation of 70 cases of alleged civil rights 
violations stemming from beatings and deaths suffered by inmates in the county 
jails. 
However, U.S. Atty. William Braniff said that his office and FBI investigators 
are still reviewing two cases to determine if criminal prosecution of deputies 
or other jail personnel is warranted. Braniff refused to identify the two 
cases. 
Sheriff John Duffy was out of town and not available for comment, but 
department officials said that they felt vindicated by the FBI investigation. 
'We're Very Pleased' 
"Obviously, we're very pleased by the outcome of the FBI investigation. It's 
extremely reassuring . . . I can't stress that strongly enough," said Sheriff's 
Department spokesman Lt. Alan Fulmer. " . . . In my estimation, the fact that 
the FBI has completed its investigation and released these findings helps us 
considerably. . . . We've been the target of finger-pointing and unwarranted 
criticism for far too long, so, yes, we feel vindicated." 
But Braniff was careful to say that the findings do not necessarily mean that 
prosecutors felt that prosecution was unwarranted in every case. Some cases 
were borderline and could have gone either way, he said. 
"We can only make our judgment based on evidence. . . . If the evidence is not 
sufficient, we must make that judgment. I'm sure you could find cases that were 
closer to the border than others," Braniff said. Sometimes the decision whether 
to prosecute or not "came down to credibility issues," he said. 
Declined Comment 
He declined to elaborate further or comment on individual cases that were 
investigated. The decision not to prosecute in the 70 cases was made by Braniff 
and the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department. 
The announcement by Braniff drew an immediate complaint from Roberto Martinez, 
co-chairman of the Coalition for Law and Justice, a community organization that 
looks into allegations of police brutality. He called the investigation's 
results shocking. 
"They're saying that these people (jail personnel) are doing nothing wrong and 
all of these deaths and injuries were justified," said Martinez. 
FBI agents began the investigation in May, after numerous complaints from 
alleged victims and critics who charged that deputies at the jails were beating 
inmates without cause. During the summer, a host of former inmates, many of 
them middle class with no criminal records, testified at a Board of Supervisors 
hearing about beatings they said they received while in custody. 
Because of the statute of limitations for criminal prosecutions, Braniff said 
that agents only investigated cases filed in the last five years. The incidents 
investigated were alleged to have occurred at the county jails in Vista, 
Santee, El Cajon, downtown and the women's jail at Las Colinas. 
Some inmate deaths have been attributed to beatings suffered at the hands of 
jailers. Braniff acknowledged that some of the cases investigated by the FBI 
included several deaths. 
Braniff declined to say whether deputies were cleared in the death of Albert 
Manuel Varela. Varela, 28, died Jan. 21, 1988, after an altercation with four 
deputies while he was being booked for violating a restraining order. The 
deputies were exonerated by the district attorney's office; a coroner's report 
said Varela was a homicide victim but said the controversial choke hold applied 
by Deputy Roy Devault was not the direct cause of Varela's death. 
The findings of the investigation will be forwarded to the San Diego County 
Grand Jury, which is conducting a review of the county jail system. Grand Jury 
Foreman Armistead B. Smith Jr. declined to comment. However, Smith said that 
the Grand Jury's findings of its investigation of brutality at the jails will 
be released about March 15. 
