PACIFIC SYMPHONY DROPPED OFFER, FOSTER SAYS; 
MUSIC: CONDUCTOR TELLS OF BREAKDOWN IN NEGOTIATIONS OVER SALARY AND REHEARSAL 
TIME. 
The conductor widely regarded as the front-runner for the job of music director 
for the Pacific Symphony said Thursday the orchestra had offered him the job 
but withdrew the offer last week. 
Lawrence Foster, who conducts orchestras in Monte Carlo and Jerusalem as well 
as operas at the Los Angeles Music Center, said that his negotiations with the 
Pacific began Dec. 23 but broke down over salary and his request for increased 
rehearsal time. 
"They offered me the job in December," Foster said from Los Angeles, where he 
is preparing a revival of Verdi's "Falstaff." 
"I had accepted. Negotiations went extremely far. Then the offer was dropped 
last week." 
Preston Stedman, head of the Pacific's search committee, would neither confirm 
nor deny Foster's account. "We don't want to comment on any statements that any 
candidates might make," Stedman said. 
Foster said that he asked for a $150,000 salary for the 1991-92 season, which 
included conducting fees for concerts, an extra fee as music director and a 
travel allowance. Keith Clark, the previous music director, was paid $94,094 in 
1989, his final year. Louis G. Spisto, the executive director who is currently 
the top-paid employee of the orchestra, earned $67,000 in 1989. 
"I gave them a total package," Foster said. "I was given to understand that the 
board regarded it as too exorbitant." 
Foster, 48, said that he had programmed the entire 1990-91 season for the 
organization in the expectation that he would be hired. 
"I am brokenhearted," he added. "From the very beginning I became extremely 
excited about the project. . . . But that is their right. It is their 
organization. I can't do anything about it." 
The orchestra has been auditioning guest conductors to replace Clark, who was 
forced out in February, 1988, after a bitter dispute with the board of 
directors over artistic direction and control of the orchestra he founded in 
1979. 
Besides the salary issue, Foster said, "There was some distrust about my 
commitment to building the orchestra, that I am regarded as a European person 
and would not be sufficiently committed here." 
Foster lives in Monte Carlo, where he is in his last season as music director 
of the Orchestra Philharmonique. He said that while he would continue to keep 
his primary residence in Monte Carlo, he was more than willing to commit 
himself to Orange County. 
Born and raised in Los Angeles, Foster led the Pacific in September at the 
Orange County Performing Arts Center in Costa Mesa. Last month, he conducted 
Mozart's "Le Nozze di Figaro" for the Music Center Opera. 
He said that he plans to become music director of the Jerusalem Symphony in 
1991. He is currently music adviser to that orchestra. He did not expect that 
job to take him out of the running for the Pacific Symphony post. 
Spisto said that conducting the Pacific is not a full-time job and that it is 
not uncommon for a music director to hold that position with more than one 
orchestra. 
