JACK SMITH ON SUNDAY: DECONSTRUCTION SITE; 
IT MAY NOT MEAN WHAT IT WAS MEANT TO MEAN, AND IT MAY NOT MEAN ANYTHING AT ALL 
MY CALTECH FRIEND Herb Henrikson has sent me a copy of "ProfSpeak" (Regnery 
Gateway), by journalist Charles J. Sykes, calling my attention specifically to 
a chapter on "deconstruction." 
In general, Sykes indicts the American university "professoriat" as a 
bureaucracy of greedy, vain, selfish, pretentious, slothful mutants who speak 
only in jargon and despise their students. 
Critics of education have rounded up the usual suspects, he says: "the students 
themselves, television, the federal government, capitalism, public grade 
schools, high schools, teen-age sex, German philosophers Nietzsche and 
Heidegger, and, for good measure, the Walkman radio." 
All fail to identify the real villain, he alleges: "Almost single-handedly, the 
professors -- working steadily and systematically -- have destroyed the 
university as a center of learning and have desolated higher education, which 
no longer is higher or much of an education." 
But I am most interested in that faction of the professoriat that preaches 
deconstruction, an esoteric critical methodology that seems to undermine my 
temple and my reason for being. 
I have read about deconstruction, but I don't understand it. As Henrikson says, 
"I have a book by the 'Decons' but it is absolutely unfathomable -- obviously 
only the most enlightened can appreciate the intricacies of the emperor's new 
clothes." 
Deconstruction has been called a highly abstract critical theory "in which 
words and phrases are methodically scrutinized for multiple meanings, most of 
them contradictory and unpredictable." 
Whatever it is, it frightens me. The ignorant are always frightened by what 
they do not understand. I believe the deconstructionists hold that, to put it 
very simply, in my own words, literature is meaningless or ambiguous, since 
words don't mean what they appear to mean. Sykes says many of the hierarchy 
hold that words have no meaning at all. Thus, the written word is beyond the 
author's control, and literature is invalid. 
Deconstruction evidently means whatever its various proponents want it to mean. 
Consider this paragraph from a story by Lynn Smith in The Times: "A feminist 
deconstructionist . . . would find that a feminist argument containing the 
words, 'Do you see my point?' undermines the speaker's purpose since the figure 
of speech has phallic symbolism." 
Imagine what a variety of meanings might be drawn by deconstructionists from 
the phrase "keep off the grass" or the title line from the Leo Robin-Julie 
Styne song, "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend." 
Sykes notes the posthumous discovery that Paul de Man, the late Yale professor 
who was adulated as archdeacon of the movement in America, had written nearly 
200 pro-Nazi, anti-Semitic articles for collaborationist Belgian newspapers 
during World War II. 
Of course De Man's colleagues could hardly hold him to answer for his wartime 
prose since it couldn't have meant what he meant it to mean and, in fact, 
didn't mean anything at all. 
Sykes sees in deconstruction, a branch of "post-structuralism," the death of 
reading. As one deconstructionist professor put it, reading is "distinct from 
hallucination insofar as it describes a sequential encounter with signifiers." 
Jargon like that is the movement's lifeblood. 
"So what is to become of reading?" Sykes asks. "Of literature? Of the legacy of 
more than 20 centuries of Western civilization?" He asserts that Shakespeare 
couldn't get a job teaching beginning drama in an American university because 
he wouldn't know the jargon. 
Deconstruction is hard to define, since one must try to define it in words that 
are intrinsically suspect. One might say that "deconstruction is the theory 
that literature is meaningless," but of course that doesn't mean what one means 
it to mean. 
I wonder what the deconstructionists would make of John Donne's passage that 
ends: "And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; It tolls for 
thee" or, for that matter, of Ernest Hemingway's book, "For Whom the Bell 
Tolls," which seemed to me to be about courage, dedication and love in a 
sleeping bag. 
I have no doubt that our Southern California institutions of higher learning 
have been heavily infiltrated by the high priests of this bizarre movement, and 
I would not be surprised to be showered by abstruse protests that I ought not 
to be criticizing that which I don't understand. 
I have no defense. I have knocked at the door of deconstruction and found no 
one there who speaks my language. 
Maybe Gertrude Stein was on the right track when she wrote: "Rose is a rose is 
a rose is a rose." 
