COMMENTARY; 
THIS IS THE REAL STUFF: IT'S STUPIDITY 
This is a really great time in boxing, maybe the best ever. This is the real 
stuff. 
And nobody should enjoy it more than us abolitionists. 
This is the Marx Brothers, the Smothers Brothers, The Three Stooges, Martin and 
Lewis, Rowan and Martin, Stiller and Meara, Harold Lloyd, Marty Allen, Jonathan 
Winters, George Steinbrenner and Mr. Dithers. This is Alex Karras knocking out 
the horse with one punch in "Blazing Saddles." This is Ghostbusters and 
Dustbusters. This is Don King. 
This is boxing at its finest. 
Never mind for just a minute that by now we should have evolved beyond an event 
in which two people try to kill each other for the sake of entertainment. That 
is the intention of the game: kill your opponent or knock his brain into 
oblivion and you win a lot of money. 
Our society says you're not allowed to do that with dogs or chickens who have 
been bred to kill. You're not allowed to put a man and a bull in the ring and 
have them fight it out. That's wrong. Some day we may get around to outgrowing 
aspects of football, but injury is not the expressed intent of that game. 
We can decry the ease and comfort with which people kill and maim and hurt 
other people in our cities, and wring our hands that it marks the downfall of 
our civilization. But then we make fistic heroes of thugs like King and Mike 
Tyson and the line of others who would be mugging people in parking lots or 
doing knees for crack dealers if boxing didn't legalize their taste for mayhem. 
Tyson is a brutal person with a sweetheart's voice. 
My feeling was profoundly influenced one evening in a bar in Baltimore when 
some patron said something to a waitress and the bartender went over the top of 
the bar for him. I'll never forget the sound of the bartender's fists on the 
man's face. Some people liken that to the sound of the crack of the bat on the 
ball. Look and listen to the bloodlust at ringside. 
There is nothing sweet in the "sweet science" and never was. There's more 
reality in the current film "Triumph of the Spirit," in which an Olympic boxer, 
a Greek Jew, is forced by the Germans to fight in a concentration camp -- 
winner gets to live and feed his family and loser goes to the gas chamber. 
For some reason, boxing captured the imagination of some of our gifted writers 
and made them feel there was something noble and romantic about it. Hemingway 
felt it. Liebling felt it. These big lugs, they said, these noble savages were 
going out there into the squared circle to suffer and endure and display their 
courage because that's what they were good for. That smacks of racism without 
racial distinction. 
But this current affair goes a delicious step further. This is stupidity. 
Think of the details that surrounded Buster battering Tyson in Tokyo. It was 
one of the shockingly great upsets in all of sports history, which explains the 
great appeal of sports on TV. It's the last real suspense. 
But isn't it wrong when Buster Douglas, in order to get his shot at the 
champion, had to cede promotional rights to his next three fights to King? So, 
in effect, King held promotion ties to both sides in Tokyo and to the 
inevitable rematch. Would it be wrong if a tennis player had to change agents 
in order to play Wimbledon? 
Since there is no structure of league standings, three different groups can 
have separate champions of the world and New Jersey. Championship playoffs are 
made for the money potential -- either right now or in protecting the future. 
And then, of course, the promoter lies like anything. 
Like Tuesday, King, hair and his face straight, said he never tried to overturn 
the decision. Can you imagine any other sport in which the owner of one side -- 
or both -- can closet two commissioners after the contest and not open the door 
until they decide like Larry, Moe and Curly, there can be no champion before 
they hold a meeting a week later. 
All King said he wanted was a rematch for his fighter. The rules of the 
alphabet organizations say immediate rematches are prohibited. But if the 
commissioners could be made to doubt what they had seen with their own eyes, 
then they could justify setting aside the rules for King's big-bucks rematch. 
When the closet door opened in Tokyo, referee Octavio Meyran pleaded guilty for 
giving Buster the benefit of the long count. "I'd like to recognize my 
mistake," he said, for not having picked up the count from the timekeeper at 
ringside. Is there something wrong with a sport that stages its showcase event 
and then questions the competence of the person it has chosen to be the 
referee? 
Tuesday, the alphabet groups recognized Buster as the new champion and King 
plaintively appealed for the justice of a rematch. Is there any doubt he'll get 
it? 
But first, basics. Look at the scorecards of the three judges at the time Tyson 
was counted out. The American judge had Buster considerably ahead, as did most 
of the media witnesses. One of the Japanese judges had Tyson ahead and the 
other had the score tied. 
Isn't that silly. Imagine the Lakers playing the Knicks for the championship 
without a scoreboard: Nobody knows who's in front until the buzzer has sounded 
and the referee has added up the ones, twos and treys. There could be no 
four-corners offense to kill time, no hurry-up offense to close the gap. 
But then with boxing's secret ballot, neither the crowd nor players can see if 
the judges are calling the fight or jumping to Don King's service. Remember the 
travesty of the Olympic boxing in Korea. This is the real stuff. 
Liebling told of Pierce Egan, who wrote in the 1820s of "pageant scenes of 
trulls and lushes, toffs and toddlers ... setting off for some great public, 
illegal prize fight." And of the painter Rowlandson's print of the 1811 fight 
between Tom Cribb, the champion, and Tom Molyneaux, "an American Negro ... In 
the foreground of the picture, there is a whore sitting on her gentleman's 
shoulders, the better to see the fight, while a pickpocket lifts the 
gentleman's reader (watch). Cribb has just hit Molyneaux the floorer ..." 
Listen, do you smell Las Vegas or Atlantic City? 
