ALL ABOARD AMTRAK 571; 
COMMUTING BY RAIL OFFERS A FEELING OF CAMARADERIE AND A CHANCE TO RELAX 
At 6:10 a.m., before dawn, John Garrett settles on a stool at the San Juan 
Saloon in San Juan Capistrano. Over coffee and a cigarette, he scans his 
newspaper while a lengthening row of men silently do the same beside him. 
Garrett is a member of a pioneering breed, the Orange County rail commuter. 
More than 200 commuters use Amtrak trains to make the morning trip northward, 
according to a new study by the Orange County Transit District. That hardly 
compares to the thousands of drivers on the road at that hour, but rail riders 
are a dedicated lot. 
The commuters -- mostly male professionals in their mid-40s -- endure 
occasional late arrivals and pay as much as $17.60 a day for a train ticket, in 
addition to travel expenses at their destinations. 
Garrett, a chief scientist at Hughes Aircraft, has been riding Amtrak's San 
Diegan to Fullerton for seven years, ever since he moved to Southern California 
from Fort Worth, Tex. A major reason he chose to live in San Juan Capistrano 
was the train station, he says, adding, "Either I'm going to live across the 
street from where I work, or I'm going to take public transportation." 
By 6:30, the serenity of the San Juan Saloon has given way to preliminary 
socializing. Most of the 30 or so commuters in the saloon cluster near the bar, 
where coffee is served, continuing threads of conversations from the day 
before. 
By the pool tables, Jim Mitchell and Bob Ross, co-chairmen of the month-old 
Amtrak Commuters Assn., huddle over a fistful of documents. The Capistrano 
commuters have become political animals since the city recently announced plans 
for a $2-per-day parking fee for the commuters. 
For Mitchell, an administrator for the downtown Los Angeles law firm of Hanna 
&amp; Morton, the parking fee seems particularly onerous. Both he and his wife, 
Joyce, have taken the 6:38 train into downtown L.A. for the last two years, but 
because they return on different trains, they must drive two cars to the 
station from their Dana Point home. The new charge would mean another $500 on 
top of the $4,000 each pays to ride the train to L.A. each year. 
"The commuters are the only ones (who will be) forced to pay a fee. That's 
discrimination," Mitchell insists. "If San Juan wants to project the image of 
fair-minded, ecologically concerned community, this isn't the way to do it." 
Ross, a marketing manager at Hughes Aircraft, agrees that train commuters are 
being penalized for relying on a mode of transportation that government, from 
the local to the federal level, has declared environmentally desirable. 
A former fighter pilot, he has been riding the train for six years. "I've 
driven maybe three times in four years," he says. 
In their first year in Orange County, Ross and his wife lived in La Habra. They 
decided there were too many people there and began scouting the coast for a new 
home. After six months they found what they wanted in San Juan Capistrano. 
"I timed it during rush hour and said, this isn't going to work," Ross recalls. 
His wife suggested that he take the train. Ross says that at the time he didn't 
even know a train went through San Juan Capistrano, but he told his wife that 
if it did, he would take it. 
The crossing bell starts clanging at 6:37. 
The commuters empty out of the saloon as Amtrak's first northbound train of the 
day slows to a halt. By the time the six-car train stops, there are more than 
80 people lined alongside it. The Mitchells separate, Jim Mitchell heading for 
the smoking car while his wife opts for nonsmoking. 
The smoking car is always the next-to-last car on the train. The more 
gregarious of the smoking car commuters occupy a cluster of four seats that 
face each other at the front of the car. Martin Dimand, between greetings to 
the other commuters, sketches the social dynamics of commuting on Amtrak. 
After traveling on the train daily for three years, Dimand, who lives in Laguna 
Beach, knows everyone in the smoking car. "What commuting has done is create a 
very loose association of contacts; you meet people that live in different 
cities, work in different cities and you talk with them," he says. 
Although the daily train commute soon becomes routine, riders do occasionally 
celebrate in style. Every December they have a party aboard the train, chipping 
in $5 each for hors d'oeuvres and drinks. They decorate the car with lights, 
tinsel and signs wishing everyone a Merry Christmas and Happy Hanukkah. 
Over the years, the smoking-car commuters have developed a camaraderie 
extending beyond the daily train ride. When someone retires, they hold a party. 
Occasionally some will get together and go to a nightclub, and every few months 
as many as 18 of them will take the train to the Del Mar race track. 
People ride the rails to work because they don't want the aggravation of 
driving, Dimand explains. They also feel as if they're making an environmental 
contribution because they're not using their cars for long-distance travel. 
Dimand also notes that these are people who can be late to work on occasion 
without risking their jobs. He is the director of operations for the Charen 
Corp., a clothing manufacturer. It's extremely rare for him to drive to Los 
Angeles; he doesn't do it more than three times a year. He keeps a car at Union 
Station and pays $50 a month for a monthly pass for overnight parking. From 
Union Station it's a five-minute drive to work in the garment district, where 
he pays another $50 a month to park his car near his factory. 
While the train races through Irvine at 70 miles an hour, one of the regulars 
does a creative reading of the daily horoscope. Farther back, the more solitary 
types huddle over computers or papers, taking advantage of the free time to 
catch up on their work. 
From another set of four facing seats across the aisle, Dani Stevens leans over 
to say that she is a recent convert to the train culture and that what she 
found surprised her. 
The manager of a tool and die company in Placentia, Stevens had begun commuting 
by train only a week before, after moving to Oceanside. She was nervous on her 
first day taking the train, she says, but she found she was immediately 
welcomed into the group. 
Before relocating in Oceanside, her drive to work took 15 minutes from her home 
in Anaheim. Now her commute takes an hour and 15 minutes, but it's more 
peaceful, she says. Her boss sends someone to pick her up when she gets off the 
train in Fullerton. Although she is job hunting in Oceanside, she has enjoyed 
the train. 
After collecting more commuters in Santa Ana, the San Diegan arrives in 
Fullerton at 7:20. Commuters stream off the train while another 50 or so wait 
to climb aboard. Garrett and Ross disembark. Hughes supplies them with 
automobiles that they leave at the station overnight. 
As the train begins to roll again, Bob Sharp drops into one of the facing 
seats. Sharp, a vice president with Workmen's Auto Insurance Co. in downtown 
L.A., used to travel on the Chicago transit system. He is less forgiving of 
Amtrak's foibles than some of the other riders, but he also appears to enjoy 
his gadfly role in the group. 
"Service is totally inconsistent and unreliable," he pronounces. "We're 
reminded all the time that this isn't a commuter." 
His total travel time from his home in Yorba Linda is an hour and 20 minutes, 
if everything goes smoothly -- which he claims isn't often. 
Dimand disagrees. In his opinion, the trains run within 15 minutes of their 
schedule most of the time, and other commuters nearby nod in agreement. Sharp 
gives his cronies a look that says they're living in a pipe dream. They grumble 
about the picture he's presenting. 
Dimand does admit that the train occasionally is as much as an hour and a half 
late. Some of the delays are unannounced. 
Amtrak is replacing track south of San Juan Capistrano, and that sometimes 
causes delays. When Amtrak warns of track work, commuter ridership drops off 
because people don't want to be late. 
If the train is running very late, Sharp catches an OCTD Park and Ride express 
bus that for $2 drops riders in downtown L.A., but he says it's crowded and 
uncomfortable and he prefers the train. 
The group in the smoking car agree that train service could be improved with 
the addition of more trains. "We need an earlier train, one that leaves 
Fullerton at 6:30 or 7 a.m," Sharp says. 
Such a train would reach Union Station between 7 and 7:30, allowing commuters 
plenty of time to reach work by 8 a.m. 
Sharp also proposes an evening train that leaves later than the 5:50 but 
earlier than the last train, which leaves at 8:45. 
Today, the trip proceeds uneventfully, and at 7:55 the train slides into Union 
Station. The commuters flood from the San Diegan and hurry through the wide, 
dark halls of the station. 
Sharp walks a block and climbs aboard a city bus with Jim Mitchell. The RTD 
ride costs 90 cents. Mitchell gets off a half-mile away. Ten minutes after 
leaving the station, Sharp gets off two blocks from his office. In the evening, 
when he has more time, he takes Dash, a private commuter bus that costs 25 
cents and winds its way around downtown L.A. 
That evening, on the commute back to Orange County, the faces change a bit. 
Wine and mixed drinks replace the morning coffee. The daily crossword puzzles 
pass back and forth across the aisle, traded when somebody gets stuck. 
Dimand takes the 4:45 train, arriving home at 6:30. "Naturally, all this is 
predicated on the train being on time," he says. Still, to Dimand, the 
potential for delay is no greater than on the freeway, and there's an 
advantage. "When you get home at night, you're relaxed," he says. 
While the rail commuters' ranks are growing only slowly, that may not always be 
the case. 
According to Tom Fortune, public affairs officer for the Orange County 
Transportation Commission, plans are in the works to add a morning commuter 
train and an evening commuter to the schedule. These could operate at a cost to 
the commuter of 12 cents a mile, compared to the 20 cents a mile Amtrak 
charges. 
The two trains could be in operation as soon as OCTC, Amtrak and the Santa Fe 
Railroad finalize their plans, and they could wind up attracting a whole new 
group of commuters who think the price and the schedule are right. 
Until then, despite the expense and the lengthened travel time, Orange County's 
rail commuters are still committed supporters of rail travel. 
As Bob Sharp says, "I drive to work only a couple of times a year. That's why I 
still have my sanity." 
WHO'S ABOARD 
Who rides Amtrak's San Diegan? 
The Orange County Transit District found the answer by conducting a survey of 
847 riders using its No. 571 and No. 573 northbound morning commuter trains for 
two days in mid-November. Half of the responses came from Orange County 
residents. The results: 
81% have professional or managerial jobs. 
58% are male. 
The average age is 43. 
69% have household incomes of $60,000 or more. 
51% ride the train three or more days a week; 28% ride it every day. 
15% wanted better on-time train performance; 12% wanted more trains; 22% wanted 
added work space, and 11% wanted lower fares or commuter discounts. 
RELATED STORY 
Terramaster speedster on comeback trail after being packed away for 25 years. 
N3 
