COLUMN ONE; 
BATTLING TO CLIMB THE LADDER; 
ON A FIRE DEPARTMENT ROSTER IN ALABAMA, THE DEBATE OVER REVERSE DISCRIMINATION 
IS FRAMED IN VERY PERSONAL TERMS THAT COULD CHANGE LEGAL HISTORY. 
Listen to the two men even briefly, and the similarities between Robert (Kenny) 
Wilks and Jackie Barton are apparent: Both graduated from Birmingham high 
schools in 1967, Wilks the son of a steelworker, Barton of a railroad man. Both 
now are Birmingham firefighters, one 40, the other 41. Both work out of Fire 
Station 10 in Avondale, 20 blocks due east of downtown. 
The differences between the two men, however, are even more apparent. Wilks is 
white, Barton black. Wilks joined the fire department the year after he 
completed high school, while Barton waited 10 years, the fire department not 
being an available option for blacks in 1967. 
Wilks remembers the Birmingham of his youth as a "well-rounded community, the 
type of place you'd want to grow up in." Barton recalls it as a city he could 
barely enter, with one black movie theater and no good jobs. 
Wilks watched Police Commissioner Eugene (Bull) Connor and the violent 1963 
Birmingham demonstrations on television, thinking it all "a bunch of bull, a 
bunch of hell-raising." Barton watched the clashes from the streets, throwing 
rocks at the firetrucks and dodging the charging dogs. 
There is one other difference between the two men, a difference revealed by a 
look at the roster that hangs from a wall in the office at Fire Station 10. 
There, both of their names are listed at the top in red, for they each are 
officers, but Barton's has a star beside it. He is the station's captain. Wilks 
is his lieutenant. 
Wilks will not even look at that roster, with its blunt star an ever-present 
taunt. Every year in which he's taken the civil service exam for promotion, 
Wilks has ranked high -- eighth one year, third another, then ninth. One of 
those years, Barton ranked 86th. Barton is Wilks' boss only because of a 
consent decree and an affirmative action plan the city embraced in 1981. 
One day in the uncertain future, Wilks hopes to alter this circumstance. Barton 
rode the results of a job discrimination lawsuit to his position, and Wilks 
means to do the same. He's part of the way there already. Last June, in the 
case titled Martin vs. Wilks, the U.S. Supreme Court opened the door to a 
lawsuit filed by Wilks and other white firefighters. The justices said their 
charge -- that Birmingham has discriminated against whites by implementing its 
1981 consent decree -- should have its day in court. 
"The Civil Rights Act passed 25 years ago, and a whole generation has come up 
since then," Wilks said. "Where's affirmative action going to end? I say end it 
now. My kids shouldn't have to pay for it. There's got to be an end. Sooner or 
later you pay a car off. There's got to be a stopping point somewhere." 
"I didn't invent it," Barton countered. "I just happen to be in this place at 
this point in time. Just as I was there throwing rocks in 1963. Now I'm a fire 
captain." 
Resentment Grows 
The situation in Birmingham's Fire Station 10 is anything but aberrant. Over 
the past 15 years, affirmative action plans have wrought considerable changes 
in the workplace, helping a good number of women and minorities gain a foothold 
in the middle class. But they also have bred an abiding and deepening 
resentment among the white males who have been displaced. 
That resentment, gaining shape and force throughout the 1980s, encouraged by 
the Ronald Reagan Administration's policies and judicial appointments, now 
represents a full-fledged countermarch. The Supreme Court's decision in the 
Birmingham case has already triggered a number of other such reverse 
discrimination lawsuits, for Martin vs. Wilks all but invited them. 
Boston, for example, presently faces three -- one each from firefighter 
applicants, police applicants and policemen seeking promotions. San Francisco 
faces four -- from firemen, policemen and two teacher organizations. UC 
Berkeley faces a federal investigation into charges of discrimination against 
whites in its admissions policies. 
In courtrooms across the country during the 1990s, juries and judges will find 
themselves wrestling with questions energetically addressed more than a decade 
ago but not -- it is becoming increasingly apparent -- fully resolved. Are 
affirmative action plans still appropriate a quarter of a century after passage 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964? Should there, in the 1990s, be equality of 
access and opportunity, or of final status? How is minority preference not 
reverse discrimination? How are goals not quotas? 
High Court Watched 
Beyond such cases the experts see even more sweeping litigation on the horizon. 
A decade ago, when the Supreme Court in United Steelworkers vs. Weber ruled 
that Title VII of the Civil Rights Act does not prohibit voluntary affirmative 
action plans, Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote the opinion for a narrow 
five-judge majority, and Justice William H. Rehnquist drafted the caustic 
dissent. Now Rehnquist is the chief justice and has a majority on his side. 
There are those who believe the Supreme Court in time will declare all 
affirmative action plans -- public or private, voluntary or court-ordered -- to 
be unconstitutional violations of Title VII's ban against job discrimination. 
"I fear that the Supreme Court will narrow Weber, and if they narrow Weber, you 
can throw out affirmative action," said Charles Craver, a professor at George 
Washington University Law Center who teaches a course on the law of employment 
discrimination. "I think the pervasive feeling now among the populace and 
professional people is that the biggest discrimination is against white males. 
White students see scholarships all going to minorities. They see minorities 
being flown all over this country, being wooed by graduate schools and 
employers. You don't see any whites getting this treatment. Clearly there is 
some reverse discrimination now. It is very difficult to have legitimate, 
official discrimination and then not have some backlash." 
The momentum on the legal battlefield has certainly shifted. That much can be 
seen simply by watching and listening to those involved in the Birmingham 
battles. 
The lawyer for the white firefighters, Raymond Fitzpatrick Jr., can barely 
suppress a gleam in his eyes as he reminisces about his case's genesis and 
watches his clients offer practiced political analysis to TV cameras. By 
contrast, one of the lawyers for the black firefighters, Susan Reeves -- who 15 
years ago filed the lawsuits that led to the now-disputed consent decree -- 
bites off her words bitterly, resentful at being put on the defensive. 
"How do you feel sitting here in Birmingham investigating discrimination 
against whites?" she demanded of one visiting national television reporter 
after he had shut down his camera. 
It is Birmingham city officials, though, who are left in the greatest disarray 
by the present turn of events. They have been squeezed hard, caught between two 
swings of a pendulum. A decade ago, they were being sued for discriminating 
against blacks, so they agreed to an affirmative action plan pressed on them by 
the Justice Department. Now, for implementing that consent decree, they're 
being sued for discriminating against whites. And once again the Justice 
Department is against them. 
There is no better place to observe this turnabout than in the disheveled 
office of the lawyer who represents the city, James P. Alexander, a partner at 
the distinguished Birmingham law firm of Bradley, Arant, Rose &amp; White. 
Alexander is a prototypal management labor lawyer, and his firm is among the 
largest and most traditionally conservative in the state, so he is accustomed 
to representing companies charged with job discrimination against blacks. Now 
-- somewhat to his own wonder -- he defends those same clients against similar 
complaints lodged by whites. 
"The rules have changed," he observed one recent morning. "And they're going to 
change some more. There's a change in the sense of what's fair. There's a 
change in the sense of what's in the interest of the country." 
Among other things, a look at the Birmingham experience provides revealing 
glimpses at how and why this has happened. 
Birmingham was not founded until 1872, and then it was by carpetbaggers, drawn 
to the region because its iron, limestone and coal provided a rare locale where 
all the ingredients were available to make steel. Segregation was sustained by 
outside owners to keep labor peace in what soon became a lucrative industrial 
center. 
The change -- and predicament -- for Birmingham began not long after Bull 
Connor stood in the street beside Kelly Ingram Park in May, 1963, directing 
fire hoses and dogs against young black demonstrators. Those images helped set 
the stage for the Civil Rights Act and its Title VII job discrimination ban, 
which in turn provided the basis for a barrage of lawsuits against 
Birmingham-area employers. 
"It is difficult to think of a major Birmingham industrial firm not on the 
receiving end of one of these cases," Alexander said. "The plaintiffs were 
winning. We distributed money to the plaintiffs. We had to -- this was a hotbed 
of employment discrimination." 
For this reason, the three lawsuits filed against public authorities in 1974 
and 1975 by a handful of blacks, the National Assn. for the Advancement of 
Colored People and the Department of Justice were regarded as just another 
brush fire to extinguish. A settlement seemed inevitable. 
Until 1958, after all, announcements for the city's public-service jobs limited 
applicants to "whites only." The Birmingham Fire Department did not hire its 
first black until 1968 and didn't hire its second until 1974. There were no 
black supervisors of any sort until 1982 -- not surprising because black 
applicants for promotion needed favorable evaluations from white supervisors 
and faced a seniority policy that added one point to the test scores for each 
year in the department. 
Those setting about to remedy these conditions soon faced a critical fork in 
the road: They could try to cure the root causes -- among them the fact that 
only 24% of the black applicants even passed the test, compared to 82% of the 
whites -- or they could simply change the final results. That they chose the 
latter course had something to do with who made the final decisions. Lawyers, 
not social planners or philosophers, fashioned Birmingham's affirmative action 
plan. 
Hiring Goals Set 
The black firefighters' lawsuits were their impetus. Liability for damages and 
back pay was looming. The Justice Department was urging the city to settle. The 
matter had to be resolved, and in a fashion that yielded measurable results in 
the foreseeable future. 
So, in the spring of 1981, after a year and a half of negotiation, the lawyers 
forged two consent decrees that tied long-term hiring goals directly to the 
ratio of blacks in the Jefferson County civilian labor force -- 28% in 1980. To 
reach that level, the city temporarily would give blacks half of each year's 
available jobs and promotions, drawing from a supplemental list of black 
candidates provided by the Jefferson County personnel board. The personnel 
board would compile this list by certifying additional eligible candidates, on 
the basis of race, beyond the top three it usually provided for each job 
opening. 
In other words, the backbone of the Birmingham consent decrees, quite simply 
and without disguise, was a race-conscious plan to favor blacks with lower 
scores over whites with higher scores. 
In this intent, and in their wording and numerical goals, Birmingham's consent 
decrees were not particularly unusual. Just two years before, in fact, the 
Supreme Court had endorsed a plan with similar provisions in the Weber case. 
"The decree was bread and butter, plain vanilla, consistent with what was going 
on then," Alexander said much later, sounding close to bewilderment. "We didn't 
think we were doing anything dramatic. The relief was within the parameters of 
existing case law." 
More Black Officers 
The consent decrees certainly had their intended effect. Between March, 1982 
and 1989, the number of black firefighters climbed from 47 to 118, the number 
of black lieutenants from zero to 28, the number of captains from zero to nine. 
The first black battalion chief was named. Black firefighters in 1982 made up 
10% of the department; they now form almost 24%. There were no black 
lieutenants and captains in 1982; they now make up 28% of the department. 
Such a swift change altered lives considerably, particularly for middle-aged 
black men such as Barton, Carl Cook and Tony Jackson. They had grown up in 
Birmingham never imagining they would be firemen, and now they were department 
supervisors, directing the efforts of hundreds of men. During the mid- and late 
1980s, Cook became a lieutenant, Barton a captain, Jackson the battalion chief. 
Such a turn of events was, for them, stunning. 
"When I was growing up," Cook recalled recently, "if you went to the store and 
tried to buy pork chops, the man would say, 'What you need that? Neck bones OK 
for you.' It was unreal but it was very real. . . . In 1963, I remember being 
washed down Fourth Avenue by Bull Connor's fire hoses. They told us to just 
fall down and protect ourselves, but my parents were scared that if you got 
caught, they'd bomb your house, so I'd run. You couldn't fight the hose, but it 
could wash you down the street only so far. I was fortunate to never get bitten 
by the dogs. I was fast then; I got up and flew." 
Jackson mainly heard of Connor's fire hoses at church. "That's how we knew 
everything," he said. "The church was the information center. We were always 
there, hearing what was going on. . . . Life then was frightening -- you had to 
guard against so much -- but I don't remember really being taunted or jeered by 
whites. That's because we were so separated. We were not part of that world." 
When Cook graduated from high school in 1964, he knew the fire department 
wasn't an available option, but he tried anyway. 
"I knew no blacks had been accepted there, but I didn't know why," he said. 
"Had any even applied? I went over to the downtown employment office on Eighth 
Avenue. 'I'd like to be a firefighter if you have any openings,' I said. They 
looked at me real odd and said there were no openings. I thought maybe there 
wasn't an opening. Or maybe it wasn't the right time. In those days, we 
accepted our situation. I had a family after all. Your parents were always 
telling you your actions could bring down problems for the family." 
Three years later, when he graduated in 1967, Barton didn't even try to apply. 
Nor did Jackson in 1969. "I never imagined that," Jackson said. "What I 
expected was to become a steelworker or a miner . . . or move north." 
In time, Cook found work doing manual labor at a Birmingham industrial plant. 
Barton joined the Air Force and became a military firefighter, roaming through 
Thailand, South Korea and the Philippines. Jackson earned an associate of arts 
degree in management-supervision training at a local junior college, but he 
ended up working on the line at an assembly plant that made utility trucks. 
During the 1974 recession, Jackson's luck turned particularly bad. Just after 
he married and bought a house, he was laid off. He spent the next year taking 
odd jobs -- chauffeur, bartender, groundskeeper, custodian, parking valet -- 
"anything I could find, anything and everything to keep my house and car." 
Then, that same year, Birmingham was hit with the initial lawsuit charging 
racial discrimination, and suddenly the black men's fortunes improved. Cook 
again applied to the fire department and this time he was hired, one of five 
that first year. A year later, Jackson landed an assistant's job in the city's 
engineering department. In 1977, he became a fireman, as did Barton, who left 
the Air Force after eyeing the new opportunities back home. 
'Different Ways of Life' 
Once hired, Cook, Barton and Jackson found themselves working alongside whites 
who had grown up in a Birmingham far different from the one they had inhabited 
as boys. For men like Wilks and Charles Brush, black colleagues were a new 
experience. 
Brush -- who serves with Wilks in Fire Station 10 and is president of the local 
firefighters union -- had never even attended school with blacks. "It was all 
white then," he recalled. "That was just the way things were." 
Wilks' high school wasn't integrated until 1964, and when it finally happened, 
he didn't like it. "I felt it was forced upon us," he recalled later. "I knew 
blacks -- we swam at the same swimming hole, we'd run them out, or they'd run 
us out -- but we had different ways of life. They had their way of life, I had 
mine." 
Wilks had joined the fire department in February, 1968, Brush in 1972. Watching 
the first blacks arrive, Brush recalls some "irritation" among his colleagues 
but nothing stronger. He was already a lieutenant, after all, when Barton was 
hired in 1977. 
"Some of the blacks wouldn't tell us their test scores," Brush said. "Some said 
they'd never took the test. But in the late '70s, there really was no big 
problem. The big rub was when they came out with the consent decree. We 
understood there'd be some hiring of minorities, but promotions were never 
discussed. . . . When you get into promotions, you're talking about leaders of 
people." 
The matter of promotions was indeed a more incendiary issue than new hires. It 
was also more complicated. 
Although the consent decrees required that half of the new lieutenants be 
black, there were only a few blacks from which to choose -- just the handful 
who had been hired since the first lawsuit in 1974, who by 1982 composed 10% of 
the department. Such disproportionate ratios made for considerable strain. 
When Jackson took the lieutenant's test in 1982, he ranked 60th on the combined 
score -- which included test results and seniority points -- but the city 
needed to pick the four highest-ranked blacks, so he became a lieutenant. 
Wilks, who ranked eighth overall, did not. 
In 1983, the city took the two whites who ranked first and second, then passed 
over 76 other whites to promote the blacks who had ranked 80th, 83rd and 85th. 
Cook, the black ranked 85th, became a lieutenant. Wilks, ranked third this 
time, still did not. 
A year later, Barton, ranked 86th among all applicants, became a lieutenant. 
Wilks, ranked ninth, again did not. 
Promotions Criticized 
In 1986, Wilks finally made lieutenant, but by then the blacks were climbing 
higher. Jackson became a captain in 1983, as did Barton in October, 1988. When 
Jackson made battalion chief in July, 1987, he ranked 15th out of sixteen 
applicants. 
This sequence of events understandably has provoked objections. Those who are 
displeased above all criticize what they consider the city's exceptionally 
stark and rapid manner of implementing affirmative action. 
"A better alternative would have been to do this, but not go as fast," Brush 
said. "You can't raise the education level of a class of people in a few short 
years." 
"Could we have been less intrusive?" countered Alexander, the city's attorney. 
"What you're really asking is, could we have done it over 30 years instead of 
six. Well, sure, yes we could have. . . . But then you wouldn't have dealt with 
the problem for two generations." 
To some extent, judgments about how Birmingham implemented its affirmative 
action plan depend on the importance assigned to the firefighters' scores on 
the written tests. Some people value the tests and frankly believe that the 
blacks aren't capable or disciplined enough to study for them. Others, however, 
suggest that the tests are a white man's game, skewed toward those who write 
and administer them. And more than a few argue that pencil-and-paper tests are 
not, in any event, the best way to evaluate firefighters. 
They ask: Why not measure ability to lead or act, not memorize? Why not put 
people in situations and see how they react? How about a test for bravery? For 
reaction time in moments of crisis? For ability to follow orders? For ability 
to lead? For quickness? 
As it happens, such a notion provides common ground for some blacks and whites 
otherwise pitted against each other. The white firefighters, after all, would 
rather have a new test than a system that ignores test results entirely. 
"We are not wedded to the current paper test," Brush said. "It's up to the city 
to choose. But then apply the results evenly." 
That call for equity, however, is not so easy to provide. Pleas such as Brush's 
eventually focus attention on the irksome difficulty at the heart of 
affirmative action plans -- their unavoidable trade-offs. Results are never 
applied evenly -- whatever the juggling with tests and labor ratios, the 
minorities are supposed to prevail. In the pursuit of equity there is a loss of 
equity. Some gain, some lose. 
In Birmingham, as elsewhere, the losers in this equation simply are no longer 
inclined to accept their fate without a fight. 
'Ironic' Grouping 
That Wilks and Brush presently toil in Fire Station 10, reporting to Barton, is 
a circumstance they find utterly galling. It does not help that Wilks was the 
station's ranking officer, an acting captain, until Barton's arrival a year 
ago. 
Although the three men rarely work side by side -- they rotate 24-hour shifts 
every third day -- Wilks thinks the trio's grouping "kind of ironic," and not 
at all accidental. Wilks, after all, is point man on a reverse discrimination 
lawsuit, Brush is the union president, and Barton heads the Birmingham Brothers 
Assn., a splinter group established by black firefighters when they realized 
their union dues were paying for the white firefighters' lawyer. 
One day recently, Wilks screwed his thumb into his palm by way of describing 
what he believed someone higher up is doing to them. 
"I don't like it," he said. "But I do my job." 
Then he leaned forward in his chair, reached for the cover page of the fire 
department's application form and stared at it. 
"Nowhere on this is there a line to indicate race," he said. "It's not a part 
of it. There's no box for race. Where is it?" 
Putting down the application form, he lifted first one, then another, of the 
textbooks he had studied for so many hours. 
"Used to be, you took the test and those who did best got picked," he 
continued. "That's the way it used to be. That's the way it should be. . .. The 
white middle class is suffering the burden of the consent decrees. They're 
carrying the load. When they passed the Civil Rights Act, that should have been 
it. The right to the same school, water fountain, whatever. . . . But to give 
them preferential treatment on basis of race. . . ." 
Brush, arriving at the station soon after, added his thoughts: 
"Hell, it's not fair, not right to give jobs or promotions on the basis of skin 
color. We didn't discriminate against anyone. Don't hang it on us. We weren't 
the ones who put up the 'no blacks apply' signs. I want to shake these people 
and say, 'So you are going to do it to me, discriminate against me on the basis 
of race, and now it's all right?' It wasn't then and it isn't now. . . . I 
really believe the American people have had enough of the idea that everyone 
should have the same quality car and food. If there was a referendum in this 
country, you couldn't get approval for quotas. And you couldn't get it through 
Congress. No way. It would be suicide for a politician to propose a system like 
ours here in Birmingham. People have had enough. I know I have." 
The blacks do not, by and large, respond with equal fervor. Their more laconic 
comments provide a reminder of just who has prevailed. 
"In all wars there are casualties," Cook said, shrugging. "Not everyone comes 
out clear. Those people, they're casualties of war." 
"It's not totally fair, but was it fair that I couldn't be a fireman back in 
the '60s?" Jackson said. "If there had been black firemen in 1962, there 
wouldn't have been a consent decree in the first place." 
As the talk about fairness builds, Cook likes to invoke a story concerning the 
First Alabama Bank: 
"Your daddy goes there, robs that bank. Then he buys a house on a hill with the 
stolen money. Buys Mom a mink, you a Jaguar. The FBI arrives, wants to take 
Dad, his house, the mink, the Jaguar. You say, 'No sir, not fair. I didn't rob 
the bank. I want to keep the car.' Point is, all these things you have is a 
result of what happened before, something that wasn't right. When it's time to 
pay the piper, now it's unfair. Well, if you want, let's start out zero-zero. 
Not you 30 points ahead." 
Listening to the conflicting viewpoints, it is clear that somewhere in the past 
20 years, these blacks and whites have swapped visions of Birmingham. Where 
Wilks complains of rising crime and expresses nostalgia for a vanished city, 
Cook now talks warmly of his hometown. 
"Birmingham has changed greatly, for the better," Cook said. "It's a city to be 
proud to live in now. You can buy pork chops. You can be someone. It was 
important to blacks for Doug Williams to be in the Super Bowl. Blacks can be 
Doug Williams. Or Bo Jackson, who's from our neighborhood. And now they can be 
Lieutenant Cook. They can aspire to this. Back then, we had no one to aspire 
to. That's important. You can say to yourself now (that) if I work hard, I can 
be like this person. That's important." 
If this transformation is the triumph of affirmative action, however, it is 
also, to some, reason for its cessation. It's precisely because of improved 
conditions that even a few of those committed to the spirit of the consent 
decrees now express reservations about the need for them in the future. 
"It is essential for the welfare of a city that all people have a chance to do 
well," said David Vann, the progressive Democratic mayor of Birmingham from 
1975 to 1979. "But there may be a time when affirmative action is no longer an 
appropriate remedy. . . . That time may be coming close." 
In coming months, the relative merits of all the various arguments will be 
tested both in Congress and the courts. 
Civil rights organizations and their major congressional allies soon will 
introduce legislation that will try to reverse Martin vs. Wilks and two other 
recent Supreme Court decisions related to affirmative action. And in the 
Birmingham federal courthouse, lawyers one day this year again will rise to 
argue whether it is legal to favor minorities over whites. 
In these forums, more than a few of the experts expect the pendulum to continue 
swinging, however slowly, away from the notion of affirmative action. 
"We will see a flood of reverse discrimination cases now, but they won't win," 
said Craver, the George Washington University law professor. "Only if they 
narrow Weber will they win. Three or four years from now that's possible. . . . 
I think the nation is growing increasingly divided. Positions are hardening." 
Certainly that is so in Birmingham, where matters promise to grow only more 
complicated. With 28% of the fire department's lieutenants now black, the city 
has met the consent decrees' short-term goals, so the special juggling of the 
promotion rankings will soon end, regardless of court action. That means the 
certification lists once again will probably be all white, because the black 
firefighters' scores on the written tests and limited seniority alone haven't 
qualified any of them for a promotion. And such all-white lists, in turn, will 
most likely trigger renewed legal action by blacks. 
"I anticipate seeing both reverse discrimination and traditional discrimination 
suits at the same time," a beleaguered Alexander predicted one recent morning. 
"We are on the horns of a dilemma. All we know is that whatever we do, the 
losing side is going to sue us. There is no reason to settle. Everybody's got a 
side. It's a sad affair. We're back at the same old stalemate. We're still 
bumping heads. This might never end." 
