THE ELITE; 
TEN BASKETBALL STARS NAMED COUNTY'S BEST OVER THE PAST 20 YEARS 
Tom Lewis was the scoring sensation and Rich Branning was a point guard 
extraordinaire. 
LeRon Ellis was the graceful center, and Wayne Carlander was a powerful 
blue-collar forward. 
Matt Beeuwsaert was the ultimate team player, and Mark Wulfemeyer was a legend. 
For the past 20 years, some of the Southern Section's most talented basketball 
players have gained fame, notoriety and scholarships to some of the nation's 
top major colleges while playing for Orange County high schools. 
County players dot the section's career scoring list with five listed among the 
top 11 players who have competed in the past 76 years. 
Mark Wulfemeyer of Troy, the most electrifying player in county history, is 
second on the list with 2,608 points in 4 seasons. The Wulf averaged a stunning 
27.5 points per game. 
Forward Tom Lewis (Mater Dei) is fourth at 2,456 points, Wayne Carlander (El 
Toro-Ocean View) sixth at 2,314 points, Adam Keefe (Woodbridge) eighth at 2,212 
points and Johnny Rogers (La Quinta) 11th at 2,012 points. 
The Times has extensively covered the county's best players for the past two 
decades, and began selecting an all-county basketball team 14 years ago. 
The criteria for picking the all-star teams have always followed a simple 
formula: The 10 best players regardless of position have been selected with no 
second team. 
Following this formula, for the sake of a good argument or some great memories, 
here is The Times' all-Orange County high school basketball team covering the 
past 20 years -- which was based solely on the athletes' high school careers. 
RICK ABEREGG 
Aberegg was a seasoned veteran by the time he reached Katella, having played 6 
seasons on traveling all-star teams for Pete Liapis at the Fullerton Boys Club. 
Aberegg was starting on sixth-grade teams as a third-grader and lost only 1 
game in 6 years of youth basketball. 
He teamed with another standout guard, Bob Sherwin, at Katella in 1969 to lead 
the Knights to the 2-A championship game in his junior year. Katella lost to 
Verbum Dei, 90-87, in what some consider the greatest basketball title game in 
Southern Section history. 
"It was 32 minutes of craziness," Aberegg recalled. "Both teams pressed the 
entire game. Defense created a lot of the points. The next year was my team and 
it was the most fun I ever had playing basketball." 
Aberegg later starred at Fullerton College with Sunny Hills' Brad McNamara and 
transferred to Cal State Long Beach where he played for Jerry Tarkanian. 
Aberegg, 37, plays for fun in an Anaheim recreation league where he admits he 
has developed a liking for the 3-point shot. "It's nothing to make those," he 
said. "Where were they when I played?" 
MATT BEEUWSAERT 
Was there anything Matt Beeuwsaert couldn't do? 
"He did everything for us," said Gary McKnight, Mater Dei coach. "He brought 
the ball up the court. He scored. He rebounded. Plus, he was a great kid who 
always put the team ahead of himself." 
Beeuwsaert was named the Southern Section's 4-A Player of Year in 1982 after 
leading Mater Dei to its first of five 4-A championships as a junior, but his 
overall game suffered his senior year when McKnight moved him to point guard. 
Beeuwsaert's scoring, rebounding and field-goal percentage marks dropped from 
the previous year as the spotlight shifted to center Tom Lewis. 
"When I look back, the moves only broadened my game," he said. "I looked at the 
added responsibilities as a challenge." 
Beeuwsaert started for three seasons, earning All-Southern Section honors each 
year. Digger Phelps signed him without ever seeing him play a game. 
Beeuwsaert went to Notre Dame, the school he said he always wanted to attend, 
but left after his sophomore year because of lack of playing time and is now 
starting for the University of California. 
RICH BRANNING 
Branning always seemed to be a step ahead of opposing defenses. He had the rare 
quality of seeing the entire court and making split-second decisions while 
running the offense. 
"I get more enjoyment out of making a nice pass than I do making a basket," he 
once said. "I get more of a feeling of being involved with the team by passing 
than I do shooting." 
"By far, the best high school point guard I've seen," said Steve Popovich, 
Marina coach. "The only one who comes close is (former Verbum Dei star) Roy 
Hamilton." 
Many thought Branning and Hamilton would be matched in the 4-A championship 
game in 1975, but Palos Verdes upset Verbum Dei in the semifinals and then beat 
Marina in the title game. 
Branning developed into a scorer his senior year, averaging 27.4 points per 
game, but Marina was upset in the first round of the playoffs by Estancia. 
"Rich had two bad ankles, a 104-degree temperature and we never had a chance," 
Popovich said. 
WAYNE CARLANDER 
Jim Harris, Ocean View coach, claimed he always knew when Wayne Carlander was 
going to have a big game because his knees were shaking during warmups. 
One particular night, Carlander's knees were rumbling. Playing against 
arch-rival Katella, Carlander scored 50 points and had 19 rebounds in what many 
consider the best single-game performance in county history. 
Nicknamed "The Franchise" at Ocean View, Carlander once had 33 rebounds in a 
game as a senior and ranks fourth on the section's career list with 1,325 
rebounds. 
The lefthander seldom displayed emotion and rarely spoke, but he never backed 
off. He wasn't the quickest player, but no one questioned his competitive 
spirit. 
Carlander was also an iron man. He never missed a game in high school or 
college, starting every game in four years at USC where he became the career 
scoring leader. 
Carlander attend El Toro as a freshman, then transferred to Ocean View where he 
played from 1978-81. 
LeRON ELLIS 
A Renaissance man at Mater Dei, Ellis cooked gingerbread houses, auditioned for 
the school play and even doubled as a hole man in water polo when he wasn't 
busy leading the Monarchs to the State Division I title as a senior. 
Ellis was named the state's player of the year in 1987 after averaging 23 
points, 10 rebounds, 4 blocked shots and 2 assists per game. 
"The most graceful big man I've ever seen in high school," McKnight said. 
"There wasn't anything he couldn't do athletically." 
Ellis proved McKnight's point by high jumping 6 feet 8 inches in his only track 
meet as a senior. He was also the water polo team's leading scorer that season. 
Still, some questioned his intensity, aggressiveness and mental toughness. He 
proved the doubters by starting seven games as a freshman at Kentucky last 
season. 
"LeRon probably can run the floor as well as any big man I've ever seen," said 
Kentucky Coach Eddie Sutton. 
ADAM KEEFE 
The victories, scoring and rebounding exploits and MVP trophies were great, but 
Woodbridge Coach Bill Shannon said one of the great tributes to Keefe was that 
he never heard an opposing coach, player, member of the media or teacher say a 
negative thing about the redhead. 
"That's a reflection upon his family and the way he was raised," Shannon said. 
"He's a class guy. When it came time to sign with a college, he didn't give 
academics lip service." Keefe signed with Stanford. 
Keefe, along with talented teammates David Townsend and Vince Bryan, led 
Woodbridge to the State Division II championship as a junior in 1987, but was 
two games shy of repeating as a senior with a less talented supporting cast. 
Keefe worked diligently to become a good player, playing in hundreds of summer 
league and pickup games. "A workaholic," Shannon said. 
Keefe is almost certain of being selected to the all-Pacific 10 freshman team 
and there is a good possibility he will be selected to play for the West team 
in the Olympic Festival this summer. 
TOM LEWIS 
The most publicized player in the county's most publicized program, Lewis 
helped Mater Dei compile an 86-5 record in three brilliant seasons. Mater Dei 
finished 29-0 in 1985, the only county school ever to finish undefeated. 
Lewis once scored 20 points in a quarter against Banning in the Tournament of 
Champions and most of those came during a 4-minute stretch in which Mater Dei 
used a fullcourt press. 
Lewis was strong, quick, and above all, determined. He could score inside, 
outside or from 3-point range. He played in three straight championship games 
and the only player who ever stopped him was DeMatha's Danny Ferry, now 
considered one of college basketball's best players. 
Lewis also made headlines off the court during a troubled recruiting period 
before finally signing with USC, turning down offers from Kentucky, Maryland, 
Nevada Las Vegas, Syracuse and UCLA. 
If one player were to be selected as the county's best over the past 20 years, 
Lewis would win the honor. 
JOHNNY ROGERS 
Johnny Rogers, a prolific shooter, was described as "a guard trapped inside a 
center's body." Former USC Coach Stan Morrison once called Johnny Rogers "the 
best shooting big man I've ever seen." 
J.R. could flat-out shoot. He never brought the ball down below his numbers and 
seldom put the ball on the floor. He scored 40 or more points nine times during 
his senior year. 
Rogers shot 60.6% from the field and 78% from the foul line as a senior. He 
scored 40 and 45 points in playoff victories over West Covina and Dominguez 
that season. In his junior year in 1980, he led his team to the 3-A 
championship. 
Rogers signed with Stanford, transferred to UC Irvine for his junior and senior 
seasons and then was drafted on the second round by the Sacramento Kings. 
He played two seasons in the NBA before signing with Real Madrid of Spain, one 
of the best club teams in the world. 
JACK TUZ 
Students would chant, "Jack Tuz is what it's all about" whenever Tuz made a 
difficult play look routine. 
He had a memorable dunk against Long Beach Poly's Dino Gregory in the 
Tournament of Champions as a senior that dazzled the media and college coaches. 
"Of all the players I coached, he had the most physical abilities," said former 
Corona del Mar Coach Jack Errion. "He was strong, could run like a deer and 
really jump." 
Tuz averaged 16.4 points as a senior, leading Corona del Mar to its first 
Southern Section title in 1977 with a 56-50 overtime victory over Ramona. 
MARK WULFEMEYER 
Football star Mickey Flynn of Anaheim and guard Mark Wulfemeyer of Troy are the 
county's legendary prep stars. 
Wulfemeyer, a 4-year starter from 1970-74, played with a style and flair that 
no one since has come close to matching. 
Last-second shots? Wulfemeyer was the master, frequently hitting halfcourt 
shots at the buzzer to end a quarter. 
Ball-handling skills? Wulfemeyer could dribble faster than most of his 
opponents could run. He faced every gimmick defense devised and averaged 27.5 
points every time he suited up. 
He signed with USC and several weeks later with the Angels, both of which he 
said he would change if given the opportunity to do over again. 
"But I had a lot of fun playing the game, and no one can take that away from 
me," he said. "I'm having a lot of fun coaching my son these days. He's going 
to be a good athlete some day." 
NOTABLE OTHERS 
Dave Meyers, Sonora: The 1971 2-A player of the year at Sonora. He averaged 
22.7 points his senior year and was later a 2-time All-American at UCLA. 
Kevin Heenan, El Dorado: The 1975 2-A Player of the Year. He averaged 22.3 
points as a senior. El Dorado won two consecutive 2-A titles and was 47-13 with 
Heenan in the lineup. 
Steve Trumbo, El Modena: A 3-year starter who earned first-team 3-A division 
honors in 1978, averaging 23.8 points per game as a senior. Later played at 
Brigham Young University. 
Clayton Olivier, Los Amigos: He averaged 27.2 points as a junior, making 
first-team All-CIF, then averaged 30.5 points per game as a senior to earn 
co-MVP honors of the 3-A division with Rogers in 1980. 
Tony Neal, Santa Ana Valley: He averaged 24.8 points per game in 1981 and was 
one of the county's best rebounders for 3 seasons. 
How the Team Was Picked 
Tom Hamilton began reporting on Orange County high school sports for The Times 
in the fall of 1968, the year the Orange County edition was started. He has 
covered county high schools longer than any other newspaper reporter. His 
selections for this all-county team were based on performances of athletes in 
the past 20 years and were based on the athletes' records in high school, 
irrespective of college or professional accomplishments. 
PROFILES OF THE TOP 10 
Rick Aberegg 
Katella 
5-10, Guard 
Looking Back: Two-year starter from 1968-70 who averaged 17.4 points as a 
junior and 27.5 points as a senior. Named second-team All-Southern Section both 
seasons. Teamed with Bob Sherwin in the backcourt to lead Katella to the 2-A 
title game in 1969. Holds school single-game and season scoring records. 
College Career: Played two seasons at Fullerton College and transferred to Cal 
State Long Beach, where he played on teams that were 50-5 under Coach Jerry 
Tarkanian. 
Personal: Living in Yorba Linda and works as a tile setter. Married with two 
children, Courtney, 6, and Brian, 4. 
Matt Beeuwsaert 
Mater Dei 
6-6, Forward 
Looking Back: Three-year starter from 1980-83, earning All-Southern Section 
honors each season, averaging 19.2 points as a sophomore, 15.7 as a junior and 
15 his senior season. Led Mater Dei to the 4-A division title as a junior and 
was named the section's player of the year. 
College Career: Signed with Notre Dame but left after his sophomore season and 
is currently a starting forward at California. 
Personal: Gary McKnight, Mater Dei coach, named his third son, Matthew, after 
Beeuwsaert. 
Rich Branning 
Marina 
6-1, Guard 
Looking Back: Three-year starter from 1973-76 who led Marina to the 4-A 
division title game in 1975 as junior. Averaged 19.2 points as a junior and 
27.4 points as a senior. 
College Career: Was a four-year starter for Notre Dame. Holds the school mark 
of 460 career assists. 
Personal: Drafted by the Indiana Pacers in the fourth round in 1980, but never 
played professionally. Involved in real estate, married and living in Corona 
del Mar. 
Wayne Carlander 
El Toro/Ocean View 
6-8, Forward 
Looking Back: Played his freshman year at El Toro and then transferred to Ocean 
View, where he was a 3-year starter from 1978-81. Averaged 26.4 points as a 
junior and 33 points as a senior. Sixth on the Southern Section's career 
scoring list with 2,314 points. 
College Career: Signed with USC, where he was a 4-year starter. Holds the 
school's career scoring mark of 1,524 points. 
Personal: Drafted on the fifth round in 1985 by the Clippers. Played 2 seasons 
in Spain. 
LeRon Ellis 
Mater Dei 
6-11, Center 
Looking Back: Two-year starter from 1985-87 after transferring from Parkrose 
High in Oregon. Averaged 23.2 points as a senior, leading Mater Dei to the 
State Division I title with a 32-1 record. Named the state's Player of the Year 
in 1987. 
College Career: Signed with Kentucky and is the team's starting center. 
Personal: Ellis was also an excellent water polo player at Mater Dei and high 
jumped 6 feet 8 inches on the track team. Father, LeRoy, once played for the 
Lakers. 
Adam Keefe 
Woodbridge 
6-9, Center 
Looking Back: Three-year starter from 1985-88; named the Southern Section's 2-A 
Player of the Year as a junior and senior. Led Woodbridge to the State Division 
II championship in 1987. Finished 11th on the state career scoring list with 
2,212 points. 
College Career: Signed with Stanford, where he is a reserve player as a 
freshman. 
Personal: A versatile athlete, Keefe also started for 2 years on Woodbridge's 
volleyball team. Charlie Brande, Corona del Mar volleyball coach, once 
projected Keefe as a potential Olympic volleyball player. 
Tom Lewis 
Mater Dei 
6-7, Forward 
Looking Back: Three-year starter from 1982-85 who helped Mater Dei win a 4-A 
title in 1983 and a 5-A title in 1985. Averaged 30.7 points as a junior and 32 
points as a senior. Fourth on the Southern Section's scoring list with 2,456 
points. 
College Career: Signed with USC and was the leading freshman scorer in the 
nation. Left USC after his freshman season and is a junior and starting forward 
at Pepperdine. 
Personal: Continued his scoring antics at Pepperdine last year where he led the 
West Coast Athletic Conference with a 22.9 average. Third-leading scorer among 
sophomores in the NCAA. 
Johnny Rogers 
La Quinta 
6-9, Center 
Looking Back: Three-year starter from 1978-81 who led La Quinta to the 3-A 
division title in 1980. Averaged 28.5 points as a junior and 32.4 points as a 
senior. Named the 3-A Player of the Year as a junior and senior. 
College Career: Signed with Stanford but transferred to UC Irvine for his 
junior and senior seasons where he led the team in scoring both seasons. 
Personal: Drafted in the second round by the Sacramento Kings in 1986. Played 2 
seasons in the National Basketball Assn. and is now playing for Real Madrid in 
Spain. Married a year ago. 
Jack Tuz 
Corona del Mar 
6-6, Forward 
Looking Back: Two-year starter from 1975-77 who teamed with Alex Black and Paul 
Akin to lead Corona del Mar to the 3-A division title in 1977. Averaged 16.4 
points as a senior. 
College Career: Signed with Colorado, but an ankle injury plagued him 
throughout his college career. 
Personal: Plays professional basketball in New Zealand and lives in Corona del 
Mar in the off-season. 
Mark Wulfemeyer 
Troy 
6-1, Guard 
Looking Back: Four-year starter from 1970-74 who averaged 27.5 points in 95 
career games, totaling 2,608 points. Named second-team All-CIF as a sophomore, 
first team as a junior and Player of the Year as a senior when he averaged 36.5 
points per game. 
College Career: Signed with USC and several weeks later accepted a $42,500 
bonus to sign with the Angels. Played less than two seasons at USC and finished 
his career at Marymount College, an NAIA school in Kansas. 
Personal: Living in Corona and working as an athletic shoe salesman and 
bartender. Son, Mark, is an aspiring 9-year-old athlete. 
