THE HIGH SCHOOLS; 
DIMINUTIVE CALDERON BEGINS TO SIZE UP POTENTIAL COLLEGE CAREER 
Exactly how far can a 5-foot-8 point guard expect to extend his basketball 
career? 
"I'd like to go to college," Marnie Calderon of Burroughs said. "But the 
letters haven't been coming." 
Calderon might not be hearing from colleges because he is only a junior. But 
the three-point baskets have kept coming -- at a rate of one in every two 
attempts. 
Calderon, who is averaging 10.3 points a game, has made 43 of 86 three-point 
shots, including four in a game three times. 
"Some of his threes have pretty much been NBA threes," Burroughs Coach Ira 
Sollod said of Calderon's cruise missiles. "A lot of it is just coming down and 
pulling up. He's got the green light. 
"Last year he was only a fair shooter. But he's really come on." 
Calderon's contribution this season is one reason Burroughs clinched its first 
Foothill League championship since 1968. 
Calderon, however, is far from clinching a scholarship. The shot is there. And 
so are the grades; he maintains a 4.0 grade-point average. 
But college scouts, Calderon said, might be looking over his head. 
"Right now," Calderon said, "height doesn't really matter. But in college it 
might. I'd really like to play basketball if possible. But I study hard, so if 
I can't play basketball, I'll go to a UC school anyway. 
"A future is a future, right?" 
Cleveland, as in clank: As far as sustained excellence goes, few would argue 
that Cleveland has had the best boys' team in the Valley area for a number of 
years. The Cavaliers, 18-2 this season and ranked No. 2 in the state, have 
played in the City Section 4-A Division final twice in three seasons. 
For what it's worth, here is a report card on recent play: 
Defense: Rates an A. The toughest press around. 
Offense: B+. Simply explosive at times. 
Talent: A-. Ranks among the City's best. 
Free throws: C. As in clank. 
And the latter is no secret. 
Cleveland Coach Bob Braswell attended the UCLA-Oregon State game at Pauley 
Pavilion on Sunday. While there, he watched a familiar face -- Cleveland 
graduate Trevor Wilson, now a starting forward for the Bruins -- do some 
familiar things. 
Despite finishing with 26 points, Wilson made only six of 12 free throws. 
For Braswell, watching players miss free throws is fast becoming routine. 
Cleveland players, historically, have not been good free-throw shooters, he 
said. The Cavaliers' last loss, a 63-62 tournament loss to St. Joseph of 
Alameda in December, was due in part to an inability to convert one-and-one 
attempts, Braswell said. 
Cleveland's white-line fever has become a running gag. Even Wilson realizes 
that something is, well, amiss. 
"The first thing he said after the (Oregon State) game is, 'I can't make 'em 
because I'm from Cleveland," Braswell said. "I don't know what it is, but 
sometimes we just don't seem to shoot them very well here." 
I was only kidding: San Fernando Coach Dick Crowell groused aloud to Canoga 
Park Coach Joey Nakasone before their teams met in a West Valley League game 
Wednesday. Both teams were suffering from late-season attrition. 
San Fernando, in fact, was down to seven players. Canoga Park was in similar 
straits. 
"They only had eight guys," Crowell said. "I told Nakasone, 'No fair, you're 
one up on me. That's one too many.' " 
Minutes later, it was all even at seven each. 
Canoga Park's Mario Rodriguez fell during a warm-up drill and suffered a 
fractured ankle. Crowell said that a Canoga Park statistician apparently 
wandered under the basket during layup drills and Rodriguez landed on him. 
Add San Fernando: The Tigers defeated Canoga Park, 79-47, to remain in 
contention for a playoff berth. Third-place San Fernando (9-12, 3-6 in league 
play) will play host to second-place Chatsworth (11-8, 4-5) at 7 tonight. 
If San Fernando wins, the same teams will meet in a playoff for second place 
next week, Crowell said. Only the first- and second-place teams in the City 3-A 
advance to the playoffs. 
Does San Fernando -- which has played inconsistently all season and lost two 
starters last week when Crowell kicked them off the team for rules violations 
-- still have a fighting chance? 
"We're playing the theme to 'Rocky', " Crowell said. "We're on the ropes, but 
we're still trying." 
End around: Cleveland running back-safety Sean Burwell, who had orally 
committed to attend Iowa State, pulled an end-around on Wednesday and instead 
signed with Oregon. 
Burwell, a Times All-Valley selection, said he had been recruited by Oregon all 
along but that the Ducks' running back coach, Gary Campbell, told Burwell he 
must redshirt his first year. It fast became a point of contention, Burwell 
said. 
So Burwell committed to Iowa State -- for a matter of minutes. 
"(Campbell) called me later that day to tell me I'd made a big mistake," 
Burwell said. "He said I'd have a good opportunity to play at Oregon." 
Campbell visited Burwell at the player's home last Friday and told Burwell he 
didn't have to redshirt if he didn't want to. 
"That was the main thing," Burwell said Thursday, "I didn't want to redshirt. 
They told me at first that I would, but then they changed their mind." 
As did Burwell, who rushed for 1,145 yards last season. Whatever Campbell said 
worked -- Burwell informed Oregon of his decision Saturday. 
Come one, come all: Five of the Marmonte League's seven teams are still in 
contention for playoff berths in their respective divisions. 
Simi Valley (16-8, 9-3), which is guaranteed at least a co-championship; 
Camarillo (16-6, 8-3), which could tie the Pioneers with a win at Newbury Park 
tonight; and Westlake (14-10, 7-4), which clinched third place Wednesday, are 
locks because they finished in the top three. 
On the bubble are Royal (11-12, 6-5), which needs to beat Thousand Oaks tonight 
to finish at .500, and Newbury Park. The Panthers are 4-7 in league play, but a 
strong nonleague showing and 13-9 overall record might be good enough for a 
postseason invitation. 
Rained out: Grant's alumni baseball game, scheduled for Feb. 11, has been 
rescheduled because of poor weather. The game will be held March 12 at 11 a.m. 
at Grant. 
Staff writers Tim Brown, Steve Elling and Vince Kowalick contributed to this 
notebook. 
