AFTER MEYERS' KICK START HE GEARS FOR OLYMPICS; 
BICYCLING: HIS LEISURELY ACTIVITY HAS TURNED INTO A GOAL OF GREATNESS. 
When Dean Meyers first bought a bicycle, it was to be used for those leisurely 
afternoon rides. 
Meyers was working in a grocery store in Monterey at the time. A fellow 
employee was training for triathlons and invited Meyers to ride with him. 
Before Meyers knew it, his lesiurely rides had turned into intense training 
sessions. 
"He'd come back to work and say, 'I'm kicking Dean's butt everyday,' " Meyers 
said. "So I start training, mostly just to beat him. We joke about it, but he'd 
get me up at 7 o'clock every morning and just go out and kill me. I'd come home 
so tired, but I got really strong because of that and because I rode with 
someone so much better than me." 
Before long, Meyers was the one bragging at the grocery store. 
"After a while I was beating him, and then from there I started setting my 
scopes bigger and bigger," Meyers said. 
That was four years ago. Now a senior at San Diego State and a member of the 
school's cycling club, Meyers will be one of the top competitors in SDSU's 
Cycling Classic today and Sunday. Meyers is the favorite in today's Men's A 
46.5 mile road race in Jamul. But he will not race in Sunday's criterium on the 
SDSU campus due to previous commitments. 
Last year at the collegiate nationals, Meyers placed 15th in the criterium, 
which is approximately 40 miles. This year Meyers' goal is to win the 
nationals. 
Collegiate cycling, however, is not Meyers' main focus. He's setting his sights 
first on the Olympics, then on riding for a professional racing team. Meyers 
now rides for both SDSU's club and the San Diego Bicycle Club, both of which 
are sanctioned by the U.S. Cycling Federation. Riding for the San Diego club, 
he can keep his prize money and still retain his amateur status, which is vital 
to his Olympic goals. 
"Collegiate racing is fun and it's prestigious for what it is but if you want 
to make it to the top you got to get out there with the U.S. Cycling 
Federation," Meyers said. 
In addition to collegiate and USCF racing, Meyers was asked to be on a team to 
race mountain bikes. The team is sponsored by Nishiki through a shop in 
Monterey called Les Joselyns Bike Shop. 
"With NORBA (Northern Off Road Biking Assn.) I'll do a lot of traveling all 
over the country, and the races won't conflict with USCF," Meyers said. "They 
wouldn't do that because it would be detrimental to both businesses." 
Meyers said many cyclists do both road and off-road racing. Off-road, Meyers 
said has a lot more bike handling. 
Meyers said one of the best ways for him to improve as a cyclist is to ride 
with a better cyclist. And fortunately for Meyers, he has two right under his 
roof. Roommates Steve and Trent Klasna provide Meyers with tough competition. 
Steve, a member of Team Reebok, is "one of the top riders in the country," 
Meyers said. And Steve's brother, Trent, who rides with the San Diego Bicycle 
Club also "pushes" Meyers when training. 
Meyers and Trent Klasna recently returned from Colorado Springs where they 
attended a three-week camp in which 55 of the top amateur cyclists in the 
country trained under the national coaches. They were selected for the camp 
based on their cycling accomplishments over the last year. 
"It's an opportunity for them to get a look at us and for us to see what the 
system is at that level," Meyers said. "It's kind of preparatory for the 
Olympics." 
Each day of the strenuous camp began at 7 a.m. with training on stationary 
bikes for an hour. After breakfast they would go on a 70-mile bike ride, which 
Meyers said was often difficult because the temperatures would drop to five or 
10 degrees, and often below zero. Later, the cyclists would go out to the 
soccer field for running, then to the pool, then more riding. 
"It's a very good base for the rest of the season," Meyers said. "You come out 
of there really tired because they work you so hard. Right now I'm starting to 
feel what I went through there and feel myself getting stronger." 
The camp gave Meyers the opportunity to meet the coaches, so it put him one 
step closer to his Olympic goal. 
"They told us to keep in contact," Meyers said. "They want to know what we're 
doing. If I keep in touch and have a successful season, they might invite me 
back to a camp next year which is just another step." 
Meyers said the team is usually chosen about two weeks before the Olympics 
because "they want a team riding strong at that time." 
"They're going to keep monitoring all the people they're in contact with up 
until the last minute," Meyers said. "I have all of this year and next year so 
I have as good of a chance as any. 
"I want to shoot for the top but it's too early to say I want to win the Tour 
de France. I can say it and its true, but I need a couple more seasons to say 
it with validity." 
