A STAR IS RESTORED; 
A STAR IS BORN THE MAKING OF THE 1954 MOVIE AND ITS 1983 RESTORATION BY RONALD 
HAVER (ALFRED A. KNOPF: $24.95; 300 PP.) 
Ronald Haver's "A Star Is Born: The Making of the 1954 Movie and its 1983 
Restoration" is quite simply one of the best books ever written about 
Hollywood. If it had stuck strictly to its subject, as stated in its subtitle, 
it would be fascinating and invaluable as a record of the fate of one of the 
American cinema's most cherished films maudits. 
Happily, it's much more than that. Through an exceedingly detailed -- yet brisk 
and succinct -- account of the film's troubled production, Haver, the Los 
Angeles County Museum of Art's longtime film programmer, gives a clear idea of 
the workings of a major studio in the twilight of Hollywood's Golden Era. He 
even sets the stage by evoking not only the motion picture industry but the 
city of Los Angeles and the country at large at the time "A Star Is Born" was 
shooting. 
Throughout, he illumines the technical aspects of film making by bringing alive 
a cast of real-life Hollywood characters more vivid than even those in the film 
they were making. At the forefront are Judy Garland, for whom the film was to 
be a comeback after a troubled four-year absence from the screen; director 
George Cukor, celebrated for his deftness in guiding star-actresses; and Jack 
Warner, who gambled a near-unprecedented $4,970,000 of his studio's money on 
the belief that the public still loved Garland. There is even the shadowy 
presence of a Burbank Studios film editor, said to have some key missing 
footage from the film's uncut version; sure enough, it turned out that he did 
-- when he was arrested for the illegal possession of hundreds of cans and 
boxes of film! 
It was Garland's new husband, producer Sid Luft, who had the inspired idea of 
starring his wife in a musical remake of one of Hollywood's most popular movies 
about itself. Its sure-fire plot, as all movie lovers know, has to do with an 
alcoholic matinee idol (Norman Maine) who discovers and falls in love with the 
talented, unknown Esther Blodgett, soon to be given the nom de film Vicki 
Lester. Norman and Vicki marry, but as she soars to stardom, he hits the skids. 
Janet Gaynor and Fredric March were the original Norman and Vicki. (Cukor 
himself had directed an even earlier variation on the plot, the 1932 "What 
Price Hollywood?" starring Constance Bennett, Joel McCrea and Lowell Sherman.) 
Moss Hart wrote the new script and Harold Arlen and Ira Gershwin contributed 
the songs, including the famous "The Man That Got Away." 
At the time Haver directed the 1983 restoration effort on behalf of the Academy 
of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, he said that there were no real villains 
in the unhappy fate of the film that resulted in its being trimmed by 27 
minutes from its original 181-minute running time. Yet Haver makes it clear 
that "A Star Is Born" was a risky venture from the beginning. First of all, 
there was Garland, caught up in her barbiturate and amphetamine dependence that 
inevitably resulted in many absences from the set. Then there was Luft, who, 
while clearly invaluable in holding his wife together, had no experience in 
producing such an elaborate film. And then there was the costly decision, early 
in production, to scrap everything and shoot in the new CinemaScope format. 
Most of us who love the movie love the 18-minute "Born in a Trunk" sequence 
written by Leonard Gershe and Roger Edens and directed by choreographer Richard 
Barstow. It's a film-within-the-film, inserted by Luft, Garland and Jack 
Warner, that tells of its heroine's birth into vaudeville and emergence into a 
star that has direct parallels to Garland's own life, but it does bring the 
overall story to a halt, and it did pave the way for Warner to yield to the 
demands of exhibitors faced with less-than-thrilling box-office receipts. (In 
major cities, Haver discovered, the uncut version started screening at 8 a.m., 
and in the evening it was shown at the inconvenient hours of 6:30 and 10 p.m.) 
Cukor was outraged that he and Hart had not been allowed to "sweat out" 20 
minutes that he claimed "would never have been missed." Most of the cuts are 
near the beginning of the film and contain scenes crucial to the development of 
Vicki and Norman's relationship. Haver suggests, credibly, that the aborted 
version could have cost Garland, Mason and others the Oscar. 
Even though Warner regrettably did not let Cukor make the cuts that everyone 
seemed to finally agree were necessary, he does not emerge as the stereotypical 
villainous studio head but a thoroughgoing, no-nonsense professional prepared 
to take considerable risks -- and even battle with his brothers to do so -- but 
also quick to cut losses. The Judy Garland that emerges here seems tragically 
doomed -- gallant, rarely temperamental but too often absent, incredibly 
courageous and giving, but finally too fragile to be expected to resume the 
rigors of full-time movie making. As for Cukor, the book offers the best 
portrait of the director yet -- mercurial, witty and -- to use his own favorite 
word of praise -- tough. 
Among Haver's primary sources were production designer Gene Allen, assistant 
directors Earl Bellamy and Russ Llewellyn and the late James Mason, who was the 
perfect Norman Maine but was far from the first choice for the role. (That was 
Laurence Olivier, followed by Richard Burton, Tyrone Power and Cary Grant. 
Grant actually read for Cukor, who believed he would never reveal himself on 
the screen in the way the role of Norman demanded.) Some of the most 
pleasurable moments in the book come from Allen and Bellamy's descriptions of 
the truly collaborative art of film making, in particular that of the crew 
rising to the challenges presented by the wide CinemaScope image. 
The second part of the book is a veritable detective story as Haver starts 
searching for the missing 27 minutes, which took him into the Warner vaults, 
where he did find the uncut sound track but eventually had to settle for 
filling out an elusive seven minutes with stills. Even the task of restoration 
climaxed on a moment of high drama; less than 24 hours before Cukor was to see 
the first reassembled portion of the film, he died suddenly of heart failure in 
January, 1983, at age 83. As Haver describes the arduous, tantalizing process 
of the restoration, filled with nearly as many disappointments as happy 
surprises, his book becomes a timely plea for the cause of film preservation. 
(If only Jack Warner had preserved all the cuts from the original negative 
instead of melting them down for the silver content, a lamentably standard 
Hollywood practice for decades.) 
In "A Star Is Born: The Making of the 1954 Film and Its 1983 Restoration," 
Haver admirably clarifies the intricate, often high-pressure task of big-scale 
Hollywood film making, but his primary accomplishment is making the most 
dramatic and persuasive case imaginable for the need to preserve our film 
heritage. 
