QUAINT LITTLE INN BESTS BIG LUXURY CONDOS 
Old World charm beat out upscale progress this week when the Ventura City 
Council blocked a luxury condominium project that would have dwarfed a quaint 
European bed-and-breakfast inn next door. 
Darrik Marten Development, which proposed the Island View Townhouse Project, a 
three-story complex of three swank condominiums on Poli Street, said it would 
have helped revitalize the lagging downtown area. 
But Gisela Flender Baida, the German-born owner of La Mer Bed &amp; Breakfast, 
complained that the project would have robbed her two-story inn of its ocean 
view and quiet, homey ambiance. 
What might otherwise have been just another routine zoning dispute thus erupted 
into a symbolic battle. 
Even though the size of the condominiums did not exceed city zoning standards, 
the council unanimously rejected them as too tall and too bulky to stand next 
to the 99-year-old Victorian structure that has housed La Mer since 1985. 
"I know it's subjective, and I really don't like to do something like that," 
Councilman Don Villeneuve said. "But we have to realize that we have distinct 
neighborhoods where the architectural flavor, the scale, the era represented 
and the historical continuity are all important. 
"I hope we sent out a message to developers telling them they have to abide by 
architectural guidelines that go beyond just dimensions." 
Michael E. Wooten, president of the development company, which won unanimous 
approval for the 6,000-square-foot project from the Planning Commission in 
December, said the message came a little late in the game. 
"If a zoning ordinance establishes rules for a zone and a landowner goes in and 
presents a project consistent with that zone, it seems reasonable for the 
landowner to expect to have the project approved," Wooten said. "For the city 
to reverse that normal process is not in keeping with good planning practice or 
in good faith with landowners." 
For Baida, however, the council decision represented a victory that she said 
meant the difference between economic life and death. 
Her five-room inn, which was termed one of 15 top romantic getaways for lovers 
in the Los Angeles Times Travel section Sunday, depends on such intangibles as 
charm, airiness and good cheer for its success, she said. 
Donning an innkeeper's apron, Baida told the council: "If this happens and my 
little Victorian landmark gets squished, . . . I might as well commit suicide." 
No Unanimity 
During the 2 1/2-hour public hearing, numerous neighbors and downtown merchants 
sympathized, but many others didn't. 
"That parcel is not likely to remain a eucalyptus grove into perpetuity," said 
Larry Matheney, a Ventura Port commissioner, referring to the steep hillside 
lot where the condominiums were planned. "Change is going to occur." 
But Bobbye Ming, an uphill neighbor, said change should not come at the expense 
of longtime residents. 
"Are you going to allow the developers to come in here and steal the view from 
those of us who didn't have to steal it from anyone?" she asked the council. 
Ironically, the dispute mirrored a battle that neighbors fought against La Mer 
before its opening in 1985, when they complained that the inn would generate 
traffic problems and threaten the residential flavor of the neighborhood. 
