CZECH WRITER SENTENCED TO 9 MONTHS; 
HAVEL CONVICTED FOR PROTEST AMID COMMUNIST CRACKDOWN 
Dissident playwright Vaclav Havel was convicted Tuesday for his role in an 
unauthorized rally and sentenced to nine months in prison as Czechoslovakia's 
Communist authorities persevered in their hard-line stance against human rights 
activists and opposition forces. 
Havel, who was taken to and from a closely guarded courtroom in a sealed police 
van, had been in custody since his arrest Jan. 16 during a demonstration to 
honor the memory of a youth who burned himself to death to protest the Soviet 
invasion that crushed the "Prague Spring" reform movement in 1968. 
The playwright was charged with inciting citizens to take part in banned 
demonstrations and with obstructing police. 
Before he was sentenced, Havel, 52, told Helena Hvalata, the presiding criminal 
court judge, that he did not feel guilty and that the charges against him were 
not proven. He suggested that the authorities will one day be forced to "open a 
dialogue with society, not excluding anyone." 
Havel defended the activities of Charter 77, the human rights declaration that 
he helped write 12 years ago, arguing that he had often warned the authorities 
that resistance to reform would lead to increased public disaffection. 
"Warning voices of this kind were not listened to," Havel said, "and today the 
present power harvests what it has sown, the fruits of its own proud attitude." 
Havel's trial took place in a courtroom on a narrow street sealed off by 
uniformed and plainclothes policemen. Representatives from international human 
rights agencies were barred, but Havel's wife, Olga, and his brother, Ivan, 
were present. 
53 Others Charged 
During his trial, 53 other defendants were facing similar charges in courtrooms 
throughout the city. Seven other leading dissidents arrested in the memorial 
demonstrations, which spread over four days beginning Jan 15, were being tried 
together, and their cases were expected to be decided today. 
The specific charges against Havel, in the view of Western diplomats and 
representatives of human rights groups gathered outside the court building, 
were virtually irrelevant. The object of the proceeding, they said, was to use 
Czechoslovakia's most prominent dissident as an example to show that the 
authorities have no intention of taking part in the reforms sweeping other East 
European countries. 
The demonstrations that led to the arrest of Havel and the others were among 
the most sustained protests in Czechoslovakia in nearly 20 years. The stern 
police response, which included the use of tear gas, water cannon and dogs, 
brought widespread shock to Czechoslovaks, who had assumed that frequent 
government references to "radical reform" meant that a measure of tolerance had 
crept into the system. 
However, the government and the Communist Party apparatus seem to be firmly in 
the hands of officials whose rise to power followed the crackdown that came at 
the end of the 1968 reform movement. Any liberalization of the system, most 
observers say, would be taken as a decisive reversal for those officials. 
'Closed Off Options' 
"They realize that any liberalization would mean the end of them," said Jiri 
Dienstbier, an opposition activist and journalist. "They have closed off any 
other options." 
The hard-line stance of the Czechoslovak party bosses has been criticized not 
only by Western-based human rights organizations but by Communist Hungary and 
Poland, where officials have argued that further delay in undertaking reform 
could worsen Czechoslovakia's economic and political situation. Recent 
high-ranking visitors from both countries, diplomatic sources have indicated, 
urged party leaders to open a dialogue with the opposition. 
The Czechoslovak authorities, however, seem determined to hold to their 
hard-line course. Dissident activists say the authorities are concerned 
especially about containing a growing mood of discontent among young people, 18 
to 25 years old, who have no memory of the 1968 events and have grown bolder in 
their protests in recent months. 
Dissidents say that of the seven activists being tried together, the harshest 
sentence may be given to Jana Petrova, 22, who has emerged as one of the young 
people's leaders. 
"They want to teach the youth a lesson," Dienstbier said. "I am afraid the 
sentences of Petrova and the others will be for the maximum." The maximum 
sentences are two years for incitement and six months for obstructing police. 
New Laws Against Protests 
The authorities recently introduced new laws to prevent demonstrations and 
protests, including fines of up to $1,000 and jail terms for those who fail to 
heed police warnings to disperse from any event that officials feel is 
provocative. 
The bite of the new regulations was evident outside the court building where 
Havel was tried. Scores of police officers were taking the names of passers-by 
and people lingering in the street, and anyone so recorded was subject to 
arrest and prosecution if caught on the street after an initial warning to move 
on. 
About 200 Charter 77 supporters managed to get into the court building early in 
the day, but they were cleared out after the court took a brief break for 
lunch. 
Havel was seen by only a few of them, and only for a moment, as he passed 
through a hallway dressed in jeans and a brown sweater. 
His brother, Ivan, said he spoke to Havel for a few moments after the 
sentencing. 
"I think he was in a good condition and in a good mood," he said. "He said he 
was touched by the local and international support, and he said his mood from 
this was more important than the sentence." 
Havel has had frequent brushes with the authorities since the early 1970s. He 
spent nearly four years in prison, from 1979 to 1983, and since then has been a 
frequent target for police harassment. 
With his internationally acclaimed status as a playwright, he has been the 
nation's leading dissident voice and a constant thorn in the side of the 
regime. 
Among his plays, generally starkly modern, are "The Temptation," which will 
open in New York this spring; "The Garden Party," and "The Memorandum." 
