IRS INQUIRY FOCUSES ON FOREIGN FIRMS' U.S. COMPANIES; 
TAXES: AUDITS INTO SUSPECTED 'UNDERPAYMENTS' HAVE BEEN IN THE WORKS FOR YEARS. 
THE AMOUNT IN QUESTION COULD RUN AS HIGH AS $12 BILLION. 
The Internal Revenue Service confirmed Sunday that it has been auditing 
American subsidiaries of foreign-owned companies to see whether they have been 
underpaying their corporate income taxes. 
IRS officials estimated that the cases they now have in progress suggest that 
suspected "underpayments" by such firms over the past several years could 
amount to as much as $12 billion. However, many of the cases are still in 
negotiation and may not yield that much. 
The suspicion stems from the fact that although foreign investment here has 
tripled during the past decade and foreign firms are now earning substantially 
more than they did before, the amount they are paying in U.S. taxes has 
remained almost unchanged. 
IRS officials confirmed Sunday that data compiled by the agency indicates that 
of about 36,800 foreign-owned companies that filed U.S. tax returns in 1986, 
more than half reported they had no taxable income. 
Although authorities say the cases often are a matter of judgment, there is 
suspicion that some foreign-owned subsidiaries in this country have 
successfully reduced their tax liability by "overpaying" for the parts or 
technology they import, thus cutting back the income they report here. 
Charles S. Triplett, deputy associate chief counsel of the IRS, said the 
auditing, which was reported Sunday by the New York Times, was begun in the 
early 1980s and was intensified during the last half of the decade when foreign 
firms' presence in the United States increased. 
"We stepped it up four years ago -- it's not exactly a hot flash," he said in a 
telephone interview. 
Triplett said that contrary to some reports, the probe was not being 
concentrated on Japanese companies. But he said it is possible that more 
Japanese-owned firms ultimately may be challenged because they tend to import 
from parent firms rather than buy their parts here. 
"We are not picking on any particular country," Triplett said. "We also have a 
lot of Canadian and West German cases, but they don't seem to make the news 
flashes." 
The disclosure follows a study last year by the congressional Joint Committee 
on Taxation that suggested there was "some indication that the level of tax 
payments of foreign-owned businesses in the United States is unusually low." 
Triplett said the agency's efforts could be bolstered in future audits by a 
1989 law that enables the IRS to fine foreign-owned companies up to $10,000 a 
month if they do not comply promptly with demands for records or testimony, and 
then eventually assess extra taxes. But he said the law does not apply to 
records for tax years before it was enacted and so is of little help in the 
audits that the IRS currently is performing, which primarily involve the 
behavior of corporations during the early 1980s. 
IRS officials said the new law was enacted to reinforce a 1987 ruling by a 
federal district court in Los Angeles that empowered IRS officials to subpoena 
the records of a U.S. subsidiary of a foreign firm. That case involved Toyota, 
U.S.A., the auto importer. 
Triplett said the IRS frequently finds a reverse pattern when U.S. subsidiaries 
move to foreign tax havens. In those cases, he said, they sometimes allocate 
too much of their incomes to their foreign operations, thus reducing the amount 
they must pay to Uncle Sam. 
Triplett cautioned, however, that in many such instances the allocation of 
income between one country and another is a matter of judgment and eventually 
is determined by negotiation between the IRS and the corporation involved. 
"They're not out of compliance necessarily," he said. 
