HUMAN RIGHTS GROUP COULD BE REAL TEACHER 
It is preposterous to suppose that allowing students to form chapters of 
Amnesty International on the campuses of Dana Hills and Capistrano Valley high 
schools somehow would violate the constitutional requirements of separation of 
church and state. 
So is the contention that the work of Amnesty International does not fit the 
high school curriculum. And also that the organization is political. But those 
are some of the misguided concerns to which officials in the Capistrano Unified 
School District have alluded in their refusal to allow students to form Amnesty 
International chapters on those campuses. 
School officials of more than 1,000 other public schools, across the country -- 
including seven here in Orange County -- do not harbor such misconceptions. 
They have welcomed Amnesty International chapters on their campuses. Those 
school officials correctly recognize that the organization is not religious, 
political or partisan. 
Amnesty International, which won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1977, is a 
humanitarian group dedicated to the preservation and protection of human 
rights. It has a worldwide membership of about 700,000 in 60 countries. Its 
only weapons in its war against torture, government executions and the 
imprisonment and mistreatment of prisoners of conscience are protest 
letter-writing campaigns and its ability to spotlight public opinion on human 
rights violations. 
We can think of nothing more suited to academics. As Chris Bergerud, a senior 
at Dana Hills High School and Natalie Pierce, a senior at Capistrano Valley 
High School, both of whom have been attempting to gain their principals' 
approval for campus chapters, point out, the California Board of Education 
requires human rights education. So it seems ludicrous that educators would not 
be eager to help students become active in an educational and informational 
program that is tied to the reality of human rights in the real world. 
Bergerud and Pierce, having been rejected by their principals, are taking their 
case to the school board March 6. Board trustees should follow the example set 
by the Los Angeles school board last October when it granted an appeal filed by 
a senior from Birmingham High School in Van Nuys, reversing a decision that 
rejected her request to form an Amnesty International club on campus. No less 
is needed now in the Capistrano district. 
Teaching human rights in class from a textbook is fine. But it is far better 
for students -- and for people suffering the loss of their basic rights -- to 
have that knowledge put to practical use through extracurricular humane 
efforts. An on-campus chapter of Amnesty International would be just such an 
effort. 
