PLAIN TALK; 
TO ACCENTUATE THEIR CHANCES FOR SUCCESS, IMMIGRANTS SEEK EXPERTS' HELP IN 
POLISHING THE WAY THEY SPEAK 
When Der-Shsuan Lii arrived in the United States in 1985, he read and wrote 
English well enough to complete a master's degree at USC. 
But it was a different story when it came to speaking his new language. Lii, a 
native of Taiwan, had trouble with English vowels, l's and r's and the th 
sound. There were many words he could not pronounce. 
His language problems quickly became a block to his career as management 
systems director for the San Gabriel Valley Medical Center, where his chances 
for promotion were dashed because managers did not understand him. 
"My job is to persuade people to cooperate and to improve their management," he 
said. "Naturally, I had a lot of resistance." 
To overcome this obstacle, Lii, like thousands of immigrants nationwide, sought 
to improve his speaking by taking an accent reduction course taught by a speech 
pathologist. 
"It's really improved my pronunciation," he said of the class. "People noticed 
the change." 
Speech pathologists say they have become the modern equivalent of Henry 
Higgins, the character who refashioned Eliza Doolittle's speech in "Pygmalion" 
and "My Fair Lady." 
Because people are judged not just by how they look but also how they sound, 
employees whose speech is unpolished are considered less intelligent and get 
promoted less often, experts note. 
Retreat Into Silence 
"People in the United States hear a Vietnamese accent, for example, and it's 
unfortunate, but many are not going to listen intently to that person 
addressing a group because it's difficult to understand," said Lou Ann Brine, a 
Lakewood speech pathologist. 
Lynn Dickson Gold, a speech therapist whose practice is based in Irvine, 
observed: "I have a client who is a very bright engineer. He told me that, 
whereas he puts all the work into a project, he does not present it because he 
has a heavy accent and his co-workers and supervisors do not understand him 
clearly. 
"In work, the ability to interchange ideas verbally has a powerful influence on 
the effectiveness of the employee and on the ability of that person to rise in 
the company. The silent employee is not recognized for his work and he very 
often is silent because people have difficulty understanding him." 
Although immigrants say accent reduction programs help, such efforts have been 
criticized because some say they homogenize speech -- they make all speakers 
sound like television anchors. 
But speech pathologists say this will never occur. 
"A person will never lose an accent completely," said Beverly Gottlieb-Karp, a 
Santa Monica speech pathologist. "There are infinitesimally few who can change 
their accent after they reach maturity or who can speak a second language like 
a native." 
Iris Maybruck, a West Los Angeles speech therapist, agreed, noting, "My goal is 
not to necessarily help (clients) lose their accent but to pronounce English so 
that it enhances the way they speak. We in the U.S. love accents. You hear the 
television commercials with French accents and you love them, but it's because 
you understand them." 
Therapy to reduce an accent does not come cheap, whether it is offered 
individually or in small groups. In the Los Angeles area, teachers contacted 
charged $60-$85 a session for roughly a dozen individual sessions. Fees for 
small group sessions -- in which participants often are referred by 
corporations -- were $450 a person for 10 meetings or $720 for 13 meetings. 
The experts try various methods to help their clients. They hand out tapes and 
workbooks for home practice. One technique has speakers use a mirror to see how 
their tongue should be positioned -- an exercise that Lynn Gold asked two 
Vietnamese immigrants to perform recently in a Huntington Beach class. 
Maybruck tape-records her students periodically so they can hear their 
progress. Dennis Napoli, a Newport Beach speech pathologist, requires clients 
to carry a notebook to jot down terms important to them. He then records the 
words so students can practice saying them. 
English pronunciation, experts say, is difficult for newcomers to master 
because it differs from their native tongue in sound, grammar, syllabification 
and melody (the timing and pitch variations of speech). 
Melody Patterns 
The wrong emphasis on the wrong syllable can make a word in English 
undecipherable. Uncommon melody patterns also can be a hindrance; when the flat 
lilt of the Indian language is applied to English, for example, it can prove 
utterly distracting to a listener. 
Learning correct pronunciation in a new language is always difficult. But it 
can be an even tougher chore if speakers studied extensively in their native 
lands, where they only heard the new language spoken with an accent. 
Masatoshi Teramoto studied English in Japan and learned the language well 
enough to read novels. But he heard English spoken only by Japanese. As a 
result, when he arrived in America in 1987, "I found I could hardly hear what 
people were saying." 
That was a problem in his job as a loan officer at Tokai Bank of California, 
where he communicates loan amounts, interest rates, maturity dates and other 
information daily to foreign banks and governments. 
A Confidence-Builder 
Teramoto enrolled in an accent reduction class with South Pasadena speech 
pathologist Elaine Low and said that after 15 classes he felt "more confident." 
"Before I wanted to speak English but I had no confidence to understand what 
people were talking about, so it was very difficult to ask questions. Now I can 
understand English much better," he said. 
"Even if I don't understand all of what they say, I can understand what they 
mean. . . . I have to keep good relations with those who are working in our 
customer banks. . . . After I got confidence from her classes, it's been very 
helpful for me." 
