ENRILE ARRESTED IN DECEMBER COUP BID; 
PHILIPPINES: THE SENATOR IS A POLITICAL FOE OF AQUINO. HE IS VIEWED AS A MENTOR 
OF MUTINOUS YOUNG SOLDIERS. 
President Corazon Aquino's government arrested Sen. Juan Ponce Enrile, a key 
opposition leader, inside the Philippine Senate late Tuesday on a charge of 
rebellion and murder stemming from the December coup attempt that nearly 
toppled Aquino's government. 
Enrile, a co-leader of the 1986 military revolt that helped catapult Aquino to 
power, was charged with causing the death of a boy killed by a rebel plane on 
the first day of the bloody Dec. 1-9 military uprising. 
The surprise arrest of Aquino's lone Senate opponent and harshest public critic 
is likely to increase political pressure on her struggling four-year-old 
administration, which faces almost daily threats of a seventh coup attempt. 
Enrile, 66, a flamboyant political leader and former defense secretary under 
both Aquino and the late President Ferdinand E. Marcos, is seen as a mentor to 
many of the young soldiers responsible for the six military uprisings. 
Aquino has been heavily criticized in the past for not punishing coup 
ringleaders. Enrile, a Harvard-trained lawyer, is the most prominent figure 
ever to be indicted in a Philippine coup attempt. Six other civilians were also 
charged. 
Enrile was taken into custody in the Senate president's office shortly after he 
delivered an emotional speech on the packed Senate floor. Red-eyed and his 
voice choked with emotion, he shook hands and said goodby to most of his 
colleagues before leaving the building with Alfredo Lim, director of the 
National Bureau of Investigation. 
The two men drove away in Enrile's bulletproof van. After providing photos of 
himself to police, Enrile met with reporters through the night in Lim's plush 
air-conditioned office. Officials said it was unclear when or if he would be 
jailed. 
Enrile, who was martial-law administrator under Marcos, was implicated but 
never charged in a 1986 coup attempt against Aquino. He has denied any 
complicity in the most recent mutiny. Instead, he portrayed his arrest as a 
blow against freedom and democracy, warning that Aquino will have to "answer to 
God and history." 
"I really hope that history will remember that there was one soul who lit a 
candle of freedom," Enrile told reporters at the Senate building. "And hoped it 
would flicker. And that one soul is named Juan Ponce Enrile. 
"They are giving me a rare opportunity to bring to public attention the 
corruption, the oppression and the lack of justice in our lives," he said. 
The formal combined charge of "rebellion . . . murder and multiple frustrated 
murder" carries a maximum penalty of life in prison, prosecutors said. Enrile 
was also charged with harboring rebel leaders during the height of the coup. 
The December uprising left more than 113 dead and 500 wounded. 
Aquino and Enrile have traded bitter barbs in recent weeks in a personal and 
political grudge that dates back to when Enrile jailed her late husband, 
Benigno S. (Ninoy) Aquino Jr., for nearly eight years in the 1970s. Aquino, the 
longest held prisoner of Marcos' political opponents, was assassinated at 
Manila airport when he returned from exile in the United States on Aug. 21, 
1983. Six years later, that case is still in court here. 
Also charged in Tuesday's filing was former army Lt. Col. Gregorio (Gringo) 
Honasan, a former Enrile aide who already has a $250,000 bounty on his head as 
a career coup plotter, and Rodolfo Aguinaldo, another former aide who was 
recently suspended as governor of Cagayan province for announcing over Manila 
radio that he was sending tanks and artillery to the capital to support the 
coup attempt. 
Others charged were retired Brig. Gen. Felix Brawner and retired Lt. Col. Billy 
Bibit, who the government alleges were key coup leaders. Charges were also 
filed against a Manila hotel owner, Rebecco Panlilio, and his wife, Erlinda. 
Prosecutors said they provided food for a party that Enrile threw for Honasan 
and 100 armed rebel troops during the first night's fighting. 
A 25-page court document filed with the charges alleges that Enrile also met 
with coup leaders at the Hotel Inter-Continental in Makati while rebel troops 
were occupying the swanky financial district of the capital. 
At a press conference, senior state prosecutor Aurelio G. Trampe said Enrile is 
considered a "participant" rather than a coup sponsor. 
"We charge conspiracy," Trampe said. "When there is a conspiracy, the act of 
one is the act of all. The guilt of one is the guilt of all in this 
conspiracy." 
Under that theory, Enrile is charged with murder in the death of Rolando 
Estrada, who died when a rebel T-28 "Tora-Tora" plane tried to bomb the 
government-run Channel 4 television complex in suburban Quezon City and instead 
hit several houses. Four other people were wounded in the blast. 
Justice Secretary Franklin Drillon said prosecutors recommended against 
granting bail, but a department spokesman said later that a judge could 
overrule the recommendation when Enrile is arraigned. No date was set. 
Aquino issued no comment, but her spokesman, Tomas Gomez, praised the 
prosecutors' action. "What we are witnessing today is the effective operation 
of our criminal justice system under a constitutional democracy," Gomez said. 
"Crimes have been committed, criminals have been identified, and therefore, 
cases have to be filed." 
