SLAYING OF PRIESTS INSPIRES TEACH-IN AT LOYOLA ON SALVADORAN CONFLICT 
For the first time since the Vietnam war era, students and faculty at Loyola 
Marymount University on Wednesday held a daylong teach-in to reflect on the 
brutal murders of six Jesuit priests in El Salvador and the struggle for 
democracy throughout Central America. 
The assassination of the Jesuits last November in a predawn attack by 
Salvadoran army troops at the University of Central America in San Salvador 
provided the impetus for the teach-in at the Jesuit campus in Westchester. 
"The leadership of that university, the administrative and academic leadership, 
was just slaughtered," Loyola Marymount University President James N. Loughran 
said in an interview. "They are martyrs." 
He said the killings touched the lives of many on his campus and led to the 
cancellation of all classes and an unusual day devoted to large assemblies and 
small discussion sessions on all aspects of the Central American conflict. 
"This is a big day," Loughran said in opening the teach-in. "May our minds and 
hearts open up." 
A spirited but civil discussion followed about the causes and potential 
solutions to the 10-year-old civil war in El Salvador. 
Ernesto Rivas-Gallont, former Salvadoran ambassador to the United States, told 
the audience of more than 800 students and faculty that deep political, social, 
economic, ideological and cultural conflicts that led to the civil war will not 
be solved without outside mediation. 
"It's been 10 years now that the country has been bleeding to death," he said. 
"It's about time it stops." 
Rivas-Gallont and Father Cesar Jerez, president of the University of Central 
America campus in Managua, Nicaragua, differed on what needs to occur to bring 
peace to El Salvador. 
Rivas-Gallont said the United States is an "important player" and must continue 
to assist Salvadoran President Alfredo Cristiani in efforts to strengthen 
democracy by continuing to provide economic aid, including more financial 
assistance to labor unions in El Salvador. 
The United States can do more by supporting the peace process than aiding the 
war, he said. 
But Jerez singled out the Bush Administration as part of the problem. "The 
small countries of Central America have been considered by Washington for years 
as the back yard of your country," he told the audience. 
"Central America under the Bush Administration is part of a Cold War" that pits 
East against West. 
He suggested that the United Nations, the Organization of American States and 
the Catholic Church must mediate the battle between leftist and rightist forces 
in El Salvador and elsewhere in Central America. 
Jerez said he has told members of Congress that the United States must stop 
military and economic aid to the government of El Salvador "if it is clear that 
they are violating human rights." 
If the United States does not stop aid to El Salvador, Jerez urged that it be 
conditioned on establishment of a dialogue between the warring factions -- the 
government, the army and the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN). 
Both agreed that the slayings of the Jesuits, their cook and her teen-age 
daughter were, as Rivas-Gallont put it, "abhorrent, heinous murders" and that 
the perpetrators must be brought to justice. 
The director of El Salvador's military academy and eight other members of the 
Salvadoran army have been charged with premeditated murder in the assassination 
of the priests. 
Among those killed was the university rector, Ignacio Ellacuria and Vice Rector 
Ignacio Martin-Baro. All the priests were leftist intellectuals and advocates 
of negotiations between the U.S.-backed government and the Marxist liberation 
front. 
"I hope the deaths of the brothers will stop what is going on," Jerez said. But 
he urged the audience to consider the U.S. role in fabricating the "bullets 
that killed the Jesuits in El Salvador," in the invasion of Panama and support 
for the Nicaraguan Contras. 
Loughran said in an interview later that it is hoped the death of the Jesuits 
will lead to democratic reforms in El Salvador. "If we can force an honest 
investigation and have a fair trial and bring people to justice, that would be 
a crack in a whole bad situation," he said. 
Loyola student Martha Arevalo, who came to Los Angeles from El Salvador, 
praised the university for holding the teach-in, which she said was long 
overdue. "If people here in the U.S. can understand and be educated about the 
situation in El Salvador," she said, "something could be done to stop the 
thousands of people who are dying and the whole war itself." 
Sara Martinez, a panelist who fled the war in El Salvador, expressed the hope 
that events like the teach-in will increase American understanding of the 
problems in her native country and help end the civil war there. She said many 
members of Los Angeles' large Salvadoran community want to return home. "We 
really would like to go back under circumstances of peace and justice," 
Martinez said. 
REFLECTIONS ON EL SALVADOR 
Father Cesar Jerez 
'The small countries of Central America have been considered by Washington for 
years as the back yard of your country.' 
Father James N. Loughran 
'The leadership of that university, the administrative and academic leadership, 
was just slaughtered. (The six assassinated Jesuit priests) are martyrs.' 
Ernesto Rivas-Gallont 
'It's been 10 years now that the country has been bleeding to death. It's about 
time it stops.' 
