BRITISH FREEZE TIES TO IRAN AMID THREATS 
Britain froze its diplomatic relations with Iran today as Iranian Muslim 
fundamentalist leaders said suicide squads are preparing to carry out the 
"death sentence" imposed on novelist Salman Rushdie and his publishers by the 
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. 
United News of India and the British Broadcasting Corp. said telephone callers 
threatened to bomb British planes to India unless Rushdie, whose novel, "The 
Satanic Verses," has outraged many Muslim fundamentalists, appeared in public. 
Two airlines, British Airways and Air Europe, said they are taking the threat 
seriously. 
Britain, which reopened its embassy in Tehran in December for the first time in 
eight years, condemned the threats and announced that it has frozen plans to 
"build up further our embassy." 
Iran's lone diplomat in Britain, Mohammed Basti, was summoned to the Foreign 
Office in London to discuss the situation and emerged defiant, telling 
reporters that Khomeini's "decree or verdict" was delivered "after careful 
consideration." 
"It has nothing to do particularly with your country," the charge d'affaires 
said. 
'Totally Unacceptable' 
The Foreign Office called Khomeini's statement "totally unacceptable." 
"We recognize that Muslims and others may have strong views about the contents 
of Mr. Rushdie's book," it said in a statement. "However, no one has the right 
to incite people to violence on British soil or against British citizens." 
Britain maintains three diplomats and support staff in its Tehran embassy. It 
had planned to send in more representatives as part of its normalization of 
relations with Iran. 
British news media said the Indian-born Rushdie is hiding with his wife, 
American novelist Marianne Wiggins, under police guard. Press Assn., the 
domestic British news agency, said Rushdie's first wife, Clarissa Luard, also 
has been given police protection. 
'Put On Our Shrouds' 
Tehran Radio, monitored in Cyprus, said religious figures in the northwestern 
Iranian city of Rezaiyeh declared in a statement: 
"We have already put on our death shrouds and pledge to carry out the imam's 
(Khomeini's) death sentence against Salman Rushdie and his publishers in the 
United States and Europe." 
An Iranian cleric Wednesday offered up to $2.6 million for Rushdie's murder, 
and the author canceled a U.S. promotional tour that was scheduled to begin 
Friday. 
In Washington, the State Department said today that it is appalled by the death 
threats against Rushdie and denounced such actions as "completely 
irresponsible." 
Department spokesman Charles E. Redman said he did not see how "this in any way 
could improve the prospects" for U.S.-Iranian relations. Pakistan's government 
demanded that the United States and Britain ban the book and that all copies of 
it be destroyed. Six people died in Pakistan during a weekend riot over the 
book. 
