ANOTHER BILLION ON THE WAY 
Without birth-rate stabilization, populations will continue to outrun food 
supplies and economic advances, condemning millions to deteriorating incomes 
and marginal nutrition -- if not starvation. This is the message of compelling 
new studies that underscore the critical importance of government-funded 
birth-control programs. 
In the developing nations of the world, contraceptive programs are essential to 
population stabilization, according to a new analysis by the Population Crisis 
Committee. Global population could be stabilized at 9 billion, compared with 
5.2 billion at the present time, if existing population programs in Asia, 
Africa and Latin America are tripled. That would be 4 billion to 5 billion 
fewer than if growth continues on its existing course. 
In the United States, publicly funded family- planning services have proven 
remarkably cost-effective, according to another new study, this one by the Alan 
Guttmacher Institute. The report found that in 1987, federal and state programs 
cost $412 million and resulted in a saving of $1.8 billion in public funds that 
otherwise would have gone for medical and welfare costs. "These savings 
represent an average of $4.40 saved for every dollar spent to provide 
contraceptive services," according to the study. 
The timing of both reports is fortuitous. The report on the importance of 
contraceptives in global population control will serve to strengthen proposals 
for an enlarged role by the U.S. government in providing foreign aid for 
population-control activities. The program has been handicapped by imposition 
of regulations denying assistance through two of the most effective avenues, 
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and the International Planned 
Parenthood Federation. The report on the efficacy of American programs to 
subsidize contraceptives for low-income families comes as the Senate takes up 
reauthorization of Title X of the Public Health Service Act. This legislation 
has, since 1970, funded access to basic health screening, comprehensive family 
planning (but not abortions), and referrals for millions of poor women. 
A third study, by the United Nations, provides the ominous context in which 
population programs must be planned. The world's population will increase by 
another billion in this decade. This year alone, 90 million people will be 
added. Only a rapid expansion of contraceptive distribution can accelerate 
population stabilization. 
