MWD FINDS NEW CHEMICAL SPILL IN YORBA LINDA CREEK 
On the same day last week when criminal charges were filed against the 
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California for a toxic spill in a Yorba 
Linda creek, a second spill fouled the same creek. 
"It couldn't have been more horrible timing," MWD spokesman Jay Malinowski said 
Tuesday. 
The Feb. 6 spill involved a nontoxic substance, but state water quality 
officials say they are investigating to determine if the water district, the 
biggest in Southern California, violated its discharge permit. 
The chemical that spilled from the water treatment plant in Yorba Linda was a 
substance known as alum, or aluminum oxide, and is not considered toxic in low 
concentrations, said Kurt Berchtold, a supervising engineer for the state 
Regional Water Quality Control Board in Riverside. 
"But it's not something we like to see routinely discharged," Berchtold said. 
Last week, the Orange County district attorney's office filed felony charges 
against the district and misdemeanor charges against four top MWD officials for 
the Oct. 26 spill of 466 gallons of caustic soda into Telegraph Canyon Creek. 
The district faces a possible $1-million fine, and each of its officers faces a 
$75,000 fine and three years' imprisonment on charges of negligence and 
knowingly disregarding the law. MWD has denied any criminal wrongdoing. 
In the Feb. 6 spill, an estimated 10 gallons of alum sludge spilled into the 
creek after workers poured the sludge into a holding pond for use in the water 
treatment process, said Bob Gomperz, another MWD spokesman. The alum foamed up 
out of the holding pond and into the creek because the pond was dry for the 
first time in recent memory. 
When water is in the pond, Gomperz explained, the alum reacts to help coagulate 
smaller suspended particles in the water into larger ones that can be more 
easily skimmed off. But since there was no water, Gomperz said, the alum turned 
into white-gray foam in the pond and a strong wind at the time blew it over the 
side. 
The spill was not discovered until the next day, Gomperz said, when workers 
discovered the foam coating a 200-foot stretch of the creek, which leads down 
to the Chino Hills State Park. 
Gomperz said that while it was not toxic, the alum is not supposed to be 
discharged into the creek. A state official said the MWD is permitted only to 
discharge 6,000 gallons of treated water per day into the creek. 
"Only from an aesthetic point of view are we in possible violation of our 
permit," Gomperz said, adding that the foam was quickly mopped up the day it 
was found and that the district promptly notified state water quality 
officials. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Jan Nolan said her office is investigating the latest spill. 
The October spill occurred, MWD officials said, when a pressure relief valve 
malfunctioned and the caustic soda backed up into an underground drain line 
that discharges into the creek. The spill was not detected until two days 
later. 
Nolan said her office has documents showing that the MWD had known since at 
least 1984 that caustic soda -- used at the plant to reduce the water acidity 
level -- would overflow into the creek if there was a malfunction of a pressure 
relief valve. The soda, which consists of sodium hydroxide, burns the skin on 
contact. 
