STAGE BEAT: 'CITIES': A DEAD END FOR DREAMS AT FIGTREE 
The loss of dreams and where that loss can put us is the subject of three short 
plays gathered under the umbrella title "Cities," at the Figtree Theatre. 
They're well worth the less than two hours it takes them to unfold. 
The production is spare. L. Lewis Stout's set grows in detail as each play 
grows in size and scope. The writing is also spare, but as rich as it needs to 
be to rip open the wounds of disappointment. 
Bruce McIntosh's monologue "Jill," smoothly directed by the author, places 
actress Victoria Haas in a straitjacket in a Connecticut asylum, reciting the 
important events of her short life. Nothing worked -- not family, not her 
fascination with art history (she lost her virginity at Sotheby's), not the 
cowboy "around a crimson van with white trim" at Madison Square Garden. But 
Haas makes it work. It's a sensitive piece of writing. 
Tennessee Williams' "Talk to Me Like the Rain and Let Me Listen" moves north to 
Manhattan's Eighth Avenue. It's the '40s, and the Man and Woman have reached a 
dead end. 
McIntosh and Lisa Houle, as the couple, show with delicacy and insight their 
brief moments of false optimism, and their quick slide to despair. Len Donato's 
direction gives the performance force. 
McIntosh is less open but just as intricate as the sleazy New York type looking 
for a comet's tale to grab in Willy Holtzman's "San Antonio Sunset." Mr. Stone 
is looking for a black blues singer to record. It's 1936. 
Michael Whaley, as the singer from the jukes, is fascinating as he teaches the 
white man about the blues -- and the facts of life. 
Michael Klock is very good as the desk clerk, who can look the other way but 
doesn't miss a thing. He and McIntosh make the final scene dangerous and 
intriguing as the clerk lays bare Mr. Stone's own reason for fear. The dark 
period mood is nicely amplified by the straightforward, muscular direction of 
Philip Granger. 
At 6539 Santa Monica Blvd., Hollywood; Wednesdays and Thursdays, 7:30 p.m.; 
indefinitely. Tickets: $10; (213) 960-8870. 
Bridging a Cultural, Generation Gap in 'Oasis' 
Vic Tayback is a charmer as the patriarch of a Lebanese family in S.K. 
Hershewe's "An Oasis in Manhattan" at the Venture Theatre. He's fighting not 
only a generation gap, but the large gap between the old world and the new. 
However, his fight is no different from that of the parents in "Romeo and 
Juliet" or "Abie's Irish Rose." 
The parental consternation is over the marriage of Youssef's daughter Olga (a 
charming Lainey Hashorva) and Freddie Schroeder, a young Jewish student (a 
crisp, ingratiating David Jahn). 
The action is spiced with the lively performances of Zee Tobin as Olga's 
all-American teen-age sister, and the warm, controlled mother of Diane Dorsey. 
Outside of a few overplayed small roles, the company is sharp and sincere and, 
under T.J. Castronova's direction, they bring energetic life to Hershewe's 
derivative sitcom. 
Richard Fulvio's Manhattan apartment set makes a perfect frame for the action, 
but can't obscure the fact that Tayback's performance holds it all together. 
At 3435 W. Magnolia Blvd., Burbank; Fridays and Saturdays, 8 p.m.; ends April 
14. Tickets: $12.50-$15; (818) 846-5323. 
Road to 'Country' Hits a Few Bumps at Burbage 
Some plays need help, particularly when the playwright doesn't have an ending 
up his sleeve. The help provided in the case of Gilbert Girion's "Bad Country," 
at the Burbage Theatre, detracts rather than enhances the work. It looks tacked 
on. 
"Bad Country" concerns a family facing the loss of its mother. Satirically 
slanted or not, it's drafted in the style of John Steppling, and also owes a 
lot to Sam Shepard. 
The performances of John Pappas, as the no-good brother Jimmy, and Kari Lizer, 
as his sister's girlfriend, acknowledge the debt with respect and erudition. 
Jim Haynie is also strong as the errant father, but O-Lan Jones as the sister 
presents a series of attitudes rather than a performance. 
The rest of the cast is unremarkable, though Andy Griggs' direction provides 
every opportunity. What Griggs hasn't solved is the script's feeble attempt at 
commenting on itself. A couple of goofs look too planned, and the gimmick of 
visiting Japanese theater buffs who examine the theater during the play (and 
provide the trumped-up ending) doesn't work. 
At 2330 Sawtelle Blvd., West Los Angeles; Thursdays through Saturdays, 8:30 
p.m.; Sundays, 7:30 p.m.; ends April 1. Tickets: $12; (213) 478-0897. 
'Gentleman': Victorian Farce at Celebration 
At first glance, Giancarlo Stampalia's "Gentleman's Gentleman" at the 
Celebration Theatre is a delight, a Wildean-styled farce, Victorian in shape 
and as wickedly naive as a cucumber sandwich. A second glance reveals some 
holes. 
Most of the problems stem from the script's wandering away from its original 
intention and turning into almost serious drama. There are also distracting 
details, such as referring to a gentleman's gentleman as a butler. He's a 
valet. A butler is another animal altogether. 
Steven Myles is Thomas Trilling, the dandy who poses as his own valet in order 
to win the lady of his choice. He's a little heavy-handed most of the time, 
except in the frothy opening scenes. Christopher Nixon is much surer in an 
on-the-button performance as the valet who finally wins the undying love of his 
master. 
Sarah Lilly, as Trilling's original fiancee, and Michael Scott Shaw, as the 
obsessively gay brother of Trilling's new idol, are both on a level with 
Nixon's airy delivery. 
The cast works well under Michael Benedict's direction. 
At 426 N. Hoover St.; Fridays and Saturdays, 8 p.m.; Sundays, 7 p.m.; 
indefinitely. Tickets: $12-$15; (213) 876-4257. 
'Dragon Slayers': Black Comedy for Adults Only 
The publicity for American Puppet Theatre's production of Stanley Keyes' 
"Dragon Slayers" says it's for "mature audiences only." It most certainly is. 
The company has a "kids' show" arriving during the spring, but leave the little 
ones home for this one. This black comedy concerns a troupe of puppeteers in 
Berkeley whose communal urge is first to get each other's clothes off as 
quickly as possible, then to get out of puppeteering into the Siamese 
fighting-fish racket. 
The puppet show of the title, which the company is in the throes of creating, 
follows the story line of the film of the same name, but not to any great 
length. There is little puppetry in this production. 
If the two worlds, real and puppet, were more integrated, it might all come 
together. But the play itself is quite ordinary. 
Bradford Mays' direction doesn't help. The actors scream at each other, to 
little dramatic effect, and the whole has an unmistakable aura of 
disorganization. 
 At 1625 N. La Brea Ave., Hollywood; Wednesdays, 8 p.m.; Saturdays, 2 p.m.; 
indefinitely. Tickets: $10; (213) 874-6427. 
