STUDY FINDS CONTRACEPTIVES SAVE $1.8 BILLION EACH YEAR 
Public money invested in family planning services saves taxpayers an estimated 
$1.8 billion a year in funds that would otherwise be spent on medical, welfare 
and nutritional costs resulting from unplanned pregnancies, according to a new 
study released Thursday. 
Publicly funded family planning services prevented up to 3.1 million unwanted 
pregnancies, according to the report issued by the Alan Guttmacher Institute. 
It estimated that without government support for these family planning 
services, between 1.2 million and 2.1 million unintended pregnancies would 
occur each year, and at least four in 10 of these would end in abortion. 
The report provides the first data since 1979 on the cost effectiveness of 
publicly funded family planning services. It said the services "play an 
important role in the United States by allowing substantial numbers of women to 
prevent unintended pregnancies, births and abortions. 
"The amounts spent to provide these services are small relative to those for 
many other types of health care, but they result in large savings," added the 
study, which is being presented at the National Family Planning and 
Reproductive Health Assn. meeting here today. Almost one in four American women 
who use contraception relies on a publicly funded source of care, either a 
family planning clinic or a private physician reimbursed by Medicaid, the 
report said. (The figures did not include sterilization.) The institute, a 
nonprofit organization that conducts research and policy analysis on 
reproduction and health care issues, was formerly associated with Planned 
Parenthood but has been independent for the past 11 years. 
In fiscal 1987, federal and state governments spent $412 million on 
contraceptive services for women who otherwise might not have been able to 
obtain them, the study said. Without such services, the additional public 
expenses for medical care, welfare and supplementary nutritional programs, or 
for publicly funded abortions, would have cost an estimated $1.8 billion. 
"These savings represent an average of $4.40 saved for every dollar of public 
funds spent to provide contraceptive services," the study said. 
But the report added that public spending for contraceptive services, when 
adjusted for inflation, has actually declined during the last 10 years. It also 
noted that "political conflict about family planning services has meant 
continual battles over the existence of such services and the form they should 
take, as well as over levels of program funding." 
Susan Tew, a spokeswoman for the institute, said that she couldn't "understand 
why anyone opposed to abortion could oppose contraceptive services. One reason 
we have so many abortions is because we have so many unintended pregnancies in 
this country." 
But Doug Johnson, a spokesman for the anti-abortion National Right to Life, 
said that "in recent years, these (family planning) programs have become 
entangled in abortion-related services. Some groups are trying to advance a 
pro-abortion agenda under the cloak of contraception." 
He called the timing of the Guttmacher study "no accident," since the Senate is 
about to take up re-authorization for Title X of the Public Health Service Act, 
which provides support for family planning and education services. Since it was 
enacted in 1970, the law has provided millions of low-income women with access 
to comprehensive family planning, basic health screening and referral 
information. While no Title X funds may be used to pay for abortions, clinics 
may nevertheless refer women to other facilities that perform them. 
The study referred to the recent decision by Gov. George Deukmejian to allow a 
$20-million family planning bill to become law without his signature. The study 
noted that in 1989 he had cut state funding to family planning clinics by 
two-thirds, saying he did not believe the services had saved the state any 
money. 
Tew said that the institute was studying the California figures and was 
planning to look at the specific cost/benefit ratio there. "We hope to have 
that information in a couple of months," she said. "We really want to point to 
that." 
