5 CENTRAL AMERICAN LEADERS CONFER; 
SUMMIT STARTS WITH HOPE FOR PEACE, DEMOCRACY, PROGRESS 
Five Central American presidents began a summit today with predictions that 
their two-day meeting will contribute to peace, democracy and progress in the 
troubled region. 
The leaders appeared buoyed by the mere fact of being under the same roof after 
six months of postponements, delay and dispute over the summit's prospects, 
agenda and date. 
"I am sure that we, with optimism, will analyze efforts we've made . . . and 
search for favorable solutions that will promote peace and progress in Central 
America," said Salvadoran President Jose Napoleon Duarte in brief comments 
inaugurating the meeting. 
He was flanked by Presidents Jose Azcona Hoya of Honduras, Daniel Ortega of 
Nicaragua, Oscar Arias Sanchez of Costa Rica and Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo of 
Guatemala. 
All except Ortega, who wore his green Sandinista army uniform, wore casual 
attire fitting the climate and ambiance at this seaside resort complex 40 miles 
southeast of San Salvador. 
After Duarte's statement, the presidents began work in a closed session. 
The chief executives will analyze the successes and failures to date of the 
Esquipulas II peace plan, signed by the same five men in Guatemala on Aug. 7, 
1987. The plan, also known as the Arias plan for its principal architect, was 
designed to promote peace and democracy. 
Arias, who won the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize for the plan, said upon arrival that 
the meeting will "re-establish our credibility with the Central American people 
and the entire world.... Our peoples are tired. Without peace there is no 
possibility of improving conditions of life for Central Americans. This is a 
historic responsibility that we the five presidents have." 
A decade of civil conflicts and economic depression has transformed the 
once-promising region of 25 million inhabitants into one of the world's most 
turbulent zones. 
An estimated 160,000 people have been killed in the region's wars in the last 
decade. Most Central Americans live in extreme poverty. 
