BEWITCHED BY A CAUSE; 
DICK YORK IS DYING OF EMPHYSEMA BUT HE LIVES TO HELP THE HOMELESS 
In the make-believe world that made Dick York famous, his troubles would have 
been magically swept away with the twitch of a nose or the wave of a wand. 
But no television sitcom medicine can cure what ails York, who played Darrin 
Stephens, the harried, mortal husband of the comely witch, Samantha, in the hit 
series "Bewitched" more than two decades ago. 
He shook off an addiction to painkillers but could not shake the chronic agony 
of a crippling spine injury or the aftereffects of a multipack-a-day cigarette 
habit. Nor could he elude the bank and bill collectors, who foreclosed on his 
West Covina home and sapped his life savings. 
These days, York is broke, bedridden and slowly dying of emphysema. He lives 
with his wife, Joan, on a $650-a-month Screen Actors Guild pension in the tiny 
red bungalow near Grand Rapids, Mich., that once belonged to in-laws. 
Still, this is not a sad story, because York is not a sad person or one to 
dwell in self-pity. Exuberant, excited, bursting with energy for someone whose 
slightest steps send him gasping for air, the 60-year-old actor has found one 
last part to play -- the role of his life -- as a one-man clearinghouse for aid 
to the homeless. 
Tethered to an oxygen tank and housebound for months, York spends hours on the 
phone each day chatting up radio talk show hosts, bureaucrats and just about 
anybody else who will listen to publicize the plight of street people and 
scrounge tons of clothes, food and bedding from government supplies. 
He may be an invalid in body, but not in spirit. 
'Just My Body That's Dying' 
"I feel wonderful -- it's just my body that's dying," he says with a raspy 
cackle and that slightly goofy Darrin Stephens grin stretched broad across his 
face. " . . . You know, three whales get in trouble and people from all over 
volunteer to help. Wouldn't it be wonderful if one old has-been actor with a 
hose up his nose could help millions of people?" 
Social workers from Detroit to Chicago say York has become a master at cutting 
bureaucratic mazes to scare up thousands of surplus military- and 
civilian-issue coats, cots, mattresses, sleeping bags, boots and other supplies 
long buried, and ripe for the taking, in government warehouses. 
"But his greatest contribution is heightening awareness of this problem 
nationally," said James Nauta, a Salvation Army official based in Grand Rapids. 
"He's very ill but he finds his way around the country by phone. People listen. 
When he talks, they respond." 
Champion for the downtrodden is a part for which York was typecast. He was a 
child of the Depression whose family faced a constant struggle to stay off the 
streets. 
He was raised on Chicago's Near North Side in what now is a chic neighborhood 
of town homes and condominiums but then was mostly tenements. His parents often 
were out of work and broke. When they did not have the rent -- which was often 
-- someone had to stay in the family flat at all times to prevent the landlord 
from locking everybody else out. 
As a boy, York saw his father struggle with other men for food discarded in a 
garbage can. When he was 11, an infant brother died but the family could not 
afford to bury him. So York and his father slipped into a graveyard at night 
and laid the youngster to rest in a coffin crafted from a shoe box. 
Despite such hardships, York remembers his childhood as a happy time, 
influenced most profoundly, odd to say, by something he read in a Tarzan 
adventure. 
"There's Tarzan captured in the land of the Fire Queen and ready to be 
sacrificed," York recalled. "He's tied up hand and foot and being carried up to 
the sacrificial altar. He's surrounded by 5,000 of these fierce beast-like 
characters and a knife is about to be plunged into his heart and somebody says 
to him, 'My God, Tarzan, why are you smiling?' And Tarzan says, 'Because I'm 
alive.' " 
Besides a cheery personality, York also had a beautiful boy soprano singing 
voice. A nun at St. Mary of the Lake school sent him to a singing coach, who in 
turn sent him to the Jack and Jill players, a training school for young radio 
and stage actors. Through Jack and Jill, he performed in dramas and public 
service programs on local radio stations. By the time he was 15, York starred 
in his own network radio show, "That Brewster Boy," on CBS. That was the year 
he also met Joan, his wife-to-be, another child radio star. 
He did thousands of radio shows in Chicago and New York, graduating to 
television and Broadway, where his credits include "Tea and Sympathy" and "Bus 
Stop." He also had supporting parts in several films, most notably as the young 
schoolteacher hounded by religious fundamentalists in "Inherit the Wind" with 
Spencer Tracy, Fredric March and Gene Kelly. 
Life-Changing Role 
A 1958 film, "They Came to Cordura" with Gary Cooper, proved, for York at 
least, to be his most memorable role. On the second to last day of shooting, 
York and several other actors were doing a scene that required them to lift a 
railroad handcar. At one point, the director yelled "cut" and everybody but 
York let go. The car fell on him and his spine was wrenched and the muscles 
around it torn. 
He worked through the pain rather than seek medical attention. He kept working 
for years, though the discs in his spine slowly crumbled. Over the years, he 
shrunk from more than 6-foot-1 to 5-foot-10 or so and gradually became hunched. 
By the time "Bewitched" premiered in 1964, York took heavy doses of 
painkillers, sleeping pills, cortisone and other medicines -- but only after he 
was done with each day's shoot and never while he was working, he is quick to 
stress. 
Still, his dependence on drugs grew, and, in 1969, he went into convulsions on 
the set, woke up in the hospital and was replaced on the show by another actor. 
He never returned. 
For the next 18 months, York stayed at home in bed in what he now admits was a 
drug-induced haze, as he tried to deaden his pain and heal his back. Finally, 
appalled by his stupor, he decided to go cold turkey. He moved in with his 
mother, who then lived in Buena Park, to spare his five children. 
'Bagpipes Night and Day' 
"I had a band playing in my head, bagpipes night and day," York recalled. "It 
just went on and on and on and on and on. . . . The fans whisper to you and the 
walls whisper to you and you look at television and sometimes it flashes in a 
certain way that sends you into a fit and you know that your wife has put her 
hand in your mouth so you won't bite off your tongue. You can't sleep. You 
hallucinate. I used to make a tape recording of rain so I could listen to the 
rain lying in bed at night to drown out those damned bagpipes." 
After six months, York was relieved when the hallucinations stopped and the 
ordinary pain returned. 
Eventually, the Yorks took what was left of their savings and bought an 
apartment building in West Covina where they planned to live out their lives 
quietly. 
But when tenants had difficulty paying the rent, York, mindful of his own 
youth, could not bring himself to evict them. Short of cash himself, he missed 
mortgage payments and the bank foreclosed. The Yorks held on to their apartment 
by cleaning other units in the building they once owned. In 1976, the actor who 
once earned a six-figure salary got his first welfare check. 
When Joan's father died three years ago, the couple, whose children were now 
grown, flew to Rockford for the funeral. York's emphysema worsened; he 
collapsed in the yard of his in-laws' home. He never returned to California, 
but it was, in a sense, the start of his comeback. 
Not long after his attack, a friend asked him to record inspirational tapes for 
a young Chicago girl who had been in a coma for years. He did more and more 
tapes for other shut-ins, just pressing the button on his recorder and saying 
whatever came to mind. 
Efforts Began 
He read up on the McKinney Act, a federal law that was supposed to set up 
government surplus giveaway programs but was under-used because of red tape. 
Then York, trading on his celebrity, started badgering bureaucrats and 
volunteers, first to find out what was in storage, then to figure how to shake 
it loose, and last, to transport it to shelters in need. 
Last year, he pried loose enough for 15,000 changes of clothes -- second-hand 
pants, shirts, boots, socks, belts, field jackets and more -- from Army surplus 
stocks in Illinois; he worked to get thousands of mattresses and blankets 
stored in Wisconsin. Through his calls, thousands of blankets and cots were 
moved from a federal facility in Lansing, Mich., for distribution to Detroit's 
homeless. 
Sometimes, his efforts surprise not only the charities but York himself. Last 
year, he told a friend there was a desperate need by the homeless for 
underwear. In weeks, thousands of pairs of panty hose -- good for warmth 
regardless of the wearer's sex -- showed up at the Dwelling Place, a Grand 
Rapids Shelter. Similarly, 5,000 cans of orange juice concentrate were 
delivered to the Salvation Army in Grand Rapids after York spread the word 
among friends and in interviews that shelter dwellers did not get enough 
vitamins. 
"I don't know how he does it," said Ron Still, an activist for the homeless in 
Reno, Nev., who has worked with York. "I don't question him. But more power to 
him." 
York calls his organization Acting for Life, but it consists of little more 
than a few friends across the country, a mail drop (P.O. Box 499, Rockford, 
Mich. 49341), a telephone and the moxie of a dying man possessed. 
An Old Brown Chair 
His office, littered with his wife's cigarette butts, is an old brown lounge 
chair in the corner of the living room, surrounded by tapes to be recorded and 
stacks of mail from schoolchildren, well-wishers and fans, some of whom enclose 
a few dollars with their cards to help defray his expenses. 
With such modest assets, York sits in his ratty plaid bathrobe and fuzzy blue 
slippers and dreams of doing more. He spins plans to set up a regional 
distribution network for supplies to the homeless throughout the Midwest. And 
he talks of pressuring Congress to convert dozens of military bases, recently 
scheduled for abandonment by a federal commission, into homeless shelters. 
To the less dedicated, it may seem like tilting at windmills. 
But York, brimming with confidence, insists that somehow, someway, it will get 
done. "After all," he says, "when Tarzan sets off to save the world. . . ." 
