BAKER TO OFFER NEW ARMS PROPOSALS; 
DIPLOMACY: THE PACKAGE WILL INCLUDE A COMPROMISE ON AIR-LAUNCHED CRUISE 
MISSILES. 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III will take "a good package" of arms 
proposals to Moscow this week, including ideas that go beyond the agreed 
agenda, in an effort to complete the START nuclear weapons treaty this year, 
U.S. officials said Saturday. 
Baker, who leaves Monday for East Europe and the Soviet Union, will spend three 
days with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze discussing the START 
treaty, which would cut by half the number of offensive nuclear warheads in the 
superpower arsenals. 
In talks beginning Wednesday, Baker will offer a compromise to settle the 
longstanding issue of how to count air-launched cruise missiles and will 
propose a limit on the number of warheads that can be carried on mobile, 
land-based ballistic missiles, sources said. 
The Pentagon also wants Baker to propose counting some of the warheads on 
Soviet mobile missiles against the warhead limit on Soviet fixed, silo-based 
ICBMs -- the weapons most threatening to the United States in a nuclear war, 
according to officials. 
Whether President Bush and his top Cabinet officers agreed to the Pentagon 
proposal when they met Thursday was not known. But the consensus among 
officials and non-government experts familiar with the concept is that Moscow 
is unlikely to accept it because the restraints would affect only Soviet 
forces. The United States has no such mobile missiles at present. 
Baker, moreover, has opposed general calls by conservative politicians and arms 
experts to make radical new demands on the Soviets in the belief that they are 
"on the run" and would now accept offers they previously rejected. 
Instead, he has shunned proposals that might threaten to derail or delay 
significantly the START -- Strategic Arms Reduction Talks -- treaty. Both Bush 
and Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev want to have the pact settled in 
principle at their next summit in June and fully completed by the end of 1990. 
The correct approach, Baker has said, is to "lock in" the treaty, already 
almost 90% completed, "while we have the opportunity," a reference to 
Gorbachev's apparent willingness to finish the process. 
In contrast with some previous negotiating sessions, the American team hopes to 
avoid disclosing many of its new ideas if they are unacceptable to the Soviets, 
in order not to create new obstacles or poison the atmosphere. 
"The aim this time will be to get results, not to demonstrate any 'bold new 
thinking' to the public," one official said Saturday. 
While strategic nuclear arms will be the main topic of the trip, Baker also is 
expected during his four-day stay in Moscow to provide greater detail about 
Bush's new proposal to slash U.S. and Soviet troop strength in Central and 
Eastern Europe. 
In his State of the Union address, Bush proposed ceilings of 195,000 troops for 
each nation in Central and Eastern Europe, but he also said the United States 
would retain an additional 30,000 troops in Britain, Turkey and Italy. 
The Kremlin, as expected, expressed opposition to the inequality built into the 
scheme even though, in principle, the Soviets could station 30,000 troops in 
southeastern European nations such as Romania and Bulgaria in addition to the 
195,000 in Eastern Europe. 
That possibility, however, is considered unrealistic because those nations have 
never had Soviet forces and because of the ousting of pro-Soviet governments in 
the region's current upheaval. 
Moreover, according to one source, the Bush proposal would not bind the United 
States to a ceiling of 30,000 outside the so-called central zone in Europe. 
That figure is considered a "force projection," meaning an expectednumber that 
could be increased at will. 
Baker, who will meet with Gorbachev and appear before a foreign affairs 
committee of the Supreme Soviet legislative body later in the week, also is 
expected to discuss with Soviet leaders the implications of the continuing 
upheavals in former Soviet Bloc nations. 
German reunification, to which Gorbachev now appears to be less opposed than 
last month, will be a prime topic as both superpowers seek to keep the process 
of bringing East and West Germany together both gradual and peaceful. 
In addition to his sessions with Soviet officials, Baker will confer briefly 
with French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas during a refueling stop in Ireland, 
spend a day in Prague meeting with President Vaclav Havel and other leaders of 
the new government in Czechoslovakia, and stop in Ottawa, Canada, to attend a 
conference of North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Warsaw Pact officials. 
But the centerpiece of the secretary of state's diplomatic excursion will be 
the START negotiations, where significant differences remain despite the large 
degree of agreement already achieved. 
Both sides already have agreed to a limit of 6,000 nuclear weapons, such as 
warheads, for each side. Of these, a maximum of 4,900 could be carried on 
ballistic missiles, with the rest on air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) and 
in bombers. 
Several other sub-limits of significance have been set. No more than 3,300 
warheads could be carried on land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles 
(ICBMs), and no more than 1,540 could be on very large ICBMs. Only the Soviets 
have these "heavy" ICBMs, each of which carries 10 warheads. 
Baker is expected to propose another sub-limit of between 700 and 1,000 
warheads on mobile land-based missiles. The Soviets already have rail-mobile 
and road-mobile missiles, while the United States is preparing to build both 
types. But in case Congress allows neither, the Pentagon wants Baker to propose 
that all multiple warheads on land-based missiles be counted against the 1,540 
limit on "heavies." 
Baker also will seek to nail down what has been a very elusive "counting rule" 
for ALCMs carried on bombers. The United States wants to attribute a fixed 
number of ALCMs to all bombers of a certain kind, such as 10 ALCMs on every 
B-52. The Soviets, in contrast, want to count all the ALCMs that each bomber is 
equipped to carry, such as 20 for the B-52. 
The Pentagon strongly favors the U.S. counting proposal, in part because 
bombers seldom carry their maximum payload. Moreover, it does not know how many 
B-2 Stealth bombers Congress will allow it to buy. Those planes were to be used 
for penetration missions inside the Soviet Union. If significantly fewer B-2s 
are bought than initially planned, the military wants the flexibility to load 
more ALCMs on B-52s to make up for any B-2 shortfall. 
Baker is expected to propose a compromise in which, if the Soviets accept the 
U.S. counting principle, the United States would accept Soviet demands for a 
greater limitation on the range of the ALCMs. 
Moscow wanted all nuclear ALCMs with a range of more than 600 kilometers (375 
miles) to be counted, while Washington wanted the range limit set at 1,500 
kilometers (925 miles). A possible outcome, an official said, would be a 
slightly higher ALCM count, such as 12 for the B-52, in exchange for a range 
limit of 1,000 kilometers (500 miles) or even less. 
