STAGE WATCH: TAPER TO PRODUCE 'ALL THE KING'S MEN'; FOUR PAIRS OF LOVE BIRDS 
FOR 'LOVE LETTERS' 
Forget Humpty Dumpty. Can Gordon Davidson put "All the King's Men" back 
together again? 
Adrian Hall's adaptation of the Robert Penn Warren novel will receive a Mark 
Taper Forum production "sometime in the next year -- I don't know when," said 
Taper artistic director Davidson. The process will begin today, when Hall 
conducts a Taper workshop using actors from Kenneth Branagh's Renaissance 
Theatre Company, some American actors and the "King's Men" text. 
But still to be decided are the dates for the production and whether it will be 
complete -- running over two nights -- or just a single fragment. 
Asked specifically whether a version of "All the King's Men" might replace 
Arthur Kopit's "The Discovery of America" in the last slot of this season's 
schedule, July 8-Sept. 2, Davidson declined to comment. 
But Kopit independently confirmed that "America" may go undiscovered this 
summer. "We're not going to be ready, I don't think," said Kopit from Houston, 
where he is working on his "Road to Nirvana" at the Alley Theatre. "I don't 
know when I can commit the full time to go into production on it. My schedule 
has been in such flux. . . . It's possible it could be this summer, or next 
winter, or next spring, or a year from this summer." 
The thornier question may be whether "All the King's Men" will be done in one 
or in two parts. 
Hall's adaptation opened in 1986 at Dallas Theatre Center. After the first 
preview, which ran nearly five hours, Hall eliminated what he calls "the 
prologue," which is essentially an adaptation of the book's Chapter 4, a 
"digression back to the pre-Civil War era," said Hall. This brought the show's 
length down to a more manageable three hours, and it ran in this form in Dallas 
and in 1987 productions at Trinity Repertory Company in Providence, R.I., and 
Arena Stage in Washington. 
But Hall didn't forget the prologue, and he brought it to a workshop he 
conducted in Dallas last fall. Davidson attended the workshop, at Hall's 
invitation, and then agreed to put a production together. 
That production could consist of just the prologue -- or it might be a two-show 
package: the prologue and the already-seen three-hour "King's Men," performed 
in repertory. It will depend "on whether I can figure out the logistics of it 
all," said Davidson. 
"It could be that if we did just the prologue, we might go as soon as this 
summer," said Hall. Chances of getting the entire project launched by this 
summer are slimmer. 
The earlier three-hour production included music by Randy Newman. Davidson said 
he hoped that Newman would be involved with the Taper production. 
The next step is the workshop to be held today. Hall believes that Branagh's 
Renaissance actors will be able to contribute advice on playing in repertory. 
"In this country," he said, "we've had trouble playing in rep." Yet he 
discouraged the idea that the Renaissance company's involvement would extend 
beyond the workshop. 
"If I wanted to cast Louisiana in the 1930s," said Hall, "I probably wouldn't 
shop around in London." Warren's 1946 novel was modeled on the story of 
Louisiana Gov. Huey Long. The book has been adapted for other stage 
productions, the first of which also originated in Dallas, where Erwin Piscator 
directed an adaptation in 1947. 
VALENTINE NEWS: A star-studded list of Hollywood names, including a few married 
couples, will be among the frequently changing casts of A.R. Gurney's "Love 
Letters," opening Feb. 25 in the Pasadena Playhouse Balcony Theatre. The 
actors: 
David Dukes and Pamela Reed (Feb. 25-26), Ken Olin and Patricia Wettig (March 
4-5), Sandy Duncan and Perry King (March 11-12), Meredith Baxter Birney and 
David Ogden Stiers (March 18-19), Donna Mills and Perry King (March 25-26), 
Jill Eikenberry and Michael Tucker (April 1), Ed Harris and Amy Madigan (April 
2), Richard Benjamin and Paula Prentiss (April 8-9), author Gurney and Holland 
Taylor (April 15-16). 
The marrieds: Olin and Wettig, Eikenberry and Tucker, Harris and Madigan, 
Benjamin and Prentiss. 
PARKING: Cancel last week's word on parking at Los Angeles Theatre Center 
during the next seven months (while a new parking garage is being built behind 
the theater). This week's news is that two new lots have opened up on 6th 
Street, south of the theater. The underground garage at the First Interstate 
Bank building, 6th and Spring, charges $5; an outdoor lot near the southwest 
corner of 6th and Main charges $3. 
Meanwhile, the parking brouhaha on the side streets off Melrose Avenue, near 
the Zephyr and Groundlings theaters, has been cleared up with the announcement 
of a compromise between the area's merchants and homeowners. As soon as signs 
can be installed, post-8 p.m. parking will be available on west sides of the 
streets, but not on the east sides, which will be reserved for permit parking 
by residents. 
"TUNA" RETURNS: "Greater Tuna," the two-man production about the denizens of a 
small Texas town, will open at the Westwood Playhouse March 21 for a four-week 
run with the show's creators and original cast members, Joe Sears and Jaston 
Williams. The two appeared in "Tuna" at the Las Palmas Theatre in Hollywood in 
1984 and at the Lyceum in San Diego last year. 
"WOOLF" RETURNS: In case you missed Edward Albee's staging of his "Who's Afraid 
of Virginia Woolf?" at the Doolittle last fall, you'll have another chance this 
spring -- though this time it will be with the understudies. 
Albee mounted a production with the Los Angeles understudies at Houston's Alley 
Theater. It closed there Sunday and went on a tour that will arrive at Cuesta 
College in San Luis Obispo March 30, the Norris Theater in Rolling Hills 
Estates March 31, the Lobero Theater in Santa Barbara April 1 -- and the Soviet 
Union on April 13. 
"DIARY" RETURNS: "Diary of Black Men . . . How Do You Love a Black Woman?" 
returns to the Orpheum Theatre in downtown Los Angeles for performances Friday 
and Saturday. Three sold-out performances there in January were the first 
"legit" shows at the former vaudeville palace since the early '60s. 
BIG WEEKEND: "Art in Chaos: The Political Struggle" will be the subject of a 
symposium at Los Angeles Theatre Center's annual Big Weekend, March 1-4. Also 
on the agenda are staged readings of four new plays, presentations by six of 
LATC's labs, and four 20-minute performances on the theme of censorship. 
One day after the Big Weekend, on March 5, Allen Ginsberg will read poetry as 
part of LATC's poetry/literary series. Information: (213) 627-6500. 
