YOU CAN HELP!: SOME FOLKS NEVER BORED BY RAVIOLI 
For her brand-new Italian daughter-in-law, Nancy Toomey of San Diego would like 
to find a wooden ravioli board; a metal one won't do. Can you show your mettle 
by coming up with a source, or will our newcomer be faced with a chile welcome 
because all of us want to pasta buck? 
A few years ago, Isabelle Meyer of Glendale says, you could buy a man's sports 
jacket made of a silvery polyurethane fabric with a quilted lining, but no 
more. It was great for backpacking because of its insulation and waterproof 
exterior. Can you come through before Meyer has to be put into a straitjacket, 
or will she pack it in merely because she didn't have enough clout to get her 
silver lining? 
Grace Johnson of Pasadena is looking for someone who will repair her 
Italian-made Copco pepper grinder. Can you come up with some sage advice, or 
will Johnson's kitchen activities grind to a halt while she awaits responses to 
this somewhat corny request? 
Mrs. Thomas of Van Nuys would like to find some slack liners, which were 
available some years back. Can you help take up the slack on this matter, or 
will Thomas and friends not be able to walk into the sunset until their pant-up 
demand is met? 
Reader-to-Reader Help Line: Susan at (213) 875-3348 is willing to pay for a 
record of "Music for Indian Club Swinging" by Leos Janacek; she's been unable 
to locate it anyplace. Please help Susan get back into the swing of things and 
don't give her the runaround. 
Note: The Reader-to-Reader Help Line is only for one-time items or for products 
no longer available in stores. And you must give us written permission to 
publish your telephone number, so that others may contact you directly. 
Hal Leonard of Rosemead, who was looking for chewable tree twigs, now has 
something to sink his teeth into. Nancy Cable of Woodland Hills says Follow 
Your Heart in Canoga Park carries licorice root. And Mrs. J. Lanning of Brea 
says to ask for licorice sticks at California Health Foods in Fullerton (and 
perhaps at other health food stores too.) 
Emmett W. Schoeberl of Agoura Hills, who was looking for an old-fashioned 
hand-operated clothes wringer, can stop wringing his hands. Several readers 
told us that Clark Dye Hardware, 210 S. Main St., Santa Ana, Calif. 92701, 
(714) 547-1633, has these wringers. Jeanne Rempel of Upland says the item is 
also available from a catalogue put out by Lehman Hardware &amp; Appliances 
Inc., P.O. Box 41, 4779 Kidron Road, Kidron, Ohio 44636, (216) 857-5441. Mrs. 
Warren H. Scott of Santa Barbara says Haack Products, Box 210, Franklin, Mich. 
48026, sells a Mr. Wringer for $34.95 plus shipping. Dirck Meengs of Thousand 
Oaks says the Vermont Country Store, P.O. Box 3000, Manchester Center, Vt. 
05255-3000, has stocked that wringer. 
Hain cannot answer mail personally but will, space permitting, respond in this 
column to readers who need -- or have -- helpful information. Write (do not 
telephone) to You Can Help!, You section, the Times, Times Mirror Square, Los 
Angeles 90053. 
