PEOPLE ON THE MOVE 
Roger Chikhani, architect with the Luckman Partnership since 1980, has been 
named an associate partner of the firm. His current responsibilities include 
restoration of the 62-story First Interstate Bank Building in downtown Los 
Angeles, which was severely damaged by fire on May 4, 1988. The building 
originally opened in 1974 and was designed by this Los Angeles-based company. 
LaCagnina &amp; Associates, headquartered in Encino, has promoted William C. 
Hidalgo to senior vice president. The firm develops, manages, consults and 
leases shopping centers and malls. Hidalgo was previously vice president and 
general manager for Gladstone Development Co. 
Calprop Corp. has added Patricia M. Logan to its staff as vice president of 
marketing and sales. She will oversee the Marina del Rey-based company's 
marketing activities in both its Northern and Southern California divisions. 
Logan brings to Calprop 12 years of experience in residential and commercial 
marketing, plus public property development. 
Ellen Cohn has joined two subsidiaries of A. Epstein and Sons International 
Inc. as their director of marketing. These Los Angeles firms, Interior Design 
Inc. and A. Epstein and Sons (California) Inc., provide full-service interior 
design, architecture and engineering. 
The Washington, D.C.-based Construction Management Assn. of America has 
announced that its new president is Wayne C. Twedell of Jones Construction 
Management of Los Angeles. 
Pardee Construction Co. has promoted Nancy B. Smith to vice president of sales 
processing. She will be working out of the firm's main office in Los Angeles, 
where she will coordinate residential home sales in Los Angeles, San Diego and 
Ventura counties and Las Vegas. 
The management firm of Prentiss Properties Ltd. Inc. has brought on board 
George J. Wilds and William A. Shubin as its western region vice presidents of 
commercial and industrial development, respectively. Wilds' responsibilities 
include the acquisition, design and development of office and mixed-use 
properties. Shubin's responsibilities are the same except he will focus on 
industrial parcels and buildings. 
Jerry Friedman, a longtime associate of Vistar Financial Inc., has joined the 
staff as its director of investor relations. He will be in charge of 
maintaining personal contact with investors and assisting in financial planning 
and investment analysis. The company is based in Marina del Rey. 
Manager of corporate tax and special projects is Mark Doyle's new position upon 
joining McMillin Communities, a San Diego company in home building for more 
than four decades. Doyle will handle its general accounting, investment 
analysis and tax compliance. 
Elliott Corp. of Newport Beach has brought in Gary Monroe as its senior project 
manager. He will coordinate the construction of the Calabasas Commerce Center 
and will head the West Valley/Ventura Country regional office. 
Michael J. McGarrey has joined Jaric Development Partners as chief financial 
officer. His responsibilities for the Los Angeles-based commercial real estate 
development firm will include project financing, general accounting and lender 
relations. 
Holt Hinshaw Pfau Jones of San Francisco has opened an office in Los Angeles. 
Tom Goffigon will direct the architectural firm's Southern California 
operations. 
Ellerbe Becket has announced two changes in its structure: Harry Wolf, as new 
senior vice president and corporate design principal; and Robert J. Nasraway, 
as director of its Los Angeles office. Wolf's position will have a major 
national and international design responsibility for the firm's Los Angeles 
office; Nasraway will have executive responsibility for the region. 
The California Council, American Institute of Architects (CCAIA) has elected 
Robert Allen Reed vice president, professional practice for 1989 and 1990. 
CCAIA represents about 10,000 California members on issues involving state 
regulatory agencies and boards. 
David Linsel has joined the Feola/Deenihan Partnership in Glendale, bringing 
with him 20 years of architectural experience in the design of shopping 
centers, hospitals and other buildings. 
W. Gary Mangham has been promoted to senior associate for the Newport Beach 
firm of Ware Associates Inc. 
The Los Angeles Cultural Affairs Commission has a new member, Michael C. F. 
Chan, principal/founding partner of Michael C. F. Chan &amp; Associates Inc. 
and of Kober/Chan International. Commissioners, appointed by Mayor Tom Bradley 
for five-year terms, are responsible for approving design of structures built 
on or over city property and all artworks acquired by the city. 
Howard Needles Tammen &amp; Bergendoff has appointed Steve Adams director of 
interior design at its Los Angeles office. Adams' experience includes interiors 
projects and he has created diverse furnishings for a variety of manufacturers. 
The position of senior designer, interiors division of Leason Pomeroy 
Associates has been accepted by Pamela S. Light. She will be involved in 
product design, from marketing to furniture specifications and contract 
documentation, at the firm's Orange County office in Orange. 
Long Beach District Board of Realtors has recognized J. Steven Warshauer as 
Realtor of the Year. Warshauer is president of Dolphin Properties. 
Roland A. Wiley of Los Angeles is one of four young California architects 
chosen by the California Council, American Institute of Architects for 
membership in the Young Architects Forum. The members help identify and plan 
for upcoming architectural trends, taking into consideration the broad social, 
economic and technological aspects. 
Joseph J. Honick has been appointed director of international affairs of the 
Ceramic Tile Distributors Assn. (CTDA). He will handle programs and activities 
of CTDA whose membership includes representatives of nearly 30 nations. 
Bill Schweinfurth, director of operations for Vedder Park Management in 
Glendale, was elected president of Western Mobilehome Assn. The organization 
represents about 2,000 mobile-home park owners, operators and developers in 
California. 
An appointment to the College Real Estate Advisory Board has been made to Irene 
Pernice, vice president and manager of HomesWest Realty in Westlake Village. 
LINDA MARTINI-POSNER 
