HUSBAND KILLED AFTER CHASE; 
WIDOW SAYS SHE NEVER HEARD POLICE WARNING 
Debbie Edson remembers hearing her husband say he was going out to buy some 
shampoo. 
"He said, 'I'll be back in a few minutes.' " 
Within the hour, however, he was dead. 
Robert Vincent Edson, 28, was shot and killed by Anaheim police just a few feet 
from the door of the couple's motel room last Thursday. Edson had led officers 
on a 45-minute chase, police say, when he returned to the motel, got out of his 
car and started running up a flight of steps. They opened fire when he appeared 
to reach for a weapon in his waistband. No weapon was found. 
The incident is under investigation by the Orange County district attorney and 
Anaheim police. 
In an interview Monday, his 29-year-old widow said she and her 9-year-old son, 
Johnny, were in the motel room when they heard the gunshots. 
"I had gone to sleep," she recalled, "and when I woke up, I heard these sounds: 
'Pop. Pop. Pop.' It was like gunshots exploding outside. I opened the door to 
look and there was Bob, lying down. He was shot." 
Police Dog Attacked 
She said she watched as a police dog ran up and attacked her dying husband 
moments after the shooting. 
Angry and emotional during the interview, the widow charged that officers fired 
at her husband without warning. "I didn't hear anything before the shots, no 
sirens and nobody yelling at him to stop," she said. Police said officers had 
chased her husband with help from a police helicopter and cruisers that had 
sirens blaring and lights flashing. 
Edson said it was hard enough for her to accept the couple's recent run of bad 
luck -- which included eviction from an apartment in Orange when they ran out 
of rent money -- let alone her husband's death. 
Her husband had operated a struggling ticket service for concerts and sporting 
events. They decided to temporarily move into a motel for a week before looking 
for another apartment to rent, she said. 
Her husband did not want to be stopped because he had not paid prior traffic 
tickets. Friends said that his driver's license had been suspended and that he 
could not afford auto insurance. The car was a "beat-up old thing," she said, 
that only had one working headlight. 
Police declined Monday to comment in detail on Edson's interview. 
No Headlights 
But Sgt. Chet Barry said officers initially tried to stop Edson because he was 
driving without his headlights on. 
"This guy had been running away from police for quite some period of time," 
Barry said. "Officers were pursuing him with red lights and siren, and also a 
police helicopter." 
As for when officers issue a warning, Barry said "it depends on the 
circumstances." 
"If you're chasing somebody and you feel like you're in jeopardy, sometimes 
there is not sufficient time to give a warning. And here, please keep in mind, 
I'm not saying these officers did or did not issue a warning. That is still 
under investigation," Barry said. 
Edson's widow said he had been wearing a heavy jacket and probably was reaching 
for his motel room key when he was shot. 
"He didn't even like guns," she said. "And I never let my son play with any gun 
toys. . . . 
Son's Reaction 
"One of the worst things about this whole thing has been my son's reaction. I 
have always tried to teach Johnny that police are your friends, that whenever 
you're in trouble or you need help to call them. But after this, I don't think 
he ever will, at least that's what he told me." 
Edson charged that she and other members of her family have since run up 
against a "wall of silence" erected by investigating authorities. 
Although her husband's body was released for funeral services today, she could 
not recover his car keys, wallet, and other personal property that remains 
police evidence. 
"We still don't know how Bob died," said the widow's father, Richard Barnard of 
North Hollywood. "The police say they can't tell us. And today (Monday) we 
couldn't get any of his personal property. What kind of a system is this?" 
Left angry and emotional, Debbie Edson said she probably will seek legal 
advice. But she maintains that will be poor consolation because it will not 
bring back her husband. 
Funeral services are at 11 a.m. today at Fairhaven Memorial Park in Santa Ana. 
