STATE LEADERS URGE GAS TAX HIKE TO FUND HIGHWAY WORK 
Gov. George Deukmejian and state business, labor and legislative leaders agreed 
Wednesday that an additional $20 billion will have to be pumped into the 
state's transportation system over the next decade to reduce congestion and 
keep pace with population growth. 
Emerging from a three-hour "summit" meeting, several participants said everyone 
except Deukmejian appeared to agree that a substantial gas tax increase would 
be needed to raise the kind of revenue it will take to update California's 
overcrowded highways, provide additional mass-transit facilities and initiate 
new techniques for managing congestion. 
"In fact, not a single soul opposed a gas tax increase except the governor," 
said Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco). "Everyone but the 
governor was in sync that a gas tax increase has to be the primary source." 
Gas Tax Hike Foreseen 
Afterward, Deukmejian reiterated his view that a gas tax increase is not the 
"best way" to raise the revenue. But, as he has in the past, the governor also 
said that he would "not stand in the way" of an increase as long as it was 
subject to voter approval -- a requirement legislative leaders and many of 
those attending the meeting oppose. 
"I think we ought to have nerve enough to do it ourselves," Brown said, 
predicting that there will be a gas tax hike "one way or the other." 
Despite the disagreements, the governor and legislative leaders said they had 
reached enough of a consensus on some issues that it should be feasible to 
fashion a plan to attack the state's long-range transportation needs. The 
governor said the group would meet again next month. 
"Everyone seems to be in general accord that working together in good faith . . 
. we can reach some kind of agreement upon an approach to resolve the issue," 
Deukmejian told reporters afterward. 
Senate President Pro Tem David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles) added: "I am very 
optimistic we are going to have a real product for the people of the state of 
California in the not-too-distant future." 
Deukmejian had invited to the meeting 27 business, labor and political leaders 
involved in transportation in an effort to develop a comprehensive plan for 
easing the mammoth traffic problems that plague California's urban areas. 
Advisers said the decision to convene the high-level meeting was a rare move 
for the governor, who seldom seeks such widespread outside advice when he is 
working on a proposal for dealing with state problems. To have called such a 
meeting, they said, was an indication of the priority Deukmejian has attached 
to the need for solving the state's transportation problems. 
The governor recently announced that he will retire from public office after 
his present term expires in 1990, and he has indicated eagerness to resolve the 
state's transportation problems before he steps down. 
Jack Maltester, president of Californians for Better Transportation, said 
recommendations at the meeting for gas tax increases ranged from 3 cents a 
gallon to 10 cents. 
He said several participants at the meeting suggested marrying a gas tax 
increase to a general-obligation bond issue. He said the bonds -- favored by 
Deukmejian -- would be used to solve an immediate funding crisis in the state's 
transportation system while money raised from a gas tax increase would go to 
long-range improvements. 
While many of the issues before the group were left unresolved, Maltester said 
the agreement on the $20-billion figure was a signal that state government and 
private business and labor leaders were ready to seek long-term solutions to 
the transportation problems. 
"Nobody was talking about a quick fix," he said. 
Most of those invited to the meeting had already taken strong public stands in 
favor of a substantial increase in the state's 9-cent gasoline tax. 
In the Senate, Roberti and Sen. Quentin Kopp (I-San Francisco) have authored 
legislation that would raise the tax by 10 cents. In the Assembly, Brown and 
Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) have unveiled a proposal that would hike 
the tax by 5 cents initially and then increase it every two years for the next 
decade. Those increases would be tied to inflation. 
The sticking point in each proposal as far as the governor is concerned is that 
neither requires voter approval. 
