INTO THE NIGHT: GRAPHICALLY ARTY DINNER, SALE 
THE SCENE: The annual Valentine's Gala for the Graphic Arts Council of the L.A. 
County Museum of Art. (It was held Friday night, presumably getting a jump on 
this year's Valentine activities.) The event, held at the Beverly Hills Hotel, 
honored one of the founders of Pop Art, contemporary artist Roy Lichtenstein. 
It was the second major event in one week for the museum, which opened its 
Helen Frankenthaler exhibit with a dress party last Tuesday. 
THE BUZZ: After dinner, the council held an auction of about 50 items ranging 
from artwork to vacations in London, San Francisco and the Napa Valley. Among 
the more unusual things on the auction block were an original Stephen Sprouse 
gown (Size 6), four hours of computer classes, a case of champagne magnums, two 
hours of private art appraisal and a "couch potato" package with 20 classic 
videotapes and a basket of gourmet food. 
WHO WAS THERE: Lichtenstein, wife Dorothy, and most of the Graphic Arts 
Council, including chairwoman Joni Weyl. Shirley Colby and Louise Epstein 
chaired the dinner. 
DRESS MODE: Black tie optional, emphasis on the black tie. In deference to 
Lichtenstein, many people wore graphically inspired ties and blouses: Stripes, 
polka dots, checks. 
CHOW: French onion soup, chicken piccata, angel hair pasta and strawberries 
with ice cream. 
NOTED: One of the items up for auction was a basketball in a plexiglass box. 
Although it appeared to be a sculpture by Jeff Koons, it was actually a ball 
autographed by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, which came with two tickets to an upcoming 
Lakers-Sonics game. 
QUOTED: Upon being congratulated on being the evening's honoree, Roy 
Lichtenstein smiled nervously and said: "The honoree? Really? Are you sure I'm 
not just the fall guy here?" 
TABLE TALK: While the quality of art drew mixed reviews from guests (none of 
whom, of course, wanted to be quoted by name), most of them were marking their 
bidding books for at least one item or two, and everyone agreed the estimated 
values in the catalogue were quite low. Others, such as Caroline Ahmanson, were 
preparing for next weekend's Music Center outing to David Murdock's new resort 
in Hawaii. 
TRIUMPHS: A catalogue of Lichtenstein works sold briskly, earning even more 
money for the museum. Also, chairwoman Weyl, a jazz fan, assembled a fine combo 
of musicians to provide dining and dancing music. The dance floor was kept busy 
all evening, even between courses. 
GLITCHES: Guests who left during the auction were puzzled by the favors piled 
by the door. There were black and white paper bags emblazoned with the museum's 
name and filled with red tissue paper and . . . nothing else. Serves people 
right for trying to leave early. KEVIN ALLMAN 
