HOME DESIGN; 
CONCERN FOR EARTH BEGINS AT HOME TOO 
Saving the world! 
Sounds like a job for Superman, doesn't it? 
Actually, this particular job would be better handled by millions of 
mild-mannered homeowners willing to make a few changes in the way they live by 
making their homes environmentally friendly. 
"We have to start thinking about how to use less energy per person," says Bill 
Roley, an environmental science instructor at Saddleback College and the 
executive director of the Permaculture Institute of Southern California, an 
organization that provides public education on ways to live without polluting. 
"Home energy consumption is a significant portion of the pollution in general. 
Insulating your home is addressing the greenhouse crisis because you are going 
to use less fossil fuel. 
"We could probably reduce the 6.5 tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 
every year just by using a house that's been insulated wisely." 
Roley is the designer of Sprout Acres, a model environmentally friendly home in 
the Bluebird Canyon area of Laguna Beach that shows how people can live in a 
way that promotes conservation of natural resources and encourages recycling. 
This "house of the future" -- as Roley calls it -- includes systems for solar 
heating and cooling, year-round organic food production, a solar greenhouse and 
earthworm fertilizer farming. The four components of human living -- water, 
food, energy and waste -- are part of a cohesive system designed to lessen the 
demand on the utility, water and sewer companies and also on the grocery store. 
"You link everything together so that one waste is another resource for 
something else," Roley says. At Sprout Acres, for instance, household waste is 
composted to nourish the gardens, filtered water from the shower and kitchen 
sink is recycled into the garden, and air rising from the attached greenhouse 
heats the main house. 
Eco-Home in Los Angeles is another such demonstration project. It features 
energy and water conservation systems such as solar-powered lights, 
solar-heated water, low-flow shower heads and toilets, wall and attic 
insulation, and weatherstripping around doors and windows. Organic gardens, 
drip irrigation and trees are part of the environmental-preservation effort. 
"An environmentally friendly home is one that allows us to maintain our life 
style without damaging the environment," says Julia Russell, founder of the 
Eco-Home Network, a nonprofit organization dedicated to demonstrating physical 
systems for the home that are not detrimental to the surroundings. The 
organization is based in Los Angeles and counts 900 members worldwide. 
It doesn't take living in a model home to save significant amounts of energy, 
though. Roley says there are several simple energy conservation steps that any 
urban homeowner can take: Weatherstrip doors and windows, add attic insulation, 
use trees to shade the house in the summer, illuminate individual work areas 
instead of an entire room, use energy-efficient appliances and fluorescent 
light bulbs, hang curtains to keep heat inside during the winter and outside 
during the summer. 
And there's another payoff: Sprout Acres has the lowest utility bills of any 
house in its neighborhood. 
Conserving energy is only one facet of living in an environmentally friendly 
manner. Reducing the use of toxic materials can make your home more compatible 
with Mother Nature. The first step is to stop buying them every week. 
"You have to shop ecologically. Smart shopping habits can reduce the production 
of carbon dioxide and CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) in the atmosphere," Roley 
says. 
Stores such as the Natural Grocer in Laguna Niguel and Mother's Market in Costa 
Mesa carry products that are environmentally safe. At these you'll find 
nontoxic, biodegradable household items such as fabric softeners, glass 
cleaners, laundry detergents, cleansers and floor polishes. All are made 
without perfumes, dyes, phosphates or chlorine. 
The Seventh Generation mail-order catalogue offers hard-to-find items such as 
unbleached toilet paper and coffee filters, cellulose sandwich bags and paper 
products made from recycled paper. To request a copy, call (800) 456-1177. 
Remember that there are simple alternatives to toxic products. The Alameda 
County Office of Education publishes a comprehensive booklet called "Our Common 
Future: Healing the Planet -- A Resource Guide to Individual Action." Among the 
information on alternatives to toxic household products and shopping with an 
environmental awareness are several suggestions for making substitutions: a 
dish of hot vinegar can be used as an air freshener; a mixture of lemon juice 
and olive oil can polish furniture or floors; and baking soda dissolved in 
water can clean ovens. 
Recycling is also important. 
The pressure to reduce trash production is reaching critical mass. According to 
a state survey, Southern California generated 67.1% of California's waste in 
1988. The state Waste Management Board estimates that if trash continues to be 
created at its current rate, Southern California will run out of landfill 
capacity in four years. 
Reducing the amount of trash your household contributes to the waste stream can 
have a significant impact on the environment. 
According to a compilation of government statistics by Janet Marinelli of 
Garbage magazine, an estimated 30% by weight and 50% by volume of household 
garbage is disposable packaging material used to hold and wrap the items we 
buy. The process starts at the grocery store: If you don't bring it into your 
home, you won't need to discard or recycle it. 
Buy products sold in bulk and with the least amount of packaging. Buy meat, 
poultry and fish at the butcher counter instead of in prewrapped packages. 
Avoid items covered in many layers of packaging, particularly those that are 
wrapped in more than one type of material. Don't purchase one-time items such 
as disposable razors or cameras. Select items that are repairable, refillable 
and reusable. Stay away from disposable paper products as much as possible. Use 
mugs instead of paper cups, cloth instead of paper napkins, dish towels instead 
of paper towels. 
Buy items that are recycled or that come in containers that can be recycled. 
The three most easily recycled materials are glass, aluminum and newsprint. 
The act of recycling has many ramifications. Not only does it reduce the trash 
sent to landfills, it also conserves natural resources and reduces energy use. 
It can, for example, slow the depletion of tropical rain forests. 
"The bauxite mining that takes place in the tropical regions of South America 
is the direct result of our consumption of aluminum cans," says Jennifer Rigby, 
curator of education at the Santa Ana Zoo. "If people can recycle more aluminum 
cans, it may reduce the need for the mining of bauxite." 
On Earth Day, April 22, the Santa Ana Zoo will be presenting a program between 
11 a.m. and 2 p.m. to show how individuals can make their homes more 
environmentally friendly. It will include information and demonstrations on 
recycling, resources for finding alternatives to toxic household cleaning 
products, guidelines for making environmentally sound choices at the 
supermarket. There will also be exhibits on endangered wildlife species and 
their disappearing habitats. 
Rigby, who created the zoo Earth Day program, says she is keeping the scope 
simple, hoping to get people interested. 
"Ultimately," Rigby says, "what we want to show people is that they're capable 
of making (conservation-minded) decisions. There are alternatives. The point is 
not to despair. Take a small step. If everyone takes one small step, we will 
make a difference." 
 Sprout Acres is open for tours once a month. The February tour will begin at 
noon Feb. 24. Directions and further information is available at (714) 494-5843 
. 
 A two-hour tour of the Eco-Home in Los Angeles will be led Tuesday and Sunday 
at 10:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. Call (213) 662-5207 for reservations. A donation of 
$5 is requested. 
 Homeowners interested in reducing their electricity consumption can get a free 
energy audit from Southern California Edison. To arrange one, call (800) 
952-5062. 
