TOWARD EQUALITY; 
EXPLORING A WORLD OF DIFFERENCE; 
BACKLASH AGAINST THE 'MODEL MINORITY'; 
RESENTMENTS SPAWN ANTI-ASIAN-AMERICAN INSULTS AND VIOLENCE 
Lucie Cheng has been a faculty member at UCLA for 18 years, but never had she 
experienced anything like this. She recalled that, while walking on campus 
recently, two white male students yelled a racial epithet at her and told her, 
"Go home!" 
Cheng, a sociology professor, noted that the taunts came amid growing incidents 
of anti-Asian graffiti on campus, perhaps sparked by resentments of Asians' 
growing numbers on campus and their academic success. 
The incidents have begun to occur even in neighborhoods generally considered 
racially liberal. Three Chinese-American businessmen, for example, recently 
fought with two whites in a Silver Lake restaurant after the whites asked them, 
insultingly, if they were in town for a Honda convention and where their 
cameras were. 
"We've lived in Silver Lake for some 20 years, and Silver Lake is one of the 
most diverse communities around," said one of the businessmen, Martin V. Lee, a 
real estate developer and attorney. "It's kind of frightening to see that 
happen in our neighborhood." 
Asians in Southern California -- as in many other parts of the United States -- 
are increasingly becoming targets of anti-Asian backlash or resentments similar 
to that seen against Japanese-Americans during World War II or against Chinese 
immigrants during the anti-Asian hysteria of the late 1800s. 
Violence has also been reported between blacks and Korean grocery store owners 
in black neighborhoods. Blacks have claimed the store owners do not hire enough 
blacks or mistreat black customers. In high schools and colleges, white 
students have attacked Asian students or taunted them with racial epithets. 
The backlash stems in part from trade frictions with Japan and other Asian 
nations. It also derives from the rapid growth of Asian immigration here and 
the resulting economic competition between those newcomers and non-Asians over 
jobs and scare resources. Some blame just simple intolerance or ignorance over 
cultural differences. 
The backlash has entered political and business arenas. Several companies have 
instituted "English only" rules limiting the ability of Asians and other 
immigrants to speak their native tongues at work. Elected officials like Los 
Angeles City Councilman Nate Holden have called for restrictions to limit real 
estate investments by Asians and Asian immigrants who are not U.S. citizens. In 
Monterey Park, where the Chinese immigrant population has boomed in the past 
decade, some City Council members are considering limits on Chinese-language 
business signs as well as Chinese-language books in the public library. 
But in its ugliest side, the backlash has come in the form of racially 
motivated violence, intimidation and epithets, in some cases coming from other 
minorities. 
The Los Angeles County Commission on Human Rights reports increasing "hate 
crimes" against Asians as part of overall trend of rising racially motivated 
attacks against minorities. These include graffiti and hate literature, 
assaults or attempted assaults, and vandalism, said Eugene S. Mornell, 
commission executive director. 
"We think there are many more incidents than are reported," said Mornell, 
noting that Asians tend to mistrust police or have cultural or language 
barriers that hinder their reporting of crimes. 
However, government agencies and community leaders are beginning to undertake 
innovative efforts to stem the tide. 
The Los Angeles Police Department has set up a program to monitor incidents of 
racial, religious and anti-gay violence, a program hailed by some community 
leaders as the first of its kind among major West Coast cities. And while the 
program has been ineffective among some Asians due to their lack of knowledge 
of English and the LAPD's lack of bilingual staff to communicate with 
immigrants, efforts are under way to improve the program and better publicize 
it. 
Korean and black church and community leaders have eased tensions through 
meetings of diverse community representatives. To further reduce tensions among 
minorities, community leaders are planning a conference sometime this year for 
black, Latino, Asian and American Indian business and community leaders. The 
aim: To foster economic development, joint ventures, fair share agreements, 
better communications and hiring practices. 
