U.S. SEEKS VAST POWER OVER UNION; 
TERMS IN TEAMSTER PROPOSAL SHOW FEDERAL CONTROL TO 1996 
The troika of administrators that the federal government wants to put in charge 
of the Teamsters Union would have vast power over the union's operations until 
1996 and its elections until 2001, according to the government's proposed terms 
for settling the massive racketeering case against the union. 
The government's offer was unanimously rejected by the Teamsters' board on Jan. 
28, but details of the unprecedented extent of government control sought by 
federal prosecutors had not been previously disclosed by the union or the 
government. 
According to the 19-page settlement proposal, obtained by The Times, the only 
unbridled authority left to the union would be contract negotiations. 
The federal administrators would be able to discipline officers or employees, 
institute trusteeship proceedings over local unions, examine all books of the 
international union (it also has members in Canada) or any of its 700 locals, 
and veto any expenditure of the national union's funds or the transfer of any 
of its property. 
James T. Grady, general counsel of the 1.6-million-member union, did not return 
calls seeking comment Monday. But in an interview on Jan. 28, he branded the 
settlement proposed by Rudolph W. Giuliani, then U.S. attorney for the Southern 
District of New York, "totally unacceptable." 
Randy M. Mastro, the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the racketeering 
suit, also was unavailable for comment Monday. 
The civil suit, filed against the Teamsters last June under the 
Racketeer-Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), charged that the 
union is heavily influenced by organized crime and is not responsibly serving 
the interests of its membership. A trial in the case is scheduled to begin in 
federal court in New York on Feb. 27. 
The suit marks the first time that the government, in essence, is seeking to 
take over a national union. The RICO law previously had been used in an attempt 
to purge alleged corruption from several local unions in New York and New 
Jersey. 
As previously reported, the union would be required to acknowledge that "there 
have been past problems with La Cosa Nostra corruption of various elements of 
the IBT (International Brotherhood of Teamsters)." 
And the Teamsters Union would have to change dramatically the way it conducts 
elections for its top officers. The union constitution would have to be amended 
so that delegates to national conventions would be elected by a rank-and-file 
secret ballot no more than six months in advance of the convention. Now, some 
delegates are picked several years in advance and some union officers become 
delegates simply by virtue of other positions they hold in the union. 
In addition, once at the convention, the delegates would nominate the top 
officers, rather than vote on a slate presented by the union hierarchy. 
The president, the secretary-treasurer and the five area conference directors 
would then be elected by rank-and-file secret ballot. The 11 vice presidents 
and three trustees would be elected by delegates to the convention in a secret 
ballot. 
The "Election Officer" would supervise elections at the union's next convention 
in 1991 and then in 1996 and 2001. The Labor Department would supervise 
Teamster elections in 2006 and 2011 and any special union elections held 
between 2001 and 2011. 
Among the troika would be an "investigations officer" who could launch 
inquiries on a wide range of matters involving the national union or any of its 
state or local bodies. Further, the "Independent Administrator" would be 
empowered to place locals under trusteeships. The standard of proof would be 
"just cause," according to the settlement proposal. Labor lawyers noted that it 
is a standard that is less rigorous than normally would be applied in a court 
action. 
The settlement also would require the union to pay for insurance to protect any 
of the three court-appointed government officials and persons acting for them 
"from personal liability for any of their actions on behalf" of the union. 
Henry Weinstein reported from Los Angeles and Ronald J. Ostrow reported from 
Washington. 
