JUDGE RULES TRIBE CAN'T DICTATE BABY'S FATE 
In a surprise victory for a part-Aleut mother, a Santa Ana judge reversed 
himself Wednesday and decided that the teen-ager's native Indian tribe has no 
right to dictate who will adopt her 8-month-old baby. 
The ruling by Orange County Superior Court Judge Robert J. Polis gave Jodi 
Argleben, 19, of Cypress, the right to choose who will rear her daughter, 
Rebecca. Argleben already has selected a couple in Vancouver, Canada, and 
smuggled the baby into their care in September. The baby has remained there 
during the protracted legal struggle over the adoption here and in Canada. 
A final decision almost certainly will be delayed by appeals. But Argleben has 
sworn that she will rear Rebecca herself rather than surrender her to the 
Aleuts in Akhiok, the small village on Kodiak Island, Alaska, where the 
teen-ager was born. 
Argleben beamed as Polis announced his decision Wednesday. Later, she said 
simply: "It's great." 
Jack Trope, the attorney representing the Aleut tribe, said he was so shocked 
by Polis' decision that he had not yet considered an appeal. But Argleben's 
attorney, Christian R. Van Deusen, said he expects the Aleuts to appeal. 
Polis ruled Jan. 19 that the 1978 Indian Child Welfare Act gave the tribe the 
right to make sure Rebecca is placed with an Aleut family. The Aleuts had cited 
that law, designed to stem the breakup of Indian families and the loss of their 
customs and culture. 
Polis said at the time that he made the decision reluctantly, because he felt 
that the law infringed on a woman's right to reproductive freedom by "reaching 
into her womb" and dictating who will rear her baby if she decides to give it 
up for adoption. But he said his personal objections did not make the law 
unconstitutional, so he had to follow it. 
Faced with Argleben's request for reconsideration Wednesday, Polis initially 
indicated that he was inclined to stick by his decision. But one hour later, he 
changed his mind. 
Polis zeroed in on a section of the law that says that Indian nations must be 
notified when an Indian child is being taken from its parents against the 
parents' will. But he noted that the law requires no such notice when an Indian 
child is voluntarily surrendered for adoption. 
The judge reasoned that if Congress did not mandate notice to the Indians in 
voluntary adoptions, it "may well be that (Indian tribes) have no right to be 
heard" in those situations. 
He said there is no question that Indian nations have been subjected to "crass 
racism and discrimination" by whites who felt that troubled life on tribal 
reservations entitled them to "drag off" Indian children and have them adopted 
by non-Indian families. 
But the circumstances of Rebecca's adoption are not the ones contemplated by 
Congress when it passed the Indian Child Welfare Act, Polis said. Rebecca has 
virtually no link to Aleut culture, since Jodi Argleben is only half Aleut and 
was adopted by a white family when she was 18 months old. 
If the baby were being taken from her parents and an existing Indian community 
involuntarily, Polis said, his decision "would be quite different." 
He also told Trope, the lawyer for the Aleuts, that he was troubled by the fact 
that Rebecca's Indian heritage means her mother loses control over her 
adoption. 
