BRITAIN FREEZES IRAN TIES; BOUNTY ON RUSHDIE RAISED 
British government Thursday froze diplomatic relations with Iran, angry over 
reports that assassination squads were en route to London to carry out a "death 
sentence" imposed by the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Iran's supreme leader, on 
British author Salman Rushdie. 
The British Foreign Office condemned Khomeini's death threat against Rushdie, 
whose book "The Satanic Verses" has been denounced across the Muslim world as 
blasphemous. 
"We recognize that Muslims and others may have strong views about the contents 
of Mr. Rushdie's book," it said in a statement. "However, no one has the right 
to incite people to violence on British soil or against British citizens." The 
statement, however, stopped short of completely severing relations. 
It summoned Iran's lone diplomat in Britain, Mohammed Basti, told him 
Khomeini's threat was "totally unacceptable" and demanded special protection 
for its Tehran embassy, which it reopened in December after eight years. 
However, Basti emerged from the Foreign Office in a defiant mood, saying 
Rushdie's "infamous book" has had "appalling consequences in some Islamic 
countries." 
"It is a decree, it is a verdict after careful consideration," he said of the 
death sentence. "It has nothing to do with any particular country." 
Earlier Thursday, fundamentalist leaders in Iran, in a declaration on Tehran 
Radio, said, "We have already put on our death shrouds and pledge to carry out 
the Imam's (Khomeini's) death sentence against Salman Rushdie and his 
publishers in the United States and Europe." 
Adding to the tension were reports that the bounty for killing the writer was 
doubled -- to $5.2 million. Tehran Radio said that the original $2.6-million 
bounty offered by Iranian religious leaders was matched Thursday by Mohammed 
Hashemian, a religious leader in the southwest city of Kerman. 
In Washington, State Department spokesman Charles Redman said the United States 
was "appalled" by the threats. 
"Such threats are completely irresponsible and are incompatible with basic 
standards of international conduct," he added. 
In Luxembourg, Secretary of State James A. Baker III agreed. 
"I think it is regrettable. As you know, the United States is firmly committed 
to opposing terrorism in all its forms, particularly state-sponsored 
terrorism." 
Rushdie, who was born a Muslim in Bombay, India, but no longer practices Islam, 
is a naturalized Briton whose novel has sparked violent protests from Islamic 
fundamentalists. He has canceled a promotional tour for the book in the United 
States and remains in hiding with his American wife, Marianne Wiggins. British 
news reports said they were under police guard. 
In New Delhi on Thursday, an anonymous caller to the United News of India 
threatened to bomb British flights unless Rushdie emerged from hiding. India 
immediately stepped up security at its airports. 
At London's Heathrow Airport, British Airways also tightened security with 
bag-by-bag searches of luggage of passengers on its Thursday evening flights to 
the Indian subcontinent and the Far East. 
The European Parliament, meanwhile, called on the 12 European Community nations 
to make it clear to the Iranian government that "if there is an attempt on the 
life of Mr. Rushdie and his editors, serious sanctions will be taken against 
Iranian interests." 
At the same time, French, Spanish and West German publishing companies dropped 
plans to publish the novel. 
