A DISTURBING BACKDROP FOR CONVENTIONAL ARMS TALKS 
A member of the West German Parliament, visiting in Los Angeles recently, was 
asked by American luncheon companions to comment on complaints in this country 
that the European allies are not carrying a large enough share of the burden 
for their own defense. His response was blunt. 
"I am tired of hearing that if West Germany doesn't do this or that, the United 
States will withdraw its troops," he said. If America wants to withdraw its 
forces, it should go ahead and do so. 
Other West Germans at the meeting, sponsored by the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, 
hastened to say that the Bundestag member does not reflect the Bonn 
government's views on defense issues. 
Just last month, however, participants in a NATO seminar in Munich heard 
similar words from Rupert Scholz, the West German defense minister. 
Objecting sharply to U.S. "reproaches" on burden-sharing, he said that they 
could result in "indignation against the American ally" and a rethinking of 
German commitments to the alliance. 
The growing U.S.-German frictions form a disturbing backdrop to preparations 
for a crucial new round of East-West talks aimed at deep cuts in conventional, 
non-nuclear forces in Europe. 
There is a broad and growing weariness in West Germany with what is seen as an 
outmoded U.S. predominance in German affairs. 
It is reflected in public demands for a reduction or even an elimination of 
low-level practice flights by NATO warplanes after recent crashes in which 
German civilians were killed. 
It is also reflected in trade frictions and high-level resentment at overt U.S. 
pressures on Bonn to crack down on West German companies that provided 
materials and know-how for a chemical-warfare facility in Libya. 
Chancellor Helmut Kohl is a staunch ally who welcomes the fresh breezes from 
Moscow but believes that a stable and peaceful Europe will require a strong 
American military presence into the indefinite future. 
Probably most West Germans still support NATO membership, but the foundations 
of that support are visibly eroding. Recent polls indicate that 75% of the West 
German public believes that the military threat has ended, up to 80% want all 
nuclear weapons removed from Europe and a large minority now favors a 
withdrawal of U.S. troops. 
This mood, coinciding with budgetary pressures in Washington, will make it hard 
for the alliance to maintain the unity that is badly needed in the 
conventional-arms talks. 
President Bush must get a handle on the huge U.S. budget deficit. The 
impression is growing that he will accept, albeit reluctantly, the necessity of 
large cuts in projected defense outlays. 
The American military commitment to Europe -- where more than 340,000 U.S. 
troops are stationed -- will inevitably come under review. However, significant 
reductions would be risky unless the Soviets are willing to make even deeper 
cuts in their numerically superior forces. 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev announced plans in December for a 
unilateral reduction of 500,000 troops, plus cuts of 10,000 tanks, 8,500 guns 
and 800 combat aircraft in Eastern Europe and western parts of the Soviet 
Union. 
Allied governments, although delighted by the promised cuts, have jointly 
observed that even after the unilateral reductions occur the Warsaw Pact will 
have more than a 2-1 advantage in weapons most suited for an assault on Western 
Europe. 
Thus, if a negotiated reduction of U.S. troops is to take place, the Soviets 
must make deeper cuts than we do. Gorbachev had appeared to agree, but the 
latest pronouncements from Moscow reflect the Soviet military's stand that 
asymmetries favoring the Soviet side are already offset by asymmetries in the 
Western favor. 
Gorbachev's interests in force reductions seems real, however. Just the other 
day he told his people that cutbacks in military spending are essential to 
solving Soviet economic problems. 
There is ample evidence that the Soviet military believes that Gorbachev indeed 
intends to make deep cuts -- and is uneasy over the prospect. 
Thus the way may be open for negotiated reductions that will allow Bush to 
safely reduce U.S. outlays for European defense. 
The Kremlin, however, may be sorely tempted to stonewall in the expectation 
that the West will make reductions anyway. 
Congress and the Bush Administration itself may not be able to wait for 
successful negotiations before reducing U.S. military outlays in Europe. West 
Germany, especially, is in no mood to take up the slack. 
It seems, then, that the best hope lies not in Western steadfastness, which may 
not exist, but in the domestic economic pressures on Gorbachev to get on with 
shifting resources away from the Soviet military. 
Those pressures are real. We might luck out. But relying too much on another 
country's altruism is a chancy business -- especially when you consider that 
the survival of Gorbachev and his policies is far from a sure thing. 
