POLICING ARMS TREATIES MAY COST BILLIONS 
As prospects for new arms agreements increase, experts here warned Saturday, 
the cost and complexity of verification systems to police those treaties will 
grow rapidly and some of their techniques may be not be worth the money. 
A total verification bill approaching $1 billion a year is not out of the 
question by the end of the decade, experts estimated. This is assuming all of 
the nuclear, conventional and chemical weapon negotiations bear fruit, and that 
Congress and the Administration continue to demand the same level of intrusive, 
detailed inspections of Soviet facilities that they have in the past. 
But Dr. Roger Hagengruber of the Sandia National Laboratory, one of several 
experts on verification who addressed a meeting of the American Assn. for the 
Advancement of Science here, forecast "incredible inertia against spending $1 
billion to verify a $40-billion system" of weapons involved in such agreements. 
The existing U.S.-Soviet treaty that eliminates intermediate-range nuclear 
(INF) missiles costs $25 million to $30 million per year to verify, according 
to Pentagon budget figures. 
The anticipated strategic arms reduction treaty (START) has at least four times 
more provisions than the INF agreement and will presumably cost at least $100 
million a year to police, verification experts estimated. 
U.S. and Soviet inspectors have established a so-called "perimeter and portal" 
monitoring enclosure around one INF missile plant in each country, for example. 
In the START treaty, at least 10 factories and perhaps 20 or 30 factories will 
be policed, according to Dr. Sidney N. Graybeal, chief scientist of the 
consulting firm Science Applications International. Policing an agreement 
cutting conventional forces in Europe will be complex as well as costly, with 
23 nations taking part, seven from the Warsaw Pact and 16 from NATO. A 
verification system will check on the pledged reductions in men, tanks, 
artillery, armored personnel carriers, helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, 
presumably for a decade or more. 
Further away, a chemical warfare treaty will cost hundreds of millions of 
dollars per year, plus an estimated 15% loss in production due to on-site 
inspections, according to Dr. David W. Dorn of the Livermore National 
Laboratory. 
Some inspection equipment used by U.S. monitors to police the INF treaty seem 
unduly sophisticated and costly, the experts said, and some techniques planned 
for use in the START treaty may not be cost-effective. 
For example, a huge X-ray machine costing over $6 million is being installed by 
U.S. on-site inspectors to monitor the size of Soviet missiles emerging from a 
plant at Votkinsk. To do the same thing at a Utah plant they monitor, the 
Soviets use a long pole with graduated length markings and a flashlight, 
Hagengruber said. 
Both work, he said. The X-ray unit can measure key dimensions far more 
accurately and check for other deviations that may show cheating, he said, but 
seems superfluous in the present climate of U.S.-Soviet relations. 
For the future, Graybeal suggested that the United States propose "short notice 
inspections" by human inspectors at weapons factories rather than establish 
permanent perimeter and portal monitoring networks with X-ray scanners around 
them. 
