TODAY'S INCIDENT EERILY REMINISCENT; 
BOEING BESET BY RECENT SAFETY PROBLEMS 
The Boeing Co., maker of the 747 jumbo jet that lost part of its fuselage after 
takeoff from Hawaii today, has been beset by recent safety and production 
problems and has hired a public relations firm to spruce up its image. 
There was no immediate word on the cause of today's incident, in which eight to 
11 people were sucked from the plane when a 10-by-40-foot vertical hole opened 
in the jet. 
It was eerily reminiscent, however, of an accident last April 28, also over 
Hawaii. A flight attendant was killed and 61 people were injured when part of 
the fuselage of a Boeing 737 peeled off during an Aloha Airlines flight from 
Hilo to Honolulu, exposing the first-class section to the open air at 24,000 
feet. 
That incident led to widespread concern about the safety of aging jets like the 
Aloha 737. Tiny cracks were found later in nearly half the aging Boeing 737 
jetliners inspected in the months after the Aloha accident. 
Boeing Still Sells 
Airlines have voted with their dollars, however, in expressing their continuing 
confidence in Boeing airplanes. All Nippon Airways on Wednesday ordered 20 new 
747-400s in a deal valued at $3.1 billion. 
But Boeing has been plagued by various safety and production concerns of late: 
* The company confirmed Wednesday that crossed wires were found in two more 
airplanes. The latest cases involved cargo-hold fire-extinguisher systems in 
two Air Canada 767s. 
The Federal Aviation Administration on Feb. 1 ordered checks on the plumbing 
and wiring of fire-suppressant and monitoring systems in cargo holds and 
engines of Boeing planes built since 1981. Over the last year, 30 such problems 
have been found by airlines worldwide. 
Boeing has said it is taking steps to find the cause of the problems and to 
make changes so they will not happen in the future. 
* The FAA said earlier this month that it had asked Boeing and McDonnell 
Douglas to determine whether inadequately tested nuts, bolts and rivets made by 
Voi-Shan Aerospace Products were used in making aircraft. Voi-Shan, of 
Chatsworth, Calif., is being investigated because of reports that test 
documents on the fasteners were falsified. 
