BIRD RESCUE STATION SHUTS DOWN; 
CLEANUP: NEARLY ALL OF THE OIL SPILL'S FEATHERED VICTIMS HAVE EITHER DIED OR 
ALREADY BEEN CAPTURED AND TREATED, VOLUNTEERS SAY. 
When a shapeless creature wrapped tightly in a flowered bedsheet was lifted out 
of a pickup truck Thursday morning, rescue workers were waiting. 
Within minutes of its arrival at the Huntington State Beach lifeguard station, 
the protective wrappings were cut away and a California brown pelican emerged, 
bedraggled and terrified, its dark feathers matted with oil. 
As the pelican strained to move its heavy wings, bird expert Marge Gibson held 
it immobile but spoke to it softly, soothingly. 
"Had a bad morning, hey guy," she said as she settled the pelican's black 
webbed feet atop a white-covered worktable and matter of factly set about 
caring for it. 
For the oiled pelican, discovered about an hour earlier near the Newport Beach 
Pier, there were more indignities to come. Gibson, director of the station, 
took its temperature rectally with a baby thermometer, then gently forced a 
long red tube filled with nutrients into its beak. 
That done, she and volunteer Betty Pridy lifted the pelican into a towel-lined 
cardboard box and placed it beside a portable heater. It was only "moderately 
oiled" Gibson said; it should survive. 
Over the last two weeks -- ever since a Feb. 7 tanker spill off Huntington 
Beach created an environmental disaster for Orange County's shore life -- a 
back room at the main state lifeguard station here has served as a field 
hospital for oil-covered birds -- among them Western grebes, surf scoters, 
Pacific loons and pelicans, an endangered species. Its mission has been to 
stabilize the birds, then send them on to a major bird rehabilitation center at 
Terminal Island, there to be washed of the oil and prepared for release. 
The station's medical supplies were simple -- latex gloves and cotton jumpsuits 
for the workers, lots of Pedialyte, Murine and cotton swabs (for cleaning avian 
eyes irritated by crude oil), and donated towels, bedsheets and cardboard boxes 
to keep the feathered patients warm. 
But this bird recovery station -- which at its peak had the frenetic pace of an 
army MASH unit -- was closing Thursday. By now, nearly all the birds oiled in 
the spill are thought to be either captured or dead, state wildlife biologists 
said. 
On Feb. 12, the station's busiest day, the Huntington Beach facility handled 
151 birds, and Gibson and her 15-year-old daughter worked at least 16 hours 
straight. In the first week of the spill they were joined by at least 15 
volunteers including Pat Shea, a garden club officer from Fountain Valley who 
took it upon herself to make chili and sandwiches for up to 40 workers a day. 
By contrast Thursday, activity was clearly winding down. Gibson cared for just 
five birds -- one limp and very ill Pacific loon, suspected of having ingested 
oil, and four oil-coated pelicans. 
For Gibson, much of the recovery effort was a success story. Of 452 birds 
brought alive to the lifeguard station and medically "stabilized" there, only 
three died there. 
Still, not far from her worktable were two large commercial food freezers 
marked with bright yellow labels that said "EVIDENCE." 
Inside, stashed in plastic bags and frozen hard as a rock, were the bodies of 
more than 100 birds -- pelicans, surf scoters, grebes, cormorants that died of 
hypothermia when oil robbed their feathers of their insulating power, or that 
ingested the poisonous stuff. Their bodies are to undergo necropsies and kept 
indefinitely by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as evidence against the 
firms involved in the spill. 
Gibson, director of the Birds of Prey Center in Villa Park, has seen the 
evidence of oil spills before. She helped rescue bald eagles oiled last year in 
the much larger spill that occurred when the tanker Exxon Valdez went aground 
off Valdez, Alaska. For that spill she was temporarily employed by 
International Bird Rescue, a Berkeley firm hired to clean the birds. 
She acknowledged that working on badly oiled birds can be terribly upsetting. 
"I think any time you see any animal that's obviously distressed, and there's a 
question as to how he's going to survive, you do your best," she said. "But 
sometimes you feel terrible. Because it is a man-involved accident. They did 
not do anything. They were just swimming." 
For all that, Gibson said she was not angry at British Petroleum, whose oil it 
was that spilled. Rather, she is concerned that "people are going to forget 
this once the beaches are clean." 
After all, she said, "British Petroleum didn't mean for (the oil spill) to 
occur. But we're all responsible because we all use oil." 
