COMMERCIAL SCENE: SBA MAY HAVE JUST THE DEAL YOU'RE LOOKING FOR; 
FINANCING: AGENCY'S GUARANTEES HAVE ENABLED SMALL COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES TO 
OBTAIN FAVORABLE REAL ESTATE LOANS. 
Forget most of what you've heard about the U.S. Small Business Administration 
and its loan program, say local lenders. 
Borrowers looking for start-up capital or a loan without collateral need not 
apply. Borrowers turned down elsewhere for insufficient credit are out of luck 
too, they add. 
But if it's a commercial real estate loan you want, the SBA may have just the 
deal you've been looking for, said Sidney Moray, chief executive officer of 
Government Funding Corp., a private Hollywood-based lender that concentrates on 
disbursing SBA-backed loans. 
Small commercial real estate loans are all but off limits to most troubled 
savings and loans and to banks accustomed to dealing exclusively with big 
accounts, Moray said. 
That has left buyers of business properties with few options when it comes to 
financing $500,000 to $2 million deals. The few loans that are available often 
have to be paid back in less than 10 years and carry prohibitively high 
interest rates. 
Through the SBA's loan guarantee program, however, private lenders get up to 
$750,000 of their business loans backed by the U.S. government in case the 
borrower defaults. 
These same lenders are also able to offer 25-year loans -- with no balloon 
payments and with less than a month's wait for approval -- all at conventional 
loan rates. The result, said Moray, is that "we are swamped with requests for 
loans." 
Originally conceived as a federal program to bolster entrepreneurs, the SBA's 
guarantee program has evolved into a massive commercial real estate lending 
operation. 
The agency estimates that at least 35% of its $676 million in California loan 
guarantees last year went to finance real estate deals. Local lenders, however, 
report that 40% to 100% of their SBA-guaranteed loans are being disbursed for 
the purchase or development of commercial real estate. 
After shopping several lenders for a $450,000 loan to finance the purchase of 
their Culver City automotive engineering facility, Richard and Willy Guldstrand 
decided to try getting an SBA loan through private lender Government Funding 
Corp. of Hollywood. 
Main-line lenders "didn't want to touch our loan application," said Willy 
Guldstrand. But with an SBA loan guarantee, she said, "we had no problems." 
"The banks were much harder to deal with," reported borrower Agapito Cordero 
Jr. He and his family borrowed $480,000 to finance the purchase of their 
automobile body shop in La Puente. 
"The commercial loan was more expensive," he said, because lenders didn't want 
to spread his payments over 25 years. The SBA-guarantee program made it 
possible to get a long-term loan, however. For Cordero, buying his own business 
"was an All-American dream." 
By hooking up with the SBA, "we've been able to help customers we couldn't 
otherwise make a loan to," said Jim Whitney, senior vice president at American 
Pacific State Bank in Sherman Oaks. That's why, he reasoned, "the SBA program 
is becoming a more frequently used method for real estate financing." 
At American Pacific, he said, more than half of his SBA loan disbursements go 
to finance the purchase of commercial real estate. 
The bank prefers such loans, he said, because they carry the backing of the 
federal government and allow the bank to be more flexible in some of the terms 
it offers to qualified borrowers. 
In the future, he predicts, many lenders will compete to become SBA lenders -- 
especially as a secondary market develops among investors interested in buying 
whole SBA-backed loan portfolios on Wall Street. 
New underwriting requirements have also prohibited many lenders from making 
what can often be very profitable small business and real estate loans. The 
SBA's backing, however, can make these loans pass regulatory muster. 
Such loans are not available to everyone. Only about one out of every 20 
interested borrowers actually qualifies. Further, the property being bought or 
developed must be used as the buyer's place of business. Most important, say 
lenders, is that the borrower exhibit a healthy cash flow and bottom line. 
"What we look for first is management," said Jerry Morita, an executive at 
Mechanics National Bank in Paramount. "We view it primarily as a business loan, 
not as a real estate loan." 
Morita estimated that 30% of his bank's SBA-backed loans are being used for 
real estate. And, he expects such loans to become more common. Most banks don't 
make long-term commercial real estate loans anymore, he said, so "the SBA 
program is becoming more and more competitive." In essence, he said, "it 
provides a cushion to stretch out payments." 
This cushion, added Government Funding's Moray, makes SBA-guaranteed loans "the 
most attractive game in town." In fact, his company did nothing but SBA-backed 
loans last year, racking up a loan volume of $59 million in California -- and 
making his company No. 1 in SBA lending state-wide. 
What most prospective borrowers don't understand, he added, is that the reality 
of SBA loans today has little to do with what the program was like just a few 
years ago. 
Gone are most loans directly from the government and incentives for lending to 
women and minorities. Gone too are the days of risky loans that created an 
astronomical default rate in the 1970s. Borrowers, Moray said, qualify purely 
on the basis of their financial ability -- nothing more and nothing less. 
If all the numbers add up to the borrower's favor, Moray said, loan approval 
can be a very quick process. The SBA can provide borrowers with a list of 
so-called preferred lenders that are authorized to approve a loan without first 
passing the paper work to the SBA. 
And so-called certified lenders need only pass a loan application to the SBA 
for a cursory glance. In some cases, Moray said, he can process a loan and cut 
a check within seven days. 
SALES 
Business Park Planned in Santa Fe Springs 
McGranahan Carlson &amp; Co. is planning a $120-million business park on 102 
acres it bought late last year in Santa Fe Springs. The Culver City-based 
developer bought the site from a subsidiary of Santa Fe Railroad and has named 
its project MC&amp;C Commerce Center II. Located near the junction of the Santa 
Ana (5) and San Gabriel (605) freeways, this master-planned office and 
industrial development is less than 1 mile from the company's 
185,000-square-foot MC&amp;C Commerce Center I, completed in 1988. 
Work is already under way to prepare a 15-acre portion of the newly acquired 
site for the project's first phase, offering a total of 300,000 square feet. 
McGranahan Carlson and joint-venture partner Old Stone Development Corp. of 
Providence, R.I. plan a total of 1.5 million square feet of commercial 
development at the new center. 
Trizec Properties Inc. finally closed escrow on its purchase of about 22 acres 
of Warner Center property from Dataproducts Corp. Calgary. Canada-based Trizec 
has been trying to buy the two parcels along Erwin Street for nearly a year. 
When the printer company rebuffed its first offer, Trizec cut a deal to buy the 
properties for $57 million from DPC Acquisition Partners, a group of dissident 
Dataproducts shareholders that made several unsuccessful attempts last year at 
an unfriendly takeover. When that strategy didn't work, Trizec returned to 
Dataproducts with a new offer for $63 million last fall. 
Since then, buyer and seller have been haggling over the details. The closing 
price, reported Trizec broker Julien J. Studley Inc., was $59.5 million, giving 
Trizec a $3.5-million discount on its offer to make up for recently discovered 
"environmental" problems that need to be remedied at the sites. 
Not one to rest on its laurels, Trizec is considering plans to develop the 
properties after Dataproducts moves out in two years and also is entertaining 
offers to sell out. One such offer may be forthcoming from billionaire Marvin 
Davis who has expressed an interest in buying at least part of the property for 
a new Sports Club L.A. in the west San Fernando Valley. 
Leed Properties of Beverly Hills is developing 18.5 acres of Chino property 
into a $40-million distribution complex at Chino Industrial Park. Oltmans 
Construction Co. of Whittier has initiated work on five buildings that will 
provide nearly 800,000 square feet of space. 
Trammell Crow Co. has added to its land holdings in Santa Fe Springs with the 
acquisition of 32 acres fronting Norwalk Boulevard in Santa Fe Springs. The 
site will be combined with an 18-acre parcel the company already owns to create 
The Colonnade, an office and industrial center totaling up to 900,000 square 
feet of development. 
Swede-Cal Properties Inc. paid $15.3 million for the Anaheim Corporate Center, 
totaling 158,149 square feet of office and R&amp;D space on 9.3 acres. Tenants 
at the project's four buildings include Control Data and R.J. Reynolds. 
Galperin is a Los Angeles-based free-lance writer who has covered the 
commercial real estate scene for several years. News releases and column 
inquiries should be mailed to 8306 Wilshire Blvd., No. 7078, Beverly Hills, 
Calif. 90211. 
