SACRAMENTO FILE: GOVERNOR 
Issued a proclamation declaring Feb. 19 as "A Day of Remembrance: 
Japanese-American Evacuation" to pay tribute to the California victims of the 
World War II internment. 
Will leave for Mexico on Tuesday to open a new California trade and investment 
office in Mexico City, meet with government and business leaders and attend a 
border-state governors' conference in Saltillo. He will return to California on 
Saturday. 
Assembly 
Bill Introductions: 
Raffles: ACA 20 and AB 555 by Assemblywoman Jackie Speier (D-South San 
Francisco) would authorize cities and counties to permit raffles to be 
conducted by nonprofit organizations for charitable purposes if the voters 
approve such a move. 
Junk Fax Advertisements: AB 576 by Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) would 
prohibit the transmission of unsolicited advertisements by facsimile machine. 
Cable Television: AB 544 by Assemblywoman Gwen Moore (D-Los Angeles) would make 
it a misdemeanor offense to make illegal connections to a cable television line 
or to interrupt programs with unauthorized remarks. 
Poll Closing Time: AJR 16 by Assemblyman Dominic L. Cortese (D-San Jose) would 
ask Congress to establish a national uniform poll-closing time for presidential 
elections. 
Senate 
Bill Introductions: 
Equalization Board: SB 438 by Sen. Quentin L. Kopp (I-San Francisco) would 
prohibit members of the state Board of Equalization from participating in a 
board decision if they have received a political contribution of $250 or more 
from any party affected by the decision within the previous year. 
Vicious Dogs: SB 428 by Sen. Art Torres (D-Los Angeles) would provide for the 
regulation and licensing of potentially dangerous and vicious dogs, such as pit 
bulls. 
Lead Poisoning: SB 416 by Sen. Art Torres (D-Los Angeles) would require the 
state Health Department to establish an occupational lead poisoning prevention 
program. 
Automobile Insurance: SCR 22 by Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) would request a 
freeze in assigned-risk auto insurance premium rates until Jan. 1, 1990, or 
until the state Department of Insurance has received certain cost data and 
explanations. 
