MAN GIVEN 2 MORE YEARS IN SEX CASE; 
SENTENCE: THE PENALTY FOR SEXUAL ASSAULT ON A 13-YEAR-OLD GIRL BROUGHT THE TERM 
NOW FACED BY A DEFENDANT CONVICTED IN AN EARLIER CASE TO 25 YEARS. 
A former consumer marketing manager for the Los Angeles Times, serving a 
23-year sentence for sexually assaulting two young girls, was given two 
additional years in prison Monday. 
The two years were added in exchange for a guilty plea by Thomas Scarth 
McVickers in the case of a third victim, a 13-year-old girl. McVickers now 
faces a total of 25 years in prison. 
The sentencing, by Superior Court Judge Myron S. Brown, disappointed the 
prosecutor in the case, Deputy Dist. Atty. Ariadne J. Symons, who had hoped 
that the charges would result in an additional 10 years on his sentence. 
"It's not enough for what this man has done," she said of the 25-year sentence 
McVickers now has. 
Prosecutors allege that McVickers, now 43, of Anaheim, picked up some of his 
victims -- either hitchhikers or runaways -- while driving the Los Angeles 
Times van assigned to him. He allegedly told his victims that he was a 
professional photographer who could help them get started with modeling 
careers. 
One alleged victim told the police that McVickers had told her he was "a 
photographer-interviewer for The Times, looking for attractive female models." 
A spokesman for the Times Orange County edition circulation office said 
McVickers was in charge of a crew of sales people and was assigned a van as 
part of his duties. McVickers was employed by The Times from April 26, 1983, to 
May 4, 1989, although he had been in Orange County Jail since his arrest in 
March, 1988. 
McVickers wrote to the court last year that he never meant to commit any 
crimes, but that he simply "gave in to temptation when opportunities presented 
themselves." 
One of the victims, whose case was part of McVickers' first trial, was only 12 
years old when she posed for him and was forced to have sex. The girl was the 
daughter of a woman McVickers had been living with at the time. The second 
victim was 15 when she first had sex with McVickers. 
The police alleged that there were several other victims not included in the 
original charges either because they would not cooperate or because of statute 
of limitation problems. But Symons did manage to file new charges involving one 
more victim, the 13-year-old girl. 
Symons said that the victim in the new charges could have been included in the 
first trial but that the parameters of that case had already been decided 
before she was assigned the case. Symons said she decided to go after McVickers 
at a new trial because she believed that his 23-year sentence was not proper 
punishment for him. 
"This man should never be out on the streets again," she said. "This is a man 
who hates women." 
McVickers' attorney, William Morrissey, declined to comment on Judge Brown's 
sentence. Symons, though unhappy, claiming that two more years was inadequate, 
said there were reasons behind it. 
"Judge Brown is faced with having to deal a lot of cases because of courtrooms 
already overcrowded with trials," she said. "He may have decided that 25 years 
total was enough for these charges. But I don't agree." 
Brown runs the calendar courtroom for Superior Court -- where almost all felony 
cases are either resolved or sent out for trial -- and is faced with daily plea 
bargaining. Monday, for example, Brown had more than 90 cases in his courtroom. 
Symons added that even if it was just two more years, it was worth the effort 
because it will cause at least a year's delay in McVickers' release. 
