MODERN WOMEN EXPLAIN RETURN TO ORTHODOXY 
A one-time anti-war protester and member of an Oregon commune, Judith Margolis 
-- now an artist, college teacher, writer, wife and mother -- pursues the 
epitome of a busy modern life. 
She also is the quiet keeper of an ancient tradition. 
Among her people, she is called ba'alei tshuva, because as an adult, she has 
returned to her religion and chosen to practice Orthodox Judaism, the most 
traditional form of a faith whose beliefs are thousands of years old. 
Margolis, 44, is not alone. Orthodoxy, rabbis say, is growing in Los Angeles, 
where a rising number of Jews walk the streets in skull caps, patronize an 
increasing number of kosher restaurants, organize study sessions in synagogues 
and send record numbers of their children to religious schools. They follow 
strict dietary laws, pray several times daily and observe the Sabbath. 
As part of their faith, Orthodox women must meet yet other religious 
requirements -- some of which might seem to clash with elements of feminist 
thought and conduct in 1989. 
Orthodoxy, for example, speaks of women's importance in running the home and 
family, not the office and the world. It limits their leadership roles in 
religious services. It details what are acceptable sexual and personal habits 
(though some of these standards are disputed among the Orthodox, some of whom 
are even more traditional than others). 
In short, the modern practice of Orthodox Judaism -- like the adherence to many 
other traditional religions -- often can require special effort, especially by 
women, to reconcile with life in the late 20th Century, the faithful say. 
But the daily process of dealing with the minor details and major concerns to 
adhere to their faith has not dissuaded women from returning to Orthodoxy. 
To artist Margolis, for example, integrating her religion and her life can be 
part of a creative trade-off that actually improves her work. 
To advertising executive Susan Weintraub, it is a lifelong learning process 
about a dignified, disciplined way of being. 
And to physician Sharon Schwartz Brooks, it is a connection with history and 
the divine. 
Judith Margolis has not always approved of Orthodox practices. She learned 
about them only after meeting her second husband, David Margolis, a writer who 
developed an interest in traditional Judaism while researching a history 
project. 
Shortly after they were married, the couple moved to San Francisco and joined a 
small, storefront synagogue, where for the first time she had close contact 
with Orthodox Jews. 
"My husband was drawn immediately and made a commitment to be observant," she 
said, adding that she acceded to his wishes because that preserved the harmony 
in their small family, which then included a daughter and son, ages 6 and 7. 
Changing Views 
Later, her views slowly changed. She accepted the Orthodox rules that prohibit 
Jews from working, using the telephone or riding in a vehicle on the Sabbath, 
which runs from shortly before sundown Friday until shortly after sundown on 
Saturday. 
She learned to keep kosher (to meet the dietary laws). 
"After many years of struggle," she said, "I no longer wanted to eat non-kosher 
food and I experienced a connection to God that being kosher helped me 
maintain. I have never felt anything like that before. It followed shortly 
after I had started to completely keep the Sabbath." 
But for an artist like Margolis -- who writes for magazines, teaches at USC and 
whose works have been exhibited in the Long Beach Museum, the Otis Parsons 
Gallery and the now-defunct Los Angeles Institute of Contemporary Art -- 
meeting the demands of her faith has posed professional problems. 
"I observe the Sabbath and am not able to go to functions, such as openings, 
which occur then," she said. "And if I go to functions, I cannot eat the 
(non-kosher) food. Or people may invite you to dinner, and you cannot eat in 
their homes." 
Other Satisfactions 
Still, Margolis finds other satisfactions in Orthodoxy. 
"There is a tremendous amount of pressure to be an artist," she said. "There is 
no clear definition of success. Financial reward is undependable and you have 
only your own will to encourage you to keep doing it. . . ." 
Her faith helps sustain and refresh her. For example, "by keeping the Sabbath, 
I take one day when I cannot be striving. . . . It's a day when I have to rest. 
It energizes me enormously." 
Her career and marriage also has been helped, she said, by Orthodox laws that 
put some limits on intimate contact between married couples and requires wives 
to participate in a ritual bath or mikvah. 
"I think an artist needs a certain psychic privacy to be creative," she said. 
"A marriage is sometimes destructive to that because there is so much 
togetherness and merging of personalities. Orthodox practice . . . allows a 
person to have time alone. I experience myself. And that turns out to be 
supportive of creative work." 
Career Hasn't Suffered 
In the time she has maintained her faith, her peers have accepted it and her 
career has not suffered, she said. 
"One time an opening for my exhibit was scheduled on the Sabbath without my 
knowledge," she recalled. "The gallery director found out that I couldn't come 
and he changed the date and reprinted the invitations. The fact that my absence 
would have been to observe the Sabbath meant something to him. I was extremely 
touched." 
Her daughter and son, now 22 and 24, are Orthodox Jews. They live in her 
Pico-Robertson neighborhood, which is one of the areas in Los Angeles where 
many of the Orthodox reside. 
As for her parents, Margolis said her religion remains difficult for them. "My 
parents are OK, but are very inconvenienced by it and it makes them very cranky 
sometimes. They do not like that I do not answer the phone on the Sabbath. . . 
. 
"I think they are in part a little proud and a little confused by it. The fact 
is, they are that way about my art and my life in the commune. . . . They do 
not quite know what to make of what I do, but it looks like other people like 
it, so it must be OK." 
Susan Weintraub, who eats non-kosher food outside her home and does not cover 
her hair in public, as most Orthodox rabbis recommend, conceded she still is 
learning how to conduct herself in Orthodox fashion. 
That's partly because the Westside resident only began to consider Orthodoxy 
three years ago. 
While working on a beach shoot, a photographer told her there were problems 
because a young, hip Jewish stylist she had hired to coordinate the models' 
outfits had said she could not work past sundown. 
"Why?" Weintraub asked. 
"Because she's observant," the photographer replied. 
"Observant of what?" Weintraub asked, adding she was "amazed" by the stylist's 
explanation and attended a class with her on Orthodox Judaism. She liked what 
she heard and has pursued her faith since. 
Each Tuesday, she leaves her office at lunch to take Hebrew lessons in a 
Fairfax-area home. On Wednesday nights, she attends an Orthodox women's study 
class. On Thursday afternoons, a rabbi bearing heavy books visits her office to 
instruct her in Jewish law. 
On Fridays, she leaves work by no later than 4:30 p.m. to reach a friend's 
house by the start of Sabbath, which she spends in the synagogue or with 
friends and her husband and 20-year-old daughter. 
A Nonreligious Background 
Weintraub, who grew up in Tarzana and Sherman Oaks in a non-religious family, 
is learning to admire the discipline of Orthodoxy and its rules for men and 
women. 
"If you look at face value at what men can do and what women can do, there is a 
lot of opportunity for both," she said. ". . . It seems that men and women and 
children are happier. Their lives are structured. There's more balance." 
Weintraub -- fashionably attired recently in an oversized black jacket, 
two-piece black knit outfit, silver bracelets and black metal earrings -- knows 
that Orthodox Jewry requires women to dress modestly and forbids them to swim 
with men. 
But she sees no conflict between those rules and her job directing advertising 
for the sometimes revealing products of Catalina Swimwear. 
"My work is something I'm proud of," said the agency account supervisor in her 
spacious seventh-floor Hollywood office, which has a panoramic window 
overlooking Mann's Chinese Theater and the Hollywood Hills. "It feels good to 
have the opportunity to be creative. 
"Modesty can also be translated as dignity. . . . It's how you conduct yourself 
in business and with family and friends." 
Logic of Rules 
She said she does not mind gender-based Orthodox rules, like one that in the 
synagogue separates the sexes with a wall. "My husband is very cute," she said. 
"If he were next to me, I'd be playing with his hair or something. I would be 
more involved with him than I should be for that period, which is supposed to 
be devoted to communing with the Almighty. I'm an intelligent woman. I can buy 
that." 
She also sees a logic in the Sabbath: "When you know every week that Friday and 
Saturday is family day and that there is an order to it and a reason for it, 
the concept elevates your quality of living. . . . You spend time with family 
and friends talking about the Torah (the sacred Scriptures) and about what's 
meaningful." 
Her brief exposure to Orthodoxy has altered her life, she noted. "I started 
meeting people who were interesting and my life started changing. I started 
grappling with questions like: What am I living for? What is my purpose in 
life? What do I want to be remembered for? What is success? . . . (Orthodoxy) 
doesn't feel like there are rules and restrictions and . . . like I'm being 
suffocated. It gives me pleasure." 
Sharon Schwartz Brooks, a Harvard-trained physician who has been a family 
practitioner at the Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in West Los Angeles for 
four years, has seen the limits of science and the need for her religion. 
"People have a symptom," she said, "and it goes away and I can't tell them why. 
And I did all my tests and everything right. I have more problems in medicine 
than I do in religion because in medicine I expect to explain everything." 
Not that everything about Orthodoxy pleases Brooks, an expectant 35-year-old 
mother, who already has two children, ages 9 and 4. 
'Independent Decision' 
Brooks -- who was raised in a moderately religious home but who made the 
"independent decision" in high school to adhere to Orthodox beliefs -- said she 
thinks "women should have much more of a role" in Judaism, starting in the 
earliest phases of their religious education. 
"Girls are not taught the same thing as boys in many religious schools -- 
that's the first prerequisite, because in Judaism, if you do not have 
knowledge, you cannot have input into decision making," she said. "The Jewish 
law has not had much female input, and it should have. 
"Women have also been written out of many aspects of public prayer," she added. 
"There are even areas where they are not allowed to be president of a synagogue 
or to take an administrative role within the religious community. That's 
ridiculous. The more you learn the sources, the more you learn what has been 
distorted and what could be changed." 
Though she hopes to change some of its laws, Schwartz Brooks, because she is a 
doctor, benefits professionally from exemptions to the strict rules on the 
Orthodox Sabbath. She can, for example, write, make rounds and use phones on 
Saturdays when those acts save lives. 
For Schwartz Brooks, whose husband is a USC mathematics professor, her religion 
is a vital, mystical part of her world, which gives "texture to my life. 
"I have ritual," she said. "I have a connection with a people, a connection 
with a history. I have a connection with a sense of the divine. I experience a 
sense of spirituality in my daily life. It's enveloping and it doesn't limit my 
personal development." 
