ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT THE OIL SPILL? 
Shoppers at South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa were asked at random Friday for 
their thoughts on the disaster involving the tanker, the American Trader, and 
the spill of 300,000 gallons of crude oil into the ocean off Huntington Beach. 
GAIL L. NICORA 
37, of Santa Ana, a collection coordinator for a pharmaceutical company, says: 
"We'd like to know why they had to unload that tanker when the swells were 
high. . . . " 
JANE C. SCHATTKE 
29, of Laguna Nigel, a chemist: 
"It's careless. . . . It's the consumers who pay in the end, and the 
environment as well." 
MARIO J. CASSAR 
20, a diamond consultant and model from Huntington Beach: 
"There's a lot of wildlife gone already. And that's not fair. I think we should 
keep the ocean clean." 
CHARLES V. HICKEN 
54, a professional fund-raiser from Sacramento: 
"I think they ought to assess the heaviest fines they can. . . . (But) how do 
you levy a fine against such enormous wealth? It means nothing. I don't know 
what they can do. But they ought to do something." 
PHILIP CHAMPLIN 
50, a Superior Court judge in Napa: 
"I think they're probably going to have to start double-hulling ships. It just 
points out the vulnerability of the fleet. The potential of devastating the 
shoreline of a tourist area like this points out the need for greater 
precaution." 
SUSAN J. MIRSHAHZADEH 
37, a mother who lives in Anaheim: 
"It's disgusting. . . . I think it's disgusting in general with what they're 
doing with the ecological system of this planet. It's just another example. 
We're making the world uninhabitable." 
BOB W. NICORA 
50, of Santa Ana, who works in research in a pharmaceutical company: 
"It seems as if the oil companies haven't developed the contingency plans to 
make sure these spills don't happen. . . . And I think the government hasn't 
stepped in." 
JEFF B. THOMPSON 
25, of Huntington Beach, an account representative for a Seal Beach printing 
company he said has sent 25 employees to help with the cleanup: 
"It's pretty horrible. But I think it's neat to see all the support the 
community is giving." 
