SHARON RESIGNS AT STORMY MEETING; 
ISRAEL: HAWKISH CABINET MINISTER DEBATES SHAMIR IN A HEATED GIVE-AND-TAKE. 
SHAMIR WALKS OUT OF PARTY MEETING. 
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir walked out of a chaotic meeting of his 
Likud Party on Monday after a verbal brawl with hawkish rival Ariel Sharon, who 
surprised everyone by quitting his Cabinet post to protest developing peace 
talks. 
During the meeting, Shamir sought a vote of confidence in his leadership while 
Sharon tried to drum up votes to block compromises in peace negotiations. 
Sharon demanded that the Palestinian uprising come to an end before talks begin 
and that the talks be barred to Palestinians expelled from Israel and Arab 
residents of East Jerusalem. Both men tried to have their way -- at the same 
time -- by shouting into microphones and calling for the party's 3,000 Central 
Committee members to vote. 
"You must confirm me in my work. That's my resolution to the Central 
Committee," the bantam-sized Shamir called out as he peered over the podium. 
Hands in the audience started going up. 
"Who is in favor of wiping out terror? I ask the committee," began the portly 
Sharon, leaning into his own mike. 
The crowd, gathered in a Tel Aviv exhibition hall, roared. It was difficult to 
say just who was supporting whom, although Sharon supporters set off loud 
chants of "Arik! Arik!" -- Sharon's nickname. 
"Please sit down," Shamir told Sharon. "Democracy will decide who has faith in 
me, who has confidence." 
"Who is in favor of excluding deportees? Raise your hands," commanded Sharon, 
who until Monday was minister of trade and industry. 
"Ah, nonsense! Vote only on this resolution. . . !" yelled Shamir, thrusting a 
finger into the air. 
"Who is in favor of excluding East Jerusalem Arabs?" Sharon asked loudly. 
The crowd was on its feet, booing and cheering all at once. Each contestant 
declared himself the winner. Shamir adjourned the meeting and trudged off the 
dais, circled by grim-faced security agents and trailed by a flock of his 
Cabinet ministers. Sharon's backers taunted the 74-year-old prime minister with 
hisses and calls of "Coward! Coward!" 
Sharon slapped down his memo pad, stayed on the speakers' platform and was 
joined by allies from the audience. 
Did Shamir get a hands-up vote of confidence and end the meeting before 
Sharon's attack? Were the shouts in answer to Sharon's resolutions a defeat for 
the prime minister? It was like a bout the World Boxing Assn. might rule on. 
By offering his resignation, the 61-year-old Sharon shed responsibility for 
Cabinet decisions and can now focus on undermining Shamir's leadership in 
Likud, party observers said. Sharon himself hinted as much: "I decided to 
resign from the government to continue my struggle for reaching our national 
objectives, which are now endangered as a result of the government's policy." 
Sharon, a former defense minister who led Israel into the 1982 Lebanon war, 
claimed that he told Shamir of his resignation by letter Sunday. Shamir said he 
knew nothing about it until the meeting got under way, and there was no 
indication that he had accepted it. 
The meeting, called by Sharon and two other hawkish Cabinet ministers from the 
Likud Party, attracted wide attention because of its possible impact on efforts 
to arrange Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. 
U.S. Secretary of State James A. Baker III has proposed a meeting with the 
foreign ministers of Israel and Egypt to work out a list of Palestinian 
participants. The chosen Palestinian panel and the Israelis would discuss 
Shamir's plan to hold elections in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
For the past seven months, the peace effort has stalled over which Palestinians 
will take part. Participation would either be limited to residents of the 
occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip or would also include East Jerusalemites as 
well as Palestinians who have been expelled by Israel. 
Israel is wary that Palestinians-in-exile will front for the Palestine 
Liberation Organization, which is based in Tunisia. Many Israelis believe that 
if Jerusalem Arabs take part, the talks might throw into question the country's 
hold on its own capital. 
In his speech, which kicked off the meeting, Sharon expressed a lack of 
confidence in Shamir. "Under your government," he said, turning toward the 
prime minister, "Palestinian terror runs wild within the land of Israel and 
causes heavy losses to innocent Jews and Arabs." Sharon made a pitch for a 
tougher crackdown on the uprising, as well as for Israel to keep all the 
occupied land. 
Israeli soldiers have killed 600 Palestinians during the intifada, or uprising. 
Another 160 Arabs died at the hands of Palestinians themselves, mainly on 
suspicion of collaborating with Israeli authorities. Forty Israelis have been 
killed by Palestinians in Israel and the disputed land. 
Last week, two terrorists shot up and threw grenades into a tourist bus in 
Egypt and killed nine Israelis on board. Israeli officials say the killers were 
Palestinians expelled from Israel during the past five years. 
In a head-to-head battle with Sharon, Shamir appears to have the upper hand. 
Political experts had predicted a 2-to-1 victory by Shamir had the issue 
actually come to a vote of confidence. 
Foreign Minister Moshe Arens assured reporters that despite the dispute, the 
government will go on promoting a vote in the territories. 
