SALLIE BINGHAM STRIKES BACK; 
THIS DAUGHTER OF A DYNASTY HAS PENNED AN EXCORIATING MEMOIR, ONE HER FAMILY 
VOCIFEROUSLY DISPUTES 
When she was growing up on a secluded estate in Louisville, Sallie Bingham felt 
the presence of "this lurking something" in the Big House, the family name for 
the grim mansion on the Ohio River that housed her aristocratic tribe. 
When she went back last year for the funeral of her father, newspaper publisher 
Barry Bingham Sr., she felt it again, she said. "It's still there . . . the 
hovering presence of something unexplained that has malevolence." 
A Blood Vendetta 
Leaning back in an easy chair, surrounded by the sophisticated rusticity of the 
farmhouse she shares with her third husband here, Bingham's dark memory clashes 
with the sunny winter day. Down the road in Louisville there are those -- most 
especially her mother, brother and sister -- who would argue that Sallie 
Bingham's recollection also clashes with reality and that she is bent on 
trashing her family name in a blood vendetta. 
At 52, Bingham -- a novelist, playwright and now a memoirist -- is the maverick 
of Kentucky's Bingham clan, until three years ago owners of the state's major 
newspapers, a television station, a radio station, a printing firm, a family 
with direct links to Presidents and influence far beyond the borders of their 
small state. 
The woman who writes, runs a foundation for women in the arts, and raises 
chickens and sheep on 400 acres of rolling, oak-spotted land often has been 
cast as the villain in the $434 million sell-off in 1986 of the Bingham media 
kingdom that included the influential, Pulitzer Prize-winning newspaper, the 
Courier-Journal. After prolonged behind-the-scenes bickering with her brother, 
Barry Jr., Bingham chose to sell her 15% share of the companies, a decision 
that often has been portrayed as precipitating her father's decision to divest 
the family of its wellsprings of fame and fortune. It was the end of one of the 
last family-owned media dynasties in this country, a dynasty that exercised 
liberalism in a conservative state and made progressivism and rectitude its 
family credo. 
Sallie Bingham's share of the divestiture was $62 million. 
And that should have been that. 
But it isn't. 
Sallie Bingham did not retreat behind a wall of money. She just completed a 
book, "Passion and Prejudice," about her family, a book that is part memoir, 
part feminist tract and part angry retaliation against her mother, Mary, her 
brother, her dead father and her dead grandfather. For her, the book seems to 
be a necessary walk through the past to cast her own perspective on her family 
and her role in its sometimes fantastic story. 
The book proved "valuable for me . . . because it was me saying this is what I 
feel and I'm going to write it down. People will have different opinions about 
it, but I stand behind it, this is what I feel," Bingham said. 
"Passion and Prejudice" also is her attempt to come to terms with her father, 
whom she did not know well and who contributed, somehow, to the spirit of the 
Big House. 
"He was a shadowy presence all the time I was growing up, so that it's very 
hard to re-create that kind of person," she said. "I had to depend on what I 
could remember, which was very mystifying because, of course, he had this 
enormous charm that everybody responded to. . . . When I tried to go into 
detail, to say, who is this man, not only in relation to me but in relation to 
other people and in relation to the world, that strange vagueness kept coming 
in. Someone who is so charming, everyone loves, wonderful, good-looking, 
energetic. But who is he?" 
But what the 520-page volume seems most likely to do is rekindle public 
scrutiny of a family that has been the subject of two other recent books and 
will be the subject of at least one more. It has already triggered family and 
community scorn. 
"Passion and Prejudice" is a tale of a cloistered rich girl's woe. It details 
Bingham's childhood of servants and family secrets. It chronicles her 
ultimately unsuccessful attempt to escape from her family. It resurrects old 
scandals and hints at possible involvement by her father with the Central 
Intelligence Agency. It charges that the family masked private conservatism in 
matters of race and class behind a facade of public liberalism and benevolence. 
It laments a family that chattered constantly but never talked about its 
feelings toward one another. It recounts the bizarre deaths of her brothers 
Worth and Jonathan -- the first killed by a surfboard laid across the back of a 
convertible that snapped into the back of his head when it struck a parked car 
and the second electrocuted while splicing outdoor lights into a power line. It 
recounts other deaths, too, that form the tapestry of tragedy against which the 
Binghams won fame, wealth and power. It mourns the women who Bingham contends 
brought the family riches, strength and position but were always held back from 
power and glory by domineering, calculating men. It chronicles her own 
evolution from a sheltered childhood to becoming a writer, a feminist, an 
activist. 
The book's driving force is anger, Bingham said. "My anger goes way back to the 
feeling of being disprized as a child," she explained. "Any girl growing up in 
a dysfunctional family, I think, has a great deal of anger. In a sense, I never 
had parents and that's something I've come to terms with. But the anger that 
fueled the book is really 50 years of anger." 
Advance copies of the subjective family history, which will be published Friday 
by Alfred A. Knopf, already have caused a stir in Louisville where longtime 
Courier-Journal cartoonist Hugh Haynie 10 days ago compared "Passion and 
Prejudice" to Pinocchio, the children's character whose wooden nose grows 
longer each time he tells a lie. 
Irene Nolan, the Courier-Journal's managing editor who worked with Bingham when 
she was the newspaper's book page editor, said that the continuing controversy 
over the Bingham family is beginning to wear thin. "I think a whole lot of 
people are getting tired of the subject," she said. 
Challenging Bingham 
After reading "Passion and Prejudice," Nolan said she "wondered if we (herself 
and Bingham) had been working in the same building." She challenged Bingham's 
version of her hiring as the Courier-Journal's book editor, saying that Bingham 
got the job because of family influence, and that the previous editor "was not 
removed because she was not doing a good job." Nolan, the first woman managing 
editor of a major metropolitan newspaper, also said she disagreed with Sallie's 
allegations that the Binghams had not done enough to hire and promote 
minorities and women at their businesses. 
Perhaps most notably, the family itself has issued a dossier disputing nearly 
every major point -- and many minor ones -- made by Bingham. The bound file 
containing nearly 300 separate points of dispute, supporting documents and a 
29-page summary has been sent to every major publication in the country that 
might review "Passion and Prejudice." In a cover letter signed by Mary, sister 
Eleanor, Barry Jr. and his wife Edith, the family declares, "For whatever 
reasons, Sallie's view of the family history is maliciously skewed. Her claims 
rest on unsupported assertions, erroneous suppositions, leaps of logic, and in 
some cases, outright fabrications." 
Referring to Sallie Bingham's dark suspicions about her family, the Binghams 
note elsewhere in the file that the book "seems less 'a family memoir' than a 
flight into fantasy supported by mystical conjectures and assertions that, more 
often than not, bear no relation whatever to fact." 
Unlike a previous book that the Binghams challenged before publication, the 
cover letter also says, "We would like to make clear at the outset that we have 
in no way attempted nor will we attempt any type of restraint of publication of 
this book. . . ." 
Dropped Publication 
In the previous instance, McMillan Publishing Co. dropped publication of David 
Chandler's "The Binghams of Louisville: The Dark History Behind One of 
America's Great Fortunes" after Barry Bingham Sr. rebutted the book's 
allegations with documents weighing a total of 8 pounds. Chandler's theory was 
that Judge Robert Worth Bingham founded the family fortune in 1917 when he 
"murdered his second wife for money." Mary Flagler Bingham, at the time the 
richest woman in America, bequeathed the judge $5 million. Chandler's book was 
later published by Crown. 
"Passion and Prejudice," for which Bingham said a second printing is already 
planned, has been chosen as an alternate selection of the Book-of-the-Month 
Club. Bingham herself will be traveling all over the country this month to 
publicize it. 
During an interview last Friday in the front room of her farmhouse, Sallie 
Bingham seemed more hurt by what she called the "vicious" and "devastating" 
broad strokes of the newspaper cartoon than by her family's counterattack, or 
by other critics who want to deal in fine details. She said she unsuccessfully 
has demanded a retraction of the cartoon and had written a letter to the editor 
protesting the drawing "that perfectly clearly implied that I was a liar and 
the book was nothing but lies." 
In contrast, she seems unfazed by her family's ire, at least initially. When 
she learned of the dossier, "Well, frankly, I laughed," she said. "I thought, 
here they go again . . . and I thought how do they have the time and the 
energy. . . . And when you think of mailing that all over the country, every 
magazine, every newspaper. I asked them to let me see the list. I haven't seen 
it yet but that must be a formidable list. Why do that? Why not use the money 
another way? Why not give it to the homeless? Because this is not going to have 
the desired effect of making people doubt the book. People usually in my 
experience want to form their own opinions." 
Later in the interview though, Bingham's attitude of jaunty defiance toward her 
family cracked a bit. Asked if she would re-establish contact with her family, 
she said, "No, I really wouldn't want to see them. I've had a couple of very, 
very painful encounters which have reduced me to tears." A catch in her voice 
made her pause. "As you can see, it's causing me some feeling now," she 
continued, displaying the only flustered moment during a long interview. 
She added that she had talked to her publisher's lawyers and they had found in 
all, "one adjective in my book and part of one sentence that they felt needed 
to be changed for the next edition." 
Needs to Be Rewritten 
On the other hand, the family contends that most of the book needs to be 
rewritten. The document rebuts, with long lists of editorials published in the 
Courier-Journal, Bingham's charges that her family hid biases about race, sex 
and other social issues, and disputes that Barry Sr. had any ties with the 
American intelligence community. The brief -- which also alludes to the theory 
advanced by Chandler -- says that, among other things, Sallie got the cooling 
system in the Big House wrong, that it was not "metal fans suspended over pans 
of water" as she writes but actually "an ammonia compressor in the basement." 
More importantly, the family says medical tests prove that Judge Bingham "did 
not have syphilis as Sallie Bingham would have the reader believe." 
The family quotes medical testimony that the judge's wife, Mary Lily, was not 
poisoned, adding that the notion is an old, discredited contention that has 
been repeatedly raised over the decades, as well as by Chandler and by Sallie 
Bingham. (Members of the Bingham family declined to be interviewed personally, 
saying that their written response to the book is sufficient. However, in a 
statement issued through her attorneys, Mary Bingham said, "Our response to 
this work is an appeal to the conscience of institutions we respect and admire, 
and our purpose stems only from what we see as a responsibility to provide a 
true and accurate historical record of the Bingham family.") 
In its challenge to Bingham's book, the family says that the pattern of big and 
small errors "can only suggest the need for careful evaluation of the author's 
credibility and her lack of supporting documentation." "Passion and Prejudice" 
contains a bibliography but no footnotes. 
Meanwhile, Alex S. Jones -- winner of a Pulitzer Prize in 1987 for his 
reporting for the New York Times on the dissolution of the Bingham enterprises 
and now at work on a book about the subject with his wife, Time magazine 
associate editor Susan E. Tifft -- said in a telephone interview that "Passion 
and Prejudice" is "a fascinating blueprint to her (Sallie Bingham's) psyche but 
as history it is worthless." 
Speculation or Documentation? 
Based on his reading of "Passion and Prejudice," Jones said that Bingham seemed 
to have done little research and sometimes relied on her own speculation rather 
than documentation. 
For example, Jones said that Bingham apparently did not check the voluminous 
documentation of the death of Judge Robert Bingham's first wife, Eleanor, 
killed in 1912 when the car in which she was riding was struck by a trolley. 
Others previously had been killed at the site where Eleanor died and the hazard 
of the crossing was a scandal of the time, Jones said, asserting that the death 
was clearly an accident. But Bingham, he said, plays up the potential for 
mystery. 
In the book, at the conclusion of the section in which she wonders if Eleanor 
committed suicide by jumping on the tracks, Bingham writes, "It is only 
speculation. No one alive today can or will explain why Eleanor Miller Bingham 
vanished so completely." 
Bingham admitted that some of the issues she raises in the book are unproven. 
She said her speculation that her father had longstanding ties to U.S. 
intelligence is "an educated hunch and I try to express it as that." 
She explained: "As I tried to re-create him (her father) in my mind I couldn't 
explain certain things to myself. What was he doing in England in World War II? 
Was he really part of the D-Day invasion, because he told it so many different 
ways. What was he doing in Guam when mother was so desperate to have him home?. 
. . It is another book. There's not much here but it is another book. And I 
felt I owed it to myself to say there is a question. . . . I was fascinated to 
find out about six months ago that the woman who had been doing research with 
me in Washington said the Navy Department had no record that he had ever 
served. . . . That's the kind of thing that makes you wonder. It doesn't prove 
anything except that I think there's something unexplained about his career." 
Writing "Passion and Prejudice" was a cathartic experience that devoured "many 
sleepless nights," Bingham said. "Often I would just sit there and cry. . . . I 
would sit down and write a 'graph and think, 'Oh God, obviously I'm avoiding 
everything,' and start over. I had to admit how upset I was, how hurt I was." 
Her estrangement from her family dates back practically to her birth, Bingham 
said. She remembers a "beloved" governess telling her when she was 3 or 4 "that 
mother felt that I somehow didn't look like a Bingham. . . . I was so puzzled 
because we're all blonds, shall we say, Hitler's favorite color. So it wasn't 
that I suddenly had turned out to be black. I never did understand really what 
that meant but it gave me the feeling that somehow I was different." 
And in her circle, Bingham was different, she said, looking back at her youth 
from a secure middle age. 
"It's been such a relief to me to be 52, to like being 52, not to fuss about 
whether I've got wrinkles or I've got gray hair, or people think my teeth are 
ugly," she said. ". . . Looking back on it, remembering what it was like for 
young women that I knew in the '50s to be considered beauties, that was quite a 
sizable burden. You had to make your debut. You had to spend a lot of time 
going out to parties, talking about clothes. And I saved a lot of time and 
energy. I spent a lot of time and energy then learning how to be a writer." 
When she returned to Kentucky in 1977 after two failed marriages, Bingham said 
she had second thoughts almost immediately. "I remember my feelings of both 
pleasure and dismay when I would ride in the back seat of the car -- I was in 
my early 40s -- with my parents going to parties. I would think, 'My God, I 
didn't do this when I was 17. What am I doing? Why am I here?' " 
Continuity and Stability 
She stayed mainly because she wanted continuity and stability in the life of 
her sons, Bingham said, as well as remaining in the region that inspires her 
writing. 
And she intends to stay, Bingham said, no matter how tough the opposition 
becomes. "I am sure there are many committees (to run her out of town) but they 
won't succeed," she said with a laugh. 
As for her family, Bingham believes that writing the book gave her a valuable 
insight into other members' behavior. "Well, I understand their lack of free 
will," she said. "Here they apparently had everything, as so many people say. 
But what I think -- and I just speak now of them in a conglomerate because they 
all signed that cover letter -- they really ultimately lacked the ability to 
act as individuals and that's tragic." 
But Bingham said there are some things she may never understand, such as the 
deaths of her two brothers. 
"I take a leaf out of my mother-in-law's life. . . . She lost one of her sons 
at an early age to a brain tumor and she said it was the will of God," Bingham 
said. "Now that's a faith that I don't have but it's what I try to reach toward 
because I think it's really the only light at the end of the tunnel. . . . To 
us it seems such an unmitigated tragedy, for such young men particularly. But 
there was a reason for that, which we'll probably never know. That's what I try 
to hang on to." 
Then she added that occasionally she has a glimmer of an explanation as to why 
her brothers died. 
"I sometimes think that the suffering that both Worth and Jonathan were going 
through, or would have gone through in order to keep up the myth, would have 
made life intolerable for them. I feel so strongly that this myth is so cruel 
to the people that have to uphold it." 
Lately, too, she said, she has started going to church again. "I'm trying to 
find my way back. I need it," she said. 
