UPDATE 
Production is under way on "Fall From Grace," an NBC movie based on the story 
of Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker starring Kevin Spacey and Bernadette Peters. The 
drama, expected to air this spring, will explore the personal story behind the 
rise and fall of the couple's evangelical dynasty beginning in December, 1980, 
with the dream of Heritage Village and ending with their ouster from P.T.L. in 
May 1987. 
A diverse group of musical guest stars, including country's Tanya Tucker, pop's 
David Crosby and punk rock's Iggy Pop, will appear in an episode of NBC's new 
drama series "Shannon's Deal," set to premiere this spring. Film director and 
writer John Sayles, who wrote the episode titled "Words to Music," will guest 
star as an abusive husband. 
Terry Kiser, Meagan Fay, Richard Kind, Jeremy Piven and Anita Barone have 
joined Carol Burnett as regular cast members of NBC's new half-hour comedy 
series, "Carol &amp; Company." The show, due this spring, will feature guest 
stars each week and be performed before an audience on a specially-built stage 
at Disney Studios. 
HBO's anthology "Tales From the Crypt," based on the 1940s comics of the same 
name, will return in March with 18 new stories of supernatural suspense, 
including an episode featuring actor Arnold Schwarzenegger's directorial debut. 
Returning to direct new episodes will be film veterans Richard Donner, Walter 
Hill and Robert Zemeckis. 
The cable channel TNT is developing a TV movie about the Chernobyl nuclear 
disaster. The drama will focus on the experiences of Robert Gale, an American 
doctor who went to the Soviet Union to help treat victims of the nuclear 
accident. 
George Burns, Bob Hope, Steve Allen, Sammy Davis Jr., Angie Dickinson, Herbie 
Hancock, Patti LaBelle, Smokey Robinson and Dionne Warwick all gathered around 
the Motown microphone to record "Forgotten Eyes," a song to benefit the 
degenerative eye disease Retinitis Pigmentosa. A music video of the recording 
session is expected to air on the cable music video channel VH-1. 
In March, the Disney Channel will introduce its first original weekly drama 
series, "Avonlea," based on the stories of Canadian author Lucy Maud 
Montgomery. The series stars 10-year-old Sarah Polley, Colleen Dewhurst and 
Patricia Hamilton. 
