MORNING BRIEFING: IT'S ANOTHER CHANCE TO HOLD COURT 
Tom Lasorda, who a few weeks ago was analyzing the Super Bowl on television, 
has turned to basketball. 
Last weekend, the Dodger manager sat on the bench with Coach Rollie Massimino 
and his Villanova team during its game against Georgetown. 
Massimino, who last summer served as a Dodger bat boy, had invited Lasorda to 
the game. 
But, according to Newsday's Sandy Kennan, Lasorda might have gotten his friend 
into trouble. 
A preseason memo, sent to the coaches by Big East Commissioner Dave Gavitt, 
stated that non-university personnel -- such as boosters, car dealers and 
celebrities -- were not to sit with the team during conference games. 
Georgetown Coach John Thompson, asked if it bothered him when Villanova fans 
chanted "S-A-T, S-A-T, S-A-T" when his players were at the free-throw line, 
said: 
"Not when my shooter is valedictorian of his high school class." 
Senior Jaren Jackson, who led the Hoyas to a 69-55 victory, was valedictorian 
at Walter Cohen High in New Orleans. 
How do you stop all the fighting in pro basketball? 
Brad Daugherty of the Cleveland Cavaliers says stiffer penalties may be an 
answer. He and Detroit's Bill Laimbeer were each suspended a game and fined 
$5,000 for fighting Jan. 27. 
But Daugherty thinks Laimbeer, who has a history of fighting, got off too 
lightly. 
"When it's a repeat offense, you have to do something, like start suspending 
somebody, for five games, 10 games," Daugherty told the Delaware County Daily 
Times. "Things like that." 
Before Wednesday night's game against the Houston Rockets, a professional 
hypnotherapist, Gil Boyne, appeared on Channel 4's early news to hypnotize any 
Clippers who might have been watching. 
Maybe it worked, since the Clippers won, 114-111. 
You might have seen that recent clip of Detroit's Isiah Thomas, strangling one 
of the Pistons' assistant coaches. 
The assistant, Brendan Malone, told David Aldridge of the Washington Post, what 
happened. 
Chicago's Bill Cartwright had just sent Thomas flying with an elbow, resulting 
in a cut near Thomas' eyebrow. 
When Malone came out on court to calm Thomas down, Thomas had a few choice 
words about Cartwright and then said words to the effect of "he makes me so mad 
I could . . . choke him." 
And that's what Thomas acted out on Malone, who never flinched. 
Malone said he knew he was in no danger, and that Thomas thanked him later for 
keeping him from getting ejected from of the game. 
Thrift Rift: Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher Jeff Robinson says that Syd Thrift, the 
team's general manager who was fired in October, was continually phoning 
Manager Jim Leyland in the dugout last season, second-guessing strategic moves. 
"This season is when you will get to see how good a manager Jim Leyland is," 
Robinson told the Washington (Pa.) Observer-Reporter. "He won't have Syd 
looking over his shoulder or calling him on the phone about why he bunted a man 
over in a certain situation." 
Asked if Leyland had resented Thrift's suggestions, Robinson said, "I know how 
I'd feel." 
Quotebook 
John McEnroe, on finding the proper intensity level: "I'm getting closer to the 
right door. There are 10 doors and I've tried about eight. Not one of them has 
opened, but I feel so close." 
