MORNING BRIEFING: HE'S LOOKING FOR LIGHT AT THE END OF TUNNEL 
Defenseman Rich Pilon of the New York Islanders was struck in the right eye by 
a shot from Detroit Red Wing Brent Fedyk on Nov. 4. The injury caused a scar to 
form over Pilon's retina and he is unable to focus on objects. 
NHL rules require that players have at least 20-70 vision in each eye and 
Pilon, from a medical perspective, has no vision in his right eye. 
Said Pilon, 21: "Sometimes I think to myself that I can get in awesome shape 
and be like Paul Coffey, be a star, and they'll have to let me play," he told 
the New York Post. "They're just stupid thoughts. 
"But if I get mad, I pump iron. You can't drown in your sorrows. When you do 
that, life's done and there are too many things in life, no matter how negative 
this is." 
Add NHL: Mike Smith, general manager of the Winnipeg Jets, on preseason tours 
of the Soviet Union by NHL teams: "I don't think, if you're trying to rebuild a 
hockey club, you should be doing it on the plains of the Ukraine." 
Last add NHL: Pat Burns, coach of the Adams Division's Montreal Canadiens, on 
the weakness of the Patrick Division: "Whoever comes out of our division has a 
ticket to the Stanley Cup finals." 
Trivia time: On Feb. 23, 1906, who won a 20-round decision over Marvin Hart in 
Los Angeles for the heavyweight boxing title? 
The real deal: Wally Backman, signed as a free agent by the Pittsburgh Pirates, 
says he won't miss playing for the Minnesota Twins. 
"After I was in the American League for a month, I knew that I only wanted to 
play in the National League," Backman said. 
"It wasn't because of the caliber of ball. It was just the way the game is 
played (in the American League). It's just sitting around, waiting for the big 
home run." 
Add real deal: Heavyweight champion Buster Douglas, visiting Las Vegas, said he 
favored that city as a fight site over Atlantic City, N.J. "I feel very 
comfortable here. Vegas is real; Atlantic City is just a carbon copy." 
Quiet . . . too quiet: Abe Lemons, Oklahoma City basketball coach, on the best 
way to distract a free-throw shooter: "What gets you is total quiet. Kids love 
to play with noise and a full house. That's the reason we didn't play well at 
Rice. There was never anyone there. 
"Try total quiet a few times. After having the noise reverberating in your ears 
all game, all of a sudden, it's quiet. That's tough." 
Trivia answer: Tommy Burns. 
Quotebook: Jimmy Connors, on recent criticism of John McEnroe's on-court 
behavior: "What's happened in the past has been far worse, not only from 
McEnroe, but from Connors and a lot of others. So why the fuss now?" GARR 
KLUENDER 
