VICTIM OF BURGLARY ACCUSED OF SEX CRIMES; 
INVESTIGATIONS: A DOWNEY MAN IS CHARGED WITH CHILD MOLESTATION AFTER A 
VIDEOTAPE STOLEN FROM HIS APARTMENT IS GIVEN TO THE ALLEGED VICTIM'S MOTHER. 
A Downey man was charged with molesting his 9-year-old neighbor after a burglar 
stole some video equipment from his apartment -- and a homemade, pornographic 
videotape taken in the theft ended up in the hands of the girl's mother. 
Ward Allen Rafay, 28, pleaded not guilty Wednesday to nine felony counts of 
committing lewd acts with a child and one felony count of possession of 
marijuana for sale, according to Downey Municipal Court documents. Rafay is 
being held in lieu of $50,000 bail pending a preliminary hearing on March 1, 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Dean Shotwell said Thursday. 
Rafay was arrested last Saturday after the girl's mother viewed a portion of 
the videotape and called police, said Downey Police Capt. Bob Williams. 
The tape allegedly showed Rafay fondling and performing oral sex acts on the 
girl. Rafay and the woman were friends and neighbors at the modest apartment 
complex on Neo Street, police and an apartment manager said. 
Rafay told police that his apartment had been broken into about two weeks ago 
and some video equipment had been stolen, Williams said. The tape apparently 
was in the equipment, police said. 
Williams said detectives are investigating the burglary of Rafay's apartment 
and how the mother obtained the tape. The mother's boyfriend told police that a 
friend of a friend bought a video camera from an unknown man and the tape was 
in it, according to court documents. They recognized the girl and turned it 
over to her mother. 
No one has been arrested in the burglary. 
"Everyone who is involved in this we'll talk to," Williams said. "Everyone is 
under investigation." 
Police also are investigating whether other neighborhood girls may have been 
molested. Williams said there is no evidence that Rafay was producing child 
pornography for sale. 
Apartment manager Sheri Romero said the arrest has monopolized conversation in 
the complex of yellow stucco apartments on Downey's West Side. 
Tall and slender at 6-foot-1 and 160 pounds, Rafay had lived in the apartment 
for about five years and did not attract much attention, Romero said. 
The alleged victim also had been living at the complex with her mother and four 
brothers and sisters for several years. They often visited Rafay. 
"The mother and (Rafay) were good friends," Romero said. "They used to go in 
(to Rafay's apartment) all the time." 
The alleged victim told police that Rafay paid her to engage in sexual acts and 
to keep quiet, according to court documents. 
Police found nine other videotapes when they searched Rafay's apartment, 
according to court documents. Five of them were adult pornography and the rest 
general entertainment. Police also seized about a pound of marijuana, according 
to court documents. 
If found guilty on all counts, Rafay would face 25 years in prison, Shotwell 
said. 
