CZECH PARTY POWER STRUGGLE HINTED; 
HESITATION, INDECISION SEEN IN CRACKDOWN ON DISSIDENTS 
The Communist authorities here have filed charges of "incitement" against 
Vaclav Havel, a prominent playwright who was arrested during a Jan. 16 street 
demonstration, thereby resolving, at least temporarily, an internal stalemate 
over the handling of the case. 
But the evident hesitation and indecision in the Communist leadership suggested 
a party power struggle may be building as officials grapple with mounting 
international pressure to relax their hard-line stance against dissidents. 
Havel was arrested with 15 other activists in Prague's central Wenceslas Square 
when he tried to lay flowers to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the death 
of Jan Palach, a student. Palach set himself on fire Jan. 16, 1969, to protest 
the Soviet-led invasion that ended the "Prague Spring" reforms of 1968. Most of 
those arrested were released, although 10 activists of the Charter 77 human 
rights organization were charged with "hooliganism." 
Havel, however, as the most prominent of the dissidents, has been kept in 
Ruzyne Prison while the authorities have attempted to work out a strategy to 
deal with an arrest -- and now perhaps a highly publicized trial -- that many 
of them wish had been avoided altogether. 
Havel, whose works have long been banned, was also charged with obstructing 
police. The incitement charge carries a maximum penalty of two years in jail, 
and the obstruction charge a maximum of six months. No date was set for the 
trial, which is expected to be conducted behind closed doors. 
Criticism from Conference 
Havel's arrest, and the harsh police action that met the demonstrators last 
month, brought sharp criticism from the international human rights conference 
in Vienna, where Czechoslovakia was one of 35 nations agreeing to a broad 
package of rights and freedoms set down by the conference. The criticism came 
only days after Czechoslovakia joined in signing the rights document. 
The memorial observances for Palach began the day before Havel's arrest and 
continued for three days afterward, spurred on in part, activists say, by the 
forceful police action, which seemed to have been planned well in advance. 
The riot police used water cannon, tear gas, dogs and truncheons to break up 
the demonstrations, the most sustained series of street protests in the country 
for nearly 20 years. 
Police rounded up hundreds of demonstrators, including some bystanders who were 
not participants, and herded them into police vans and buses. Those not singled 
out for interrogation were driven miles outside of Prague, where they were let 
out of the buses and told to walk home. 
Most of the other activists arrested with Havel were charged with hooliganism, 
which could bring maximum penalties of two years in jail. 
In the aftermath of the protests, no party official has stood up to claim 
responsibility for the heavy-handed police action, a silence that is taken by 
some diplomats and other observers as an indication of the shock that was 
registered over the events even inside the government and the party. 
Party leader Milos Jakes, the hard-nosed apparatchik who presided over the 
post-1968 party purges, has remained silent on the issue, along with the rest 
of the party leadership, allowing the official parliamentary committees to 
characterize the dissidents as "hooligans" who "only disrupt the economic and 
social rhythm in the center town." 
Many Prague observers believe the heavy police action was ordered by Miroslav 
Stepan, the Prague party leader, often mentioned as a potential successor to 
Jakes, who has held the job for just over a year and could be ousted in a party 
congress next year if the oddly muffled turbulence within the party continues. 
"It is very hard to know what they are doing," said Jiri Dienstbier, a 
prominent dissident and journalist, "but it is obvious there is confusion and 
consternation. 
"In fact, they have nothing to do -- they have come to the limits of their 
possibilities. Now they have Havel in jail for nearly one month. If they go 
ahead with a trial, they can be sure there will be more demonstrations. And if 
he continues to be in jail, it will bring a continuing flood of petitions and 
protests, and it may win for Havel the Nobel Prize -- he has been mentioned as 
a serious candidate." 
'It's Preposterous' 
"I think they are lost, bankrupt," says Martin Palous, who was arrested a day 
after Havel and has been charged with hooliganism. "It's preposterous. They 
charged Havel with incitement because he lays flowers in the street! What they 
are doing has nothing in common with reality. It is the style of the 1950s. 
They speak about more democracy and openness, but they do not accept the 
consequences." 
The spectacle of police arrayed in massive numbers around Wenceslas Square for 
seven days in a row shocked many Prague residents, who had assumed that such 
pointed displays of state force had passed out of favor. 
"I cannot understand it," said a woman who works as a cashier in a shop on the 
square. "There was no necessity for the police, for their water hoses and the 
dogs. People were completely peaceful." 
A petition has circulated among Prague's leading movie and television actors, 
protesting Havel's arrest. The petition has continued to gather the signatures 
of Czechoslovakia's performers, writers and intellectuals, significantly 
including those who have not been active before in dissident circles. 
Perhaps more important than the public reaction was the dismay felt by some 
government bureaucrats and middle-level officials, who told some Czechoslovak 
friends that the police action was uncalled for and that the government had 
made a tactical error in arresting Havel. 
The government could have backed down by releasing Havel after a 48-hour 
detention period -- a measure frequently employed against dissidents here -- 
but its decision to hold onto him is viewed by diplomats as a sign of serious 
disarray in the party. 
"They have to decide soon which why they are going to move," said an East 
European diplomat. "Jakes will always follow Moscow -- but what does Moscow 
want? He'll always be a loyal party man -- but what does the party want? These 
things are no longer so clear to the Czech leadership, and they are going to 
have to be sorted out soon." 
A Central Committee meeting of the party in March may be pivotal for the 
leadership as it tries to find the answers to those questions and apportion the 
blame for the trouble brought by Havel's arrest. 
"We have no idea which way it is going to go," fellow dissident Palous said. 
"You think they have to change, but it is not sure. I have been caught up in 
this machinery. It is like a blind force going forward, and it is hard to stop 
it when it gets moving." 
