ROCKWELL CHIEF WINS TOP ENGINEER'S AWARD; 
3 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA PROJECTS ALSO HONORED DURING ANNUAL OBSERVANCE OF 
ENGINEERS WEEK 
Los Angeles' observance of National Engineers Week, which coincides yearly with 
the birth date of George Washington, culminated with the awarding of honors and 
citations last week for engineering achievements and commemoration of two 
milestone events. 
Nationally, engineers drew praise for their profession from President Bush, who 
stated that "America's engineers have always played a vitally important role in 
developing America's way of life and standards of living. 
"From constructing bridges and highways to exploring the vast earth beneath us, 
American engineers are helping America to keep America moving and safe." 
The observance, initiated in 1951 by the National Society of Professional 
Engineers, also honors the first President as a surveyor and military and 
agricultural engineer. 
Locally, a weeklong series of events culminated with a presentation of awards 
for outstanding engineering events from the past year, with participation by 
local societies under the co-sponsorship of Institute for the Advancement of 
Engineering and the American Society of Civil Engineers. 
Made Major Contributions 
Donald R. Beall, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of Rockwell 
International Corp., El Segundo, received the George Washington Award for 
"Engineer of the Year, Southern California." 
As a key executive of one of the nation's largest technological organizations, 
Beall has made major contributions to the advancement of space flight, advanced 
aircraft design and the development of sophisticated systems. 
A practicing engineer, Beall has applied his skills to a wide range of 
programs, including the space shuttle, B-1 bomber, Peacekeeper intercontinental 
ballistic missile, Freedom (space) Station, and satellites. He also served as 
chairman of the Aerospace Industry Assn. during 1987. 
Three projects were chosen by the institute to receive Engineering Project 
Achievement Awards: 
Intermodal Container Transfer Facility, the world's largest computerized 
container transfer yard for international cargo, was developed with the Ports 
of Los Angeles and Long Beach under a joint powers authority and operated by 
Southern Pacific Transportation Co. 
Saves on Oil 
Kern County Cogeneration Project, near Bakersfield, the largest grass-roots 
co-generation plant in the United States, produces a net saving of 7,500 
barrels per day of crude oil compared to the system it replaced, and produces 
enough electricity for half a million households. It is a joint venture of 
Southern California Edison's Kern River Cogeneration Co. and Texaco Inc.; Fluor 
Daniel Inc. of Irvine has turnkey responsibility for the energy enhancement 
project. 
Ultra High Bypass Demonstrator, a company-owned Douglas MD-80 aircraft, has 
been equipped with advanced-technology propulsion systems, a major breakthrough 
in aviation efficiency developed by McDonnell Douglas Corp., Long Beach. 
Distinguished Engineering Achievement merit awards were presented to Robert S. 
Horii, city engineer of Los Angeles and to William B. Johnson, automation 
consultant for Rocketdyne division of Rockwell International, Canoga Park. 
Resolutions also honored the following for community service achievements: 
Mayor Jacki Bacharach of Rancho Palos Verdes; Albert L. Baietti, ICN 
Biomedicals Inc., Irvine; James F. Foxworthy, professor of civil engineering, 
Loyola-Marymount University; Dale B. Hartman, executive director, Institute for 
Manufacturing and Automation Research, Los Angeles; Jim C. Hoover, vice 
president, manufacturing technology, Northrop Corp., Hawthorne, the Frank E. 
Reeves International Interprofessional Memorial Award; John D. McDonnell of 
Douglas Aircraft Co., Long Beach; William M. Schoenfeld, architect and deputy 
executive director of the Los Angeles Department of Airports and Harold H. 
Wilson, TRW Electronic and Defense Division, Redondo Beach. 
Also noted were the 75th anniversary of the Los Angeles section of the American 
Society of Civil Engineers and the 75th anniversary of the first Los Angeles 
Aqueduct, a landmark engineering accomplishment. 
