3 MAJOR SOCIAL BILLS OFF TO FAST START; 
BACKERS CHALLENGE 'KINDER' BUSH TO FAVOR BLOCKED LEGISLATION 
Congressional backers of major social legislation that was blocked by 
Republican-led filibusters last fall are challenging President Bush to show his 
"kinder, gentler" side by quickly endorsing an increase in the federal minimum 
wage, a family and medical leave bill and a compromise child care bill. 
Pushed by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), chairman of the Senate Labor and 
Human Resources Committee, and several key Republicans, the three measures are 
off to a fast start in the new session of Congress. 
Backers said they expect Bush to give positive signals on the legislation next 
Thursday when he will go to Capitol Hill to announce his program and revisions 
in the budget submitted by former President Ronald Reagan last month. 
Even without Bush's support, however, the prospects for passage of some 
variations of the three measures were regarded as better than they have been in 
years. 
'Less Ideological President' 
"We are out of a very strong ideological period (under Ronald Reagan), and we 
have a less ideological President, judging by his Cabinet appointments," 
Kennedy said in an interview. 
The measures last year were blocked by conservatives who charged they would add 
to business costs, cause elimination of some jobs and make U.S. businesses less 
competitive. 
Introducing a family and medical leave bill Thursday, Sen. Christopher J. Dodd 
(D-Conn.) said it was essential to provide a way for working parents to take 
time off for family and medical emergencies without losing their jobs. 
"This is an idea whose time has come," Dodd said. Sen. Bob Packwood (R-Ore.) 
indirectly prodded Bush by saying: "We are trying to provide a kinder, gentler 
atmosphere in this country." 
Rep. Marge Roukemma (R-N.J.), sponsor of a similar bill in the House, added: 
"Republicans must go beyond lip service in our devotion to family values" and 
predicted at least tacit support of the measure by the Bush Administration. 
Dodd's bill would require employers of 20 or more workers to grant up to 10 
weeks of unpaid leave in event of childbirth, adoption or serious illness of a 
child. It would require up to 13 weeks of unpaid time off in the event of an 
employee's serious illness. 
Kennedy said another bill to raise the $3.35-an-hour minimum wage to $4.65 an 
hour in three steps would be approved next Wednesday by his committee, in the 
hope that Bush would take a position soon and the Senate then could be "ready 
for action" in March. 
A similar measure -- but with a $4.55 maximum rate -- was blocked by a 
filibuster in the Senate after Reagan threatened to veto the bill. It still 
faces massive opposition from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and other business 
groups. 
While Bush called for a higher minimum wage in the election campaign, he has 
not mentioned a figure and said it would have to be accompanied by a "training 
wage" below the proposed rate for new workers -- a feature strongly opposed by 
organized labor. 
"We will increase the minimum wage in this Congress," Kennedy said in an 
interview. "I hope we'll do it with the Administration's support, but we can do 
without it, if necessary." 
Kennedy already has met with Minority Leader Bob Dole (R-Kan.) and previewed 
his legislative timetable with White House officials in hopes that the 
Administration will prepare alternatives to bills marked for fast-track 
consideration in the Senate. 
After the minimum wage bill and the family and medical leave bill, the Senate 
Labor Committee hopes to get bipartisan agreement on more controversial child 
care legislation. In this area, Bush is expected to endorse use of the tax code 
to allocate payments of up to $1,000 to working parents for day care of their 
children. Dodd, with some backing from key conservative Sen. Orrin G. Hatch 
(R-Utah), has proposed a program costing up to $2.5 billion a year that would 
establish federal standards for child care centers as well as channel federal 
funds to lower-income working families. 
Asked where the funds would be found for expanded social programs in view of 
the massive federal deficit, Kennedy said that if Bush drops the idea of 
increasing the defense budget by 2% after offsetting any inflation, it would 
free $8 billion for other purposes. 
TESTING BUSH'S 'KINDER, GENTLER' VISION 
 Highlights of three major bills being readied by Democrats and Republican 
allies for early congressional action this year: 
MINIMUM WAGE -- An increase from the present $3.35 hourly rate to $4.65 in 
three stages, with an exemption for smaller business firms and adjustments in 
the tip credit allowed for hotel and restaurant owners. Senate Labor Committee 
approval expected next week. 
FAMILY, MEDICAL LEAVE -- Requires firms with more than 20 employees (50 
employees in the House version) to provide up to 10 weeks of unpaid leave to 
workers with more than a year's service in case of childbirth, adoption or 
serious illness of a child or elderly parent. Introduced in Senate Thursday. 
CHILD CARE -- Authorizes $2.5 billion a year to aid low-income working families 
with child care expenses and sets minimum health and safety standards for child 
care programs supported by public funds. Introduced in Senate last month. 
