JAPANESE FIRM OFFERS STATE O.C.-L.A. COMMUTER TRAIN 
A Japanese firm told state legislators Friday that it is willing to pay for a 
$30-million-per-mile, magnetically levitated commuter rail line connecting 
downtown Los Angeles, Orange County and the San Fernando Valley in exchange for 
rights of way along freeway medians and an exclusive operating agreement. 
Eiji Ikeda, general manager of HSST Corp., told a joint hearing of the Senate 
Transportation and Appropriations committees here that a five-mile 
demonstration project on the Santa Ana Freeway between Santa Ana and Anaheim 
could operate within 18 months of approval. 
Ikeda said the sleek, aerodynamic train would resemble a demonstration model 
used at Expo '86 in Vancouver, B.C., Canada and could move millions of 
commuters each year to urban centers and both Los Angeles International and 
John Wayne airports at speeds ranging from 60 to 200 m.p.h. 
Pressed on whether financing would be available for a full, 155.6-mile loop 
around Southern California, Ikeda said, "Money is very much available in Japan, 
especially right now." 
Reaction to Ikeda's proposal by state and federal officials ranged from 
skepticism to cautious enthusiasm. Ikeda acknowledged that although his and 
other foreign firms have developed magnetically levitated commuter trains, 
which ride above a rail guideway by electromagnetic force, none is operating 
yet except on test tracks or at exhibitions. 
Ikeda said that fares on a completed Southern California system would be less 
than what Amtrak charges for traveling similar distances, such as the $9 
one-way ticket price between Santa Ana and Los Angeles. 
Ikeda said his firm wants to build the five-mile demonstration link in Orange 
County to "show everyone that it works." 
He added that his firm needs assurances from the state that the environmental 
clearance process would be speeded up (but not waived). In addition, HSST would 
need Caltrans' donation of rights of way along the Santa Ana, Golden State and 
San Diego freeways. 
Where medians are not available, Ikeda said, the trains could use freeway 
shoulders and air space above freeway lanes. 
It was environmental concerns that largely doomed a 1981 proposal for a 
steel-wheeled, high-speed Bullet Train from Los Angeles to San Diego. The HSST 
is "free of air and noise pollution, aesthetically pleasing, economical, 
reliable, safe, requires less energy consumption than other systems," Ikeda 
testified. 
The Japanese proposal surprised the two senators in attendance at Friday's 
hearing -- Robert Presley (D-Riverside), chairman of the Senate Appropriations 
Committee, and Reuben Ayala (D-Chino), a committee member. 
After joking with Ikeda about how fast the company might be able to build a 
system, Presley said, "It's good to learn that this technology is available to 
draw on." 
After the hearing, Presley supported the concept of a five-mile demonstration 
project and called HSST's technology "far advanced." 
However, he cautioned that the firm's request for speedy environmental 
clearances would be difficult to grant, but added that a successful legislative 
package he sponsored for construction of new state prisons included provisions 
that hastened the environmental review process. 
"I have to go back to the experience we had with the Bullet Train," said 
Caltrans' assistant director Warren Weber. "Any proposal like this one has to 
go through the California and the federal environmental processes, since the 
highways are owned by the state and the federal government. It's plausible to 
work it out, but I'm not sure they (HSST Corp.) have studied carefully enough 
all of the bridges and overpasses that might have to be reconstructed to 
accommodate their train system." 
Ron Scolaro, Amtrak's chief administrator for government affairs, said he did 
not fully understand Ikeda's presentation but found it "interesting." 
"He didn't talk about how much money it's going to take to operate the system 
after it's built," Scolaro said. "I think there's a place for both" Amtrak and 
a new commuter rail service, Scolaro said, adding, "I just don't know if he 
(Ikeda) can pull it off. It's going to be awfully difficult. It's going to cost 
an awful lot of money." 
HSST Corp. is bidding against other companies, including a German firm, for a 
$100-million, five-mile commuter rail project in Las Vegas. 
Ikeda said his company is not seeking the contract for the $4-billion, Las 
Vegas-Anaheim high-speed train project because costs are expected to be higher 
than those projected by the California-Nevada Super Speed Train Commission, a 
bi-state agency that is overseeing the privately funded effort. 
However, Ikeda said he sees his firm competing with others for construction of 
a six-city monorail system that has been proposed for central Orange County. He 
revealed that he recently met with Santa Ana Mayor Daniel H. Young and other 
city officials. 
The Bidder: HSST Corp. 
Founded in 1985. Principal business is building magnetically levitated trains 
-- vehicles that hover above their tracks on a cushion of electromagnetic force 
at speeds of between 60 and 200 m.p.h. 
An offshoot of Japan Airlines, which began studying "mag-lev" trains in 1974 as 
an alternative to airliners. Financed by a group of more than a dozen Japanese 
companies, including Seibu Railway Co. and Hazama-Gumi Ltd. 
Was selected by the Wall Street Journal as one of the companies of the 1990s 
and beyond that will lead advances in technology. 
Current projects include a bid to build a five-mile "mag-lev" system in Las 
Vegas. 
