NO BARRIER; 
TRUCK CAREENS OFF FREEWAY, HITS 2 HOUSES 
North Hollywood residents renewed their pleas Wednesday for a sound barrier 
along the Hollywood Freeway after a tractor-trailer truck carrying hazardous 
waste careened off the road and plowed into two houses. 
"We've been fighting this thing for years, trying to get a barrier," said Diana 
Cobb, who lives next to one of the damaged houses. "Now maybe they'll listen." 
No one was hurt in the accident, which occurred north of Saticoy Street shortly 
after 10 p.m. Tuesday. California Highway Patrol investigators said they 
believe the driver of the 18-wheel flatbed truck loaded with containers of used 
asbestos insulation drifted onto the freeway shoulder, hit a parked car and 
crashed down an embankment. 
The driver fled after asking the startled resident of one of the damaged houses 
on Babcock Avenue to call 911 for help, CHP Officer Randy Klucker said. 
Compton Firm's Truck 
The truck is registered to J. Cal Transportation of Compton, Klucker said. But 
investigators could not immediately determine who was driving the truck, he 
said, adding that their inquiry is continuing. 
The vehicle was removed from the back yards of the two houses Wednesday morning 
after the Los Angeles County Health Department determined that none of the 
sealed asbestos containers had opened in the accident, Klucker said. 
After years of complaining to various agencies without results, the North 
Hollywood Residents Assn. formed a coalition last July to push for freeway 
sound walls in its community. Their plan included the Hollywood Freeway section 
that was the scene of Tuesday night's accident, said Bob Brice, a Babcock 
Avenue resident and association member. 
"We've always known this could happen, but we certainly hoped it wouldn't 
happen," Brice said. "We didn't want to wait for a tragedy before we did 
something." 
William Minter, a state Department of Transportation engineer, said a block or 
poured concrete sound wall probably would not have prevented the accident. 
"It hit so hard, had there been a wall there, there would have been a wall and 
a truck in those houses," he said. 
Guardrail Study 
Minter said Caltrans will study whether a guardrail would help the area where 
the truck left the freeway. But he said Caltrans' research has shown that 
guardrails sometimes make accident situations worse. 
Neighbors said they would welcome a guardrail, but they still believe a sound 
wall would have slowed the truck. 
"We need both of them," Brice said. 
The truck flew through Sam Yacharn's back yard, leaving holes in the back of 
his house and skid marks on his chimney, then landed in Rolando Manasala's 
kitchen. It could not be immediately determined how much it will cost to repair 
the two stucco houses in the 7800 block of Babcock Avenue. 
"I heard a big boom, you know," said Manasala, who was watching television when 
the crash occurred. "I told my wife, 'It's a big earthquake coming down.' " 
Swing Set in Kitchen 
When Manasala entered his kitchen, he saw rubble and glass and twisted metal, 
which turned out to be Yacharn's back-yard swing set. But he didn't see the 
truck. 
"Then I heard a voice that said, 'Anybody home? I need help,' " he said. "It 
was the truck driver." 
Manasala could not get a dial tone on his telephone, so he left to use a 
neighbor's phone. When he returned home a few minutes later, he said, the truck 
driver was gone. 
The houses on Babcock Avenue were built a decade after the freeway opened in 
1968. Proposals for sound walls in that area became mired in a power struggle 
between Caltrans and the Los Angeles City Planning Department, Brice said. 
Caltrans' Minter said the city is at fault for allowing a developer to build 
next to the freeway without requiring sound barriers. But Rick Kunz, field 
deputy for Councilman Joel Wachs, said no precedent exists for the city to get 
involved with freeway sound-wall decisions. 
