OPENING THE DOOR FOR CARCINOGENS; 
ASSAULTS ON NATION'S FOOD-SAFETY LAWS MULTIPLY 
As conservationist William K. Reilly takes over as Environmental Protection 
Agency administrator, the agency is embarking on a new policy that opens the 
nation's food supplies to a multitude of carcinogenic pesticides. Announced in 
the waning days of the Reagan Administration, this policy gives the highly 
politicized EPA broad discretion to allow contamination of food with 
carcinogenic residues of "negligible risk." The policy has already been 
exercised in recent EPA decisions allowing continued use on fruits and 
vegetables of the carcinogenic growth regulator Alar and the fungicide captan. 
Before the new EPA policy, carcinogenic pesticides in food were regulated under 
dual standards of the 1954 Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act. Residues on raw 
agricultural commodities were subject to discretionary tolerances in accordance 
with commercial benefit considerations of the Federal Insecticide Fungicide and 
Rodenticide Act. But, under a 1958 amendment, the so-called Delaney clause, 
there was an absolute ban -- zero tolerance -- on residues in processed foods, 
regardless of commercial benefits. 
The scientific basis for Delaney has been under concerted attack by the 
agrichemical industry since its enactment; it has been repeatedly examined by 
committees and authorities with expertise in carcinogenesis, which have 
unequivocally concluded that there is no way of setting safe levels for any 
carcinogen. 
In deliberate violation of that law, EPA has failed to ban residues of most 
carcinogenic pesticides, particularly those registered before 1978, in 
processed foods. The agency asserts that the pesticides had not been adequately 
tested, although their continued use was made conditional on such retesting by 
1972 amendments to the pesticide law. 
To resolve its dilemma, the EPA adopted the new standard allowing "negligible 
risk" tolerances for all carcinogenic pesticides on all foods. The basis for 
this standard was largely derived from a 1987 report by the National Academy of 
Sciences, which was funded and dominated by agrichemical and food industry 
interests to the near exclusion of expertise in cancer prevention. 
The new policy trivializes cancer prevention for the sake of a marketplace 
definition of pesticide "benefits." The negligible-risk standard is targeted 
only at residues of "active" ingredients of individual pesticides. It does not 
take into consideration the substantial risks from carcinogenic inert pesticide 
ingredients, contaminants and impurities that may not have been disclosed. Nor 
does it consider the cumulative and unpredictable effectsof numerous 
carcinogenic pesticides in the total diet, in drinking water and in the air. 
This policy also ignores risks from carcinogenic food additives, coal-tar dye 
colors, animal-feed additives, including hormones, and food-wrapping chemicals 
and contaminants, which the FDA allows in food in flagrant contravention of the 
law. 
More fundamentally, the negligible-risk policy is based on quantitative risk 
assessment, which attempts to estimate cancer risks to humans from animal 
tests. Quantitative risk assessment is at best a pseudoscience and at worst a 
smoke screen for the numbers used to prop up politically predetermined 
decisions, such as EPA's recent downgrading of risk estimates for the herbicide 
2,4-D, the termite insecticide chlordane and the contaminant 2,3,7,8-dioxin, 
the most potent known carcinogen. The results of risk assessment for any 
carcinogen can vary up to 10 million-fold, depending on which mathematical 
model is arbitrarily selected for assessment. 
Finally, the new standard is a powerful disincentive to reduce the 
1-billion-pound annual agricultural pesticide usage, and a disincentive to the 
development and application of alternative pest management or organic farming 
methods. 
EPA's failure to implement the pesticide food-safety law must be corrected, and 
the law must not be emasculated, as it would be by the new policy and by past 
legislation introduced by Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles) and Sen. Edward 
M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), now slated for reintroduction in Congress. 
Instead, the Delaney law must be strengthened and uniformly applied to all 
carcinogenic pesticide ingredients in processed foods. Tolerances on raw 
agricultural commodities must be progressively reduced with a mandated zero 
goal. Until then, state and local initiatives must be developed to protect 
consumers, including right-to-know laws on pesticide use and residues, and 
supermarket residue-testing and certification programs. 
The nation is losing the war against cancer, which has reached epidemic 
proportions, now striking one in three people. Consumers nationwide will expect 
Congress and the Bush Administration to take early and vigorous action to 
ensure that we can eat safely while reducing our substantial risks of 
preventable cancer. 
