EFFECT OF CALCIUM, EXERCISE, ESTROGEN IN PREVENTING OSTEOPOROSIS STUDIED 
With the help of a color computer monitor and a machine called a dual photon 
absorptiometer, Gail Dalsky, an exercise physiologist, can tell women things 
about themselves they probably never knew, or even thought about. 
The machine measures bone density, yielding important information that can 
determine whether a person is at risk of developing osteoporosis, a potentially 
disabling disease that primarily strikes women after menopause. 
Osteoporosis is caused by the loss of bone density resulting from the sharp 
decline of estrogen production after menopause, which usually occurs between 
age 45 and 55. Bones are weakened and become susceptible to fracture. 
Dalsky and Dr. Jo-Anne Smith, director of the Osteoporosis Center at the 
University of Connecticut Medical Center in Farmington, are conducting a study 
on the effects of calcium, estrogen and exercise on bone density and are 
looking for evidence that osteoporosis can be prevented. The study is being 
conducted on women who had their final menstrual period more than three months 
earlier, but less than five years ago. 
"We know that estrogen stops bone loss. And we know that in certain 
populations, exercise will help to a small extent," said Dalsky, who has a 
doctorate in exercise physiology from Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. 
"What hasn't been done, especially in the early post-menopausal woman or in any 
study, is to use both treatments." 
While it is recommended that women get the recommended amount of calcium in 
their diet, taking calcium supplements alone will not prevent osteoporosis. 
When calcium supplements are combined with estrogen supplements, they seem to 
make the estrogen more effective in strengthening bone, Dalsky said. 
An unrelated study of osteoporosis by Yale University researchers shows that 
women taking the hormone Calcitonin by nasal spray are maintaining bone mass. 
The women in the University of Connecticut study will be placed in four groups. 
One group will receive calcium only, another will receive calcium and will 
exercise, another will take estrogen and calcium and the fourth will get a 
combination of calcium, estrogen and exercise, Dalsky said. The researchers 
hope to have 120 volunteers. 
"We hope that by combining exercise with the estrogen, a woman who is low in 
bone mass upon entry into the study can maintain her bone mass, and that with 
the combination of exercise and estrogen, we can reduce her risk of fracture by 
making her bones stronger. That's the goal," Dalsky said. 
The gradual loss of bone is painless until a fall or bump causes a fracture. 
Nearly 250,000 hip fractures occur each year that are related to osteoporosis, 
according to the National Osteoporosis Foundation. These fractures can leave a 
person permanently disabled. 
The disease is also responsible for the "dowager's hump" that some elderly 
women have, which is the result of numerous small fractures of the vertebrae. 
Since bone is lost as a result of the aging process, men can also develop the 
disease, but for them it does not usually occur until they reach their late 70s 
or 80s. 
Bone density is measured using the dual photon absorptiometer. The patient lies 
flat on her back while a mechanical arm moves along her body, pausing at 
certain points. A camera emits a small amount of radiation, the same amount of 
background radiation that occurs naturally in this area. 
A computer printout shows the distinct outline of a hip bone socket known as 
the proximal femur, and another shows the lower vertebrae that intersect with 
the pelvis. These areas are of particular interest to the researchers. 
"Because of the type of bone that is predominantly in the spine, it is more 
susceptible to the loss of estrogen," Dalsky said. "Often we will see decreases 
in the spine before we see decreases in another body part." 
Even though it is normal to lose some bone mass with age, she said, "in 
athletes and people who exercise, we've found they tend to have a higher bone 
density at the hip than they do at the spine. In people who don't exercise, the 
density in each is about the same. 
"For instance, my bone density at the spine is 96-97% (normal), and at the hip 
it's about 10% above normal because I exercise," she said, adding that 
weight-bearing exercise such as walking, jogging, stair-climbing and 
weight-training have been shown to have beneficial effects on increasing bone 
mass. 
Dalsky said bones respond to exercise the same way that muscles do. "If a 
muscle isn't exercised, it atrophies. If it is exercised, it gets stronger and 
so does bone. It becomes stronger by adding more mineral to the bone," Dalsky 
said. 
"Our study is interested in not only keeping good bone in the spine, but also 
in the hip, because hip fracture is what causes a lot of disability in people. 
About 50% of people who suffer hip fractures do not resume a normal life. They 
are wheelchair-bound or unable to live alone, so we are interested in building 
bone, both at the spine and the hip," Dalsky said. 
There are other factors that are believed to make a person susceptible to 
osteoporosis, according to the osteoporosis foundation: Women who are thin and 
small-framed are at greater risk than heavier women. Women who experience early 
menopause may be more likely to develop osteoporosis than other women. Asian 
and Caucasian women are more prone to developing the disease than black women, 
although it is not known why. Calcium deficiency in childhood and early 
adulthood can also increase the risk. Heredity also plays a role. 
Angenette Rienow, 49, a financial secretary who lives in Farmington, Conn., is 
a volunteer in the University of Connecticut study, which began this past 
summer. 
"I've never had any health problems whatsoever, and the little I know about 
osteoporosis is that slender people are more affected, and I've been slender 
all my life," she said. 
So far, she has had her bone density examined and her cholesterol checked. She 
has undergone stress tests on a treadmill to determine her level of fitness and 
kept a diary of her eating habits, and she is taking calcium supplements. In 
the next few weeks, she will be assigned to a test group. 
"I just thought this would be a good opportunity to find out my physical 
condition, as well as hopefully prevent (disease) from occurring," Rienow said. 
She is not particularly worried about developing the disease, and she has never 
known anyone who has it. "But I don't exercise at all. I hear all the things 
about the importance of exercising, and I am just not self-disciplined enough 
to do it. I'm hoping that I get in the exercise group because I really want to 
exercise. I'm a very committed person so if I get in the exercise group, I will 
be there three or four times a week to exercise." 
Smith said regular exercise for younger women will help keep bones strong, but 
she stressed that overdoing it can have serious ramifications. 
"We've all heard about women who exercise so strenuously that their menstrual 
periods stop for some time. And that's dangerous because they lose the 
protection of estrogen and they become susceptible to fracture much earlier in 
life," she said. 
The study may ultimately show that women who use a moderate exercise program up 
to and beyond the age of menopause can offset bone loss. 
The women in the study will have a program of brisk walking and climbing stairs 
three times a week in a supervised setting, Smith says. "We have a feeling that 
will be enough to maintain bone mass, something that is definitely doable for 
women in that age range," she said. 
