BUSH ENGAGES IN 'SUMMITS' ON MIDEAST; 
'NO NEW INITIATIVES' AS HE MEETS ISRAELIS, ARABS, OTHER LEADERS 
President Bush, on the first day of his Far East visit, plunged into a series 
of mini-summits with Israeli and Arab leaders, as the United States suggested 
that new Soviet initiatives in the Middle East are merely "rhetorical 
exercises." 
Against the backdrop of an imperial Japanese funeral, Bush conferred with 
Jordan's King Hussein, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Israeli President 
Chaim Herzog. Bush pledged that the United States will take an active role in 
the search for peace in the region. 
Reporting on the talks, Secretary of State James A. Baker III said there are 
"perhaps some opportunities out there with respect to the Middle East peace 
process that haven't existed before." 
In particular, Baker noted that the United States has opened talks with the 
Palestine Liberation Organization, which Washington had shunned for years as a 
terrorist group. 
Baker said Bush did not offer any new U.S. initiatives in the Middle East. 
To Attend Funeral 
On his first overseas journey as President, Bush will attend the funeral Friday 
of Japanese Emperor Hirohito, who died of cancer Jan. 7 at the age of 87. 
Bush today held private talks with a handful of other world leaders, including 
French President Francois Mitterrand, Portuguese Prime Minister Mario Soares, 
Japanese Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita and Prime Minister Chatichai 
Choonhavan of Thailand. 
It was Bush's talks with Hussein, Mubarak and Herzog that provided a 
counterpoint to the 10-day trip through the Middle East by Soviet Foreign 
Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, who is trying to advance Moscow's role in the 
region. 
Baker said "it's healthy, quite frankly, that the Soviet Union would be 
interested in contributing to the cause of peace in the Middle East." 
'Rhetorical Exercises' 
He added: "I suppose we would want to know that there were concrete 
contributions that they have in mind, rather than simply rhetorical exercises." 
Challenging Moscow to "contribute in a concrete way," Baker said the Soviet 
Union should establish full diplomatic relations with Israel and "cease its 
support of radical countries in the Middle East region such as Libya." 
He said Moscow also could exercise influence with Syria. 
