SINKING UNITS HAVE FALLEN 40% IN VALUE, JURORS TOLD 
An appraiser for homeowners in the Los Angeles Community Redevelopment Agency's 
sinking Monterey Hills housing complex said in court Monday that buildings in 
the Eaton Crest section of the subdivision have decreased in value by more than 
40% since their construction in 1981. 
The appraiser, James O'Donnell, was the last of 24 witnesses called by 
attorneys for the homeowners in a Los Angeles Superior Court trial that has 
already lasted more than four months. The trial is to determine the loss of 
value and cost to repair 164 townhouses and condominiums that the Eaton Crest 
Homeowners Assn. contends are built on improperly compacted fill. 
The lawsuit was brought by more than 200 homeowners and Security Pacific 
National Bank, the bond trustee on their mortgages. It is the second suit of 
five to go to trial, all brought by homeowner associations against the 
Community Redevelopment Agency and private firms involved in building the 
project. The suits were filed after homes in the development began tilting and 
cracking several years ago. 
Since other homeowners living in the same area as Eaton Crest have also filed 
suit, the trial may affect the course of other litigation yet to be heard. 
Drake Terrace Settlement 
The first suit brought by Monterey Hills homeowners against the CRA was settled 
last year when the agency agreed to pay Drake Terrace homeowners $6 million and 
to spend $3 million to repair their damaged homes. Drake Terrace is built on 
fill different from Eaton Crest's. 
Joel B. Castro, the homeowners' attorney, said he is building his case on the 
testimony of expert witnesses, city officials and homeowners. 
He has said that he will prove that Eaton Crest homes are steadily sinking and 
that CRA plans to repair them are inadequate. He has also said he will prove 
that the homes have decreased and will continue to decrease significantly in 
value. 
Eaton Crest and another section of the 1,600-unit complex, Temple Terrace, sit 
on what once was Pullman Canyon. At its maximum depth, the canyon is filled 
with more than 120 feet of dirt, which has settled rapidly and unevenly. Since 
the early 1980s, cracks and other structural faults have appeared in some 
buildings built on the fill. 
In testimony Monday, O'Donnell estimated that the fair market value of the 164 
Eaton Crest homes today is $10.4 million, more than $9.6 million less than 
their value in an undamaged condition. 
Repair Costs 
Earlier in the trial, three expert witnesses called by the defense estimated 
the Eaton Crest buildings would cost $18.3 million to repair. Attorneys for the 
homeowners are seeking damages to cover at least part of the loss of value and 
the cost to repair the homes. 
The homeowners' case rests in large part on whether their attorneys can 
persuade a jury and Superior Court Judge Eli Chernow that land underneath the 
subdivision will continue to settle. Witnesses for the homeowners have 
testified that it will. The seven defendants in the trial contend that further 
settling will be negligible. 
In December, Castro called a CRA consultant to the stand in an attempt to show 
that the agency had acknowledged the complex to be sinking at one time. The 
consultant, engineer James Slosson, headed a 1986 team hired by the agency to 
examine the fill. Slosson said in court that the fill underneath Eaton Crest 
may settle an additional 1% of its depth. 
Slosson also testified that extensive repairs are necessary to restore Eaton 
Crest and Temple Terrace to their original conditions. 
Attorneys for the CRA and the other defendants said they plan to call 21 
witnesses, including soils and engineering experts, appraisers and property 
managers in the complex. 
Agency counsel Laurie Zelon and other attorneys for the defendants conceded in 
their opening statements that the Monterey Hills complex is damaged and that 
the homeowners are entitled to compensation, but said they will prove that the 
damage is cosmetic and requires less than $2 million in repairs. 
They also said they will show that the homes can be resold at market value even 
if no repairs are made on the buildings. 
Repairs Promised 
In the Drake Terrace suit last year, agency officials said repairs would be 
made to the Drake Terrace section as well as to Eaton Crest and Temple Terrace. 
The agency assurances were central to its defense in the trial. 
But attorneys for the CRA said in their opening statements that they will prove 
that such repairs are no longer necessary. According to a study commissioned 
after the Drake Terrace case was settled, they said, the complex is sinking at 
a fraction of the rate previously believed and does not require extensive 
structural repairs. 
Slosson said he stands by the conclusions in the 1986 report, despite the 
existence of the new study contending that the repairs are unnecessary. "After 
going through Ft. Benning infantry school," Slosson said in court, "I seldom 
panic." 
Slosson's report recommends injecting grout into the soil underneath parts of 
Monterey Hills to stabilize the fill. 
