FOR MOST CEOS, PERK IS STILL PREFERENCE 
Lee A. Iacocca may be pulling down $18 million a year in salary and bonuses, 
but his counterparts in the rest of corporate America want you to know how the 
other half lives. 
The median salary for chief executives at the nation's small and medium-sized 
firms -- those with sales of less than $100 million -- is $139,000 a year, 
according to the National Institute of Business Management, which surveyed 562 
companies on the subject. 
If that seems like a weekly allowance compared to Iacocca's take, it should. 
But this cadre of executives doesn't seem to mind. They prefer the executive 
perk, things like wining and dining on the corporate expense account, driving a 
company car and socializing on company-paid country club memberships. 
In fact, many executives at smaller companies, particularly private firms, are 
willing to forgo compensation in favor of plowing profits back into the 
business, which they may just happen to own themselves. 
"Perks are more valuable to them than to larger company executives because 
their . . . personal compensation is not that exorbitant," said Harry H. 
Linowes, managing partner of BDO Seidman, an accounting and consulting firm 
that co-sponsored the survey along with the Research Institute of America. 
"They of necessity cannot afford to lay out of their own pockets for some of 
these most important things in life -- an automobile, a phone in the car or 
being able to belong to a country club." 
The corporate perks, which averaged $7,000 per executive, are a sign of the 
times. Four years ago, the use of car phones didn't even register on the 
survey's hit parade. Today, car phones are No. 9 on the chart, with 31% of the 
institute's members offering them to one or more executives. 
As recently as four years ago, offering tax preparation assistance to 
executives was not a big seller. 
Now, thanks partially to the complications of dealing with the Tax Reform Act 
of 1986, some 32% of companies offer tax help, compared to 25% in 1987. 
The use of entertainment expense accounts has also gained in popularity -- 67% 
of the companies offered some form of them in 1988, compared to 54% in 1987. 
This includes everything from credit cards for personal use, to country club, 
athletic and dining memberships, to first class business travel. 
The perk to watch, according to the institute, is personal computers. 
Currently, 13% of executives have the luxury of working at home on a personal 
computer, either paid for or provided by the company. 
Other perks on the cutting edge include liability insurance for executives and 
telephone credit cards. 
Off the top 10 perk list are supplemental medical insurance, company paid 
parking, supplemental retirement plans, low or interest-free loans and 
financial counseling. 
The old stalwart, the company car, is still found in the garages of seven of 10 
executives. 
