BROWN DROPS KIDNAP SUIT AGAINST PARENTS 
Ginger Brown, who was the prosecution's key witness in a criminal trial that 
ended with charges of kidnaping, false imprisonment and assault and battery 
against her parents, sister and others being dismissed, has dropped her own, 
$2.75-million civil lawsuit against them. 
Brown's dismissal was recorded Thursday in Superior Court, and word reached her 
parents and others Friday. 
"I'm delighted, for sure. I'm pleased beyond words," said Dorothy Brown who, 
with her husband, Earle, were said by attorneys to be the first parents in the 
country to be charged with the kidnaping and false imprisonment of an adult 
child. 
Ginger Brown filed her civil suit one day short of a year after she was taken 
from a parking lot in Encinitas to an Escondido home where, for five days in 
May, 1988, deprogrammer Cliff Daniels tried to persuade her to sever her 
allegiance to a small religious organization known as Great Among the Nations, 
which her parents believed was a cult. 
The district attorney filed criminal charges against Earle and Dorothy Brown, 
both 58, of Santa Cruz; Holly Brown, 25, one of their other daughters; Daniels, 
35, of Los Angeles, and Hank Erler, 23, in whose mother's Escondido home the 
deprogramming effort occurred. 
Although Earle Brown admitted in courtroom testimony that he and others took 
Ginger Brown in a deprogramming effort, defense attorneys argued that the 
daughter had baited her parents to take her so she could later sue them for 
monetary damages. The filing of the civil lawsuit, the attorneys argued, lent 
credence to that theory. 
During the trial, Ginger Brown said she intended to drop the civil lawsuit 
against her parents and the others, but, to the trial's end, the civil action 
remained active -- a fact that was known to the Superior Court jury deciding 
the case. 
The jury acquitted some of the defendants of some of the charges but was 
deadlocked on the most serious. Superior Court Judge David B. Moon Jr. then 
dismissed the case altogether, saying it never should have been brought to 
trial. 
A spokesman for the district attorney's office said Friday that no decision has 
yet been made on whether to appeal Moon's decision that the case cannot be 
refiled. 
According to court records, on Thursday, Brown, now 24, signed the necessary 
document to dismiss her civil lawsuit. She could not be reached for comment. 
But her mother said she was relieved. 
"I don't see how we could have physically, emotionally, financially or any 
other way have gone through another trial," Dorothy Brown said. 
Ginger Brown's attorney in the civil action, Caryle Christianson, had removed 
herself from the case last month and declined comment on Friday. 
But attorneys involved in the Browns' defense suggested Friday that 
Christianson dropped the case because she took it on contingency and saw little 
likelihood that the civil action would prevail, especially in the wake of the 
criminal charges being dismissed. 
Saul Wright, Earle Brown's defense attorney, said he was "relieved but not 
surprised" by the dismissal. "It was a bad lawsuit from the beginning. I'm sure 
when they saw the reaction of our jury, they concluded it wouldn't be worth 
pursuing." 
The lawsuit named not only each of the five people who faced the criminal 
charges, but others including former members of Great Among the Nations who met 
with Ginger Brown during the deprogramming effort to try to get her to renounce 
her allegiance to the group, which claims to be a fundamental Christian Bible 
study group and television evangelism ministry. 
The suit alleged that the defendants were guilty of negligent supervision and 
intentional infliction of emotional distress. 
