NOW FOR A SALVADORAN MIRACLE; 
 THE NICARAGUAN UPSET SHOWS THE POWER OF A SECRET BALLOT 
The election defeat of the Sandinistas was almost as big a stunner in El 
Salvador as it was in Nicaragua. Now the Cristiani government and the leftist 
rebels -- and the Bush Administration -- have a great opportunity to reopen 
stalled peace talks and end that bloody civil war. 
Some leaders in San Salvador and Washington may be tempted to view the 
electoral rout of the Sandinistas as the precursor of a battlefield rout of 
their ideological kin, the Salvadoran rebels of the Farabundo Marti National 
Liberation Front. But that's simplistic and probably wishful thinking. Sure, 
the Sandinistas gave aid and comfort to the FMLN, but that aid was never all 
that pivotal. In terms of battlefield tactics and, even more important, popular 
support inside El Salvador, the FMLN repeatedly proves itself quite capable -- 
even against a 50,000-man army backed up by $1.4 million a day in U.S. aid. 
Not only are the FMLN rebels tough, but the Salvadoran army's performance still 
leaves a lot to be desired. Despite 10 years of scolding and prodding by U.S. 
advisers -- many of whom learned painful lessons about guerrilla war in Vietnam 
-- the Salvadoran generals still insist on pursuing small, mobile rebel bands 
with large army units -- and only in the daytime. Worse, Salvadoran military 
leaders still have not won the hearts and minds of their own people. The murder 
of six Jesuit priests by an elite army unit did not help to win a whole lot of 
public support. 
So the defeat of the FMLN's allies in Managua doesn't mean the Salvadoran 
government should launch a renewed frenzy of war. That would resolve nothing 
and prolong the bloodshed. The lesson to learn from Nicaragua is that a 
peaceful political fight can be more devastating to Marxists than 
anti-guerrilla warfare. Consider the Chamorro political miracle: It was only 
when the Nicaraguans took their political differences to the polling booth that 
a white-haired grandmother accomplished what the Contra rebels and the CIA 
failed to do: beat the Sandinistas. The Salvadoran government may be able to 
the same thing, but we won't know until it draws the FMLN into the political 
process, too. That won't happen at the point of a gun, but it just might at the 
conference table. 
