ARCHITECTURE: SAN DIEGO COUNTY; 
STEPNER'S LOW PROFILE STIRS GRUMBLING BY SOME CRITICS 
Since filling the new post of San Diego city architect in September, 1988, Mike 
Stepner has kept a decidedly low profile, concentrating more on getting his 
fledgling department organized than on public displays of power. 
In the eight months since Stepner was relieved of doing double duty as 
assistant planning director, he has concentrated on assembling a staff of 25 
and assigning it to key areas: urban design, historic preservation, downtown 
planning and special projects. 
Although most observers agree that the job of creating the new city architect's 
office from scratch was monumental, some critics believe it's time for Stepner 
to exercise his power, to stand up and be counted when he has an opinion on 
important issues. Already, he appears to have missed a few opportunities. 
A prime example was last fall, when the City Council approved a high-rise 
apartment tower at State Street and Broadway downtown. The council delayed a 
decision for months before selecting the Huntington, which is bulkier and 
several stories taller than a close runner-up known as 900 State. Both projects 
were well designed. 
"In public, he said both were legitimate, architecturally speaking," said 
Councilman Bob Filner, who favored the second-place plan. "But it was my 
impression that his department favored 900 State but was unwilling to say that 
as clearly in public as they would in private." 
"I did favor that project," Stepner acknowledges, "but after all the teeth 
gnashing that went on, my considered opinion was that the council was making a 
mountain out of a molehill. They needed to get on with a decision. Either 
project would work. Each needed refinements." 
Although Stepner seems to prefer a low profile, Filner and others would like to 
hear his opinions loud and clear. After all, he's often one of the only 
licensed architects on hand -- Councilman Ron Roberts is the other -- when 
important design decisions are made at City Hall. 
"I had assumed that we would have a design review of major issues that come to 
council," Filner said. "I don't think we're getting that, and I don't know 
why." 
Stepner stands by his philosophy, saying he doesn't want to be regarded as 
"some kind of Lone Ranger who rides in to save the day." Instead of such 
immediate flashes of glory, he wants to gradually arrange his priorities, then 
work within the system to realize them. 
Part his long-range impact won't be measurable until several complex new 
planning ordinances and guidelines now in the works have been adopted and had 
some effect on San Diego's diverse communities. 
Early in his new position, Stepner got off to a soft start on another matter: 
historic preservation. Last year, the council voted against a panel's 
recommendation to create a special historic district to help save several 
Egyptian-flavored Art Deco buildings on Park Boulevard near University Avenue. 
The idea of such a district came after the owner of the best of the buildings, 
a courtyard apartment complex, hired workers to jackhammer away its delicate 
period ornamentation. Some speculate he wanted to mar the building so it would 
no longer be worthy of a historic designation that might prevent him from 
developing the property with a new, larger building. 
(The building has since been sold, and a new owner has vowed to restore it.) 
"The district was voted in by the city's Historic Site Board," said Carol 
Landsman, a member of the North Park Community Planning Group and chairwoman of 
the Community Planners Committee, which includes representatives from several 
of the city's community planning groups. Landsman thinks the council's "no" 
vote partly reflects Stepner's performance. "That's a fairly negative 
statement." 
But, on this issue, too, Stepner stands by his actions. 
"It would have been handled differently if we'd had more time. One thing was 
overlooked by the council. Those buildings aren't just important as objects, 
but as threads of a neighborhood fabric. Their scale and character added 
something." 
Anyway, he's not counting out an Egyptian historic district. He thinks the idea 
could be revived. 
Besides more vocal support for historic preservation, Landsman would like to 
see city funds allocated to surveying and designating historic buildings. Right 
now, such work is done with federal Community Development Block Grant funds, 
which are scarce or, in some years, not available for such work. Landsman and 
other preservationists fear that more fine period buildings will be disfigured 
or destroyed if they aren't soon recognized by the city. 
But historic preservation is only one of several important neighborhood issues 
Stepner faces. 
Perhaps even more perplexing is the problem of preserving neighborhood flavor 
and scale in the face of new -- and often more intense -- development. 
An ordinance being drafted in an attempt to improve the quality of new 
apartment and condominium buildings may indicate Stepner's overall approach to 
architecture citywide. Due for council consideration later this year, the 
ordinance has gradually moved away from specifying elements of architectural 
style and toward controlling broader issues of bulk, height and land use. 
Architects, including the members of a citizens Architectural Advisory 
Committee formed by Ken Kellogg to advise Stepner, are applauding this trend, 
while community leaders such as Landsman would like even tighter architectural 
controls on new projects, especially in neighborhoods with a period flavor. 
During the coming year, Stepner will have a role in perhaps the most 
significant project of his career: a new downtown civic center. 
A design competition has been organized by the city manager's office with help 
from Stepner and his staff. Last fall, Don Hansen, then president of the local 
chapter of the American Institute of Architects, sent a letter to Stepner 
expressing the organization's fear that good design will be secondary to 
economic considerations. Under the "design/develop" competition format being 
used, more than 200 architects who have already submitted their qualifications 
will be narrowed to a list of 18 or 20. 
In some kind of mating dance, developers will team with architects. Then each 
of the five or so teams deemed strongest -- in development experience and 
design ability -- will receive $100,000 to create detailed civic center design 
and construction packages. 
Hansen credits Stepner with pressing to make design a higher priority, making 
the selection of a "short list" of architects the first event, rather than the 
choice of a developer. 
But Hansen and other local architects believe the kind of open, 
architecture-only competition that led to Escondido's impressive new City Hall 
would have been feasible for San Diego's civic center, even if the project were 
several times larger. 
Stepner sides with the city. 
"Where I failed was in convincing the AIA that we are going with this 
competition process because the city feels it'll get a better project." 
Despite some impatience with Stepner's low profile, most insiders have faith in 
him. 
"We know he's on the verge of stepping forward with leadership," said architect 
David Thompson, president of the local AIA chapter and one of Stepner's more 
vocal critics in the past. "Probably more than anything, I'm disappointed he 
hasn't organized his role faster." 
"In time, I would expect that, between his own actions and those of his staff, 
there would be a stronger presence felt throughout the system," said Councilman 
Roberts, who approves of Stepner's concentration on getting organized instead 
of speaking out. "Quite frankly, I think he's shown some good judgment." 
DESIGN NOTES: Two homes share "Home of the Year" honors from San Diego 
Home/Garden magazine: a 1912 house designed by William Hebbard, restored under 
the direction of architect Bill Hayer, and a contemporary La Costa house 
designed by Randy Robbins and Thomas Elliott of the Austin Hansen Group. The 
houses, and winners of five "Awards of Excellence," can be seen in the February 
issue. . . . Architect Michael Graves' Aventine project in La Jolla recently 
received a satellite dish atop its Hyatt Hotel, visible from Interstate 5. 
Alexey Griforieff, the project architect for Graves' office, called it an 
"unfortunate addition," and said the architects could have concealed it within 
the hotel's arched roof had they known about it during design. 
