O.C. ART; 
'BER LIN' CELEBRATES MAN'S STEADFAST SPIRIT 
You see it all the time in art reviews: A writer will proclaim that a 
particular work compels the viewer to do so-and-so, or think such-and-such. But 
that's just hype and blather. Artists aren't totalitarian states or the 
superego that polices your psyche. What artists can do, however, is create a 
climate that subtly influences the point of view and even the actions of those 
who choose to view the work in an active, participatory way and then reflect on 
the experience. 
At the Laguna Art Museum's South Coast Plaza satellite, Paul Kos' group of six 
installations -- collectively called "BER LIN" -- incorporates certain physical 
and psychological mechanisms designed to involve the viewer in the artist's 
concerns about freedom and constraint. Commissioned by the museum especially 
for this gallery space, "BER LIN" is by far the most searchingly intelligent 
and provocative show ever mounted there. 
Other than the neon letters spelling out the title of the installation (divided 
to represent the division of the city into East and West sectors by the Berlin 
Wall), the piece that a viewer is first likely to encounter is "rEVOLUTION: 
Notes for the Invasion -- mar mar march." Slats of wood cross the carpet at 
regular intervals. If you choose to enter the gallery, the length of your 
stride is regulated by those slats, since the normal thing to do is to step 
between them. 
While you're stepping -- conscious of the activity of walking, as you probably 
aren't when there's nothing in the way -- you hear the sound of a typewriter 
typing in a regular rhythm. It's the aural accompaniment to a small video 
monitor with the image of a typewriter typing the words "mar mar march" over 
and over, and a woman in boots marching back and forth. 
It seems natural to match your stride to the sound -- natural, in other words, 
to "fall in" with a lock step established by the cadence of a completely 
arbitrary device. You are marching without being offered any real reason for 
doing so. 
Like Alice in Lewis Carroll's "Through the Looking Glass," you have entered a 
world that seems to have its own rules. The next stop on this journey is 
"Rift," a piece that doesn't work as well as it should because of its awkward 
placement in the gallery. "Rift" is simply a narrow section that has been cut 
out of the gallery's wall-to-wall carpet. 
The cut is a dividing line, a break in the natural order of things. But instead 
of serving as another forceful impediment, it doesn't really intrude on the 
viewer's path. You can walk around it -- and dismiss it -- too easily as you 
look up at the next element in Kos' master plan: "Just a Matter of Time." 
There, a red light beams on a row of cuckoo clocks, each ticking away in an 
independent rhythm, like people whispering in a crowd. Instead of the usual 
weights for the clock movements, hammers and sickles dangle on metal chains. At 
seemingly random intervals, a clock will sound. 
These irregular bursts of activity seem to be metaphors for the "voice" of the 
human spirit, speaking out -- as we've seen in the past few months in Eastern 
Europe -- to demand its freedom. 
At the rear of the gallery, "Silenced Tongues" -- conceived as a response to 
the Tian An Men Square massacre in China last spring -- expands on Kos' overall 
theme with strikingly minimal means. The outlines of bells are etched on two 
large sheets of glass that lean against the gallery walls, illuminated by a 
low-hanging naked light bulb. 
Etched on a third sheet of glass is the phrase, "When tongues are silenced only 
memory remains." The words repeat twice -- via a shadow effect -- on the wall 
behind the glass. When you step in front of the glass, your body obliterates 
one of the phrases but not the other two. 
Kos' gorgeously subtle use of glass, light and line creates an apt metaphor for 
the workings of memory: seemingly fragile yet vivid and strong. The subtle 
orchestration of allusions to sound and silence and the use of shadow effects 
as visual "reverberations" give the piece a meditative quality. 
The viewer's final encounter is likely to be with "Trotsky." A red stool stands 
on the gallery floor. High overhead, a pickax tied with a red cloth is stuck 
into the wall. The reference is to Soviet leader's 1940 murder by an 
ax-wielding Spanish Communist while in exile in Mexico. 
A principal figure in the 1917 October Revolution who served as commissar for 
foreign affairs and war under Lenin, Trotsky began to speak out against 
repressive tendencies in the party in the early '20s. He was denounced by the 
Stalinist government and ultimately -- in 1929 -- banished from his country. 
This piece is the most specifically history-bound of the six works, 
crystallizing the underlying issue of a political state conceived as a tool of 
freedom for the common man but subsequently manipulated into a tool of 
oppression. 
Kos has said that he thinks of the six installations in the gallery as merely 
the "Eastern sector" of "BER LIN," which "includes every store and shop in 
South Coast Plaza." In other words, issues of freedom and repression are as 
relevant to the world of dazzling choice represented by a giant shopping mall 
as they are to countries struggling out of the yoke of communism. An obsession 
with material goods can blind us to the preciousness of the freedoms we have, 
as well as to elements of our society who want to distort them in the name of 
narrow-minded "morality." 
 "BER LIN" continues at the Laguna Art Museum South Coast Plaza satellite, 3333 
Bristol St. in Costa Mesa, through April 29. Hours: 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. Mondays 
through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturdays, and 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sundays. 
Admission: free. Information: (714) 662-3366. 
