U.S. SHIFTING ITS MILITARY FOCUS IN PERSIAN GULF 
U.S. military planners have been told to create a new policy for the Persian 
Gulf emphasizing defense of friendly Arab states instead of Iran's 
vulnerability to a Soviet attack. 
The threat of a Soviet thrust into Iran to seize oil fields and gulf ports long 
has dictated U.S. strategy and troop deployments in the region, but the Soviet 
Union's preoccupation with internal economic problems and regional ethnic 
disputes has made a potential Iranian offensive far less likely, defense 
officials said Tuesday. 
The policy shift is contained in the latest Defense Planning Guidance, a 
biennial classified policy document issued by the secretary of defense to help 
the military services as they draw up their budgets for the coming five years. 
But aside from a significantly relaxed assessment of the Soviet and Warsaw Pact 
threat to Western Europe, the document offers few surprises and little specific 
guidance to help military officers carry out their long-range planning. 
A senior Pentagon official involved in preparing the recently completed report 
says its guidance is likely to be rendered obsolete within months by 
international events and other studies now under way at the Pentagon. The 
official briefed a small group of reporters on the condition that he not be 
identified. 
The document reflects the difficulty of strategic planning in an era of 
dizzying change. In years past, the report has been much longer than this 
year's 28-page version and has offered highly specific advice to the services. 
"A document that's five or six minutes old is out of date these days," a 
military officer familiar with the latest guidance said. 
Senior defense officials are conducting extensive studies to determine 
appropriate U.S. military policy in the Far East, the Persian Gulf and Europe 
after an anticipated conventional force reduction agreement is completed. 
Additional reviews are under way of technology and its effect on national 
security policy, on the "Star Wars" space defense system and on four costly 
aircraft development programs. 
The results of those studies, due in the next few months, are likely to cause 
"major revisions" to the just-issued guidance, the official said. 
For example, a senior Pentagon policy-maker said "Star Wars" is being 
fundamentally reassessed and "might be restructured" as a result of the current 
review. 
The guidance notes that the United States is likely to lose some or all of its 
bases in the Philippines in coming years and orders the services to plan other 
ways to defend U.S. interests in the Pacific. It also says that Japan and 
Korea, although important U.S. allies, must bear a higher share of the cost of 
their defense. 
