BID TO CONTROL S.D. ATHEIST'S ESTATE FALTERS 
The nation's best-known atheist has a lost a key lawsuit in her fight for 
control of a fortune left by a religion-hating eccentric. 
The court defeat leaves the $14-million estate of the late, cranky James Hervey 
Johnson of San Diego -- as well as the oldest atheist publication in the 
country -- in the hands of a church-going Episcopalian and a Mormon, who say 
they intend to carry out Johnson's wishes of "(exposing) religion as against 
reason." 
Madalyn Murray O'Hair, atheism's most high-profile leader and self-described 
"most hated woman in America," says that the setback is only temporary and that 
she intends to keep fighting in the courts to keep "atheist money" away from 
those who believe in God. 
"I'll be badgering them for the next 20 years," vowed the bombastic O'Hair, who 
played a role nearly 30 years ago in outlawing prayer in public schools and who 
also tried to prevent "In God We Trust" from being printed on American 
currency. 
The dispute arose even before Johnson, whose exaggerated holistic health ideas 
often compelled him to go long periods consuming nothing more than orange juice 
and condensed milk, died alone of a heart attack at age 87 in August, 1988, as 
he soaked his pain-riddled body in the bathtub inside his austere Hillcrest 
apartment. 
For years, Johnson and O'Hair were rivals. While O'Hair was making headlines 
promoting atheist causes throughout the country, Johnson was quietly amassing a 
fortune by selling family property and using the money to invest in the stock 
market. 
In the early 1960s, Johnson assumed control of the Truth Seeker, which at 117 
years is the oldest atheist magazine in the nation, as well as two old atheist 
organizations -- the American Assn. for the Advancement of Atheism (AAAA) and 
the National League for the Separation of Church and State, also known as the 
National Liberal League. 
Through the Truth Seeker, Johnson launched racist and anti-Semitic attacks that 
drove many allies away and left him an outcast. But, among all the things he 
detested, one stood out: religion. 
And, in his will, filed a year before his death, Johnson demanded that his 
millions be placed in a trust and the income used "to publicize my views on 
religion and health." He selected Lawrence Y. True as the person to control it 
all. True, a bank trust officer, had known Johnson for 25 years but they 
weren't close, talking only a few times each year, and did little business 
together. 
True, now in his late 60s, has retired from his job to work full time on the 
estate, which has so far paid him a minimum of $217,000 for his services and is 
likely to pay him about $70,000 a year as caretaker of the trust. True is also 
an Episcopalian active in his Hillcrest congregation. 
That fact sent O'Hair into a frenzy. How, she asked, could a Christian and 
believer in religion and God have any idea about promoting atheism? She and 10 
other old-line atheists filed a lawsuit in San Diego federal court, claiming 
they were entitled to control the estate and take ownership of the Truth 
Seeker. The Austin, Tex.-based O'Hair even began printing a duplicate Truth 
Seeker. 
After Johnson's death, O'Hair formally challenged the will in probate court. 
But, one after another, O'Hair's legal challenges have been rebuffed. First, a 
probate judge ruled against O'Hair's lawsuit, which has allowed True to begin 
spending money from the estate. O'Hair appealed and the matter is being 
considered by the 4th District Court of Appeal. 
Last August, the federal court judge threw out a contention by O'Hair-led 
atheists that Johnson had amassed his fortune by mingling money from atheist 
organizations with his personal accounts. More important, the judge said O'Hair 
and several others could not be made party to the lawsuit. Then, three weeks 
ago, on Jan. 8, the judge dismissed the lawsuit entirely, in part because the 
last remaining plaintiff -- an ally of O'Hair's -- failed to prove he was a 
stockholder in the Truth Seeker. 
Still before the federal court, though, is a countersuit filed by Johnson's 
lawyers, accusing O'Hair of racketeering for allegedly conspiring to take over 
the Truth Seeker, AAAA and the National Liberal League, a charge she dismissed 
Wednesday as "a bunch of silliness." 
In a telephone interview from Austin, O'Hair said she is confident that she and 
other atheists will end up victorious despite the recent court defeats. She 
said she plans to embark on a counter legal attack that includes appealing the 
federal court ruling, and, if that fails, she will file another lawsuit in the 
state courts in either California or New York, where the Truth Seeker was 
incorporated. 
The legal history of American atheism, she said, shows that the movement's 
defeats at the lower court level have often turned into victory at the 
appellate level. "The only hope we've ever had is at the appellate level," she 
said. 
Aside from the legal machinations, O'Hair has written critical letters to 
leaders of the Mormon Church and to the minister of True's church, chastising 
them for allowing members of their dominations to use atheist money. 
Meanwhile, Johnson's estate moves forward. Last year, it was worth $16.5 
million. Taxes took more than $1 million and fees to attorneys and True have 
consumed at least $600,000. 
A probate judge has allowed the remaining $14-million estate to be split into 
two parts; one fourth, or about $3.5 million, will be used to support the Truth 
Seeker, a publication that bears little resemblance to the magazine Johnson 
published, and which, to its critics, has nothing at all to do with promoting 
atheism but is instead a mishmash of New Age philosophy headed by Bonnie Lange, 
a Mormon and Johnson's former friend and housekeeper. 
Three-fourths of the estate, about $10.5 million, has been placed in a 
charitable educational trust. Roy R. Withers, Johnson's attorney, said he is in 
the midst of registering the charitable trust with the state attorney general's 
office and applying for tax-exempt status from the IRS. Under the law, annual 
income from the trust, estimated to be about $1 million this year, must be 
disbursed by the end of the calendar year to organizations that promote 
Johnson's views on religion and health. 
That will make it one of San Diego's largest charitable trusts, and already, 
said Withers, groups and individuals from throughout the country have contacted 
him about obtaining grants. Withers and True are preparing a brochure on 
guidelines for applicants, who must have IRS tax-exempt status to qualify. 
"We're getting calls from groups in L.A. and Wisconsin. . . . Some are against 
religion and others are into health science," Withers said. "When people know 
you have money to give, you don't have to advertise." 
