HOLOCAUST 'DEBATE' IS FORUM FOR REVISIONISTS 
Prof. Robert Faurisson had a question for his audience. 
How many, the French professor wanted to know, had any doubts that the Nazi 
Holocaust of 6 million Jews is, in fact, nothing more than a hoax? 
The audience was silent. 
Heads swiveled as people looked to see who was willing to acknowledge publicly 
the belief that maybe the Nazis had murdered all those Jews, many of them in 
gas chambers. 
Slowly a hand was raised, and another. 
The final count was five, out of an audience of about 200. 
One-Sided Conference 
What was billed as a debate on the Holocaust on Tuesday in Torrance turned into 
a one-sided conference for people who call themselves "historical 
revisionists." The event was sponsored by the Committee for Open Debate on the 
Holocaust, a group with ties to the Institute for Historical Review, a group 
that formerly had offices in Torrance and asserts that the Holocaust is a 
fabrication. 
No spectators who believed unequivocally in the Holocaust showed up, nor did 
four speakers who were supposed to argue the case for the Holocaust. 
The militant Jewish Defense League, which had clashed with people attending an 
anti-Holocaust conference in Huntington Beach last weekend, stayed away as well 
under the belief that the debate had been canceled, according to Irv Rubin, its 
national chairman. "These people are scum," he said in an interview later. 
With the drama taken out of the event, the revisionists had only themselves to 
talk to. 
Approving Nods 
Among the statements that received approving nods: The numerous eyewitness 
accounts of gas chamber operations from concentration camp survivors have no 
value because the witnesses have not been cross-examined. At Auschwitz, what is 
identified as a gas chamber is in fact a mortuary that could not have been used 
as a gas chamber without killing guards and people in a nearby hospital. 
Instead of 6 million Jews dying, the true figure is no more than 300,000, who 
died from starvation, disease and Allied bombing. 
Also: Rather than being victims, Jews have made a flourishing industry of the 
Holocaust, and they control too much of the world's mass media. 
There were delighted smiles when one speaker declared that the name of Nobel 
laureate, Holocaust author and concentration camp survivor Elie Wiesel 
accurately stands for its translation into English -- "weasel." 
And laughter greeted the recounting of statements that the Nazis made soap and 
lubricating oil of the corpses of Jews. 
Rick Louk, head of the Torrance police intelligence unit, was on duty at the 
hotel in case trouble developed. Professionally impassive at the event, he said 
afterwards that he could not help being affected by the audience. 
"If you were there and listened to those people laugh about how they disposed 
of body parts that were still quivering. . . . It was gross," he said. 
"It was amazing that people could joke about atrocities." 
Louk said he also noticed that speakers never talked "about the bad things the 
Nazis had done." 
After the morning session, he said, he was surprised to see almost the entire 
audience return after lunch. "Those people are so fanatical," he said. "I am 
just glad that it went off without any problems." 
A number of audience members declared their belief that the Holocaust story is 
part of a Jewish-Communist conspiracy. 
Testimony of 'No Value' 
Faurisson, a professor at the University of Lyons, said at the meeting that he 
places "no value" on statements from former concentration camp inmates if they 
have not been subjected to cross-examination. 
Faurisson conceded that his cross-examination requirement is unusual but said 
it is justified because the accusation that the Nazis used gas chambers is so 
serious that it should be treated with legal, rather than historical, methods. 
Asked if this standard would not also invalidate much of what is known about 
Stalinist labor camps -- which many consider to be on a par with Nazi 
atrocities -- Faurisson said he has not studied the Soviet Gulag and is not 
prepared to say whether the camps were as bad as they are claimed to have been. 
Faurisson, an associate professor of literature, added that he had problems 
with accepting the writings of Alexander Solzhenitsyn about the camps because 
the Soviet emigre author and Nobel laureate is a novelist and not trained in 
historical methods. 
Besides the problem with drop-out speakers, conference organizers had trouble 
finding a meeting place. They changed the location twice, from the Tetelestia 
Christian Center to the Calvary Church of the Coastlands to the Quality Inn. 
The churches backed out after Louk called and explained that the Committee for 
Open Debate on the Holocaust is tied to the Institute for Historical Review, 
whose offices, formerly in Torrance, were fire-bombed in July, 1984, in what is 
still an unsolved case. Louk said he also told church officials that the Jewish 
Defense League had a record of confronting the institute. 
"You are liable to get caught in the middle for providing the facility," Louk 
said he told church officials. 
Although Jewish groups stayed away, they were not silent. 
Rabbi Abraham Cooper, associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, said it 
was a "sorry state of affairs" that the event attracted any news coverage. "I 
think those who call for a debate (on the Holocaust) deserve about the same 
attention as the Flat Earth Society," he said. 
"You can classify revisionists into two camps. (Some) people . . . deny the 
Holocaust because they are more comfortable not believing the reality of the 
Holocaust. The second group says the Holocaust never occurred and, given the 
chance, they would like to finish the job." 
Said Rubin: "These people are dedicated Jew-haters. The tragic, reprehensible 
thing about this movement is they are mocking not only the Jewish people but 
America, because America fought Hitler." 
On the factual issues raised by the revisionists, Prof. Raoul Hilberg, author 
of the three-volume "Destruction of the European Jews," said in an telephone 
interview from Burlington, Vt., that the evidence of a Holocaust was 
overwhelming. 
"We deal at the outset with a disappearance of a lot of people," he said. While 
scholarly debate continues over the numbers, the lowest "responsible" figure is 
his computation -- 5 million, he said. Three million died in concentration 
camps, 1.3 million were shot and 700,000 to 800,000 died in ghettos, where 
policies of starvation led to death rates of 1.5% a month, he said. 
Numbers Detailed 
Captured German documents, including railway records and a Gestapo report, 
detail the number of Jews deported to specific camps and the number of 
shootings, he said. 
Explanations that deportees were taken to concentration camps for labor but not 
for killing do not wash, he said, because of the large number of Jews that 
German rail records show were taken to the camps. 
"There is absolutely no possibility that these camps were transit stations of 
some sort or places in which people were kept until the end of the war. As one 
German railway official said, otherwise Auschwitz would have become a 
metropolis." 
"We have the testimony of SS men, not just one but quite a few, not just from 
the Nuremberg trials, but from trials in 1960s, '70s and '80s," he said. "The 
SS testimony is absolutely explicit that people were put to death in gas 
chambers at Sobibbor, Treblinka, Belzec, Kulmhof and Maydanek, in addition to 
Auschwitz." 
He added pointedly that "in every one of the trials, cross-examination is built 
into the procedures. Most everything the SS has said was subject to 
cross-examination. SS people don't write books. If we had absolutely no 
testimony from Jewish survivors, we would still have that testimony and that 
picture." 
Hilberg said a report that an Auschwitz building could not have been designed 
as a gas chamber is correct but irrelevant. 
"It was not the primary place for killing," he said. "The Germans blew up the 
gas chambers. . . . The ruins are still there. We do have two additional pieces 
of evidence. We have the floor plans for the gas chambers -- they are still 
around in the Auschwitz museum -- and aerial photographs retrieved by the CIA 
(showing the buildings)." 
The same sort of analysis refutes claims that the Germans were using the 
cyanide-based chemical Zyklon B for fumigation only, he said. The 
manufacturers' records shows that the orders sent to Auschwitz are far in 
excess of what is needed for fumigation, he said. 
"We have the plans and the ruins, the testimony and the photos and they all 
coincide, reinforce each other," he said. 
Faurisson, the French professor, said at the revisionists' meeting that he is 
critical of Hilberg's work because it does not examine the evidence that the 
Holocaust did not occur. 
In response, Hilberg said that was like criticizing someone writing about the 
first trip to the Moon for not presenting the case that the trip did not occur. 
"It is no fun for me after 40 years of research to have to reiterate and 
reiterate," he said. 
