WHITE HOUSE PRESSING SENATORS TO PUBLICLY BACK TOWER 
The White House, concerned that opposition by Senate Armed Services Committee 
Chairman Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) could derail John Tower's nomination as secretary of 
defense, is privately pressing senators to endorse Tower publicly without 
waiting for a final FBI report on his background. 
Nunn, obviously nettled that the lobbying is taking place before the final 
report is filed, declared Tuesday that he will wait and examine the document 
before deciding how to vote on the nomination in committee. 
And he said he expects most senators of both parties to await the committee's 
recommendation before making a commitment on how they will vote when the 
nomination comes before the full Senate. 
President Bush, according to informed sources, ordered the lobbying effort 
after Nunn told him at a private meeting on Feb. 7 that he had "serious 
concerns" about certain allegations involving Tower. Nunn told Bush that, if a 
committee vote were taken at that time, as some had urged, he "would vote no 
because of those concerns." 
Nunn, as well as other senators on the committee, were known to have expressed 
concern about allegations involving excessive drinking and an accusation by a 
suspect in the Pentagon procurement fraud investigation that illegal 
contributions had been channeled to Tower's campaign when Tower was a senator. 
With the FBI continuing to investigate those allegations, the committee agreed 
last Wednesday to delay any action on the nomination until after the Senate 
returns next Tuesday from a recess. 
The investigation is now being concluded and a report should be completed in a 
few days. A source familiar with the inquiry said that no "smoking gun" had 
been found. 
Marlin Fitzwater, White House press secretary, said Tuesday that Frederick D. 
McClure, Bush's assistant for legislative affairs, is leading the White House 
lobbying effort for Tower's nomination and that several senators had agreed to 
"speak out" for Tower. 
Fitzwater, interviewed at a luncheon session with editors and reporters of The 
Times' Washington Bureau, at first said that several Democratic senators were 
among those who would speak out but refused to name any. Later, after checking 
with McClure, Fitzwater said that there are no commitments from Democrats and 
that the lobbying is confined to Republican senators. 
However, sources familiar with the lobbying told The Times that the effort is 
aimed at lining up Democratic senators also. And one Democratic member of the 
committee, who asked not to be identified, said that he has been contacted but 
told the White House that he plans to support Nunn in whatever position he 
takes. 
Nunn said that there is nothing "inappropriate" about the White House lobbying. 
But he said it is strange that the Administration would be pressing senators to 
speak out before the final FBI report has been filed, especially because White 
House counsel C. Boyden Gray has told him that it "would not be proper" for the 
committee to make a decision before seeing the report. 
Another committee member, Sen. Timothy E. Wirth (D-Colo.), said: "I find it 
incredible, extraordinary, that they're asking us not to take a position until 
we have the report but they are urging others to take a position." 
Wirth said that Nunn is the key to Tower's fate. If the chairman votes against 
him, the Democratic-controlled Senate probably will reject the nomination. "It 
all depends on Sam," Wirth said. "Everybody has such respect for Sam, and he's 
very cautious." 
Another committee member, Sen. Carl Levin (D-Mich.), is "very, very troubled" 
by inconsistencies in Tower's statements about his consulting work for British 
Aerospace Inc., an aide to Levin said. The aide said it is likely that Levin 
will ask that Tower be recalled to testify about the discrepancies. 
Tower told the committee two weeks ago that he represented the British aircraft 
and weapons maker only on civil aviation matters, such as the sale of 
commercial jets. But, in a divorce deposition taken in June, 1987, Tower stated 
that he had given the company advice on "selling certain systems to the Defense 
Department." 
Tower sat on the board of directors of the U.S. subsidiary of the British firm 
and was paid more than $260,000 during the 2 1/2 years that he was associated 
with the company. 
A Tower attorney said that the divorce deposition was a casual accounting of 
what he did for British Aerospace and a number of other defense contractors and 
was not meant to be a definitive statement of his consulting business. He said 
that the more recent statement to the committee is accurate. 
However, when Tower registered as a legislative lobbyist in February, 1988, he 
explicitly listed British Aerospace as a "defense contractor" and not as merely 
a manufacturer of commercial aircraft. 
Staff writers John M. Broder and Ronald J. Ostrow in Washington contributed to 
this story. 
