ART BUCHWALD: HOW TO PREDICT THE UNPREDICTABLE 
Presidents of the United States are not the only ones who hire soothsayers to 
tell them what the future will bring. Large corporations also sign up former 
Cabinet officers and foreign policy experts to warn them what to expect around 
the globe. These experts don't come cheap, but they're worth it. From Moscow to 
Mandela it's been one triumph after another for global consultants. 
Occasionally, there are misunderstandings. I was sitting in the anteroom of 
Heinrich Applebaum's "Made-to-Order Quality Predictions" when Willard Dergen, 
CEO of Stardust Avionics, charged in. He wanted to know why he hadn't been 
informed about the overthrow of the old regime in Czechoslovakia, and its 
replacement with a playwright, when he had paid Heinrich a fee of $750,000. 
Heinrich smiled, as he usually does when stuck in a corner, and replied, "We 
didn't want to bother you with something so insignificant. Czechoslovakia is 
such a little country, it can't affect anything." 
Willard spluttered and said, "Why did I have to find out on CNN that Romania 
was about to fall and its leader had been killed? Your job is to let me know 
who is going to get killed in Romania." 
"Willard, we didn't want to go off the deep end until our CIA sources confirmed 
it for us. One thing we don't do at Applebaum Predictions is fax a client for 
the sake of faxing him." 
"This may sound strange to you, but I don't like to spend $2 million a year and 
not even know about the fall of the Berlin Wall. Why didn't you people inform 
us that the wall was going to be torn down?" 
"The East Germans gave us their word that the wall would stay forever. But they 
double-crossed us to suck up to West Germany." 
"Why didn't your firm predict the collapse of communism in East Germany?" 
"We don't Red-bait. Nobody could have seen that coming. If we had told you last 
year that there would soon be only one Germany, you would have asked for your 
money back. Weren't you surprised?" 
"I pay you so that I won't be surprised. How come I didn't hear from you when 
Bulgaria went under?" 
"We told you that there is a surcharge for information about events in 
Bulgaria. Willard, were we or weren't we right on Poland?" 
"You were as right as Time magazine which was where I first read the story. 
What have you been doing about the Soviet Union? 
"I have to know now. If I can't figure out what the Soviet Union is doing, I 
won't be able to decide how much business the Defense Department is going to 
throw my way. You owe it to me to give me the scoop on daily events in the 
Kremlin." 
"Willard, we have a report on Raisa Gorbachev's dressmaker that will make your 
hair stand on end." 
"When do I see this intelligence?" 
"As soon as we get the leather-bound report with your name engraved on it back 
from the printer. It's a gorgeous presentation if I must say so myself." 
"Give me something today that I can go back to my board with to justify your 
outrageous fee." 
"The South Africans are going to release Nelson Mandela from prison." 
"They did that last week." 
"They did?" Heinrich was truly surprised. "Nobody tells me anything." 
