BAYLES' BIG QUARTER PROPELS CRESCENTA VALLEY, 74-65 
For the first half of Crescenta Valley's Southern Section 4-A Division playoff 
opener Wednesday night, it appeared as if Falcon senior guard David Bayles 
would be relegated to a cameo role. 
Reasoning that Bayles' poor outside shooting would not help Crescenta Valley's 
cause against the 3-2 press of Newbury Park, Coach John Goffredo sat him down 
58 seconds into the first quarter. 
But Bayles' bid for playoff heroics wasn't over. When Newbury Park switched to 
a 2-3 zone in the second half, Bayles caught fire. 
Bayles scored all of his career-high 14 points in the fourth quarter as 
Crescenta Valley ran off a late flurry to take a 74-65 win at Crescenta Valley. 
Bayles' timely run and Crescenta Valley's superior balance was more than enough 
to put away the Panthers. 
Newbury Park forward Wayne Cook scored a game-high 30 points, but his team went 
cold in the final three minutes. He made 13 of 27 field-goal attempts as the 
team consistently looked to him for the big basket. 
"He's our No. 1 player and the best athlete I've ever coached," Newbury Park 
Coach Ken Barone said. "So he has to have the green light to shoot whenever he 
wants." 
But it was Bayles who shot down Newbury Park (13-11). 
Trailing, 59-58, with 2:55 to play, Crescenta Valley (16-8) mounted a 14-6 run. 
Bayles scored eight of the Falcons' points in the run, scoring on a jump shot, 
two layups and a pair of free throws. 
Cook tried in vain to answer Bayles, scoring seven of Newbury Park's final 18 
points. 
Cook, a senior who will attend UCLA on a football scholarship in the fall, made 
three of six from three-point range. 
Cook, however, was unable to do it alone. Crescenta Valley held a 48-47 lead 
heading into the fourth quarter, but outscored Newbury Park, 26-18, over the 
final eight minutes. 
Cook was one of only two Panthers to reach double figures. 
Chris Falzone scored 11 for Newbury Park and teammate Amir El Farra added 
eight. 
When it counted, Crescenta Valley knocked off Newbury Park with a depth charge. 
John Gilmore scored 12 points and teammates Paul Matijasevic and Brian Cortes 
each added 10. 
Lamar Breeding, who was promoted from the junior varsity last week, scored a 
career-high 15 points for Crescenta Valley, 13 in the first three quarters to 
keep the Falcons close. 
