GUERRILLA ATTACKS THREATEN DIALOGUE, BAKER TELLS PLO 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III said Saturday that the United States has 
decided to continue its dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization but 
that Washington has warned the PLO that guerrilla attacks against Israeli 
targets could change that stance. 
"These are actions that present us with great difficulty," Baker said, 
referring to an apparent attempt by five PLO guerrillas to infiltrate Israel 
last weekend. 
"We are not prepared at this time to say that this constitutes action by the 
PLO that would cause us to break off the dialogue," he said. 
But in a message delivered to the PLO by the U.S. envoy in Tunisia last week, 
he said, "We made the point that actions such as this, directed at military or 
civilian targets inside or outside Israel, were something that gave us 
trouble." 
The five guerrillas, four Palestinians and one Lebanese, were intercepted and 
killed by Israeli troops in southern Lebanon, a few miles from Israel's 
northern border. Israeli officials said the guerrillas carried documents 
showing that they were associated with two factions of the PLO. 
The Jerusalem government also charged that the guerrillas intended to attack a 
target inside Israel, partly because they carried grenades and wire-cutters -- 
presumably for breaching the security fence along the border. 
When the Reagan Administration opened official diplomatic contacts with the PLO 
in December, it did so on condition that the organization renounce terrorism 
and recognize Israel's right to exist. 
Last week, after the guerrillas were intercepted, Israel formally demanded that 
the Bush Administration break off its relations with the PLO on the grounds 
that the Palestinians had violated its terms by attempting an act of terrorism. 
Baker carefully sidestepped the question of whether the guerrillas' presence in 
the Israeli-controlled sector of southern Lebanon constituted terrorism. 
But he also made explicit a new, broad definition of the kind of operations 
that would put the U.S.-PLO dialogue in danger: not only attacks against 
civilians inside Israel, but raids against Israeli military units inside 
Lebanon as well. 
