FATHER TESTIFIES IN MOLESTATION HEARING 
A former Irvine pastor testified Wednesday that he met twice with a Newport 
Beach neurosurgeon for an explanation of treatments on his daughter, then 12, 
that allegedly involved regular pelvic examinations and photographing of her 
genitals. 
The father, who headed a Baptist church in Irvine, testified that he met with 
Dr. Francis J. Williams, 64, after church one Sunday in 1985 to discuss his 
daughter's reports that the examinations and photographs did not seem right. 
"She was having feelings that she shouldn't be examined like she was . . . the 
postures she was asked to assume," the father said during the second day of 
Williams' preliminary hearing on charges that he sexually molested the girl and 
another female patient. 
15 Visits to Office 
The defendant, now 16, testified Tuesday that she was asked to kneel nude on 
the table while the doctor examined her from behind. The incident allegedly 
occurred during one of about 15 visits to Williams' Newport Beach office in 
1985. 
The girl's father testified Wednesday in Municipal Court in Newport Beach that 
Williams had explained the treatment in "medical terms I didn't understand," 
adding that the pictures were taken because "his medical books were old and 
outdated and he'd rather use (the pictures) to show her things." 
Attorneys for Williams have said the pictures were used to explain hygiene to 
the girl, who now lives in Lexington, Ky., with her father and mother. 
Williams, who was a member of the pastor's congregation, had hired the girl's 
mother as an office assistant and was treating the daughter for a learning 
disability, as well as giving money to the family as a favor, said Williams' 
attorney, Byron K. McMillan. 
Williams was arrested in November and charged with molestation after the girl 
told doctors in Kentucky of the alleged molestation during a counseling session 
for an attempted suicide by drug overdose. 
The second alleged victim testified Wednesday that she did not come forward 
until she saw television news reports about Williams' arrest. 
The 26-year-old woman, under questioning by Deputy Dist. Atty. Kelly McEachern, 
said Williams gave her a pelvic examination last January after she was referred 
to him by her doctor for consultation about back and leg pain. The woman said 
she asked Williams at the time why a pelvic exam was needed. 
"He said there were just some nerves he wanted to test to see if there was a 
reaction," she testified. 
She said she did not consider notifying authorities about the exam until she 
saw Williams on television in connection with the alleged molestation of the 
Irvine girl. She contacted her doctor, who told her that a pelvic exam had not 
been listed in notes on the case forwarded to him by Williams. 
The defense countered with testimony from Williams' longtime associate, 
gynecologist Johnnie Betson Jr. Betson said he and Williams created and had 
used a technique that treated back problems by removing a spinal disk by way of 
the abdominal area. He said a pelvic exam could be necessary in the woman's 
case in preparation for the operation. 
Father Arrested 
Defense questioning also revealed that the teen-ager's father had been arrested 
in January, 1985, by a Newport Beach police officer posing as a prostitute on 
Harbor Boulevard. That information was introduced to suggest that the girl's 
emotional problems could have stemmed from family problems. The girl's father 
testified Wednesday that he pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of disturbing 
the peace in the case. 
Municipal Judge Susanna S. Shaw is expected to decide today whether there is 
sufficient evidence to try Williams on the charges. 
If convicted, Williams could face 20 years in state prison, MacEachern said. 
