CRITIC AT LARGE: THE BAFFLEMENTS OF OSCAR TIME 
As almost every observer has remarked, the single largest astonishment of last 
week's Academy Award nominations is that the Australian director Bruce 
Beresford ("Breaker Morant," "Tender Mercies") was not nominated, although the 
film he directed, "Driving Miss Daisy," received a total of nine, tops for the 
year. No academy vote is without a surprise, sometimes bordering on outrage, 
and that was it. 
There was surprise as well that Spike Lee was not nominated for his direction 
of "Do the Right Thing," which had been much honored by critics here in Los 
Angeles and elsewhere. Lee did receive a nomination for his script for the 
film. 
Like the overlooking of Beresford, who as director bears responsibility for the 
film and all its nominated components, the ignoring of Lee as director seems 
contradictory. What was likable, or unlikable, about "Do the Right Thing," 
began with the script. In so personal a film, the script and the direction were 
in a real sense indivisible. 
The list of also-rans, the academy's equivalent of the cutting room floor, is 
piled high with names worthy of nomination. I think among others of Ed Zwick, 
who did so fine a job of mixing scenes of intense intimacy and massive chaotic 
battle in "Glory." 
Like many others, I admired "Drugstore Cowboy" for what I think of as its 
demythologizing of the drug scene, examining its low consumer end as the 
symptom of a hollowness and disappointment young people (some of them) appear 
to feel in their society. But the film proved to be invisible in the voting, 
and for the all-too-logical reason that it was not a box-office winner and was 
seen by relatively few voters. 
But in reacting to the nominations there is a distinction to be made between 
personal preferences that the voters didn't agree with, and a large bafflement 
like the overlooking of Beresford. 
Beresford, who became available for "Driving Miss Daisy" when a film he was to 
do for Dino De Laurentiis collapsed, worked closely with Alfred Uhry on the 
script. Because no one would finance the film at the relatively modest figure 
-- $12 million -- at which it was originally budgeted, Beresford helped plan 
the production changes that cut the costs by nearly a third. The contradictions 
in the nominating process arise, as ever, because directors vote for directors, 
writers for writers, actors for actors, and so on, while everybody gets a shot 
at best picture. The branches vary widely in population, with the actors 
numbering more than 2,000 and some of the technical branches with only a few 
dozen voters. 
Traditionally, the writers have been the least tethered and the most 
adventurous of the branches (or so it has seemed to me) and thus the nomination 
for Lee in their category. 
Considered historically, the academy voting has become broader and more 
democratic over the years, and also more internationally-minded, as witness 
1987 when the directors failed to nominate a single U.S.-born director. 
This year's tally of 4,900 voters is a modern record, probably double what it 
was a quarter-century ago. The academy leadership has tried hard to make the 
voting fairer and more representative of the industry as a whole. 
While some of the branches still have a clubby feeling in which new boys and 
girls have to wait their turn for honors, the voting generally is free of the 
influence of studios, as it was not in the past. 
But what remains true is that the Motion Picture Academy, like all academies of 
honor, reflects an older, more conservative viewpoint. An academy of creative 
craftsmanship inevitably rates craft highly -- higher than trenchant social 
commentary, especially when the commentary is toned with anger, criticism and 
pessimism. Especially pessimism. 
The voters clearly respect success, yet it's too easy to dismiss the Oscars as 
a popularity contest. Too many big box-office winners ("Batman" this year) are 
ignored. The likelier explanation is that more voters get to see the good films 
that are also long-running hits. The good, tough little film that doesn't make 
it into citywide release continues to be the academy's prime casualty. 
As in any election, subjective matters come into play. There are times when the 
academy voters seem to play share-the-wealth, overlooking certain achievements 
because the achiever has been honored recently before. And now and again a 
nomination and indeed an Oscar can only be interpreted as honoring not just the 
immediate achievement but a life's work (e.g., John Wayne in "True Grit"). 
The vote-out, so to speak, between "Born on the Fourth of July" and "Driving 
Miss Daisy," as the final ballot promises to be, will be a fascinating study in 
the academy's psychology. The choice would be between the angers, triumphantly 
resolved, of Oliver Stone's look at the traumas of Vietnam, against the warm 
humanism of "Daisy," with its subtle-enough reminders that there were hatreds 
and prejudices just up the street and that the standard status quo was not 
necessarily wonderful, even for wise chauffeurs. 
Ironically, all the analysis of the nominating process does not really explain 
the bypassing of Beresford by his fellow directors. Did it seem that with a 
sure-fire script and two (or four) wonderful performers, the director only had 
to call "Action" and "Cut"? The directors, of all groups, ought to know better. 
