HIGH BIRTH RATE THREATENS TO WIPE OUT AFRICA'S MODEST GAINS IN ECONOMIC GROWTH 
Elizabeth Mazivire, a 16-year-old mother of three, works in the tobacco barn of 
a wealthy Zimbabwean farmer to supplement the earnings of her tractor-driver 
husband. 
Her eldest son, Peter, is only 4 years old. 
Weary, and looking far older than her age, Elizabeth says she "accidentally 
fell pregnant" at 12 and since then has continued having accidental pregnancies 
by her 20-year-old husband, Jonathan. 
She is one of thousands of Zimbabwean women who, either because they do not 
know about contraceptives or have no access to them, end up having more 
children than planned. 
Zimbabwe, with only 9 million people in a country the size of France, hardly 
ranks as overcrowded. But here, as almost everywhere in Africa, a high birth 
rate is threatening to wipe out modest gains from economic growth. 
Zimbabwe and neighboring Botswana have been spotlighted by the World Bank as 
the only two countries in sub-Saharan Africa where vigorous government efforts 
to promote family planning are starting to show results. 
About 40% of Zimbabwean couples now use contraceptives -- about 10 times the 
African average, according to the World Bank. Only Mauritius, an Indian Ocean 
island not typical of Africa, scores higher, with 78%. 
Even so, Zimbabwe is still fighting an uphill battle against the African 
tradition of large families. 
Between 1980 and 1987 the net population growth was 3.7%, although the latest 
figures show a drop to 2.9%. World Bank statistics show that as recently as 
1988, the average Zimbabwean woman could expect to give birth to five children 
in her lifetime. 
Population growth has far outpaced Zimbabwe's annual average economic growth 
rate of 2.4% since independence in 1980, according to World Bank statistics. 
This has led to an average drop in the per capita gross domestic product of 
1.3% a year, with falling living standards, growing unemployment and increased 
pressure on social services. 
In much of Africa the figures are far worse. World Bank projections foresee a 
doubling of the continent's population to 1 billion in the next 30 years, and 
at the moment only 3% to 4% of couples use contraception. 
In Zimbabwe accidental pregnancies are most prevalent among schoolgirls who, 
for moral reasons, are barred by the authorities from freely obtaining 
contraceptives like their married and adult counterparts. 
But teen-agers and couples who do not use any form of modern contraception for 
cultural, religious and other reasons are now the main targets of a 
state-backed family planning program. 
The Zimbabwe National Family Planning Council has expanded its activities since 
independence to almost every town and has established a rural network in which 
contraceptives are given freely to couples and unmarried adults. 
"We are the nerve center of the country's population control strategy," said a 
spokeswoman of the council, which gets 70% of its funds from the government. 
The council holds lectures for couples on why and how to space their children 
and counseling sessions for young people on the consequences of early marriage. 
However, the campaign to persuade families to have fewer children has yet to 
reach every corner of the country, particularly isolated rural areas where 80% 
of Zimbabwe's population lives. 
Elizabeth, for example, despite living on a farm only 40 miles from the 
capital, said she had never heard of contraceptives until "a few weeks ago, 
when I went to Harare for specialized medical treatment." 
"I wish I knew there was this (contraceptives) and I think I couldn't have 
fallen pregnant in the first place and I could have been in school now," she 
said with a wry smile. 
Rural families, who rely on children to work on their farms, have an average of 
eight children. Before the advent of modern medical care, infant mortality 
encouraged women to have a large number of pregnancies to ensure that several 
children survived. 
