GRANT TO FUND 7 CITY BUSES POWERED BY NATURAL GAS 
San Diego Transit Corp. is about to embark on an experiment that may lead to 
cleaner-running buses. The catalyst is a $1.3-million grant from the federal 
Urban Mass Transportation Administration that San Diego Transit will use to 
purchase seven buses powered by compressed natural gas. 
The natural, high-pressure gas is less polluting than gasoline or diesel fuel. 
Officials hope that cleaner buses will encourage more people to leave their 
cars at home. 
"We already feel that bus service is one of the major contributors of clean air 
because we get all those dirty automobiles off the road," said Roger Snoble, 
president and general manager of San Diego Transit. "If we can take that black 
cloud away from our buses, we'll be even more effective in helping to clean the 
air." 
The grant was announced Monday by Brian W. Clymer, head of the federal agency, 
at a meeting in San Diego of American Public Transit Assn., a nationwide 
organization of transit-system operators. 
A request for bids to build the buses has already been published, and Snoble 
expects to have the buses on the road by mid-1991. The seven, 40-foot long 
buses will run on regular routes and will be evaluated over five years. 
SDG&amp;E will build a compressed natural gas refueling station at San Diego 
Transit's Imperial Avenue facility. The station will cost $460,000. SDG&amp;E 
will bear two-thirds of the building cost and San Diego Transit will contribute 
the rest. 
The utility will sell the compressed natural gas at a price comparable to what 
the transit company pays for diesel fuel. 
The new buses will be able to travel 400 to 500 miles without refueling and 
will travel up to about 55 m.p.h., about the same as with diesel fuel, said 
Jennifer K. Sansone, new products and services administrator for SDG&amp;E. An 
additional advantage to using natural gas is that it is a domestic resource, 
Sansone said. 
San Diego Transit is one of the first transit companies to receive a an UMTA 
grant for the natural gas buses, Snoble said. 
Transit systems, in Europe and Canada as well as Los Angeles and a private bus 
company in Brooklyn, also are experimenting with compressed natural gas as a 
fuel for buses, Snoble said. 
"It is the way to go," he said. 
