BACK INTO THE THICKET WITH BUSH; 
CAPITAL-GAINS BREAK WOULD UNDO FAIRNESS OF TAX REFORM 
As a presidential candidate, George Bush pushed for restoring the tax break 
that gave a preferential rate to capital gains. He argued that it would 
increase jobs, promote risk-taking and raise revenue. 
If such a simple change to the tax code would accomplish all that, why isn't 
everyone jumping onto the bandwagon? What Bush didn't mention was that his idea 
would undo half of the principal deal that made tax reform a reality. We traded 
tax breaks used by the few for lower marginal tax rates for all. Now President 
Bush proposes to reinstitute the capital-gains break, but no one expects him to 
offer a marginal rate increase at the same time. 
Heading down that path would be a significant break with the Reagan 
Administration. Congress and President Ronald Reagan found common ground by 
coupling changes in the marginal rate structure with the closing of loopholes. 
This process steadily ratcheted down rates and shut down special-interest 
provisions in the Internal Revenue Code. 
There are sound tax policy and equity arguments for maintaining the status quo. 
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 set marginal rates so low that the rationale for a 
preferential capital-gains rate no longer made sense. 
Advocates of the preference say that we need the lower rate to encourage 
investors to provide venture capital to risky enterprises, but such investment 
is only a tiny slice of the capital-investment pie. Certainly you could risk 
investing $10,000 in a new business that might fail. However, you could also 
put your $10,000 into IBM stock, gold coins or land. Under the old tax law you 
got the same preferential rate on a gain from either type of investment. 
When you take a look at the equities, though, you cannot avoid the fact that 
capital-gains realizations are concentrated among highest-income taxpayers. A 
survey of 1986 tax data by the Internal Revenue Service revealed that 77% of 
net long-term capital gains were realized by taxpayers with incomes of more 
than $75,000 (only about 3% of all taxpayers). The survey shows that 57% of net 
long-term capital gains were realized by taxpayers with incomes of more than 
$200,000 (a minuscule 0.3% of all taxpayers). 
It is plain that any reduction in the rate for capital gains would directly 
benefit the very wealthiest of taxpayers. Since preference advocates promote 
the differential as a boon to investment rather than to investors, logic and 
common sense dictate that this kind of proposal be linked to an increase in the 
marginal rate for upper-income taxpayers. 
Tax policy and equity are not the only considerations. Today changes in the 
Internal Revenue Code have to be evaluated for potential effect on the deficit. 
We can't afford to make the deficit worse. 
Even expert opinions on this issue are inconclusive. Reputable studies predict 
very different revenue consequences for a restored capital-gains rate. The 
Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation's analysis of a 15% maximum rate (the 
current maximum rate is 28%) predicted a $41-billion revenue loss over five 
years. On the other hand, Harvard Prof. Lawrence Lindsey estimates a three-year 
gain of $31 billion on the same change to a 15% rate. 
Historical evidence is no help, either. The Kennedy rate cut of 1962 generated 
revenue. However, when the 1981 tax bill lowered the capital-gains rate from 
28% to 20%, a Treasury Department study concluded that it had cost the 
government more than $300 million in the first two years alone. 
The bottom line is that the revenue effect of such a fundamental change in the 
current structure is unknown and unpredictable. With Gramm-Rudman waiting in 
the wings, can we afford to guess wrong? 
Actually, no guessing is required. This is one instance when Congress and the 
President should keep their hands off. The preferential rate for capital gains 
was justified under an income-tax system based on high marginal rates and a 
multitude of adjustments, deductions and preferences. As a result of the Tax 
Reform Act of 1986, which took the opposite approach, that justification 
evaporated. 
There is no notion more central to tax reform than the idea that individuals 
with similar incomes ought to pay similar amounts of tax. No principle is more 
deeply embedded in our tax structure than that the tax burden be distributed 
based on the ability to pay. Our old tax system paid lip service to those 
concepts but allowed those who could reduce their tax liability to do so and 
required those who could not do so to pay higher rates than necessaryin order 
to compensate. If we re-establish a capital-gains preference, we would be right 
back on the path that led us to the pre-1986 tax mess. 
