MAN BEHIND MALATHION SAFETY STUDY DISAVOWS IT 
In a potentially embarrassing blow to the state's aerial spraying campaign to 
eradicate the Medfly, an author of a 1980 state study used to demonstrate the 
safety of malathion has disavowed the report's findings, saying the pesticide 
may pose a danger to infants, the elderly and the sick. 
Marc A. Lappe, a professor of health policy and ethics at the University of 
Illinois, who was part of a state risk assessment team, said he found in 1980 
that malathion could cause six extra cases of cancer for every million people 
-- six times greater than what the report officially concluded. 
State health officials, however, immediately discounted Lappe's criticism, 
calling the changes made in the report scientifically insignificant. Moreover, 
they said, later studies by federal health authorities found the chemical did 
not cause cancer. 
Despite the later studies, Lappe said in an interview Monday, he is concerned 
about the possible health hazards of spraying. While six cancer cases in a 
million people are relatively few, he said, they suggest a potential hazard. 
"The public has been ramrodded into accepting this without their basic right to 
have a full airing," said Lappe, who resigned his state post in 1981 because of 
the changes made to the report. "It could be quite dangerous to infants, the 
elderly and the infirm." 
Federal policy generally assumes that a one-in-a-million risk is insignificant. 
But state regulation puts the standard at less than 1 in 100,000 for the 
enforcement of Proposition 65, the 1986 ballot initiative that requires 
businesses to warn people who are exposed to certain toxic chemicals. 
Dr. James Stratton, a medical epidemiologist with the state Department of 
Health Services, said that five years after the state's report was released, 
the National Toxicology Program determined that the cancer risk from malathion 
was virtually undetectable. 
Dr. Ephraim Kahn, Lappe's supervisor in 1980, said the study purposely assumed 
an exaggerated cancer danger. Such "worst case" assumptions make the difference 
in Lappe's numbers insignificant, Kahn said. 
"The implication that his numbers were changed to hide some serious effect is 
just ridiculous," said Kahn, who is known within the department as a supporter 
of strong pesticide regulations. 
The controversy over the report erupted this week because of an affidavit Lappe 
filed in support of a suit by the cities of Garden Grove, Huntington Beach and 
Westminster to stop the spraying. 
At the heart of the controversy is National Cancer Institute study that looked 
at the possible cancer risk of malathion in rats and mice. Researchers found a 
slightly higher incidence of liver cancer in the animals, but nothing that was 
statistically significant. Nevertheless, to be on the conservative side, Health 
Services decided to use the institute's worst-case figures in its 1980 report. 
Lappe -- who is recalled by former colleagues as brilliant, but stubborn and 
single-minded in his views -- said he took the strictest approach he could 
imagine. He assumed the greatest cancer risk possible from the institute's 
study, even though it was statistically insignificant; he chose as his 
hypothetical subject a naked baby lying outside and assumed that the baby had 
come in contact with all the malathion sprayed over 30 square feet. 
Lappe's calculation showed that there could be as many as six extra cancer 
cases in a million people, assuming six sprayings. He said the figure could go 
up to 10 in a million with 12 sprayings -- what the state proposes for some 
Southland areas. 
Kahn said he later adjusted the figures downward by assuming slightly less 
exposure to the hypothetical baby because he believed the change was 
scientifically insignificant and the result would be better understood by the 
public. 
Dr. Lynn Goldman, chief of environmental epidemiology and toxicology section at 
Health Services, said she also believes such a change is virtually meaningless 
in a risk assessment. 
"There is a lot of uncertainity in risk assessment," said Goldman. 
Regardless of Lappe's calculations, Stratton said the 1980 study became 
irrelevant five years later when the National Toxicology Program, in 
conjunction with the National Cancer Institute, released a new study that found 
malathion noncarcinogenic. 
"Malathion is frankly not among the list of chemicals that your readership 
should be worried about" as a cancer risk, he said. 
State officials Monday revealed plans to set up a Southern California malathion 
health advisory panel and conduct air and water quality reviews in local spray 
areas. 
The panel -- to be formed as early as this week -- would be made up of area 
health professionals. It would advise the state on the possible health 
implications of the spraying, as well as educate the public on its findings, 
Stratton said. Officials of the Department of Food and Agriculture said they 
were confident that the local panel's conclusions would mirror the state's 
findings. 
In another development, Dr. Paul Papanek, chief of the Toxics Epidemiology 
Program of the Los Angeles County Health Department, proposed that the state 
Department of Food and Agriculture pay for free testing for people who believe 
they have had an allergic response to malathion. He estimated the tests would 
cost $200 to $300 per person and involve about half a dozen people a week. 
He said the proposal was spurred by telephone calls from concerned spray zone 
residents and by the stepped-up spraying schedule. 
An independent lab in Palm Desert, meanwhile, is offering to provide malathion 
testing of produce, ground water and soil samples, at cost, to residents, said 
Craig Eaton, the lab's marketing director. For $25, the lab will analyze 
mail-in samples. 
Eaton said he is working with representatives of the Mt. Washington Assn., 
which has been active in the movement to stop malathion spraying. 
The lab, which opened in December, is registered by the state Department of 
Food and Agriculture but not yet accredited, said a department spokesman. 
Registration is mandatory but accreditation is not. 
Freelance writer Kathleen Doheny contributed to this story. 
MEDFLY SPRAYING MAP: B2. 
