UNLV IS STILL THE BIG GUN IN BIG WEST 
Greg Anthony, his face covered with tape because of a broken jaw, looked like a 
masked man. Anderson Hunt, who worried the last two days that he might have 
chicken pox, looked the picture of health. 
The two guards inspired Nevada Las Vegas to a 109-86 rout of New Mexico State 
Thursday night, staving off the Aggies' bid to take over first place in the Big 
West Conference. 
Anthony, who broke his jaw Monday night in a game against Fresno State, shocked 
Coach Jerry Tarkanian by showing up for practice Wednesday. Anthony intended to 
play wearing a hockey helmet and a football facemask. 
He decided before the game, however, not to wear the mask and immediately made 
a three-point shot, exciting the crowd of 18,790 in the Thomas &amp; Mack 
Center, and setting the tone of the game. 
The Rebels (21-4, 13-1 in the Big West) made 13 three-point shots, nine by 
Hunt, who as it turned out had only sinus congestion. Hunt, who came within one 
of tying Freddie Banks' school record for three-pointers, scored 31 points. 
Anthony played 32 minutes, scored 10 points and had six assists and two steals. 
"Greg was a real inspiration, he played with so much courage," Tarkanian said. 
"Every time he came out, they were putting oxygen in his nose." 
Tarkanian was worried. Center David Butler's knee was strained, reserve guard 
Stacey Cvijanovich has a shoulder separation and reserve guard Travis Bice has 
chicken pox. 
And the seventh-ranked Rebels, who have won the Big West seven consecutive 
years, were not comfortably in first place as they usually are this time of 
year. In addition, they lost to the Aggies, 83-82, on Jan. 8 at Las Cruces, 
N.M. 
"This is the game we had to have," Tarkanian said. "I didn't have a good 
feeling before the game, but our team has great pride." 
Las Vegas dominated the Aggies (20-3, 11-2) in the first half and were never 
threatened. The Rebels lead the Aggies by 1 1/2 games. 
The Rebels got off to the emotional start they wanted when Anthony, Hunt and 
Butler made contributions right away. 
Anthony and Hunt each hit three-point shots and Butler, dominating the boards, 
had two free throws and a tip-in, and the Rebels led, 10-6. 
New Mexico State tied the game, 10-10, but the Rebels, passing the ball crisply 
over New Mexico State's matchup zone defense, went on an 8-2 run, highlighted 
by two three-pointers from Hunt. 
Hunt stayed hot, swishing two more of the long shots to give the Rebels a 26-16 
lead with 8:45 left. 
Meanwhile, the Aggies couldn't make much headway against Las Vegas' man-to-man 
defense. 
"We played about as good as we can in the first half," Tarkanian said. "We 
moved the ball beautifully and our defense was great." 
The three-point shooting was contagious. Barry Young came off the bench to make 
two bombs before Hunt made two more in succession to increase the lead to 
48-31. He made another one at the buzzer, and the Rebels led at the half, 
62-39. 
Johnson had 21 points and Butler scored 17 for the Rebels. 
