SUPERCONDUCTORS WILL GET FIRST SPACE TESTING; 
SCIENCE: THE NEW DEVICES, IF THEY PROVE HARDY ENOUGH, COULD GREATLY REDUCE THE 
WEIGHT AND COST OF ORBITING ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT. 
A scientific satellite to be launched next year will carry electronic circuits 
made from high-temperature superconductors for the first tests of the materials 
in space, researchers said Monday at a meeting of the American Assn. for the 
Advancement of Science. 
Scientists hope that the superconductors, whose existence was first reported in 
January, 1987, could reduce the weight of many electronic devices and, thus, 
the cost of putting them in orbit, but it is first necessary to see how well 
they survive in the hostile environment of Earth orbit. 
In a daylong seminar here on the high-temperature superconductors, which carry 
electricity without any loss because of resistance, scientists also said that 
they are much more enthusiastic now about the commercial development of the 
materials than they were a year ago, and that the first commercial uses could 
appear within three to five years. The superconductors could also have a 
previously unsuspected impact on the microwave electronics industry, they said. 
Surprisingly, researchers agreed, Japan has not taken the lead in developing 
the superconductors that had been expected. Japanese and American investment in 
the new technology has been about the same, roughly $250 million a year, and 
well ahead of other countries' spending. But in the United States, two-thirds 
of the funds have come from the government, while in Japan two-thirds have come 
from industry. 
While most Japanese companies are working on only one particular type of 
superconductor material because they think it is the most promising, they could 
have a major advantage if it proves to be most effective. 
But if another type of material proves better, said Edward J. Mead of E. I. du 
Pont de Nemours &amp; Co., "they could all go marching off the edge of the 
cliff together, like a bunch of lemmings." 
The new high-temperature superconductors were discovered at an IBM Corp. 
research laboratory in Zurich, Switzerland, a feat for which the inventors won 
the 1988 Nobel Prize in Physics. Previous superconductors, which were either 
metals or alloys, had lost all resistance to the flow of electricity only at 
temperatures near absolute zero, roughly minus 460 degrees Fahrenheit. 
But the new materials, ceramics containing copper oxides and certain other 
metals, were superconducting at around minus 400 degrees and, within a year, 
researchers led by physicist PauW. Chu of the University of Houston and others, 
had raised the minimum temperature for superconductivity to minus 285 degrees 
Fahrenheit. 
The significance of this achievement was that it made possible cooling with 
inexpensive liquid nitrogen rather than the much more expensive liquid helium 
used with previous superconductors. Researchers predicted a vast array of new 
applications for the materials, including magnetically levitated trains, 
long-distance transmission of electricity and exceptionally fast 
supercomputers. 
But researchers encountered major difficulties. The superconductors could carry 
only limited amounts of electricity and, because they are brittle ceramics, 
cannot readily be fabricated into wires. By a year ago, the superconductivity 
community had become very discouraged about the prospects for commercializing 
the technology. 
They are regaining their enthusiasm, however. "We've entered a period of 
consolidation and the progress has been really tremendous," Chu said Monday. 
One of the most important developments, he said, was the ability to achieve 
high current-carrying capacity in thin films of the ceramic superconductors. 
These thin films can be used to produce electronic devices, such as the 
superconducting quantum interference devices, or SQUIDS, recently perfected by 
IBM. SQUIDS are very sensitive detectors of electromagnetic radiation, and Chu 
predicted that the new SQUIDS could be marketed in as little as three years. 
The new SQUIDS could have major applications in prospecting for petroleum and 
metal ores, Chu said. Researchers inject an electrical charge into the ground 
and look for telltale minute residual electrical currents. SQUIDS are now used 
for such purposes, but the requirement for liquid-helium cooling makes them too 
cumbersome for routine use. 
No cooling at all might be needed for superconducting electronic devices used 
in satellites as long as they were shielded from direct sunlight. Four 
companies, including Du Pont, are producing superconducting electronic devices, 
such as capacitors and filters, that will be carried on a Naval Research 
Laboratory satellite to be launched sometime in 1991, he said. 
Another potential new application for the materials is the production of 
microwave communications and radar devices. 
Although the commercial market for superconducting microwave components would 
be only about $5 million by 1995, Mead said, that technology could be 
particularly valuable to the military. Conventional microwave radars divert a 
significant amount of energy into what are known as side lobes -- emissions at 
a 90-degree angle to the main radar beam. "It is these lobes that an enemy 
locks on for detection and jamming," Mead said. The use of superconductors 
reduces the side lobes substantially. 
But all the panelists agreed that it will be well into the next decade before 
high-temperature superconductors are used for large magnets, electricity 
transmission and similar applications. 
"This is a marathon, not a sprint," Mead said. 
