SPECIAL REPORT: OIL ON THE BEACH; 
ON SHORES OF CONGRESS, SPILL EXPECTED TO ADD TO RIPPLE EFFECT OF OUTRAGE 
When the hull of the American Trader was ripped open with its own anchor last 
week and crude oil surged into Southern California's coastal waters, the 
ripples could be felt all the way to Washington. 
Even before the 400,000-gallon Huntington Beach spill, the oil industry had 
been fighting a tidal wave of congressional outrage stirred by the 11-million 
gallon Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska last March. 
Congress had delayed consideration of the industry's plans for exploratory 
drilling in the Alaska National Wildlife Reserve and Bristol Bay. It also voted 
last September to impose a blanket moratorium on new drilling off California 
until July. 
Now, as a congressional conference committee prepares to iron out differences 
later this month between House and Senate bills that would take the lid off 
financial liability limits for oil spillers and require expensive double hulls 
and bottoms for oil tankers, Big Oil is in for yet another bruising battle. 
"The impact of the Alaskan spill was enormous. The follow-up spill this week at 
Newport Beach within helicopter distance of every major media outlet in Los 
Angeles is going to reinforce the emotion," Richard W. Lewis, a Washington 
D.C.-based Chevron, U.S.A. lobbyist said a telephone interview. 
Andy Palmer of the American Ocean Campaign, which has been fighting offshore 
oil drilling, added, "I think this will put the political pressure on even 
more. It's clearly the kind of accident that could have been lessened or 
prevented with a double hull tanker." 
But proponents of tougher liability laws and double hulls still don't 
underestimate the oil industry's determination to push members of the 
conference committee for favorable provisions. 
"I think it will be nip and tuck even with the record floor votes and the spill 
because it represents a tremendous cost to the oil industry and they're going 
to fight it," Lynda Schuler, an aide to Sen. Pete Wilson, said. 
Both the House and Senate bills, approved earlier on overwhelming votes, would 
create a $1 billion national fund -- financed by a new tax on oil -- to pay for 
oil spill damages and would place the U.S. Coast Guard in charge of 
coordinating cleanup activities. 
Both bills would also remove the limit on how much an oil spiller would have to 
pay in damages if a spill resulted from "gross negligence, willful misconduct 
or failure to observe navigation or safety laws . . . ." 
Barring such failures, however, a tanker's liability would be limited, 
depending on its size. The House would sharply raise existing limits of $150 
per ton to $1,200 per ton for any accident. The Senate would raise the limit to 
$1,000 per ton or $10 million, whichever was greater. 
The House version of the bill, approved Nov. 1, would require double bottoms, 
hulls and sides on all new tankers and barges. It also would require existing 
tankers and barges to be retrofitted with double bottoms within 7 years if they 
are in excess of 20,000 tons, and double hulls within 15 years. 
The Senate bill would require double hulls and bottoms on new tanks only if the 
secretary of transportation determines within a year of the bill's passage that 
the extra construction would result in "a net enhancement of oil tanker 
navigation safety." A study that could help settle that issue is due in 
November by the National Academy of Sciences. 
Still, the Huntington Beach spill, in the view of environmentalists, argues 
persuasively for the tougher House version. 
"It's going to make it a lot harder for industry to say the Senate bill is a 
better way to go," said Clifton E. Curtis, executive director of the Oceanic 
Society in Washington. 
Meanwhile, legislation is moving in the California Legislature as well. A bill 
by Assemblyman Ted Lempert (D-San Mateo) would impose a 50-cent fee on each 
barrel of oil shipped to the state to underwrite a $500 million oil spill 
response fund. The money also would be used to strengthen the state Fish and 
Game Department's oil spill response office. 
Similar to the proposed federal legislation, the Lempert measure -- strongly 
backed by state Controller Gray Davis and Lt. Gov. Leo T. McCarthy -- would 
require tankers in California waters to be double-hulled, would levy a 
$10-per-gallon fine for any oil spills and a $30-per-gallon fine for spills 
caused by willful misconduct or negligence. 
Several authorities have suggested that had the American Trader been built with 
a double hull, last Wednesday's spill may have been much less extensive or 
averted altogether. Earlier, a Coast Guard study indicated that spillage from 
the Exxon Valdez would have been reduced by 80% if it had had a double bottom, 
according to Sen. Brock Adams (D-Wash). 
The Huntington Beach spill poses political problems for President Bush as well 
as the oil industry. The White House is due to announce soon its decision on 
whether to support a permanent or longer-term moratorium on offshore oil and 
gas drilling. 
"I think that particularly in light of the Huntington Beach spill we should be 
able to muster the voters to extend the moratorium another year," said Schuler 
of Wilson's office. 
"It would be expedient for the President to agree to Congress' intent. 
Secondly, it would be a real signal to the country and and the environmental 
community that Bush does intend to live up to his pledge to be an 
environmentalist," she said. 
