SCOTT OSTLER: YEAR AFTER YEAR, HE BUILDS TEAMS THAT LEARN HOW TO WIN 
I'm sitting in the Crenshaw High gym, waiting for Los Angeles' greatest active 
basketball coach to return from his regular noontime trip to a nearby burger 
joint. 
"He'll be here soon," one student tells me. 
"You'll know him," another student says. "Looks like Smokey Robinson." 
"Talks like Cosby," says the first. 
"Walks like Pat Riley," says the second. 
It's a sign of the respect that West has earned at Crenshaw that students would 
compare him to three of the giants of the entertainment industry, because 
Willie really doesn't look, talk or walk much like any of the above. 
What Willie West does do, he does better than anybody around. He coaches 
basketball. 
He took over the Crenshaw varsity in 1970 and won the City championship in that 
season. 
"We weren't supposed to win it that year, that's for sure," West says. "Things 
fell into place. We had a lot of luck." 
The luck continued. In his 18 seasons, Willie's Cougars have won the City 
championship 9 times and finished second four times. They won the state high 
school tournament three times. West's career record: 405 wins, 45 losses. Very 
lucky guy. 
The wins have done wonders in terms of interior decorating of Crenshaw's 
otherwise dingy gym. The huge championship banners cover the walls. 
In terms of local fame and fortune, the winning hasn't done much for West or 
his players. He makes a large annual shipment of graduating seniors to various 
universities far from L.A., but the local college recruiters seldom come 
calling, and the college job offers don't pour in. 
Off last season's Crenshaw team, nine players got basketball scholarships to 
Division I schools. When you can send all your starters and four of your 
reserves to major colleges, you are doing something right. 
But the USCs and UCLAs and Loyolas and other Southland schools leave Crenshaw 
pretty much alone. 
"That's why a lot of (Crenshaw) kids are leaving the area, I think," West says. 
"Basically, all you need is for the kids to see you. When you get a Denny Crum 
(Louisville coach), a Dale Brown (Louisiana State coach), people like that, to 
come at least once, the kids are impressed." 
As for Willie himself, he has never had so much as an interview for a college 
coaching or assistant coaching job. He had a feeler from Occidental after his 
first Crenshaw season, but it would have meant a drastic pay cut, and West had 
just bought a house. 
Maybe it's because West wouldn't score high on a charisma test. He's basically 
a shy person, a freakish trait in a basketball coach. He went to a coaching 
clinic in Las Vegas once. USC Coach George Raveling was the featured speaker, 
and Raveling spotted West and introduced him to the crowd. 
"That was sort of embarrassing," West says, sheepishly. 
He's a loner, doesn't do a lot of backslapping in the basketball community. 
Pretty much just teaches, coaches, wins, goes home. 
He only reluctantly consented to an interview, and then he worried that 
whatever I would write might rile Crenshaw opponents. 
 Look at this story. That Willie West is tooting his own horn again. That man's 
ego is out of control. 
He works quietly. He takes a new crew every year and builds a winner. The 
office he shares with another coach is a tiny, cluttered, windowless cell in 
the corner of the gym. No carpet, yucky yellow paint, wall-to-wall industrial 
linoleum. 
This is an inner-city school, and if you have glanced at a newspaper rack 
during the last couple of years, you know the inner city is falling apart 
faster than a $50 Chevy. 
More and more, sports is a refuge from the gangs, drugs, poverty and depression 
-- the growth industries of the area. More and more, Willie West's program is 
vital to the players, in terms of opportunity and self-esteem. 
"We're sort of losing the kids a little bit," West says. "I'm fighting harder 
to keep 'em." 
He's proud of the players Crenshaw has sent to pro ball -- Marques Johnson, 
John Williams, Darwin Cook and others -- and of the major college stars such as 
Syracuse's Stephen Thompson. 
But West is most proud of the hundreds of Crenshaw Cougars who simply made it 
to college. 
"David Carter (a former Crenshaw player) came by last Friday, said he'll be 
graduating on time," West says. "We've had guys do well. Three doctors, one 
surgeon. The surgeon, I told him, 'These are the hands of a surgeon?' He used 
to be clumsy, had terrible hands. We've got two or three attorneys, some 
teachers, coaches. 
"We've had some bad ones, too." 
One, Maurice Duckett, did time in prison for being involved in a murder. Now 
he's West's assistant coach, a reminder to the players of the possibilities -- 
of screwing up big and of turning a life around. 
West has to be more than a coach. He's the black version of The White Shadow, 
the ghetto coach in the 1970s TV series. 
How do his teams win, year after year? Some say he out-slickers his opponents, 
luring stars from all over greater Los Angeles with devious recruiting. West 
argues that most of the good players in the Crenshaw High district bus out to 
suburban high schools, and that he seldom recruits kids not referred to him. He 
says half his current team lives in the Crenshaw district. 
"I think I do less (recruiting) than anyone," he says. 
He can't win for winning. 
This season, experts tell me, the Cougars feature some of the least impressive 
talent of West's 19 seasons, yet they are 15-2. Maybe they'll get lucky, like 
the 1970-71 team. 
West is 48 years old, and his chances of moving up the coaching ladder shrink 
each year. Long ago he wanted to be a professional baseball player, but he went 
to a segregated Houston high school and feels he never got a chance. 
"Three-seventy-five as a sophomore, .394 as a junior, .494 as a senior," he 
says. "I thought baseball would be my livelihood. It didn't work out." 
He found something else he could do pretty well, although in many ways it seems 
like a losing battle. 
"Losing battle?" West says. "No, because I'm still here." 
That's the bad news and the good news. 
