SOCIETY: USO RECEIVES HEARTFELT APPRECIATION 
Some may regard the new San Diego Convention Center as solid proof that the 
city has outgrown its reputation as a sleepy Navy town, but the long line of 
white sedans with Navy plates and enlisted drivers that waited outside the 
center Saturday night made it clear that, wide awake or not, this city remains 
very much a Navy town. 
An even dozen admirals, a pair of Marine Corps major generals and sufficient 
Navy captains to command a convoy across the seven seas joined more than 300 
civilian supporters in the center's ballroom for "Give Your Heart to the USO." 
The event celebrated the 50th anniversary of United Service Organizations, the 
civilian-operated outfit known simply as the USO to several generations of 
servicemen and servicewomen. The organization invited a number of active 
enlisted personnel to attend. 
Vice Adm. Jack Fetterman, commander of naval air forces in the Pacific and the 
ranking naval officer in San Diego, and Adm. Leon Edney, vice chief of naval 
operations, headed a list of active and retired brass that also included Marine 
Major Gen. John Mahoney, Marine Major Gen. Don Fulham and San Diego's 
astronaut-in-residence, retired Capt. Wally Schirra. 
Retired Rear Adm. Herbert Stoecklein, president of the local USO Council and 
gala co-chairman, said that "Give Your Heart to the USO" was the first of what 
the organization intends to be an annual fund-raiser. Proceeds from the 
inaugural benefit, 
expected to reach about $40,000, are earmarked for the $60,000 cost of opening 
and staffing the new USO facility at Lindbergh Field. 
The event came a few days late to qualify for Valentine's Day status, and the 
decor, which consisted of red and white carnation centerpieces and a few lacy 
hearts floating above the bandstand, was suitably restrained. In the immense 
and cavernous spaces offered by the convention center, most decor quickly 
becomes lost anyway, although the giant red, white and blue USO banner, 
borrowed from the head office in Washington, made a powerful statement. 
Several guests who remembered some of the big, military-themed parties given 
during World War II said that the mood somehow captured the brisk and 
efficiently hopeful tone of that era's entertainments. 
When the Dick Braun Orchestra played "Anchors Aweigh" the gala seemed almost a 
revival of an earlier age in San Diego, and this impression was highlighted by 
the party's location in the city's newest public building. But event organizers 
said they chose the center simply because it is a neighbor of the USO on Harbor 
Drive. 
"After putting up with the years of construction it took to put up this 
building, we had to come party here," said one USO staffer. 
Servicemen make about 200,000 visits a year to the Harbor Drive USO, which in 
addition to offering a social setting provides such services as finding free 
housing for families relocated by emergencies. 
The military, perhaps because it likes a good parade, seems very fond of 
dancing, and most guests took the floor repeatedly between the several courses 
of a dinner that featured chilled shellfish remoulade, tournedos Bordelaise and 
pastry swans. After the meal, the band briefly retired while KSDO radio 
announcer Ron Reina conducted a live auction that contributed several thousand 
dollars to the event's proceeds; among the items were a "Love Boat" cruise to 
Mexico and a pair of wooden duck decoys hand-carved by Rear Adm. Jack Adams. 
The guest list included retired Rear Adm. Bruce Boland, Eleanor and Art 
Herzman, Morris Wax, Rachel and Judson Grosvenor, Sharon and Tim Considine, 
Cathy and Nicholas Monroe, Fern and Robert Murphy, Carol and retired Vice Adm. 
Harry Schrader, Jan and Mike Madigan, Martha Carpenter, Jane Stoecklein, Betty 
and Cushman Dow, Shirley and retired Rear Adm. David Rubel, and Loretta 
Bonvouloir. 
The carefully plotted geometry of the annual Women of Dedication luncheon 
encompasses, within its generous angles, just about every charitable and social 
service organization in the county, and was symbolized at Thursday's "Silver 
Jubilee" luncheon at the San Diego Marriott by the silver boxes that centered 
every table. 
The day saw 15 women added to the roster of Women of Dedication, which in its 
25 years has developed into a reliable "Who's Who" of the county's volunteers. 
More than 300 women now claim membership in this group. 
The event ranks as the major annual fund-raiser given by the Women's Auxiliary 
to the Salvation Army Door of Hope and benefits maternity care, scholarship, 
and drug- and child-abuse prevention programs. But more than that, it has 
become a February tradition at which volunteers turn out to congratulate their 
own. As a result, a sold-out attendance of 940 jammed the ballroom Thursday, a 
turnout that Chairwoman Betty Hubbard described as "thrilling and exciting." 
"It's good to see women who have given so much to the community acknowledged," 
said Maj. Richard Love, county coordinator for the Salvation Army. "The Women 
of Dedication deserve their name, because they do a spectacular job." 
The Silver Jubilee proceeded according to the pattern established over the 
years, with the lunch of dilled salmon and chocolate tulips preceding the 
formal march of the honorees. A fashion presentation by La Jolla's Capriccio 
concluded the event. 
The women walked in turn down the long runway while Channel 10 news anchor 
Carol LeBeau read each one's civic resume. These walks can be amusing when, as 
frequently happens, the male escorts -- husbands, sons or family friends -- 
attempt to gallop down the ramp. A pre-event pep talk obviated that difficulty 
Thursday. 
Letha H. Brown, president of the board of trustees of the San Diego Center for 
Children, led the procession. Following were Betty Byrnes, immediate past 
chairwoman of the National Coucil of Business and Professional Women; Mary-Lynn 
Deddeh, board chairwoman of the Lamb's Players Theater; Ruth Gonsalves, past 
president of the Social Service Auxiliary; Zee Griffith, president of Women 
Incorporated; Mary-Em Howard, vice president of Alpha Phi Sorority; Betty 
McElfresh, past president of the San Diego Optometric Auxiliary, and Mary 
McGregor, vice president of the Friends of the Library Board at the University 
of San Diego. 
Sister Virginia McMonagle, director of Constituent Relations at USD and a board 
member of an orphanage in Haiti, was followed by Helen Monroe, the executive 
director of the San Diego Community Foundation; Sandra Pay, past board 
president of the San Diego Opera; Mitch Pflugh, past president of the Junior 
League of San Diego. 
