THEY HEAR IT THROUGH THE GRIPEVINE IN SAN MARCOS 
Complaining to the San Marcos City Council has become easier than ever, thanks 
to a computer link between City Hall and residents. 
The link, which was established in December but is not yet fully operational, 
allows people with a computer and modem to connect with the city's computer 
bulletin board. 
The board gives access to City Council agendas and minutes, and allows people 
to send messages to individual City Council members and express their views by 
writing articles that appear on the board. 
The link is the brainchild of Chris Preston, 17, the son of San Marcos 
Councilman Mike Preston, who modeled the computer bulletin board after a much 
larger operation in Santa Monica. 
"The idea is to open up government to more people," the senior Preston said. 
"For instance, our bulletin board will be open from 6 p.m. to 7 a.m., so people 
who would like to but are not able to attend City Council meetings can call in 
when they get off work." 
Private messages may be sent to City Council members or anyone with a "mailbox" 
in the system, to be read when that person links up to the system later on. 
Public messages may also be written on the computerized bulletin board for 
anyone with a computer and a modem to read. 
Computer bulletin boards are information exchange networks designed to connect 
people with similar interests, using computer links. Bulletin boards have long 
been used in educational and corporate settings. 
The San Marcos service is still too new to have a list of users, Preston said, 
because the city has yet to be listed in the computer bulletin-board 
publications. 
Only about 10 users -- who have heard about the city's bulletin board through 
the grapevine -- have connected with it so far, according to Chris Preston. The 
younger Preston hopes that about 50 people will be regular users of the 
bulletin board when it becomes fully operational Tuesday. 
Preston said the total cost of the project, which began in September, came to 
just under $200, which includes bulletin board software and software to convert 
city hall programs to the bulletin board. The bulletin board uses existing city 
hardware. 
The service is free to any resident with a computer and a modem. The bulletin 
board's modem number is 744-0511. 
