ONLY IN L.A. / PEOPLE AND EVENTS 
Sandra Felton remembers one Halloween when her house was such a wall-to-wall 
mess that she closed the curtains and futilely tried to clear off a portion of 
the living room rug near her front door. 
"I'm a messy," admits the Miami high school teacher, and she estimates that 
there are at least 7,000 chronically disorganized people like her in the 
nation. 
Felton learned to control her problem, however, and recently founded Messies 
Anonymous to help others. She's coming to town to speak to a Messies Anonymous 
branch Thursday night at the Sheraton in Redondo Beach and to a Friday night 
meeting of the National Assn. of Professional Organizers, which addresses the 
same problems. 
Chronic messiness is particularly difficult for women, Felton notes, "because 
they're supposed to be organizers. If a man is a messy, he can get a woman -- a 
secretary, a wife, a girlfriend -- to help out." 
Felton says messy types range from pack rats to the "classic absent-minded 
professors. There's a story about a professor who meets a student as he's 
strolling across campus. After they finish talking, he asks the student, 'Which 
way was I going?' The student points. And the professor says, 'Good. That means 
I've eaten.' " 
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev prefers to whiz about in Russian-made limos on 
his visits to the United States. But Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita of Japan, 
whose country also makes automobiles, has been making the rounds in a 100% 
American limousine during his stay in Southern California -- a Cadillac. 
A gesture of good will in the trade war between the two nations? A spokesman 
for the Japanese Consulate here would say only that the State Department 
handled car selection for the visit. 
Perhaps it was enough for Takeshita to know that virtually every photographer 
who covered his downtown visit Sunday was using a Japanese-made camera. 
The customer's always right. And perhaps so is the student at upscale 
Pepperdine where parents shell out upward of $18,000 per year for tuition, room 
and board for their darlings. 
Just to remind university personnel of whom they're dealing with, 200 workers 
and executives attended a one-day course in manners at a Holiday Inn on Monday. 
The speakers were supplied by Nordstrom stores, the Marriott hotel chain and 
McCuistion and Associates (a customer service consulting group). 
The instruction was the brainstorm of Pepperdine President David Davenport, who 
has "long been impressed by the service at Nordstrom's," said schoolspokesman 
Jeff Bliss. "And he considers students customers." 
The Nordstrom's representative emphasized that good service "isn't a strategy. 
It's a commitment" but avoided any specific recommendations, such as a 
gift-wrapping service for textbooks. 
You think driving the San Diego Freeway is grueling now? 
Westways magazine, celebrating the publication's 80th anniversary, carriesthis 
1909 account of the P. A. Benton family's excursion from Los Angeles to San 
Diego in a Matheson touring car. 
It sounds like a Chevy Chase movie. 
"At Santa Ana," the adventurous Benton said, "we were informed it was 
impossible to reach San Diego by the coastline and were advised not to try it. 
. . . About halfway between San Onofre and Santa Margarita, there is a ford at 
the bottom of a very steep grade, and here the bank had been cut away, which 
made a jump off of about two feet. . . . The water in the Santa Margarita River 
was about two feet deep, but with our carburetor being located high in the 
hood, we had no difficulty in fording it. 
"Just before La Jolla, we sank axle-deep in adobe. (But) from this point to San 
Diego, the road is in good condition." 
Time of the 120-mile trip: About 12 fun-filled hours. 
