WON'T CHANGE EUROPE TROOP PLAN, BUSH SAYS 
President Bush said Monday he will not revise his formula for a joint 
U.S.-Soviet military reduction in Europe even though the Soviets have rejected 
the idea because it would leave U.S. forces with an additional 30,000 troops. 
Pointing to the geographical advantage the Soviet Union would have in 
redeploying units to Central and Eastern Europe west of Soviet borders, Bush 
said that "we've got a big ocean between us and . . . Western Europe" that 
would delay a speedy redeployment. 
"I don't think any of us think we can see with clairvoyance as to what's going 
to happen the day after tomorrow," Bush said at a press conference, defending 
his plan for maintaining U.S. forces in Europe. 
The President proposed on Jan. 31 that the United States trim its 305,000 
troops in Europe to 195,000 in Central Europe, most in West Germany, with an 
additional 30,000 in the rest of Western Europe. The Soviets, by this plan, 
would trim their deployment of 380,000 in East Germany, Poland and 
Czechoslovakia to 195,000. 
On Sunday, the Soviet Union stated its readiness to withdraw all of its troops 
from Central Europe, many of them unilaterally, in an effort to accelerate the 
negotiations now under way on reducing conventional forces in Europe. 
The Kremlin, in a statement, said it accepted Bush's 195,000 limit if the more 
than 30,000 American troops in Britain, Italy, Spain, Greece and Turkey are 
included and if negotiations are scheduled to reduce the overall number. 
Bush on Monday, however, stood by his initial proposal and reacted coolly to 
Soviet suggestions that the troop limits could go well below the 195,000 level 
put forth by Bush. 
"Our European allies want us there," Bush said. "I have a feeling that some of 
the Eastern Europeans want us there, because they know that the United States 
is there as a stabilizing factor, and we will be there for a long time to come, 
hopefully at significantly reduced numbers." 
Despite that area of contention, the President offered a particularly upbeat 
assessment of the broad sweep of U.S.-Soviet relations after Secretary of State 
James A. Baker III's visit to Moscow last week. Bush said that work on treaties 
reducing conventional, strategic and chemical weapons can be "substantially 
complete" by the time Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev arrives in the 
United States for a summit in June. But he said he was uncertain that the 
weapons treaties and a new pact limiting nuclear testing could be signed by 
then. 
And, even as he acknowledged that East and West Germany appeared "to be moving 
very fast" toward becoming one nation, he maintained that there was no room in 
Europe for a unified Germany that has divorced itself from the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization -- thus seeming to close the door on the prospects for the 
"neutral" Germany favored by Moscow. 
The President spoke at a time when the East-West relationship, in general, and 
the U.S.-Soviet relationship, in particular, are tumbling through dramatic 
changes, and his remarks reflected the almost daily assault on the Cold War 
that has left policy makers grasping to assess the changes and develop new 
positions to account for the emerging opportunities for democracy in Eastern 
Europe. 
"If we continue this kind of momentum in our bilateral relationship with the 
Soviet Union, the June summit will be a major success," Bush said. 
Over the past week, the President has offered conflicting views of the changing 
world, a reflection of the domestic political pressure on military spending at 
a time of nearly unalloyed optimism about the state of East-West relations. 
Last week, Bush carried out a controversial cross-country journey that offered 
daily backdrops of military operations straight from the peak of the Cold War 
and doses of still-tough presidential rhetoric as he pressed for approval of a 
$295-billion defense budget. On Monday, Bush spoke of the "extraordinary and 
positive week in East-West relations," a week in which the Central Committee of 
the Soviet Communist Party stunned many with large strides toward a pluralistic 
political system. 
But there remains the thorn presented by the prospect of a single, large, and 
presumably economically powerful Germany -- a nation from which two world wars 
emanated. 
Siding predictably with West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Bush said, "I think 
that Chancellor Kohl is absolutely correct, and we ought to support him: NATO 
membership. I think it's stabilizing. I think it's good." 
Would that mean the same sort of full membership in NATO that has made Bonn an 
integral element in the alliance? "Sure, yeah," Bush said. 
He said the concern of "many Europeans," that a unified Germany outside the 
bounds of NATO might pose a threat and could be dangerous, "would be allayed" 
if the nation's membership in NATO was maintained. 
However, on the central question that appears to be the greatest stumbling 
block -- that of the role of troops in a new unified Germany -- Bush said, 
"There might be some flexibility, obviously, on deployment of NATO forces." 
Moments later, he said the deployment question deals with the role of Western 
forces in what is now East Germany. Officials have said in the past that these 
troops would remain in the western sector. 
In other areas, Bush said his top priority when he meets on Thursday with the 
leaders of three major cocaine-producing nations in Cartagena, Colombia, will 
be to emphasize that his Administration is moving forward "on all fronts" to 
reduce the drug demand within the United States. 
The message reflects Administration efforts to ease South American concerns 
that the aggressive new U.S. plans for a war on drugs in the Andean nations 
have failed adequately to address American responsibility for cocaine 
trafficking in the region. 
At the same time, however, Bush indicated that he did not plan to offer 
immediate new economic assistance to help those nations subsidize a shift away 
from the cocaine economy, warning that they "ought not to be condoning the 
growth of crops that are illegal." 
Bush also said he hopes to persuade the Colombian government to sign off on a 
plan that would deploy U.S. Navy ships to the Caribbean to monitor air and sea 
routes commonly used by smugglers bringing drugs northward from Colombia. 
Times staff writer Douglas Jehl contributed to this report. 
