A REMARKABLE REALISM ON AFGHANISTAN; 
GORBACHEV SAW THE FUTILITY, WE SHOULD SEE THE OPPORTUNITY 
The withdrawal of the last Soviet soldier from Afghanistan is an occasion not 
only for rejoicing but for reflection as well. The effect of Soviet defeat may 
prove more profound than the consequences of American failure in Vietnam. 
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's remarkable realism here demonstrates an unprecedented 
willingness to cooperate in resolving regional conflicts. More recent 
initiatives in Angola and Cambodia suggest that this willingness extends to 
other conflicts, too. Even in Central America, the graveyard of the 
Reagan-Shultz-Abrams campaign to overthrow the Sandinistas, a satisfactory 
settlement appears within reach -- if the United States has the will to 
stretch. Current circumstances present the Bush Administration with the widest 
window of opportunity in the postwar period to decisively conclude the era of 
Soviet "wars of liberation." 
In 1979, when the Soviet forces invaded Afghanistan, no one could have dreamed 
of such an outcome. To appreciate the magnitude of this victory and its 
implications, it is necessary to go back nine years to American and Soviet 
perceptions of the stakes. 
For President Jimmy Carter the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was a formative 
experience. As he confessed: "This action of the Soviets has made a more 
dramatic change in my opinion of what the Soviets' ultimate goals are than 
anything they've done in the previous time that I've been in office." 
The Carter Administration interpreted the Soviet action as a geostrategic grab. 
Afghanistan translated the Soviet military buildup into action. For the first 
time since World War II, Soviet military forces were directly engaged outside 
Europe. Afghanistan represented a calculated step in Russia's centuries-old 
quest for warm-water ports. Domination of the world's strategic oil reserves in 
the Persian Gulf was the unspoken prize. 
All this became conventional wisdom after 1980 and shaped the Reagan 
Administration's views of Soviet ambitions. Indeed, it continues to dominate 
the thinking of many Americans today. 
Statements by the Soviet government and commentaries by Soviet advisers did 
little to allay the American concerns. In conversations with Westerners, even 
Soviets who had opposed Soviet intervention made a point of emphasizing the 
difference between Afghanistan and Vietnam. As one told me bluntly: "Whatever 
the merits of the decision, having decided to act, the Soviet Union will do 
whatever is necessary to win. We will never bug out for lack of guts or heart." 
Yet Gorbachev has accepted defeat, with only a fig leaf of calling it 
stalemate. He has not even demanded the "decent interval" that Henry A. 
Kissinger sought in 1975. 
Americans who believed, as I did, that Afghanistan constituted a geostrategic 
challenge must now ask how Gorbachev's reversal of that policy can be 
explained. In the light of the potential benefits of success, and the probable 
consequences of failure, what kind of Soviet leader and what kind of Soviet 
Union could actually do such a thing? 
A chorus of commentary explains simply that the Soviets found the costs 
exceeding the benefits. But this tautology just rephrases the puzzle. Clearly 
the combination of Afghan courage, Western supplies (including American Stinger 
missiles), international condemnation and domestic discontent imposed heavy 
costs. But who says that these costs exceed the benefits of realizing a 
venerable geopolitical aspiration? Had the Soviet Union continued the war and 
even annexed Afghanistan or parts thereof, these pundits would solemnly 
announce that the benefits exceeded the costs. 
Consider the consequences of Soviet acceptance of defeat and withdrawal. How 
will the Soviet army explain to itself and its supporters that a military 
establishment that consumes 15%-20% of the Soviet gross national product, that 
faced no restrictions on its pursuit of the war, in a system of government that 
puts long-term interests ahead of short-term pressures of public opinion, 
nonetheless lost. Even more significant will be the reverberations in Soviet 
satellite and client states, since the defeat in Afghanistan rolls back for the 
first time the Brezhnev doctrine of the irreversibility of communist gains. 
What will happen in Afghanistan? The Soviet client government is unlikely to 
last as long as Nguyen Van Thieu did in Vietnam. The prospects of continuing 
warfare and instability, perhaps even a "Lebanon" right on the Soviet border, 
cannot be excluded. 
The crucial factor explaining the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan is 
Gorbachev. Reviewing the facts -- a declining Soviet economy, increasingly 
burdensome Third World clients and an international system evolving away from 
military-based bipolarity toward technologically determined multipolarity -- 
Gorbachev has come to a radically different conception of how the Soviet 
Union's interests can best be secured. While his predecessors sought greater 
security through support for Marxist-Leninist revolutions, Gorbachev has seen 
that real security can best be achieved, for the foreseeable future, through a 
normalization of relations that respects both sovereignty and international 
law. If the Bush Administration will think clearly about what U.S. interests 
require, it can now settle this aspect of the Cold War on terms that achieve 
our original objectives. 
