SEC SEEKS TOUGHER RULES TO PROTECT SMALL INVESTORS IN PENNY STOCKS 
The Securities and Exchange Commission on Wednesday proposed stiff new rules to 
protect small investors from high-pressure sales tactics often used in the sale 
of so-called penny stocks. 
The commission voted 5-0 to propose requiring stockbrokers to obtain written 
customer agreement and make a documented "suitability" determination before 
completing the sale of such stocks in most cases. 
Penny stocks are inexpensive issues sold over the counter. They are not listed 
on any major stock exchanges or quoted on the NASDAQ over-the-counter system. 
SEC staff members said the rule was deliberately crafted in a narrow way to 
avoid hurting the ability of small companies to use the markets to raise 
capital. 
The proposed rule "in no way is intended to target small issues or speculative 
investment decisions per se," said Richard Ketchum, head of the SEC's Division 
of Market Regulation. Rather, he said, it was designed to give investors a 
chance to make "careful and unhurried" decisions. 
The price of penny stocks is prone to manipulation because they are thinly 
traded and subject to domination and control by a single market maker. 
SEC Chairman David S. Ruder, who has vowed to step up the commission's efforts 
to combat penny stock fraud, said his target was "boiler room" operations used 
to make hundreds or thousands of telephone pitches a day to relatively 
unsophisticated people unable to properly evaluate the risks. Such operations 
are called boiler rooms because of the high-pressure tactics used. 
He said such operations had spread to many parts of the United States from 
Denver and Salt Lake City, their traditional bases. 
Charles Harper, administrator of the SEC's Miami regional office, described for 
the commission some of the techniques used by salespeople to clinch a sale. 
To rush people into making a decision, he said, sales managers would sometimes 
rattle a stapler to simulate the clatter of a ticker tape as their salesmen 
spoke on the phone. The pitchman would then tell a prospective buyer: "You 
better hurry. There goes the ticker. Orders are coming from Japan and Germany, 
and we only have a limited amount to sell." 
