A DOCTOR WHO PRESCRIBES WORLD NUCLEAR ANTIDOTES 
Dr. Herbert Abrams talks about nuclear war not only as a radiologist who might 
have to treat the wounds it would inflict, but also as a man whose organization 
won a 1985 Nobel Peace Prize for trying to keep such a war from happening. 
There will be no way to try the superpowers for malpractice for using nuclear 
weapons, says Abrams, so the best insurance is a world fully informed of the 
consequences of nuclear war and working to reduce its likelihood. 
The International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, a body Abrams 
helped establish, outlines nuclear risks in forums and publications around the 
world. Closer to home, Abrams, a physician who has written many of the 
textbooks about diagnosing heart disease, lectures to Stanford University 
undergraduates about accidental nuclear war -- and about the danger of 
annihilation inherent in a world where weapons could be stolen by terrorists or 
decisions blurred by a disabled President. 
Despite the progress toward arms reduction in the last Reagan years, Abrams is 
worried about continuing that progress under George Bush, concerned that Bush 
went out of the mainstream and veered toward the right during his presidential 
campaign. And "the agenda of the radical right demands some kind of obeisance 
in the international arena." 
Bush has a window of opportunity that may not come again soon, Abrams suggests, 
recalling a dinner conversation he had with Andrei Sakharov at the dissident 
physicist's Moscow apartment. Sakharov spoke of a rigid system in which "no 
amount of good will or intelligent planning or glasnost or perestroika or 
democratization" can necessarily achieve within an acceptable time frame what 
the Soviet people want to see. 
"Sakharov is not sanguine about the chances of (Soviet President Mikhail S.) 
Gorbachev staying in power," Abrams said, adding that if tangible change is to 
occur in the arms-control arena, it therefore must happen in the next three to 
five years. 
"I think it's an enormous opportunity to move ahead aggressively in 
arms-control agreements that are really savage cuts," Abrams added, "and I'm 
not sure that George Bush has the stamina and the durability to accept the 
radical right's critique that he would be compromising our security. Instead of 
having 20 times overkill, we'll have only 12 or 11 or 10. I think it's an 
opportunity which we've really got to grasp." 
Abrams speaks of such concerns in the low-key manner of an instructor who might 
be telling a medical student how to take an X-ray. How can he be so understated 
in talking of nuclear war? The subject, after all, is about the possible deaths 
of millions of people. It is also about the number of military people with drug 
or alcohol problems who have had their fingers near the nuclear trigger. 
"It's an area in which I think hyperbole can really obscure some of the 
seriousness of the problems," said the 68-year-old physician during a recent 
interview in his basement office at Stanford's School of Medicine. "I think the 
facts speak for themselves." Besides, he added, "I've got an actor in my 
family" already. His brother, Mason Adams, is the dry voice in dozens of 
commercials and the man who played managing editor Charley Hume to Ed Asner's 
Lou Grant. 
Abrams remembers the time when, for him, concern turned into activism during 
Jimmy Carter's presidency: "In the early 1960s, a lot of us were concerned 
about testing in the atmosphere; radiologists had to be concerned about that," 
Abrams recalled. "Then the partial test ban came and I was frankly fully 
involved running a department of radiology, participating in the activities of 
a medical school," first at Stanford and later at Harvard. But with increasing 
tensions in the Persian Gulf, the unthinkable -- that is, use of nuclear 
weapons -- moved into the category of the thinkable. And Abrams became 
involved. 
"Carter's approach to this was that we might have to use any weapon that was 
available to us in order to make certain the free flow of oil," to ensure 
protection of American interests. Drawn by Carter's policies to study the 
issue, Abrams discovered that "virtually every President from Eisenhower on 
considered the use of nuclear weapons . . . . It began to dawn on me that these 
weapons of annihilation were being considered for use in the settlement of 
disputes between nations when I had honestly not thought that that was ever in 
the cards." 
One of Abrams' early contributions was a report on the medical problems of 
survivors of nuclear war, published in November, 1981, in the New England 
Journal of Medicine. Among survivors, millions would have trauma or burns. A 
third of those would have radiation sickness as well. The radiation to which 
they had been subjected would increase susceptibility to infection, as would 
subsequent hardships. Food and drinkable water would be in increasingly short 
supply. On top of all that, fewer than 80,000 doctors might be left alive to 
treat the injured. 
Abrams thinks Physicians for Social Responsibility, which holds its national 
meeting March 10 and 11 in Palo Alto, has played a major role in telling the 
public "what medicine could and could not do if there was a massive exchange." 
People have begun to understand that talk about survival or a winnable nuclear 
war really has no relationship to reality, he adds. 
Physicists, educators, engineers and business people all played a role, but 
Abrams thinks doctors were central. "Physicians are a conservative bunch. This 
was a conservation of health and life issue." 
The chance to be a bridge between those doctors and arms controllers brought 
Abrams back in 1985 to Stanford -- where he'd done his medical residence and 
taught for 16 years -- after almost two decades at Harvard. Today, he is not 
only a professor of radiology but also a member-in-residence of Stanford's 
Center for International Security and Arms Control. The center examines arms 
control with experts from several disciplines, including politics, history and 
science. Abrams felt he could bring together "the physicians, who are 
suspicious of the arms controllers as people who want to manage the stockpiles, 
and the arms controllers who wonder about these kooky doctors invading their 
territory." 
As early as the late 1970s, Abrams and several medical colleagues had 
revitalized a U.S. group known as Physicians for Social Responsibility. By 1981 
they had met with doctors from the Soviet Union, Japan, Canada and various 
Western European nations. Among the key leaders were U.S. doctors Bernard Lown, 
James Muller, Eric Chivian and Abrams, plus Evgueni Chazov of the Soviet Union. 
The American participants always made clear to their Soviet counterparts that 
"the organization would be professional, medical and scientific and that the 
moment it was used as a propaganda vehicle for the Soviet Union or for the 
United States or for anyone, that our interest in it would terminate. 
"There may have been a few individuals who looked at the Soviet Union through 
rose-colored classes," Abrams said. But most had no illusions. The real 
question "is whether we were able -- working through individuals who at that 
time, in the Brezhnev era, were obviously acceptable to the leadership -- were 
we able to get access to Soviet society in any way, shape or form? The answer 
is yes, we were able to. Were they free to criticize their own government the 
way we are here? No, not at all. 
"But so long as they accepted our agenda, whether that coincided with theirs, 
that was fine with us . . . so long as they understood that a sense of alarm 
and concern had to be conveyed broadly through the world." 
