S.D. GLANCES INWARD, WEIGHS RACIAL TENSION 
When the San Diego Unified Port District commissioners refused last week to 
name the city's new $160-million bayfront convention center after the Rev. Dr. 
Martin Luther King Jr., longtime black civil-rights activist Vernon Sukumu 
recalled thinking, "Same old story, new chapter." 
Other San Diegans of all races had similar thoughts, for the Board of Port 
Commissioners' rebuff of the attempt to honor the slain civil-rights leader was 
only the most recent in a series of racially tinged episodes in California's 
second-largest city. 
Over the past three years, San Diego -- now the nation's seventh-largest city 
-- has suffered through divisive controversies that included the firing of the 
city's first black city manager, a citizen-led referendum that overturned a 
City Council decision to rename a major thoroughfare for King, the racially 
charged trial of a young black man who eventually was acquitted of killing a 
white policeman, and now, the Port District's refusal to endorse the council's 
plan to rename the new convention center after King. 
Also, racial tensions in schools and the locally based national white 
supremacist group headed by Tom Metzger have drawn occasional headlines, and 
the city's decision late last year to close several beachfront parking lots 
overnight had racial overtones. 
Sobering Question 
All of this has some residents in this booming coastal city pondering a 
particularly sobering question: Is San Diego, which calls itself America's 
Finest City, experiencing a rise in racism? 
Though some defend the city's racial climate while others caustically condemn 
it, the consensus is that San Diego's racial problems probably are comparable 
to those of other major American cities. What is significant, many say, is how 
the city has been slow to see -- and reluctant to accept -- that reality. 
"Without suggesting that there's rampant racism in San Diego, I think it's fair 
to say that public officials haven't always recognized the racial significance 
of their policy decisions," said San Diego City Councilman Bob Filner, who was 
arrested in Mississippi as a Freedom Rider in the 1960s. "Sure, there are 
racial problems here. And the way to start solving them is to start looking at 
these issues through different eyes." 
Dennis Rohatyn concurs. He is a professor of philosophy at the University of 
San Diego and an occasional radio commentator on local issues. 
"The problem with San Diego is that it has big-city problems but a small-town 
mentality," Rohatyn said. "It prefers to think of itself as this idyllic little 
seaside village, where we wink our eye and pretend that typical urban problems 
don't exist." 
Different Picture 
The 1980s, however, have provided ample evidence to the contrary. 
In the past five years alone, a city mayor and a councilman were forced from 
office by criminal charges, a nondescript madman killed 21 people at a 
McDonald's in the worst single-day massacre in U.S. history, and a series of 
100-decibel business scandals was topped by the collapse of J. David (Jerry) 
Dominelli's La Jolla investment empire after he admitted bilking investors out 
of more than $80 million. The city faces burgeoning drug and gang problems, the 
same deteriorating infrastructure and financial woes that confront other big 
cities, and it has seen mounting friction between local residents and the 
area's growing population of illegal aliens. 
Now, last week's Port District vote has magnified a thorny, disturbing question 
over race relations that some political, business and community leaders argue 
has been minimized for too long. However, even as they encourage a kind of 
civic introspection, they also take comfort from the knowledge that San Diego's 
racial troubles pale by comparison to those of other major cities. 
"The thing to keep in mind is, whatever our problems are here, San Diego is 
light-years behind racially charged cities like Boston and Chicago," said Steve 
Erie, a political science professor at UC San Diego who specializes in ethnic 
politics. "If some of the things that have happened here had occurred in some 
other cities, you'd have seen rioting in the streets." 
'Turn Other Cheek' 
That is partly attributable to the relatively mild, conciliatory tone often 
adopted by San Diego black leaders, who, as one of them put it, "perhaps have 
been too willing to turn the other cheek." 
Even last week's port vote appeared to leave more disappointment than anger in 
its wake among blacks, some of whom preferred to talk more about ongoing plans 
for a King memorial in Balboa Park than the convention center setback. 
"We've compromised ourselves to death," said the Rev. George Stevens, a 
firebrand '60s street activist who, though now an aide to Rep. Jim Bates (D-San 
Diego), still is willing to throw down the gauntlet on occasion. After the Port 
District vote, Stevens announced plans to organize a nationwide boycott against 
San Diego aimed at keeping tourists and conventioneers away -- a proposal that 
drew a lukewarm reception among other black leaders. 
Last week's intense news media coverage of the port's vote and its aftermath 
left many leaders -- white as well as black -- fatigued, edgy and somewhat 
ashamed by the declining tenor of debate over how best to honor King. Herb 
Cawthorne, head of the Urban League's local office, flatly refused to comment 
on the matter, as did several council members and others inside and outside 
City Hall. 
For a far greater number, however, the port's action -- in which the 
commissioners, instead of naming the center after King, made him the first 
inductee in a proposed "Avenue of Honors" on the complex's terrace -- spawned 
reflection over the status of race relations in San Diego. 
Is There a Pattern? 
To link the dispute over the center's name to the council's 1986 dismissal of 
City Manager Sylvester Murray and the controversial 1986-87 trials of police 
killer Sagon Penn, some argue, overlooks the disparate factors behind each and, 
perhaps, ascribes a commonality that is more theory than fact. Most local 
leaders, however, regard the surface similarity of the events as sufficient 
justification for treating them as a pattern, not as isolated occurrences. 
"I think there clearly is a connection that shows that San Diego, like every 
other city, has racism," said Susan Golding, chairman of the county Board of 
Supervisors. "That's not to say they all stemmed from racism because there were 
other causes, too. But the perception of racism is there, and perception is 
usually more important than reality." 
Explanations about the causes and state of racial relations in San Diego begin 
with the city's demographic makeup. Blacks account for only about 9% of the 
city's 1.1 million population and 1869507705found in any other American city 
its size. By comparison, 1980 census data showed that Dallas, which has almost 
the same population as San Diego, had a 29% black population and Los Angeles 
17%. 
Though San Diego's growing Latino population, nearing twice the size of the 
black community, has occasionally been at loggerheads with the city's political 
leadership, those disputes generally have not been as emotional. And despite 
the continued infusion of Asian immigrants, San Diego remains, in the words of 
one social scientist, "the whitest border-area city in America." 
Lack of Clout 
The resulting lack of black political clout is compounded, blacks admit, by 
their historical inability to effectively organize at the polls or to push for 
major goals at City Hall. 
In a 1987 election highlighted by two issues of particular import to blacks -- 
the first "open" seat race in a heavily black council district in nearly two 
decades and an emotional initiative over whether to change the name of Martin 
Luther King Way back to Market Street -- the turnout in largely black Southeast 
San Diego was 25.5%, the lowest of any neighborhood in the city and 11 
percentage points below the citywide average. 
"This shows a complete apathy and complacency that this community should be 
ashamed of," said the Rev. George Walker Smith, a former city school board 
president and founder of the Catfish Club, a politically potent black leaders' 
weekly luncheon forum. "We have only ourselves to blame for a lot of our 
problems." 
Others, however, suggest that a greater share of that blame is attributable to 
the actions -- or inaction -- of the area's white majority, which generally 
hews to a conservative, Republican line in its political and business dealings. 
"You can't divorce this issue from the fact that San Diego is one of the most 
-- if not the most -- conservative big cities in America," said George 
Mitrovich, president of the San Diego City Club and a longtime political 
activist. 
Poor Track Record 
No Democratic presidential candidate since Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944 has 
carried San Diego County, and local Democratic or liberal causes have generally 
fared little better. 
There is one black on the eight-member San Diego City Council and one on the 
five-member San Diego County Board of Supervisors -- and no Latinos on either. 
The seven-member Board of Port Commissioners that made last week's 
controversial decision on the convention center consists of seven white men. 
Though such numbers are not totally out of line with blacks' percentage of the 
overall population, the paucity of black elected officials has exacerbated 
their other political difficulties. 
Arguing that a "pattern of prejudice" has been evident in the convention center 
dispute and other recent controversies, Daniel Weber, a lawyer and immediate 
past president of the NAACP's San Diego branch, contends that the level of 
racism here is "well above the norm" of other major cities. San Diego leaders, 
he charges, often display "a plantation mentality, a paternalistic attitude of, 
'We know best.' " 
Added Bates aide Stevens: "San Diego is a great place to practice racism." 
A diametrically opposite perspective comes from San Diego Chamber of Commerce 
President Lee Grissom. 
"I just don't see that at all. I see so many positive contacts between the 
races that the instances where that doesn't happen are isolated exceptions." 
As evidence, he points to the chamber's plans to help raise $250,000 for the 
King memorial in Balboa Park and another $500,000 for an annual scholarship 
fund in King's name. 
Is Problem Masked? 
Others, however, contend that racial disputes are neither as rare nor as 
inconsequential as some city boosters suggest. The relative surface calm in 
black-white relations, they say, masks deep underlying strains. At least one 
City Council member received a death threat after voting for the convention 
center name change, and last week's Port District hearing saw numerous speakers 
descend into bigotry and racial stereotypes to make their points. 
Roger Hedgecock, the former San Diego mayor who now plays host to a popular 
phone-in radio talk show, said he was distressed by the virulence of callers on 
both sides of the convention center debate. 
"To most white callers, King was a communist sympathizer and womanizer who 
doesn't deserve to have his name on any building," Hedgecock said. "Blacks, 
meanwhile, believe that whites will use any excuse to block any plan to honor a 
hero who is recognized worldwide but whose skin color prevents him from being 
properly recognized in San Diego." 
The extremity of those attitudes illuminates the deep racial divisions in San 
Diego, as well as a deterioration in the dialogue between the races, according 
to the Rev. Ellis Casson, one of the city's most prominent black ministers. 
"I'm sorry that we've reached a point in San Diego where people say, 'If you 
disagree with me, you're a bigot,' " Casson said. "Because that's not always 
the case. Blacks and whites can disagree for reasons other than racism. But 
it's sad that we're back at that fork in the road again." 
Getting to Real Reasons 
That "fork in the road" has often prompted impassioned advocates to veer off on 
sharply divergent rhetorical paths in debates over the recent racial 
controversies, with their differences being framed in acerbic us-versus-them 
terminology. 
For instance, did a white City Council fire Murray because its members had 
trouble dealing with a black manager, as some suggest, or did the dismissal 
stem from management differences that would not have raised an eyebrow had 
Murray been white? 
Similarly, despite Penn's acquittal in the fatal shooting of one white 
policeman and the wounding of another officer and a civilian, there are those 
who still think of him as a hot-tempered black youth who got away with killing 
a cop. Others, however, agree with two juries' judgment that Penn acted in 
self-defense while being unnecessarily beaten by a racist white policeman. 
And, did the Market Street and convention center decisions stem from racism, or 
from legitimate concerns such as, in the former case, worries about saddling 
businesses with the cost and inconvenience of changing addresses? 
The answers, many argue, probably fall somewhere between the two extremes -- 
and may even be largely irrelevant. 
Debates over individuals' motivations and the extent of racism in San Diego 
obscure the critical facet of each of the recent controversies, said Roy 
Brooks, a USD law professor who recently completed a book on racial relations. 
Instead of getting mired in that perhaps-insoluble morass, Brooks said, the 
focus should be on the "racial subordination" that results from those actions, 
not the causal mind sets or reasons. 
'Blacks Have Been Hurt' 
"We should look not at a person's motivations but at what happens as a result 
of his actions," Brooks said. "Who's helped or who's getting hurt? That's the 
key. It doesn't matter if discrimination is intentional or stems from 
prejudice. It just matters that it occurs. And in San Diego, it's pretty 
obvious that it's blacks who have been hurt." 
As occurred after the previous disputes, last week's contretemps touched off 
hand-wringing among local leaders over whether such incidents might warp the 
city's self-image and sully its national reputation. 
Wes Pratt, the city's sole black council member, said he has been embarrassed 
by questions in other cities about San Diego's repeated failures to honor King. 
Other prominent local blacks describe similar experiences. 
However, even national black organizations with arguably the greatest psychic 
stake in the issue apparently have not followed the latest controversy closely. 
Spokesmen for the NAACP in Baltimore and the Martin Luther King Center for 
Nonviolent Social Change in Atlanta were unaware of the convention center name 
debate or Stevens' subsequent boycott call. 
For that reason and others, concern over the city's getting a black eye appear 
both premature and exaggerated. Significantly, a computer check of 10 major 
newspapers throughout the country showed that none carried stories about this 
week's flap. 
"San Diego isn't well-enough known nationally to get a black eye," said UCSD 
political scientist Sam Popkin. "The unfortunate thing is . . . maybe it 
deserves one." 
Times staff writer Leonard Bernstein contributed to this story. 
