REFORMS FAILED THE TEST OF FAULTS AND CONSEQUENCES; 
ETHICS: THE PROPOSAL FOR PUBLIC FINANCING OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS WAS FLAWED. 
THE CITY COUNCIL WAS RIGHT TO DEEP-SIX IT. 
The Los Angeles City Council did the right thing in refusing to be stampeded 
into endorsing the public financing of political campaigns that was proposed by 
Mayor Tom Bradley's Citizens Ethics Commission. 
The panel's proposal fell far short of its stated goals: curbing the influence 
of special interests on the city government, capping the cost of city election 
campaigns and opening up the election process to a broader range of candidates. 
In fact, the plan would have served instead to further entrench incumbents and 
further empower the affluent, while doing nothing to curb special-interest 
money. 
Under the commission's plan, a portion of the private funds raised by 
candidates for city office would have been matched with taxpayer dollars. In 
exchange, overall limits would have been placed on the amount that could be 
spent in a citywide or council district election. 
Let's analyze this proposal in the context of its stated objectives: 
* Would it have limited the influence of "special-interest" money on the 
political process? The answer is a resounding "No!" 
Candidates would still have been permitted to solicit and receive funds from 
persons or companies doing business with the city or its agencies -- the very 
definition of "special interest" money. Mayoral candidates would have been able 
to receive up to $1,000 from such donors, and council candidates up to $500. 
That is precisely what current law allows. 
If those laws fail to provide the necessary controls, there are more-effective 
ways to stop special-interest contributions than the proposal put forth by the 
Ethics Commission. One is to prohibit elected officials from voting or acting 
on matters affecting their contributors. Such a law is in effect in Orange 
County and was proposed for Los Angeles by Councilman Joel Wachs and me during 
the ethics debate. Another is to have campaigns completely financed by the 
taxpayers, thus prohibiting all private contributions. Oddly, the Ethics 
Commission chose not to propose either of those options. 
* Would the proposal have placed a meaningful cap on the amount of money that 
is spent on city elections? Again, no. 
In fact, the proposal allowed for a level of spending per campaign is so high 
that it has only been exceeded twice in City Council elections and never in a 
citywide election. 
* Would the proposal have opened up the process to a broader range of 
participants? No. 
The commission's proposal required that in order for any candidate to qualify 
for public funds, he or she must raise at least $25,000 in amounts of $250 or 
less. Failure to reach that threshold automatically disqualified that candidate 
from any form of public financing. 
In the 1989 elections for the City Council, only two challengers raised more 
than $25,000. What the commissioners failed to realize was that, for most 
candidates, it is still exceedingly difficult to raise that amount of money. 
This is a particular hardship on candidates for office in less affluent parts 
of our city, or for candidates who don't have access to people with lots of 
discretionary income. 
Election-financing laws affecting the city have already changed twice in the 
last five years. 
Ernani Bernardi, one of the council's most outspoken reformers, won 80% voter 
approval in April, 1985, for one of the strictest campaign-financing laws in 
the country. Then, in 1988, the voters of the state passed Proposition 73, 
which further restricted fund-raising and which is still being tested in court. 
Those laws have been in effect only for a short time and they deserve a chance 
to prove themselves before we junk them for yet another change. 
Opponents of public financing have other gripes about the concept. It limits 
freedom of speech for a candidate. It carries a $27.4-million price tag at a 
time when the city's budget is strained and demands for service are at an 
all-time high. And it arouses the resentment of some voters who aren't 
comfortable with the notion that their tax dollars would finance the campaigns 
of candidates with whom they fundamentally disagree and for whom they would 
never vote -- like Lyndon LaRouche, who has twice qualified for federal 
matching funds in his campaigns for the presidency, even though he has barely 
garnered enough votes to be noticed. 
This is not to argue that all aspects of the old system were better than the 
current or proposed systems; it is to say that no system is without its faults 
and consequences. And the faults and consequences in the commission's plan made 
it a well-intentioned but ill-advised proposal that was rightly rejected by the 
City Council. 
