QUADRUPLETS TO START COMING HOME IN SHIFTS 
Al and Karen Miner thought they would have a couple of weeks to prepare a 
nursery after the birth of their quadruplets. As it turns out, they only have a 
matter of days. 
One by one, their babies will be going home from the hospital sooner than 
expected. The first will be home on Tuesday. 
Knowing their hands will be full, literally, the Miners have been spending the 
last few days organizing their four-bedroom home in Orange for a house full of 
babies. 
"We're having the family come over to help us prepare," Al Miner said. "Knowing 
that time will be very precious for us, we're spending the next few days 
getting ourselves organized. We do have diapers. We're not totally organized 
with food yet, but we will be. We have to take inventory of what we do have and 
what we still need." 
The Miner quadruplets were born one week ago today, eight weeks early. To 
monitor the development of multiple premature babies, the hospital staff 
usually keeps the babies for a few weeks or even months, according to Dr. 
Manuel Porto, director of maternal-fetal medicine at UCI Medical Center in 
Orange. 
Because the quadruplets are progressing at different levels, each will be 
released at different times. 
Three of the babies -- Brianna, Whitney and Vincent -- were born healthy and 
bigger than most quadruplets, he said. One, Jeffrey, was born with a lung-fluid 
problem but is now in fair condition. 
The quadruplets, all clad Friday in white beanies, booties, diapers and 
T-shirts embroidered with their names, were reunited on Valentine's Day when 
Jeffrey was released from intensive care to the intermediate nursery. 
"I don't know if I have gotten used to holding both of them in my arms, but it 
sure feels good," said Karen Miner as she rocked two of the children near her 
husband, who was holding the other two. After 59 days in the hospital, Karen 
Miner, 32, was discharged Thursday. 
The infants were the first quadruplets born in Orange County, and the second 
such birth in California, through the fertility technique know as GIFT, gamete 
intra-Fallopian transfer. The method involves the woman's eggs being placed 
with the man's sperm in her Fallopian tube. Four eggs were used to increase the 
chances of pregnancy for the Miners. 
The couple said they were shocked when they were told last summer that they 
were going to become the parents of quadruplets. 
"I laughed," said Al Miner, a 34-year-old management consultant. "I don't know 
if the reality has struck me yet. Ask me in six months." 
"I was devastated and shocked," said Karen, a second-grade school teacher in 
Fullerton. "We wanted a child and we were blessed with four. We'll make the 
best of it." 
It is still hard to identify each infant, said Karen, but each is starting to 
develop his or her own characteristics. 
"It's hard," she said. "But, I can tell Jeffrey because he has the blond hair 
and Brianna because she is the smallest." 
