IRVINE TAKES NEW MEXICO STATE TO THE WIRE BEFORE FALLING 
There were more wacky goings-on in UC Irvine's mixed-up season Thursday night 
at New Mexico State. 
The woebegone Anteaters came to the Pan American Center trying to stop a 
14-game losing streak. New Mexico State, favored by 16 points and hoping to 
crack the top 25, was desperately trying to take Irvine seriously. 
All things considered, who would have figured a taut, 79-75 New Mexico State 
victory? 
Who would have known the Anteaters would make 21 of 26 free throws (80.8%), 
force the Aggies into 17 turnovers and rally from 17 points down late in the 
game? 
Irvine did all those things and nearly came away with one of the biggest upsets 
in the Big West Conference. 
"The problem New Mexico State had was trying to get up for a team that is 0-11 
(in conference play)," Irvine Coach Bill Mulligan said. 
Still, New Mexico State led, 70-53, after Randy Brown made one of two free 
throws with 8 minutes 22 seconds left. The Aggies finally seemed to have shaken 
off the Anteaters, but they suddenly went flat. 
Jeff Herdman's bank shot a moment later got Irvine started on an 18-6 run. 
His three-pointer cut New Mexico State's lead to 76-68 with 3:30 left and 
Irvine kept its frantic comeback rolling. 
And when Herdman fed Rod Palmer for a three-pointer, the Anteaters had crawled 
to within 76-73 with 55 seconds left. 
Brown hit two free throws, but Herdman hit a short jumper with Brown draped all 
over him. 
William Benjamin then made one of two at the line for a 79-75 Aggie lead that 
held up, as Irvine missed four three-pointers in the final 20 seconds. 
Just getting by with a victory wasn't what New Mexico State Coach Neil McCarthy 
had in mind and he blasted his players' effort. 
"Everyone was a no-show tonight," McCarthy said. "We were fortunate to win 
tonight. I'm embarrassed. We ought to give our fans their money back." 
On the other hand, the Anteaters were feeling "encouraged," according to 
Palmer. "We were down by 17 and no one gave up. That's a good sign." 
Added Herdman: "Right now, we know we're not in contention, so we come in and 
play hard and try to upset someone." 
Herdman played his best game of the season. Coming off the bench, Herdman had a 
season-high 22 points, making eight of 14 from the field, and had 10 rebounds. 
"I'm just happy I'm playing again," said Herdman, who was benched for the 
University of the Pacific game Saturday for his chippy play. 
He picked up a costly technical foul shoving Fresno State's Pat Riddlesprigger 
in the Anteaters' 78-75 loss last Thursday. 
"We're all looser now," Herdman said. "We're not going to worry about 
anything." 
Palmer scored 13 points, Dylan Rigdon had 11 and Jeff Von Lutzow had 10 points 
to go with 10 rebounds for Irvine (2-19 overall, 0-12 in the Big West). 
Brown had 19 points before leaving with 14 seconds left with a bruised sternum. 
Chasing Herdman, who was lining up a three-pointer, Brown ran into a vicious 
pick from Ricky Butler. 
He left the court under his own power after spending several minutes being 
attended to by New Mexico State trainers. 
Keith Hill added 14 for the Aggies (19-2, 10-1). 
"I like New Mexico State," Mulligan said. "I think they can beat UNLV. I'd love 
to see Neil win at Vegas. I think it would be good for the conference because 
no one gives the conference much credit." 
The Aggies play third-place UC Santa Barbara in Las Cruces Saturday, then play 
at Nevada Las Vegas Thursday. 
"Just so we keep getting better, then I'll be happy," Mulligan said. 
Anteater Notes 
They strung up Peter the Anteater, or at least a stuffed model of Irvine's 
mascot, in a pregame ceremony. Peter joined a 25-foot shark (representing 
Nevada Las Vegas), Cal State Fullerton's Tuffy Titan and the 49er from Cal 
State Long Beach, dangling from the rafters of the Pan American Center. . . . 
Irvine is off until it plays Cal State Long Beach Thursday at Long Beach. . . . 
A loss to the 49ers would tie the school record of 20 losses in a season, set 
in 1979-80, the year before Bill Mulligan became coach. 
