COMMITTEE APPROVES SULLIVAN FOR CABINET AFTER HIS APOLOGY FOR ABORTION 
CONFUSION 
The nomination of Louis W. Sullivan as secretary of health and human services 
won swift approval from the Senate Finance Committee on Thursday after Sullivan 
apologized for "having misspoken . . . and having caused confusion" over his 
position on abortion. 
"I am opposed to abortion, except in the case where the life of the mother is 
threatened, or in cases of rape or incest," he said in his confirmation 
hearing. "I support a human life amendment, embracing the exceptions just 
noted. Like President Bush, I would welcome a Supreme Court decision 
overturning Roe vs. Wade," the 1973 decision that made abortion legal. 
Further, he said, he would work to encourage adoptions and other alternatives 
to abortion if confirmed as secretary. 
The vote to approve him was 17 to 0, with one member of the committee, 
conservative Sen. William L. Armstrong (R-Colo.), voting "present." The 
nomination is scheduled to be voted on next week by the full Senate, where it 
is expected to be approved easily. 
The nomination of Sullivan, president of the Morehouse School of Medicine in 
Atlanta and the only black named to Bush's Cabinet, ran into some turbulence 
shortly after his selection when he was quoted in an Atlanta newspaper as 
favoring a woman's right to abortion. Several weeks ago, he fueled the 
controversy when he reportedly told Sen. Bob Packwood (R-Ore.), a member of the 
Senate Finance Committee and a supporter of a woman's right to have an 
abortion, that he privately opposes reversing Roe vs. Wade. 
For the most part, however, members of the committee, including Packwood, were 
gentle with Sullivan. 
"You're going to go with my blessing," Packwood said. "You're going to have to 
make some decisions that -- because of the Administration's position -- that 
I'm going to disagree with . . . but we're going to make the final decisions, 
and it's clear you're going to follow the law." 
Sullivan's only tense moments occurred during an exchange with Armstrong over 
the use of fetal tissue in scientific and medical research, which Armstrong 
strongly opposes. Now, there is a moratorium on the federal funding of such 
research. But, last fall, an independent federal advisory panel of the National 
Institutes of Health recommended that the research be allowed to continue as 
long as there were safeguards to discourage women from seeking abortions for 
the purpose of providing fetal tissue. 
Scientists believe that the transplantation of fetal tissue holds extraordinary 
promise for the treatment of such illnesses as Parkinson's disease, diabetes, 
leukemia, Alzheimer's disease and a growing list of other serious conditions. 
The 55-year-old hematologist insisted that he could make no decisions involving 
fetal tissue research until he had received the National Institutes of Health 
report. 
He said, however, that "society has reaped benefits . . . as a result of our 
broad research efforts" and that he has "reservations about any blanket 
prohibition concerning research." But he said: "I would certainly not want to 
do anything that would encourage abortions to be done in order to get fetal 
tissue . . . . I would find that ethically unacceptable." 
Armstrong accused Sullivan of "ducking the question" and refused to vote in 
favor of his nomination. He said, however, that, after he has had an 
opportunity to "sort (Sullivan's responses) out," he "may still vote for him on 
the floor" when the full Senate considers his nomination. 
Sullivan's hearings had been postponed for more than three weeks while the FBI 
completed its background investigation. During that time, questions arose about 
whether Sullivan could still receive income from the college during his 
government service, including $300,000 in accumulated benefits and separation 
pay. 
Also, the FBI was examining the relationship between Morehouse and a Fulton 
County commissioner, Reginald Eaves, who was hired as a part-time lecturer at 
the college. Eaves was paid more than $34,000 during a four-year period when he 
sat on the commission and reportedly used his seat to promote issues of benefit 
to the school. During that time, in an unrelated matter, Eaves was convicted of 
extortion. 
Sullivan told the committee Thursday that, if confirmed, he will resign as 
president of the school and take an unpaid leave of absence as professor of 
medicine. However, he said, he would continue to participate in the school's 
benefit programs, such as life, health and disability insurance. 
But he said he would forfeit the $300,000 so that conflict-of-interest 
questions would not be raised. Morehouse, which gets federal funds for many of 
its programs, received $5.8 million from the Health and Human Services 
Department last year. 
Several of the senators expressed sympathy with Sullivan's financial situation 
and said that they would look into the matter. 
"I think we ought to take a look at the ethics laws we promulgate around this 
place," said Sen. John H. Chafee (R-R. I). "I don't think you should have to go 
through a tollbooth where the charge is $300,000." 
In response to questioning about Eaves, Sullivan said that the school had erred 
in "not monitoring the situation carefully and closely" and had since "taken 
steps to see that this will not happen again." 
