PANEL TO DISCUSS TRYING AGAIN ON MEASURE M 
Orange County transportation commissioners are expected to say "one more time" 
at a workshop today focusing on whether to try again in November for voter 
approval of a half-cent sales tax increase to pay for highway and transit 
projects. 
If the workshop participants decide to go for it, the staff of the Orange 
County Transportation Commission will develop an election proposal for formal 
approval in March, county officials said. 
Drivers for Highway Safety, an Irvine-based grass-roots organization opposed to 
car-pool lanes, is expected to try to talk the commission out of placing a 
Measure M before the voters again. 
Measure M, a half-cent sales-tax proposal, was defeated in November by a margin 
of 52.6% to 47.4%. Political experts said the measure lost because voter 
turnout -- 22% -- was low. Critics of the tax plan said it would have earmarked 
too much money for car-pool lanes and mass transit at the expense of new 
highways. However, a post-election survey paid for by Measure M supporters 
concluded that it failed simply because of anti-tax and anti-government 
sentiment and that it probably would have passed in a general, rather than a 
special, election. 
Measure M was the only countywide issue on the ballot last November; only a few 
city and special district elections were held at the same time. 
Bill Ward, a member of Drivers for Highway Safety, said that group will propose 
alternatives to Measure M today, although the commission is not expected to 
allow testimony, as the session is a workshop and not a public hearing. 
His group is seeking nighttime public hearings, Ward said, so that the 
commission "can get closer to the people and really hear what's on the public's 
mind. They're really out of touch with what the public really wants." 
Ward recently urged the panel to explore the possibility of a local gasoline 
tax that would be devoted to highway improvements, but commission officials 
pointed out that it would take a local gas tax of 19 cents per gallon to raise 
the same amount of revenue that a half-cent sales tax increase would. 
"I expect to go for a November election," commission Chairman and county 
Supervisor Thomas F. Riley said Wednesday. "The state is out of money, and the 
federal government is using money (the highway trust fund) for purposes other 
than which it was intended." 
Riley said federal officials are refusing to spend highway trust fund dollars 
so as to make the federal deficit appear smaller. 
Riley and Transportation Commission Executive Director Stanley T. Oftelie said 
some minor changes may be made in the implementation ordinance for the measure 
so that cities could use some of the money from sales taxes for other transit 
projects. One such project could be the central Orange County monorail system 
that various cities, Santa Ana among them, have proposed. 
As proposed last year, Measure M would have raised an estimated $3.1 billion 
over 20 years for highway and transit projects. The proceeds would have been 
split, with $1.325 billion earmarked for freeway improvements, $350 million for 
local streets and roads, $650 million for regional highway projects, and $775 
million for mass transit. 
Oftelie said a new measure for a sales tax increase may retain the same 
"Measure M" ballot designation. 
Orange County is the only urban county in the state without such a sales tax 
surcharge. 
