UCI WELCOMES GAY-LESBIAN FESTIVAL BUT HOUSING STILL FOR MARRIEDS ONLY 
With students in the background protesting what they call discrimination 
against homosexuals, organizers for the Gay and Lesbian Festival said Friday 
that UC Irvine officials have agreed to allow the controversial fair to be held 
on campus this year. 
Students continued to camp out for a third day in a shantytown of cardboard 
boxes and sheets of plastic to protest a university policy that bars unmarried 
and gay and lesbian couples from university housing for families. Fifty yards 
away, festival organizers announced plans to hold the fair and parade at UCI on 
Aug. 11-12. 
Some of the student protesters charged that the university was being 
inconsistent. 
"Gay and lesbian couples cannot get (university) housing, but we can have a 
parade here," said Michelle Richards, a sophomore English major who slept 
overnight on the rumpled blankets outside the administration building to 
support the protesters. "There seems to be an inherent contradiction." 
University spokeswoman Linda Granell said Orange County Cultural Pride, the 
group of volunteers that staged the gay festival last year in Santa Ana, was 
invited to hold the event at UCI by the campus Gay and Lesbian Student Union. 
"The timing makes it so these two issues are viewed together, but they're 
really completely separate," Granell said. "One is a legal issue and the other 
is a student activity." 
Granell said the Gay and Lesbian Festival is welcome at UCI. But she said 
university family housing, which is moderately priced, is available only to 
legally married couples. Unmarried gay and lesbian couples cannot live at the 
860-unit Verano Place apartments on campus, she said. 
The first Gay and Lesbian Festival encountered virulent opposition last 
September when it was held at Centennial Regional Park in Santa Ana. A tense 
shouting match between fundamentalist Christians, and gays and lesbians erupted 
into a fist-swinging fracas that ended with six people arrested, from both 
sides. 
Fundamentalist Christians subsequently launched a recall effort against six of 
the seven City Council members for allowing the park to be used. Petition 
organizers have until mid-March to get a recall ballot, said City Councilman 
John Acosta, who publicly opposed the festival and thus is the only council 
member not targeted by the recall effort. 
The fair will not be held in Santa Ana because a new city law bans large public 
events that charge entrance fees, said festival spokeswoman Janet Avery. 
Organizers said they believe the second festival will not generate as much 
controversy, in part because of the new location. 
"It will take us a few more annual events before we're allowed to go and do our 
thing" without bringing out counterdemonstrators, predicted Connie Long, 
president of Orange County Cultural Pride. 
Leaders of the Anaheim-based Traditional Values Coalition, which mobilized the 
Christian demonstration last year, would not say whether they would demonstrate 
at this year's event, according to Steve Sheldon, the son of the group's 
founder, the Rev. Louis P. Sheldon. 
Security at the festival will be tightened this year, Avery said. She declined 
to be specific, but said police drawn from many of the nine UC campuses will 
cover the event. 
