LIFE ON WHEELS: THAT'S LUXURY IN THE COUNTY DRIVER'S SEAT 
Candice Pratt, 15, has her future all mapped out. "On my 26th birthday, I'm 
going to get a red Ferrari Testarossa convertible," says Pratt, who lives in 
Laguna Niguel. And after that, she plans to become a U.S. senator and 
eventually president. 
Richard Mairena, 32, wasn't interested in the presidency when he was 15. He 
just wanted a Ferrari. And 3 years ago -- that's right, before he was 30 -- he 
wrote a check for roughly $72,000 and drove away in a black Ferrari Mondial 
400. 
Welcome to Orange County, the land where status car dreams come true. 
Statistics are hard to come by; the Department of Motor Vehicles doesn't keep 
track of how many such vehicles are registered here, either by make or by price 
tag. But when was the last time you looked around -- on the freeway, on Pacific 
Coast Highway, in just about any parking lot -- and didn't see a Mercedes-Benz, 
a Porsche or a Jaguar? 
Sales of dream cars are booming here, according to the people who sell them. 
Although Ferrari sales can't go higher because production is limited, the 
county does have the world's largest Ferrari dealership: Newport Imports, which 
also handles Jaguar, Aston Martin, Lotus and Range Rover. Jaguar sales have 
quadrupled since 1982, according to Newport Imports manager Don Moothart. 
Mercedes-Benz dealer Jim Slemons says his sales went up 15% in 1988, and this 
year's sales so far are ahead of last year's. 
"There's nowhere in the United States where you see as many luxury cars as you 
will in Newport Beach," Moothart says. "Nowhere." 
Newport Beach may have a high concentration, but the rest of the county has its 
share of status cars too. The other day at a north county K mart, the 
blue-light special announcements were interrupted by a notice that "there's a 
royal-blue Jaguar in the parking lot with its lights on." 
"People do kind of stare at you when you drive into the lot at Fedco or the 
Price Club," Rolls-Royce owner Linda Weaver says. "It's like, 'What are you 
doing here?' " 
But of course people look, whether you pull up in front of a discount store or 
an exclusive restaurant. Isn't being seen the whole point of driving a status 
car? 
Not necessarily, according to some owners. Although status is a factor, it 
isn't always the most important one. 
"You can't really draw conclusions about someone's motivations by simply noting 
that they possess this object," says psychiatrist Martin Brenner, medical 
director of CPC Santa Ana Hospital and the owner of a 1986 Jaguar Vanden Plas, 
which cost him "about $40,000." 
"I always dreamed of having a Jag," Brenner says. "I loved the old XKE, it's an 
awesomely beautiful car. And when I got my car, I just felt good with myself 
that I was driving a car that I liked and that I felt proud of." 
In Orange County, having a nice car is simply "conforming to the prevailing 
custom," Brenner says. "You fit better. It's like going into a very nice 
restaurant where everybody's dressed nice." 
Brenner concedes that although he bought the car primarily for himself and not 
to impress others, "I do enjoy the fact that I get positive feedback about my 
automobile." 
But Richard Engel, owner of a blue 1986 Ferrari Testarossa, says status is the 
primary reason he bought his car. "A lot of my friends have status cars too -- 
Ferraris, Lamborghinis, whatever -- and I would say that status is probably the 
controlling aspect of why we buy them. 
"This is the most powerful, fastest car made, ever. It looks great, and it 
makes me feel great. I like to be looked at. It's a conversation piece. 
"I'm not a snob about it. If a boatload of kids start honking, I'll roll down 
the window and talk to them about it. That's part of the fun." 
Engel, who lives in Newport Beach, had to wait 18 months to get his car 3 years 
ago. Now the wait is 2 1/2 years, according to Ed Woodburn of Newport Imports. 
"A couple of people have gotten tired of waiting and taken their names off the 
list," Woodburn says. "But not many." 
The Testarossa sells for $141,780, Woodburn says. 
Weaver says she wishes that her 1979 Rolls-Royce Silver Wraith had dark-tinted 
windows because "I prefer not to get looked at." But she's well aware that not 
everyone feels that way. Weaver, co-owner with Mairena of Pegasus, a courier 
and limousine service, sometimes rents out her own car through the company to 
customers who definitely want to be seen in a Rolls. Unlike a stretch limo, she 
says, "it's easier for them to make people think it's their car." 
Weaver, who lives in Irvine, owned a Mercedes-Benz and had been shopping for a 
new one when she came across the used Rolls about 5 years ago. "A new (Rolls) 
was extremely out of all reason," she says. But she was able to get the older 
model for "in the neighborhood of $50,000," about $15,000 less than the she 
would have paid for the new Mercedes she had in mind. 
"I've always wanted a Rolls," she says. "It makes you feel like what you worked 
for has turned out right. They do ride so nicely; that's really the pleasure of 
the car. It's like taking a scenic ride on your couch to Santa Barbara or 
whatever. It's so quiet, it's just not as stressful." 
Mairena, Weaver's partner, says that "as a child, the Ferrari was the ultimate 
car I wanted to have. I started thinking about it from the time I started 
thinking of what I was going to be when I grew up." 
"It's kind of nice when people look," he says. "But it doesn't really matter. 
That's not the intent. It's not a red Ferrari; it's a black Ferrari. And you 
don't really know it's a Ferrari until you look at it, really look." 
Mairena's first vehicle was a 1956 Ford truck, followed by a Volkswagen beetle, 
a Fiat, a Porsche, then the Ferrari. 
"The Ferrari was everything I expected it to be," he says, "even though it 
doesn't have all the whistles some American cars do, such as electronic seats 
that recline and turn." 
Mairena isn't sure how big his car's engine is or how fast it can go, but he 
has taken it up to 125 m.p.h. and "it didn't seem to be straining." 
The Ferrari doesn't do as well when it's stuck in traffic, however: "It's 
terrible because you have to keep shifting." 
Gary Babick of Newport Beach may be a more typical owner of a luxury car. He 
drives a 1986 Mercedes-Benz 300 and a 1983 Porsche 911se. "But I don't consider 
either of them a status car. In California, there are so many nice cars, even a 
Mercedes is commonplace." 
Although he admits to being "into cars," Babick says he picks his cars because 
they please him, not for the effect they may have on others. 
Luxury automobile dealer Slemons is also active on the county social circuit. 
He says a Mercedes-Benz is "definitely a status symbol." 
"There are more of them in Newport Beach than any other kind of car," says 
Slemons, who also sells Acuras, Hondas, Jeeps and Eagles (in addition to Volvos 
in Hawaii). 
A Mercedes-Benz is "almost like a uniform," he says. "It's a way of saying 
you've arrived." 
Slemons says the Mercedes fits the county's conservative image better than some 
more expensive, flashier cars: "It's conservative, classy, just like people in 
south Orange County are conservative in their attire, their politics and the 
things that they do." 
His own car of choice is a 1972 Mercedes-Benz 280sl, which he bought used from 
a dealer in Hawaii. 
Another up-and-coming status car, Slemons says, is the Jeep Cherokee Limited. 
"It's sort of a status second car." 
If you want 12 cylinders but can't quite afford a Testarossa, there's the new 
BMW 750il with a sticker price of $73,000. It can theoretically go up to 185 
m.p.h., although "there's a governor on it that keeps it down to 155," says 
Harry Taylor of McLaren's BMW in Fullerton. 
Engel says he has had his Testarossa up to 187, "but that was on a test track." 
Pratt, a freshman at Capistrano Valley Christian High School, says that in her 
age group, "the girl who has the Mercedes definitely gets more attention. But 
mostly, people don't judge you by what kind of car you have. It's really just 
whether you have a car or not. 
"Kids don't see their first car as the one of their dreams." 
It's for You! (Or Is It?) 
Do you have a phone in your car? If so, we'd like to know why you decided to go 
cellular. If not, tell us why you prefer to remain incommunicado on the road. 
The Road to Romance 
Sure, you've heard of life in the fast lane, but how about love in the fast 
lane? How many of you indulge in a little freeway flirting now and then? And 
how many have actually dated that attractive stranger one lane over? We would 
like to hear. 
Send your comments to Life on Wheels, Orange County Life, The Times, 1375 
Sunflower Ave., Costa Mesa, Calif. 92626. Please include your phone number so 
that we can contact you. To protect your privacy, Life on Wheels does not 
publish correspondents' last names when the subject is sensitive. 
