ERMA BOMBECK: THAT VERY FIRST IMPORTANT VALENTINE 
I am always saddened when adults take a simple holiday for children and screw 
it up. 
What began as a presentation of simple gifts to delight and surprise children 
around the Christmas tree has culminated in a woman opening up six shrimp forks 
from her dog, who drew her name. 
The tradition of little children wandering through the darkness in makeshift 
fright costumes on Halloween has given way to adult parties of such magnitude 
an entire industry has evolved to clothe them. 
It is small wonder that Valentine's Day struggles to remain a day for young 
lovers, a day when the human heart is made out of chocolate and naked cherubs 
defy the February chill to send out their arrows. 
Whenever adults speak of Valentine's Day, they go back as I do, to a small 
classroom in the second grade. They go back to Miss Dawkins, who put a box on 
her desk a week before. It is covered with red hearts made out of construction 
paper and ribbon of crepe paper. All week my classmates drop in their fistful 
of secrets. Everyone but Ray Deger. 
On Valentine's Day, just minutes before Miss Dawkins is to distribute the 
cards, Ray drops his in. My heart stops beating. Would the love I felt for him 
be returned, or would I be left to trudge through life alone, rejected, 
unloved? 
Miss Dawkins takes an eternity to pass out the valentines. The ones stacked 
before me hold no interest. There can't be more than two or three left in the 
box when she calls out my name. It is signed "Ray." My eyes dissect the card 
for hidden messages. There are two bears kissing one another, with three hearts 
poised above their heads. It says, "I Care for You." 
There is no doubt in my mind -- I was one of the bears and Ray was the other 
one. Professionally, my eyes take in that there are no erasures or smudges, so 
the card is new, bought just for me. Sylvia Prishold points out later that his 
mother signed it. That's all she knows. It's his signature, all right. 
There have been other Valentine's Days, days of candy hearts and even roses at 
$80 a dozen. My children brought me homemade valentines that held awkward 
messages of love. My husband has showered me with all kinds of remembrances 
throughout the years celebrating his devotion. 
But the day will never again recapture that breathless moment when Miss Dawkins 
handed me the small valentine from Ray Deger declaring, "I Care for You." He 
had never spoken to me before that day, and he was never to speak to me during 
the four years we went to grade school together. 
The moment belonged only to a phenomenon called Valentine's Day. 
