SOUTH AFRICA LEGALIZES ANC, VOWS TO FREE MANDELA SOON; 
S. AFRICA; 
APARTHEID: PRESIDENT DE KLERK MAKES A HISTORIC CONCESSION IN THE BLACK 
MAJORITY'S STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. THE MOVE IS HAILED AS GREATLY COURAGEOUS. 
President Frederik W. de Klerk legalized the African National Congress on 
Friday and promised to free Nelson Mandela, a historic concession to the epic 
struggle for freedom by the nation's black majority. 
Thousands of blacks filled the streets of several cities to celebrate the 
announcements by De Klerk in a speech that was widely hailed as courageous. 
But black activists and several countries said that despite the move to 
legalize the ANC and dozens of other anti-apartheid groups, the white-run 
government must now follow through. De Klerk did not act dismantle the 
foundation of the apartheid system that would give South Africa's 28 million 
blacks a direct voice in running the country. 
Activists, white businessmen, liberal politicians and foreign governments 
praised the courage of De Klerk, who scrapped many other restrictions on 
opposition activity in a bid to draw the ANC into negotiations on South 
Africa's future. 
"It's incredible. What he said has certainly taken my breath away," said 
Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu, winner of the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize for his 
opposition to apartheid. "We could say that we are probably seeing history in 
the making in South Africa." 
President Bush called the move "quite positive" and said he will review U.S. 
sanctions on South Africa. An aide said De Klerk and Mandela will be invited to 
the White House when the black leader is released. 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain described De Klerk's announcement 
as "a historic landmark," and lifted cultural and academic embargoes. 
The exiled ANC said De Klerk's announcements "go a long way to creating the 
climate conducive to negotiations." But the Zambia-based organization, which 
has been fighting a guerrilla war almost 30 years, said more changes were 
needed before talks could begin. 
If the two sides begin negotiations, quick breakthroughs appear unlikely. 
The ANC and all leading anti-apartheid groups demand a one-person, one-vote 
democracy, which De Klerk opposes, saying it will result in the 28 million 
blacks dominating the 5 million whites. 
De Klerk, since taking office in August, has said he envisions some type of 
system in which no single racial group would dominate. 
Mandela, 71, the country's best-known black leader, would be freed shortly, De 
Klerk said. But he said "personal circumstances and safety" were among the 
factors delaying the release. 
"I want to put it plainly that the government has decided to release Nelson 
Mandela unconditionally," he said. "Unfortunately, a further short passage of 
time is unavoidable." 
Tutu agreed with De Klerk's assessment, saying, "There may be people, a lunatic 
fringe, who would want to subvert the process by liquidating him. I think that 
we have to accept that there are certain constraints." 
De Klerk said he would lift bans on more than 30 outlawed groups and scrap 
restrictions on a similar number. He pledged to free most prisoners jailed for 
belonging to these groups, declared a moratorium on executions, and lifted most 
of the restrictions imposed during a 43-month-old state of emergency. 
These were the principal steps demanded by Mandela and the ANC as conditions 
for negotiations on a new constitution that would end the black majority's 
exclusion from national politics. 
"The season of violence is over. The time for reconstruction and reconciliation 
has arrived," De Klerk said in his speech, greeted with cheers from supporters 
and silence from the right-wing opposition. 
De Klerk said his Cabinet unanimously agreed on the decision and the action on 
legalizing the groups requires no action from Parliament or any other branch of 
government. 
Andries Treurnicht, leader of the pro-apartheid Conservative Party, challenged 
de Klerk to call an immediate election for white voters to see whether they 
backed his decisions. 
"We say he has no mandate for doing the drastic things he intends doing," 
Treurnicht said. 
At the perimeter of the parliamentary buildings, about 5,000 demonstrators, 
many chanting "ANC! ANC!" joined a march demanding Mandela's release. 
In Cape Town, Johannesburg and Durban, the three largest cities, thousands of 
blacks sang and danced in the streets to celebrate the ANC's legalization. 
Police said marchers threw stones at them in Johannesburg and ordered the crowd 
to disperse. They then fired tear gas. No arrests or serious injuries were 
reported. 
The groups to be legalized, in addition to the ANC, include the smaller 
Pan-Africanist Congress guerrilla movement, the South African Communist Party 
and the United Democratic Front, a nationwide multiracial anti-apartheid 
coalition. 
The United Democratic Front, which is aligned with the ANC, welcomed De Klerk's 
changes but called for sanctions to remain in place. 
"To lift sanctions now would be to run the risk of aborting the process to 
democracy," it said in a statement. 
De Klerk said he was lifting restrictions imposed on 374 activists after their 
release from detention. 
He said state-of-emergency detentions would be limited to a maximum of six 
months and emergency restrictions on the media would be scrapped except for 
some unspecified controls over photographic and television coverage of unrest. 
Mandela, 71, has been jailed since 1962 and is serving a life sentence for 
helping plan the start of the ANC's sabotage and bombing campaign. He has met 
with De Klerk, other government officials and anti-apartheid leaders over the 
last several months in talks aimed at clearing the way for negotiations. 
The ANC was outlawed in 1960 after 48 years of nonviolent campaigning for black 
rights. In 1961, it launched its sabotage campaign. 
In the last year, the guerrilla campaign has subsided markedly. The ANC's 
exiled leadership has acknowledged that its military options were limited and 
that it favored negotiations if De Klerk was willing to allow unrestricted 
black political activity. 
"The allegation has been that the government did not wish to talk to them (the 
ANC and the Pan-Africanist Congress) and that they are deprived of their right 
to normal political activity," De Klerk said. 
"The unconditional lifting of the prohibition . . . places everybody in a 
position to pursue politics freely," he added. "The justification for violence, 
which was always advanced, no longer exists." 
DE KLERK'S PROPOSED REFORMS 
Here are highlights of the concessions to the black majority made by President 
F. W. de Klerk on Friday in a speech to Parliament: 
* Legalization of the African National Congress, outlawed since 1960, and more 
than 60 other banned and restricted organizations including the Pan-Africanist 
Congress, the South African Communist Party, the United Democratic Front and 
the Azanian People's Organization. 
* Release in the near future of Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners -- 
except those who have committed ordinary crimes. 
* Moratorium on hangings, until the government rewrites the death-sentence law 
to apply only to extreme cases. Death Row prisoners henceforth will have an 
automatic right to appeal. 
* Repeal of the Separate Amenities Act promised during the current session of 
Parliament, ending the right of local authorities to segregate public 
facilities by race. 
* Lifting of emergency regulations regarding education and the press, except 
the restrictions on photography and filming of political unrest. 
* Ending emergency restrictions on freedom of speech, movement, assembly and 
work that were imposed on 374 freed detainees, and the emergency regulations 
which allowed such restrictions to be repealed. 
* Retaining detention without trial, but limiting it to six months. Detainees 
will have the right to legal representation and a doctor of their own choice. 
