PLANNER CHOSEN TO OVERSEE HOLLYWOOD REDEVELOPMENT 
A transportation planning expert who headed Los Angeles' downtown 
revitalization effort has been assigned to oversee the city's billion-dollar 
Hollywood redevelopment project. 
Donald R. Spivack, one of three operations directors for the city's Community 
Redevelopment Agency, said Monday that he will supervise all aspects of the 
Hollywood project. His duties will include overseeing work done by city project 
managers, planners, engineers, and real estate and financial experts, and 
consulting with City Council offices and public interest groups. 
Spivack's appointment comes at a critical juncture for Hollywood, according to 
redevelopment agency spokesman Marc Littman, because city planners are working 
with Councilman Michael Woo's staff to establish Hollywood's first 
comprehensive transportation management plan and urban design guidelines for 
Hollywood Boulevard. 
The Hollywood redevelopment project, the agency's second-largest after the 
1,500-acre central business revitalization plan, will encompass a 1,100-acre 
area bounded by Santa Monica Boulevard on the south, Franklin Avenue on the 
north, La Brea Avenue on the west and Western Avenue on the east. 
Spivack said in an interview this week that he will try to balance the wishes 
of the business community and development-sensitive community members. 
"In overseeing the project, I want to make sure that steady and good progress 
is being made in carrying out the project with a clear understanding of the 
sensitivity and needs of the community," Spivack said. "We are trying to put 
Hollywood forward on its best foot -- it's not only a world renowned place but 
home to a number of people." 
Historic preservation, improving traffic flow, remedying social needs and 
protecting neighborhoods will be top priorities in the project, which is 
formally known as the Hollywood Redevelopment Plan, Spivack said. 
Cooke Sunoo, the redevelopment agency's current on-site Hollywood project 
manager, will report to Spivack but his duties will not be affected, Littman 
said. Sunoo's former supervisor, Diana Webb, was recently promoted to deputy 
chief of operations at the agency, prompting the reshuffling of assignments 
among other directors, Littman said. 
Spivack will also oversee agency redevelopment projects in North Hollywood, the 
Crenshaw District, Chinatown and Monterey Hills, Littman said. 
Spivack joined the redevelopment agency as transportation manager in December, 
1982, coordinating transportation planning in downtown Los Angeles, Hollywood 
and North Hollywood. For the last seven years, he has managed the agency's 
Central Business District Redevelopment Project. 
Before working for the agency, Spivack worked on the expansion of the 
Washington, Metro Rapid Transit System into the Maryland suburbs. 
