MOTOR RACING / SHAV GLICK; 
FERKEL, AN ORIGINAL OUTLAW, MAKES FAREWELL TOUR OF WEST COAST 
Rick Ferkel, who came out of Findlay, Ohio, in 1973 and helped change the face 
of sprint car racing, is making one final swing of California sprint car tracks 
this year. 
The ageless Ferkel, one of the founders of the World of Outlaws, will be 
driving his own Gambler car with its 5-foot by 5-foot overhead wings and a new 
Ron Shaver aluminum engine Friday and Saturday nights in the Midwinter Outlaw 
championships at Ascot Park against a combination of World of Outlaws and West 
Coast drivers. 
It will be Ferkel's first visit to Ascot, where he and Bubby Jones, then of 
Danville, Ill., introduced the drag racing tire called the "humper" on the 
right rears of their sprinters in 1973, since the Pacific Coast Nationals in 
1985 and his first year touring with the Outlaws since 1982. 
"I've been staying pretty close to home the last few years but the opportunity 
came up this year to come out West and I decided to take it," said Ferkel, who 
still lives in Findlay. "It may be my last time out this way. 
"Back in the early '70s, before the Outlaws came about, we raced wherever we 
heard there was a good payday. Me and Bubby read about this race at Ascot and 
came out with our humpers, which were nothing more than drag racing tires with 
a tall profile, and broke the track record by a ton and lapped nearly everybody 
in the race." 
By the following season, nearly every car in the CRA was equipped with the 
odd-looking right rear tire, which is now standard equipment. 
The Outlaws will present a new look this season and Ferkel, who helped Ted 
Johnson form the organization 12 years ago, is not pleased. Steve Kinser and 
Sammy Swindell, who have won all 11 Outlaws championships, have left to help 
form a rival organization, the United Sprint Assn. 
"Maybe I'm old-fashioned or something, but I don't understand the loyalty, or 
lack of it," Ferkel said. "The World of Outlaws brought sprint car racing 
national recognition, and it was that recognition that made millionaires out of 
Kinser and Swindell. How can they forget what got them where they are today?" 
The USA will open its season Saturday night in Savannah, Ga. Kinser, Swindell 
and Karl Kinser, chief mechanic and owner of Steve's car, are among the 
majority stockholders of USA. 
"If the USA was out to make sprint car racing a better product, I'd say fine, 
but it appears to me that it's just a group of guys with an ax to grind," 
Ferkel said. "If their idea is to cause a big split in the sport, it could set 
sprint car racing back, and that's crazy because the guys who owe the Outlaws 
the most are the guys who left." 
Jeff Swindell, Sammy's younger brother, won the Outlaws' season opener last 
Saturday at Firebird Raceway in Chandler, Ariz., and will head the cast of 
Outlaws at Ascot. Swindell beat Bobby Davis Jr. to the flag in a battle of 
Memphis drivers. Davis finished third behind Kinser and Sammy Swindell in last 
year's standings. 
Ascot fans may remember Jeff Swindell as an 18-year-old in 1980 who came from 
the rear of the C main, through the B main qualifier and eventually from 26th 
to finish fifth in the Pacific Coast Nationals. 
Other prominent Outlaws entered include Andy Hillenburg of Broken Arrow, Okla., 
and Jac Haudenschild of Millersburg, Ohio, who were sixth and eighth, 
respectively, last year. 
West Coast defenders will be led by Ron Shuman of Tempe, Ariz., a former Outlaw 
who stayed home last year and won the California Racing Assn. championship for 
wingless cars; Brent Kaeding of Campbell, Calif., the Northern Auto Racing Club 
champion; and Lealand McSpadden of Tempe, Ariz., who won 15 CRA main events 
while racing part-time. 
OFF-ROAD -- Competitors in the Mickey Thompson Off-Road Gran Prix series will 
face the longest and perhaps most demanding stadium course yet designed 
Saturday night when they compete at Jack Murphy Stadium in San Diego. The 
course has been stretched to four-tenths of a mile, with 10 turns and nine 
jumps. Jeff Huber, the only driver to win a Grand National sport truck in a 
main event in a Ford, will rejoin the Ford team after a two-year stint with 
Mazda. Huber, an Apple Valley driver who won at Orange Show Stadium in 1985, 
will replace Dan Esslinger, who is co-owner of the team and was its driver the 
last two seasons. 
MOTOCROSS -- When Rick Johnson won his fifth straight Supercross last Saturday 
night at Miami, the Honda rider from El Cajon passed Bob (Hurricane) Hannah as 
the winningest rider in stadium motocross. It was Johnson's 28th win. Johnson 
is now after Hannah's national record of 64, counting both stadium and outdoor 
races. Johnson's combined total is 59. The next Supercross is set for Saturday 
night at Atlanta. . . . Sportsman riders will complete their season Sunday in 
the 13th annual Continental Motosport Club's Golden State Nationals series at 
Glen Helen Park in San Bernardino. 
DRAG RACING -- Bernie Longjohn, manager of L.A. County Raceway in Palmdale, has 
also been named manager of the new Bakersfield Raceway -- formerly Famoso Drag 
Strip -- by the National Hot Rod Assn., which recently acquired a 20-year lease 
on the famous strip where the March Meet Fuel and Gas Championships were held 
for 39 years. The March Meet will not be held this year while improvements are 
being made on the facility, but it will be resumed next year. 
MOTORCYCLES -- Round 2 of the Miller Formula One Grand Prix sprint series, 
sanctioned by the American Road Racing Assn., will be held Sunday at Willow 
Springs Raceway. 
STOCK CARS -- Former CRA champion Brad Noffsinger of Huntington Beach was a 
late scratch in the Daytona 500, being replaced by Charlie Glotzbach. . . . P. 
J. Jones of Torrance, after starting fifth in the Daytona Dash 200, led briefly 
before spinning out in a tangle of cars early in the race. 
NEWSWORTHY -- Gordon Hoyt of Whittier has been elected president of the 
Bonneville 200 MPH Club. . . . Jim Kropfeld, a two-time world unlimited 
hydroplane champion who suffered a broken neck when his Miss Budweiser flipped 
upside down in the opening race of 1988 in Miami, will return to racing this 
year for Bernie Little's Budweiser team. Tom D'Eath, who won the title in the 
same boat last year, has switched to car racing. 
