OGILVY GETS PARAMOUNT PICTURES AD ACCOUNT 
The scramble for the largest available film studio account in the nation ended 
on Monday when Paramount Pictures handed the bulk of its estimated $60-million 
to $70-million advertising business to the Los Angeles office of Ogilvy &amp; 
Mather. 
Ogilvy's Los Angeles office will split a portion of the business with the giant 
firm's New York office. 
"Ogilvy &amp; Mather has an exceptional and enthusiastic team with extensive 
knowledge of the entertainment industry," said Arthur Cohen, president of 
worldwide marketing for the Motion Picture Group of Paramount. "Their marketing 
skills and competitive spirit are unmatched," he said in a statement. 
For Ogilvy, the win represents a spectacular return to the film entertainment 
business. About two years ago, Ogilvy lost the Columbia Pictures advertising 
account after handling it for nearly six years. 
"This is as big as it gets for an advertising agency," said Gerald D. McGee, 
managing director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles. "If you're an agency in 
this town and you're not in show business, you might as well not be in this 
town." 
Despite the windfall, the agency plans no new hires. "We still have a lot of 
people on board from when we had Columbia," said McGee. The agency, which 
creates ads for American Express and Carnation Co., will not actually create 
ads for Paramount. The ads will continue to be mostly developed by Paramount 
and several smaller, speciality agencies it hires to help make movie trailers 
and print ads. 
Ogilvy will primarily be responsible for purchasing TV and radio broadcast time 
and print ad space for upcoming Paramount films. Ogilvy will also help with 
strategic planning for the marketing of such upcoming Paramount films as "Days 
of Thunder," scheduled for late May release, starring Tom Cruise as a race car 
driver, and "Another 48 Hours," starring Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte, which is 
scheduled for summer release and features the duo banging heads with an Aryan 
motorcycle group. 
Paramount, which released 14 pictures in 1989, says it expects to release 18 
films in 1990. 
The agency that formerly purchased Paramount's advertising time said Ogilvy has 
plenty of work ahead. "I think they're a fantastic agency, but they'll have 
their hands full," said James D. Helin, managing director of the Los Angeles 
office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles. "It's a load of a responsibility." 
Ogilvy employees celebrated in true Hollywood style late Friday when the agency 
was told the good news. The ad firm's entire staff was called into the lobby 
for a meeting. Employees were entertained by several of the agency's top 
executives -- including McGee -- who sang and danced to the Broadway tune 
"There's No Business Like Show Business." 
