U.S. TO STAND BY CONTRAS, BUSH VOWS; 
HUMANITARIAN AID PLEDGED BEYOND MARCH 31 CUTOFF 
President Bush, in his first public comment on a Central American peace 
initiative that he admitted took him by surprise, promised Thursday that the 
United States would not abandon Nicaragua's Contras or "leave them twisting out 
there" in the face of a plan to disarm them and close their bases. 
Talking to a small group of reporters in the Oval Office, Bush pledged to 
continue some form of "humanitarian" assistance to the Contras after the 
current $27-million aid package expires March 31. 
The President said that there are both "positive" and "troubling" elements in 
the plan adopted Monday by five Central American presidents, which calls for 
disbanding the Contra military forces in exchange for promises of free 
elections and democratic reforms by Nicaragua's leftist government. 
'National Reconciliation' 
He said that if Managua's Sandinista government keeps its end of the bargain in 
the new peace plan, it would produce the sort of democratic government that the 
Contras have been fighting for. 
"They're talking about national reconciliation and full freedoms, including 
complete freedom of the press and free and fair elections and an end to 
subversion," Bush said. 
But he said that the United States will be wary about taking the Nicaraguan 
government at its word because President Daniel Ortega's regime has broken its 
promises before. 
"Let's be sure that we not leave the resistance standing alone, leave them 
twisting out there without fulfillment of the commitment to democracy on the 
part of the Sandinistas," he said. 
Kremlin Call Rejected 
In the mini-press conference with the reporters, Bush also rejected the Soviet 
Union's renewed call for an embargo on arms shipments to Afghanistan and urged 
Moscow to support a neutral, nonaligned regime in Kabul. He said that 
Washington would continue supplying weapons to the anti-communist moujahedeen 
guerrillas because the Soviet Union turned over to the Marxist government vast 
stockpiles of armaments before the last Soviet troops left the country this 
week. 
Bush attempted to gloss over a festering dispute between the United States and 
West Germany over North Atlantic Treaty Organization plans to modernize 
battlefield nuclear weapons, maintaining that "we are far closer to West 
Germany than the public perceptions might be." 
The Bonn government opposes upgrading NATO's short-range nuclear arsenal 
because most of the weapons are deployed in West Germany. Because of the 
weapons' limited range and the country's geographic position at the front-line 
of any East-West conflict, fired missiles would, in the event of war, probably 
land inside West Germany's borders. 
"I would use this opportunity to shoot down the concept that there are major 
divisions between ourselves and the Federal Republic (of Germany) on this 
question," Bush said without providing any sort of hint about how the dispute 
would be resolved. 
The Contras have been camped in bases on the Honduras side of the 
Nicaragua-Honduras border for months, surviving on non-lethal aid voted by 
Congress last year to pay for food, clothing and other supplies. Bush said that 
he is determined to provide some form of aid after the current appropriation 
runs out next month. But he said he had not yet decided how to do it. 
"I have every intention of seeing that these people receive humanitarian 
support, but how that comes about, we'll just have to wait and see," the 
President said. A text of the press conference, which was attended by several 
reporters, was made available later. 
The Administration said previously that it will not seek renewed military aid 
for the Contras. 
The agreement signed by the presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, 
Guatemala and Nicaragua calls for drafting, within the next 90 days, a detailed 
plan to disarm the Contras and remove them from the bases in Honduras. The pact 
also calls for free and fair elections in Nicaragua before the end of next 
February, nine months earlier than elections were previously scheduled. 
Bush said that the United States would work during the next 90 days with the 
Central American leaders "to see that there's not just some fluffy promises out 
there, but that there's some teeth in the promise of democratization. 
"We're talking about freedom of the press, freedom of elections, freedom of 
worship," he said. "And it's fine to spell these things out in generalities, 
but now let's get down to how we proceed. What does a free and fair election 
mean? I want to see some certification of the election process." 
Bush candidly admitted that he had not expected the Central American presidents 
to act as they did, despite several recent high-level contacts. 
"I wouldn't have said that they'd do exactly what they did do," he said. "In 
terms of being caught off-guard, we are in the midst of a review of our whole 
policy there." 
