SUSPECTED SWEATSHOPS ARE RAIDED; 
LABOR: STATE, COUNTY AUTHORITIES SEIZE UNFINISHED CLOTHING AND CITE SHOPS. 
Labor and welfare fraud inspectors swooped down on suspected garment sweatshops 
Friday, finding labels from half a dozen prominent clothing companies in three 
private homes, seizing unfinished garments and citing one shop for an alleged 
child-labor violation. 
One manufacturer said he was "incensed" to hear that his label had been found 
in a squalid back-yard shed, along with a cot and two sewing machines. 
"I'm crazed over this because they have absolute instructions that none of my 
merchandise ever goes into anything resembling a sweatshop," said Barry Forman, 
owner of D.K. Forman, whose clothing is sold in top department stores. 
The label, which reads "Deborah Barry for D.K. Forman, Proudly Made in U.S.A.," 
was found in the shed behind a home raided by authorities on a tip about 
illegal home sewing. 
It is a violation of state and federal law to sew women's garments in homes. 
But labor authorities say they have repeatedly found clothing brands sold in 
posh stores being sewn in Orange County homes, often by immigrant women -- and 
sometimes children -- earning less than the minimum wage. 
Inside the shed at the Santa Ana home, Catholic icons looked down on two sewing 
machines, a rumpled cot, fabric scrap, tangles of old thread and the labels. 
But the occupant insisted the sewing machines did not belong to her. 
Among the labels were Betty &amp; Sheila Garments, a Los Angeles-based junior 
sportswear and dress manufacturer; Contempo Casuals Inc. of Los Angeles, a 
retail chain owned by Neiman Marcus Group Inc., and Wet Seal Inc., an 
Irvine-based retail chain with 73 stores in California, Arizona and Nevada and 
sales of $79 million in fiscal 1989. 
Wet Seal Inc. President Ken Chilvers said retail chains such as his often 
contract to have private-label clothing made for them by other garment 
manufacturers and usually have no idea where their garments are sewn. 
"I'm going to have to try to track it back and find out exactly who it was," 
Chilvers said. "We'll do what any responsible company would do, which is try to 
put a stop to it." 
Betty &amp; Sheila President Deborah Kattler said that she had "no idea" how 
her label made its way to the shed but that she would never be a party to any 
of her 10 or 15 contractors farming her goods out to be made elsewhere. 
"It's not something my company approves of, supports or encourages," Kattler 
said. 
Contempo Casuals officials could not be reached for comment Friday evening. 
Friday's raid was one of periodic spot checks jointly conducted by state labor 
inspectors and the welfare fraud unit of the Orange County district attorney's 
office. Fraud officials check that welfare recipients who are earning money on 
the side report their sewing income. Labor inspectors make sure garment workers 
are being paid properly, check for child-labor violations and crack down on 
home-sewing operations. 
State Deputy Labor Commissioner Craig Cubberly said that since 1987 he has 
levied $45,000 in fines on garment sweatshops for minimum wage, overtime and 
child-labor violations involving children ages 13 to 17. 
Manufacturers can also be fined if their sewing contractors are found 
underpaying workers or having clothing sewn at home -- but only after repeat 
offenses and if it can be shown that they knew of the labor violations. 
On Friday, however, Cubberly and his colleague Jesse Atilano cited two Garden 
Grove sewing shops in an industrial complex off Euclid Street. Both were sewing 
dresses and jackets for the All That Jazz label owned by Chorus Line Inc. 
Golden Fashion was fined $1,000 for inaccurate time records after Atilano 
noticed that nine of 10 workers' time cards had been punched at exactly 10:01 
a.m. 
"This is typical," Atilano said. "These gentlemen told me they have been here 
since 8 a.m. working." 
The owner, who identified herself as Ne Thi Tien, said the workers had simply 
forgotten to punch in. 
Next door, Fashion Quality was fined $100 after a 17-year-old worker was found 
behind the machines and $600 for six workers who had no time cards, officials 
said. 
After a federal labor investigation last fall, Queens Fashions, another 
contractor in the same complex that was also sewing All That Jazz, agreed to 
repay workers for alleged minimum wage and overtime violations. But Queens 
Fashion had closed its doors Friday, and a new sewing shop had opened in the 
same spot. 
"We're going to kick their tail bones," said Chorus Line Inc. Controller Jim 
Hogan, when told of the latest fines. "We'll tell them to clean up their act or 
they're not going to get any more work from us." 
Hogan dismissed the argument, by its contractors and other sewing shop owners, 
that manufacturers pay them so little for each garment that they cannot 
possibly pay their workers the minimum wage. 
"We can't help it if they run an inefficient shop," Hogan said. "If they can't 
make money at the prices we pay them, then they should not accept the work. We 
are not trying to beat them out of any kind of money." 
Hogan said the company has 80 contractors in greater Los Angeles and that only 
the three in Orange County have been cited for labor violations. 
In two other home sweatshops Friday, officials confiscated batches of clothing 
that their owners later said were being sewn for the Bee Darlin' and Paris 
Sport Club labels. Those companies could not be reached for comment. 
A small boy watched impassively as inspectors questioned his mother and counted 
scores of partially sewn dresses that had been stuffed in a closet. 
Though the kitchen wall behind her industrial sewing machine was gray with 
wear, and a special fluorescent light had been installed above her head, the 
woman, who receives welfare assistance, stuck to her denials. 
"She's saying she's only been sewing since yesterday, doesn't know who she's 
sewing for, and doesn't know who owns the clothes," Cubberly said in 
frustration. "And they haven't told her yet what she (will be paid). 
"We're not getting the truth here, but that's nothing new." 
