POLICE HONOR 9 OFFICERS IN FOOTHILL NARCOTICS UNIT 
A group of northeast San Fernando Valley narcotics officers, honored Thursday 
at an awards ceremony, said they oppose using barricades to curtail drive-by 
narcotics traffic, as is being done in Sepulveda. 
"There will never be a need to put up barricades to keep out drug dealers in 
Pacoima and other areas of the Foothill Division," Sgt. Cary Krebs said. "We 
have found we can rid the neighborhoods of drug dealers by being out there day 
and night busting people." 
Krebs heads a narcotics unit composed of nine officers who Thursday were 
awarded medals by Police Chief Daryl F. Gates during the Los Angeles Police 
Department's 11th annual Recognition Day ceremony in Studio City. 
They were among 105 police officers and civilian employees honored for bravery 
in acts ranging from battling drug traffic to calming a suicidal woman to 
attempting to save a drowning woman who had driven a Jaguar car into her 
Brentwood swimming pool. 
Krebs' unit, the only one of its kind in the city composed of patrol officers 
instead of detectives, has arrested nearly 1,000 dealers since its inception 
almost two years ago. 
"We don't need barricades," said Mike Cherry, one of the officers in the 
Foothill narcotics unit. "If Van Nuys and Devonshire did what we did, we'd all 
drive drug dealers out of the Valley." 
It was police officers from the Devonshire Division who proposed in November 
setting up roadblocks around a 30-square-block area in Sepulveda. The 
barricades were erected late last year with the support of the Los Angeles City 
Council, which voted to keep them up as long as police deem necessary. 
At the time, Devonshire Police Capt. Mark D. Stevens said the barricades were 
necessary because traditional police methods, such as foot patrols, had failed 
to stem the tide of drive-by drug traffic. 
The barricade concept -- believed to be the first such effort on a large scale 
in the country -- has not prompted any organized opposition in Sepulveda. 
Police credit the roadblocks with dramatically reducing crime and have used 
them in parts of South-Central, Koreatown and Pico-Union as well. 
But Krebs said Thursday that the "supermarket atmosphere" in which drugs are 
openly sold in some areas of the city can be eliminated by assigning undercover 
officers to arrest drug dealers. 
Not all the awards went to officers fighting drug traffic. 
Sgt. Jim Staugaard and management analyst Karen Frick of the North Hollywood 
Division were recognized for hiring a homeless man as a Police Department 
janitor and loaning him money to buy food. 
Roosevelt Weeks, the man they helped, said he feels fortunate to earn $351 a 
week in take-home pay as a department custodian. "I had 42 cents and no place 
to sleep when they helped me," he said. 
Twenty-seven officers received medals for acts of bravery and service. Officer 
Karen L. Kubly, the only woman to receive a medal for bravery, had used Spanish 
she had learned in the Police Academy to calm a 67-year-old intoxicated woman 
until her partners could grab the woman from the edge of a Hollywood apartment 
roof. 
And Officer John Lopata was honored for diving into a Brentwood swimming pool 
to rescue an 81-year-old woman whose blue Jaguar had sunk to the bottom. The 
woman died despite Lopata's efforts. 
"To me, it wasn't anything out of the ordinary," said Lopata, who moved to Los 
Angeles from Chicago in 1970. "I didn't even tell my wife about it." 
