THE TOWER PREDICAMENT 
John Tower, President Bush's defense secretary-designate, has assured the 
Senate Armed Services committee that he has no drinking problem and that he is 
a man of "discipline" who now limits his alcohol consumption to the odd glass 
of wine. Ordinarily this would probably suffice to answer the charges, made 
most recently before the committee by one conservative witness, that Tower on 
occasion had been seen drunk in public. It might further be expected that the 
committee would give special weight to Tower's denial since he is both a former 
senator and a former member of the same panel that must recommend on his 
nomination. Approval of Tower could still come fairly soon. For the moment, 
though, a vote has been deferred so that the committee can pursue "additional 
information." What this suggests is that the Tower nomination may be in 
trouble. 
The exact nature of any such trouble is open to speculation. Some committee 
members clearly remain bothered that Tower was paid more than $750,000 between 
1986 and 1988 for giving advice to six companies that did a lot of business 
with the Defense Department. That lucrative consulting role followed 
immediately on Tower's brief service as a delegate to the 
strategic-arms-reduction talks, raising concerns about the appearance -- if not 
necessarily the fact -- that he cashed in on insider information. Other 
members, as their public questioning showed, are disturbed about the 
allegations and rumors concerning Tower's drinking and womanizing -- the latter 
an accusation also made in divorce-court proceedings by his second wife. 
Tower concedes that he was a heavy drinker in the past. In open session before 
the committee he says that he has put that behind him, adding that he is fully 
aware that the responsibilities of the defense secretary's job make temperance 
essential. Certainly few members of the Senate would insist on abstinence as a 
qualification for high office. Certainly, too, Tower may indeed have overcome 
his earlier drinking problem through the self discipline he now cites. If so, 
he deserves respect. 
At the same time, though, it is not just proper but imperative that the Armed 
Services Committee and the full Senate satisfy themselves that any doubts about 
Tower's ethics, sobriety and behavior have been resolved. The importance and 
sensitivity of the defense secretary's job leave no room for uncertainties; in 
times of crisis and stress the President and the armed forces must be able to 
expect that he will be reachable, clearheaded and effective. The time to learn 
about potential short comings is before a confirmation vote is taken. Afterward 
it may be too late. 
