SPECIAL REPORT: OIL ON THE BEACH; 
SURFACE-DIVING BIRDS MOST VULNERABLE TO OIL; 
WILDLIFE: SPILL COULD ALSO HARM PRIMARY FOOD SOURCES FOR COUNTLESS MIGRATING 
BIRDS AND THE ENDANGERED LIGHT-FOOTED CLAPPER RAIL IF IT ENTERS SENSITIVE 
WETLANDS AREAS. 
Each fall, the distinctive black-and-white western grebe wings south from its 
breeding grounds in Alaska to winter off the coast of Southern California and 
Mexico. 
Thousands of the birds bob in the waters off Orange County, where they are 
joined by other surface-diving sea birds: common murres and several species of 
scoter. 
These birds are the most vulnerable to the floating oil released Wednesday by 
the ruptured tanker American Trader. 
"Grebes and murres spend most of their time sitting on the water, so they're 
highly vulnerable to oil," said Michael Fry, a research physiologist in the 
avian sciences department at UC Davis. And because oil is not a natural aspect 
of the birds' environment, they don't know to avoid it. In fact, Fry said, the 
oil has a flattening effect on the water that may actually attract the birds as 
they fly in search of choice feeding locations. 
Fry has seen his share of oil-soaked birds. He oversaw the pathological study 
of birds killed by last year's spill off Valdez, Alaska, in which an estimated 
30,000 sea birds and 127 bald eagles died. 
There are two life-threatening problems that occur when a bird's feathers are 
fouled with oil. 
First, a bird will try to clean itself with its bill, called "preening," thus 
ingesting some of the oil. "They do eat substantial quantities of the oil when 
they're trying to get it off their feathers," Fry said. 
Crude oil, such as that spilled off Huntington Beach, has a certain percentage 
of gasoline that gradually evaporates. If swallowed, it can cause serious 
damage to liver and kidneys. The oil itself causes anemia in the birds, which 
can lose half to two-thirds of their red blood cells, which carry oxygen 
through the body. For diving birds, which must hold their breath to feed, that 
can be fatal. 
The other main problem is that the oil mats the feathers, interfering with the 
bird's ability to float and to insulate itself from the cold waters. The body 
temperature drops, and the bird can die from hypothermia, or can literally 
starve to death as its metabolism increases to make up for the escaping heat. 
The oil spill can effect other aspects of the marine food chain, down to its 
most basic elements. If the spill enters any of the county's sensitive wetlands 
areas, it could smother the invertebrates that live in the ground. These are 
the primary food source for shore birds, including the endangered light-footed 
clapper rail, which nests in Anaheim Bay and Upper Newport Bay, and the myriad 
migrating birds that depend on the wetlands as vital refueling stops on their 
long journeys. 
"In the long term, I don't think things are going to be disastrous" if some oil 
enters the marshes, said Louann Murray, a specialist in wetland invertebrates 
and a member of Amigos de Bolsa Chica. Microbes in the mud will eventually 
break down the oil that isn't scooped out, and the marsh will eventually 
recover. 
The short-term effects, however, could be disastrous for the migrating birds 
and especially for the clapper rail. Half of the remaining clapper rails in the 
United States live in Upper Newport Bay, and "could be wiped out by this 
spill," Murray said. 
If the oil hits tide pools, the results could also be devastating, according to 
Harry Helling of the Orange County Marine Institute in Dana Point. "There's 
nothing you can do to rescue a tide pool," Helling said. 
In the ocean waters near shore, mussels and snails can ingest the oil without 
apparent harm. But it accumulates in their systems, and can contaminate the 
birds that feed on them, such as harlequin and goldeneye ducks and oyster 
catchers. 
Eggs and young fish are vulnerable, but because this is not breeding season, 
adult fish won't be severely impacted. However, if the oil settles to the 
bottom it could kill such bottom-dwelling fish as halibut. 
In Alaska, sea otters -- which depend on their fur for insulation -- were the 
biggest victims of the spill among marine mammals. Otters no longer live off 
the Orange County coast, but there are numbers of California sea lions, 
bottle-nose and common dolphins and the migrating gray whales. 
Large mammals are usually able to escape the oil, says Jacqui Michel, a South 
Carolina-based scientific consultant who worked the Valdez spill and is heading 
to Orange County. While evidence is inconclusive, the oil does not seem to 
stick to the skin of whales and dolphins when they swim through. 
One concern is that dolphins, which accumulate toxins in their systems, may 
suffer long-term effects if they eat fish contaminated by the spill. 
Overall though, some experts are optimistic that wildlife off the Orange County 
coast will not suffer major long-term consequences if the spill is kept out of 
wetlands and other inlets. 
"You hate to say it, but in the grand scheme of things, if you had to have a 
spill, this was the time and the place," said state biologist Robin Lewis, who 
is helping assess potential environmental damage for the state Department of 
Fish and Game. "A month later, a few miles farther to the south, in that rocky 
reach near Corona del Mar and Laguna, and it would have taken years to 
recover." 
