GODDESS OF DEMOCRACY REPLICA STIRS CONTROVERSY; 
CHINATOWN: HOPING TO AVOID A DISPUTE, THE CHINESE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE BANNED 
THE STATUE FROM TODAY'S PARADE. BUT MEMORIES OF TIAN AN MEN SQUARE PROMPT A 
PROTEST. 
Eight months, 6,000 miles and a dramatic chapter of history removed from the 
student uprising it helped to inspire in Beijing, the Goddess of Democracy is 
in the middle of a controversy that is dividing the Chinese community in Los 
Angeles. 
Fearing that it would provoke dissent among local Chinese, the Chinese Chamber 
of Commerce banned a float featuring a six-foot replica of the statue from the 
Chinese New Year's parade it is sponsoring today in Chinatown. 
As a result, the divisiveness the chamber said it had hoped to avoid has 
surfaced as pro-democracy supporters in Los Angeles react to the business 
organization's decision. 
Members of the Los Angeles chapter of the Federation for a Democratic China, 
which sought to enter the goddess float in the annual parade, are accusing the 
chamber of trying to erase from public memory the bloodshed that occurred last 
June in Beijing's Tian An Men Square. 
"It's now the Chinese Chamber of Commerce that is crushing the symbol," said 
David Ma of Arcadia, a board member of the Paris-based federation, formed last 
fall to promote democratic reform in China. He said his group will lead a 
protest decrying the chamber's decision at today's 3 p.m. parade. 
Chamber board member Irvin Lai defended his organization's stance by saying 
that his group is bound by its charter not to take sides on political issues. 
"The chamber is a business organization," Lai said. "We do not take part in 
partisan politics. We do not wish to promote divisiveness." 
The statue at the heart of the controversy is a replica of the one that Chinese 
troops bulldozed in Tian An Men Square last June after squelching pro-democracy 
protests there. It is smaller than a 23-foot replica erected in downtown Los 
Angeles last June and later moved to Chinatown, where it was destroyed by 
vandals. 
The dispute between the chamber and the Federation for a Democratic China 
highlights a split in the Chinese community over whether the time has come to 
put the Beijing massacre in the past. 
After the chamber's 14-4 vote last week to deny the Goddess of Democracy entry 
to the parade, federation members immediately wrote a letter of protest to the 
chamber board. The letter accused chamber members of "betraying their 
consciences" and helping people to forget the bloodshed in China last summer. 
For years, cultural celebrations in the Chinese community have been used by 
some as opportunities to express political loyalties. In San Francisco's 
Chinatown, for example, merchants on one side of a street will fly flags of 
communist China on Oct. 1 -- China's national holiday -- while merchants on the 
other side will display flags recognizing the Taiwan government's national 
holiday on Oct. 10. 
Lai said that in Los Angeles, the chamber has always rejected attempts by 
various groups to use its New Year's parade as a political forum. In the past, 
he said, the chamber has denied requests by groups who want to fly foreign 
flags on the floats. "We're strictly an American organization," Lai said. 
"I don't think the Goddess of Democracy is political," Ma said. The statue, in 
his opinion, stands for human rights and is an American symbol. "She just 
symbolizes our system, our way of life, our values. What we want to display on 
the float is the symbol of Americans for two centuries." 
Ma said his group was willing to compromise by eliminating from its float the 
banners that would have referred to the Communist leadership's bloody crackdown 
in Tian An Men Square. But Chamber President Ken Chan said the chamber never 
received such a proposal from the federation. 
Chan said denials of float applications are routine, and that the federation's 
entry was not singled out. "They are not the only ones denied." 
He declined, however, to cite examples of other unsuccessful applicants to the 
parade, which the chamber has sponsored in Chinatown for decades. 
Some in the Chinese community have also questioned whether business ties 
between the chamber and the Chinese government might have influenced the 
group's decision, but chamber board member Fred Hong noted that the chamber's 
150 to 200 members do business not only with China, but also with Taiwan and 
Hong Kong. 
Ma said he respects the chamber's right to stay neutral, but he added that he 
believes Chinese-Americans should not be discouraged from speaking out for 
democracy in their homeland. 
"Our Chinese community is divided," Ma said. "Let's face it. A lot of people 
have different opinions vis-a-vis democracy in China." 
