LACK OF FUNDS HURTS COASTAL PANEL, ANALYST SAYS; 
BUDGET: THE LEGISLATURE IS TOLD THAT A SHORTAGE OF MONEY AND PERSONNEL IS 
HURTING THE COASTAL COMMISSION'S ABILITY TO PROTECT THE COASTLINE. 
The mission of the California Coastal Commission to protect the state's 
coastline is being hampered by a lack of money and personnel, said Elizabeth 
Hill, state legislative analyst. 
"Our analysis indicates that the commission has significantly fewer resources 
to devote to regulatory activities today than it did eight years ago," Hill 
told the Legislature last week. 
Hill, the Legislature's nonpartisan budget adviser, made the comments as part 
of her review of the $53.7-billion state budget proposed for the 1990-91 fiscal 
year by Gov. George Deukmejian, who has held office for seven of those eight 
years. 
When adjusted for inflation, Hill said, the commission's proposed $6.2-million 
budget is actually $2 million less than it was in 1982-83. And she noted that 
the commission's work force has been cut from 170 to 110 in the last eight 
years, a 35% reduction. 
Hill painted a grim picture of commission operations, including delays in 
certifying local coastal programs, a backlog of potential violations that need 
to be investigated and a high volume of work per staff member. 
But a spokesman for Deukmejian defended the governor's tight-fisted approach 
toward the panel. 
Tom Beermann, the governor's deputy press secretary, said Deukmejian, a 
longtime critic of the commission, would still like to see the commission 
abolished. 
"He believes that decisions affecting land use along the coast should be 
carried out by those individuals who are directly responsible to the electorate 
in that area," Beermann said. "And the Coastal Commission is not responsible to 
the electorate." 
Planners have pointed to a noticeable strain on resources in the commission's 
office in Long Beach, the governor's hometown. It is the busiest of the Coastal 
Commission offices and oversees coastal development in Los Angeles and Orange 
counties. 
"Our (building) permit load has increased from about 800 five years ago to more 
than 1,200 a year now; at the same time the number of staff planners has been 
reduced from 13 to nine," said Gary Timm, a planner in the Long Beach office. 
The Long Beach office has vacancies for two planners, but officials say the 
jobs are difficult to fill because qualified candidates, mindful of the 
commission's endangered status, are hesitant to apply for a job that may not 
last. 
Such staff shortages have left the commission vulnerable to criticism, both 
from developers, who complain about delays in their projects being approved, 
and environmentalists and slow-growth advocates, who say some projects drag on 
so long that it is difficult to sustain opposition. 
In addition to personnel shortages, commission staffers complain of a lack of 
modern office equipment. For example, at the panel's San Francisco 
headquarters, workers still use a rotary phone system that frequently breaks 
down. 
"It got to the point where I finally just bought my own touch telephone at the 
office," said Jack Liebster, the agency's public information officer. 
Presumably, the telephone problem will be relieved because the commission is 
expected to relocate its main office this spring. But the commission will have 
to absorb at least $200,000 annually for increased rent, "effectively resulting 
in another reduction in funds," Hill said. 
Moreover, none of the commission's permit application files are accessible by 
computer, meaning that staffers and the public must search through index cards 
for information on any of the thousands of commission actions over the years. 
Although a 1983 amendment to the state Coastal Act called for the creation of a 
Coastal Resource Information Center, which would be a computerized system 
tracking coastal development, staffers say the Legislature never allocated 
funds for it. "Even if we could afford to develop the software, there's no 
money to buy hardware," said Jim Burns, the agency's chief deputy director. 
Hill's report on the conditions facing the commission met with a mixed reaction 
from lawmakers. 
Several Democrats welcomed her assessment but said that until a new governor is 
elected in November there is not much that can be done to boost the 
commission's budget. 
Assemblyman Terry B. Friedman (D-Los Angeles) predicted that whoever becomes 
governor will do a better job than Deukmejian of protecting the coastline. "I 
don't think anyone can do worse for the coast," Friedman said. 
But Assemblyman Gerald N. Felando (R-San Pedro) maintained that the commission 
has exceeded the scope of its original authority -- preserving access to the 
coast. He said many of the commission's activities, such as monitoring oil 
spills, were never envisioned for the panel. 
"If they had stuck to what they were originally formed to do, their budget and 
staff is adequate," Felando maintained. 
Steve MacElvaine of Morro Bay, a Deukmejian appointee to the panel, said the 
commission was set up to certify local coastal programs and then turn over 
permitting of projects and enforcement to local authorities. MacElvaine, saying 
he was speaking just for himself and not the commission, said the reason for 
the work backlog is that local city coastal programs have not been completed. 
MacElvaine contended that much of the staff's time is occupied with dealing 
with permits for grading in the Santa Monica Mountains and the construction of 
tennis courts or decks. But, he said, if local governments had completed their 
own coastal plans, these decisions would usually be heard by local authorities 
and not the commission. 
Gladstone reported from Sacramento and Russell from Santa Monica. 
