ON AGING: DEALING WITH CANCER AS PATIENT, FRIEND 
The National Cancer Institute has developed four booklets that help people with 
their feelings and fears. These booklets give practical tips on dealing with 
cancer and its treatment to patients, families and friends. 
"Radiation Therapy and You" describes common types of radiation therapy and its 
side effects. "Chemotherapy and You" tells patients what to expect and offers 
self-help tips for managing side effects. 
"Eating Hints" stresses the importance of eating well during cancer treatment 
and provides simple and menus. "Taking time: Support for People with Cancer and 
the People Who Care About Them" discusses the emotions patients and families 
experience. 
The institute's free booklets should be required reading for anyone with cancer 
as well as their families and friends. To order the series, call (800) 
4-CANCER, or write to the Office of Cancer Communication, National Cancer 
Institute, Building 31, Bethesda, Md. 20892. 
Question: Four years ago, my parents purchased a long-term-care insurance 
policy. Recently my 87-year-old mother had to go into a nursing home and my 
father moved in with us. When we spoke to the insurance agent about coverage, I 
was amazed to learn that the plan was riddled with exclusions and barely paid 
for anything. Were my parents fraudulently treated? 
Answer: Unfortunately, most private long-term-care insurance policies don't 
provide comprehensive coverage, and many fall short of the mark in covering 
basics. 
Private long-term-care insurance was first sold in the 1970s. However, the 
majority of policies have been written in the past four years. About 500,000 
policies have been sold to older Americans. 
Researchers at the University of North Carolina examined 75 long-term-care 
insurance plans and options. They found that 82% had severe restrictions in 
coverage, making it hard for beneficiaries to collect. A $50-a-day benefit was 
considered inadequate to meet costs incurred by care in a nursing home. 
Premiums for long-term-care policies range from $400 to $1,200 per year. 
The National Assn. of Insurance Commissioners has recommended changes in 
long-term-care insurance policies: 
 -- Coverage for a minimum of 24 consecutive months of care. 
 -- No requirement of prior institutionalization. 
 -- A limitation on pre-existing conditions that can negate the policy. 
 -- No cancellation on the basis of age or health of the insured. 
 -- A designated period in which the policyholder can return the policy. 
 -- Disclosure of benefits. 
When buying any insurance, consumers need to shop around, asking for a 
disclosure of benefits explaining the policy's provisions. 
If you believe fraud was committed in the selling of your parents' policy, 
contact the office of the state insurance commission. 
Q: I'm a 61-year-old woman concerned about maintaining my health for as many 
years as possible. I read that bee pollen promotes good health and alfalfa can 
cure arthritis. Are these claims true? 
A: No. The dietary products you cited are two of a number of fraudulent product 
claims aimed at older Americans. A report by Surgeon General C. Everett Koop 
warns against wasting your money on these and other food-quackery claims, such 
as: 
 -- Superoxide dismutase, a naturally occurring enzyme sold over the counter, 
and the nucleic acids DNA and RNA, the basic building blocks of life that can 
be taken orally, as "anti-aging remedies." 
 -- Ginseng, a Chinese herb, as a curative for many ailments. 
 -- Lecithin, a waxy substance widely found in plants and animals, combined 
with vinegar, kelp and Vitamin B-6 for the prevention and cure of heart disease 
and weight loss. 
 -- Para-aminobenzoic acid, a member of the B vitamin family, as an essential 
or curative nutrient. 
 -- Pangamic acid, so-called vitamin B-15, as an essential nutrient. 
A 1984 report by the Subcommittee on Health and Long-Term Care of the House 
Select Committee on Aging indicated that quackery costs the public more than 
$10 billion a year. According to Koop, federal regulatory agencies don't have 
the resources to combat food quackery. 
