THE NBA / SAM MCMANIS; 
PREMIER DUNKERS SAY CONTEST, AT $20,000, IS NOT WORTH EFFORT 
A strong indication that the slam dunk contest has lost its status as the 
avant-garde event of the National Basketball Assn.'s All-Star weekend comes 
from reports that several marquee-value players have thought about declining 
the exclusive invitations. 
To them, the $20,000 first-place prize seems little more than loose change. As 
for the prestige of being the slam dunk champion, well, once you have won it, 
the challenge may be gone. 
Michael Jordan, the two-time defending slam dunk winner, said weeks ago that he 
did not want to compete because he feels the competition drained his energy for 
the second half of last season. Then Sunday he said he will skip the contest, 
saying that doctors have told him not to participate because of a bruised knee, 
although he has not missed a game because of it. 
Larry Nance, the first winner, in 1984, is coming off an injury that sidelined 
him for a week and reportedly is mulling the possibility of skipping the 
competition. 
Dominique Wilkins, who won it four seasons ago, said the injured ligaments in 
his right thumb will not prevent him from competing. But he added that he is 
not sure whether he wants to go to all the bother. 
"I might do it," Wilkins said. "But I might not. I'm keeping them in a sweat. 
Actually, me and Michael have been talking. If they put up more money, then 
maybe . . . " 
Don't worry, though: Otis Smith has said he definitely will be there. He has 
already sent in his RSVP. 
Although not exactly a well-known player, the Golden State Warriors' reserve 
guard surprised many in last season's competition by advancing to the 
semifinals, along with Jordan, Wilkins and Clyde Drexler. 
Smith may not be an elite player -- actually, he's only the second-best Smith 
on his team, behind Larry -- but he figures he has the necessary motivation and 
moves to win this season. 
"I can use the cash," said Smith, who is earning $225,000 in his third NBA 
season. "I need some furniture." 
But even Smith is not 100% healthy; he missed part of Monday's practice because 
of a sore knee. A team spokesman said the knee had been troubling him for some 
time, but he is expected to be able to play Wednesday against the Lakers. 
Meanwhile, the league announced Monday that three players -- Kenny Walker of 
New York, Shelton Jones of Philadelphia and Chris Morris of New Jersey -- will 
take Jordan's place. 
Rather than adopting the too-cool-to-care attitude of other invitees, Smith 
said he has practiced several new dunks and variations on other gravity-defying 
standards that have suitably impressed the judges in previous competitions. He 
said he also has enlisted advice from teammates on the Warriors. 
"I don't let it affect my game, but I have given some thought to it this year," 
Smith said. "I think I took myself out of it last year because I got too 
nervous and I didn't have it planned on what dunk I'd do. 
"I think I surprised some people last year, and they found out who I was. But, 
in a sense, I didn't do as well as I should have. But I'm working on it this 
time. I'd like to keep it a surprise, but I've got something new." 
Smith will not be the favorite in Saturday's competition at the Summit in 
Houston. Portland's Drexler, who played college ball at Houston, is the 
hometown favorite, which usually assures a victory. Spud Webb won it in his 
hometown of Dallas in 1986 and Jordan in Chicago last season. 
But the player Smith is most worried about is Nance. 
"A lot of the factors that go into it are political things, which I don't 
control," Smith said. "But if Larry Nance decides to compete, he's the one I'm 
most worried about. Nance is the best. 
"But if I do my dunks the way I can, I think I stand a good chance of winning. 
And, because I'm relatively new at this, I've got the element of surprise." 
Maybe a victory by Otis Smith, representing all the little-known NBA players, 
will rekindle interest in an event that seemingly has lost its trendiness. 
Despite recent rumors to the contrary, Larry Bird of the Boston Celtics 
apparently will not defend his three-point shoot-out title on Saturday, 
although the league is holding a spot for him until two hours before the start 
of the competition. 
Bird, who has won all three long-distance contests, told Boston writers on 
Sunday night that his recovery from Achilles' tendon surgery has not progressed 
enough for him to compete Saturday. In fact, Bird said he might not accompany 
the Celtics on their West Coast trip, which begins after the All-Star break, 
because he still has swelling after working out. Although Bird probably will 
not compete in the three-point contest, the league has invited a foreign 
dignitary. He is Rimas Kurtinaitis, the leading scorer for the Soviet Union in 
its victory over the United States in the Seoul Olympics. 
Kurtinaitis, a 6-foot-5 guard, was invited to compete by NBA officials after he 
won a similar contest in a European league. In the Soviet Union's victory over 
the U.S. team, he scored 28 points, including four three-pointers. 
Bird's absence is not the only change in the Celtics. Danny Ainge has gone from 
starter to sixth man, a move that has helped the Celtics' scoring balance. 
The change occurred two weeks ago, after Ainge had missed two games because of 
back spasms, and Coach Jimmy Rodgers started rookie Brian Shaw in his place. 
When Ainge returned, Rodgers decided to stay with Shaw. 
It gives the Celtics more scoring off the bench, now that Reggie Lewis is in 
the starting lineup. And, in the four games in which he has played 30 or more 
minutes, Shaw has totaled 31 rebounds and 25 assists. 
Ainge has not complained and Rodgers said he plans on staying with the 
alignment. 
"We wanted to gain a scorer off the bench, which Danny has given us," Rodgers 
said. "It also allowed us to get Brian involved in quality minutes. The major 
factor was being able to come off the bench with firepower. We asked Danny to 
play that role. He's done that without any problems, and I like that. It speaks 
well for a player to do that, both physically and mentally." 
Last add Celtics: Perhaps the most obvious of the annual All-Star slights this 
time was Boston center Robert Parish's being left off the East team in favor of 
fan-favorite Moses Malone. 
Although Malone has slightly better statistics, Parish has kept the Celtics 
from going under during Bird's prolonged absence. He is having perhaps his best 
season in 13 years in the league. 
"Robert has given us great consistency during a period of time when we've been 
very inconsistent," Rodgers said. "When you have Larry Bird out, you need 
someone to go above and beyond. Robert has elevated his game on a consistent 
basis. He's having an All-Star season, without question. 
"Unfortunately, the way the system works, he's not going to be in the All-Star 
game. It's a shame he's not involved." 
Said Celtic forward Kevin McHale, who did make the All-Star team: "In the past, 
people have overlooked Robert's contributions. It's a tough thing for Robert to 
be out of the All-Star game. I'd like to see Robert make it for himself. The 
personal gratification of your teammates' respect, that makes up for not being 
in the All-Star game. And we certainly have respect for him." 
Parish said: "What I'm doing individually doesn't mean a whole lot right now. 
I'm getting more recognition with Larry out. It's always nice to be 
acknowledged." 
Walter Berry, former college player of the year and now a regular in the 
transactions column of the sports section, was recently waived by the New 
Jersey Nets and signed by the Houston Rockets. That makes four teams in three 
seasons for Berry. 
Net forward Roy Hinson recently explained why Berry is so well traveled: 
"Walter was spreading a cancer with all his complaining." 
The Detroit Pistons lost six straight road games while Roundball 1, their 
private airplane, was grounded for repairs. 
The plane was back in the air last week, and the Pistons won consecutive road 
games against Chicago and Philadelphia. 
