REPORT BY FBI CLEARS TOWER, BUSH DECLARES; 
PANEL TO VOTE ON PENTAGON NOMINEE THURSDAY AND SENATE COULD ACT ON CONFIRMATION 
FRIDAY 
With a long-delayed Senate committee vote on John Tower now set for this week, 
President Bush offered a vigorous defense of his nominee for defense secretary, 
declaring that the most recent allegations about Tower's personal life and 
financial dealings "have been gunned down" and insisting that his support for 
Tower has "never wavered." 
Bush made his comments at a press conference as members of the Senate Armed 
Services Committee reviewed the 140-page government report that the President 
said cleared Tower of recent charges and prepared to vote Thursday on whether 
to recommend his confirmation by the full Senate. 
Prompt Action Promised 
Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.) has said that the Senate is 
"prepared to act promptly" as soon as the Armed Services Committee sends the 
nomination to the floor, and congressional sources said that a Senate vote 
could be held as early as Friday. 
Sources said that the FBI report, sent Monday to the White House and to 
Congress, cleared Tower of charges that illegal contributions had been funneled 
to his last senatorial campaign. 
The report included detailed interviews with persons familiar with Tower's 
drinking habits. The finding, officials said, was that the Texas senator may 
have drunk excessively in the early 1970s but has moderated his consumption 
since then. 
"I saw this as a reaffirmation of what I've felt all along, and that is that 
John Tower is qualified to be secretary of defense -- he will be a good 
secretary of defense," Bush said. "I hope the Senate will move forthrightly on 
this nomination." 
Alcoholism Reports Denied 
Bush denied suggestions that Tower may have a continuing drinking problem -- 
the issue that Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) has 
said he finds most troubling. 
"There is no evidence of any kind of the disease (of) alcoholism," Bush said. 
"None. None, whatsoever." 
Nunn and Virginia Sen. John W. Warner, the ranking Republican member of the 
panel, announced that the committee would meet in closed session once more 
before it moves to a final vote on Thursday. The White House, in an effort to 
minimize further speculation about allegations against Tower, has pressed 
lawmakers to complete their deliberations in open session. 
But Nunn said that a closed meeting is necessary in some cases to protect the 
identities of confidential informants. 
"We'll also have to try to figure out a way to do that on the floor of the 
Senate -- if (the nomination) passes the committee and goes to the floor -- and 
that's not going to be easy," Nunn said. 
Won't Criticize Committee 
Bush on Tuesday refused to fault the Senate committee's handling of Tower's 
confirmation proceedings, which have been stalled for more than three weeks as 
Nunn and Warner called for further investigation of allegations reaching the 
panel. 
"I think (Nunn has) been fair," Bush said, responding to a reporter's 
suggestion that Nunn hoped to dominate defense policy by delaying the Tower 
vote. "The idea that he will run defense policy, I think he'd be the first to 
say that's not true." 
But Bush added that Nunn "will be a key player in it, and I hope that he'll be 
able to support Sen. Tower." 
After reviewing the latest FBI report, Nunn refused Tuesday to discuss his 
position on the Tower nomination, saying that he would not do so until the 
committee is ready to vote. 
Could Kill Nomination 
On Thursday, the committee will vote first on whether to recommend Tower's 
confirmation. If a majority votes no, the committee could then take a vote on 
whether or not to send the nomination to the Senate floor for a vote by the 
entire chamber. 
Nunn's position on Tower's confirmation is believed to be critical both within 
the committee and to a Senate floor vote. Since becoming chairman of the 
committee in 1986, Nunn has had broad influence on defense matters within the 
Senate among members of both parties. 
When asked Tuesday how his handling of the Tower confirmation hearings would 
affect his working relationship with Tower if the ex-senator is confirmed, Nunn 
replied cautiously. 
"One step at a time," he said. 
