ASIA TRIP GIVES BUSH CHANCE TO REVIEW POLICIES 
President Bush, embarking today on a whirlwind, 100-hour visit to Japan, China 
and South Korea, attends the funeral this week of the emperor who reigned in 
Japan during World War II and greets a dozen or so leaders whose cooperation he 
will need as he crafts a foreign policy for what he hopes will be a period of 
reduced global tensions. 
Bush's first major international journey as President offers mostly symbolic 
opportunities in the crucial Pacific Basin rather than the prospect of 
direction-setting initiatives. The more immediate impact may be on the home 
front, where Bush is fighting suggestions that his measured, deliberative 
approach to setting a foreign policy is allowing the nation to drift on the 
world stage. 
'Negative Approach' 
"I simply don't agree with that," Bush said, with an edge to his voice, at a 
news conference Tuesday. "I really hadn't ever heard such a negative approach 
to foreign policy." 
Declaring that "we have a foreign policy," Bush said that the 17,000-mile trip 
will advance his process of carefully reviewing East-West relations, events in 
South America and the U.S. role in the Middle East as specific goals and 
courses are plotted. 
There will be time for only brief meetings in Tokyo with no more than a dozen 
of the approximately 60 government leaders visiting Japan for the funeral of 
Emperor Hirohito. But the trip -- according to White House National Security 
Adviser Brent Scowcroft -- "is an opportunity to underscore not only the 
importance of the three countries that the President will be visiting to 
American interests, but also the growing importance of the U.S. relationship to 
Asia as a whole, and to point out, again, that the United States is an Asian 
power." 
At the same time, the high-profile appearance in international settings also 
presents a valuable opportunity in a more parochial realm. It is a chance to 
extend the honeymoon phase of the new presidency at a time when it is suffering 
the sorts of nicks and scratches that eventually dull the shiny veneer of a new 
Administration. 
If shifting attention from controversies and criticisms in Washington "turns 
out to be a dividend, let it never be said (that) this Administration ever 
refused to accept a dividend," White House Chief of Staff John H. Sununu said. 
Growing Criticism 
Criticism has been growing in Washington that the new Administration may be 
moving too slowly in developing foreign policy initiatives toward the Soviet 
Union, Nicaragua and other key nations and regions. 
While Bush did not spell out specific policies that will be pressed on the 
trip, he said that U.S. policy in the Middle East is intended to encourage 
discussions between Jordan's King Hussein and Israel. Bush plans to meet with 
Hussein, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Israeli President Chaim Herzog in 
Tokyo. 
Bush also intends to meet with key figures from Belgium, Brazil, France, 
Nigeria, Pakistan, Singapore, Thailand, Turkey, West Germany and Japan, said 
Scowcroft, in a schedule "that fills up almost every spare minute that the 
President has." 
"We're going to try to see as many as possible, so the substance will not be 
extensive," Scowcroft said in a briefing for reporters. 
Officials have said that the topics will range from superpower relations and 
the complicated U.S.-Japanese relationship to the unsolved problems of Third 
World debt. 
The importance of the trip is "not with how long the meetings necessarily are 
and how much substance, but the significance of a face-to-face opportunity to 
get, at least, out on the table a few issues for discussion," Scowcroft said. 
"That's very, very important, and it eases the sense of communication between 
countries after that if you've had this kind of personal contact." 
Courtesy Calls in China 
In Beijing, several courtesy calls are being squeezed into a tight schedule but 
only one in-depth, lengthy session -- with Premier Li Peng -- is planned. A 
stop in Seoul on the way home from China is scheduled for barely four hours. 
The six-day trip represents the latest phase in a presidency that, in its first 
five weeks, has unfolded in phases. 
 -- The first 10 days or so, the President's aides say, offered the nation a 
view of who George Bush is, and the standards -- particularly in ethical 
behavior -- that he expects from those who work for him. The ethics question, 
however, reflected unfavorably when two of his closest advisers, Secretary of 
State James A. Baker III and White House counsel C. Boyden Gray, encountered 
pointed criticism over their initial reluctance to release control over their 
substantial financial investments. 
 -- Next came the unveiling of his fiscal 1990 budget priorities, meant to put 
some flesh on the vision of a "kinder and gentler" America that he drew during 
the presidential campaign. But he did not highlight any central themes of his 
proposal, provoking complaints from Democrats that he had turned over to 
Congress the political liability of deciding which programs to cut. 
 -- Now the focus turns to foreign affairs, as the White House takes advantage 
of the timing of Hirohito's funeral during a politically difficult period in 
Washington when the Senate is focusing on the embattled nomination of former 
Sen. John Tower to be secretary of defense. 
Seeking Direction 
Throughout it all, the Administration has been weighing the direction it 
intends to pursue in foreign policy, even as it continues to assemble its 
national security group at the Pentagon and State Department. 
Asked for evidence that the United States had set a course for its relations 
with Asia, Scowcroft conceded that it is "unfortunate that the President 
doesn't have his national security team in place as yet," but he said 
sarcastically at a White House briefing for reporters: 
"One month after he's come into office we're already worrying that he's not 
charging off in all directions with finished policy. 
"I believe the President is not trying to make quick headlines. What he is 
trying to put into place is a foreign and national security policy which will 
look forward . . . toward the end of the century and try to set in place 
near-term actions which will aid us in where we think we'd like to be at the 
end of the century." 
For his part, Bush said he is undismayed by such developments as the current 
Middle East tour of Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze. 
"I don't want to be stampeded by the fact that the Soviet foreign minister 
takes a trip to the Middle East. In my view, that's a good thing," he said, 
adding that he envisioned "a limited role" for the Soviets in that troubled 
region. 
As for the timing of his own trip, of course, Bush had no choice. 
Once the Japanese announced that the funeral for Hirohito, who died Jan. 7, 
would be Feb. 24, the only question for the President was whether to attend -- 
a decision about which there was little debate, given the importance of Japan 
to U.S. policy in Asia and to the global economy, White House aides said. 
Indeed, in the view of White House officials, others who are advising Bush and 
such outside observers as Stephen Hess of the Brookings Institution, the timing 
provided an opportunity. 
'Too Many Glitches' 
"His takeoff hasn't been flawless. There have been too many glitches," said 
Hess, a student of the presidency since the Administration of Dwight D. 
Eisenhower. "Here's an opportunity to 'Come fly with me,' get above Washington 
and look like a statesman." 
While the President and his staff have yet to be caught in the grip of the sort 
of crisis atmosphere that invariably takes over the White House from time to 
time, there have been political crises of sorts, seen and unseen. 
"Obviously, they're still learning," said Rep. Richard Cheney (R-Wyo.), the 
assistant House minority leader and chief of staff in the Gerald R. Ford White 
House. "There's a shakedown process under way. They're learning. Give them a 
little bit of time." 
There was the quickly aborted plan to charge savings and loan depositors a fee 
on their savings to help bolster the sagging S&amp;L industry. And there were 
questions that flared up and then vanished as the White House mobilized behind 
the scenes to defend the Cabinet nominations of Housing and Urban Development 
Secretary Jack Kemp, since confirmed by the Senate, and Louis W. Sullivan, who 
has yet to face Senate hearings as Bush's choice for secretary of health and 
human services. 
Then, the nomination of Tower to be secretary of defense ran into a wall of 
allegations and doubt that has not yet been resolved. 
"Personally, I'm very upset. I don't think this is any way to start a new 
Administration," groused one White House newcomer, recognizing the need for 
what he called "some serious damage control." 
Others, taking their cue from the President, say that the controversies have 
not diverted them from the initial tasks of setting the Administration on 
course. Indeed, they say, the Asian trip represents an opportunity to chart a 
course in a crucial part of the world without distracting them from more 
pressing domestic issues. 
"The White House is reeling. The White House is spiraling," a senior White 
House official muttered mockingly as he walked down the silent corridor just 
beyond the Oval Office on a day when the allegations about Tower were 
particularly bothersome. "I don't notice much reeling. I don't notice much 
spiraling." 
A VISIT TO ASIA 
President Bush's trip to three Asian capitals will include these visits: 
TOKYO 
Akasaka Palace -- Modeled on the palace at Versailles and on the Louvre, it was 
completed in 1909 to be the crown prince's residence. Emperor Hirohito, whose 
funeral Bush will attend Friday, lived at the palace before he ascended the 
throne in 1926. 
The Imperial Palace -- The main ceremonial building within 284 acres of ponds, 
moats and forests in the center of Tokyo was built in 1968 to replace a 
structure destroyed in World War II. In the 17th Century the complex was the 
headquarters of the Tokugawa Shogunate that ruled Japan. 
Shinjuku Imperial Gardens -- This park, the site of Hirohito's funeral 
services, once served as the garden for the imperial household. 
BEIJING 
Great Hall -- Built for the celebration of the Communist government's 10-year 
anniversary in 1959, it sits on Tienanmen 
Square in the traditional heart of the city and is the site for all major 
gatherings. 
Zhongnanhai -- A 213-acre compound that includes two large lakes that used to 
be part of the imperial palace grounds, it now serves as Communist Party 
headquarters. 
Chongwenmen Christian Church -- Bush is expected to attend services at this 
Protestant church. 
Los Angeles Times 
SEOUL 
The Blue House -- The nation's presidential residence since the Republic of 
Korea was formed in 1948. 
The National Assembly -- Home of South Korea's unicameral legislative body. 
Yongsan garrison -- Actually a city within a city, this is headquarters for the 
Combined Forces Command, the U.S. Forces Korea, the U.S. 8th Army and the 
United Nations Command. 
