ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: TUSTIN; 
LEARNING THE ABCS OF HANDICAPS 
Francisco Burgos, a second-grader at Arroyo Elementary School, didn't like 
being blind. As soon as he could, the boy took off the black scarf tied around 
his eyes and squinted in the bright morning sunshine. He was thrilled that the 
experiment was over. 
"I kept bumping into stuff," he said. "It's kind of sad for people who are 
blind." 
For about 15 minutes Tuesday, the school's playground was filled with children 
careening about in wheelchairs, tapping white canes while wearing blindfolds 
and pushing themselves forward in walkers. 
The idea, said teacher Nancy McCloud, is give the children a first-hand 
experience of what it's like to be handicapped. 
"I think they develop an understanding of differences between people," McCloud 
said. "They physically know the meaning of the old proverb, 'Walk a mile in my 
shoes.' They've rolled a mile." 
Gina Kim, 7, of Santa Ana, who had seen a walker at her grandmother's house, 
said she now has a better idea of what the grandmother goes through. "I think 
she's kind of hurting in her body," Kim said. 
Kim Thompson thought being blind was scary. But she quickly pointed out that 
many blind people are aided by guide dogs. 
"They have to use special things and they are differently-abled," the 
7-year-old from Santa Ana said. 
Her classmate, Athina Singer, who helped guide Thompson around the schoolyard, 
added, "We shouldn't laugh at them and we shouldn't feel sorry for them. If you 
tease them, they won't feel OK." 
McCloud developed handicap education lessons for the state-funded Mentor 
Teacher program in which instructors show their colleagues innovative ways of 
teaching traditional and special subjects. The program will be introduced to 
all of Arroyo's second-grade classes by the end of the year. 
McCloud's lessons integrate information about being handicapped into regular 
course work. When pupil students study George Washington and Abraham Lincoln, 
they'll study Helen Keller as well. 
During silent reading time after lunch, pupils can select from such books as 
"I'm Deaf and That's Okay" or "I Can Sign My ABCs." When music is discussed, 
the class will hear a few songs from blind musician Stevie Wonder's latest 
album. When pupils discuss the alphabet, they will learn a few letters in 
Braille. 
Administrators have even become involved in the program. 
Several children experimenting with wheelchairs have visited Principal Gerry 
Aust's office. He said he never mentions the wheelchairs and treats the 
students like any other child coming into his office. 
"Kids can really be cruel without meaning to be cruel," he said. "If we can 
make them aware of these people, we've given them a good education." DANICA 
KIRKA 
