THE GREATEST POLITICAL EXECUTIONER OF THE DECADE; 
IN THE NAME OF GOD THE KHOMEINI DECADE BY ROBIN WRIGHT (SIMON &amp; SCHUSTER: 
$19.95; 284 PP.; 0-671-67235-5) 
In the contemporary world, the first draft of popular history is composed by 
journalists. When a distinguished journalist who has covered a landmark story 
for 10 years writes a book about the event, the result can add depth, scope and 
perspective to her original dispatches. Robin Wright is such a journalist, and 
her account of the Iranian revolution surpasses the expectation. 
The title of the book, "In the Name of God," signifies the centrality of 
religion (Shii Islam) in revolutionary Iran, and the subtitle, "The Khomeini 
Decade," recalls the Ayatollah's dominant role in defining the concrete 
dictates of the faith from the birth of the Islamic Republic on Feb. 11, 1979, 
to the day of his death on June 3, 1989. 
A chronology as well as an interpretive portrayal of events during this 
tumultuous period, this book is intended for general readers but does not avoid 
or impose labels or complex phenomena. Wright aims at explaining the degree to 
which the Iranian revolution has succeeded or failed in pursuit of its 
self-proclaimed goals. 
Wright, a reporter for the Los Angeles Times, begins her lucid narrative by 
placing Iran's grievances against the Shah's regime in historical perspective, 
and by doing so makes the Islamic revolution intelligible. Pointing out that 
the sudden fall of the Iranian state was a surprise not only to foreign 
specialists but also to native revolutionaries themselves, Wright shows that 
Alexis de Tocqueville's remark on the French Revolution -- "Never was any such 
event so inevitable, yet so completely unforeseen" -- is equally applicable to 
the Iranian cases. Thus when the Shah was forced into exile, his successors did 
not have a practical plan for the new Iran. 
What united the diverse elements of the spontaneous mass movement was more 
negative than affirmative. For a variety of sociohistoric reasons, the vast 
majority of Iranians had come to believe that the destruction of the monarchy 
would necessarily improve their lives. The kind or the degree of this supposed 
gain was not a matter of serious concern. 
Consequently, in the early days of the victory, disagreements among the 
revolutionaries were so basic that calls for compromise invariably fell on deaf 
ears. Disputed issues included the name of the republic, the structure of 
authority, the role of the state in the national economy, the origin of 
political legitimacy, the nature of foreign policy, women's rights and the 
extent of autonomy for the national minorities: In the midst of a multifaceted 
clash of ideas over such questions, Khomeini remained the uncontestable source 
of appeal and arbitration. In the beginning, he seemed to be above 
factionalism, but as time went on, his close ties with the fundamentalist 
clerics became evident. 
The militant fundamentalists were determined to transform Iran into an Islamic 
state, but they had no clear idea of what the institutions and laws of such a 
state would be like. Even Khomeini, whose writings were more specific about 
political matters than were those of any of his colleagues, merely assigned to 
the government the traditional duties of protecting Islam, defending the 
frontiers, administering justice and collecting taxes. 
As Wright correctly observes, for months after the fall of the shah, "it was 
not at all clear that Khomeini intended for the Islamic Republic to become a 
theocracy, or a state ruled by the clergy." Indeed, evidence supports Wright's 
view that at first "Khomeini seemed content to leave the workings of government 
in the hands of the Tehran technocrats, while his role was at first limited to 
guide or counselor during disputes." 
The rise of Khomeini as the ruler of a theocratic Iran was as unimaginable to 
him as it was to the Iranian people. In fact, few even saw him as a threat to 
the progressive aspirations of the revolution. Precipitating the birth of the 
Iranian theocracy were: 1. the capacity of fundamentalist teachers (mullahs) to 
galvanize the urban poor and control the network of mosque-centered committees 
throughout the country, 2. the pathetic fragmentation of the secular forces and 
3. the lure of absolute power to Khomeini. Of these three factors, Wright 
thoroughly analyzes the first, makes some perceptive comments on the second and 
virtually ignores the third. 
The seizure of the American embassy in Tehran on Nov. 4, 1979, was the first 
pivotal moment in the post-revolutionary power struggle because it produced an 
irreversible advantage for the militant fundamentalists, drew Khomeini to the 
center of decision-making in the daily affairs of the state, checkmated the 
radical-left groups and put the liberal forces on the defensive. 
The demonstrations in front of the American embassy compound that immediately 
followed the shah's admission to the United States on Oct. 22, 1979, were 
organized by the radical-left competitors of the clerics. This development 
deeply worried Khomeini and his lieutenants because it was the first occasion 
since the fall of the shah that leftists had taken the initiative in a major 
public mobilization. 
Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan and the liberal forces he represented were 
opposed to such confrontation with Washington, but given the general public's 
perception of the shah's admission to the United States as a hostile act toward 
the revolution, they could not mobilize much support for their position. 
The militant fundamentalists responded to this volatile situation by stealing 
the issue of anti-Americanism from the radical left. They sent a group of their 
supporters to occupy the embassy to take the U.S. diplomatic personnel hostage. 
This was one of the shrewdest moves Khomeini made in his political career. 
Wright has done an excellent job of explaining the dramatic impact of the 
episode on Iran's domestic politics. She shows how Khomeini used the ensuing 
hostage crisis to consolidate his power and disarm or discredit his opponents. 
The dividends he gained from the situation convinced him that America was more 
useful to him as an enemy than as a friend. 
Wright also demonstrates how the Iran-Iraq war played into the hands of the 
militant fundamentalists and paved the way for the expansionist phase of the 
Islamic revolution. For the Iraqi invasion of Iran on Sept. 22, 1980 provided 
Khomeini with an opportunity to attempt to export the revolution in the name of 
defending Islam and Iran. In June, 1982, when Iran gained the upper hand in the 
war, Khomeini rejected any suggestion of settling the conflict through 
negotiation. 
The Ayatollah and his lieutenants were so mesmerized by their successes that 
they actually came to think that there was no limit to what their religious 
zeal could achieve. The clerics' intoxication finally was ended when the Iraqis 
managed to reverse the military balance and made it imperative for Khomeini to 
accept U.N. Security Council Resolution 598, which called for a cease-fire and 
peaceful resolution to the conflict. 
The guns fell silent at the end because both sides were exhausted, morally and 
economically, and because the Reagan Administration, in a reversal of its 
policy during the first seven years of the war, saw more benefit in ending the 
feud than in fueling it. A million deaths, 2 million wounded, hundreds of 
billions of dollars in material destruction and the immense suffering of the 
people could not move the 88-year-old spiritual leader of the Islamic Republic, 
but an actual threat to his regime was altogether a different matter. 
Wright's assessments of the Islamic Republic's performance are as valid as they 
are painful. It seems that the achievements of the "government of God" are 
limited to its own survival and the sharing of political power "beyond the 
wealthy, Westernized elite." The cost of this accomplishment, it must be noted, 
has been massive repression and the spread of terror among dissidents. In the 
decade of Khomeini there have been nearly 15,000 confirmed political executions 
in Iran -- far more than the combined number of such killings in the rest of 
the world combined. 
As for the Ayatollah's ambition to spread his message abroad, evidence shows 
that "Tehran's brand of Shi'ite extremism never took hold except in 
neighborhoods of chaotic Lebanon and among handfuls of Gulf Arabs." Even in 
Lebanon, the so-called pro-Iranian Hezbollah have been reduced to the mercenary 
types. Khomeini's fanatic followers in Lebanon came to a rude awakening with 
the revelation of the Ayatollah's secret contacts with Washington and Tel Aviv. 
In the economic sphere, the ruling clerics brought chaos and misery to Iranian 
society. Even the urban poor, their supposed constituency, were "more 
impoverished during the revolution's first decade than under the shah, with 
little to show for the 'dignity' that Khomeini had promised." And in the realm 
of dictating "moral" conduct, the Islamic regime's record is equally as dismal. 
While people were whipped in public for drinking alcohol, underground 
bootlegging became a multimillion-dollar trade in the theocracy. Similarly, 
even after nearly 2,000 drug-related executions and incarceration of 50,000 
addicts in labor camps, official statistics put the number of addicts at 1 
million. 
Before the revolution, opium dominated drug use in Iran. Today heroin has 
displaced opium -- a vengeful victory for modernization in the Islamic 
Republic. As Wright concludes, when Khomeini died on June 3, 1989, his legacy 
included an uncertain future, a deeply polarized society, an increased 
dependency on the outside world for the nation's basic necessities, a cruel 
machinery of repression, Iraqi occupying forces on Iranian soil, a pariah 
status for Iran in the international community, a devastated economy and a 
pervasive feeling of disillusionment or betrayal for millions of Iranians who 
thought the revolution would produce some civility in their political life. 
Given Wright's realistic portrayal of what the decade of Khomeini did to Iran, 
it is puzzling that she chooses the religious honorific imam for Khomeini and 
presents him as a man of holy qualities. He did use such words as faith, vision 
and dream to characterize his motives and sensibilities. And after all, he was 
not the only national leader to have dragged God into war and politics; nor was 
he the first to leave the fighting to Him when the shortages of weapons, money 
and men became critical. 
But we cannot forget the fact that it was his ignorant and inchoate view of the 
world that prolonged an internecine war for six years and directed Iran's 
revolutionary energy toward the delusion of grandeur. In the words of Mahmud 
Dowlatabadi, Iran's foremost novelist: under Khomeini's guidance, "The word 
'war' became sanctified. The revolution, we were told, would flower in war." 
Indeed, it was not religious faith but psychopathology of power that shaped 
Khomeini's choices and turned him into a despot. He personally approved mass 
executions of political prisoners and never made an attempt to reason with his 
critics. He was a credible moral opponent of the shah, but once in power he 
became a shrewd connoisseur of intrigue and an extremist practitioner of the 
"ends justifying the means" game. 
He might have begun his career with wholesome intentions, but after 10 years 
ruling Iran, he demonstrated to us all that the exercise of absolute power can 
infect the prayer mat with more plague than it did the peacock throne. 
