REFLECTIONS: 'I STILL HAVE THE BROWN ENVELOPES MY PAY CAME IN.' 
How many secretaries can boast that they've sold antiques to Lana Turner, and 
seen Salvador Dali throw a temper tantrum -- and a bathtub -- through a display 
window at one of New York's most chic clothing stores? Dorothy Hay of San 
Marcos can. For almost 50 of her 70 years, Hay has been a secretary, never 
tiring of filing, typing and taking dictation. But excitement seems to 
gravitate toward her like lint to blue serge. In 1939 she worked for Bonwit 
Teller, New York City's elegant dress and accessories shop and arch rival to 
Bergdoff Goodman. It was at Bonwit's that Hay saw such celebrities as Dorothy 
Lamour, the Bennett sisters and Gloria Vanderbilt. An independent woman before 
it was fashionable, Hay moved to California alone during World War II to find 
work. She fell in love with "paradise" and has been here ever since. Times 
staff writer Caroline Lemke interviewed Hay at the Antique Mart in Leucadia, 
and Bob Grieser photographed her. 
I was born in Bristol, Conn. I just couldn't wait to get out of high school and 
go to New York City. That was where all the action and excitement was. When I 
was a sophomore in high school, I met an artist who took a liking to me. When 
Easter vacation came, she invited me to come to New York. My parents let me go. 
My father always said she ruined my life. I don't think she did; she opened 
this great big door. 
I answered an ad in the paper for a messenger position at Bonwit Teller. Within 
three weeks I became a secretary to the buyer of handbags. Bonwit's was the 
elegant shop on 5th Avenue in New York City. 
I worked six days a week for $15 a week. And I had to pay $10 a week to live at 
the Ferguson House. If you were late five minutes, or if you were sick a day, 
they docked your salary. I still have the brown envelopes my pay came in. We 
were paid in $2 bills and change. It was hard, but it was fun and exciting. 
At the time, the president of the store decided to give all the illustrious 
artists a window to decorate. One of the artists he chose was Salvador Dali. 
Each artist was told they could do their window any way they wanted. What Dali 
did was take one of those old-fashioned standing bathtubs, line it with real 
black Persian lamb fur -- sporadically, not completely, so there was some white 
of the tub showing -- and in the bottom of the tub, where the water should be, 
he had blazing red hot coals. They looked like they were really on fire. And on 
top of the coals he had placed this nude mannequin. 
The windows were finished Saturday night, and on Sunday morning the president 
of the store was walking down 5th Avenue to preview the windows, sees Dali's 
window, and he calls up the display manager and says: "Sunday or not, you've 
got to come down here and change this window. It's disgraceful. It's shocking." 
You should not fool around with an artist's work. On Monday, Dali came down to 
admire his wonderful creation and saw it changed. It incensed him so much that 
he just sneaked in behind the cosmetic department, slid the doors back and went 
into the front window, picked up his creation and threw it out the window. I 
never forgot that. 
When I came to California, I didn't know a single, solitary soul. It was still 
wartime and you couldn't find a place to stay or a hotel or anything. I ended 
up in Laguna Beach and got a job as a secretary for an antique shop, the 
Treasure Chest. 
One day when the owner was very busy with a customer, I saw Lana Turner get out 
of her gorgeous pale-blue Cadillac convertible and run up our stairs. She said, 
"Do you have something for a man who smokes a pipe?" Well, I did so much 
dusting and polishing between typing letters that I said: "Yes, I have 
something wonderful. I have a match safe." I went into the display case and got 
out this sterling silver match box. It's a narrow box to put Blue Diamond 
matches in, and on the bottom there's a little scratcher made of riveted lines. 
She thought that was wonderful. We went through this whole thing, and, before 
she got through, I had gotten about $750 written up on the sales slip and the 
owner never even got to see her. 
When I showed her the sales slip, she said: "Dorothy, you are no longer a 
secretary. You are a salesperson." 
