FOOD AND COMMON SENSE: VERY STRICT MEDICAL GUIDELINES ARE APPLIED TO 
VERY-LOW-CALORIE DIETS 
Mention the name Oprah Winfrey, and the conversation is as likely to turn to 
diet as it is to her popular talk show. Details of the celebrity's prior 
failures and success (a 67-pound weight loss in just four months in 1988) 
offered new hope to scores of overweight individuals yearning to shed fat. 
Predictably, demand for very-low-calorie diets soared, and companies producing 
diet formulas stepped up their zealous marketing to physicians. 
Despite the recent surge of interest, very-low-calorie diets (VLCD) are not 
new. In the 1970s they were all the rage -- until reports of 58 deaths from one 
diet and six from another made front-page news. Today's products are a lot 
safer, but that doesn't mean they should be used across-the-board by anyone 
with any amount of excess weight. 
Concern about overuse of these diets led three noted obesity experts -- Thomas 
Wadden (University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine), Theodore Van Itallie 
(Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons) and George Blackburn 
(New England Deaconess Hospital) -- to spell out ground rules in a recent issue 
of the Journal of the American Medical Assn. If you're considering following a 
VLCD for quick weight loss, you'd do well to heed the doctors' advice. Such 
diets, they point out, should be used only by people at least 30% and at least 
40 pounds overweight. Candidates should get a checkup. Their medical slate 
should show no recent heart attack, history of cardiovascular, kidney or liver 
disease, cancer, juvenile onset diabetes or significant psychiatric problems. 
Then, there's the diet itself. Whether in the form of powder derived from egg 
or milk, or from lean meat, fish or fowl, it should provide as much as 1.2 to 
1.5 grams of protein per kilogram of desirable body weight. That's at least 
one-third more than the normal adult Recommended Dietary Allowance. The diets 
must be supplemented with vitamins and minerals, particularly potassium, and 
the patient must consume over two quarts of calorie-free fluid daily. 
So far, so good: It's all fairly straightforward. And while following these 
diets, patients typically lose from 2 1/2 to three pounds weekly -- sometimes 
even more. Over 12 to 16 weeks, that adds up to a loss of at least 30 pounds. 
At that point, according to these experts, it's time for something else. 
For the next three to six weeks, that something else is refeeding, a period in 
which conventional foods gradually are reintroduced. The entire process, from A 
to Z, must be done under strict medical supervision, meaning a weekly physical 
exam with biweekly lab tests, including electrolyte measurements. It may be 
possible to achieve satisfactory results with lighter medical surveillance, but 
close monitoring protects those few patients who might react adversely to the 
program. Less-frequent monitoring is usually needed as the rate of weight loss 
decreases. 
The experts' guidelines seem clear enough. It's when you start bending the 
rules that problems arise. The greatest potential risk of complications is 
linked to self-help initiatives as overzealous dieters select their own plans, 
consuming too little food or misusing one of the commercial formulas. 
Individuals can experience a spectrum of short-term complications that are 
easily managed by a doctor who understands how the diet affects the body. 
Without supervision, however, problems can escalate. Long-term complications 
can endanger the heart, gallbladder and pancreas. Too rapid refeeding carries 
special risks. 
Very-low-calorie diets are ill-advised for those who are just mildly 
overweight. Studies of VLCD safety have been conducted only in individuals who 
are severely obese. There's no evidence that the diets are safe for people who 
need to shed a few pounds. Mildly obese individuals lose more lean body mass 
than do heavier ones. This can disturb heart function and damage other organs 
as well. 
Also, lean tissue is more active metabolically and burns more calories. If you 
diet too stringently, your energy requirement goes down, actually making losing 
weight harder than it should be. 
The long and short of it is that dabbling in these diets is playing with 
nutritional fire. They should be prescribed only by physicians trained in their 
use, as part of an overall treatment package that includes a behavioral 
psychologist and a dietitian. After weight is lost, patients can benefit from 
three to four months of programs focusing on eating, exercise and other 
lifestyle factors, and six months to a year of instruction in weight 
maintenance. 
If this supervision sounds too intense to you, consider that most patients 
treated exclusively by VLCD regain the weight almost as quickly as they lose 
it. With more comprehensive programs, the success rate significantly improves. 
So, to Oprah -- all the best. But the rest of us need to think carefully before 
embarking on a regimen that could be inappropriate, unsuccessful and, at worst, 
dangerous. 
In Prudent Diet, Saturated Fat in Coffee Holds Less Significance 
Question: My husband was a scoffer: He always said serum cholesterol was for 
others to worry about, not him. Then, two weeks ago, he went for a routine 
checkup and learned his cholesterol level was in the high-risk range. Now he's 
a changed man -- and doing well on the new regimen. But we argue about the 
whole milk he still puts in his coffee. I say he should use low-fat milk, and 
he says forget it -- it's not important. Who's right? 
Answer: We applaud your concern for your husband's well-being. But if, as you 
describe, he's sticking to a prudent diet, then the amount of saturated fat 
he's getting in his morning coffee is of little consequence. It's true that a 
cup of whole milk contains eight grams of fat, half of it saturated, while a 
cup of low-fat milk (containing 1% fat) contains only two grams of fat, of 
which less than a single gram is saturated. But even if he uses a rather 
generous three tablespoons of milk, he'd be getting only about a gram of 
saturated fat in his coffee. 
On the other hand, the story changes if he chain-drinks coffee throughout the 
day. If he does drink numerous cups, all containing the same amount of milk, we 
recommend he consider using a cream substitute made with unsaturated fat. 
Alternatively, he may prefer to wean himself gradually from whole to low-fat 
milk by mixing the two together. 
Q: Is alcohol consumption declining in this country? I've read conflicting 
reports. 
A: The data suggest that it is declining. Consumption rose from 1977 to 1980, 
but in 1981 the trend reversed itself. By 1986 (the year most recently 
reported), it was down 2.3%. The decline was all in hard liquor. Beer and wine 
intake actually increased a bit. 
Across the 50 states, consumption has risen in some and fallen in others. Also, 
data on per-capita consumption are difficult to interpret. Everyone 14 years or 
older is included. Sadly too many children and young adolescents do drink very 
early. But a 1983 national survey found that fewer than 7% began drinking when 
they were 14 or younger. 
Another glitch is that most estimates of per-capita consumption are obtained by 
taking total alcohol sold and then dividing it by the population -- including 
those who abstain. Eliminating teetotalers can change the picture entirely. In 
West Virginia, per-capita consumption of ethanol (hard liquor, beer and wine 
converted to estimate pure alcohol) is 1.6 gallons. But in that state, 65% of 
residents report that they abstain. When only drinkers are counted, average use 
jumps to 4.7 gallons per year. 
A closer look at who does the drinking provides the real shock. Estimates show 
that while two-thirds of the adult population use some alcohol, 10% of the 
population accounts for half of all the alcohol consumed. Setting aside the 
terrible cost of human life from drunk drivers, the toll on lives is weighty. 
In 1986, over 26,000 Americans died of chronic liver disease and cirrhosis. In 
more than 40% of those cases, the disease was linked to alcohol. Nearly half 
the deaths from chronic liver disease occur in individuals under 60. Let 
drinkers beware. 
Q: I recently read that the bacteria E. coli can cause serious illness. I 
recall learning in college that E. coli were harmless residents of the 
intestinal tract. Is that no longer thought to be true? 
A: There are several types of E. coli. This is a case of the good, the bad and 
the ugly. The ones that normally inhabit the GI tract are harmless and can even 
produce B vitamins for our use. 
Other strains are associated with both traveler's diarrhea and diarrhea in 
young children, especially in developing countries. But the one to which you 
probably refer, known as E. coli 0157:H7, was first identified in the early 
1980s as the cause of bloody stools in individuals who had eaten undercooked 
hamburger in a restaurant. Since then, it's been linked to other symptoms, 
ranging from the acute discomfort typical of many food-borne infections 
(cramps, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting and low fever) to kidney failure and, in 
the extreme, death. 
As with most unfriendly bacteria, it is children, the elderly and those with 
weakened immune systems who are most vulnerable. If the bacteria are present, 
anywhere from 30 to 60% of people exposed will become ill. 
Fortunately, as with other bacterial infections, this one is easily 
preventable. Most cases are associated with either undercooked ground beef or 
unpasteurized milk. So, for safety's sake, avoid raw milk and undercooked meat. 
Beyond that, the same safe practices that prevent other food-borne infections 
apply to these nasty bacteria too. 
