SWEATSHOP BILL PUTS HEAT ON MANUFACTURERS 
Assemblyman Tom Hayden plans to introduce legislation this week aimed at 
cleaning up sweatshops by making garment manufacturers more responsible for the 
treatment of the workers who sew their clothing. 
"It's like a Dickens novel," the Santa Monica Democrat said of ongoing wage, 
hour and child labor abuses in the Orange County and Los Angeles garment 
industries. "You have primitive, 19th-Century sweatshops underpinning an 
economy that is super-opulent, with the rich being in most cases completely 
unaware of the source of their clothes." 
Hayden, the chairman of the Assembly Committee on Labor and Employment, said he 
would introduce the bill by Friday, the deadline for new legislation. But even 
as he began drumming up support for the measure, he warned that new laws alone 
would fail unless consumers and retailers begin applying conscience to their 
fashion sense. 
"If the people who care about animal rights would only add workers' rights to 
their immediate agenda, you'd have quite a movement going on the West Side (of 
Los Angeles)," Hayden said. 
Officials with two garment trade groups said the state should spend enough 
money to enforce existing laws before passing new ones. 
The last round of garment industry reforms, passed in 1980, required sewing 
shop owners to register with the state and pass an exam covering state labor 
laws, said Joe Rodriguez, executive director of the Garment Contractors Assn. 
of Southern California. The licensing fees were to have been earmarked for 
enforcement, but have instead been siphoned off into the general fund, 
Rodriguez said. 
Bernie Brown, president of the Coalition of Apparel Industries of California, 
said his group has supported a wide array of reform bills but warned that 
over-regulation would doom the $6-billion-a-year Los Angeles apparel industry. 
"We are trying, very desperately trying to clean up the act in our industry," 
Brown said. "(But) if indeed there's a liability act we can't live with, we'll 
just move out of California." 
In the past year, federal and state regulators have uncovered a nest of 
sweatshops paying workers as little as $1 an hour to sew clothing bound for 
Southern California's priciest department stores. 
Labor inspectors found that one 7-year-old boy had spent hundreds of hours 
helping his mother, a Mexican immigrant, sew designer clothing in their Santa 
Ana home for wages that averaged $1.45 an hour. 
But Brown said publicity given such dramatic cases has obscured the fact that 
most apparel businesses are law-abiding. 
Still, some officials and labor leaders say the problem with existing labor 
laws is that they make it relatively simple to fine sweatshop bosses, but 
nearly impossible to punish manufacturers who profit from the sweatshop system 
by having their clothing sewn at rock-bottom prices. 
Sewing shop owners complain that some manufacturers pay them so little per 
garment that they cannot pay their workers the $4.25-per-hour minimum wage and 
survive. But legitimate manufacturers, who may have up to 100 sewing 
contractors and subcontractors scattered across Southern California, say they 
haven't the means to police the labor practices of dozens of independent 
businesses. 
The U.S. Department of Labor in Santa Ana, which began a crackdown on Orange 
County sweatshops last summer, has tried to attack the problem with a dual 
approach: requiring sweatshop owners who underpaid workers to repay the back 
wages, and using the 1938 "hot goods" law to prevent manufacturers from 
shipping across state lines clothing that was made in violation of federal 
labor law. 
Since last summer, the department has filed suit against nine suspected 
offenders and obtained consent judgments from four of them. As part of the 
legal proceeding, the department is for the first time holding manufacturers 
accountable for the abuses of their suppliers. 
Hayden's bill would take a similar approach on the state level by strengthening 
the "joint liability" provisions of state law. 
The California law does make manufacturers liable for labor violations by their 
contractors, but only if the manufacturer knew of the abuses. 
"We want to define (liability) in such a way as to give the manufacturer an 
incentive to know," Hayden said. 
The exact wording of the liability clause was still being hammered out by 
lawyers Tuesday. 
Even if the law passes, Hayden said, "This is such an entrenched problem, and 
has been going on for so many decades, that people will find ways to avoid the 
letter and spirit of any law like this. So we need a broader strategy." 
Among other things, the law should provide for disclosure of the names of 
companies cited for abusive labor practices, he said. 
"The consumer has to start asking the retailer, 'Who makes these clothes and 
where are they made?' and have a sense of morality in their clothing 
selection," Hayden said. "And the manufacturer has to know he'll be liable all 
the way down the line for labor violations. That's the goal." 
Brown said there is no question that a few unscrupulous manufacturers squeeze 
their contractors and then turn a blind eye when the contractors underpay their 
workers. 
"They go out and shop around, and they bleed (the contractor) to the last dime 
until they go out of business," Brown said. "In many cases they are taken 
advantage of, there is no doubt about it." 
