PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS MAY REALLY BE PHYSICAL 
Question: As a current college student who was once considered to have an 
attention deficit disorder and was also thought to be hyperactive, I would like 
to add something to the discussion of this problem. Briefly, my "problem," if 
you can call it that, disappeared when I got eyeglasses. I learned that my 
vision was so poor when I was younger that I couldn't even see the blackboard. 
How could I not have problems in school when I couldn't see properly? I think 
parents and doctors should consider that something of this nature may need 
correcting before a child is labeled as having an attention deficit disorder. 
Answer: Thanks for your letter. Inattentiveness and hyperactivity are not 
necessarily symptoms of an attention deficit disorder. Medical problems that 
might explain a child's behavior should first be considered and excluded before 
a diagnostic label is pinned on a child. 
As you indicate, impaired vision or impaired hearing may account for a child's 
inattentiveness. Rather than diagnosing such a child as being hyperactive or as 
having an attention deficit disorder, steps should be taken to resolve the 
underlying medical problem. 
Q: My brother-in-law had a bad case of asthma, so the doctor gave him 
corticosteroids which made him better in only a short time. I would like to 
know why other people who have asthma are not treated with corticosteroids when 
they have an attack, since it seems to work so well. A: A decision to use 
corticosteroids to treat asthma depends on the patient's condition. 
Corticosteroids, like other medications, are associated with both benefits and 
risks. One benefit, as you have seen, is its value in the management of severe 
asthma. However, the use of corticosteroids also carries some risk, including 
facial disfigurement; the development of depression, insomnia or euphoria; 
gastrointestinal problems; and fluid retention. Therefore it cannot be used 
indiscriminately. 
In the face of a life-threatening emergency, these risks become less important 
compared with the benefits of treatment. I assume this explains the use of 
corticosteroid therapy for your brother-in-law, and its lack of use in other 
patients with less severe asthma. 
Q: Would you please explain how a woman could get a fracture without falling or 
being in an accident of some kind? I've been told that these kinds of fractures 
do happen. 
A: Atraumatic fractures may be caused by such common events as twisting, 
sneezing or coughing. As might be expected, the fractures occur most often in 
older women who have a low bone density. 
Q: I know that animals can be the cause of an allergy, but can dead animals 
also cause an allergy? 
A: Allergic reactions have been reported in people, such as hunters, who have 
had contact with dead animals. These symptoms may mistakenly be attributed to 
the presence of outdoor allergens. 
Q: I had been thinking of getting a kerosene heater for my home, but a friend 
of mine told me that he had heard it was not a good idea because it would make 
the air in the house bad. But I know someone else who has had a kerosene heater 
for a good long time, and he and his family have not had any problems. I don't 
see how it's possible for a heater to be good for some people but not for 
others, and I would appreciate it if you would clear this up. 
A: The results of one study on the effects of kerosene heaters suggested that 
while they may affect the quality of the air in a home, this does not seem to 
pose a hazard to healthy individuals. On the other hand, a person who has 
asthma, for example may be adversely affected by the use of a kerosene heater 
in the home. In this sense, use of the heater may in fact be acceptable for one 
family but not for another. 
Q: It seems to me that women are discriminated against even when it comes to 
something like herpes. I've heard that women can be more badly affected by 
herpes than men, and I'd like to know what can cause herpes to flare up after 
it hasn't caused any problems for several months, if not years. 
A: Herpes simplex virus may be reactivated by such stimuli as emotional stress, 
fever and sunlight. It carries a particular risk for women because it has been 
found to be associated with an increased incidence of cervical cancer. 
More indirectly, herpes simplex in a pregnant woman may dictate a Caesarean 
delivery in order to avoid exposing the infant to lesions in the vaginal canal. 
Because this involves major surgery, the risk to the woman is again increased. 
Q: I'm long past my adolescence but I have a reason for asking this question. I 
would like to know whether the fact that an adolescent boy had a homosexual 
experience means that he will have such a life style in his later years. 
A: Many adolescent boys entertain thoughts about homosexual activities and some 
engage in such activities. However, this does not necessarily mean that they 
will adopt this sexual preference in later life. 
Q: I would like to increase the amount of calcium I have in my diet, but at the 
same time I would like to stay away from dairy products because I have a slight 
problem with cholesterol. Would you have any suggestions? 
A: Dairy products are not the only source of calcium. Try adding dark green 
leafy vegetables to your diet. You can include broccoli, spinach and Brussels 
sprouts, all of which contain calcium. 
Moreover, even dairy products you use do not have to contain high cholesterol. 
Use low-fat products such as skim milk or low-fat yogurt or cheese instead of 
whole milk and cream. You can also use skim milk in hot cereals and soups. 
