STATE HEARINGS OPEN ON PLAN TO SELL FARMERS TO FRENCH; 
INSURANCE: REGULATORS MUST DETERMINE WHETHER AXA-MIDI IS "FIT" TO OWN FARMERS 
GROUP, WHICH WOULD BE SOLD IF ITS PARENT, BAT, IS ACQUIRED. 
California insurance regulators opened a crucial hearing Tuesday into the 
suitability of Axa-Midi Assurances, a French insurance firm, to own Los 
Angeles-based Farmers Group. 
Farmers' current parent, BAT Industries of London, is being pursued by Hoylake 
Investments, headed by Anglo-French financier Sir James Goldsmith. Hoylake has 
agreed to sell Farmers to Axa-Midi if it succeeds in acquiring BAT. 
Frank Britt, a Department of Insurance administrative law judge, has scheduled 
eight days of hearings in Los Angeles. Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie 
is expected to announce her decision on Axa-Midi's "fitness" by April 9. 
Britt presided over a similar hearing on BAT's fitness to acquire Farmers in 
1988 before BAT's hostile bid was sweetened to $5.3 billion, acceptable to 
Farmers. 
A similar hearing has been under way for several weeks in Illinois, another of 
the nine states in which Farmers' subsidiaries have headquarters. Hoylake and 
Axa-Midi must obtain approvals in each state -- a process Axa Chairman Claude 
Bebear said will take until June. 
Only then could Goldsmith refile Hoylake's bid for BAT with the panel that 
regulates takeovers in Britain. That panel allowed Goldsmith to withdraw his 
original offer, valued at about $21 billion, after it became clear that the 
transaction could not be completed within the 60 days allowed under British 
law. 
Bebear maintains that BAT is trying to use Farmers as a "poison pill" to thwart 
Hoylake's hostile bid. On Tuesday, Axa-Midi filed documents that it says show 
that BAT Chairman Patrick Sheehy ordered a management group to explore just 
such a strategy. Moreover, Bebear told reporters, one of the options BAT 
explored was "cutting a deal with Axa-Midi and cutting out Hoylake." 
Farmers, in its opening argument, urged Britt to assess Hoylake's suitability 
to own an insurance company, as well as Axa-Midi's, in case delays should 
develop in the plan for Hoylake to sell Farmers. It also maintained that 
Axa-Midi's plan to pay Hoylake $4.5 billion for Farmers not only undervalued 
the insurance holding company but would jeopardize insurance reserves in case 
of default on the loans, since Farmers would be Axa-Midi's only substantial 
asset in the United States. 
