SOVIETS PLAY DIFFERENT TUNE IN THEIR NEW CAMPAIGN FOR A ROLE IN MIDEAST PEACE 
What a difference a decade makes. The last time a Soviet foreign minister 
traveled to the Middle East, his sole objective was to undermine the 
Arab-Israeli peace process. Now, ten years later, Moscow's chief diplomat is 
helping to assemble a regional coalition in favor of a negotiated settlement. 
Back in March, 1979, the only stop on Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko's 
itinerary was Syria, where he arrived bearing arms and support to bolster the 
Assad regime in its rejection of the approaching peace treaty between Egypt and 
Israel. This week, in stark contrast, Gromyko's successor, Eduard I. 
Shevardnadze, is visiting Jordan, Egypt, Iraq and Iran in addition to Syria, 
which he wants to fall in line behind an emerging group of Arab parties that 
support peace talks with Israel. 
The switch in Moscow's policy represents no overnight conversion. For three 
years the Soviets have been struggling to apply the principles of Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev's "new thinking" to the complexities of the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
And though it is constrained by intransigent local allies and the exigencies of 
traditional superpower rivalry, Soviet policy has gradually, though in an 
oftentimes halting fashion, begun to change in ways that favor a political 
settlement. 
Thus there has been a significant upturn in relations with Israel to the point 
where the restoration of full diplomatic ties seems no longer a question of if, 
but when. Similarly, Moscow's relations with traditionally pro-Western Arab 
states have improved. Today, tensions over the direction of the peace process 
are far more likely to result from disagreements with long-time friends in 
Syria and the Palestine Liberation Organization than with moderate leaders in 
Egypt and Jordan. Indicative of this change was Moscow's policy toward the PLO 
late last year. Working with Egypt and against the expressed wishes of Syria, 
the Soviet Union played an important role in convincing Yasser Arafat to 
recognize Israel's right to exist and renounce terrorism. 
There is some reason to believe, therefore, that Shevardnadze is genuine in 
wanting to use his trip to "give new impetus to a Middle Eastern settlement." 
At the same time, however, he clearly hopes to enhance Moscow's claim to a 
central role in any future negotiations. In this sense, the timing of the visit 
is no accident. With the Bush Administration still in the throes of transition, 
and American strategy toward the Middle East clearly in flux, Shevardnadze's 
high-profile tour aims to demonstrate the vitality and purpose of Soviet 
diplomacy in the region. Even more important, Moscow wants to preempt the 
United States' Mideast agenda by confronting Washington with a joint 
Soviet-Arab approach to the peace process, one that focuses on an international 
conference with Soviet participation. This unified position would be presented 
to President Bush by Jordan's King Hussein and Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak 
during their visits to Washington this spring. 
With or without "new thinking," such efforts to strengthen the Soviet position 
in the Middle East should come as no surprise. After all, Moscow remains a 
great power with real interests and aspirations in the region. What is new and 
encouraging is that the Soviets increasingly seek to augment their influence 
through policies that bolster stability rather than undermine it, through 
policies that make Arab-Israeli negotiations more feasible rather than less. A 
willingness to publicly rebuke Syrian militarism, to align with moderate Arab 
positions on the peace process, and to help temper PLO rejectionism are all 
actions that should not be discounted too quickly. 
Of course, significant differences continue to exist between Moscow and 
Washington on important questions. The Soviet view of an international 
conference with broad powers to effect a settlement remains unacceptable to the 
United States, as does Moscow's insistence on an independent Palestinian state. 
But increasingly, with Soviet policy demonstrating new flexibility and 
pragmatism, these demands appear more as opening bargaining positions than as 
ultimatums. As such, they suggest that Washington should continue bilateral 
discussions with Moscow to explore ways in which the Soviets might contribute 
to an environment that is propitious for direct Arab-Israeli negotiations. 
One complaint that must be registered about Shevardnadze's itinerary is that it 
does not include Israel, arguably the most important player in the peace 
process. Moscow may insist that it is constrained by the objections of its Arab 
friends, but it remains a fact that the Soviet Union's claim to a mediator's 
role in negotiations will never be entirely credible so long as it fails to 
establish a normal working relationship with Israel. Everything suggests that 
this is only a matter of time. Still, Shevardnadze would be well advised to 
include an extra stop on his next trip. Next year, as the saying goes, in 
Jerusalem. 
