CAMP O'NEAL HAS HISTORY OF VIOLATING STATE RULES 
Camp O'Neal, the youth facility in charge of three teen-agers who died in the 
Convict Lake tragedy, has been repeatedly cited over the last two years for 
violating state licensing standards -- including improperly supervising and 
medicating residents, failing to train staff adequately and supplying 
inadequate clothing for youngsters. 
"There have been some pretty chronic problems there," said Kathleen Norris, 
public information officer for the state Department of Social Services, the 
agency responsible for licensing private group homes for troubled youngsters, 
such as Camp O'Neal. Norris said that the camp had shown some improvement in 
the last year and no action to revoke its license is being taken. 
Bobbi Trott, camp director, said that the facility is the victim of unfair and 
overzealous inspectors working out of the state's licensing office in 
Riverside. 
"I think we have a chronic problem with the local agency," she said. 
An official of Mono County, where the camp is located in the Eastern Sierra, 
said local youngsters are no longer sent to Camp O'Neal partly because of its 
alleged problems with the care and treatment of the disturbed delinquent boys 
it serves. 
Probation department officials in Tulare and San Bernardino counties, who have 
sent youngsters to the camp, have praised the facility and said they were not 
aware of chronic problems cited by licensing authorities. 
Licensing officials said that the camp has had chronic troubles but declined to 
compare the facility to others in the state. 
State licensing reports of alleged violations over a three-year period at Camp 
O'Neal make up scores of pages in a two-inch-thick file. By comparison, a 
six-year file on Boys Republic, a Chino facility for delinquent youth which is 
also inspected by officials from Riverside County, makes up about 10 pages. The 
Boys Republic houses 151 youths, whereas Camp O'Neal's capacity is 34. 
State and local authorities continued their investigation into Monday's 
incident in which seven drowned. There have been no allegations that camp 
personnel were responsible for the tragedy. 
On Thursday, Trott disclosed that one of the youngsters who died in the frigid 
waters of Convict Lake had been diagnosed as having a condition that made him 
"manic, extremely hyperactive with poor impulse control." 
The youngster, with three others, had strayed from a group of 16 camp 
residents, who were on an outing under the supervision of two counselors, one 
of whom was working his first day on the job, Trott said. As the youngsters 
strayed toward the center of the lake, the new counselor, Randy Porter, tried 
to warn them that the ice was not safe, according to camp spokesmen. 
Four youths plunged through the ice as Porter and veteran counselor Dave Meyers 
went to their aid and also fell through the ice. Two other would-be rescuers 
also went down. One youngster survived, but the others perished. 
Asked why a hyperactive, impulsive youngster was allowed to go on an outing at 
the potentially dangerous lake, Terry Christensen, a member of the camp's board 
of directors, said: "The kid had begun to make improvements." 
Camp officials have hired a Newport Beach public relations firm, Professional 
Image, which on Thursday issued to local newspapers a press release lauding the 
behavior of counselors on the ice. 
"The ratio of supervision here was one (counselor) to eight (students)," the 
release read. "One of the victims' parents told me his child was never so happy 
in his life as he was with us." 
Benjamin Epstein of Professional Image said he was contacted by camp officials 
Wednesday. 
"They were very concerned," Epstein said. " . . . The impression everyone is 
left with when they see a story like this is there was irresponsibility in some 
way on the part of the camp and camp counselors. 
"The rescue efforts were heroic. That's the part they want people to understand 
-- they haven't done anything wrong." 
Privately run facilities for delinquents such as Camp O'Neal are inspected 
annually by state licensing officials who also make visits if complaints are 
received. Inspectors monitor the quality of housing, clothing, food, clients' 
rights, medical care and other services provided by the facility. If the care 
is not up to standard, the facility is cited for a "deficiency" and fined if 
the violation is not corrected or if the transgression is considered especially 
serious. 
Last month, licensing officials accused Camp O'Neal of tranquilizing youngsters 
against their will. 
"Clients are provided psychotropic drugs to mask (control) such behavior as 
aggressiveness, hyperactivity, etc.," the report said. It also said such policy 
is against state regulations. 
Trott maintains that the state inspector, Paul Zimmer, is not qualified to 
reach conclusions regarding improper medications and that he had not reviewed 
the clients' medical files. She said one-third of the youngsters in the camp 
are on medication and many came there already using such drugs. 
During the same visit last month, the state inspector reported that youngsters 
were inadequately clothed. 
Trott said that the inspector thought the youths looked like "ragamuffins" 
because "shredded jeans are in style." She said the camp attempted to buy 
adequate clothing, but that some of the youngsters demanded expensive 
acid-washed jeans. 
The camp was cited for lack of supervision last December when an inspector 
discovered that a resident had attempted sexual acts with nine other youths. 
"It is evident that the staff were lacking in care and supervision if this one 
client was able to (attempt to) commit so many acts of sodomy and oral 
copulation . . .," the report said. 
"We got rid of the kid," Trott said, adding that it is not feasible to provide 
a staff member to supervise each child. 
The facility also was cited for inadequate staffing in 1988 when 21 incidents 
were reported of youths leaving the grounds without permission. 
Trott maintained that several of those "AWOLs" were the same youth running out 
the door and explained that camp personnel are not allowed to physically 
prevent youngsters from leaving. 
Both state officials and former staff members complained that the camp does not 
provide adequate training to deal with the troubled delinquent youngsters it 
serves. 
In February, 1988, the camp was cited by the state because it allegedly had "no 
plan for orientation, development and training of staff." 
"The money that was coming in, I couldn't see it going back to the kids or to 
staff training," said Lynn Morris, a child care supervisor at the camp who left 
in October, 1988, because of his dissatisfaction. 
Trott said new staff members receive on-the-job training and an hour of 
instruction per week. 
Mono County turned over the camp, which had been run by its probation 
department, to Camp O'Neal Inc. in March, 1987, after officials decided the 
facility was too expensive to run. 
Trott, who had overseen the camp as a probation department employee, became the 
secretary of the new nonprofit corporation and continued to run the facility. 
Tim Christensen, who helped arrange the transfer from the county, serves as 
vice chairman. 
In September, 1987, after the county withdrew school services to the camp, 
Christensen said he was forced to open his own school on the grounds and 
established the for-profit High Sierra School. Christensen and Trott were 
married the next month. 
Youngsters sent to the camp by various counties are deemed in need of special 
education and attend the school run by Christensen. 
Camp O'Neal charges $32,220 per client per year and High Sierra School charges 
$30,960. 
Some former employees and critics of the camp said that Trott and Christensen 
have a financial incentive to keep the camp beds filled and to expand by 
accepting clients regardless of whether they are amenable to treatment. 
Alice Watkins, a former office aide at the camp, said that when the camp had 
difficulty filling its beds, Trott began to accept more severely troubled boys. 
Watkins, who was at the camp for 13 months, said she resigned because of her 
dissatisfaction with the way the camp was run. 
But, Christensen said: "We are here to help the kids. We take a child because 
we feel we can work with him. . . . We don't take violent or heavy-duty kids. 
We take kids that need a break and a highly structured environment. 
Unfortunately we don't succeed with everyone." 
