LOYOLA FORUM ADDRESSES DECISION TO DENY RECOGNITION TO GAY GROUP 
More than 100 Loyola Marymount University students attended a campus forum 
Tuesday on homosexuality that took the theological and ethical measure of the 
school president's decision last week to deny recognition to a club for gay and 
lesbian students. 
The forum, sponsored by the Student Housing Office and led by a panel of 
professors and students, discussed the church's teachings on homosexuality and 
heard students question the ruling that went against the Alliance of Gays and 
Lesbians. 
Susan Rabe, a professor of church history and one of five members on the panel, 
said a question defines the fundamental problem: "What is it about this issue 
that is so threatening? It has been my experience personally and as a historian 
. . . that when high emotion surfaces over issues it says a great deal more 
about the people who are rejecting groups than it does about groups 
themselves." 
The problem confronting the campus is one of "prejudice, rumor, false 
accusation, questions of human dignity, of civil rights and ignorance," she 
said. 
Rabe also said she was disturbed by "violence in the words . . . and in the 
attitudes" among some students toward gays and lesbians. 
The 12-member alliance was formed last spring in an off-campus apartment. This 
year, the group sought official recognition from the university, including the 
right to meet on campus. University President James N. Loughran last week 
denied the group official recognition, but granted them access to campus 
facilities and support services. 
The decision was announced in a brief unsigned statement issued by the 
university's public relations office, and was accompanied by a two-page press 
release. It said the university cannot condone "a sexually active, homosexual 
life style" but should "support those among us who happen to be homosexual." 
Alliance President James Munselle, one of the five panelists, told the forum 
that the group is disappointed by Loughran's decision. 
"We believe all people have a right not to be invisible, not to be segregated, 
not to be distinguished from other people as inferior," Munselle said. 
Panelist Father Michael O'Sullivan, a Jesuit priest who said he supported the 
group's right to meet on campus, was asked as a theologian to explain church 
policy on homosexuality. He said the Catholic Church does not condemn 
homosexual orientation and in fact "supports gays and lesbians in terms of 
people who are a minority who suffer prejudice, who suffer discrimination." 
But, he added, "the church does condemn homosexual genital sexual activity" 
because it takes place outside of marriage and because, "by its nature it 
cannot lead to procreation." 
Senior Brad Collins, a panel member who earlier this month voted against a 
student senate resolution supporting the group, said he was disappointed that 
the panel was not more representative of the campus. He was the only panelist 
who supported Loughran. 
"I would hope future forums would be a little more evenly balanced," Collins 
said. "I know there are people who have very different opinions than were 
represented today." 
One student asked the panel members to speculate why Loughran denied the group 
recognition, but panel members declined. Munselle urged students to write or 
call the president's office asking for an explanation. 
Another student supposed that the university "said no because the (gay) group 
isn't treating homosexuality as a sin." 
Rabe pointed out, however, that the church sees any sex outside of marriage -- 
even gay sex -- as a sin. Homosexuality itself is not a sin, she said, as shown 
by the church's permitting homosexuals to be priests if they take a vow of 
celibacy. 
Other panel members also said the issue of sin couldn't be the deciding one 
because other campus clubs are not asked whether their beliefs conform with 
church policy. 
"Does Air Force ROTC discuss whether killing is a sin?" O'Sullivan asked. He 
said other campus clubs are not required to state whether their members have 
sex outside of marriage, which the church views as sinful. 
Travis Lawmaster, a member of the student senate who voted against the club, 
said the panel had not addressed the counseling needs of individual gays, 
especially those who want to refrain from homosexual sex. 
He said gays need to accept Christ and the word of the Bible, which allows 
celibacy or sex within heterosexual marriage. Lawmaster questioned whether the 
club could "match up with these alternatives," which would open the way for it 
to be permitted on campus. 
But Munselle responded that alliance group members are not confused about their 
homosexuality. "That's not this club," he said. "This is a group of people 
struggling with discrimination," he said. Homosexual students seeking spiritual 
or psychological guidance would be referred to counselors, he said. 
Michael Doyle, director of counseling services who was also on the panel, said 
gay students who are facing spiritual crisis "find it very difficult to find 
answers when the consistent message they hear from the church is negative. 
That's not the church's stance, but that's the message they hear in statements 
like this one that Father Loughran has issued." 
Since Loughran's decision, attorney Gloria Allred, who represents Munselle, has 
sent the president a letter asking him to meet with the group. Allred 
criticized the university's statement, which said the university "cannot 
endorse or condone, or appear to endorse or condone a sexually active, 
homosexual life style." 
Munselle argued that the group's purpose, as stated in its constitution, is to 
educate and to support the human rights of its members. 
Allred and members of both the undergraduate and law school gay students' 
alliances said they will picket Loughran's office today because the statement 
was "issued by some nameless and faceless individual" and was not signed by 
Loughran. Allred said they will seek an explanation from Loughran of why he 
rejected the group's application. 
Panel members discussed the possibility of holding more forums, and some 
students agreed it seems a good idea. 
"People don't know what the real issues are," one student told the panel. "I 
came here with questions and after hearing the discussion, I think the club 
should be approved." 
