BUONO CHALLENGE TO VOID MURDER CONVICTION FAILS 
The state Supreme Court on Thursday refused to set aside the conviction of 
Angelo Buono in the grisly murders of nine young women in the Hillside 
Strangler case. 
The justices, in a brief order, declined to hear Buono's challenge to a ruling 
last November by a state Court of Appeal that rejected his contention he had 
been denied a fair trial. 
Buono was sentenced to life in prison without parole for the 1977 and 1978 
murders. His cousin and accomplice, Kenneth Bianchi, pleaded guilty to five of 
the murders and two other killings in Washington and is serving a life sentence 
in that state. 
In other criminal cases Thursday, the state high court upheld the death 
sentences of two convicted murderers, including one case in which the 
prosecution removed all blacks, Asians and Jews from the panel of prospective 
jurors. 
The justices, by a vote of 5 to 2, affirmed the sentence of Andrew Edward 
Robertson for the stabbing deaths of two young women in San Bernardino County 
in 1977. The court in 1982 had overturned a previous sentence of death and 
ordered a new penalty trial for Robertson. 
In another 5-2 decision, the court upheld the conviction and sentence of James 
Willis Johnson for the murder of a Milpitas jewelry store owner during a 1980 
robbery. 
The court, in a majority opinion by Justice Edward A. Panelli, rejected 
Johnson's contention that the prosecution improperly removed minority jurors 
from the case, depriving him of the right to trial by a jury reflecting a fair 
cross-section of the community. 
Under previous rulings by the state high court and the U.S. Supreme Court, 
challenges to any prospective jurors are permissible, so long as they are made 
on individual grounds and do not reflect bias against an entire racial or 
religious group. 
The justices upheld the trial judge's finding that the prosecution had offered 
acceptable reasons for excusing each of the jurors for specific reasons, such 
as apparent prejudice against policemen or disapproval of the death penalty. 
However, in an unusual 83-page dissent, Justice Stanley Mosk, joined by Justice 
Allen E. Broussard, said the majority was retreating from previous rulings 
designed to guard against group bias in jury selection. Mosk urged Johnson's 
lawyers to press the issue in further appeals to the federal courts. 
Mosk noted that the prosecutor, in defending his challenge to four Jewish 
jurors, had denied prejudice by asserting, among other things, that he had 
often entertained Jews in his home and that "some of the more diligent 
prosecutors in our office" are Jews. 
"This ritual recitation of the hoary excuse, 'Some of my best friends are 
Jewish,' is obviously insufficient as a matter of law," Mosk observed. 
In the Buono case, lawyers for the defendant contended that the appellate court 
improperly rejected his challenge to the credibility of testimony by Bianchi 
that implicated Buono. 
The appeal panel found that Bianchi's testimony was "abundantly corroborated" 
by independent evidence that was sufficient itself to support Buono's 
conviction. 
The panel, in an opinion by Appellate Justice Lynn D. Compton, conceded that it 
might seem improbable that anyone could be capable of the brutality of the 
crimes at issue. 
"Yet it is certain that Bianchi and one other person were so capable," wrote 
Compton. "Once such a premise is accepted, and its validity is neither 
challenged nor rationally susceptible to challenge on the record before us, the 
probability that (Buono) was that other person is an essentially inescapable 
conclusion." 
Lawyers for Buono, noting that 1,300 pages of briefs had been filed before the 
appeal court, said the panel, in its 29-page opinion, had "not adequately or 
fairly addressed" virtually any of the issues raised by Buono. 
