HIGH SCHOOL ROUNDUP; 
SIMI VALLEY MARCHES INTO SOCCER FINAL 
Simi Valley High, ranked No. 1 in boys' soccer in the 4-A Division, moved into 
the Southern Section final by defeating Don Lugo, 1-0, on Tuesday in Chino. 
Junior forward Brian Weaver scored with two minutes left on an assist from 
Andre Markarian. Simi Valley is 28-1-0. 
Senior goalie Angelo Macano recorded three saves en route to his 16th shutout 
of the season, breaking the school record of 15 set by John Petritz in 1988. 
Simi Valley will play defending champion Palos Verdes in the final on Friday 
night at 8 at Gahr High in Cerritos. Palos Verdes defeated Edison, 1-0, in the 
other 4-A semifinal Tuesday. 
In another boys' semifinal: 
Cerritos 3, St. Francis 0 -- The Golden Knights were issued four red cards, 
including one to assistant coach Hugo Bustamante, in a Southern Section 3-A 
Division loss at Cerritos. 
Midfielder Erik Franken was ejected for tackling with 20 minutes to play, 
leaving the second-ranked Golden Knights three players short until a Cerritos 
player was red-carded 10 minutes later. When a player is ejected from a soccer 
match, he may not be replaced. 
Forward Kevin Hurley was penalized for aggressive play and Kevin Caberto 
received a red card for tackling. Bustamante was ejected for protesting 
Caberto's dismissal. 
GIRLS' 1-A SOCCER 
Mayfield 4, Oak Park 0 -- The Eagles (15-7-1) were eliminated in a semifinal 
match at Mayfield (20-2-2). 
BASEBALL 
San Fernando 12, Franklin 4 -- Junior left-hander Canto Franco pitched 3 1/3 
scoreless innings to lead the host Tigers in a third-round game of the San 
Fernando tournament. 
Richard (Shorty) Sanchez was two for two with a double, and Octavio Serrano and 
Fernando Ortega were both two for two with two runs batted in for San Fernando. 
San Fernando (2-0-1) will play host to Poly (2-1) today at 3 p.m. in a game 
that could decide the championship of the round-robin tournament. 
Grant 4, Granada Hills 3 -- Grant scored twice with two out in the bottom of 
the sixth, and reliever Gary Rosoff pitched out of a two-on, no-out jam in the 
seventh as the Lancers (1-2) won a third-round game of the San Fernando 
tournament. Granada Hills is 0-3. 
In the sixth, with Grant trailing, 3-2, Granada Hills reliever Bryan Martin hit 
Jim Guth with two out and Shane Williams followed with a double. Petur 
Georgesson singled home Guth, and Williams scored on the tail end of a double 
steal. 
Poly 8, Birmingham 0 -- Senior right-hander Eddie Castellanos won his second 
game in as many starts in a third-round San Fernando tournament game at Poly. 
Castellanos (2-0) walked two, struck out six and scattered six hits. He also 
drove in a pair of runs with a sacrifice fly and a single. 
Poly's Jonathan Campbell had three RBIs and Rodrigo Dorame drove in two runs. 
BOYS' TENNIS 
Kennedy 4, Harvard 3 -- In a season-opening intersectional battle, Kennedy's 
Josh Etting defeated Oliver Gellis, 7-5, 6-2, in the deciding singles match at 
Kennedy. 
In the premier match of the day, Kennedy's Bobby Butler came from behind to 
defeat Harvard's Raj Vaswani, 0-6, 6-2, 7-6, in No. 1 singles play. 
Glendale 15, Alhambra 3 -- Glendale swept all nine singles matches in its 
opener at Alhambra. 
SOFTBALL 
Sylmar 24, Verdugo Hills 0 -- Catcher Regina Hernandez was two for four with a 
double and had six RBIs to lead Sylmar in a nonleague opener at home. 
Krystina Moore threw a one-hitter and struck out 12. 
BOYS' SWIMMING 
Crespi 97, Calabasas 62 -- Jason Michel swam legs in both of Crespi's relay 
victories and also won the 200-yard individual medley in a nonleague opener. 
Crespi's Rusty King won the 200 freestyle and the 500 freestyle. Skip Seeder 
(100 backstroke and 50 freestyle) and Mike Litter (100 breaststroke and 100 
butterfly) were Calabasas' multiple-event winners. 
BOYS' VOLLEYBALL 
Newbury Park d. Buena, 15-11, 16-14, 15-4 -- Junior outside hitter David 
Kadosono had 11 kills for host Newbury Park in a nonleague match -- the first 
boys' match in school history. 
