ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: STANTON; 
PLAN PANEL TO VOTE ON PHONE ANTENNA 
When residents of a mobile home park were told to expect a new neighbor last 
month, they didn't show the hospitality usually reserved for outsiders. 
The new arrival is a 63-foot cellular-telephone antenna which the Pacific 
Telesis Co. wants to install next to the Katella Estates Mobile Home Park on 
Central Avenue. Renters said that the radio waves from the antenna -- the same 
type emitted by FM radio and television transmitters -- are harmful. 
About 120 park residents signed a petition to try to block its construction and 
presented it to the city's Planning Commission in January. 
"It's just human experimentation," said Yvonne Hemwood, who started the 
petition drive. "There are so many unknown things we'd be exposed to. Who knows 
what it's going to cause?" 
Officials at PacTel say the transmitter is harmless, and that it is needed to 
service the 250,000 mobile phones in Southern California. Its output would be 
limited to 100 Watts under federal regulations, they said, which is equivalent 
to the power used by a light bulb. 
"It's not dangerous," said Neil Fitzpatrick, the company's general manager for 
government and business relations. "It's like an ant running down the freeway. 
It's absolutely minuscule." 
Under pressure from the park's residents, the Planning Commission postponed a 
decision on the antenna until Wednesday. Mike Bouvier, the city's planning 
manager, said research conducted on antennas such as the one being erected on 
Central Avenue shows that there are virtually no negative effects from exposure 
to the radio waves. 
"Nothing in the literature would seem to indicate this is a major problem," he 
said, adding that the power level output would be "negligible." 
But Hillary Deuchar, a resident of the mobile home park, said that the articles 
he's read about cellular antennas show exactly the opposite: that long-term 
exposure to the antenna can be harmful. 
Kelly Howard, an associate industrial hygienist for the California Occupational 
Safety and Health Assn., said that residents should be less concerned with the 
antenna's power and more worried about their proximity to it. 
"Generally, 30 feet is a safe distance to be at," he said, adding that the 
antenna would have to be in a resident's living room -- "about 1 foot away" -- 
to be harmful. 
If the city lets PacTel install the antenna, residents will fight on, they have 
vowed. 
"We can't chop it down." said Ellen Munsterman, who lives about 30 feet from 
the proposed antenna site. "We'd like to move, but we can't." CHRISTOPHER 
ELLIOTT 
