LEARNING COPYRIGHT LAWS 
Most art piracy cases never reach the courts because infringement is difficult 
to prove or artists can't afford expensive lawsuits. Admirers of the late 
Lorser Feitelson's paintings, for example, have noted a similarity between his 
"lineform" abstractions and the twisted ribbon-like design on Coca-Cola cans, 
but the likeness has never been legally challenged. Neither has the similarity 
between one of Matt Mullican's images and the logo on Max Studio clothing. 
Such situations seem to be part and parcel of the creative world, but in an 
increasingly complex and litigious society, artists are finding that the only 
way to protect their income, their art and credit for their work is to get 
smarter about copyright law. 
California Lawyers for the Arts aims to aid that effort. The nonprofit 
organization, with offices in Los Angeles and San Francisco, offers copyright 
clinics as a regular part of its services which include other educational 
programs, lawyer referrals, book publishing and a resource center. 
"Artists are an under-represented minority. They're not getting the information 
they should have on copyrights and other issues, but it's hard to reach them," 
said Gregory Victoroff. "California Lawyers for the Arts now has an office that 
artists can walk into, a place where they can become aware of their rights so 
don't have to run to a high-priced lawyer every time they have a little 
copyright problem." 
Biweekly copyright clinics are scheduled on the second and fourth Saturdays of 
each month of this year (except March 25, May 27, Nov. 25 and Dec. 23). The Los 
Angeles location is 315 W. 9th St., Suite 1101; (213) 623-8311). San Francisco 
clinics are at Ft. Mason Center, Building C, Room 255; (415) 775-7200. 
Cost for drop-in consultations between 10 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. is $10 for 
members of California Lawyers for the Arts, $20 for nonmembers. The Beverly 
Hills Bar Assn. also offers one-day courses in copyright law. Information: 
(213) 553-6644. Suzanne Muchnic 
