BIG NAMES WHO HAVE BEEN BURNED; 
CELEBRITY VICTIMS; 
THE RICH AND FAMOUS OFTEN LOSE OUT IN TAX SCAMS. BUT PROSECUTORS SAY THEY MAY 
NOT DESERVE MUCH SYMPATHY. 
"Show people tend to treat their finances like their dentistry," Dick Cavett 
said in 1985. "They assume the people who handle it know what they are doing." 
Cavett was explaining how he had put money in a phony investment scheme that 
was designed to shelter his income with tax losses. He might have been speaking 
for people in a lot of other businesses as well. 
Some of the brightest lights of Hollywood and the sports and business worlds 
have been caught up in phony tax schemes that have come to light in recent 
years. Among the luminaries are actors Bill Cosby and the late Lorne Greene, 
CBS boss Laurence A. Tisch, producer Norman Lear, writer Erica Jong and 
ex-pitcher Don Drysdale. 
On Wednesday, prosecutors in New York added some new names: Billionaire 
businessman John W. Kluge and the late fashion designer Perry Ellis, who 
prosecutors said were investors in an allegedly fraudulent tax scheme run by 
Jon Edelman of Rye, N.Y., and Bernhard F. Manko of Lighthouse Point, Fla. The 
pair were charged in a 32-count indictment. 
Celebrity victims in other cases have included the late pop artist Andy Warhol, 
actors Michael Landon, Bill Murray and Sidney Poitier, and Woody Allen and his 
collaborator Marshall Brickman. The canny businessmen who have been stung in 
such schemes include former U.S. Postmaster General Preston Tisch and Michel 
David-Weill, head of the Lazard Freres &amp; Co. investment bank. 
The sports notables who have seen their writeoffs disallowed includes San 
Francisco Giants pitcher Atlee Hammacher and Oakland Athletics second baseman 
Glenn Hubbard. 
Such luminaries tend to fall victim for some fairly obvious reasons: They have 
the money to invest, huge incomes to shelter from taxes and a desire to have 
somebody else handle their tax problems for them. 
Tax Rules Tightened 
"They pass their problems over to the tax attorney or accountant, and he picks 
the investment for them," said Stuart E. Abrams, a New York lawyer who as a 
federal prosecutor pursued tax swindler Charles Atkins in such a case. 
Sometimes, in their eagerness to impress their clients by sharply reducing 
their tax bills, these tax advisers have led their clients to schemes that 
promised huge writeoffs. In the late 1970s and through much of this decade, 
investors could gain such huge writeoffs as limited partners in deals that 
invested in oil or gas, real estate, government securities or even horse 
breeding. 
Though tax rules have since been tightened, these schemes often promised to 
shelter $4 of income for every dollar invested. Sometimes they sheltered as 
much as $10 for every dollar invested. 
In recent years, many celebrity victims turned up in cases that, like the 
Edelman and Manko case, involved allegedly phony investments in government 
securities trading. 
The investors in such cases were customarily told that their money would be 
used to trade in the highly risky government securities market. They were told 
that if the trading made money, they would share in the profits; if it lost 
money, they would reap the tax-loss benefits. 
In fact, prosecutors allege, the operators of such investment plans have no 
intention to make money but simply plan to rack up big losses, which they can 
pass back to investors. Among the cases like this are those Charles A. Atkins, 
"the boy wonder of tax shelters"; Washingtonian Edward A. Markowitz, and the 
Sentinel Government Securities case. 
The celebrities whose names have appeared in connection with these cases have 
often had the same tax adviser. 
In the Markowitz case, for example, Allen, his manager Jack Rollins, 
collaborator Brickman and others became investors because they were using the 
same accounting firm, the now defunct Bernstein &amp; Freeman of New York. 
Charles Carberry, the former federal prosecutor who led the government's 
efforts in the Atkins, Sentinel and Markowitz cases, said such investments 
often seem legitimate to outsiders because it appears that reputable lawyers 
and accounting firms have given them their blessings. The crooked firms show 
their books and operations to reputable lawyers and accountants, telling them 
they fully intend to try to make money in securities trading. 
"But they have no intention to -- and they've prearranged trades to ensure they 
won't make money," Carberry said. In the Atkins case, for example, Atkins' 
concern had "opinion letters" from the Big Eight accounting firm of Arthur 
Young &amp; Co. and from the reputable Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; 
Porter. 
The celebrities who fall victim in such cases, like other investors, often end 
up owing huge sums in back taxes and interest but are not charged with any 
crime. 
Still, the publicity about their involvement seems to cause the celebrities 
great grief. In early 1987, after actor Landon was identified as an investor in 
the Atkins scheme, he called a press conference to denounce then-U.S. Atty. 
Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York for releasing investors' names. 
Landon accused Giuliani of "climbing the political ladder on the backs of 
innocent American citizens." 
But some prosecutors contend that taxpayers should suspect the legality of any 
scheme that promises them $4 or $10 in writeoffs for every dollar of their 
investment. 
When he announced the Atkins indictment in 1987, Giuliani was asked about the 
innocence of Atkins' investors. He said he wouldn't comment on the ethics of 
what they had done, but added: "I wouldn't lose a lot of sleep sympathizing 
with their problems." 
Paul Richter reported from New York and George White from Los Angeles. 
