NEIL SOLOMON: FACTS ON IRON-FORTIFIED INFANT FORMULA 
Question: I've heard that if a baby is given formula that has had iron added to 
it, the baby will have more problems than if the formula did not have added 
iron. Is this true? 
Answer: There is a commonly held belief that iron-fortified formulas are 
responsible for digestive disorders in infants, and cause them to be fussy; 
however, this was not substantiated in a study of 42 infants. 
In the study, the infants received either an iron-fortified formula or one that 
did not contain added iron. The investigators found that the reactions of the 
infants were similar regardless of which formula they received. 
Q: I have been getting hot flashes, but I'm not surprised because I'm at the 
age where this is to be expected. In talking with other women my age, I find 
that those who have the same problem are taking estrogen. Is that what everyone 
takes, or are there any other ways to treat this condition? 
A: Estrogen is not the only treatment for the hot flashes associated with 
menopause, but it is the treatment against which all others are measured. Other 
suggested treatments include antidepressant medication and tranquilizers, but 
the effectiveness of these other measures has not been compared with placebo 
therapy. 
Oral estrogen is prescribed most often, but an estrogen skin patch and other 
routes of administration are also possible. One beneficial by-product of 
estrogen therapy is improved sleep. Hot flashes often awaken postmenopausal 
women; once the symptom is eliminated, sleep becomes more normal. 
Q: Sometimes the medication that a doctor prescribes for an illness seems to be 
worse than the illness. Since I've been on medication, my mouth feels so dry 
that I can hardly talk. Is there anything that can be done about this? 
A: If you experience dry mouth as the result of medication, try drinking lots 
of water and chewing sugarless gum. Brushing the teeth should also prove 
helpful. In addition, any unusual side effects you may experience should be 
brought to the attention of your physician. It's possible that a change in 
dosage may eliminate the problem, or some other medication may be substituted 
for the one you're taking. 
Q: My brother has been placed on antidepressant medication. Isn't it possible 
that he will become addicted to it? 
A: Antidepressant medication is not habit-forming; however, monitoring is still 
essential to assure that the patient is getting the right dose. 
 (If you have a medical question, write to Neil Solomon MD, P.O. Box 36184, 
Baltimore, Md. 21285-6184. Dr. Solomon cannot give personal replies but will 
answer as many questions as possible in his column.) 
