SINGLE LIFE: SOME IDEAS FOR MELTING YOUR VALENTINE'S HEART 
Once upon a time -- about AD 269 -- in a small village outside Rome, lived a 
man named Valentine who was imprisoned for refusing to worship on a lawfully 
appointed day. Children who were fond of Valentine tossed messages of love 
between the bars of his cell window. Later, his goodness recognized, he was 
sainted. 
Is this how St. Valentine's Day came to be? 
No one can prove it, but florists agree that Feb. 14 is their busiest day of 
the year. 
And now, perhaps because of that sainted prisoner who received those first 
declarations of love, every woman in America feels slighted when a gift of 
candy or flowers -- or at the very least a card -- fails to arrive in 
mid-February. Thanks to Valentine, every absent-minded man will reap the 
discomfiting ire of The Forgotten Woman. 
If the relationship is new, he might think about sending a Valentine but then 
second-guess himself, thinking it presumptuous. 
This is a wrong assumption. 
Every woman loves being remembered on Valentine's Day -- whether she's crazy 
about you or not. 
Assuming you are fond of her, the next question is: how fond? Do you slip her a 
card, send flowers, or invest in jewelry? Be creative. Women have unique "buy 
me/surprise me" genes. Select one of these ideas and you are sure to score 
points with her. 
Escort her on a romantic flight over the city. Ron Tye, a Huntington Beach 
pilot and flight instructor who operates from the Long Beach Flying Club, will 
take you and your sweetheart for a champagne coastal flight over Orange County 
in a twin-engine airplane for $130 an hour. (714) 969-8864. 
Touch down to a surprise dinner for two catered by Tina Taitt, owner of A Taste 
of Class. A popular request is for Salmon Wellington, which she decribes as 
"fresh salmon filled with a stuffing made of artichoke bottoms, wrapped in 
pastry and baked. We top it with a Madiera sauce." Champagne rice pilaf is one 
of the side dishes she serves with the gourmet treat. Chocolate lovers may wish 
to crown the evening with her thick -- and very rich -- chocolate torte a deux. 
About $200. (714) 841-5662. 
Put a little magic into your evening, courtesy of Daryl. His specialty is 
improvisational hocus-pocus: "Give me a name and any date -- a birthday, an 
anniversary, the day you met -- and I'll design a special magic act for the two 
of you." The Anaheim-based sleight-of-hand artist, who has received a number of 
awards from the Magic Castle in Hollywood, can magically produce the ring if 
you're thinking about popping the question. The cost is $350 for a 30-minute 
show. (714) 533-7887. 
You may not be able to give her the moon, but you can give her the stars. For 
$110, Giovanna will forecast the year for individuals and couples. The 
Irvine-based licensed astrologer (one of only five licensed astrologers in 
Orange County) has 25 years of experience that she claims enables her to 
accurately predict trends. She insists that "knowing the right time to start 
projects or begin a life together as a couple is critical to its success." 
(714) 551-2514. 
Immortalize her. Charles F. Queenan, a former newspaper reporter and veteran 
free-lance writer, puts life stories on paper for posterity. Whether your life 
is epic or soap opera material, the author and historian will record it all and 
present a bound copy to you for about $40 per hour. (714) 979-4517. 
Flowers, imported Belgian chocolates, champagne and caviar may be what it takes 
to melt your lover's heart. If so, sisters Linda Sugino and Elaine Miyagishima, 
owners of Bell Tower Florist in El Toro, will deliver a gourmet basket designed 
especially for your sweetheart, complete with champagne glasses for $100 and 
up. (714) 768-6788. 
For those who think big, a larger-than-life balloon sculpture by Peggy Martin, 
owner of Impressions Party Design might be just the ticket. The El Toro-based 
artist and full-service party planner insists that she loves challenges -- "the 
more unusual the better." She creates air-filled and helium sculptures that 
last up to three weeks. The most common request, she says,is for an eight-foot 
white dove ($200) and a walk-through Valentine heart ($265). (714) 770-2376. 
Remember, whether you are a prince or a pauper, the most cherished gifts are 
the ones that money cannot buy: your time, affection, appreciation and respect. 
And a steamy love letter wouldn't hurt. 
