IRVINE INVENTOR FINDS INSPIRATION IN THE BIZARRE, EXTREME 
Doug Malewicki would be the first to admit that some of his inventions have 
literally never gotten off the ground. 
Malewicki has invented a jet-powered motorcycle, a mileage-record-setting car, 
a speed-record-setting bicycle, a popular game for kids and a car-chomping 
mechanical dinosaur that performs at monster-truck shows. 
Malewicki is a real-life version of the scientist named Szalinski, portrayed by 
actor Rick Moranis in the hit movie, "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids." Szalinski 
mistakenly zapped his children to sub-insect dimensions. 
"Yeah, you could say I related to that movie," said Malewicki, who has lived in 
Irvine for 12 years. "I'm sure some of my friends thought I was a little crazy 
with some of my first inventions." 
The jet-powered motorcycle, Evel Knievel's Skycycle, made a highly publicized 
but unsuccessful attempt to jump the Snake River Canyon in Idaho. Malewicki 
designed and engineered the steam-powered motorcycle that barely got off the 
ground, but rocketed Knievel to greater fame, nonetheless. 
"It was a sham, but people started looking up to me after the association with 
Evel Knievel," Malewicki said. "Even though the project didn't work, my peers 
knew how much thought and work went into building the Skycycle." 
Malewicki has had other disappointments. Before he could claim the world 
land-speed record of 152.284 m.p.h. for a bicycle, he had perhaps the world's 
fastest flat tire on a memorable day in 1985 at the Bonneville Salt Flats. 
Three-time U.S. Olympian John Howard was mounted on the prototype bicycle that 
featured a double-reduction gear setup and was nearing 150 m.p.h. when the rear 
tire went flat. 
"The flat tire could have killed him," Malewicki said. "There were 1,600 Gs 
(the measure of gravity against an accelerating object) on the valve spring of 
the tire. We were really worried about maintaining the balance of the bike when 
we took the tire off." 
Malewicki's most successful project, the California Commuter, never brought him 
a dime but earned him a place in the Guinness Book of World Records. The 
prototype car got 157 miles per gallon on a trip from Los Angeles to San 
Francisco. 
"I'm most proud of that project, although it never took off," he said. "We left 
the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion and weren't on the road 20 minutes when three 
California Highway Patrol cars pulled us over in Woodland Hills. 
"They asked to see the operating license and started asking all kinds of 
questions about the car. They must have radioed ahead the entire trip because 
every once in a while another patrol car would pull up beside us, give us a 
signal and then take off." 
Malewicki's most profitable project has been a child's game, "Nuclear War." 
Self-described as "a comic, cataclysmic card game of global destruction for 
kids of all ages," it has been a best seller for Flying Buffalo Games for 25 
years. An IBM computer version is due for release next month. 
"I've gotten a $300-a-month royalty check for that game for 25 years," 
Malewicki said. "They tell me if the computer game takes off, I could get 
$50,000 a year. 
"It's been a word-of-mouth type of game. The company tried advertising but 
found it sold more games by friends telling other friends how much fun it is to 
play. People wear the decks out and write for more." 
Malewicki's lastest project, Robosaurus, is a 40-foot-high, 56,000-pound, 
fire-breathing monster robot capable of lifting and crushing 4,000-pound cars. 
The machine, which took 18 months to build, moves freely with the aid of 
cylinders, valves, pumps, air brakes and air suspensions. A two-man crew 
strapped inside the monster's cranium controls its huge claws with fly-by-wire 
electronic equipment. 
Sound outrageous? 
Malewicki envisions his lastest creation as potentially his most profitable 
project. Investors earned $25,000 when the machine appeared at a recent two-day 
show that drew 67,441 spectators to Anaheim Stadium. 
Robosaurus rolled onto the stadium field, lifted a junk car 40 feet, tore off 
the car's roof with its steel jaws and then slammed it to the ground. 
Robosaurus is scheduled to appear in shows in Tempe, Ariz.; Toronto and 
Vancouver, Canada; Los Angeles and Indianapolis. Malewicki said he is also 
negotiating a deal with Universal Studios to produce a two-hour pilot 
television show. 
"This is my first real winner," Malewicki said. "It's King Kong, Godzilla and 
Star Wars rolled into one." 
Malewicki's next project will be to build a hybrid gasoline-electric vehicle, 
capable of traveling 145 m.p.h. and as far as 100 miles per gallon. Its gas 
engine will run a generator and an electric motor in each wheel will power the 
car. Malewicki plans to build the car in Irvine and then embark on a 
cross-country promotional tour. 
"Some of these things I've invented are crazy," he said. "But at some point, 
they become creditable and then acceptable." 
