FESTIVE SOVIET CEREMONY MARKS AFGHAN WITHDRAWAL 
The Soviet Union marked its military withdrawal from Afghanistan on Monday with 
a festive if premature ceremony characterized more by a sense of relief than of 
triumph or satisfaction. 
A battalion of 300 paratroopers who had left their base near Kabul three days 
earlier rolled onto Soviet territory on the north bank of the Amu Darya River 
at 11:37 a.m. local time, marking the beginning of the withdrawal's final 
phase. 
As they crossed the Friendship Bridge linking the two countries here in Termez, 
they passed a billboard bearing the message, "The Soviet Armed Forces Are a 
School of Hardening and Courage." 
But for all the talk of the army having fulfilled its "internationalist duty" 
in nine years of propping up the revolution in Afghanistan, the highest-ranking 
official on hand for Monday's ceremonies was a deputy premier from the Soviet 
republic of Uzbekistan -- the rough equivalent of a lieutenant governor in the 
United States. 
"If we'd had glasnost in 1979, we'd never have gone in," one army veteran said, 
referring to Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policy of openness. 
Gorbachev has referred to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, which began 
in December, 1979, as one of the sins of the past that the leadership is now 
trying to expunge. Many among the men coming home would agree with him. 
"The problem was that nobody supported us," an officer said, speaking on 
condition of anonymity. "If the (Afghan) people had supported us, we could have 
won." 
The Soviets are withdrawing under the terms of the April, 1988, Geneva 
agreement between Afghanistan and Pakistan. The United States and the Soviet 
Union are acting as official guarantors of the agreement. 
Moscow pledged to remove all its forces from Afghanistan by Feb. 15, and 50,000 
were pulled out last summer under the first phase of the agreement. An army 
spokesman said Monday that 30,000 have been withdrawn in recent weeks, 
apparently leaving only about 20,000 still south of the border. 
The army spokesman said Soviet troops are still present in only five of 
Afghanistan's 26 provinces, mostly in the northern part of the country. 
Moscow does not count an unspecified number of advisers reportedly being left 
behind to help the pro-Soviet government in Kabul fight off the rebel 
moujahedeen, who are supported by the United States. 
Washington and Moscow continue to supply weapons to the opposing sides in the 
Afghan conflict. 
Nearly 200 Soviet and foreign correspondents were permitted to come to this 
normally closed border town to observe Monday's ceremony. Officials along the 
way have gone to considerable length to discourage any comparison between the 
withdrawal from Afghanistan and the American withdrawal from Vietnam. 
"Absolutely no analogy exists between Vietnam and Afghanistan," Uzbek Foreign 
Minister Sattar A. Azimov said at a press conference in the republic's capital 
of Tashkent. 
Maj. Gen. Valery P. Stripnin, deputy chief of the political department of the 
Soviet Central Asian command, said: "Soviet troops are getting out of 
Afghanistan not because they suffered a defeat but because of a new situation 
and new approaches to the problem of (Afghan) national unity." 
The army concedes that the war has cost at least 13,000 Soviet lives. More than 
35,000 other Soviet soldiers were wounded, and 311 are missing in action. 
The war became increasingly unpopular at home and cost the Kremlin dearly in 
terms of foreign relations. 
Now, Lt. Alexander Smirnov said, "Afghans will sort out their own problems." 
Smirnov carried an Afghan flag in Monday's ceremony as a mark of continuing 
Soviet friendship for the country, he said. 
"We just hope that what we did will not be wasted," said Pvt. Georgi Bulat, 20. 
Emphasis on the Present 
About 3,000 dignitaries, townspeople and relatives were on hand to greet the 
returning troops, and they seemed to be more eager to enjoy the present than to 
reflect on the past or ponder the future. 
On one side of the parade ground were stands selling such normally "deficit" 
consumer goods as toothpaste, bars of hand soap and nylon stockings. 
Early birds lunched on freshly grilled shish kebab, chicken and fish. A local 
bakery supplied cakes decorated with multicolored frosting. 
The paratroop battalion, commanded by Lt. Col. Alexander Skachkov, 39, an 
18-year veteran from Smolensk, took five minutes to cross the Friendship Bridge 
in a fast-moving convoy of 64 vehicles. 
The troopers, mostly draftees 19 or 20 years old and from virtually every part 
of the country, waved and smiled as their flag-bedecked vehicles rolled past 
Soviet and Western television cameras. 
Some of the vehicles had the name of the driver's hometown scrawled on them, 
and many were draped with red-and-white propaganda banners. One announced that 
"We Fulfilled the Order of the Motherland." 
The vehicles were parked in four columns on a huge parade ground, and the men 
dismounted to form up in review. 
"The battalion, having performed its internationalist duty, has come home," Lt. 
Col. Skachkov reported to the assembled crowd. Then he congratulated his troops 
for their service. 
Two 19-year-old Uzbek women from Termez, dressed in native costume, gave 
Skachkov the traditional welcome of bread and salt, and schoolgirls presented 
him with flowers. 
A military band played the national anthem, and Deputy Uzbek Premier Valery V. 
Sudarenkov told the troops that they had passed their test with flying colors. 
He said they deserved the gratitude of the Afghan and Soviet people. 
They had returned, he said, to a country in the midst of profound change, and 
he added, "We want you to join the front ranks of the fighters for the 
revolutionary transformation of our society." 
As the official welcoming ceremony wound down, people from the crowd were 
permitted onto the parade ground. They gave the soldiers flowers, balloons, 
bread and sweets. 
Several soldiers put the flowers in the muzzles of their rifles or the big guns 
mounted on their vehicles. Then they roared off in a dusty farewell. 
For Pvt. Normund Skutelis, a Latvian, it was one more step toward getting back 
to civilian life. He wants to be a farmer. 
"Politics is a slippery thing," he said. "But the land will always stand by 
you." 
