PROP. 103 CHIEFS WON'T BACK HAYDEN FOR INSURANCE POST 
The leaders of Voter Revolt, which sponsored Proposition 103 on the November 
ballot, said Thursday they are searching for a candidate to endorse for the 
newly elective post of state insurance commissioner, but it will not be 
Assemblyman Tom Hayden (D-Santa Monica). 
The only one of five insurance initiatives to win approval on the November 
ballot, Proposition 103 provides for sweeping changes in state insurance law, 
including making the commissioner's job, which now is filled by gubernatorial 
appointment, an elective post starting in 1990. 
Hayden, who will say only that he is considering running for the job, emerged 
as the leading prospective Democratic candidate in a recent California Poll. 
But Proposition 103 leaders, Harvey Rosenfield and Bill Zimmerman, expressed 
concern that the assemblyman, with his reputation for radicalism, might weaken 
the statewide Democratic ticket in 1990. They also charged that he was more 
closely aligned with a rival November ballot initiative, Proposition 100, 
backed by the California Trial Lawyers Assn. 
Their statements raised the possibility of a continuing split in consumer and 
liberal ranks in the fight over the future of the insurance system, just as 
last year Propositions 100 and 103 competed against each other for consumer and 
liberal support. 
Rosenfield and Zimmerman said that by making it known they would endorse 
someone other than Hayden, they hoped to encourage other candidates to come 
forward. Rosenfield said he has been told in recent weeks that many prospects 
on the Democratic side are discouraged because they think Hayden may have a 
lock on the party's nomination. 
A Hayden spokesman, Bill Schulz, said later that the assemblyman "had no 
comment except to reiterate his position that he intends to run for reelection 
to the Assembly in 1990 and will continue to explore the option of running for 
insurance commissioner, feeling that the office deserves the strongest possible 
consumer advocate for Californians." 
"He intends to make his decision known sometime later this year," Schulz added. 
Zimmerman was manager of several Hayden campaigns in the 1970s and early '80s 
but has since had what he would only describe Wednesday as a "personal" falling 
out with the assemblyman. 
The endorsement of the Voter Revolt organization, and particularly Rosenfield, 
might be of considerable importance in any race for insurance commissioner next 
year, presuming that the constitutionality of Proposition 103 is upheld by the 
state Supreme Court and the post does become elective. Rosenfield has said he 
will not run himself. 
He and Zimmerman listed as other possible Democratic candidates Assembly 
members Lloyd G. Connelly, Sacramento, and Maxine Waters, Los Angeles; 
Consumers Union West Coast Director Harry Snyder, and state Sens. Gary K. Hart, 
Santa Barbara; John Garamendi, Walnut Grove; Alan Robbins, Tarzana, and Daniel 
E. Boatwright, Concord. Also listed were Contra Costa County Supervisor Sunne 
McPeak, Los Angeles City Atty. James K. Hahn and state Board of Equalization 
member Conway Collis. 
