MUSIC REVIEW; 
SCHWARZ SAVES THE DAY WITH 'GURRELIEDER' 
Not every conductor knows the "Gurrelieder." Arnold Schoenberg's youthful 
masterpiece -- possibly the last sprawling, monumental, super-emotional, 
resoundingly poetic gasp of a romanticism in decay -- isn't exactly regarded as 
standard repertory. 
Admittedly, one gets to hear the work more and more these days. The Los Angeles 
Philharmonic ventured it under Zubin Mehta in 1968 and 1977. Even Keith Clark 
and the Pacific Symphony in Orange County had a stab at it in 1988. Still, the 
composer's lofty, indulgent rhetoric and the Gargantuan forces needed to convey 
that rhetoric remain prohibitive in most quarters. 
The number of major conductors who happen to know the "Gurrelieder" is small. 
One thinks of Seiji Ozawa, Pierre Boulez and Herbert Blomstedt, in addition to 
Mehta, for starters. The number of major conductors who know the "Gurrelieder" 
and might be available to take over a performance at a short notice is 
laughably smaller. 
The Los Angeles Philharmonic found this out last week when Andre Previn 
canceled his scheduled commitment here. Reportedly a victim of the flu, our 
beleaguered ex-music director left the management with a sprawling, monumental 
headache. 
For a while, cancellation of the Schoenberg performances seemed the only 
sensible hope for relief. Then someone remembered Gerard Schwarz, the 
celebrated and -- more important -- versatile music-director of the Seattle 
Symphony. 
Never mind that he had never conducted the Los Angeles Philharmonic -- he had 
spent his years here at the helm of the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra. Never 
mind that he had ventured the "Gurrelieder" only once before, and that was some 
20 years ago at the Juilliard School of Music. Never mind that he would have 
only four days of rehearsal. Never mind that he was off on a much wanted 
vacation, skiing with his family in some vaguely inaccessible locale. 
Schwarz happens to be a musician who thrives on unlikely challenges. He doesn't 
like to just say no. 
He thrived emphatically on this challenge. Friday night at the Dorothy Chandler 
Pavilion, he led a performance of the "Gurrelieder" that was neat and logical 
at worst, assertive and insightful at best. Just in case Los Angeles was still 
wondering, he proved that he can think big. 
It would be less than realistic to pretend that he has grasped every subtle 
inflection of the piece overnight. It will take time for him to fill in all the 
blanks, to make a profoundly personal statement in this complex and often 
evasive music. 
Some listeners could argue that he began the marathon rather tentatively, that 
once in a while he would bury the singers under the thick orchestral blanket, 
that he sometimes slighted the transitional dynamics or that he occasionally 
rushed needlessly toward cadences. He really did blow the climactic summer 
wind, for instance, into a mighty storm. 
No matter. Even at this early stage, he exerted fine technical control and 
demonstrated a keen understanding of the inherent structural problems. He 
savored the cumulative tensions of the piece, appreciated the crucial 
difference between pathos and sentimentality, between power and bombast. 
He offered enlightened, essentially authoritative music-making on a properly 
heroic scale. He coaxed brilliant playing from a decisively sympathetic, 
eminently cooperative orchestra. He certainly has earned a return engagement 
under more comfortable circumstances. 
Luckily, he inherited a splendid ensemble of soloists, three of them holdovers 
from Mehta's last "Gurrelieder." Jessye Norman sang the tragic rhapsodies of 
Tove with uncommonly lush tone and sweeping ecstasy. Florence Quivar brought 
otherworldly pathos to the song of the Wood-Dove. Hans Hotter, now 81 and still 
revered as the greatest Wotan of his time, once again burst the confines of 
Sprechgesang with the passionate poignance of his "Summer Wind" narration. 
Like most tenors -- helden or human -- Gary Lakes found the ascending outbursts 
of Waldemar an unreasonable strain. He compensated, however, with forthright 
lyricism wherever possible. 
James Johnson was the rather muffled Peasant. David Gordon managed the plaints 
of Klaus the Fool pointedly, a sinus infection notwithstanding. The Los Angeles 
Master Chorale and the Pacific Chorale fused to make an appropriately mighty 
noise. 
The large, appreciative audience followed the printed text dutifully. 
Unfortunately, the management made the mistake of providing an uncredited, 
inaccurate and all-too-liberal libretto. This padded translation obviously was 
intended to be sung, not to be read. 
