HOME TECH / CD CORNER: 'MUSIC FOR MAIDS': TITLE GIVES ALBUM AN EDGE 
It's rare that an album's title alone is enough to persuade you to listen to 
it. But it's hard not to be intrigued by the teasing title of a new CD 
collection of Brazilian music from Rounder Records: "Brazil: Forro / Music for 
Maids and Taxi Drivers." 
Album coordinator Gerald Seligman's liner notes explain the title's origin. He 
writes: "A Brazilian friend of mine was aghast. 'Forro! You must be kidding. 
That's what maids listen to, what taxi drivers listen to.' " 
Seligman was so amused by his friend's reaction that he borrowed some of it for 
the title of this 38-minute collection of forro, which he describes as "roots 
music, the unvarnished rock and roll of the Brazilian northeast." 
As the liner notes further suggest, there is a strong similarity between the 
warm, relaxed, accordion-driven forro style (pronounced faw-RAW) and the 
equally disarming, joyful spirit of the Louisiana zydeco strains popularized by 
such artists as Buckwheat Zydeco and the late Clifton Chenier. 
"Forro is the music of choice at weekend revels which break up the hard life of 
the workers," Seligman writes. "It is played everywhere they are, even at the 
weekly fairs held throughout Brazil, where displaced northeasterners, who have 
tried to flee the poverty and governmental neglect characteristic of their 
region, meet to buy wares and drink, eat and listen to music." 
Most of the forro musicians, including some of those featured on the album, 
hold day jobs and only play on weekends or when asked. Only Jose Orlando -- of 
the artists featured on the album -- is relatively well-off, Seligman says. 
Orlando owns an amplified pickup truck that he uses as a mobile stage for 
touring. He is joined on this richly inviting collection by Toinho de Alagoas, 
Duda da Passira and Heleno Dos Oito Baixos. 
CLOSER TO HOME: If "Brazil: Forro" renews your appetite for the wonderfully 
appealing Cajun and zydeco sounds featured in the film "The Big Easy," Rhino 
Records spotlights that music in a most attractive CD titled "Alligator Stomp." 
The collection, featuring four bonus tracks, begins with Rockin' Sidney's "My 
Toot-Toot," probably the best known zydeco hit of the '80s. The tune was also 
recorded by Jean Knight, who had a Top 50 pop hit with it, and John Fogerty. 
Other artists on the 18-song, 49-minute package include Clifton Chenier, Jo-El 
Sonnier, Rusty and Doug (the Kershaw brothers), Beausoleil and Queen Ida. 
IN PRINT: Schwann has discontinued its monthly CD catalogue in favor of a 
series of new publications. InMusic is a monthly magazine that lists new 
releases -- CD, vinyl and cassette -- from all fields, pop and rock to jazz and 
classical. Besides listing the song titles and other information about the new 
releases, the magazine offers additional features, including a few reviews. 
Spectrum, the second publication, is a quarterly that lists all available pop, 
rock, county, soul and jazz albums, while Opus is a quarterly that will list 
available classical product. Both catalogues will include sound track albums 
and Broadway cast albums. InMusic sells for $2, while Spectrum and Opus costs 
$4.95 and $5.95 respectively. Information may be obtained by phoning (800) 
937-3513. 
