MOSCOW OFFER: ALL FORCES OUT OF CENTRAL EUROPE 
The Soviet Union, declaring the Cold War over, on Sunday stated its readiness 
to withdraw all of its troops from Central Europe, many of them unilaterally, 
in an effort to accelerate the negotiations now under way on reducing 
conventional forces in Europe. 
In a formal government statement, the Soviet Union said that it expects to 
conclude agreements shortly with Czechoslovakia and Hungary on the withdrawal 
of its troops from those countries, that it is willing to reach a similar 
agreement with Poland and that it wants to speed up its pullout from East 
Germany. 
Moscow, expressing the hope that it could withdraw all of its 555,000 troops 
from Europe within five years, called for the bolder moves at the negotiations 
in Vienna between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact on 
military cutbacks. 
Noting the growing rapprochement between East and West and attempting to speed 
the pace of negotiations to match, the Kremlin urged other countries "not to 
miss this historic chance and to supplement political detente by the relaxation 
of tensions in the military field." 
In declaring its readiness to withdraw all its forces from Central Europe, the 
Soviet Union again sought to set the political and moral priorities in 
negotiations with the West and to overtake the recent proposal by President 
Bush that Moscow and Washington reduce their force levels in Central Europe to 
195,000 each. 
That figure is too high for Moscow to accept as a ceiling, Secretary of State 
James A. Baker III was told during his discussions with President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev here last week, and the Soviet Union is more determined than ever to 
promote broad disarmament in Europe. 
Moscow accepted Bush's 195,000 limit if more than 30,000 American troops in 
England, Italy, Spain, Greece and Turkey are included and if negotiations are 
scheduled to reduce the overall number. 
"The Cold War period has ended," the Soviet Union said in its statement, "and a 
transition to a qualitatively new international order based on fundamentally 
different relationships among European states has begun. 
"For the first time in the post-war period, a realistic possibility has arisen 
for the gradual dismantling of the outdated model of the European balance of 
forces that took shape over the Cold War years and was based primarily on 
military confrontation. 
"Instead, a new system of relations is to be established to ensure stability 
and security on the European Continent." 
With the dramatic changes in Eastern Europe in the past six months and the more 
gradual improvement in relations between East and West, the Soviet Union is 
increasingly apprehensive that a failure to match political detente with 
military cutbacks could undermine the whole process. 
"This task (of disarmament) becomes increasingly urgent, and there are good 
prerequisites for accomplishing it," the government statement said. "Successful 
headway at the Vienna talks on reductions in conventional armed forces . . . is 
one of the main prerequisites. At the same time, there are misgivings that the 
results of the Vienna talks may lag behind the pace of reforms in Europe. This 
should not be allowed to happen." 
The Soviet fear, quite plainly, is that most of its forces will already have 
returned home by the time the negotiators in Vienna have worked out an 
agreement covering their withdrawal and that there will be a consequent pause 
while the United States and NATO catch up in pullouts. 
The Vienna negotiations are expected to produce a first agreement this autumn 
on reduction of armed forces in Europe. Diplomats are now discussing a possible 
summit meeting, favored by both the United States and the Soviet Union, to sign 
the agreement and lay the basis for further talks. 
Moscow's initiative on Sunday, going significantly beyond its previous calls 
for arms reduction, was the first to recognize the impact on arms control of 
the sweeping changes in Eastern Europe, where one Communist regime after 
another has been forced out, and to acknowledge that the often breathtaking 
speed of the changes has left the diplomats far behind. 
Moscow said it expects to conclude agreements, which are already under 
negotiation, with Czechoslovakia to withdraw its 70,000 troops there and with 
Hungary to pull out its 65,000 troops there this year, probably before the end 
of summer. 
The Soviet Union said it is also prepared for similar talks with Poland, where 
40,000 Soviet troops are based. 
"There are all grounds to expect that these talks will end in agreement on all 
aspects of troop withdrawal, including the technical and social matters, and 
that Soviet soldiers and officers will be able to return home as quickly as 
possible," the statement said. 
The Soviet troops in East Germany, estimated to number 380,000, are in a 
different category, Moscow said, and their reduction -- beyond important 
unilateral cutbacks already under way -- must be negotiated in Vienna, perhaps 
in terms of the probable reunification of East and West Germany. 
Although Moscow was initially pushed hard to meet the demands of Hungary and 
then Czechoslovakia for the withdrawal of Soviet forces, Soviet officials now 
speak with some enthusiasm for bringing the troops home, thus ending a much 
regretted chapter in Soviet foreign policy. 
The major problem, Soviet officials say, is practical -- how to retrain, 
employ, resettle and house the officers and noncommissioned officers 
demobilized in the cutbacks. 
Roughly a fifth of those being demobilized -- Gorbachev unilaterally trimmed 
500,000 men from the 4.3-million-member defense forces this year -- need such 
retraining and resettlement. But the officers coming from East Germany will be 
even more of a problem because they have enjoyed better housing, better 
supplies of food and more consumer goods there than are available at home. 
If Moscow's East European deployments were cut back to the 195,000 limit 
proposed by Bush and accepted in principle by Gorbachev, the troops that 
remained would be concentrated in East Germany -- assuming that Moscow 
concludes the agreements it expects for the withdrawal of its forces from other 
Warsaw Pact countries. 
