LIVES OF MARTIN MAGNER: FAME IN EUROPE, TV PIONEER AND ACTIVE DIRECTOR 
Martin Magner has lived several lives in his almost 89 years. In his current 
incarnation, the Los Angeles-based director is prepping for the Friday opening 
of "La Ronde" at the Harman Avenue Theatre in Hollywood. From 1939 to 1965, he 
lived in New York, directing television at CBS. Before that, he'd built a 
reputation in Europe as one of the leading directors of modern theater. 
Born in Germany, Magner discovered acting at 18. "I had no idea what a director 
is," he admitted in his gently fractured English. "I thought it is someone who 
makes sure the actors don't bump into each other. As an actor, I played a lot 
of ghosts, did many plays by Strindberg, Dr. Rank in 'A Doll's House,' 
Mephisto. I think I was quite a good devil -- a little devil." 
By 1930, he was working in an increasingly politicized theatrical community. "I 
hate to say leftist because it was just tremendously progressive, very aware -- 
aware of the times, and completely opposed to the Nazi ideology," Magner noted. 
The general director of the theater, who felt especially vulnerable because 
both of his parents were Jewish, feared the repercussions of his work and 
hurriedly left town. 
Officials lost no time filling the post with the half-Jewish Magner. "There 
must be some mistake," he told them. "You can't make me general director; I am 
on both sides Jewish." The visitors produced the 1904 death certificate of his 
father, Maximilian Magner -- a Lutheran. "There was nothing I could say," he 
recalled grimly. "They said, 'You don't know that?' I said, 'Well, my memory is 
sometimes foggy.' " 
Magner held the uneasy position until the night of March 21, 1933, (he 
remembers the exact date of all the important events in his life), when he 
received orders to fire the seven Jewish actors in the company. Without waiting 
for the banks to open in the morning, he packed a suit and a tuxedo, gathered 
his hat, coat and briefcase, and took the night train to Vienna. Three years 
later, Magner sailed to America. 
He holds tight to many cherished memories of his life in Europe. 
Such as the time George Bernard Shaw paid an impromptu visit to a rehearsal of 
Magner's radical production of Shaw's "Too True to Be Good" and declared, 
"Sometimes youth is not wasted on the young" before he strode away. Or the time 
Sigmund Freud (amused by a show Magner was staging, in which a Freud look-alike 
psychiatrist fell asleep over his patient), invited the young director over for 
tea -- and, several meetings later, suggested that Magner become a lay analyst. 
Though he speaks proudly of his accomplishments -- he was presented a special 
award from the Los Angeles Drama Critics Circle in 1975 -- there is, even in 
the grandest of statements, an endearing absence of hauteur. 
"I have pioneered so much in my life," he said of the early years in TV. " 
'Studio One,' 'Montgomery Presents.' It was a medium that was not yet 
developed. We had to do that. And we could experiment to our heart's content. 
Nobody was looking over our shoulder saying, 'Don't do that' -- because nobody 
knows anything. It was the most exciting direction because it was in your 
hands. In theater, you're backstage biting your nails. But in live television, 
you are in control: You edit while you're on the air." 
Mandatory retirement forced Magner out of CBS in 1965, and he resettled in 
California with his third wife, Marion Palfi, whom he lost to breast cancer in 
1979. "We 
were two bachelors living together," he said of their 27-year marriage. "She 
supported what I did; I supported what she did. She was a remarkable woman, a 
great photographer. Four Guggenheims." He gestures to a volume of 
black-and-white photos, "Invisible in America," Palfi's bold and eloquent 
chronicle of poverty in the South in the 1940s and '50s. 
"When she was marching in Selma with Martin Luther King, she turned to him and 
said, 'Aren't you afraid?' He said, 'Aren't you?' " 
Palfi, a former beauty queen and Ziegfeld star (Magner remembers her face 
adorning public kiosks when he was a young man) effected social change through 
her photos: Robert Kennedy used them in the Justice Department's case against 
the anti-segregationists; they were also instrumental in changing many of the 
country's child labor laws. 
Locally, Palfi taught photography at the Inner City Cultural Center, while 
Magner directed several plays there. "He had an eye for detail," said C. 
Bernard Jackson, ICCC executive director. "Most directors just go for the 
gusto. But I learned from Martin to look for the literary quality, to see 
things beyond their most superficial aspects. Also, at a time when other 
directors weren't utilizing multiracial casts, he did a lot of non-traditional 
casting." 
Coincidentally, "La Ronde," Schnitzler's 19th-Century merry-go-round of love 
and sex, had been one of the plays Magner staged at ICCC; he felt that the time 
was right to visit the work again. "Not that the play is a challenge," he 
admitted. "But it is a charming show, and I like Schnitzler very much. There is 
insight into people of both genders. It's a knowing show, it's smiling -- and, 
I think, it's a very funny play. Risque, yes." (When he originally staged it in 
Europe, "the audience throws stink bombs on stage.") 
After a career steeped in heavy works -- "Genet, Sartre, untold Shaws, Athol 
Fugard at a time when nobody knows of him" -- Magner, whose theater work is 
supported by the local Goethe Institute, is relishing comedy. 
"To me, light things is much more difficult than heavy," the director said. 
"Even back in Germany, when I started, I never liked Teutonic acting. Every 
line was filled with unbelievable importance, as unnatural as you could be. I 
never acted this way. And when I directed, I always said to the actors, 'Why 
don't you talk to each other -- talk and listen.' But in Germany, they like 
major against minor, crashing all the time." 
A former mountain climber ("The desire is not to get to the top -- anybody can 
do that -- but to get higher and higher, into the lighter and lighter air"), 
Magner appears to be a man at peace with his life. "I came in with the century; 
I don't expect to go out with it," he said calmly. 
"I had an operation a year ago, a blood clot next to my brain. Afterward, I 
crawled out of the bed, took one of the walkers and walked till the nurses 
caught me and brought me back. I wanted to live, and I wanted to be well. 
"And I am." 
