SHADES OF GERMANY'S 'UNMASTERABLE PAST' 
On Jan. 30, a far right-wing party in West Berlin made a surprisingly strong 
electoral showing in the local election, capturing 11 seats in the Berlin 
Parliament, which has a total of 144 members. 
In gaining this foothold, the Republican Party, led by former Waffen SS officer 
Franz Schonhuber, also got two seats in the German Bundestag. In and of 
themselves, the numbers seem minuscule. But the development is alarming and 
indicative of Germany's continued inability to deal with its recent past. 
Bernard Andres, the party's Berlin chairman and a former policeman, called for 
a return to such traditional German values as "cleanliness and punctuality." 
The language, style and the titular leaders of this new party are strongly 
reminiscent of Germany's not-so-recent and ugly past. 
Of course, West Germany is not the only European country endowed today with 
extremist parties of both the right and the left. The right-wing National Front 
of Jean-Marie Le Pen gained over 10% of the vote in the 1986 French 
parliamentary elections. Neo-Fascists won local and national elections in 
Italy. Right-wing extremists are especially strong politically in Belgium. They 
are also an ominous presence in Britain and Spain. On the left, the Communist 
Party remains a strong political factor in France, even though it has 
experienced a period of decline there and in Italy. 
Unlike the Nazis and Fascists of old, the new right-wing extremists do not 
boldly advocate the formation of new political systems in the countries in 
which they operate. But their motives show up in their embrace of racist, 
anti-Semitic causes. 
Anti-Semitism, of course, is a metaphor for all the old antis -- 
anti-liberalism, anti-parliamentarianism and anti-democracy. These days, the 
extremists have their own Untermenschen to focus on, the new wave of Asian and 
African immigrants and workers. In Great Britain, it is the Pakistanis and 
Africans. In Germany, especially in West Berlin, it is the Turkish workers. And 
in France, it is the North Africans. The postwar extremists feed on 
unemployment and xenophobia and the latent resentment of local workers who have 
to compete for jobs with the new immigrants. 
In Germany, however, anti-democratic, anti-Semitic, anti-parliamentary and 
anti-socialist ideologues are also strongly reminiscent of old Nazi sentiments. 
And in Germany, such sentiments traditionally have been strongly 
anti-communist, or more precise, anti-Soviet. Thus, they represent a sort of 
nationalist-international feeling. 
In this sense, the rough and rowdy political forces of the right, the 
xenophobic Republicans of Berlin, share intellectual kinship, however 
primitive, with the more respectable professors in West Germany who are 
debating anew the meaning of Germany's recent past. 
There exists today a deep division among German historians as to the burden of 
the Nazi past and its relationship to communism, and it goes by the name of the 
Historikerstreit, or the Historian's Conflict. 
The central issue in the debate is whether or not Nazi crimes were uniquely 
German, evil in a class by itself, or whether it was comparable to and inspired 
by Stalinism, as if the Holocaust was simply a more gruesome manifestation of 
the Gulag. 
The themes of German nationalism and anti-Semitism are not that far removed 
from the West German varieties of postwar extremism, except for the fact that 
the argument is couched in academic, intellectual terms. If anything, the 
historic-philosophic debate is more extreme, albeit seemingly more reasonable. 
It suggests that the Holocaust was somehow an outcrop of Leninism-Stalinism, 
and hardly German in character. In his masterful book, "The Unmasterable Past: 
History, Holocaust and German Identity," the American historian Charles Maier 
details why Germany's recent history, and particularly the Holocaust, resists 
accommodation and explainable integration. What is unmasterable for Ernest 
Nolte, the German historian-cum-metaphysician who is credited with starting the 
Historikerstreit, is clear to extremists -- that foreigners are evil and the 
Jews are agents of Bolshevism. No self-respecting extremist today would 
suggest, say, gassing the Turkish workers, but they do advocate sending them 
back to Turkey. 
Should we be alarmed by these recent developments? Probably not to a large 
extent. Nevertheless, it remains a fact that the Germans must come to terms 
with that "unmasterable past." The burden of Nazism still lies heavily on the 
German social and political consciousness, in spite of efforts by Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl to alleviate guilt. The very presence and periodic political 
successes of the extremists remind us that a nation that cannot come to terms 
with its past is a troubled nation with a troubled future. 
