LEGAL VIEW: WHEN A TENANT LEAVES PROPERTY BEHIND 
As a landlord, what do you do if your tenant leaves a stereo in his apartment 
after moving out? As a tenant, how do you get back the prized photo album you 
left behind in the duplex you leased? 
Not to worry. California law has established a procedure for landlords and 
tenants that is meant to help return all personal property to its rightful 
owner and make sure that the costs of removal and storage are properly paid. 
Notifying Tenants 
For about 15 years, the California Civil Code has imposed on landlords the 
legal burden of notifying former tenants about any personal property that was 
left behind. If the property is worth less than $300, the landlord may 
eventually be able to destroy it, keep it, or even sell it. If it is worth more 
than $300, the landlord must sell it at a public auction, after first 
publishing a legal notice in a newspaper. 
In either case, the landlord must first provide the former tenant with written 
notice that the property has been found. The law even requires the landlord to 
notify anyone else whom he reasonably believes to be the owner of the property. 
In other words, if a tenant's friend left a camera in the vacated apartment and 
the landlord knows who that friend is, that person must be notified. The form 
of the notice is set forth in Section 1984 of the California Civil Code. 
After receiving the notice, the tenant has 18 days within which to claim the 
property. (It's 15 days if the notice was delivered personally.) Then the 
landlord must "surrender" the property, after the tenant pays reasonable 
storage costs, including any out-of-pocket costs. (Surrender is a legal term. I 
know it sounds like something out of a Grade B cowboy movie, but all it means 
is that the landlord hands over the property, or if it's too heavy to lift, 
lets the tenant arrange for its pickup.) 
Don't fight about the amount of storage fees. Attorneys David Brown and Ralph 
Warner warn landlords in their book "The Landlord's Law Book" that it's not 
worth the headache. 
"It's just not worth it to get into fights over $75 worth of used books, 
records and tennis sneakers," they write. "If you insist on too high a storage 
charge and the tenant refuses to pay it, you will end up having to keep or sell 
the property. This may result in a tenant suing you and raises the possibility 
a judge may hold you liable for the entire value of the property because your 
storage charge wasn't reasonable in the first place." 
That same advice -- don't fight -- goes for tenants too. 
New Code Provision 
This year, a new code provision goes into effect. This requires landlords to 
return abandoned property upon the request of a former tenant. So even before 
the landlord's notice is mailed, or if a landlord neglects to send such a 
notice, a tenant has 18 days after vacating the premises to request in writing 
the return of his forgotten property. Within 5 days, the landlord must provide 
the tenant with a written request for payment of costs, including an 
itemization of all charges. 
Upon payment of the costs, the landlord has 72 hours to surrender the property. 
If two people claim ownership of the same property -- say the apartment was 
shared by roommates -- the landlord has to return the property to the first 
person who requests it and is not liable to the other person. 
Of course, you can avoid all these complicated legal rules and deadlines if you 
(both tenants and landlords) take a very careful look around the apartment 
before departing for good. 
Attorney Jeffrey S. Klein, The Times' senior staff counsel, cannot answer mail 
personally but will respond in this column to questions of general interest 
about the law. Do not telephone. Write to Jeffrey S. Klein, Legal View, The 
Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles 90053. 
