NONFICTION IN BRIEF: BEN HECHT A BIOGRAPHY BY WILLIAM MACADAMS (CHARLES 
SCRIBNER'S SONS: $22.50) 
When the advent of sound-on-film and amplification technology forced the entire 
art of cinema to be reevaluated in 1916, Hollywood producers began issuing 
urgent calls to East Coast literati who could take film beyond the sketchy 
plots of the silent era. Ben Hecht's call from Hermann Mankiewicz, 
co-author-to-be of "Citizen Kane," was arguably the most fruitful, for by the 
1930s, Hecht had become his era's highest-paid, most prolific screenwriter. 
Hecht seemed born to be the consummate entertainer for his culture, this 
diligently researched, affectionate history suggests, for from an early age, he 
shared its fascination with the tragic and the macabre, a spirit lingering from 
the fin-de-siecle era. When a runaway horse struck the streetcar in which 
8-year-old Hecht and his family were riding, killing a man in the seat ahead, 
young Hecht began interviewing the passengers, the ambulance drivers and the 
police. Once home, Hecht's puzzled brother Peter recalled, Hecht "locked 
himself in our bedroom and spent hours writing and rewriting his version of the 
bloody mess -- the commotion, fainting, etceteras." 
By his late teens, Hecht had turned his obsession into a profession, becoming 
the most yellow of journalists. Having none of the police contacts necessary to 
rout out lurid stories, he simply made them up, convincing a police captain to 
pose, gun in hand, on his boat (his paper's headline the next day: "Police 
Pursue River Pirates") and his landlady to pose beside a small trench and some 
broken crockery ("The Great Chicago Earthquake"). Ironically, Hecht's first 
film, "Underworld," won the first "screen story" Academy Award in 1929 for its 
realism; Hecht gave the gangsters at the center of the film human quirks, such 
as a tick in the right hand, and dressed them not in turtleneck sweaters and 
cloth caps, a dime novel stereotype, but in sophisticated business suits. 
While "Ben Hecht" is an absorbing chronicle of a compelling man, MacAdams' 
focus on Hecht's cinematic work overlooks some of the literary influences that 
shaped Hecht's writing style, such as that of the French naturalist writer 
Joris-Karl Huysmans, and mentions Hecht's early, darkly cynical novels, such as 
"Erik Dorn," only in passing. MacAdams does, however, examine Hecht's most 
significant literary attempt at optimism, "A Book of Miracles," where one 
character, a solitary ant, manages to look beyond the "froth of hunger and ego" 
of human society and recognize that while "we have come forward only a small 
way, it is a noble inch we have moved." 
