NATURE SUPREME IN BAY OF ISLANDS 
Three hours by car north of Auckland lies the town of Russell, known a century 
ago to sailors and whaling men as the "hellhole of the Pacific." 
The picture in 1990 is one of a pastoral city of 1,000 souls, fronting one of 
the myriad bays of the Bay of Islands. Russell was also the first capital of 
New Zealand and has some historic landmarks that represent New Zealand's soul. 
On its main street, friendly citizens constantly ask: "Isn't it lovely?" or 
"Aren't we lucky?" or "Isn't this God's country?" Even the most hard-bitten 
traveler can't argue with them. 
Fine walks lead visitors through the bush -- along its rivers and seashore, 
carefully marked, meticulously manicured. 
The Bay of Islands was discovered by Capt. Cook in 1796. Since his appearance 
the subsequent path of history follows the usual pattern of foreign intruders 
clashing with the locals, in this case the Maoris. 
The appearance of missionaries was, of course, predictable, and Russell today 
has four churches. The town's character is gentle and civilized, with one fine 
library, two small museums and several galleries selling crafts -- quilts, 
baskets, jade and woodwork. 
The Bay of Islands is a mosaic of 345 islands, most of them featuring 
individual beaches. From the air it resembles a vast patchwork of water -- 
green and blue, with the most spectacular sunrises and sunsets in the Pacific 
Ocean. 
And the climate is balmy. In December, for example, the average temperature was 
82 degrees, with 80-degree water. The entire complex is a haven for yachtsmen, 
fishermen, campers and hikers. 
The Bay of Islands is not pretentious. It has no high-rise resorts, no 
restaurants with nouvelle cuisine. Nature reigns supreme. New Zealand won't let 
the entrepreneur sublimate it. 
Buses and ferries abound. Russell, which can be done on foot, has much to 
offer. Christ Church, diminutive and white, the oldest church in New Zealand, 
is set in a cemetery and framed by jacaranda trees and bougainvillea. Still in 
use, it is an excellent example of Gothic design. 
The Custom House on the waterfront, built in 1870, is a fine Victorian 
structure serving as the Police Station but with only one policeman, who lives 
in the station. 
At the entrance of the Returned Services Assn. (the New Zealand American 
Legion) is a sign that states: "A neat and tidy standard of dress is required. 
Not acceptable: overalls, singlets, bathing attires, bare feet, denim jackets, 
scruffy jeans, gum boots. Non-compliance with the above will earn the 
displeasure of the executive. Welcome to the Russell R.S.A." 
At the Bistro, a favorite of locals (fish and chips for $4.50, six fresh Orongo 
oysters for $6.50), two signs are posted on the back bar. One reads: "Any 
person involved in disorderly behavior will be suspended three months, 
minimum." The second states: "No mugs after 9:45," meaning liters of beer. 
Some hints for tourists visiting Russell: 
 -- Because motorists use left lanes, be cautious while crossing streets. 
 -- A takeaway is an establishment selling fast food. 
 -- The ozone layer is thin in this part of the world, so remember to heed the 
daily weather report that warns of sunburn. 
The nation's national carrier, Air New Zealand, will jet you from Los Angeles 
to Auckland in less than 12 hours. (Flights are almost always full during the 
high season, so book early.) 
Accommodations in Russell are clean, efficient and modestly priced by American 
standards, with many rooms and suites facing the bay. 
Hananui Lodge features four suites (living room, bath and kitchen) and 
balconies that face the water. In-season rates are $87 New Zealand (about $50 
U.S.) a night, double occupancy. You'll get magnificent sunsets here and a 
chance to watch the endless marine activities on the bay. Write to The Strand, 
P.O. Box 16, Russell, Bay of Islands, New Zealand. 
Duke's Lodge also has waterfront suites and a swimming pool. Rates are about 
the same as the Hananui Lodge (reduced for long stays). Write to P.O. Box 52, 
Russell, Bay of Islands, New Zealand. 
The Duke of Marlborough Hotel, oldest in Russell, has 52 rooms at $52 New 
Zealand a night. Overlooking the bay, its porch is a fine spot for afternoon 
tea. Write Box 52, Russell, Bay of Islands, New Zealand. 
Arcadia Lodge is a 19th-Century homestead set in a colorful garden overlooking 
Matauwhi Bay. Just a five-minute walk from Russell, this hotel is a favorite 
with New Zealanders, with both private and shared baths. Rates are $35 to $50 
N.Z. Write to Arcadia Lodge, Russell, New Zealand. 
Dinners at many good restaurants cost between $10 and $12 N.Z. The Duke of 
Marlborough serves luncheon on its veranda (try the oysters or the pate a la 
Maison or Camembert Korokarera, crumbled and served with a tangy fruit sauce). 
For more information on travel to New Zealand, contact the New Zealand Tourist 
&amp; Publicity Office, 10960 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 1530, Los Angeles 90024, or 
call (213) 477-8241. 
