KUALA LUMPUR; 
NEW DAYS OLD WAYS; 
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF MALAYSIA'S CAPITAL REVEALS HOW THE CITY MIXES WESTERN 
BUSINESS WITH ASIAN CUSTOMS WITHOUT TURNING ITS BACK ON TRADITIONS THAT ARE ITS 
SOUL. 
It is still dark. The moon, partially obscured by clouds, offers little light. 
Stars flicker vaguely in the sky. Street lights cast long, thin shadows on the 
streets. Swallows flit by, seeking food. 
Kuala Lumpur has begun to stir. 
Like other Asian cities, "K.L.," as it is known to residents, is lurching into 
the 21th Century, grabbing for the tail of a speeding global economy. But the 
capital of Malaysia, unlike a booming Oriental metropolis such as Singapore, 
has not turned its back on the traditions that are its soul. Rather, it has 
tried to fuse modern industry with history, Western business with Asian custom. 
In the process, K.L. has become a place where luxurious high-rise hotels are 
equipped with French pastry shops, closed-circuit color TV broadcasts in 
several languages and painted arrows point toward Mecca so that the religious 
can pray. 
It is a place where Islam is the state religion, yet where government-employed 
Muslim women wearing the purdah are not allowed to veil their faces because it 
could hinder communication. 
It's a place where one can dine on intensely spicy Malaysian noodles chased 
with German beer, followed by a night of steamy dancing at a darkened disco. 
Since 1857, when rich tin deposits were found here, this Southeast Asian city 
has progressed from a primitive boom town -- not unlike California's gold rush 
settlements -- to a British colony, to capital of the independent nation of 
Malaysia. 
But rubber, palm oil, rice, timber, tin and, increasingly, manufactured goods, 
have not been enough to fuel the country's desire to be a Pacific Rim economic 
contender. 
Malaysia needs tourism, and to that end it has scheduled a series of festivals 
during 1990 as part of Visit Malaysia Year, a promotional campaign the country 
hopes will attract more foreign spenders. It's a good time to visit this 
flower-drenched city, which is rich with Asian culture and easy to explore. 
6 a.m. 
A solitary Indian-Muslim vendor, cool in his T-shirt and white cotton loincloth 
called a dhoti, walks briskly to his tea stall -- the faster the tea starts 
brewing, the better his business. 
It is nearly two hours before school begins, but already two female students 
are waiting for a bus. They are dressed in government-school 
turquoise-and-white uniforms; their veils identify them as Muslim. An early 
morning jogger stops for a breather on the bridge overlooking the Klang River. 
And those asleep in the tranquillity of the Jamek Mosque awaken and cleanse 
themselves in preparation for morning prayers. 
"Allahu Akbar . . . Allahu Akbar." The clear, resonant call of the muezzin -- 
"Allah is the mightiest of all" -- reverberates through the surrounding 
high-rises and the squat prewar structures circling this historic neighborhood 
. . . a place revered by the tourist and religious natives alike. 
Jamek Mosque was built in 1909, 52 years after Kuala Lumpur was founded where 
the Gombak and the Klang rivers meet. Like an Arabian Nights fantasy set 
against an oasis of swaying palms, it is a replica of a graceful northern 
Indian mosque -- walled courtyard, three domes, two minarets and a breezy, open 
prayer hall. 
Surrounding the mosque are modern financial institutions, their architectural 
forms reflecting the countries they represent: an American bank in a glitzy 
skyscraper; a British bank in a traditional Georgian structure and a Malaysian 
bank building blending Asian architectural styles, capped by a distinctive 
Sumatran-influenced pointed roof. 
7 a.m. 
The narrow roads in this old section of Kuala Lumpur already are filling with 
traffic. Mini-vans crammed with commuters appear. A shopkeeper removes the 
planks covering his tiny, hole-in-the-wall space and opens for business. 
About a mile away from Jamek Mosque, passengers gather at the main railway 
station -- a grandiose, Moorish-style "palace" topped with domes and minarets, 
to meet trains filled with commuters or perhaps to board a train northbound for 
the island beach resort city of Penang, or to begin the journey 200 miles south 
to Singapore. 
By 7 a.m. the overnight train from Singapore has arrived. Passengers spill from 
the station to be immediately swallowed by waiting taxis. This pandemonium is 
known as the "government-servant" jam -- commuters who live in surrounding 
suburbs arriving for their jobs in Malaysian government offices. 
It is all a far cry from the 1920s scene reported in "A Journal in the Federal 
Capital," written by journalist George L. Peet: "So little traffic was there in 
the quiet and drowsy thoroughfare that Java Street (now Jalan Tun Perak) was in 
1929 that I could park my car outside my office all day and it was not until 
1934 that the police imposed a one-hour parking limit with a $2 fine for 
infringement." 
Kuala Lumpur did not emerge from its thatched-roof-village status until 1896, 
when it was declared administrative capital of the British-managed Federated 
Malay States. 
In 1957 it became the Federation of Malaya. In 1963 Malaysia was formed, 
bringing together Malaya with several other nearby states. In 1931 K.L.'s 
population was 112,000; today, it is more than a million. 
Like other urban areas of the world, the city has attracted migration from 
rural areas short on employment. Malays, Chinese and Indians interweave their 
cultures here. 
In 1974 K.L. became a federal district like Washington, D.C. But only in the 
1980s did K.L. blossom into a metropolis. Gleaming office structures began to 
multiply, adding a sophisticated sleekness. The number of luxury hotels and 
good restaurants increased, and the choice of night-time entertainment widened. 
Yet some things remain the same. 
At 10 a.m. the city starts to steam. The temperature rises to 80 degrees; the 
humidity is 80%. The old market at Chow Kit Road is in full bustle. Starting 
from the covered fresh-food section where you find meat, seafood and 
vegetables, the Chow Kit market spills out onto the street in a splendid, 
colorful bazaar of treasures from all over Malaysia. 
You can buy strange herbs and roots that promise virility, aromatic seasonings 
that will blend into fragrant curry powders, exotic trinkets from faraway 
villages and everyday household goods such as pots and pans. 
"Mesti hujan hari ini . . .," says a trader, predicting rain today as he wipes 
the sweat from his brow and rearranges the songkoks -- traditional Malaysian 
pillbox hats -- he is selling. 
12:30 p.m. 
Office workers all over the city scurry to outdoor food stands that pepper the 
city. The open-air food stalls serve a dizzying variety of Asian foods. Diners 
walk away with paper plates loaded with fresh fruit or seasoned rice or complex 
curries. 
Meals take place wherever space allows: in parks, on benches, on wobbly picnic 
tables on the street. Despite the cloying heat, lunch time in Kuala Lumpur is a 
noteworthy event (food is always a preoccupation for Malaysians). In the 
perfectly balanced stalls, one can get fresh-cooked meals at prices that 
astound most Westerners. For example, nasi campur, which is vegetables, 
chicken, gravy and condiments served with rice, costs just $1.05. 
All over K.L., Chinese coffee shops -- small restaurants similar to our coffee 
shops -- are famed for their variety of Malaysian-Chinese specialties. One is 
prawn mee soup, a subtly flavored prawn broth filled with boiled noodles, 
shrimp, and egg and chicken slices, and topped with crispy fried onions. 
There is also fried kway teau -- a greasy but delicious thick rice-noodle dish 
seasoned with shellfish, shrimp, egg and sometimes chives. Or try wan tan mee, 
chicken rice, curry laksa, lobak (a sort of stuffed fried turnip) or popiah (a 
non-fried spring roll). 
For those who prefer Indian food, there are three kinds of restaurants. 
Indian-Muslim coffee shops are favorite breakfast haunts. They serve roti 
canai, a scrumptious, crispy white-flour pancake eaten with a thick lentil 
curry sauce. There is also murtaba, a pancake stuffed with minced chicken or 
mutton and cooked over a hot griddle. 
Indian "banana leaf" restaurants offer top value and are a must-stop. Mounds of 
rice, vegetables, meats and curries are piled on huge banana leaves, rather 
than plates. Then there are restaurants serving classic northern Indian 
cuisine: chicken tandoori, rice pilau, minced lamb, cauliflower and potatoes. 
The best place for sampling Indian dishes is in the "Little India" neighborhood 
on Masjid India Street, about a block away from Jamek Mosque. 
One of the two locations of an excellent Indian vegetarian restaurant, Devi 
Annapporna, is in the shopping area called Medan Tuanku, about eight blocks 
east of Little India. 
Quite a few Malaysians go to great lengths to satisfy their discriminating 
palates. Yong Tau Foo, for instance, is fish-stuffed tofu cakes and vegetables 
available at most Chinese coffee shops. 
But the best, the Orchard View Yong Tau Food at Ampang Village, is about six 
miles from the city center -- never too far for the food lover, even if lunch 
is only an hour. It is always packed. 
By 2 p.m., sated and happy, workers have returned to their offices. To get 
there, hail a cab and say: "Ampang Village Yong Tau Foo, off Jalan Ampang." 
It's open every day except Monday for lunch only. 
3 p.m. 
Dark, dramatic clouds have gathered. Afternoon thunderstorms are common in 
K.L., so this comes as no surprise. Yet the tropical storm is always wondrous 
to watch and hear. Crashing thunder echoes through the Klang Valley, lightning 
cracks through a black sky and the wind whistles around the city, singing 
strange musical tones as it whips against high-rise window panes. 
Pedestrians run for cover from the sudden torrential rain. Motorcyclists take 
shelter beneath covered overpasses, and traffic slows to a crawl. Just when 
everyone is resigned to the rain, it stops as suddenly as it started, and Kuala 
Lumpur is beautifully cleansed. Frangipani flowers and hibiscus, the national 
flower, stand out in fresh splendor. The city sparkles. 
The afternoon rush hour has begun by 4:30, but not everyone heads for home. At 
the public tennis courts in Jalan Duta, an exclusive suburb north of town, 
groups of Malaysian yuppies -- many of whom were educated in England and the 
United States -- warm up for a couple of sets. Gyms and fitness centers start 
to fill. 
Others -- foreign expatriates and Malays alike -- head for drinking places such 
as the private Royal Selangor Club's pub, "The Spotted Dog." The nickname is 
thought to have originated in colonial days when a British officer's wife who 
frequented the club left her two Dalmatians tied up outside. 
After work, many Kuala Lumpurians also head for Lake Gardens, a lush park 
surrounding a lake just outside town, about 15 minutes by taxi from the city 
center. It has a well-maintained jogging track and exercise course with workout 
stations around the grounds. 
At an open-air auditorium in the park, a group of dancers practices modern 
choreographed steps to music from a large cassette player. Against the rhythm 
of this pop music, athletes repeatedly scale the theater steps outside. 
In the evenings, Lake Gardens is a great place to people-watch: families, 
children in the playground, lovers strolling and, always, young men and women 
hoping to meet each other. 
7 p.m. 
Dusk comes and the sky darkens. Throughout the city, at empty parking lots or 
unused roads, food stalls are set up and opened for the evening -- their picnic 
tables brightened by colored plastic tablecloths. 
Lately the most popular spot for all-night alfresco dining is in Bangsar, about 
three miles from the city center in a thriving residential area between the 
city and suburban Petaling Jaya. Stalls, carefully regulated by the city, are 
clean and safe for tourists. 
The stalls can easily be reached by simply telling a taxi driver: "Bangsar Park 
McDonald's." The American fast-food outlets -- McDonald's, Kentucky Fried 
Chicken and Pizza Hut, among others -- are all contained in a row of shops. 
After the sun sets, Bangsar's food stalls -- in parking lots adjacent to the 
fast-food restaurants -- become one of the city's best places to savor Malay 
and Indian dishes. 
For excellent Indian vegetarian food, try a stall called Devi Annapporna. Among 
the more unusual choices is nasi kerabu, a rice dish from the state of Kelantan 
that's flavored with grated coconut and mint. Another is ayam percik, barbecued 
chicken spiced with tangy nut-flavored sauce, also from Kelantan, which is 
close to Thailand. 
For those who prefer a more elegant and expensive dining experience, Kuala 
Lumpur's five-star hotels have everything from Caesar salad (try it at the 
Continental restaurant at the Pan Pacific Hotel) and New Zealand rock oysters 
to sirloin steak and fillet of sole. 
As in most big cities, nightclubs and discotheques are expensive, but 
traditional Malaysian entertainment is free nightly at the Central Market, an 
enclosed, air-conditioned mall filled with shoppers searching for clothing or 
handicraft items and sampling snacks. 
11:30 p.m. 
There still is activity in Kuala Lumpur's Chinatown a few blocks from the 
Central Market in the area believed to be among the oldest sections of the 
city. The first tin miners settled here in 1857, and at one time the area was 
full of brothels and gambling dens. Today it's an enormous night market and a 
haven for the imitation designer-label traders. 
Wander around the Chinese herbalist medicine stalls, where you can remed any 
yin or yang imbalance with a cup of bitter-tasting broth. 
At midnight, Jamek Mosque is as quiet as the early morning. The bright moon 
casts a romantic soft hue over its domes and minarets. The Klang River ripples 
on, joining the Gombak and flowing out to the Strait of Malacca. 
It has been another day of old traditions and new ways in Kuala Lumpur. 
A sampling of hotels: 
Shangri-La: 722 rooms, No. 11 Jalan Sultan Ismail, 50520 Kuala Lumpur; $115 to 
$1,154 U.S. per night. 
Equatorial: 300 rooms, Jalan Sultan Ismail, 52500 Kuala Lumpur; $81 to $462. 
Pan Pacific: 533 rooms, Jalan Putra, P.O. Box 11468, 50746 Kuala Lumpur; $115 
to $1,154. 
Regent: 469 rooms, No. 160, Jalan Bukit Bintang, 55100 Kuala Lumpur; $102 to 
$1,154. 
Hotel Grand Continental: 328 rooms, 2 Jln Belia, Off Jln Raja Laut, 50350 Kuala 
Lumpur; $42 to $73. 
The Plaza Hotel: 160 rooms, Jln Raja Laut, Kuala Lumpur; $31 to $135. 
YMCA of Kuala Lumpur: 60 rooms, Jln Padang Belia, 50470 Brickfields, Kuala 
Lumpur; $4 to $19. 
Here are some of Kuala Lumpur's attractions worth a visit: 
 -- The National Museum has displays relating to Malaysian history, arts and 
crafts, weapons, wildlife and economics. 
 -- The Sultan Abdul Samad building, a famous Moorish structure formerly home 
to government offices, is being transformed into a tourist and handicraft 
center. 
 -- Malayan Railway Administration Headquarters, with its splendid Moorish 
architecture, houses administrative offices of the Railway Authorities. 
 -- The Sri Mahamariamman Temple, Malaysia's largest and most ornate Hindu 
temple, was built in 1873. Opposite the Hindu temple, the Taoist temple also is 
worth seeing. 
Getting around: 
Despite its spaghetti-like street layout, Kuala Lumpur is easy to explore 
because many of its residents speak English. Taxis are inexpensive and their 
drivers are well versed in the city's tourist destinations. Addresses are not 
necessary for major sites and most restaurants and hotels. Metered taxis start 
at 70 cents (20% more for air conditioning); add $1 for a radio cab. Mini-buses 
are cheap, about 20 cents for a short trip, but there are no printed schedules. 
Ask at bus stops but avoid public transport between 7 and 9 a.m. and 4 and 6 
p.m. 
When to go: 
The rainy season begins in November and continues through the middle of 
January, so the best time to visit is after that, especially from the beginning 
of March through June. Special promotional prices are being offered this year 
in honor of Visit Malaysia Year. For example, a special railway pass is about 
$35 for 10 days, $75 for 30 days, first-class, good for unlimited use in 
Malaysia and Singapore. 
Rental car companies are offering discounts, as is Malaysia Airlines, for 
travel within the country. Travelers with U.S. passports require no visa for 
visits of up to three months. 
For more information about Kuala Lumpur or Visit Malaysia Year, contact the 
Malaysian Tourist Information Center, 818 West 7th St., Suite 804, Los Angeles 
90017, toll-free (800) 336-6842 or (213) 689-9702. 
