YOUR WHEELS: DEFECT INVESTIGATIONS AT RECORD HIGH IN '89 
The auto safety tally for 1989 has come in, and the news isn't particularly 
good for consumers. Last year, 6.7 million vehicles, including cars made by 
virtually every major producer, were recalled by manufacturers because of 
safety defects that needed correcting. 
The recalls included 1.7 million General Motors cars with sticking throttles, 
1.4 million Ford Escorts with defective seats, 500,000 Chryslers with rusty 
front-suspension parts, and 408,000 Toyota Camrys with problem seat belts. 
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration boasted that it opened 213 
defect investigations during 1989, a record in the 20-year history of the 
agency. Of the 6.7 million recalls, the agency claims that it influenced 77%. 
The statistics beg the question: Are cars safer because more investigations are 
being run, or do cars have more defects than ever? The numbers, critics say, 
show the public is at risk. 
"There are more defective vehicles out there," says Clarence Ditlow, executive 
director of the Center for Auto Safety, an advocacy group in Washington. "In 
the 1980s, we had a record number of new models introduced, which are always 
prone to problems." 
Ditlow has harsh criticism for the federal safety administration, saying it has 
dropped important safety investigations and has imposed fewer recalls than in 
past years. 
But safety administration spokesmen defend their record and say a decline in 
recent years in the number of recalled vehicles could have resulted from higher 
quality in new automobiles. 
There has never been an authoritative national estimate of highway traffic 
deaths that result from safety defects. But academic studies have indicated 
that anywhere from 5% to 33% of the 50,000 highway fatalities each year can be 
blamed on defects, including worn-out tires and improperly maintained brakes. 
Even at the lowest estimates, several thousand highway deaths each year can be 
blamed on bad maintenance and defects, a toll that virtually all experts agree 
is simply too high to accept. 
Question: On a recent vacation to Colorado and Utah, I noticed that a Texaco 
station was selling premium No. 2 diesel fuel unleaded with an octane rating of 
88. I have never seen a premium or unleaded diesel fuel or one that is 
octane-rated. Can you explain that, please? -- P.E. 
Answer: The station either had an erroneous sign or you misread a sign for 
gasoline and thought it was for diesel. Diesel fuel is a much more generic 
product than gasoline. It comes in a single grade, has few additives and 
carries no ratings for consumers. 
As you may know, gasoline octane is a measure of a fuel's ability to resist 
uncontrolled combustion inside the engine, a condition that can cause knocking 
or pinging. The higher the octane rating, the more controlled is the 
combustion. 
But diesel does not carry an octane rating, and if it did, it would be very 
low, because the whole idea with diesel is that you want very rapid burning. 
Diesel engines do not have spark plugs. Rather, they ignite their fuel by 
simple pressure and heat inside the combustion chamber. 
Diesel fuels do have something called a cetane rating, which is a measure of 
its combustion characteristics, but the rating is almost never posted at the 
pump. Diesel engines are not rated for a certain cetane in the same way that 
gasoline engines are rated for octane. 
In addition, diesel has few additives. One exception to that rule is an 
additive to retard gum formation during long-term storage. 
