IRAN ASKS SOVIET HELP TO BATTLE 'DEVILISH' WEST 
The Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Iran's leader, said Sunday he wants strong 
ties with Moscow to help fight the "devilish" West, and Iranian lawmakers 
reportedly agreed to consider breaking ties with Britain. 
Khomeini's overtures to the Soviet Union, which he previously condemned for its 
atheist ideology, came during a 1 1/2-hour meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister 
Eduard A. Shevardnadze. 
Iran's news agency said it was believed to be the first private meeting between 
Iran's 88-year-old revolutionary patriarch and a foreign minister. 
In an indication of warming relations, the semiofficial newspaper Tehran Times 
quoted an "unidentified source" as saying that "current discussions are under 
way on significant arms dealing" between Moscow and Tehran. The newspaper added 
that an Iranian military delegation visited Moscow last December as part of a 
"joint economic commission" set up in 1988. 
Neither Khomeini nor Shevardnadze mentioned arms negotiations in their public 
comments. 
The Soviet Union had been a major arms supplier to Iraq, Iran's foe in the 
eight-year Persian Gulf War. 
Khomeini stressed to Shevardnadze the importance of "the expansion of strong 
ties in various dimensions in confronting the devilish acts of the West," 
Tehran Radio reported. 
Shevardnadze later met with Prime Minister Hussein Moussavi, and the two agreed 
to set up mechanisms for "regulating political contacts" between Moscow and 
Tehran, Tehran Radio said. 
Shevardnadze said that Nikolai Konarev, chairman of the Iran-Soviet joint 
economic commission, will visit Iran shortly "with significant proposals," 
Iran's news agency reported. 
"We hope significant changes will take place in bilateral cooperation in the 
political and economic fields as a result of the current atmosphere," he told 
Moussavi. 
Khomeini used the meeting with Shevardnadze to deliver a short sermon intended 
for Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, according to the Iranian news 
service, the official Islamic Republic News Agency. 
Tehran Radio, monitored in Nicosia, said Khomeini expressed dissatisfaction at 
Gorbachev's treatment of the spiritual aspects of a message he sent him Jan. 4. 
Khomeini called for the Kremlin leader to study Islam and consider it as a 
solution to social problems. 
"I wanted to open for Mr. Gorbachev a window to a great world -- that is the 
world after death, which is the eternal one. That was the main thrust of my 
message, and I hope he will try again in this respect," the radio quoted 
Khomeini as saying. 
Shevardnadze quoted Gorbachev as saying all Soviet leaders have studied 
Khomeini's message, which was "full of many ideas." 
"Undoubtedly we agree with many major points, but there are points with which 
we disagree too," he said. 
Tehran Radio quoted Shevardnadze as telling Khomeini: "Our conviction is that 
conditions are ripe for relations between our two countries to enter a 
qualitatively new stage of cooperation in all fields." 
The ayatollah replied: "Of course we want relations to develop, too." 
The radio broadcast 22 minutes of the meeting at Khomeini's home in north 
Tehran in which Shevardnadze, speaking through an interpreter, relayed a 
message from Gorbachev to Khomeini. 
Past 'Gross Errors' 
Shevardnadze quoted Gorbachev as saying Moscow respects freedom of choice for 
nations and, while backing Iran's 1979 Islamic revolution, defended the Soviet 
system as the right choice for its own people despite "gross errors" in the 
past. 
Iran's news agency said Shevardnadze did not ask Khomeini to withdraw his order 
for Muslim zealots to assassinate British author Salman Rushdie because of his 
book "The Satanic Verses." Britain reportedly asked Shevardnadze to press 
Khomeini to give a reprieve to Rushdie, whose book has been denounced as 
insulting to Islam. 
"There was no mention of the affair in Shevardnadze's speech," IRNA said. 
The meeting with Shevardnadze came two days after Khomeini declared Iran does 
not need relations with the West. This issue has divided the Tehran hierarchy 
between so-called pragmatists, who favor more relations with the rest of the 
world, and hard-liners, who favor continued isolation. 
However, Iran's Cabinet declared Sunday that it is united behind Khomeini, 
reported Tehran Television, which also was monitored in Nicosia. 
'Enemies of Islam' 
"Your children are united as a single hand against the enemies of Islam," it 
quoted a Cabinet statement as saying of the international furor over Rushdie. 
