FIRST PERSON: RETURN OF THE NATIVE -WITH SON 
It produced the sort of cultural miasma one might expect if Madonna ever met 
and hugged the Queen Mum. 
Here was England -- tweedy, damp, sensible mother of perpetual tradition who 
still distrusts callow America as a nation. Yet she remains fascinated by 
Americans as individuals. 
Here was my visiting son -- a towering tribute to a teen-age regimen of 
weightlifting and Domino's Pizza and an All-American freshman majoring in fine 
arts, mini-trucks, Skid Row CDs and Alpha Tau Omega boondockers. Yet he's also 
a beginning cosmopolitan intrigued by half of his bloodline rooted in the 
England that Santayana saw as a paradise of anomalies, eccentricities, heresy, 
hobbies and humours. 
So they came together, this land and my lad. As big dog and puppy. With common 
suspicion, fear and interest. 
New friends and old family were impressed by: 
* His accent. 
* PJ as a name for anyone who isn't a regular on "Dallas." 
* This young man's priceless contribution to Anglo-American understanding: that 
Malibu, the drink, is not a big seller on Malibu, the beach. 
PJ, in turn, saw Utopia in this civilization that: 
* Eats a full dinner -- eggs, sausages, tomatoes, mushrooms, bacon and fried 
bread -- for breakfast. 
* Tolerates Motorway traffic at 110 m.p.h. 
* Does not card teen-agers and allows its pubs to serve 18-year-olds. 
His jury remains out on prime-time television coverage of snooker tournaments, 
Indian food to go that is known as tandoori take-away, and prim criticism of 
politicians' sex habits by daily newspapers that publish pictures of 
bare-breasted secretaries from Liverpool. 
PJ even began wrestling with bilingualism. As in "shed-yule" and 
"con-trov-azee" and "com-po-sight." 
He also remained understandably blank -- yet blessedly refreshing -- before the 
inexplicable lore of this elderly land. 
Where, he asked, is the economy of communication in road signs that warned 
"Area Closed All Day To Heavy Goods Vehicles" when a simple "No Trucks" would 
do the job? 
Why is beer called bitter when it isn't? 
Why must we be at Aunt Joy's for coffee at 10:30 a.m. when this mid-morning 
social grace is called "elevenses?" 
Then there was the compost heap. 
His grandmother, the last of the grand Victorian rosarians, keeps a compost 
heap alongside her working greenhouse. The pile is fed daily by eggshells, tea 
bags, carrot tops and other earth-soluble detritus from the most productive 
kitchen this side of Julia Childs'. It is black and slimy. 
"What," asked PJ, "is that stuff?" 
The face of humus, I explained, that has launched a thousand floribundas. It is 
Mother Nature's condiment. 
I rammed a garden fork deep into the mess and piled rotting grass upon 
suppurating cabbage leaves. That, I said, is compost. 
"That," said PJ, "is a smelly public health hazard. It also is moving." 
The finale of dinner one night, was Mother's rich, home-cured, fruity, 
family-famous pudding saved from Christmas. Humming a belated carol, she 
carried it high and ceremoniously into the dining room. 
"Dad," hissed PJ. "There's a tree growing from the middle of dessert." 
That, I told him, is a sprig of holly decorating a Christmas pudding. It is a 
tradition predating Dickens. Eat. 
"But the pudding is on fire." 
Flaming brandy, I explained. It's another British tradition alongside snooker 
tournaments and bare-breasted secretaries from Liverpool. Eat. 
He nibbled as his grandmother spoke: "It should be a lovely pudding. I put it 
up two years ago." 
The horror on PJ's face was a page from Stephen King. 
"Dad," he whispered. "I will not eat anything that is two years old." 
Son, if you have eaten salami, smoked oysters, microwave lasagna, Milk Duds, 
beef jerky and Cheddar cheese, you probably have eaten something even older 
than your grandmother's Christmas pudding. And don't tell me that Alpha Tau 
Omega frowns on 12-year-old Scotch. Eat. 
In truth, and in the confusion of the serving process, I think PJ slid most of 
his pudding into a napkin that went into a pants pocket that was emptied in the 
privacy of an upstairs bathroom. 
I couldn't blame him. 
I even understood his faux pas during 10:30 elevenses at Aunt Joy's the 
following day. 
She had offered PJ a raisin pastry with his coffee. 
"How old is it?" he blurted. 
