PAYOLA CHARGES AGAINST RECORD PROMOTER DROPPED 
A federal judge in Los Angeles on Friday threw out payola charges against a San 
Francisco-area record promoter and dealt at least a temporary setback to the 
Justice Department's much-publicized investigation into alleged illegal 
practices in the recording industry. 
Responding to a defense motion, U.S. District Judge Pamela Rymer dismissed 
three misdemeanor payola counts against Ralph Tashjian of San Mateo on grounds 
that the grand jury indictment was not specific enough to allow the promoter to 
defend himself. 
'Distributions of Cocaine' 
Tashjian had been charged with "making regular undisclosed payments or 
distributions of cocaine to program directors so the records he was promoting 
would be added to radio station play lists," according to court documents. 
Commenting on the judge's ruling, Tashjian's attorney, Anthony P. Brooklier, 
said: "The problem was, the government charged my client with multiple offenses 
over a long period of time without specifying the dates of those alleged 
offenses or the records involved. The judge ruled that the charges were too 
general and didn't adequately inform the defendant with what he was charged." 
The prosecutor in the case, Richard Stavin, a special attorney for the Los 
Angeles Organized Crime Strike Force, said the government will file a criminal 
information next week charging Tashjian with 200 individual counts of payola. 
According to Stavin, the dismissal was due to a "weakness in the payola 
statute," which addresses only specific incidents and "doesn't contemplate a 
scheme or ongoing course of action." 
"The judge suggested that Congress may want to revisit the language of the law, 
which we would urge also," Stavin said. 
Tax Evasion Counts 
Tashjian is set to stand trial, along with his wife, later this month on 
separate felony tax evasion charges stemming from the payola case. "But the 
crux of the government's case are the payola charges," Brooklier said. 
The Tashjians were indicted -- along with another record promoter and a former 
radio station manager -- in February, 1988, after a two-year investigation by 
the Internal Revenue Service under the direction of the Organized Crime Strike 
Force. Charges against the other defendants are pending. 
In announcing the indictments at a press conference at the time, U.S. Atty. 
Robert C. Bonner called it the most significant payola case in 15 years. 
