LICENSE PROCESS FOR SCHOOL BUS DRIVERS STIFFENED; 
SAFETY: TWO SAN DIEGO CASES HELPED PROMPT THE ELIMINATION OF TEMPORARY 
LICENSES, WHICH WERE GIVEN WITHOUT FINGERPRINTS AND A BACKGROUND CHECK. THE 
APPLICATION PROCESS WILL BECOME MORE STRINGENT JUNE 1. 
The California Highway Patrol, prompted in part by two San Diego incidents, 
announced Thursday that state officials will toughen the application process 
for school bus drivers. 
Robert Rengstorff, chief of enforcement for the California Highway Patrol, told 
the Assembly Transportation Committee that, as of June 1, the 180-day temporary 
licenses -- given to drivers employed by school districts and private 
contractors -- will no longer be issued. 
Two San Diego incidents involving drivers employed by Laidlaw Transit played a 
major role in the decision to make the application process more stringent. 
Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar), who called the hearing, mentioned a Feb. 2 
accident in which a Laidlaw driver was arrested on suspicion of drunk driving 
after the bus he was operating rear-ended a pickup truck on Balboa Avenue near 
Mission Bay Drive. The other incident occurred in 1987, when driver Victor H. 
Gomez was charged with kidnaping a 5-year-old girl and molesting her in the 
bus. 
Under the CHP plan, applicants for a permit to drive school buses will receive 
their licenses only after fingerprint and background checks are completed. Now, 
drivers who pass state tests are given temporary six-month permits before 
checks are made. 
Rengstorff said authorities are targeting school bus drivers because "there 
just seems to have been numerous instances where contractor-employed applicants 
have been involved in serious bus incidents," Rengstorff said. 
Katz called the hearing to examine the procedures of Laidlaw, other bus 
companies, school districts and state agencies. "There's something seriously 
out of whack" in the system, Katz said. 
He cited the arrests of two Laidlaw employees accused of driving buses while 
drunk -- one in the San Fernando Valley and the other in San Diego. Laidlaw 
receives about $20 million a year from the Los Angeles Unified School District 
as its largest bus contractor. 
In January, Laidlaw driver Harold Keith Lone was arrested in Encino as he 
prepared to pick up students at Lanai Elementary. A breath test showed Lone had 
a blood-alcohol level of 0.27%, more than three times the new legal limit of 
0.08%. Authorities have said that Lone obtained his job by using an alias to 
hide a lengthy record, including five drunk-driving convictions. 
In the San Diego accident, the driver was transporting Clairemont High School 
students when he collided with the pickup truck, injuring three people, 
according to the CHP. 
Moreover, Katz voiced concern about the other San Diego case involving Gomez. 
According to prosecutors, Gomez kidnaped and molested the girl on April 21, 
1987. He was ordered to stand trial but failed to appear on Jan. 20, 1988, and 
San Diego police say he remains a fugitive. A civil lawsuit filed on behalf of 
the child against Laidlaw is pending. 
At Thursday's hearing, Katz expressed shock that Gomez is still listed as 
having a valid license to drive a school bus. Bill Gengler, a spokesman for the 
Department of Motor Vehicles, confirmed that his agency "had not suspended or 
revoked" Gomez's license because "we had no information from law enforcement or 
other sources that would allow us to act." 
But Katz complained about DMV's "business-as-usual approach" in cases like 
Gomez's. He also said that Laidlaw and other private bus contractors "are not 
acknowledging their responsibility to develop a better procedure of screening 
the drivers." 
Dave Daley, vice president of operations for Van Nuys-based Laidlaw Transit, 
acknowledged that, when he joined the local operation, "substantial 
improvements were needed." 
For example, since Katz's committee held a similar hearing in 1988, Daley said 
that Laidlaw has beefed up checks on applicant references and its training. "We 
feel our procedures have been corrected in a responsive manner," he said. 
Daley described the latest arrests of drivers as "isolated," but said they 
pointed up the need to improve staff training to detect drug and alcohol abuse 
among drivers. 
To prevent future problems, Laidlaw officials asked the committee to adopt 
criminal sanctions against drivers who lie about their background on employment 
applications, including a mandatory six-month jail term and $10,000 fine for 
violations. 
In San Diego, Laidlaw attorney Eric Freedus denied allegations, in the civil 
suit against Laidlaw, that the company failed to do a background check of 
Gomez. Freedus said the company "requested a certificate" from a law 
enforcement agency, which checked Gomez's background and found nothing that 
would prevent him from working as a bus driver. 
Freedus could not recall which law enforcement agency was supposed to have 
checked Gomez's background. 
"The report came back negative, clean. . . . An employer has a limited ability 
to do a background check on an individual. If (law enforcement agencies) cannot 
come up with anything in a man's background, how can an employer?" Freedus 
said. 
He also questioned allegations that the girl was molested by Gomez and said 
there is evidence that the "mother suggested things" to the child. 
"Laidlaw's position is that, if this incident occurred, it is very unfortunate 
. . . But there is clearly evidence that words were put into the child's 
mouth," Freedus said. 
In a letter to the Assembly committee, attorney Irwin M. Zalkin, who is 
representing the child in the civil suit, alleged that the National City and 
Coronado school districts had requested that Laidlaw remove Gomez from routes 
in their districts. Zalkin alleged that students from the two districts 
complained that Gomez was rude, made racial comments and "was sexually 
suggestive to the girls on the bus." 
Carla Bruno, spokeswoman for the local Laidlaw office, said she did not know if 
the allegations made by Zalkin are true. 
Mark Gladstone reported from Sacramento and H.G. Reza from San Diego. 
