PIONEERING CENTERS; 
NEW CARE FOR TORTURE'S OLD WOUNDS 
A nightmare steals sleep from Gebyhu. 
Something heavy is crushing his body. "I try to call for help. I want someone 
to push the weight off. I try myself but I can't. I try to call to somebody. 
But I can't." 
Panicked, Gebyhu awakens: "I am sweating . . . breathing hard. I am scared." 
The same dream interrupts his sleep several times a week now. That is an 
improvement. It used to happen every night. It began during the five years he 
spent in an Ethiopian prison where, though never tried for a crime and only a 
teen-ager, he was tortured. 
Other Reminders 
Gebyhu is haunted by other reminders of prison. His shoulders are dislocated. 
He experiences frequent pain. His concentration is poor. His ability to trust 
has eroded. He knows about man's inhumanity to man. 
"Sometimes they held burning newspaper to our backs." Gebyhu recalls. 
"Sometimes they poured hot oil on our heads. Sometimes," he adds, "they would 
pull out (finger)nails with pliers." 
For Gebyhu (he asked that his real name not be used), the scars remain vivid 
but the healing has begun. He is more fortunate than most. 
At 29, he belongs to a huge but largely invisible population of refugees who 
settled in the United States after being tortured -- psychologically and 
physically, and often gruesomely -- in their home countries. But unlike the 
vast majority of victimized refugees, Gebyhu is among the early beneficiaries 
of a budding treatment specialty that recognizes that torture survivors have 
special problems that make it difficult for them to function free of their own 
personal nightmares. 
Few Centers Exist 
So far, these victims far outnumber society's ability to aid them. Gebyhu, for 
instance, is a patient at Chicago's Marjorie Kovler Center for the Treatment of 
Survivors of Torture. Along with the Center for Victims of Torture in 
Minneapolis, it is one of only two full-service centers in the United States 
designed to help this uniquely burdened group of refugees. 
More critically, perhaps, medical knowledge of how best to treat the survivors 
is only in the pioneering stage. Surprisingly little is known about them, and 
for now professionals must rely mostly on what has been learned about victims 
of other kinds of psychological traumas. 
"We believe their needs to be something unique," says Douglas A. Johnson, 
executive director of the Minneapolis center. "We need to do outcome research 
to find out whether or not we are having impact." 
In Minnesota, 80% of the state's 2,000 Ethiopian refugees are victims of 
torture. "It's the most severely abused refugee population in the state," 
Johnson says. "We believe that we have a minimum of 2,000 and as many as 8,000 
torture victims living in Minnesota." 
In Chicago there are an estimated 20,000 survivors, reports Antonio Martinez, 
coordinator of the Kovler center, where 79 clients have been accepted in the 
facility's initial 18 months. 
In Southern California, which has the country's highest concentration of 
torture survivors among its huge refugee population, the Walter Briehl Human 
Rights Foundation in Los Angeles is treating refugees and hopes to open a 
full-service center later this year. 
Social workers estimate the majority of victims in Southern California are 
Salvadorans. Psychiatrist Harvey Weintraub, president of the Briehl Foundation, 
says that there are also large numbers of people at risk among refugees from 
Southeast Asia, Ethiopia, Iran, Iraq and Armenians emigrating from Turkey. 
"Everybody seems to be torturing everybody all over the world," says Weintraub, 
who is treating survivors. 
The first clinic dedicated to helping torture victims opened in Copenhagen in 
1982. Others operate in Toronto and Paris. Assistance is also available in San 
Francisco and Newark, N.J. But, given the amount of torture in the world, there 
are surprisingly few centers overall. Amnesty International has documented 
torture and ill treatment of prisoners in at least 98 countries. 
Governor Helped 
The Minneapolis facility, launched with help from Minnesota Gov. Rudy Perpich, 
opened in 1985. The Chicago center -- operated under the auspices of Travelers 
&amp; Immigrants Aid -- received a boost from entrepreneur Peter Kovler and 
opened in mid-1987. 
Because the organized treatment of torture survivors is a relatively new field 
for medicine and social work, specialists are in the early stages of finding 
the best forms of therapy. Meanwhile, they rely mainly on techniques used to 
treat other post-traumatic syndromes resulting from rape, Vietnam experiences, 
family sexual abuse and natural disasters. 
"What makes the torture victim different is that they are targets of a 
strategic manipulation of their personalities," says Johnson. "With other kinds 
of victimization there is always the hope for rescue by some third party. The 
child can be rescued by another parent. The crime victim can be rescued -- even 
if they aren't -- by the police. There is the hope of some kind of rescue. 
"When you're being tortured it's being done by your government, by your police 
department, it's all been bureaucratized to great banality in terms of the 
methodology used and in the sense there is no hope of rescue," says Johnson. 
"You are the ultimate target with life and death completely in the hands of not 
only a person, but a government." 
At the Minneapolis Center, site of American threshold research on how to best 
help torture survivors, refugees accepted for treatment receive a physical 
examination and a psychiatric assessment and are then assigned to a long-term 
therapist. Simultaneously they work with a social worker who coordinates their 
overall treatment. Many also receive physical therapy. 
"Almost everybody who has been tortured suffers from chronic pain of one sort 
or another -- neck problems, back problems," says Thomas M. Dixon, clinical 
supervisor of Chicago's Kovler center. 
"Torture victims tend to relive the experience because it is often triggered by 
a common everyday object or occurrence," says Johnson. "For example, waiting is 
a very critical part of the torture experience. We schedule people so they do 
not have to wait. So that when they come in they are given attention 
immediately. 
"We try to avoid the use of a lot of electronic equipment in the examination 
procedures because people are often tortured with electricity or by rather 
formal, medical-looking equipment," adds Johnson, whose Minneapolis outpatient 
clinic is located in a two-story house to avoid an institutional appearance. 
"The goal of torture is to destroy a person's personality so that they will 
forever be subjugated to the torturer, to the power source." says Dixon. "It is 
the complete destruction of trust at all levels." 
The official international definition of torture is spelled out by the United 
Nations. "Torture . . . means any act by which severe pain or suffering, 
whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted by or at the instigation 
of a public official," to obtain "from him or a third person information or 
confession, punishing him for an act he has committed, or intimidating him or 
other persons." The United Nations adds that, "Torture constitutes an 
aggravated and deliberate form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment." 
Torture is something much more personal to Gebyhu. 
He was just 17 when he was taken off to prison along with his father and his 
older brother. They were arrested in 1977, in the aftermath of a communist 
military coup that deposed the late Emperor Haile Selassie. Their crime: 
Gebyhu's father was a security guard for the deposed royal family and his 
mother was a land owner. 
Sometimes, Gebyhu says softly, slowly, the police came at night. "When they 
came after nine o'clock we knew they wanted someone to kill. Everybody sat very 
still. Everybody tried not to look at the eyes of the police. Nobody. . . . It 
is hard to talk," he apologizes. 
His brother was taken away during one of these visits. Later the brother's 
clothes were returned to the family. "Only his clothes." 
Gebyhu was one of 9,000 in the prison. "We would sleep in crowded rooms. There 
was no place to turn. We would sleep holding the feet of someone who was lying 
the other way. And someone would hold your feet." 
But it was the hanging that still causes him pain. 
One day the guards came and told him to put his arms over a pole they held 
behind his back. They tied his hands. They raised the pole until Gebyhu's feet 
were off the ground. His upper arms carried the entire weight of his body. And 
while he was helplessly hanging . . . . 
"They beat my feet. They left me there. On the second day they cut the rope. I 
fell to the ground. They tell me I was unconscious." 
Experiences Not Unusual 
Now Gebyhu's shoulders regularly dislocate. He is often in pain. And awful as 
they may seem, his experiences are not unusual. 
It is common in Africa for torture victims to have the bottoms of their feet 
beaten, in Latin America to be forced to eat decomposed food and excrement and 
to have body parts mutilated, and in Vietnam to be subjected to isolation and 
other forms of psychological torture, reports Martinez, coordinator of 
Chicago's Kovler clinic. 
Social worker Holbrook Teter, coordinator of the San Francisco-based Coalition 
to Aid Refugee Survivors of Torture and War Trauma, says: "I've worked with 
Salvadorans, both men and women, who have been subjected to electroshock 
treatment, who were hung by their thumbs, beaten, sexually abused. They had 
their heads submerged in water, they had hoods filled with lye put over their 
heads burning their scalps." 
"There are survivors who have had cattle prods inserted into their vaginas and 
men and women who had electricity applied to their genitals," says Dixon of the 
Chicago center. "One survivor was pregnant and guards put a dead fetus in her 
urine can. Husbands are forced to watch their wives being tortured and wives 
are forced to watch their husbands being abused and parents their children 
tortured." 
Of 34 patients who received long-term treatment at the Minneapolis clinic, all 
were beaten and subjected to isolation and overcrowding and threatened with 
death, forced to watch others killed or tortured or were taunted with mock 
execution. More than half were kept in uncomfortable positions or had their 
bodies suspended in painful positions for long periods of time and more than a 
third were burned with either boiling liquid, chemicals, cigarettes or 
electricity. A third also had their feet beaten. 
One outrageous aspect of torture is the frequent "complicity of the medical 
profession," says Martinez, a psychologist. 
"There are a lot of doctors who are accomplices in these situations. . . . The 
torturer has a doctor by his side so he knows where to put the electrodes, 
where to go so not to kill the person . . . where to cut so not to kill the 
person," says Martinez. 
A range of symptoms commonly found among refugees who were subjected to torture 
include: An inability to sleep, flashbacks to instances of torture, 
nervousness, an inability to trust, hyper-activity, recurrent nightmares, 
robotic behavior, anger, an inability to enjoy normal life experiences, sexual 
dysfunction and tendencies toward suicide and violence. 
"If they are pulled over by police they think they are going to be tortured 
again, they panic and they lose control of themselves," says Dixon. "We had one 
client who was going for a (medical) exam and he freaked out. He was strapped 
to the machine and he ripped off the belts and ran from the hospital. Later he 
said he thought he was going to be tortured again." 
Children who have either been subjected directly to torture or forced to watch 
a sibling or parent tortured have difficulty in school. Both their performance 
and their behavior suffers, doctors say. 
"We emphasize calling them 'survivors' rather than victims," says Dixon, "so 
people don't carry this idea of being victimized, that that was the focal 
experience of their lives. They want to go on to more positive experiences." 
Going on is very much on Gebyhu's agenda. 
Attends College 
In the United States for the last 18 months, he is a student at Chicago's 
Truman College where his grades are good and he excels at mathematics. However, 
his constantly dislocating arms currently make it impossible for him to find a 
job and his prison experience is hurting his studies. 
"It is difficult," he says. "I don't have any concentration." 
And even here the terror continues for Gebyhu. 
Last November, his roommate, also an Ethiopian refugee, was murdered in a $70 
robbery at a downtown parking lot where he was working. 
"Please don't use my real name," Gebhyu pleads with a reporter. "I am scared." 
