ANOTHER CASE OF MURDER IN MISSISSIPPI; 
TV MOVIE ON THE KILLING OF THREE CIVIL RIGHTS WORKERS IN 1964 TRIES TO FILL IN 
WHAT 'MISSISSIPPI BURNING' LEFT OUT 
The Hollywood types flew into Meridian, Miss., to soak up local color for their 
movie. Naturally, they had to meet Lawrence Rainey, the old-time sheriff. He 
always seemed to be in the action around Neshoba County. 
This was about three years ago, as producer Tova Laiter and screenwriter 
Stanley Weiser, the visitors, were planning a film about what Mississippi calls 
"the troubles" -- that summer of '64 when those three "agitator kids" -- 
civil-rights workers -- were killed by Ku Klux Klan night riders and all the 
wrath came down. 
Weiser recalls the gathering at the restaurant at the Howard Johnson's: "So 
Rainey comes in with his country bumpkin lawyer . . . (and he was) trying to 
tell us to do 'The Sheriff Rainey Story.' 'Why do you want to dig up these old 
troubles again? Sheriff Rainey's a prince of a man and you should do his story, 
like "Walking Tall," Buford Pusser.' " 
Laiter recalls Rainey as very affable. He was tried in the case, not on murder 
charges but on federal charges of depriving the three men of their civil rights 
-- the two whites, Michael (Mickey) Schwerner, 24, and Andy Goodman, 20, and 
the black, James Chaney, 21. 
Seven men were convicted, including Deputy Sheriff Cecil Ray Price; Rainey and 
seven others were acquitted. The sentences ran from three to 10 years. 
The irony these many years later was that Rainey was working around Meridian as 
a security guard. Working for two black men. 
Weiser remembers now, "They talked about how there was no problems before 1964: 
'Before this whole civil rights happened, the blacks were treated well.' We 
asked about all the bodies (of black people) found in the rivers." The lawyer 
said that those weren't necessarily racist killings and some might have 
committed suicide. 
Rainey recited his theory that the murders in 1964 were done by "their own" -- 
other civil rights workers -- and then the FBI covered it up. 
Weiser recalls that Laiter was dumbstruck. She kept asking, "How can we believe 
that?" 
Passions ran high and wild around the murders in Mississippi, and still do. 
When it comes to the retelling of this story, truth also runs wild, although 
the latest version, via Laiter and Weiser, called "Murder in Mississippi," 
might be the best visual history of Freedom Summer. It can be seen Monday at 9 
p.m. on NBC. 
The core of the cast is Tom Hulce as Schwerner, Jennifer Grey as wife Rita 
Schwerner, Blair Underwood as Chaney and Josh Charles as Goodman. 
It has been hard to round up the facts, as the sheriff's version suggests. 
Two other film versions about the same incident -- including the Academy 
Award-nominated "Mississippi Burning," showing this month on several cable 
movie channels -- focused on the manhunt for the killers. This new one puts the 
story in its broader context; it is in effect a "prequel," showing what led up 
to the murders. 
"Murder in Mississippi" relates that it was the black leadership in "the 
movement" that called for the invasion of 1,000 or more young white activists 
into the state to register black voters that hot summer. One black leader 
comments in the film that white people are part of the problem and have to be 
part of the solution. 
Civil rights advocates believe that if it had just been Chaney who was killed, 
the media would have stayed at home. The fact that two young white men were 
killed inflamed the national conscience and set about breaking down the 
barriers to black franchise in Mississippi and the whole South. In that sense, 
they were landmark murders. 
A four-hour miniseries that veteran TV writer-producer Calvin Clements Sr. 
wrote for CBS in 1975, "Attack on Terror: The FBI vs. the Ku Klux Klan," 
preponderantly followed the FBI version of the manhunt, aided by William 
Conrad's booming documentary voice. Wayne Rogers and Dabney Coleman were the 
star FBI agents; Ned Beatty was "Sheriff Ollie Thompson." 
"I had to change all the names," remembers Clements, "and I got a call from the 
network and they wanted to change the name of the state! I said, 'You want to 
put it in Tennessee?' " 
The hit feature film from English director Alan Parker, "Mississippi Burning," 
which came out at the end of 1988, was intended as a fiction with a lot of 
factual background, but again, dealt mostly on the manhunt, starring Gene 
Hackman and Willem Dafoe as ace FBI agents. (It received seven Oscar 
nominations, including best picture, best director and best actor for Hackman 
-- and ended up winning one, which went to Peter Biziou for best 
cinematography.) 
"Mississippi Burning" evolved into a raucous, vengeance-is-thine movie that did 
a virtual double reverse on the blaxploitation films of the mid-1970s -- only 
with the white guys raging against the whites over the black frustrations. The 
beating of a white woman, wife of the deputy, set Hackman and his agents off on 
a rampage of kidnappings, extortions, assaults, arsons, breakings and other 
mayhem. 
The film was criticized for telling the story from a strictly white point of 
view. Its black characters pretty much stood around, looking stalwart and 
resolute but immobile, like the Indians in Old West movies. 
"A lot of excitement and a lot of blood and a lot of action," observed Ben 
Chaney Jr., 37, brother of James Chaney, "but it didn't reflect the attitude of 
the people who were there at the time, and that distorted history." 
Both the surviving Chaney and Dr. Carolyn Goodman, Andrew's mother, visited 
L.A. at the behest of NBC to discuss "Murder in Mississippi." Both like its 
mood and accuracy of the time and the place. 
"Seeing this movie for the first time," said Chaney, who was 12 at the time of 
the murders, "I was sort of relaxed and I thought Hollywood was getting close 
to who the people were in the movement who contributed so much to the 
struggle." 
Goodman, a psychologist for the New York State Office of Mental Health, noted, 
"On the whole, this movie did not pull a lot of punches. They were focusing on 
what happened, and what happened was an incredibly powerful time in history. It 
was not easy to watch it for me." 
And the pages of history may not close with Monday's broadcast. The Mississippi 
attorney general, Mike Moore, announced about a year ago that he would examine 
the 1964 files and see if state murder charges could be brought. He did not 
retern several calls from The Times but if he does proceed, it could evolve 
into yet another version of the truth. 
During their recent visits to Los Angeles, Carolyn Goodman and Ben Chaney 
endorsed the NBC project and introduced the film makers to families and 
friends. The Schwerner family avoided the movie. Producer Laiter said that 
Mickey Schwerner's father told her "the family had a policy not to talk about 
it and not cooperate in a movie, that his son was no more a hero than anybody 
else." 
Goodman and Chaney said that they were disturbed by "Mississippi Burning." 
"It wasn't about civil rights," said Goodman. "It was a film that used the 
deaths of the boys as a means of solving the murders and the FBI being heroes." 
(The reality is that the FBI was caught between the warring factions that 
summer. The earlier productions deified the bureau; "Murder in Mississippi" 
runs an actual TV news segment prior to the "invasion" in which J. Edgar 
Hoover, the FBI's impervious chieftain, rails against the suggestion that his 
agents should get involved. 
("We most certainly do not give protection to civil rights workers," the real 
Hoover says in the news clip. "In the first place, the FBI is not a police 
organization, purely an investigative organization. And the protection of 
individual citizens, either natives of the state or coming into the state, is a 
matter for local authorities." 
(In the TV movie scene, the civil rights workers, who are watching the TV 
screen, hoot at Hoover's statement.) 
Calvin Clements Sr., semi-retired at 74 (he has a book being circulated in New 
York, a screenplay being proposed for cable, a musical "kicking around"), was 
told back in 1974 to avoid any contact with the families. But he feels that his 
"Attack on Terror" still is "100% accurate." 
He studied articles, 3,000 pages of trial testimony and "all the FBI 
investigative reports." (In his writing career he had done episodes of the old 
"The FBI" series.) 
"I had to verify it all," he said. "I had an (FBI) agent with me all the time." 
One recent night he came across "Mississippi Burning" on a cable channel and 
"after an hour I just turned it off, it was so false. It was disgraceful." 
Frederick Zollo, producer of "Mississippi Burning," said he was "surprised 
about the enormous reaction." 
He said the movie was intended as "a drama, as powerful as we could make it, 
using the three murders as a backdrop to the study of racism in Neshoba County 
(changed here to Jessup County) and in the larger view of America. 
"I think we certainly succeeded in that respect. I think we galvanized a 
nation, which a good movie should do. We made America think about the events of 
that summer and the events in America today, whether it be in Boston (the Carol 
Stuart murder) the last few weeks, in Howard Beach (the racial incident in 
Queens, N.Y.) or in that county in Georgia (Forsyth) where no blacks live 
because of what occurred decades ago (KKK lynchings in 1912)." 
They didn't set out to remake a true story but, he said, many memorable events 
were carefully reproduced from newsreel footage, including the march on 
downtown Philadelphia, Miss., and the speech over James Chaney at the funeral. 
In publicity notes, director Parker wrote that "Our film cannot be the 
definitive film on the (Movement). Our heroes are still white. And in truth, 
the film would probably never have been made if they weren't," meaning that the 
studios wouldn't finance it out of fear that the white audience might not 
attend a film with black heroes. 
Goodman said that "Mississippi Burning" did serve to arouse interest, 
"especially among young people," who hadn't known anything about that time in 
the South. 
"At the same time," Chaney put in, "the image that younger people got (from the 
film) about the times, about Mississippi itself and about the people who 
participated in the movement being passive, was pretty negative and it didn't 
reflect the truth." 
The survivors both acknowledged inaccuracies in the new TV representation. 
Chaney, who used to "hang out" with his older brother because their mother 
always pressed James into baby-sitting, is shown in playing with his Slinky on 
the stairs at the civil rights office in Meridian. 
"I don't know if we had Slinkys in Mississippi at that time," Ben Chaney said. 
"I know we used to play out in front of the office with marbles and throw rocks 
at girls," he noted, adding a smile at the recollection. 
Goodman had minor quibbles "but I'm not sure they will interact on the impact 
of the film." 
The image of son Andrew, for example. He trained with the workers at the 
orientation sessions at Western College for Women in Oxford, Ohio, prior to 
"invading" Mississippi. He had even played a racist heckler during the fierce 
indoctrination sessions. Then he was among the vanguard heading into 
Mississippi but was there only one day before the deadly trip into the wilds of 
Neshoba County. 
In the film, Andrew Goodman is depicted as a boy who just stumbles into 
trouble. But his mother insisted, "Andy knew what it was all about. (It came) 
from his family life. We were always involved in all kinds of demonstrations, 
pro-labor, anti-fascist. That's the story of our lives. Andy was not an 
innocent." 
But, again, that misportrayal doesn't affect the essence of the film, the 
mother said. 
She noted that many of the so-called Northern agitators were "more than 
students," that many were "people from the religious community, they were 
lawyers, they were doctors, a whole cross section of people who came from far 
from Mississippi. They came from lives of relative security. They knew they 
weren't going down there for a holiday." 
Chaney would have preferred more emphasis on members of the Mt. Zion Methodist 
Church -- the one that was burned by the Klan in the incident that brought the 
three young men into the night -- "and their attitudes and how come this church 
out of all the churches in Neshoba County was the one that stood up first. What 
made those people do that?" 
Chaney referred to some dialogue in the film that some black leaders were not 
willing to accept leadership of white people. "(They felt that) this was their 
movement and they didn't believe white people could stand up under the line of 
fire anyway. And when people like Michael Schwerner came down and stood up on 
the line of fire, he got the respect of the people of Mississippi -- blacks, 
young and old -- and from then on they were able to work together." 
Goodman added that there were very few defections after the murders: "That's 
something that has to be known too." 
Tova Laiter, now president of Freddie Fields Productions, first heard the name 
James Chaney in 1984 from writer Ben Stein. Eddie Murphy's "people" 
(management) told her that they were looking for movie ideas, and she in turn 
was discussing possibilities with Stein. 
"A friend who had been a state trooper in Arkansas," recalled Stein, "told me a 
story about how he had known state troopers in Mississippi who had known Chaney 
and said what was unknown about him was that he was funny, a mimic, a comical 
guy. He could do imitations like Eddie Murphy." 
"Why," asked Laiter, "had I never heard of this James Chaney? I thought, 'How 
come I don't know about this great story?' " 
Laiter hadn't known that much American history. She was raised in Israel, 
studied art and philosophy at Hebrew University and served as a sergeant in 
Army communications in the War Room in Jerusalem during the Six Day War. She 
remembered with some pride, "I gave the historic announcement that 'We have the 
Wailing Wall in our hands!' " 
"As it turned out, Murphy didn't like it," she said. "His career was just 
getting rolling and he didn't know if audiences would accept him dying." 
But she was intrigued about the Mississippi summer and started making the 
rounds, talking to perhaps 20 people: "Everybody was patronizing. They said, 
'Tova, you know better than that.' It's true, if you take on a black subject 
matter, you're going on a suicidal mission." 
In 1987, she had a "pitch" meeting with Mark Canton, then Warner Bros. 
president of worldwide motion picture production (now executive vice president 
of the corporate Warners): "She presented the story with such passion and it 
got to me so quickly," recalled Canton, who had studied contemporary American 
history at UCLA. "It touched a nerve in me. I thought it was incredibly 
relevant and, from the dramatic viewpoint, this story was very emotional and 
very accessible." 
He talked with Lucy Fisher (now executive vice president for theatrical 
production at Warners) and the deal was set by the end of the day, with rare 
speed. 
"It seemed like a really human way to tell a story that was a story that still 
affects the nation," Fisher said. "Most things are didactic, but this one you 
could use the eyes and ears of Mickey and James." 
Laiter met with 10 or 12 writers, finally working out a script deal with 
Stanley Weiser, who had written "Wall Street" and "Project X." "My approach was 
to isolate the story on Chaney and Schwerner," Weiser said. "I thought about 
making it a 'buddy film' -- those dreaded words." 
Then they set about researching, talking with the old Freedom Summer gang in 
Boston, New York, New Orleans, Meridian. 
When "Mississippi Burning" hit big, Warners tensed. "From the management point 
of view, we had a wonderful script and we would have been happy to wait a year 
or two or three," said Fisher, "and then come at it again." But "Tova was 
incredibly intent on moving it forward," Lucy Fisher said. Laiter decided she 
didn't want to wait for a feature production and agreed to release the script 
for a TV production. 
Enter TV producer David L. Wolper. About a year ago, he recalled, "I was having 
dinner with Bob Daly (chief executive officer of Warners) and saying, 'Are 
there any films that you're not making, with scripts that may make good 
television things?' He said, 'Yes, as a matter of fact.' " 
Wolper then became executive producer of the project and the script was 
reworked for TV use. "The violence and language were a little coarser than for 
television, but it could easily be adapted," said Tony Masucci, NBC vice 
president for movies and miniseries. "The only important thing we lost because 
of time was the James Chaney relationship with a young woman in his home town. 
There were some lovely moments but we had to trim it." 
With such "true-life" or "fact-based" dramas, the question always lingers about 
what is true representation and what isn't. It's obviously a heavier question 
with heavier topics. 
Wolper, a veteran of the docudrama genre, insists, "Unless it's a court trial 
or Richard Nixon's office, nothing between two people is recorded on tape. So a 
writer creates dialogue. So right away you're taking dramatic liberties." 
He said that the purpose of the docudrama is to reflect "the emotional sense" 
of the incident. 
Director Roger Young, who shot the TV movie around Atlanta, went into 
Mississippi to investigate: "I was very concerned that we do it as right as we 
could. I drove the same roads, I went to the killing sites. I went to the 
church. "I talked to people on the streets, which was quite interesting. 
Especially this one man, running a drug store there. I said, 'What did you 
think of "Mississippi Burning?" He said, 'Well, you know, it was an OK movie.' 
I told him I was from out of town and 'What did you feel about this kind of 
thing?' He said, 'You see how old I am?' I said, 'Yeah.' He said, 'Well, I 
think they got what they deserved.' " 
Carolyn Goodman is a quiet, thoughtful woman who speaks with precision and 
authority and expresses a strong will. Ben Chaney has a feisty side apparently 
built up over years of fervor over matters of civil rights. Even within weeks 
of the discovery of the bodies, little Ben was in a group of two dozen 
demonstrators who were jailed for trying to register at all-white Meridian 
schools. "At 12 you don't feel you're too small to take on the world," he said. 
He has ridden the roller coaster of emotions of the civil rights movement. 
After repeated threats, the family moved to Harlem, where young Ben eventually 
began hanging with Black Panther militants. 
In 1970, at age 17, after a wild excursion with two friends into the South that 
exploded in the killings of four people in South Carolina and Florida, he was 
tried three times on felony murder charges. He was acquitted on one charge and 
found guilty on two, with mercy recommended in both cases since it was 
acknowledged that he didn't participate in the actual murders but drove the car 
and served as the lookout for his two young black companions, one a 19-year-old 
Vietnam War veteran. He served 13 years in prison. 
"I had a regular parole scheduled in the year 2014," Chaney said. "Ramsey Clark 
(former U.S. attorney general and a major civil rights activist) got into my 
case in 1980 and he finally convinced the Florida Parole Board to give me a 
hearing in 1983 and I was released in September." 
For a time he worked as a clerk in Clark's law practice in New York, and Clark 
donated office space for the year-old James Earl Chaney Foundation, dedicated 
primarily to voter registration drives. 
"But now I'm moving back to Mississippi," Chaney said last week. "We're going 
to station the foundation in Meridian. We're trying to look for a site there to 
put a building up or maybe rent some space in the meantime, hopefully by the 
end of the summer." 
So Chaney goes home. Will the New Mississippi be any different than the Old 
Mississippi? One question put to him during a press conference here was, "What 
were the decent white people in Mississippi doing at this time?" 
Chaney returned, "I don't know of any decent white person in Mississippi in 
1964." 
Research for this article was provided by Harry Fey and Doug Conner of The 
Times Editorial Library. 
