JUST JACK; 
COUNCIL WRITE-IN CANDIDATE SAYS LESS NAME IS MORE 
In the beginning there were only two of them: Fabian and Dion. Then came other 
famous single-namers, such as Cher and Madonna. Now make way for Jack. 
Jack is the irrepressible Jack McGrath, a political consultant running as a 
write-in candidate in the Los Angeles City Council's 5th District. In a move 
that has sent election officials scurrying for a legal opinion, McGrath says he 
wants to jettison his last name and be formally known strictly as Jack. 
"I think single names are catchy," McGrath said. "It's like Gov. George 
Deukmejian. Everybody knows him as Duke. With me, it will just be Jack." 
McGrath, 43, has already hit the streets with his campaign theme. As he extends 
his hand to 5th District voters riding buses, walking and eating in 
restaurants, McGrath is confidently proclaiming: "Jack is back!" 
Simplicity's Appeal 
McGrath said he will highlight the single-name gimmick throughout the campaign. 
The North Hollywood resident, who is running against his former boss, 
Councilman Zev Yaroslavsky, said the simplicity of one name appeals to the 
"street people" who are the target of his grass-roots campaign. 
"I'll take street power over institutional power any day," McGrath said. 
"There's a lot of that spirit alive. No one has tapped it, but I will." 
Joe Giles, the assistant chief of the city's elections division, confirmed that 
McGrath is seeking one-name status in the election. Giles said he has forwarded 
the request to the city attorney's office for a legal opinion. 
Giles could not recall another instance in which a write-in candidate used a 
single name. He also could not say when the city might issue a ruling. 
"It's purely up to the city attorney's office at this point," Giles said. 
Failed to Get Signatures 
McGrath entered the council race as a traditional candidate but was 
disqualified Saturday when he failed to get the 500 signatures needed to 
qualify for the ballot. McGrath blamed himself, saying he had trusted others to 
collect signatures. The idea of running as a write-in candidate came shortly 
afterward, McGrath said, as he sat on the beach considering his options. 
"I did some real soul-searching," McGrath said. "And I realized I could do a 
better job this way. There's only one Jack who's a write-in candidate." 
The filing deadline for write-in hopefuls in the April 11 City Council primary 
is March 28. If McGrath is allowed to run as a single-name candidate, his 
backers will be able to vote for him by writing "Jack" on their ballots. 
Presumably, they would also have the option of scribbling his full name. 
But Yaroslavsky's campaign manager, Karin Caves, said she doubts that many 
voters will do either. "This is a guy who couldn't even get 500 voter 
signatures to support him," Caves said. 
McGrath, however, is approaching the unlikely campaign with self-confidence. 
The former Yaroslavsky campaign manager and deputy, who made a name for himself 
in political circles with his flair for publicity, has proclaimed himself the 
people's candidate. As have Yaroslavsky's other opponents, Westwood activist 
Laura M. Lake and traffic consultant Ryan Snyder, McGrath has pledged that he 
would fight for a better quality of life in 5th District areas, such as 
Westwood, Beverly-Fairfax, Sherman Oaks and North Hollywood. 
McGrath is campaigning full time and plans to produce a cable television 
advertisement stressing his single-name theme. He also has a new campaign theme 
song, called "In the Streets," by newcomer Ivan Neville. 
"I play it all the time," McGrath said. "I love people in the street." 
