ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: TUSTIN; 
COUNCIL SUED OVER ELECTION DECISIONS 
In an unusual action Monday, City Clerk Mary Wynn sued the City Council in an 
attempt to force it to approve polling places, precincts and precinct boards 
for the scheduled April 10 election. 
The suit, which names the four individual council members, the council as a 
body and the city, is necessary so that Wynn can prepare for the election, City 
Atty. James G. Rourke said. The council deadlocked last week on the election 
details, usually a routine matter. Councilmen John Kelly and Earl J. Prescott, 
who oppose holding the elections in April instead of in November, voted against 
a resolution to approve the election details. 
The state election code and state law require City Council members to approve 
such details 29 days before the scheduled election, or March 12 in this case, 
said Robert Owen of the Costa Mesa law firm Rutan &amp; Tucker, which is 
handling the suit for the city. 
Superior Court Commissioner Julian Cimbaluk set a March 9 hearing date for the 
case, although Prescott and Kelly asked that the hearing be delayed until the 
city retains a defense attorney to represent them. 
Prescott said that state law entitles him to a lawyer and pointed out that 
former Councilman Ronald B. Hoesterey was allowed to choose his own attorney 
when Prescott and Kelly filed a suit against him, contesting his residency. 
Rourke said a decision has not been made about whether to hire defense 
attorneys for Prescott and Kelly. 
"If the City Council decides to hire someone and pay for their defense, they 
can," Owen said. 
Prescott and Kelly say this latest suit is a good chance to settle the question 
of Hoesterey's residency at the time of the Nov. 20 meeting, the date when the 
council majority voted to move elections to April. Although the suit by 
Prescott and Kelly was dismissed in January, the judge never ruled on the 
residency question. 
Prescott and Kelly say that if the court rules that Hoesterey was not a 
resident at the time of his vote on the election change, the April 10 election 
date is invalid. But Owen said that will not be decided in this case. 
"It takes a specific action to throw out a law," Owen said, adding that the 
issue of Hoesterey's residency is irrelevant in this case.SHANNON SANDS 
