THEY HOLD ON TO WIN BY A HARE; 
PRO BASKETBALL: NO TORTOISES, THE 76ERS NEARLY OVERCOME ANOTHER LAKER FAST 
START/SLOW FINISH BEFORE L.A. WINS, 122-116. 
Their habitual second-half lulls had become quite irksome as a topic of 
conversation among the Lakers. But they still seem incapable of preventing 
them, perhaps because they usually win anyway. 
It happened again Friday night against the Philadelphia 76ers but, this time, 
the Lakers were in no mood to dwell on the negative. They just seemed so happy 
-- no, relieved -- to finally put away the 76ers, 122-116, before 17,505 at the 
Forum. 
Leading by 23 points and shooting nearly 70% early in the third quarter, the 
Lakers entered another prolonged slump, from which they barely emerged in time. 
That, too, is another Laker habit, which might be why they are not overly 
concerned. 
"It happens," Magic Johnson said. "Right now, I'm not going to worry about it. 
If it continues on, I'll worry. We've just got to kick it up a gear." 
Indeed, another victory was all that really mattered to the Lakers, who 
improved their NBA-best record to 40-12. The Laker victory, combined with 
Portland's loss to the Chicago Bulls, increased the Lakers' Pacific Division 
lead to 3 1/2 games over the Trail Blazers. 
The Lakers' level of concern equaled the quality of competition. They were 
angry Wednesday night, when they blew most of a 14-point lead at Denver and won 
by two points. Friday, however, they lost an even more significant lead to the 
34-20 76ers, one of the NBA's hottest teams. 
While it may seem like quibbling, one Laker -- center Mychal Thompson -- said 
he is concerned about the day when the Lakers lose a big lead and do not 
recover. 
"It's getting ridiculous now, the way we blow double-digit leads," said 
Thompson, who suffered a sprained ankle during the fourth quarter but continued 
playing. "We're getting complacent out there. There's no excuse for a veteran 
team like this to let that happen time and again. 
"If we don't stop it soon, it's going to come up and kick us in the butt. When 
you run the 100-meter sprint, you don't want to cross the finish line walking 
with your back to it." 
The 76ers cut the Laker lead to four points with 5:10 to play and pulled to 
four again with five seconds to play. 
But Coach Pat Riley, who has publicly fretted about the Lakers' habit of 
blowing leads, was satisfied by his team's effort. He said it was nearly 
impossible for the Lakers to maintain their torrid first-half pace. Thus, he 
felt Philadelphia's second-half resurgence, led by Charles Barkley and Derek 
Smith, was inevitable. 
"It was a great win," Riley said. "I never felt like we'd lose the game. When 
it got to four points, it gave us something to think about. But I don't think 
there has been a big lead this year when we haven't lost part of it. That 
happens. 
"The only way we were going to lose was if we quit, and I knew that wasn't 
going to happen." 
The Laker transformation from world beater to Team Vulnerable did not begin 
immediately. They played about as well as they are capable in the first half, 
making 69.7% of their shots to take a 67-51 lead. Their fast break was in full 
throttle, and Byron Scott scored 21 points -- most from the outside. 
But after seven consecutive points in the first 1:11 of the third quarter gave 
the Lakers a 23-point lead, they watched it slowly dissolve. 
Barkley scored 20 of his game-high 32 points in the second half. But the prime 
mover for the 76ers was Smith, who had 15 points and resembled the shooting 
guard he was before suffering a knee injury with the Clippers, circa 1984-85. 
At one point early in the fourth quarter, Smith scored seven consecutive points 
-- enabling the 76ers to pull to seven points with 8:17 to play. The 76ers 
pulled to 109-105 when Ron Anderson made a jump shot with 5:10 to play. 
That is when Johnson emerged. He made two free throws with 5:00 minutes left, 
then sank a three-point shot with 4:19 left to make the Laker lead 114-105. 
But the 76ers would not yield, and Johnson needed to strike again. He made a 
three-point play with 1:37 left, then another drive with 1:17 left for a 
120-112 lead. 
Philadelphia made another run, but the Lakers had pulled through again. 
The Lakers had a right to be happy with the victory, regardless of what 
transpired in the second half. They made 58% of their shots. A.C. Green scored 
24 points and had eight rebounds. Scott finished with 24 points, all but two in 
the first half. And, Johnson had 22 points and 17 assists. 
It was a combination of Laker fatigue and a change of 76er strategy that 
contributed to the second-half turnaround. The half-court trap the 76ers threw 
at the Lakers failed in the first half, because the Lakers were able to make 
their outside shots. 
In the second half, Coach Jim Lynam basically abandoned the trap and went to a 
more conventional double-team on the ball. And the 76ers became the offensive 
aggressors. 
"Usually, teams that are down a whole bunch of points tend to give up," Lynam 
said. "But we came out in the second half and made it a ballgame." 
That is the Lakers' point. Most of the players felt it unfair to lump Friday's 
blown lead into the same category as Wednesday's blown lead against Denver or 
last-week's blown lead at Sacramento. 
"Give them credit," Johnson said. "They are a good team. They can capitalize on 
any situation. We played a good game to beat them. We just had that stretch 
where we hit nothing. We were just missing shots. It was different than Denver. 
We made turnovers (in Denver), and then you're upset. Tonight, we just didn't 
hit the shots." 
Said Riley: "It wasn't so much a letdown on our part this time. They were 
hitting the threes. Derek Smith went off on us. Ron Anderson went off, and 
Charles kept banging away. It just happens. It's hard to maintain that type of 
lead against that type of team." 
Laker Notes 
Michael Cooper, in his first game back after hitting his head on a metal stair 
while diving for the ball in San Antonio on Tuesday night, played eight minutes 
in the first half before sitting out the rest of the game because of a sore 
neck related to his fall. . . . The Lakers have 10 consecutive victories 
against the 76ers. 
James Worthy said his severely bruised right shoulder makes playing painful. 
"As long as it doesn't get hit during the game, it's OK," Worthy said. "But it 
gets hit every time I go through the lane." During timeouts, Worthy applies a 
heating pack on his shoulder. "Mostly, to keep (the shoulder) loose. I don't 
want it to get stiff." 
Vlade Divac's English has improved enough so that he now can sing the national 
anthem. "I've known the words for two or three weeks," he said. Divac paused, 
then added: "I know last word -- freeeee." Divac says he wants to teach 
teammates Mark McNamara the Yugoslav anthem. McNamara has been learning 
Serbo-Croatian, Divac's native tongue, this season and now can converse with 
Divac in two languages. 
The starting time of the Lakers' game at Denver on April 8 has been changed 
from 2 p.m. to 5 p.m., at the Nuggets' request. . . . The Lakers are off today 
and will play the Utah Jazz on Sunday night at the Forum. 
