SACRAMENTO FILE: ASSEMBLY 
Floor Action: 
Earthquakes: Passed and sent to the Senate on a 61-0 vote a resolution (ACR 11) 
by Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) to designate April as Earthquake 
Preparedness Month. The resolution also asks Californians to take appropriate 
steps to protect themselves and their property in case of a major temblor. 
Women's History Month: Passed and sent to the Senate on a voice vote a 
resolution (ACR 12) by Assemblywoman Bev Hansen (R-Santa Rosa) to designate 
March as Women's History Month. 
Bill Introductions: 
High Tech: AB 898 by Assemblyman Rusty Areias (D-Los Banos) would establish a 
special high-technology task force to develop programs for California's 
universities and colleges to help graduates better prepare for high-tech jobs. 
Insurance: AB 850 by Assemblyman Lloyd G. Connelly (D-Sacramento) would 
strengthen provisions of the voter-approved Proposition 103 that permit banks 
to compete with insurance companies in the sale of insurance policies. 
Cost-of-Living Raises: AB 780 by Assemblyman William P. Baker (R-Danville) 
would eliminate the cost-of-living increase in benefits paid to recipients of 
aid to families with dependent children and the state program for the aged, 
blind and disabled. Gov. George Deukmejian asked for this legislation last 
month in connection with his proposed $47.8-billion state budget for the next 
fiscal year. 
Pets: AB 786 by Assemblyman Richard Polanco (D-Los Angeles) would require pet 
stores to certify that their animals are healthy at the time of sale. It would 
also require pet stores to replace an animal or refund a customer's money if 
the pet died or became ill within 14 days of purchase. 
Senate 
Floor Action: 
Transportation: Confirmed on a 36-0 vote the gubernatorial appointment of 
Robert K. Best as director of the state Department of Transportation 
(Caltrans). 
Gang Violence: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 36-0 vote a resolution (SCR 
28) by Senate President Pro Tem David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles) to designate 
March 10-12 as statewide days of prayer for the victims of gang violence. 
Bill Introductions: 
Voter Registration: SB 652 by Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) would establish a 
pilot program in the San Fernando Valley to register high school students to 
vote. Schools would be paid $1 for each new voter registered. 
Water Pollution: SB 601 by Sen. Gary K. Hart (D-Santa Barbara) would direct the 
state Water Resources Control Board to adopt minimum fines for violations -- 
and require regional water quality control boards to charge those amounts or 
more for violations. 
Boxing: SB 599 by Sen. Joseph B. Montoya (D-Whittier) would require 
professional boxers or martial arts fighters to demonstrate their ability to 
perform before receiving a state license. 
Smoking: SB 591 by Sen. Nicholas C. Petris (D-Oakland) would prohibit smoking 
by minor inmates of juvenile detention facilities and ban the sale of tobacco 
products to those inmates. 
