TRIP OF THE WEEK: DANA POINT MAKES PLANS FOR WHALE OF A SHOW 
This city, which was incorporated as the 28th city in Orange County on Jan. 1, 
encompasses some of the state's most valuable and beautiful beach front. 
In addition to sweeping north to take in the Pacific shore section of Laguna 
Niguel, boundaries of the 7-week-old city extend south to include the 
ocean-front enclave of Capistrano Beach. 
New lodgings, parks and other attractions have changed the look of Dana Point. 
More enticements for visitors are on the horizon. 
Soon to break ground is a $300- to $400-million hotel and recreation complex, 
the Monarch Beach Resort, by Hawaii's mega-resort developer Chris Hemmeter. 
sh Festival of Whales 
The next three weekends include the 17th annual Festival of the Whales at Dana 
Point Harbor. Entertainment and such marine activities as whale-watch cruises 
are scheduled on Saturdays and Sundays from Saturday through March 11. 
Get there from Los Angeles by driving south on Interstate 5 to the Pacific 
Coast Highway/California 1 off-ramp that curves back north. At the second 
stoplight, turn left on Dana Point Harbor Drive to the boat basin. 
For a hilltop view of nearly 2,500 yachts and sailboats tied up in the harbor, 
drive right at the first street, Park Lantern, which climbs quickly to the new 
Lantern Bay Park. Its inviting lawn also attracts kite flyers, Frisbee tossers 
and picnickers. 
The short street also leads to the 17-month-old Dana Point Resort, noted for 
its Cape Cod-style architecture. In addition to ocean views from most of its 
350 rooms, the hotel features three tennis courts and a health club. 
 Sunday Attraction 
Champagne brunch is on Sunday (11 a.m. to 3 p.m) in the resort's restaurant, 
Watercolors. Open daily for meals. For reservations, call toll-free (800) 
533-9748 or (714) 661-5000. 
Room rates begin at $160, but through April 9 Dana Point Resort has a "Whale of 
a Time" package that costs $134 per couple for a one-night stay, two breakfasts 
and whale-watching tickets. 
A left turn at Park Lantern leads into a popular coastal campground and picnic 
spot, Doheny Beach State Park. 
Thirty-two of the 120 campsites are on the ocean front; reserve through Mistix 
($12 a night, no hookups). Day-use entry for picnicking, fishing or surfing 
costs $4 per vehicle. 
Farther along the harbor drive, turn left at Golden Lantern to reach 
restaurants and shops at the edge of the marina and the departure piers for 
whale-watch cruises aboard vessels of Dana Wharf Sportfishing. 
Observation boats leave the harbor for 90-minute outings at 10 a.m., noon and 2 
p.m. every day. On weekends there are extra trips at 8 a.m. and 4 p.m., except 
during the whale festival when tours depart every hour. Tickets cost $10; 
children under 12 and senior citizens are $6. Call (714) 496-5794. 
 Parachute Launch 
Parasailing is the new sport at Dana Point Harbor. An innovative launch system 
lets riders take off (and land) from the tow boat so fliers don't get wet. 
Children under 100 pounds can take a tandem ride. For eight minutes the cost is 
$38 per person. Call (714) 831-1850. 
Another left turn from the harbor drive onto Island Way bridges the boat basin 
to the breakwater, where Dana Drive parallels the main channel. Look for the 
statue of Richard Henry Dana, the seagoing author of "Two Years Before the 
Mast" who is the new city's namesake. 
Anchoring either end of Dana Drive are two restaurants with harbor views: 
Delaney's, which specializes in seafood, and Reuben's that is also Michael's 
Supper Club. On a bluff beyond the boat-turning basin are Cannons and the Chart 
House, two other restaurants that view the harbor. 
At the far end of Dana Point Harbor Drive, visitors are welcome at Orange 
County Marine Institute, soon to be enlarged and renamed the Marine Institute 
at Dana Point Harbor. Sea creatures are on exhibit, along with a replica of 
Dana's sailing ship, the Pilgrim. 
Tours of the 1830s-era square-rigger that's anchored in the harbor will be 
offered Feb. 26 and March 5 during the Festival of the Whales. Special lectures 
and whale-watch tours are planned by the institute early on festival Saturdays; 
call (714) 496-2744 for information. 
 Maritime Museum 
An occasional visitor to the harbor is the state's official tall ship, the 
Californian, owned and operated by the Nautical Heritage Society. Its 
headquarters is a small but fascinating maritime museum at 24532 Del Prado. 
Drive up the steep road at the end of the harbor, turn right on Green Lantern, 
then right on Pacific Coast Highway (which becomes one way) and look for a 
lighthouse-like building. Inside are high-seas memorabilia from the 1800s and 
models of historic sailing ships. Open 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. except Sundays and 
Mondays. 
A left turn on Coast Highway takes you north to Ritz-Carlton Drive and the 
Ritz-Carlton Laguna Niguel. From the resort's 150-foot-high site on the cliffs 
above the Pacific, people can keep an eye out for migrating gray whales. 
Rooms at the Ritz, the only hotel in Southern California awarded Mobil's five 
stars and the Automobile Assn.'s five diamonds, begin at $185 a night and rise 
to $2,000 for the Presidential Suite. For reservations, call toll-free (800) 
241-3333 or (714) 240-2000. 
Other lodgings include the Marina Inn at the harbor and the Capistrano Bay Inn 
and Edgewater Inn across Coast Highway at Capistrano Beach. Call the Dana Point 
Chamber of Commerce for a list of accommodations and restaurants -- (714) 
496-1555. 
Round trip from Los Angeles to Dana Point is 104 miles. 
