TRAGEDY RETOLD 
There is a weary sadness to the story emerging from the present Senate hearings 
into allegations of corruption in the federal programs dealing with American 
Indians. The hearing transcripts will take their place on federal bookshelves 
next to other volumes that tell the same shameful tale over and over again -- a 
tale of distrust, deceit and neglect. There is an occasional chapter of 
well-meaning paternalism, but an overwhelming theme of exploitation. 
Worst of all may be a pervasive perception that nothing can be done to make the 
situation right. This is not to suggest that the Select Committee on Indian 
Affairs is doomed in its attempt to identify the failings of the present system 
under the Bureau of Indian Affairs in the Department of the Interior, or to 
propose some new program that will work. The committee must make every effort 
to do so. 
Unfortunately, the testimony that most people will remember will deal with the 
alleged corruption perpetrated by both federal bureaucrats and tribal leaders. 
As the hearings continue, there is likely to be particular emphasis on the 
excesses of Peter MacDonald Sr., the controversial leader of the Navajo Nation, 
and items like the $650,000 spent to remodel his own offices and business deals 
with relatives and buddies. 
The MacDonald story contributes to the myth that while Indians want to preserve 
tribal sovereignty and seek self-determination, they just cannot be trusted to 
handle their own affairs. Playing to this theme are those who promote the 
notion of free enterprise or assimilation for the Indians but insist on an end 
to tribal federal assistance in exchange, leaving the impression that the only 
alternatives are poverty and welfare. 
There are success stories throughout the nation of thriving Indian 
economic-development programs. But the hulks of failure abound as well, like 
the abandoned Sun Lodge Motel and the closed carpet mill across the road from 
the Custer Battlefield on the Crow reservation in southern Montana. These were 
the sort of tribal enterprises that were to create jobs for the unemployed and 
help keep young Crows from moving away. 
Tribal leaders insist that the businesses failed because they were ill 
conceived and "they weren't our ideas to begin with." Truman Jefferson, the 
tribal secretary, said in an interview with the High Country News that the mill 
was doomed from the start. Such failures then become stock examples of Indian 
ineptitude at the white man's business. "Now when we try to do something they 
refer back to the Sun Lodge and the carpet mill," Jefferson said. Down on the 
Navajo reservation, some of the entrepreneurial projects are beginning to turn 
sour, too. Thus the perception is reinforced that self-help programs are bound 
to fail no matter how much the well-intentioned non-Indian capitalists try to 
help. It is an age-old story that has affected attitudes toward Indians ever 
since colonial days -- the notion of an unbridgeable cultural gap. 
But the record also suggests that whites still are too quick to exploit the 
Indians' lack of expertise and to take advantage of both inter-tribal and 
intra-tribal political rivalries in promoting deals. There is considerable 
evidence from the Senate hearings so far that federal bureaucrats have indulged 
in this practice or tolerated it while running Indian programs with 
considerable inefficiency and mismanagement. The federal government must move 
away from a paternalistic relationship with the tribes toward real 
partnerships, but it also must accept responsibility for its role in tribal 
economic failures. 
There have been proposals already to abolish the Bureau of Indian Affairs, or 
to reorganize it outside the Interior Department. The mere substitution of one 
federal agency with another usually does not solve the problem. In this case, 
however, the bureau may have become so stigmatized that reorganization is the 
obvious place to begin. Even so, that would be just the first step in building 
a real program of tribal self-sufficiency, pride and dignity. 
