U.S. BUREAUCRACY BLAMED IN CONFINED-SPACE DEATHS 
Just before dawn on Dec. 5, a fellow worker found Dennis Claypool and Mark 
DeMoss lying dead on their backs in a large tanker-trailer they had been 
directed to clean at a trucking company 60 miles south of Chicago. 
The two young men had died in the same way as about 3,000 other workers in the 
last decade: by breathing unsafe air in enclosed work spaces. In this case, 
federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration officials have concluded 
that DeMoss, 18, and Claypool, 21, died because all the oxygen had been sucked 
out of the tanker during a chemical operation two days earlier. 
Claypool's father, Philip, a Morris, Ill., carpenter, and occupational safety 
experts said the deaths of his son and DeMoss are symbolic of a striking 
failure by regulators. 
Every year, about 300 workers die in such incidents nationwide, and all of them 
die needlessly, according to John Moran, former director of safety research for 
the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). 
Unlike many health and safety issues affecting the workplace, there is little 
disagreement over the need for federal standards to regulate work in what are 
referred to as "confined spaces." Some employer groups, as well as numerous 
unions, have been among those urging the government to adopt such standards. 
In fact, OSHA itself first acknowledged in 1975 the need to set safety 
standards for workers entering and working in confined spaces. 
That was 14 years ago, but standards still have not been issued. In the 
meantime, according to Moran's figures, more than 4,000 people have been 
asphyxiated, poisoned or died in explosions in boilers, sewers, refinery tanks, 
silos, airplane wings and other confined spaces. Many of those died trying to 
rescue their co-workers. 
"This is a clear example of the failure of OSHA to act in an area where people 
are getting killed," said Margaret Seminario, associate director of safety and 
health for the AFL-CIO. "It's such a clear hazard and there's no question that 
it's feasible to do something." 
Outline Exists for 10 Years 
The formal outline of how federal OSHA could regulate "confined space" entries 
has existed since 1979, when NIOSH presented OSHA with a 68-page document 
describing the criteria for a standard. Since then, OSHA personnel have written 
several drafts but never took any action. 
Only a few days before Claypool and DeMoss died, OSHA finally finished its 
confined-space proposal and sent it to the Office of Management and Budget. The 
budget agency must approve the proposal before OSHA can formally present it for 
public hearings. 
A knowledgeable source in federal OSHA said the standard differs "very little" 
from the last major draft, completed in June, 1985. The source said that for 
the last three years Labor Department lawyers have been tinkering with the 
proposal and writing a lengthy preamble to the standard. 
Tom Seymour, OSHA's deputy for safety standards programs, acknowledged that 
confined-space deaths are a "serious problem" and that federal regulations are 
"long overdue." 
It should not have taken so long to get a standard written, Seymour said in a 
telephone interview. "Part of the problem (for the delay) has been priorities," 
he said, indicating that the agency considered other issues more pressing. 
Administration Opposition 
But union representatives and other safety and health officials asserted that 
much of the delay was due to the stated philosophical opposition of the Reagan 
Administration to adopting more regulations. "This reflects the Reagan 
Administration's knee-jerk, anti-regulation outlook which has obstructed all 
OSHA rule-making," said Frank Mirer, the United Auto Workers' health and safety 
director. 
Confined-space deaths are hardly a matter of concern only to union officials 
and safety engineers. At least some elements of corporate America say they have 
urged OSHA to act. 
"People are dying every year; industries recognize that," said Jo Anne 
Linhardt, a safety expert for Organization Resources Counselors Inc., a 
Washington-based consulting firm that gives professional assistance to numerous 
Fortune 500 companies. 
She said her organization had sent suggestions to federal OSHA on what should 
be in a confined space standard, as have several unions and professional safety 
groups, including the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Characteristics Listed 
A "confined space" is described by occupational safety experts as a space with 
any of the following characteristics: 
* Small openings for entry and exit. 
* Unfavorable natural ventilation. 
* An area not designed for continuous worker occupancy. 
The two most commonly occurring hazards in confined spaces, according to Moran, 
are oxygen deficiency and potentially explosive conditions created by the 
presence of methane gas. The deaths generally occur when a worker enters a 
confined space not knowing that there is a lack of oxygen or that the air is 
pervaded by toxic chemicals that can swiftly be fatal. The recent Illinois case 
appears to be a classic example, as was an incident in Burbank in 1981 when two 
city workers were overcome by hydrogen sulfide gas when they entered a manhole, 
unaware of the hazard. 
In the Illinois case, there was insufficient oxygen in the tanker that Claypool 
and DeMoss entered because, two days earlier, a chemical company had used 
nitrogen to remove a shipment of dodane, a liquid used in making detergent, 
from the tanker, according to state and federal officials. Nitrogen, an 
odorless, colorless gas, sucks oxygen out of the air. There was no sign on the 
tanker warning that breathing could be difficult, according to a wrongful death 
suit filed by Claypool's parents. 
Perhaps the most tragic aspect of the confined-space problem is that the vast 
majority of the calamities involve multiple fatalities. Generally at least one 
would-be rescuer perishes, as well as the original victim, according to 
government studies. 
Five Men Die 
For example, last June five young men died in a confined-space incident at 
Bastian Plating, a small company in Auburn, Ind. They were asphyxiated by 
hydrogen cyanide gas, which was created when Jeff Link was cleaning a 
5-foot-deep tank. Four of Link's colleagues died from the same fumes while 
trying to rescue him. Craig Fogle, 19, was the last. 
Fogle's mother, Brenda, a waitress, is now campaigning to get a federal law 
passed in hope that such tragedies will not recur. "The four boys tried to save 
the first one," she said. "It was such a waste." 
Ted Tomczak, a federal OSHA official who has been working on the confined-space 
issue for almost five years, goes further. "The core of the problem is 
rescues," he said. "To lose additional people trying to make an impossible 
rescue -- that borders on criminal." 
Moran agreed. He said that NIOSH's division of safety research did detailed 
investigation of 39 confined-space incidents from 1984 to 1987. The 
investigations took place in 17 states, ranging from California to Vermont, and 
covered a wide range of industries, including tanker trucks, aerospace and 
waste water treatment. 
The research revealed that 31% of the companies at which incidents occurred had 
written confined-space entry procedures but that none of the companies had used 
them. Only 15% of the companies had trained their workers on confined-space 
hazards; none of the companies had a rescue plan; 43% of the victims were 
would-be rescuers; 95% of the entries had been authorized by supervisors and 
29% of those who died were supervisors. None of the spaces were evaluated or 
tested (for oxygen or chemical content) before entry and none of the spaces 
were ventilated. 
Deaths Were Avoidable 
"None of these fatalities would have occurred if the NIOSH confined-spaces 
recommendations in the 1979 criteria document had been followed," Moran said. 
And reports of individual NIOSH investigations describe a series of grim 
incidents: "Three sanitation workers and one policeman die in an an underground 
sewage pumping station in Kentucky"; "Truck driver suffocates in sawdust bin in 
Pennsylvania"; "Two workers die in underground valve pit in Oklahoma"; 
"Insufficient oxygen level in sewer claims the life of plumbing contractor in 
Georgia," and on and on. 
In their defense, federal OSHA officials said that they have not been powerless 
to respond to these tragic incidents. In numerous instances, they have cited 
employers responsible for confined-space deaths by using the "general duty 
clause," a catchall provision of the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act 
designed to plug holes in instances where there has been a fatality or a 
serious life-threatening hazard. 
For example, federal OSHA's Long Beach office cited Continental Truck Wash on 
South Central Avenue and fined the company after a worker was killed there in 
an explosion on Nov. 10, 1987, while cleaning a truck tank that had recently 
contained aviation fuel. The fine was $1,400. 
Michael Wright, health and safety director of the United Steelworkers of 
America, one of the unions most actively advocating enactment of a 
confined-space standard, said that general duty clause citations were better 
than no action at all. However, he said that such citations are tougher to 
sustain, if challenged in court, than citations based on a specific standard, 
such as one regulating the amount of airborne asbestos that can be present in a 
workplace. 
Primarily Punitive 
More importantly, Wright said, general duty clause citations are primarily a 
punitive tool rather than a preventive tool. He said that inspectors "rarely" 
are able to issue such citations on a routine inspection before an accident 
occurs. "They're generally used after serious accidents," which is important, 
he said. "But the whole purpose of OSHA is to prevent the accident, not just to 
penalize someone afterward. . . . I can't understand why it's taken them so 
long to write a standard." 
OSHA's Tomczak said the process of drawing up the proposed confined-space 
standard had been long and "very frustrating." He said he could not provide a 
copy of the proposed standard until it had been cleared by the Office of 
Management and Budget. However, he was willing to describe some of its 
components. 
"We are demanding that the employer have a program to identify the (confined) 
spaces, identify hazards, evaluate their severity, determine proper controls 
for all the hazards, entry procedures, training and permits," Tomczak said. 
The reason for having a written permit, he said, is to make sure that the entry 
has been authorized and that all the proper procedures have been followed. 
Tomczak said such a system was designed to ensure that "in case something goes 
wrong, everyone knows what to do, where to go for help and how to get the 
people out of the space." 
Charles Conner, director of safety for the Los Angeles County Sanitation 
District, also said it would be useful to have a federal standard that provided 
clear criteria on how confined-space entries should be handled. Conner said the 
use of proper safety procedures and good training of employees could vastly cut 
down these deaths. He said there were no confined-space deaths among county 
sanitation district workers in the last decade, even though waste water 
treatment work is quite hazardous. 
Discussion Set Monday 
Officials of OSHA and the Office of Management and Budget will meet in 
Washington on Monday to have their first formal discussion of the proposal. 
OSHA's Seymour said there already are indications that OMB will oppose a major 
component of OSHA's proposal -- the requirement of a written permit system -- 
creating the clear possibility of further delay. Still, he said, he is hopeful 
that the proposal will be cleared by OMB "before summer" and that it can go 
into effect later in the year. 
Meanwhile, Claypool continues to grieve and has formed an organization called 
You're Not Forgotten, designed to provide moral support to the family members 
of victims of industrial accidents. "No one should have to go through what 
we're going through," said Claypool, referring both to his family's mourning 
and OSHA's failure to act. 
Claypool has been given moral support by Joseph Kinney, president of the 
Chicago-based National Safe Workplace Institute, an organization Kinney formed 
in 1987 after his brother died in a scaffolding accident. Kinney asserted that 
the long delay in enacting a confined space standard showed how the goal of 
improving workplace safety and health in this country had been perverted into 
an "abstract exercise in law and economics" by some government officials who 
set certain litmus tests that had to be met for regulations to go into effect. 
"Let's bias things in favor of safety and work backwards, rather than the 
opposite, which is what is done now," Kinney said. "If George Bush wants to 
make this a 'kinder and gentler nation,' one thing he could do is to get 
confined-space regulations enacted as soon as possible." 
