KERATOTOMY FOUND EFFECTIVE BUT UNPREDICTABLE 
Two-thirds of those who had eye surgery to correct nearsightedness were able to 
see without glasses four years later, but doctors still cannot predict the 
outcome of the costly operation, a study found. 
"Our study and others have demonstrated fairly well that there are some adverse 
outcomes, but they are relatively rare," said John Carter, coordinator of the 
study, based at Emory University in Atlanta. 
The surgery, known as radial keratotomy, is painless and can be performed on an 
outpatient basis. It involves making cuts in the cornea in a pattern resembling 
the spokes of a wheel. The purpose of the procedure, introduced in 1976, is to 
reduce the cornea's curvature. It costs about $2,000 per eye, Carter said. 
For four years, researchers tracked 390 patients who had undergone the surgery 
on one eye between March, 1982, and October, 1983. Visual sharpness was 
improved to better than 20/40 in 76% of eyes, the researchers reported. 
Most patients -- 69% -- had visual sharpness of 20/200 or worse before the 
operation, and none had sharpness better than 20/40, the researchers reported 
in Friday's Journal of the American Medical Assn. 
But 11 patients who had 20/20 vision or better with corrective lenses before 
the surgery suffered a significant loss of visual sharpness after the 
procedure, even with glasses or contact lenses, they reported. 
Infections developed in two patients, who were successfully treated with 
antibiotics and without vision loss, Carter said in a telephone interview 
Thursday. 
Among the 323 patients who had both eyes operated on, 64% said they wore no 
corrective lenses four years after the surgery, the researchers said. 
"It is generally thought to be a safe procedure -- and effective -- and it does 
result in the reduction of myopia," Carter said. 
"A major qualifier is (that) no surgeon can tell a patient exactly what his 
outcome will be," Carter said. "There's unpredictability." 
The study did reveal that patients who started with the most visual acuity, or 
sharpness, before surgery came closest to full restoration of acuity after the 
operation. 
But the unpredictability of the outcome of the procedure remains 
"unacceptable," the researchers said. 
"I think it's safe to say that the predictability is better now than it was, 
but there's still a range of outcomes," Carter said. 
Dr. Perry S. Binder of UC San Diego cautioned that radial keratotomy "is not 
intended for all myopic patients just because they wish to see without 
spectacles or contacts." 
Besides unpredictability and instability of the eye's effectiveness as a lens 
after surgery, the tissue being operated on is healthy, making surgeons who do 
not specialize in the procedure leery of it, Binder said in an editorial in 
Friday's Journal. 
