NOTEBOOK / SAM FARMER; 
ST. FRANCIS TAKES OFF AFTER HUMBLING LOSS 
The St. Francis High soccer team finished the regular season with a 16-1-1 
record -- including a 16-match winning streak that ended last week in a 3-3 
tie. That's a far cry from the school's previous record for consecutive wins 
which, according to Coach Cherif Zein, was three games. 
The Golden Knights got off to a rather inauspicious start, however, losing 
their season opener, 1-0, to Nogales. 
"It was a shocker. A real blow," said Zein, whose team missed two penalty kicks 
and outshot the Nobles, 32-4. "I disappeared from town. I drove up to the back 
of places. I wouldn't even go in the post office." 
Even crisp new uniforms couldn't help the Knights. 
"We looked sharp in our brand-new uniforms," Zein said. "But we played like 
maids of honor." 
Since then, St. Francis has broken in the uniforms and worn out most of its 
opponents. The Del Rey League champions are the No. 4 seed in the Southern 
Section 3-A Division playoffs and will open the playoffs against Lynnwood today 
at 3 p.m. at St. Francis. 
Walk this way: To the pitching staff of the Occidental College baseball team, 
the strike zone appears to be a shade larger than a postage stamp. 
In their first two games last weekend, the Tigers were outscored, 23-3, and 
walked 21 batters in a pair of losses. 
"It's not the record that upsets me, it's the walks," said Coach Jeff 
Henderson, whose team returns just three starters and includes nine first-year 
players. "We're young, but I didn't expect us not to throw a strike." 
And even though the Tigers are issuing free passes, the coach isn't planning to 
hand out walking papers. 
"By no means are we in a panic," he said. "We're remaining positive because we 
have the makings of a good ballclub. We're starting to jell a little bit and 
that's a continuing process -- it's not going to happen overnight." 
Qualifying exam: Occidental runner Michelle Trimble didn't wait long to qualify 
for the Division III track and field nationals for the third time in as many 
years. 
Trimble, a three-time cross country and two-time track All-American, ran the 
5,000 meters in 17:31.2, shattering the school record by more than 28 seconds. 
But there's a catch: Trimble doesn't plan to run the race in nationals. 
"I'm going to run it once more just to lower the school record even more," said 
Trimble, who missed the record by a second the previous time she ran the 5,000. 
"If I feel like it's my race, then I'll run it." 
Trimble hopes to qualify for the 1,500 and 3,000 meters and run those races in 
nationals, which is held May 24-27 in Naperville, Ill. She will get a chance to 
qualify at Occidental on Saturday when the Tigers play host to UC Riverside and 
Fresno. 
Ineligible: Crescenta Valley point guard Raffie Eskandarian, who averaged a 
team-high 20 points and 5.6 assists a game, was ruled academically ineligible 
last week. 
According to Crescenta Valley Coach John Goffredo, Eskandarian has been under 
duress all season because of an illness in the family. 
Add Falcons: To compensate for the loss of Eskandarian, Goffredo brought junior 
Lamar Breeding up from the junior varsity to play against Arcadia last Friday. 
Breeding says he was calm on the bench but when the coach gave him the nod, he 
felt a twinge of anxiety. 
"I really didn't expect to play that much," he said. "The crowd was up and 
yelling and I said, 'Oh no. I hope I don't mess up.' " 
Breeding took team-high honors in the loss with 19 points. 
Goffredo was taken aback by Breeding's offensive output. 
"I was looking in the score book after the game and thinking, 19?" Goffredo 
said. "His play wasn't a surprise, the points were." 
