PFIZER LOWERS PRICE OF AIDS DRUG, WILL PROVIDE SOME FREE 
Pfizer Inc., hoping to grab market share and skirt the controversy over the 
pricing of AIDS drugs that has dogged other companies, said Thursday that it 
will donate 6,000 bottles of its new antifungal agent fluconazole to AIDS and 
cancer treatment centers around the country. 
Pfizer also announced that its price for the drug in the United States, where 
the drug received Food and Drug Administration approval last month, would be 
20% to 30% below the price in Europe. It will be available through normal 
distribution channels Feb. 16. 
New York's People With AIDS Health Group, which had been importing the drug 
from overseas for desperate patients, applauded Pfizer's gestures. 
Still, Derek Hodel, the group's director, said the $284 monthly price tag for a 
typical 200-milligram-a-day maintenance dose "is very expensive and will place 
the drug outside the reach of people without access to reimbursement programs." 
Company officials and spokesmen defended the price. 
Dr. John Jefferis, a senior vice president of the New York pharmaceutical 
concern, said it is rushing the donated drugs to 200 treatment centers this 
week "to ensure that patients in critical need will receive it immediately." 
The drug, whose trade name is Diflucan, is approved to combat such AIDS 
complications as thrush, systemic candidiasis and cryptococcal meningitis. It 
can also be used in certain cancer and transplant patients who suffer from 
these conditions. 
For cryptococcal meningitis, the drug, which is usually taken in pill form, is 
expected to be a strong competitor to Bristol-Myers Squibb's amphotericin B. 
That drug, also known as Fungizone, must be administered intravenously and has 
side effects that can be so unpleasant that some people with AIDS derisively 
refer to it as "ampho-terrible." 
Pfizer, in a press release, said its drug offers economic benefits over 
amphotericin B because patients on the Pfizer product require fewer days in the 
hospital. Bristol-Myers Squibb wasn't immediately available for comment. 
The high prices of such AIDS drugs as Burroughs Wellcome's AZT and Lyphomed's 
pentamidine have sparked protests by AIDS activists and in congressional 
hearings. For the pharmaceutical industry, the scrutiny has raised the 
unwelcome specter of price controls. 
"Clearly, Pfizer is making an effort to placate the AIDS community," Hodel 
said. 
