YOUR BODY: PERSONAL HEALTH; 
SAFETY OF BOTTLED WATER IS AFFIRMED 
Ah, the irony. A North Carolina laboratory director was using Perrier water as 
a standard of purity to test municipal water quality when he detected traces of 
benzene, a chemical known to cause cancer in animals, in the bottled water, 
according to North Carolina Department of Agriculture spokeswoman Patty 
McQuillan. The director's discovery, reported immediately to the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration, ultimately led to a global recall of the French water -- 
and to hasty reassurances from experts that Perrier lovers need not fear any 
ill effects. 
But last week's recall has left bottled water drinkers wondering: Are other 
brands safe? And who keeps an eye on the industry? 
"Consumers -- especially those in California -- can rest easy," said William 
Deal, executive vice president of the International Bottled Water Assn. (IBWA), 
an Alexandria, Va.-based trade group representing most domestic bottled water 
companies and many importers. California's regulations governing bottled water 
processing are the most stringent in the nation, Deal said. 
"In the last five years, California laws governing bottled water and water 
vending machines have been revised four times, " said Jack Sheneman, a 
scientist with the Food and Drug Branch of the California Department of Health 
Services. These changes have tightened standards for maximum lead levels, among 
other substances, and spelled out more stringent regulations covering water 
haulers and others in the industry. California bottled water plants are 
inspected at least once a year, Sheneman said. 
On the federal level, bottled water is considered a food, subject to regulation 
by the FDA. (Tap water comes under the jurisdiction of the Environmental 
Protection Agency.) "FDA inspectors make regular rounds at bottling plants," 
said Emil Corwin, spokesman for the FDA's Center for Food Safety and Applied 
Nutrition. "Inspectors look for color, odor, clarity, chemical quality and 
physical plant cleanliness." 
(Traces of benzene crept into the Perrier, company officials say, because 
workers at the plant in France failed to change a filter.) 
Bottled water labeling is strictly regulated as well. Spring water, for 
instance, must flow naturally to the earth from an underground formation, while 
purified water must be filtered and then purified by reverse osmosis or 
deionization. (See accompanying glossary for explanations of other bottled 
water labels.) 
Most bottled water manufacturers belong to the IBWA, which has its own code of 
standards, supports federal labeling guidelines and insists on its own annual 
inspection of every bottling plant, which are "performed by an independent 
third party," Deal said. 
Consumers should put the Perrier contamination in perspective, says an Oklahoma 
City water expert. The traces of benzene in Perrier might have gone undetected 
in the past, says Charles Lawrence, vice chairman of the Department of 
Environmental Health at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center. 
"Our analytical capability has grown so fast we can now measure substances in 
parts-per-billion (PPBS) and parts-per-trillion (PPT) that used to go 
undetected," Lawrence said. 
He doesn't think bottled water is necessarily any safer than tap water. "But 
water -- bottled or tap -- is the safest beverage we have," he says. "There are 
more carcinogens in peanut butter, coffee, tea, beer and wine." 
