COMMENTARY; 
MORE DOESN'T NECESSARILY MEAN BETTER; 
ENVIRONMENTALISM: THE CONCEPT HAS GAINED ACCEPTANCE, BUT THE RESULTING 
BUREAUCRACY HAS FOUND MORE AND BETTER WAYS TO MASK INACTION. 
To be an environmentalist today takes less effort or conviction than it did 20 
years ago. In the 1960s and '70s, those who ventured to publicly voice their 
opinions about preserving the environment were branded "tree-huggers" or 
"earth-firsters." A person who wanted to protect natural surroundings instead 
of develop them encountered a certain derision. 
Today, with sewage spills, deteriorating air quality and landfills that can no 
longer accommodate our waste, the environment is a matter of great importance 
and concern to San Diego. 
Perhaps nowhere is environmentalism more evident here than in the politics of 
growth and development. The question of whether development is environmentally 
sensitive is a pivotal consideration in the determination as to how and where 
growth will occur. 
Indeed, it would be difficult today to find a San Diegan who would claim not to 
be an environmentalist. 
But the increased popularity of environmentalism has not necessarily meant 
better environmental policies. 
In 1963, the word "environmentalist" did not appear in Webster's dictionary. 
"Environment," however, was listed and defined as the "complex of climatic, 
edaphic (relating to soil), and biotic factors that act upon an organism or an 
ecological community and ultimately determine its form and survival." 
By the mid-1980s, "environmentalist" appeared in the dictionary as "a person 
who seeks to protect the natural environment." But "environment" was defined 
simply as "surroundings." No mention of "organic" or any relation to "ecology," 
and certainly nothing about survival. 
One could conclude that in those 20 years our concept of the environment was 
simplified while the number of people concerned about that concept increased. 
At least enough of a numerical increase to justify a mention in the dictionary. 
Or to put it a little less subtly, more and more of us became concerned about 
less and less. 
Today many people consider themselves environmentalists if they have paid their 
annual dues to an appropriate environmental organization. 
In 1972, President Nixon could be said to have made the entire federal 
government "environmentalists" when he established the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency. With the passage of the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act 
and a few other pieces of federal legislation, the members of Congress also 
became environmentalists. In his 1988 presidential campaign, George Bush 
surprised the Democrats by declaring himself an environmentalist. And a Gallup 
poll recently found that 76% of all Americans now consider themselves 
environmentalists as well. 
Who are these people and what are they doing to claim the label 
"environmentalist?" Does voting in favor of certain legislation make our 
elected officials environmentalists? Certainly the politicians argue that it 
does. 
What does that label mean in the complexities of politics today? When George 
Bush claims to be an environmentalist but his Administration attempts to block 
a worldwide conference on air pollution, has the label become meaningless? 
In today's political vernacular "environmentalism" has evolved into a 
simplified administrative concept. Ecology and survival have not only 
disappeared from the definition in the dictionary, but from the political 
reality of environmentalism as well. In their place, administrative criteria 
have been substituted. 
Today, if a government form is completed correctly, you have done your 
environmental duty. As long as a business meets the government- mandated level 
of compliance, it is being environmentally sensitive. It does not matter that 
those mandated levels are wholly inadequate or that for certain hazardous 
substances, no standards have been set. 
And what happens if a business does not fill out the appropriate government 
form? It is fined. The EPA calls it a "consent decree." The California Water 
Resources Control Board issues a "clean-up and abatement order." These 
enforcement tools do three things: They publicly slap the company on the hand, 
they require the company to pay the government a certain amount of money, and 
they usually request the company to clean up its mess. 
This method of administrative environmentalism stops the gas station down the 
street from pouring used oil in the sewer; it often even puts them out of 
business. But for Exxon or Union Carbide, they simply pay the fine, relocate 
the contaminant, and hire a public relations firm to clean up their image (not 
the mess). It is the new cost of doing business in the world of administrative 
environmentalism. 
Or take, for example, clean air. There was concern last year because many U.S. 
communities, including San Diego, recorded dramatic increases in the number of 
times the air quality failed to meet federal standards. Instead of working on 
reducing the number of days where communities are out of compliance, the EPA 
created an administrative category of "non-attainment" areas. In these areas, 
being out of compliance with clean-air regulations for 20 or 30 days is now 
acceptable. By changing the administrative classification, these areas can now 
meet the (reduced) standards if their air is unhealthy 20 or 30 days a year. 
Administrative environmentalism runs rampant in the area of toxic materials. 
Scientists working for the state of California recently recommended a ban on a 
widely used pesticide because they found it highly toxic. The state Department 
of Food and Agriculture decided that a ban would harm farmers' economic 
interests, so they created a regulation to allow them to use it only during 
certain times of year and at a reduced level. 
After all, EPA Administrator William Reilly stated recently that the government 
needs risk standards that are "flexible." And Agriculture Secretary Clayton 
Yeutter added that such standards could not be strengthened because they must 
be "uniform." So what administrative environmentalism calls for are regulations 
that are uniform and flexible at the same time. 
This brand of "environmentalism" seems to have placated the concerns of the new 
"environmentalists." And politicians are learning that "environmentalism" is a 
necessary buzzword to be elected. 
But administrative environmentalism masks inaction with rhetoric. And for the 
past 20 years, as people have called for the restoration of the environment, 
the politicians and bureaucrats have, through administrative environmentalism, 
allowed its degradation. 
The time has come for everyone to end this environmental charade, or in the 
next 20 years, there will be plenty of excuses but little environment left to 
protect. 
