DWP RECEIVES BAD NEWS FROM SNOW READING 
The two water surveyors pushed the hollow aluminum tube vertically into the 
snow, pulled it out and read the bad news for Los Angeles. 
"That's not much," said Terry Beitler of the city's Department of Water and 
Power as he looked at the tube filled with snow. 
Beitler and his partner, Chuck Maurer, were measuring the snowpack on the 
eastern side of the Sierra Nevada, which provides Los Angeles with much of its 
water. 
Their findings confirmed that the pack was smaller than it has been since the 
drought of 1976 and 1977. And there was more bad news. 
Inside their hollow pole they also found the wrong kind of snow. It was powdery 
snow with much less water than the wet, heavy snow -- called Sierra Cement -- 
that usually hits the mountain range. 
Beitler and Maurer were participating in the first of the three major snow 
surveys that will be made in the Sierra Nevada before the spring thaw. Other 
crews began similar measurements Tuesday throughout the mountain range. 
All confirmed what every skier knows: Not much snow yet this winter. A dry 
January in the Sierra has raised fears California may suffer a third year of 
drought. 
Tuesday's DWP survey, 10,000 feet up Mammoth Mountain, showed that the snowpack 
on the eastern side of the Sierra was only 70% of normal. 
Water for Aqueduct 
From these mountains flows the water for the aqueduct from nearby Owens Valley 
to Los Angeles. This is Los Angeles' cheapest, most plentiful and purest water 
supply. 
The rest of the city water comes from wells in the San Fernando Valley, some of 
which are polluted, and from the Colorado River and Northern California sources 
of the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. 
While Los Angeles' rainfall has been about 85% of normal so far this winter, 
making the drought seem remote, around Mammoth Lakes 285 miles northeast of the 
city precipitation has been 37% of normal, a DWP official said. 
"We have seen a lot of rain in Los Angeles, but it has no correlation with how 
much water we have because we get our water here," said Randy Neudeck, a DWP 
engineer. 
Without a sharp increase in snowfall, officials said, DWP reservoirs will be 
below capacity at winter's end. At present, they said, DWP reservoirs are at 
70% of capacity; Northern California reservoirs at 65% and Colorado River 
reservoirs at 100%. 
Complicating the situation is the powdery nature of the eastern Sierra snowpack 
caused by atmospheric conditions, according to Duane Buchholz, assistant 
aqueduct engineer. 
That was evident when Beitler and Maurer pulled out the tube after pushing it 
more than 40 inches into the snow. 
Snow Course' 
They did their work on a snow course, a flat area where snow has been measured 
the past 52 years to provide an accurate record of snow patterns. 
Underneath the snow was a snow pillow, a large rubber sack filled with 
antifreeze. 
As the snow presses down on the pillow and the antifreeze, instruments are 
activated, telling the depth and weight of the snow. These pillows are placed 
throughout the Sierra, some capable of sending their information to satellites 
and then to laboratories. 
But every pillow must be checked by surveyors. Some must snow-shoe or ski to 
remote survey points. 
After weighing the snow-filled tube, Beitler said it contained enough water to 
reach a level of seven inches in the tube if it were melted. 
In past years with the snow heavier and wetter, a similar amount of snow would 
have contained about three times as much water. 
Buchholz said this means that the runoff from the eastern Sierra into the 
creeks and the natural underground reservoirs of the Owens Valley will be below 
normal again this year unless February and March are especially stormy months. 
'Nothing Normal for Sierra' 
Nobody up here is ruling that out. After swapping stories with other DWP 
workers on the Sierra's eastern slope, Beitler said, "The longer I live up 
here, I realize there is nothing normal for the Sierra." 
However, the Department of Water and Power, like other water agencies around 
the state, are preparing for a third year of drought. 
They intend to continue to sell the city's conservation program, which 
generally is voluntary. 
And they intend to launch a three-year program of cloud-seeding along the 
eastern Sierra. 
DWP officials said tests and cloud-seeding operations in 24 countries over the 
past 30 years have shown that precipitation can be increased from 5% to 20%. 
It costs $100,000 for a year of cloud seeding in this area, they said. 
