WARM GREETINGS BUT SOME OLD GRIPES; 
BAKER'S HECTIC NATO TRIP HELPS SET UP PERSONAL TIES 
If it's Thursday, this must be Belgium. Or the Netherlands. Or maybe 
Luxembourg. 
For the better part of a week, Secretary of State James A. Baker III has been 
dashing across Europe on a grueling schedule, visiting 14 countries at a pace 
of three or four a day. The idea, Baker explained, was to show the United 
States' North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies that the Bush Administration 
cares about them -- and to give the new secretary "a chance to establish a 
personal relationship" with his European counterparts. 
The device of touching down in every NATO country -- including tiny Iceland and 
Luxembourg -- was pure Jim Baker, his aides noted. The secretary of state is 
the same student of political symbolism (and airborne campaigning) who helped 
Ronald Reagan and George Bush win three presidential elections. 
Baker's odyssey has found Western Europe, long taken for granted as the United 
States' premier ally, to be up for grabs again; the Bush Administration will 
have to accord to the future of Europe as much attention as it may have been 
ready to pay the Soviet Union, the Middle East and Central America. 
And it has provided a first glimpse of Baker as secretary of state: a canny 
politician-turned-diplomat who is likely to be as activist -- and as secretive 
-- as any since Henry A. Kissinger. 
How well Baker's opening gambit is working, however, is another question. Not 
surprisingly, the secretary's aides say his maiden voyage has been a smashing 
success. 
"Almost every single meeting . . . has started by an expression of appreciation 
for his doing this," said a senior official who accompanied Baker. "They have 
all acknowledged that this kind of a trip is backbreaking. . . . They know it 
is unusual. They know it is hard." 
Indeed, most countries went beyond the requirements of protocol, setting up 
meetings for Baker with their prime ministers rather than just his counterparts 
at the foreign ministries. Two, Belgium and Luxembourg, even produced their 
heads of state. 
In Britain, Baker was flown by helicopter to Chequers, the prime minister's 
country house, for Sunday lunch with a Margaret Thatcher clearly anxious to 
continue the special relationship with Washington she enjoyed in Reagan's day. 
Officials in Iceland and Norway, rarely favored with visits by top U.S. 
officials, were clearly impressed by Baker's two-hour stopovers. 
"We think it's an important start for a new Administration," said Norway's 
prime minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland, beaming. 
But in West Germany, where the Bush Administration has been pressuring the Bonn 
government on arms control issues, Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher was 
polite but stone-faced when Baker flew in. And in Ankara, a Turkish official, 
asked whether Baker's visit had made a big impression, shrugged dismissively. 
'Your secretaries of state all come about once a year," he said. 
Baker and his aides said they were delighted at the expressions of fidelity to 
the 16-nation Western Alliance that they heard at every stop. 
"We heard an awful lot of expressions not only of good will, but of a strong 
commitment to new partnership, greater cooperation, greater solidarity, greater 
unity," said a senior aide. 
But behind the customary talk of unity, there were also polite disagreements. 
The West Germans and Italians pressed for NATO discussions of negotiations to 
reduce the number of short-range nuclear missiles in Europe, a subject that the 
Bush Administration would prefer to avoid. The British asked for an easing of 
curbs on high-technology exports to the Soviet Union. The Greeks restated their 
intention of closing U.S. bases on their soil. NATO, one American diplomat was 
quoted as saying, is beginning to sound like "a badly rehearsed orchestra." 
Underlying at least some of the cacophony is the belief of many Europeans that 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is serious about eliminating the Soviet 
military threat to Western Europe. Since Gorbachev's announcement in December 
that the Soviet Union will unilaterally withdraw six tank divisions from the 
Continent, public opinion, especially in West Germany, has increasingly 
questioned the need for more military spending. 
"There's an impression there that if the Cold War is over and there's no 
threat, then why spend on defense?" a State Department official said. "It 
erodes the credibility of NATO." 
May Be More Pressing 
If Baker learned anything on his wearying passage through 15 capitals, 
including Ottawa before Europe, it may be that the very basis of NATO's 
existence can no longer be taken for granted -- and that the issue may be more 
pressing than he realized. 
"You can read all the (State Department) papers . . . but when you go into a 
room with people who have these problems on a daily basis, it's much more 
immediate," the official said. 
Several veteran diplomats gave Baker high marks for swiftly and deftly 
cementing bilateral relationships with each of the 15 allies. 
"He's a political animal, and these foreign ministers are all politicians," 
commented one aide. "He understands their needs." 
Baker has long been known for preparing almost obsessively for important 
meetings, and aides said he devoured thick briefing books before every stop on 
his trip. Whatever the method, he discoursed fluently on local concerns in 15 
capitals, from Aegean Sea armaments (in Turkey) to ground-water pollution 
around NATO air bases (in Iceland). 
He also turned on his Texas lawyer's charm at every stop, lauding his hosts or 
their devotion to the alliance and recalling, in a down-home way, his previous 
visits to their country -- as a Reagan aide, as a tourist or even, in Greece, 
as a U.S. Marine on shore leave in 1953. 
The trip, Baker's first as secretary of state, was something of a shakedown 
cruise. Baker and his closest aides, including several from the tightly knit 
group who have worked for him since he was White House chief of staff in the 
first Reagan Administration, are still getting used to the State Department and 
its slightly foreign ways. 
"You wouldn't believe the number of cables that they send to us," said one 
awe-struck aide. "We get through our meetings at midnight, we read until 2 in 
the morning and then we're up again at 6." 
While some of his aides looked noticeably rumpled and red-eyed as the week of 
six-meeting days wore on, Baker managed somehow to look crisp and fresh at 
every stop, even though he has said that he dreads such long trips because of 
the jet lag. 
"He's doing better than he usually does," said his wife, Susan, who also came 
on the trip -- but skipped a few of the more arduous days. 
So rapid-fire was Baker's schedule that some of his one-on-one meetings lasted 
only 20 minutes -- a pace which did not prevent him, in Lisbon, from extolling 
what he called an "extended discussion" with Portugal's foreign minister. 
Baker's famous self-discipline was evident, too. Walking out of royal palaces, 
ancient parliaments and modern office buildings in city after city, he 
responded to reporters' questions with a tight smile and a stock response: "We 
discussed a wide range of East-West issues." 
Halfway through the journey, criticism in Washington over Baker's holding 
millions of dollars worth of stock in Chemical New York Corp. -- a banking 
company with billions in Third World loans -- prompted the secretary of state 
to announce that he would sell all publicly held stocks in his portfolio. 
Aides said it was a painful decision -- the Chemical stock derived from 
holdings in a bank that Baker's grandfather founded, and its sale was expected 
to cost him hundreds of thousands of dollars in taxes. But Baker betrayed no 
concern over the issue before he made his decision, and said nothing about it 
afterward. 
The secretary of state's aides did, however, give away one small sign of 
frailty in their otherwise ascetic chief. 
Each evening, they said, he took a single vodka martini. 
