THE BEAUTY OF WARSAW; 
THE BEAUTIFUL MRS. SEIDENMAN BY ANDRZEJ SZCZPIORSKI TRANSLATED FROM THE POLISH 
BY KLARA GLOWCZEWSKA (GROVE PRESS: $18.95; 194 PP.) 
The first chapter of this vibrant book will convince American readers that 
author and translator are perfectly matched talents. A passionately committed 
and supremely ironic writer, Szczpiorski has had the good fortune to see the 
nuances of his native language turned into lyrical and idiomatic English. 
"The Beautiful Mrs. Seidenman" is more than a collection of short fiction but 
not quite a traditional novel; an elegant amalgam of distinct and separate 
tales linked by a few recurrent characters and a common setting. Each story has 
a distinct plot, though some are mere vignettes and others almost novellas in 
themselves. 
By the end of the book, every separate incident and personality has been 
thoroughly incorporated into a literary mural of life in Warsaw during World 
War II. Szczpiorski introduces us to aristocrats, students, artisans and 
soldiers; to mothers, widows, nuns and wives; to the Jews already sealed into 
the ghetto and the Gentiles living in uneasy limbo on its edges; every story 
illustrating how inextricably the various lives touch, clash and mesh. Often, 
we are introduced to a character before the war and follow that person for an 
entire lifetime. 
There are accidental heroes and inadvertent villains; surprising and unexpected 
switches that lend the book its extraordinary originality. As in classical 
drama, the horrors take place off-stage, leaving the reader to devise his own 
graphics. Though Szczpiorski writes from a profoundly Catholic sensibility and 
an abiding patriotism, his characters never slide into the stereotypes common 
even to the finest war novels. Here the war is background, exaggerating the 
contradictions and paradoxes in human nature without subsuming them. These are 
chronicles of accommodation and adjustment rather than of transformation. 
Szczpiorski begins with the story of an ordinary Polish tailor paying a call 
upon a distinguished judge. The vagaries of war have reversed the normal social 
order, inflating the value of well-tailored breeches and devaluing a university 
education and a noble name. Every few weeks, the judge sells his visitor 
another family heirloom, for which the tailor happily overpays "just so he 
could sit again on the threadbare little couch in this living room, with its 
odor of old objects and the dust from many books," discussing military strategy 
with the judge as if they were old friends and colleagues instead of two men 
brought together by grim necessity. 
Pawelek Kyrnski is 19 years old, and "already he understood well the difference 
between the sexes and was losing his faith in immortality." Kyrnski will 
reappear several times in the course of the book; arguing with his brilliant 
but reckless Jewish friend Henio; alone with his youthful hopes and dreams; 
enacting his crucial role in the salvation of Mrs. Seidenman. Her beauty, which 
would be mere prettiness in ordinary times, becomes a matter of life and death 
during the war, provoking the reactions that give these stories their necessary 
cohesion. 
She herself is not actually introduced until the third chapter, after having 
been denounced and imprisoned for masquerading as the widow of a Polish 
officer. By morning, the fair and winsome Mrs. Seidenman has been released, her 
life saved by a chain of fortunate encounters with Polish friends and neighbors 
who interceded because they believed her fiction. Spared by their efforts, she 
dedicates herself to preserving the scientific work of her late husband, the 
Jewish radiologist Seidenman. When we see her last, she's an elderly exile 
living out her days in Paris; a survivor who gave others the opportunity to be 
heroic without being in any way remarkable herself. She is a catalyst, 
illustrating the random workings of fate. 
Sister Weronika is a nun who once dreamed of becoming a missionary in Africa 
but who has settled instead for service in Warsaw, where her goal is "to bring 
to God all of earth's children -- the near and the far away, the white, the 
black, the yellow and those even more exotic. If there was any coldness in her 
heart, then it was only toward Jewish children, for it is one thing to have 
never come to know God, and something altogether different to have known and to 
have crucified him." Yet despite her prejudices and misgivings, Sister Weronika 
saves scores of children from the Nazis. She drills them in new rituals and 
tirelessly rehearses them in their strange new identities, having convinced 
herself that God has merely changed the locus of her mission. Imperfect but 
splendid, Sister Weronika lingers in the mind long after a conventionally 
saintly figure would have faded. 
Though the author has clearly attempted to present his Nazis as subtly as he 
portrays his Poles and Jews, evil has fewer guises than good. Despite a 
conscientious effort to explain the character of Stuckler, the son of a poor 
miller who becomes an officer in the SS, Szczpiorski is far more successful 
with his own countrymen. 
Naturally idealistic but made cynical by a tormented history, the enduring 
spirit of Poland is revealed here in all its complexity by a writer whose love 
for his country is tempered by a profound understanding of its every strength 
and weakness. 
