ELBOW ROOM IN EAST EUROPE; 
SOVIET ALLIES, YES, BUT NO LONGER FAITHFUL SERVANTS 
Today the winds of change blow from the Soviet Union to Eastern Europe and not 
the other way around -- and most East European regimes, making use of their 
newly granted if still limited autonomy, are dissociating themselves from 
Mikhail Gorbachev's policies of reform. Most are, in fact, united against 
almost everything he stands for, and they are unwilling to follow his example. 
With only Hungary and Poland backing Gorbachev, and emulating especially his 
policy of glasnost, the region's old diversity is thus turning into a new 
political schism. The emerging rift lacks the decisiveness and vindictiveness 
of earlier disputes, like the Soviet-Yugoslav conflict of 1948-49 or the 
Sino-Soviet split of the 1960s. Indeed, Moscow may yet restore a greater 
measure of unity in Eastern Europe by masterminding the replacement of its 
orthodox opponents, or by slowing down its reformist supporters, or both. But 
now there is an unprecedented standoff between the East European "Gang of Four" 
(Romania, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria) on the one hand and 
Hungary and Poland (and the Soviet Union) on the other. It is truly a standoff, 
because so long as the East European guardians of orthodoxy can convincingly 
argue that reforms would undermine their countries' fragile stability, there is 
little that Gorbachev can do -- or would want to do -- to impose his policies 
and preferences. 
The Soviet Bloc in 1989, then, is but a shadow of its former self. It is a 
military alliance whose members maintain extensive, but not always beneficial, 
economic ties. Their ideological orientations, and certain of their political 
interests, diverge. Romania, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria defy 
Moscow and continue to seek only to "perfect" their harsh rule. Supporting and 
supported by Moscow, Hungary declares its interest in the adoption of a 
multiparty system, and Poland may yet come to terms with labor-union pluralism. 
What are the implications of these contradictory, tentative, still reversible 
but in some cases very promising trends? Does Gorbachev have a new policy 
toward Eastern Europe? 
In examining Soviet intentions, it is useful to begin with the obvious: 
Gorbachev is a reformer, not a revolutionary. Whatever his ultimate impact may 
be, he does not seek to liquidate the Soviet hold on Eastern Europe; it is, 
after all, the most significant and the most tangible achievement of Soviet 
foreign policy. Gorbachev may bend -- he is bending -- but he will not break. 
The evolution of Eastern Europe from a Soviet sphere of domination to a sphere 
of influence may yet take place -- fitfully, the process of decompression and 
even retrenchment has begun -- but not because Moscow is ceding its "front 
yard." The Soviet role is becoming less domineering and more paternalistic, 
because to continue the old policy of heavy-handed Soviet rule would have 
deleterious consequences for Gorbachev's domestic and foreign-policy 
priorities. 
Still, a cloud of uncertainty hangs over Soviet intentions. On the one hand, 
Gorbachev still approves of past Soviet interventions and he still speaks of 
protecting the region's "common interests." On the other hand, East European 
officials trying to interpret Soviet policy no longer take it for granted that, 
in a crisis, they should either expect or count on Moscow's "fraternal 
assistance." They believe that there are conclusive signs of a growing Soviet 
reluctance to offer such "assistance": Gorbachev's withdrawal from Afghanistan 
and his promise to reduce Soviet commitments elsewhere in the Third World, his 
patience toward centrifugal tendencies in the Soviet Union, the stress he 
places on the autonomy of the East European Communist parties, his plan to 
begin thinning out Soviet forces in the region, and his subordinates' repeated 
assurance that the Brezhnev Doctrine of restricted East European sovereignty is 
dead. 
Gorbachev's policies also reflect the ambiguity inherent in Moscow's current 
position in Eastern Europe. For example, several recent decisions concerning 
personnel changes in the East European regimes were apparently permitted to be 
made mainly on the scene, and only partly in Moscow. While the removal in 
December, 1987, of the old Brezhnevite party chief of Czechoslovakia, Gustav 
Husak, was in line with Soviet expectations and suggestions, his replacement by 
a younger and more vigorous Brezhnevite, Milos Jakes, was a decision made in 
Prague. In Hungary, too, the replacement of Janos Kadar by Karoly Grosz in May, 
1988, was congruent with Soviet signals, but the wholesale expulsion of eight 
of the old Politburo's 13 members was accomplished at a party conference in 
what amounted to a local conspiracy against Kadar's associates. Produced by 
secret ballot, the eventual outcome took everyone, including the Soviets, by 
surprise. 
How Soviet leaders treat their East European colleagues behind the scenes is, 
of course, largely a matter of rumor and speculation. While Soviet officials 
claim that "a good example is the best sermon," East European officials say 
that although their Soviet counterparts show considerable flexibility both at 
bilateral and multilateral meetings, they are still tough and demanding, 
especially on economic issues. Nevertheless, during a private conversation in 
his office last October, Karoly Grosz told me that it was no longer either 
necessary or customary to ask for Moscow's "permission" before undertaking a 
new initiative. He said that recently, before making a particularly difficult 
decision, he had called Gorbachev and asked for his "opinion." The answer was 
that Grosz should be "guided by his conscience." 
The East European leaders have obtained considerable elbow room, even if their 
growing autonomy is still circumscribed by their perception of geopolitical 
realities, by the extent of their countries' economic dependence on the Soviet 
Union and by their knowledge that the political survival of the region's 
one-party systems ultimately still depends on Moscow. 
What, then, can be made of Gorbachev's more paternalistic approach to Eastern 
Europe? Clearly, Soviet hegemony is not giving way to full respect for the 
principles of sovereignty and noninterference. There are circumstances that 
would prompt Moscow to resort to the use of force on behalf of its geopolitical 
-- if not ideological -- interests, claiming that the Warsaw Pact's common 
interests were threatened. Indeed, the important question is not whether the 
Brezhnev Doctrine is alive or dead. Even if it were declared null and void, 
East Europeans would remain uncertain and skeptical. The more realistic 
questions are these: To what extent has the threshold of Soviet tolerance 
changed? How far can an East European country go without inviting Soviet 
military intervention? 
One answer is that as long as a given East European country remains in the 
Warsaw Pact and accepts socialism, there will be no intervention. A second 
answer is that the Soviet threshold of tolerance is higher for the region's 
small and strategically insignificant countries (Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary) 
than it is for East Germany, Poland and Czechoslovakia. The third -- and safest 
-- answer is that only if an upheaval occurs will Gorbachev know and decide 
what to do, and therefore the outside world cannot know in advance either. 
Absent upheavals, there are two important differences between the domineering 
Soviet policies of the past and Gorbachev's more paternalistic approach. First, 
in the past Moscow did not hesitate to tell the East European leaders both what 
they should and should not do, issuing imperatives as well as prohibitions. 
Today, Moscow is satisfied with indicating only what they should not do. Within 
the confines of such prohibitions -- against leaving the Warsaw Pact and 
renouncing socialism -- the East European regimes have gained sufficient 
autonomy to decide on their own what sort of economic and even political 
arrangements would suit their circumstances. 
Second, Moscow's major preoccupation, even more than in the past, is the 
region's stability, meaning peace and quiet at almost any price. A spontaneous, 
popular upheaval similar to that which engulfed Poland at the beginning of this 
decade is today's Soviet nightmare. Soviet officials know that large-scale East 
European disturbances would weaken and perhaps defeat perestroika and glasnost. 
This is why Gorbachev, fearful of disorder, has shied away from trying to 
dislodge the orthodox leaders of still-quiescent Romania, Bulgaria, 
Czechoslovakia and East Germany. The more idealistic goal of yesteryear -- 
creating a cohesive and viable "socialist commonwealth" -- has been shelved for 
the time being. 
Yet even the limited and relatively modest goal of stability remains beyond 
Moscow's reach. Evaluations of the region's economic ills range from serious to 
catastrophic. Hungarian and Polish reformers are uncertain of and divided over 
what to do next, while the anti-reformist contingent skirts trouble in the 
longer run by adhering to the repressive policies of the past. Meanwhile, the 
present mix of Soviet toleration of rigid East European regimes and Gorbachev's 
concurrent calls for dynamic change at home is -- unwittingly -- fueling the 
fire of rapidly growing East European popular demands. The irony, as Zbigniew 
Brzezinski has observed, is that "if the viewpoint that a Soviet military 
intervention is in fact unlikely becomes more widespread (in Eastern Europe), 
this perception might make a revolutionary upheaval more probable." 
Hence, the underlying problem is that while Moscow seeks peace and quiet in 
Eastern Europe, the East European peoples feel encouraged by Gorbachev's 
domestic politices and rhetoric to seek change. In fact, so basic is the change 
they propose in some countries that, according to a rudimentary but telling 
survey of public opinion, most East Europeans see even Gorbachev as being 
"good" for the Soviet Union but not good enough for Eastern Europe. 
The expected regional crisis of the 1990s calls for a bold supplement to 
existing U.S. policy toward Eastern Europe: direct talks with Moscow about the 
region's future. The purpose of such a dialogue would be not to settle but to 
probe; bilateral contact might also pave the way for multilateral discussions. 
For the first time in four decades, the interests of the two super-powers 
concerning the region's future may have begun to converge in Eastern Europe -- 
and to reflect the aspirations of the Eastern European people as well. 
No one would gain from violent East European upheavals that might prompt Soviet 
military intervention and very possibly mark the end of the reform process in 
both Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. By contrast, all sides would gain 
from evolutionary change under stable conditions. 
The ultimate purpose should be to shape a zone of peace in Eastern Europe, an 
area that would consist of a group of truly friendly states mindful of 
legitimate Soviet interests. In the end, they would be like neutral Austria or 
Finland, or find an independent and pluralist existence within the Warsaw Pact 
framework. 
To bring about such changes, Washington should help fashion a market-oriented 
economic environment in Eastern Europe -- and thus contribute to the region's 
viability and stability at a time of radical change. Moscow should concurrently 
help fashion a pluralist political order in Eastern Europe -- and thus 
contribute to the region's long-term viability and stability. 
An understanding along these lines would eliminate the most important legacy of 
the Cold War, give content to Gorbachev's concept of a "common European home," 
facilitate the devolution of the Soviet Empire under peaceful and stable 
conditions and afford Eastern Europe an opportunity to get on its feet and 
stand on its own. 
