ORANGE COUNTY PERSPECTIVE; 
BAD IDEA: PARAMEDIC 'USER FEE' 
It's understandable but unfortunate that the Orange County Board of Supervisors 
has decided to start charging people for emergency paramedic services. Such 
"user fees" have become popular with local governments since the tax-cutting 
Proposition 13 was approved nearly 12 years ago, but that doesn't make them 
right. Lifesaving services -- such as paramedic responses -- should be included 
as a part of the basic services paid for under general taxes. 
The new paramedic charges are part of a County Fire Department restructuring 
plan that would raise $4.2 million a year through "user fees" on a wide range 
of department services. Before the proposal goes into effect, the county board 
and each of the 13 cities that contract with the county for fire services need 
to approve it. The cities are Cypress, Dana Point, Irvine, La Palma, Los 
Alamitos, Mission Viejo, Placentia, San Juan Capistrano, Seal Beach, Stanton, 
Tustin, Villa Park and Yorba Linda. Five cities that have their own fire 
departments -- Huntington Beach, Santa Ana, Orange, Anaheim and Fullerton -- 
already charge similar fees for paramedic services. 
The proposal approved by the Board of Supervisors represents a compromise with 
Leisure World in Laguna Hills, where elderly residents are understandably 
concerned about having emergency medical services readily available. The plan 
approved by the board requires that the Fire Department develop a fee schedule 
that takes into consideration discounts for senior citizens as well as the 
user's ability to pay. A plan to allow whole communities to subscribe to 
paramedic services will also be studied. 
While it is true that paramedic services represent an expansion in the 
traditional services provided by fire departments, it would be better for local 
governments to find other ways to pay for them. The mere existence of such fees 
is an added worry for low-income or fixed-income people, particularly the 
elderly. 
