SANTA MONICA GETS WIRED: COMPUTER LINK TO CITIZENS 
Santa Monica is officially "on line." 
Starting today, residents can sign on to their personal computers and, in 
effect, talk to City Hall. 
Declaring itself "the city of the future," Santa Monica has activated a new 
computer network that puts a storehouse of information -- ranging from where to 
get a parking permit to what books are checked out of the local library -- at 
the fingertips of city residents with access to a computer keyboard. 
In addition, questions and complaints can be computer-messaged to City Hall, 
and, the city promises, officials will respond -- right to the inquiring 
resident's computer. Finally, citizens and officials can discuss burning issues 
of the day in the computer equivalent of a town hall meeting. 
When the first message bleeps up on the system's central computer, Santa Monica 
will be a pioneer in the use of interactive computer networks to enable the 
public to communicate with government. 
Increasingly, cities and counties across the nation are offering some form of 
public access to government information through computers. The product of an 
inevitable coupling of technology and civics, the trend is being hailed in many 
quarters as an important step toward better, more accessible government. 
Some people suggest, however, that a system based on the use of computers is 
elitist and question whether adequate security measures can be adopted to 
prevent abuse. 
"It's something that more and more cities are looking at," said Randy Arndt, a 
spokesman for the National League of Cities in Washington. 
Computer access "makes a city more responsive and efficient," he said. 
"There are certain efficiencies to having a computer interface rather than an 
employee answer a phone or write a letter," Arndt said. 
California communities, Arndt said, are on the leading edge of exploring uses 
of computers to link up with their constituents. 
In Pasadena, for example, residents already can browse through a variety of 
government data and calendars of events by home computer, and a private company 
contracted by the city expects to add an interactive system similar to Santa 
Monica's in about two months, said Edwin J. Stevens, president of the firm, 
EMDA. 
In Bay Area cities, residents are using computers to scan library catalogues to 
search for books by title, subject or author. 
Elsewhere in the country, a nonprofit organization in Cleveland offers a 
computer network through which the public can debate issues and retrieve 
information, while officials in Kansas City and Tampa, Fla., as part of an 
IBM-sponsored project called The 24-hour City Hall, have installed terminals 
with touch-sensitive screens in shopping malls. 
What Santa Monica is providing, however, appears to go beyond what most other 
cities are doing and is a harbinger of things to come. 
Lead to Sales 
The $350,000 system, called Public Electronic Network (PEN), was donated to the 
city, with Hewlett-Packard giving the hardware and Metasystems Inc. the 
software, both hoping that this will be a showpiece leading to sales elsewhere. 
Residents are offered four types of services. 
The first is the bulletin board, where users can scan a menu of topics and call 
up for reading such entries as earthquake safety tips, job openings and bus 
schedules. Also on the menu are agendas, minutes and staff reports from the 
City Council, Planning Commission and Rent Control Board. 
In addition, users can discover how to apply for licenses and permits. 
Eventually, they will be able to make applications through the computer as 
well, Assistant City Manager Lynne C. Barrette said. 
The second feature is electronic mail. A resident can send messages directly to 
City Hall with questions, comments or complaints. Answers will appear on the 
individual's computer screen. 
Town Hall 
The third element is called conferencing, a sort of electronic town hall. Files 
will be opened on topics such as the homeless or the pace of development. A 
resident can enter comments, which will become part of the file and can be read 
by anyone else calling it up. 
Finally, the network gives users access to a computerized library catalogue. 
People who want to log into the system will first have to register with the 
city and sign a pledge to obey computer laws. The contract also relieves the 
city of liability and preserves the city's right to deny use of the system from 
anyone who abuses it. 
Users are then assigned an identification number and given a 15-page manual. 
They choose a secret password and dial into the system. 
"Welcome to the city of Santa Monica's Public Electronic Network," reads the 
computer greeting. 
For people who do not own computers, terminals will be set up at libraries and 
other public centers. 
Phone Bill 
The system is available to residents only. Its use is free, although some 
residents may see a larger phone bill if they spend a lot of time signed on. 
No special software is necessary, and any brand of computer will do, Barrette 
said. But the home computers must have a modem -- a device that enables one 
computer to hook up with another via telephone lines -- and corresponding 
communication software. 
Users will be able to "download," or pull information onto their screens, and 
those who own printers will be able to produce printouts, said Ken Phillips, 
the city's director of information systems. 
The new network is not expected to do away with the traditional ways the city 
conducts business. Concerned and angry citizens will still telephone their 
officials and write letters. Die-hard activists and persistent gadflies will 
continue to attend City Council meetings held every other Tuesday night. 
But for people who work all day or who have little time to visit City Hall, the 
ability to log on for information at home around the clock will be a valuable 
tool, City Manager John Jalili said. 
"It's especially for those (people) who don't have time to write letters or 
call" during regular office hours, Jalili said. 
The city conducted a survey last year of 1,000 residents. Of those who 
responded, 33% said they own personal computers and 23% said their computers 
have modems. 
Michael Hill, an activist from Santa Monica's Ocean Park neighborhood, first 
suggested the computer network two years ago. He said it seemed the logical way 
to enlist "participants in democracy" in an electronic age. 
"To participate effectively (in government), one needs to be informed," said 
Hill, a counselor at the Venice Skills Center, a public vocational school. 
"That has meant schlepping down to City Hall, getting staff reports, finding 
the right staff person, getting the report photocopied. . . . 
"This is a marvelous way to access the staff reports, (get information) you 
want. You can play a truly effective role. People who feel disenfranchised can 
find a way to be a part of government." 
To publicize the network, the city is mailing out brochures. 
"Imagine," the pamphlet says, "the city of the future . . . a city where 
computers keep you in touch with city issues and services . . . a city where 
useful information is at your fingertips any time of the day, instantly and 
free . . . that future is now in the city of Santa Monica. . . ." 
Danger Warning 
There are a few voices of caution, however. Some experts in the field warn of 
the danger of "technology push" -- the eagerness to offer a sophisticated 
electronic system before the public is ready to use it or officials ready to 
handle the new demands it brings. 
"It may overburden ambivalent department heads and city employees who want to 
be responsive but aren't getting additional resources," said Judith Payne, a 
social scientist at the RAND Corp. think tank. 
The city's own programmers have been loading data into the system, and there 
are no plans to add staff. All of the messages from the PEN system will arrive 
on a central terminal in the information services office on the ground floor of 
City Hall. 
Several officials acknowledged that they worried that the network would create 
an image of elitism, that the city was catering to the professional well-to-do 
who own personal computers and that low-income residents would be left out. 
They hoped to overcome that by installing terminals in public areas, such as 
the library. 
Santa Monica officials say the public-access computer network is a natural 
evolution from a decision four years ago to start up an internal electronic 
mail system for council members and top administrators. 
Each of the seven council members was given a $3,000 briefcase-size portable 
computer, and they soon reported saving large amounts of time by discussing 
ideas and hashing out problems through computer messages. An estimated 600 city 
employees are plugged into the internal system. 
When officials considered creating a public computer system, security 
inevitably was a major concern. Several cities, in fact, have been reluctant to 
pursue similar programs because of fears that the computer system could be 
abused. 
Santa Monica consulted numerous security experts who tested the system, and 
officials believe that they have taken adequate precautions to stop computer 
hackers from getting into private files and to prevent "viruses" from being 
entered into the system and destroying data or programs. 
The computer network that residents will be tapping is entirely separate from 
the city staff's internal computer system, but officials have declined to 
detail other security measures. 
City officials are eager to see how residents in the beach city, which is known 
for its heated politics and liberal causes, will respond to the novel computer 
network. 
It "won't revolutionize the city overnight, but it's a significant step in 
opening up City Hall," predicted Alan Katz, chief of staff to Lt. Gov. Leo 
McCarthy and a former Santa Monica city councilman. 
"My guess is the public will find uses that no one imagined," he said. 
