MANSLAUGHTER VERDICT GIVEN IN BABY'S DEATH 
An Orange County Superior Court judge found Gregory Trent Wall guilty of 
involuntary manslaughter Tuesday for his part in the death of a 13-month-old 
baby. 
Declaring that the 31-year-old defendant had shown remorse, Judge Leonard H. 
McBride said he did not believe that Wall showed a total disregard for human 
life and that, therefore, Wall was not guilty of second degree murder, the 
original charge against him. Wall had pleaded not guilty in the case and was 
tried before the judge. 
As McBride announced his decision, Wall sat crying, holding his left hand over 
his eyes. 
Wall, who had been free on bail, was not taken into custody. He is to return 
March 31 for sentencing. He could face up to 4 years in prison. 
Wall was arrested in September, 1987, after the death of Shantana Speake, who 
was the daughter of Annette Chrisinger, his girlfriend at the time. 
According to Deputy Dist. Atty. Melvin L. Jensen, Chrisinger had left her baby 
in Wall's care at her home in Brea when she went to work Sept. 9. 
Jensen said Wall's version of what happened that day was that he put Shantana 
in her crib in an upstairs bedroom sometime after 5 p.m., then began vacuuming 
downstairs; he heard the baby scream, and ran and found her at the bottom of 
the stairs; he then put the baby back in her crib and telephoned Chrisinger's 
brother, then Chrisinger, to tell them what had happened but saying that the 
baby appeared to be fine. 
When Chrisinger came home, Jensen said, she questioned Wall, who told her that 
the baby had vomited after falling. 
Chrisinger went to check the baby and noticed that the she was having 
difficulty breathing, Jensen said. She immediately took the child to a 
hospital, but the child was declared brain dead soon after her arrival. She was 
removed from life support equipment the next day and died. 
Doctors and nurses at the hospital had noticed bruises on the baby's head and 
notified police of possible child abuse, and Wall was arrested, Jensen said. 
Slapping Admitted 
During questioning by police, Wall admitted that he had slapped Shantana after 
the fall because she seemed hysterical. 
During the weeklong trial, Jensen argued that Wall lied when he said the child 
had fallen down the stairs. Jensen pointed out that the steps were covered with 
padding and carpeting and therefore Shantana could not have sustained the 
injuries that she had in a fall. 
"I think he beat the child up at the crib," Jensen said. "She didn't fall down 
the stairs. . . . It appears the child didn't like him, was jealous of him. She 
had been crying and he had a tough time handling it." 
McBride noted in his decision that he was not convinced that Shantana had 
fallen down the stairs. 
Outside the Santa Ana courtroom, Wall's attorney, Deputy Public Defender Tim B. 
Severin, said he was satisfied with the judge's decision to find Wall guilty of 
a lesser charge. He said he believes Wall's version of the story, that the girl 
fell down the stairs, was slapped and went into a coma. 
Testimony From Wife 
Severin said that Wall, who came to Orange County from the Sacramento area, has 
no previous criminal record. He also said that Wall's wife, from whom he has 
been separated since 1986, testified that he never abused their own two 
children. 
Chrisinger, who was not in the courtroom Tuesday, said in a phone interview 
that she felt justice was not done, that Wall should have been convicted of 
second degree murder. 
"All I know is that my little girl lies in the ground," Chrisinger said. "I 
think they should do more about this. It's not necessary to hit babies. There 
is always some easier way to take care of the situation -- putting them in a 
playpen or just stepping away to calm down." 
