BASEBALL TALKS GO ON, BUT SO DOES STALEMATE 
Baseball Commissioner Fay Vincent participated in the resumption of collective 
bargaining talks Monday, but the meeting in the New York offices of the owners' 
Player Relations Committee lasted only 45 minutes and, apparently, there was no 
change in management's revenue-sharing proposal or the plan to lock players out 
of spring training camps starting Thursday. 
Neither side would discuss the substance of the meeting, but Don Fehr, 
executive director of the Major League Players Assn., said logistical hurdles 
alone now preclude a Thursday opening and that the negotiations have 
represented "a colossal waste of time." 
"There's not a lot to say," Fehr said. "It's my impression that the situation 
hasn't changed at all. It's my impression that we're where we were yesterday 
and the day before and the day before that. The players are resigned to what 
they think is the inevitable." 
Charles O'Connor, general counsel of the PRC, sounded equally pessimistic. 
"There's no reason to believe this can be settled quickly, but I'm always 
optimistic when we're talking, and we'll be talking again tomorrow. The 
commissioner's instinct made him feel that he wanted to be part of the process. 
He's part of the process and he'll be part of the solution. I would 
characterize his role as the same as mine, full-time." 
Both O'Connor and Fehr seemed reluctant to talk Monday and it is believed that 
Vincent asked them to reduce the rhetoric. 
"We're trying not to do any more damage to the patient," O'Connor said. 
Baseball's owners had met Friday and reaffirmed their support of the PRC's 
negotiating strategy, including a lockout beginning Thursday if the union did 
not agree to the concept of revenue sharing. Even so, there seemed to be a 
feeling that the PRC might be ready to withdraw some aspects of the proposal. 
"I don't know the basis for that," Gene Orza, the union's general counsel, said 
Monday. "I don't know why people felt that way. The owners had said there would 
be no change in strategy, no change in plans. We couldn't avoid a (Thursday) 
lockout now even with an act of Congress. The players have no reservations and 
the clubs haven't sent any equipment. 
"The question isn't, 'Will there be a lockout?' The question is, 'How long?' 
We're trying to determine just how much of an intrusion (the owners') action 
has caused." 
Of Vincent's presence, Orza said: "It can't hurt, but don't think of him as a 
third party. He's an agent of management. Within ownership, he has a measure of 
moral suasion, but what actual and factual contribution he can make, 
considering none of us who have been at the table have produced any progress, 
is uncertain. These people are trying to re-invent the wheel at a time when the 
wheel has never run smoother." 
Major league players are not required to be in camp until Feb. 28. A lockout 
will prevent them from reporting voluntarily. 
"It may not be a technical lockout, but it's a lockout nevertheless," said 
Fehr, alluding to Thursday's closing. 
