WEST HOLLYWOOD CALLS FOR END TO SPRAYING OF MALATHION 
The architect of West Hollywood's "cruelty free zone" for animals failed to 
persuade the City Council on Monday night to make the city a "malathion free 
zone." 
But City Councilman Paul Koretz did persuade his colleagues to unanimously 
approve a resolution calling for an end to aerial spraying of the pesticide in 
Los Angeles County until it is proven not harmful to humans. 
Malathion is the pesticide used by state agricultural officials in recent years 
to attempt to eradicate the crop-destroying Medfly. 
"They are routinely spraying this substance that can rust the paint off your 
car," said Koretz, author of the resolution. "How safe can that be for your 
lungs?" 
Koretz, who works for the California League of Conservation Voters, an 
environmental protection lobbying group, admits that the malathion resolution 
is little more than a symbolic gesture, but he said he hopes the action sends a 
message to state legislators. 
"I guess there's not much we could really do if they wanted to spray us again," 
he said. 
The West Hollywood City Council at times is criticized by residents of the 
1.9-square-mile city for supporting resolutions that have little concrete 
effect. 
In recent months, Koretz has authored resolutions banning the use of 
steel-jawed traps on animals in the heavily urban city, creating a "cruelty 
free zone" for animals, and urging a moratorium on the cutting of old-growth 
redwood trees. Koretz was not able to persuade council members and city staff 
Monday night to go further than a symbolic gesture. His original resolution 
called for the drafting of an ordinance that would have banned all malathion 
spraying within West Hollywood's borders. 
But such a ban would have been superseded by state law and would have been 
unenforceable, City Atty. Michael Jenkins said. 
West Hollywood, though not known for the agriculture that attracts Medflies, 
from time to time has endured aerial bombing of malathion -- most recently in 
October, 1988. City officials are worried about health hazards from the 
pesticide. 
"Some studies show that AIDS sufferers might be particularly susceptible to 
deleterious effects of malathion," Koretz said. A substantial number of the 
county's patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome live in West 
Hollywood. 
In an interview Monday, one of the authors of a 1980 state study used to 
demonstrate the safety of malathion disavowed that report's findings. Marc A. 
Lappe, a professor of health and ethics at the University of Illinois, who was 
part of a 1980 state risk-assessment team, said the pesticide may pose a danger 
to infants, the elderly, and the sick. 
Though West Hollywood's malathion resolution is unlikely to persuade state 
officials to halt malathion spraying, the city is jumping into the fray just as 
the idea of a ban is gathering steam across the state. 
In passing the resolution, the council was responding to the most recent 
assault on the crop-destroying pests by state agriculture officials. While 
Californians in spray areas have long complained that the sticky, yellow 
pesticide ruins car paint, several residents groups in recent weeks have voiced 
concerns that the pesticide may pose greater health hazards than state 
officials admit. 
