LANGUAGE STUDY PROGRAM IS A BIG SUCCESS ON A SMALL SCALE 
For the 435 students at Longfellow Elementary School in Clairemont -- all of 
them native English speakers -- the language of the day is Spanish. Similarly, 
hablando Espanol is also the norm for more than 200 children at Horton 
Elementary in Southeast San Diego, while French is the langue for 80 students 
at nearby Knox Elementary. At Spreckels Elementary in University City, about 
half the school's 600 students master Spanish and English together in daily 
bilingual studies. 
Welcome to the little-known world of foreign language study in San Diego 
elementary schools. Out of 107 schools in the San Diego Unified district and 
more than 100 in smaller county districts, the special magnet programs at the 
four schools provide the only large-scale, continuing foreign language 
instruction for students at the elementary level. 
While the programs get high marks from teachers, parents and independent 
evaluators, their special status only points up the general lack of any 
second-language curriculum below the secondary-school level, not only in San 
Diego but throughout California and the nation. 
Call for Expanded Programs 
A key recommendation from the June 1987 report on the future of San Diego 
schools called for foreign-language instruction for all elementary school 
students as part of expanded programs in world culture. That recommendation 
parallels conclusions in nationwide educational reports calling for teaching 
foreign language to more students and at an earlier age. 
Although local school officials have acted on many parts of the 1987 
independent study, they have offered no specifics regarding more language 
study. Even at the secondary level, administrators concede that instructional 
methods need revamping, with more emphasis on oral-based teaching and less on 
rote grammar so that students will pick up a second language in a more natural 
way. 
But the same administrators point to the existing magnet programs as good 
examples of how language instruction could better proceed if a commitment to 
extra money and time were made by members of the Board of Education. 
Typical Classroom 
A visitor entering one of the two kindergarten classes at Longfellow Elementary 
finds all the bulletin boards in Spanish and the class divided into several 
groups, with one cluster of munchkins singing a song in Spanish while a second 
reads a story in Spanish and a third practices vocabulary using 
Spanish-language work sheets. 
From kindergarten through second grade, children receive all instruction in 
Spanish. Beginning in the third grade, they receive 75 minutes of intensive 
English immersion so that they learn to read in English. Otherwise, the class 
continues in Spanish. 
A similar pattern is followed at Horton and Knox as well. 
"It takes a real commitment by parents to place their children in such 
programs," said Tim Allen, who directs second-language instruction for the San 
Diego district. 
The language magnets fall under the district's special integration academic 
programs first set up in the late 1970s to encourage voluntary ethnic mixing 
and to avoid mandatory busing under court order. At Horton and Knox, which are 
in predominantly minority areas, the language immersions are intended to 
attract white students who live outside the area to bus to the schools. They 
have generally been successful in doing so. The only non-white students 
eligible for the immersions must live in the immediate school neighborhoods. 
Longfellow is one of a handful of district schools without a neighborhood 
focus. All students must apply for admission. All students are selected only on 
the basis of balancing the school ethnically, and the school has a waiting 
list. 
"A key is that parents want to be certain that their children will still 
maintain their English," Allen said. "And it is usually best for a student to 
enroll beginning in an early grade." 
Longfellow magnet coordinator Helen Sabala finds that many parents who visit 
the school for the first time express both excitement and bewilderment. 
"Yes, we teach the same basic concepts of math, reading, etc., as in other 
schools but in Spanish," she told a group of parents the other day who are 
contemplating putting their children at Longfellow next year. 
"The teachers use a lot of repetition, a lot of body movement, such as pointing 
to something," Sabala explained. "The kids listen to the Spanish and, at first, 
there are non-verbal responses" such as a student handing over an object that 
the teacher asks for in Spanish. "And that leads to natural conversation 
developing after a while." 
"We begin formal English reading at the third grade, but we really encourage 
parents to continue reading to their children in English at all grades. We'll 
take care of the Spanish." 
A district evaluation last year showed that immersion students at the 
fifth-grade level did as well on standardized English tests in math, reading 
and language as their peers at regular elementary schools. In addition, the 
evaluation showed that the students develop Spanish-language skills comparable 
to students who are native Spanish speakers. 
At Knox, teacher Kathleen Stark said that parents -- many of whom are 
Francophiles -- nevertheless do worry about whether the reading skills taught 
initially in French will transfer to English. "And they do transfer," Stark 
said. "It's sometimes quite remarkable." 
Sally McArdle at Knox, who gives the third-through-sixth graders their 
intensive English reading lessons, said that, by the second semester of third 
grade, the transfer is almost always made. 
"Most already have the reading skills, and it's just a matter of getting 
comfortable with English," she said. "It's funny when they recognize English 
vocabulary by its French roots. . . . 'That's French, isn't it?' you hear them 
say." 
At Spreckels, the bilingual magnet operates on a different philosophy. An equal 
number of native Spanish speaking and English-speaking students are grouped 
together for part of the day for music or other enrichment in Spanish or 
English, but are separated by language for part of the day for basic skills 
instruction. The Spanish speakers bus to Spreckels from Southeast San Diego; 
the English speakers are University City children whose parents choose the 
program. White students from outside the area are not eligible. 
Support for Program 
The parents of Spanish-speaking natives have supported the Spreckels program 
strongly for almost a decade. For them, the curriculum allows their children 
not only to learn English but to maintain their Spanish, unlike regular 
district ESL instruction for the majority of Latino students, which is intended 
only to increase English fluency. 
Parents of neighborhood children have been much slower to warm to the program, 
afraid that their children would suffer by not spending their entire day in an 
English curriculum. That fear has diminished, administrators said, since the 
district added a gifted enrichment component in English to the program four 
years ago. 
"The Spanish kids hear a lot more English here than they do in ESL at a school 
predominantly Latino," Linda Giles, who teaches kindergarten at Spreckels, 
said. "And the Caucasian kids are hearing Spanish in real-life situations, too, 
such as on the playground . . . we as teachers try to give a sense of being 
truly bilingual by sometimes talking in Spanish just to show that is all right, 
too." 
Added fifth- and sixth-grade teacher Ivelisse Druid: "There's lots of oral work 
here, both with teachers and with each other. And we mix some of the reading 
groups as well." 
Patti Garretson put her son, Andrew, in the program because she wants him to 
know Spanish growing up in Southern California. "I work at (UC San Diego) 
Medical Center and I know the importance of having a second language . . . and, 
while some parents do fear that the program takes away from English 
instruction, I have found that the kids do most of their reading, writing and 
math in English." 
Although Garretson considered the immersion programs, she believes in sending 
her children to neighborhood schools. 
And the Spreckels teachers, while saying that Spanish immersion for English 
speakers is a choice for parents to make, do not believe that a similar English 
immersion -- instead of a bilingual focus -- would work for Spanish speakers. 
Sink-or-Swim English 
"First of all, the Hispanic kids in sink-or-swim English would not get the 
academic support at home that Caucasian kids get in English while in a Spanish 
immersion," second-grade teacher Lydia Stevens said, adding that in the present 
immersion, the point is to teach students Spanish and not to replace their 
native language. 
Giles said research shows immersions work best when the language of immersion 
is in "the so-called lower-status language," which in the United States would 
be Spanish. 
Teachers in both the bilingual and immersion programs complained that there is 
poor articulation for graduating sixth-graders wishing to continue their 
language study at the junior-high level. Second-language coordinator Tim Allen 
conceded that the problem is not only with the lack of follow-up courses in 
most cases but with different methods of teaching at the secondary level. 
"The new framework from the California Department of Education calls for 
teaching extensively through dialogue, through oral communication, but our 
texts still emphasize orderly grammar and many of our teachers haven't had 
training in new methods," Allen said. "But this is the way we want to go, both 
at secondary and also at elementary levels, if we can begin (more widespread) 
instruction at those grades." 
Sandra Scherf, a La Jolla High foreign-language teacher who has been trained in 
the new methodology, said that "too many (secondary) students now go through a 
program and learn to conjugate and read literature, but can't speak with any 
proficiency. 
"We want students to give responses that can be understood even if they are 
grammatically incorrect at first . . . with further exposure and practice, the 
errors get tidied up without resorting just to drills on verbs." 
Most students leaving the existing elementary language magnets end up in the 
more traditional programs ill-suited to the preparation they have had. 
Magnet Fails to Attract 
Students in the Spreckels program are eligible to continue to a junior-high 
level bilingual magnet at Correia Junior High in Point Loma. Almost all the 
Spanish-speaking students continue to Correia, since the bus ride there is no 
longer than that to Spreckels from their Southeast San Diego homes. 
But no neighborhood magnet student from the University City area has ever 
attended Correia, because residents perceive that Standley Junior High, their 
community school, has better academic programs, teachers said. As a result, 
Correia magnet teachers must recruit new white students from the Point Loma 
area who have had little or no Spanish study and therefore are far behind their 
bilingual Spanish counterparts. And the Spreckels students who go on to 
Standley discover that the Spanish classes there are geared more for beginning 
study. 
"Standley truly has an outstanding academic program so the parents are 
reluctant to send their kids outside of the University City area," Allen said. 
"But, because of the nature of the magnet philosophy -- it is set up to promote 
integration -- the continuing magnet isn't at Standley." 
Allen has worked on getting a better relationship between teaching styles at 
Spreckels and Standley. "Since the majority of Standley classes must be geared 
to beginning students, I would like to see maybe one class geared to a 
continuation of what is done at Spreckels." 
Similarly, students at Longfellow, Horton and Knox are eligible to continue 
intensive language instruction at Memorial Junior High in Barrio Logan. But the 
majority choose to attend their neighborhood junior highs, in part because 
Memorial is considered a "dangerous" school because of its location, despite a 
high-powered magnet emphasizing languages and world culture. Language classes 
at those neighborhood junior highs are also geared largely to beginning study. 
"And Memorial is not a true immersion, since we don't have that beyond the 
elementary level," Allen said. "We do have a special Spanish language-arts 
class for the immersion students" and students from Knox can take advanced 
French courses at San Diego High School on special transfers, he said. 
Allen said that teaching methodology will change significantly at the secondary 
level over the next several years, especially with new teacher training and 
with new texts becoming available in 1990. But he said that an oral-based 
foreign-language program at elementary schools depends on the philosophical 
bent of top administrators and the board of trustees. 
"Will foreign language be considered part of basic skills or an add-on?" Allen 
said. He noted that the district's new common-core curriculum content does not 
include additional foreign language requirements. 
"I don't know what the answer is going to be." 
