SOVIET COMPOSERS UNION REINSTATES ROSTROPOVICH 
The Soviet Composers Union announced Wednesday that Mstislav Rostropovich, the 
expatriate Russian cellist and conductor of the National Symphony Orchestra in 
Washington, has been reinstated as a member of the union in what appeared to be 
a prelude to his full political rehabilitation and an invitation to return . 
Rostropovich is the latest in a series of distinguished Russian artists, 
writers, musicians and dancers who emigrated or were expelled from the country 
in the 1960s and 1970s and who are being rehabilitated and, in some cases, 
invited back. Rostropovich expressed doubt last year that he would be included. 
He could not be immediately reached for comment Wednesday. 
Ballerina Natalia Makarova, who defected in 1970, returned to dance with the 
Kirov Ballet in Leningrad this month. Director Yuri Lyubimov has been invited 
back to Moscow's Taganka Theater, which he once headed. Rudolf Nureyev and 
Mikhail Baryshnikov have returned on family visits. Writer Andrei Sinyavsky 
returned for a visit last month in connection with the death of his friend Yuli 
Daniel. Poet Joseph Brodsky, another Nobel Prize winner, is published regularly 
here. 
In 1978, while in the United States on a concert tour, Rostropovich and his 
wife, Galina Vishnevskaya, the opera singer, were accused of "unpatriotic 
activities defaming the Soviet system" and "assisting subversive anti-Soviet 
centers," stripped of their Soviet citizenship, national awards and honorary 
titles and expelled from the composers union. Although world famous as a 
cellist, he quickly became a non-person here. 
His name was removed from musical manuscripts and books, from archival material 
at the Moscow Conservatory, where he taught, and Tchaikovsky Hall, where he 
performed. 
His principal crime, in the eyes of the Soviet leadership at the time, was his 
defense of Alexander I. Solzhenitsyn, the Russian novelist who won the Nobel 
Prize for Literature in 1970. Not only did Solzhenitsyn live in Rostropovich's 
country house, but Rostropovich spoke out forcefully against the government 
campaign that eventually led to the writer's expulsion from the Soviet Union in 
1974. 
