PAN AM, GOVERNMENT ACTIONS FAULTED; 
KIN OF VICTIMS ON BOMBED JET DEMAND NEW INQUIRY 
An enraged, tearful group of families of Pan Am Flight 103 crash victims 
demanded Monday that President Bush create an independent commission to 
investigate the actions of the airline and the U.S. government in the aftermath 
of the bombing of the jumbo jet that killed 270 people just before Christmas. 
About 30 family members -- some with a color picture of a dead relative pinned 
to their clothing -- accused Pan American World Airways of callousness and the 
State Department of ignoring their pleas for information. 
They also charged that the airline did not take adequate security precautions 
despite a previous warning of a potential bombing, that it ignored the report 
of an El Al Israel Airlines consultant of potentially serious security 
weaknesses and that it left families to fend for themselves in the days after 
the crash. 
Allegations Denied 
The State Department and Pan Am, although acknowledging the next of kin's 
grief, denied the allegations. The White House had no immediate response to the 
group's demand for an investigation. 
Paul Hudson, whose 16-year-old daughter, Melinda, was killed on the flight, 
called on President Bush "to break your silence on this tragedy and exercise 
your leadership to identify and punish persons responsible. We want Pan Am to 
be held accountable for what happened. Pan Am is said to have received 
recommendations from El Al, the airline that has the best security in the world 
for preventing bomb incidents, two years ago and did not act on them." 
Hudson demanded an accounting of why the government had not made public a 
terrorist threat that such a flight would be bombed. He said only 22 such 
threats to airplanes were considered high-level last year and "to cancel 22 
flights would hardly result in closing down air travel altogether." 
Bonnie O'Connor accused Pan Am of showing no interest when the body of her 
brother, John Ahern, 26, was brought home. "There wasn't even a person from Pan 
Am to shake our hand," she said. 
Daniel Cohen, who lost his 20-year-old daughter, Theo, a student at Syracuse 
University, told how several days after the crash a Pan Am representative 
called his home, offering "some kind of counseling." 
Cohen said at that moment his wife was distraught in the kitchen, shouting: "My 
life is over." He said he held the phone out so the airline employee could hear 
his wife's pain. 
"I can't help you," Cohen said the employee told him, and then hung up. 
Other relatives said that aside from initial death notifications from the State 
Department, the only communication they received was how to arrange to receive 
personal effects from those killed on the plane. 
"We understand the anger and the frustration of the families as expressed today 
in their meeting with the press," a Pan Am spokesman said. "We have attempted 
to do everything possible, without being intrusive, to be supportive and 
responsive to the needs of the relatives and friends of the victims during this 
very difficult time. Since the incident, we have tried to communicate 
continually with the families on a personal basis with one employee assigned to 
being liaison with one of the families." 
Jeff Kriendler, the airline's vice president for public relations, said that in 
1986 two Israelis were hired to survey Pan Am's security practices in Europe. 
"They came in with recommendations. Some were acted upon. Some were not. They 
were hoping that their recommendations would lead to full-time employment with 
Pan Am. The company declined their offer. The relationship ended at that time." 
Kriendler said Pan Am representatives were present at the airport each time 
bodies arrived. 
Pan Am and the State Department have said the threat to harm American flights 
in December was too general to lead to public warnings about specific flights. 
Philip Covington, a State Department spokesman, said that immediately after the 
crash, a special 30- or 40-person working group was established to act as 
liaison with family members. 
"We have done everything we could in this case," he said. " . . . We have 
continued to work closely with the families. There is not a single letter we 
have received from a family member we have not answered. We think we have done 
a very good and thorough job in this terrible tragedy." 
Meeting With FBI Official 
After the news conference, Hudson and Bert Ammerman, another family member, 
conferred in Washington with Oliver B. (Buck) Revell, the FBI's executive 
assistant director for investigations. 
Revell said that during the meeting he gave them his "assurance and commitment 
and resolve to follow this through to the logical end and find those 
responsible for the criminal act." 
Officials have determined that the jumbo jet was destroyed by a sophisticated 
bomb and have no conclusive evidence who planted the device. But the FBI and 
other investigators remain optimistic that they eventually will be able to 
identify those who are responsible, sources familiar with the massive inquiry 
said. 
