FIRST PERSON: ONE READER'S TRASH IS ANOTHER'S TREASURE 
I admit it: I love trash. 
I love the tawdry and the tasteless, the sensational and the shameless. I love 
celebrity gossip, "exploitation" films and television programs, tacky 
commercials -- nearly every component of our ever expanding junk culture. 
Some of my media-consuming habits may shock the serious-minded: Every week I 
buy People magazine, a major source of my trash fix. I scan the latest scoops 
from Liz Smith and other gossip columnists in the five papers I get daily -- 
often before reading the national news. A New York transplant, I still miss the 
New York Post's infamous "Page Six" (particularly its Murdoch incarnation). 
I would rather view the likes of "The Terminator" than "Out of Africa" or 
almost any movie with subtitles. And I have no moral objection to Saturday 
morning cartoons or Geraldo Rivera, although I do wish he would shave off that 
awful mustache. 
I know that an educated professional and a supposedly thoughtful person -- 
particularly one over 30 -- is not supposed to have such preferences. But I do. 
So do millions of others in all walks of life judging from the mega-dollars 
generated by America's pop culture. 
Yet despite our numbers, we are anything but brazen about our brassy tastes. 
Most of us indulge them in secret, fearing society's disapproval. I cannot 
recall how many times I have instinctively hidden a newly purchased celebrity 
magazine between more "respectable" publications like Time and Newsweek -- or 
the Atlantic when feeling particularly guilty. Or how often I've begun 
confessing my proclivities with a self-effacing opening like: "I know I am a 
trash-mongering yahoo but . . . I thought 'Nightmare on Elm Street' was 
actually a good movie." 
One can't help being affected by the critics of junk culture, whose voices have 
become so loud recently in articles and newscasts condemning "trash TV" and 
other similar ills. These trashers of trash say it has no redeeming social 
value. That it doesn't teach morality and social issues. That it doesn't add to 
the nation's scientific knowledge. 
They say it will never teach us how to build a better space shuttle or compete 
with the Japanese. Trash culture, they conclude, is crowding the minds of the 
young, preventing them from learning these things. 
Actually, I have long believed that such condemnations are, if you'll excuse 
the expression, just so much trash. If anything, one senses in the outcry a 
secret fascination, a certain defensiveness against stirrings from the dark 
side. What better indication of this than the ironic fate of some TV 
evangelists. Once known for fire-and-brimstone denunciation of various segments 
of junk culture, they ultimately became premier trash icons, thanks to their 
own moral foibles. 
The uproar over trash calls to mind the Freudian description of the self, 
energized by tension between the violent, sexual id -- its animal side -- and 
the more civilized forces of the ego and superego. With its lurid facts and 
fictions, trash culture, I'm convinced, functions as our collective id. 
Uncivilized though it may be, it plays a vital role in our society as a source 
of energy and creativity. 
Trash culture provides an arena for us to let our hair down, to relax and 
engage in the fantasy and mental play that so often yields creative ideas. 
"Life Styles of the Rich and Famous," "Geraldo" and other trash fare may not 
add to our scientific store of knowledge. But they may help our scientists use 
their knowledge more effectively. 
Indeed, the inspiration value of so-called trash was suggested some years ago 
when NASA named its experimental space shuttle "Enterprise" -- a tribute to the 
classic TV series "Star Trek." Indeed, I believe it is no accident that the 
Soviet Union, a society that has long punished trash culture, must come to us 
for technological ideas. 
I am not recommending we embrace trash to the exclusion of traditional 
education. But we should allow it to coexist and appreciate its value. In 
addition to enhancing creativity, it has a number of other virtues. 
For example: Trash is entertaining. Man cannot live on tales of budget deficits 
alone. They would make him glaze over. Nor could most of us bear the tragedy 
and despair that floods the daily headlines without some kind of respite. 
Junk culture provides the perfect answer to the classic trash question: "How do 
you spell relief?" What is wrong with checking your brain at the door for an 
hour or two of "The Naked Gun"? Or spacing out a few minutes each day amid the 
latest delectable details of the Tyson-Givens divorce. 
Trash provides a sense of ongoing drama. Not all of us are astronauts or arctic 
explorers. Even for the most successful, life can become routine. Trashy 
celebrity melodramas played out in the media inject a sense of ongoing drama 
into our otherwise dull lives. They're better than fiction because they contain 
true suspense. You don't know how they will turn out. Will Fergie lose her 
pregnancy pounds? Will Prince Charles and Princess Di reconcile and live 
happily ever after? Will Cher dump her bagel-maker boyfriend from Queens? 
Trash is reassuring. Celebrity tales contained in our trash culture validate 
us. They show that famous people with all manner of talent and wealth can be as 
mixed up as we are -- or even more mixed up. 
Gary Hart's dalliance with Donna Rice in full view of the media provided major 
comfort along these lines. "Phew," many of us thought. "We may have made 
mistakes in life. But at least we were never that dumb." 
As for those unfortunates among us who have been, it was nice to know there was 
someone out there of comparable intelligence. 
Trash teaches. Trash culture is far from the moral vacuum it is often judged to 
be. Trashy news stories are more than sagas of sex and violence -- they are 
powerful morality plays. "The Bess Mess" -- the story of a former Miss 
America's legal troubles -- is a modern retelling of the classic myth of 
hubris. 
Trash provides a way for society to come together and express shared emotions, 
such as outrage over the murder of young Lisa Steinberg. Or it may spark 
debate. Was Christina Onassis spoiled child or tragic figure? Was Tawana 
Brawley a victim or a perpetrator of a hoax? Answers to such questions 
delineate national moral conflicts that are hardly trashy concerns. 
Trash is a leveler. While a CEO and a cab driver lead vastly different lives, 
they may find common ground through talking about "Favorite Son" or "The 
Barbara Walters Special." 
OK, so trash is not high culture. But what it gives society is anything but 
junk. 
