IN MONUMENTS OF DESPAIR, A RAY OF HOPE; 
PUBLIC HOUSING: ASSIGNING SOCIAL WORKERS TO 'THE PROJECTS' MAY GO A LONG WAY 
TOWARD PROVIDING SERVICES TO THOSE WHO NEED MORE THAN JUST A ROOF OVER THEIR 
HEADS. 
As city planners and architects across the United States focus on how to 
provide more low-income housing, they repeatedly confront the specter of large 
public housing projects that never fulfilled their purpose or promise. All too 
often, what seemed like perfectly good buildings on the outside had become 
walled ghettos for gangs, drugs and poverty. 
Los Angeles is about to implement some pioneering measures to remedy that sort 
of thing and, perhaps, to see that it is not repeated here anymore. 
Last November, the Los Angeles City Housing Authority announced plans to locate 
social services and social workers in public housing projects. This proposal 
merits careful attention and support from all who are concerned about some of 
today's most pressing social problems. 
One of the bitter ironies of our time is that a significant portion of homeless 
people are alumni, as it were, of public housing projects. 
The Federal Housing Act of 1949 enunciated the goal of a decent home and 
suitable environment for every American family. But it has taken all these 
years to drive home the lesson that achieving that goal involves more than 
simply handing people four walls, flooring and a roof and leaving them to fend 
for themselves. 
Candidates for public housing are, by definition, people lacking some of the 
resources necessary to cope with the rough-and-tumble of the market system. And 
this nearly always involves more than just rent money. 
Applicants for public housing, most often women on public assistance, usually 
carry some baggage of woe, past or present -- teen-age pregnancy, domestic 
violence and abuse, divorce and desertion, drug and alcohol addiction. The 
growing number of homeless families come from among these women. 
In addition to roofs over their heads, families in public housing need day-care 
facilities, job counseling, guidance in financial planning and assistance in 
transportation. These are necessary adjuncts if such families are to stabilize 
their lives and eventually leave the welfare rolls. Both adults and children 
need recreation programs. There need to be services or arrangements for 
excluding gang violence, drug trafficking and other crimes. 
At the bottom of the whole problem is a longstanding lack of coordination 
between the Department of Housing and Urban Development and federal welfare 
programs. Public housing projects have been treated as a substitute for 
adequate welfare payments. The result has been a shortfall on both ends -- 
inadequate public housing and insufficient outlays to cover both shelter and 
the support services necessary to get people off welfare. 
In some communities across the country, public housing tenants, by remarkable 
bootstrap efforts, have brought about the needed social services. The National 
Council of Neighborhood Women in Brooklyn is an example of such effort. But 
self-help know-how is not universally on tap. In too many projects, the housing 
has ended up as squalid, unlivable magnets of disorder and crime, suitable only 
for tearing down. 
Social workers assigned to public housing projects should not be seen as 
vigilantes on a mission of ferreting out anti-social elements. They should be 
there to provide counseling and referrals to a range of health and mental 
health agencies, to help parents care for and educate their children 
effectively, to organize after-school activities for children and adolescents 
and to start support groups for young and old. Their presence among the most 
"high-risk" people in our city offers a singular opportunity for early 
intervention and possible prevention of destructive behavior. 
If the social worker's role is seen as primarily guiding and assisting 
residents in improving their lives and cultivating a constructive environment, 
the Los Angeles plan can serve as a model for an important, much-needed advance 
toward reversing the decline in low-income housing. 
