TRAFFICKERS SURRENDER 3 COCAINE LABS ON EVE OF SUMMIT; 
COLOMBIA: THE GESTURE IS SEEN AS A PEACE BID. BUSH BEGINS TALKS TODAY WITH 
THREE ANDEAN LEADERS. 
As President Bush and three Andean colleagues prepared to converge here today 
for a drug-war summit, Colombian traffickers reinforced calls for peace by 
turning over three cocaine laboratories. 
It was the biggest gesture yet in a monthlong series of attempts by the 
notorious drug lords to blunt a government crackdown by showing that they are 
mending their venal and violent ways. 
"As one more contribution to our promise of struggling for peace so that 
democracy will be strengthened, we have decided to give up the three largest 
and most modern laboratories for processing cocaine that currently exist in the 
country," declared a communique published Wednesday. It was signed "The 
Extraditables," a code word for the so-called Medellin Cartel of cocaine 
traffickers, headed by fugitive kingpin Pablo Escobar. 
Traffickers had two dozen Colombian reporters escorted secretly to the three 
laboratories, hidden in the swampy Darien wilderness of northern Colombia, near 
the Gulf of Uraba and the Panamanian border. Broadcast reports on the 
surrendered labs filled Colombian airwaves Wednesday as security forces moved 
in to take over the illegal installations. 
The drug lords apparently timed the gesture to steal some of the media thunder 
from Bush's meeting today in Cartagena with presidents Virgilio Barco Vargas of 
Colombia, Alan Garcia of Peru and Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia. 
The four leaders will sign a joint declaration outlining strategy for fighting 
cocaine traffic, from its South American origins to its U.S. destinations. The 
declaration also will emphasize the need to control American demand for illegal 
drugs and to bolster the Andean economies with legal trade and aid. 
The summit has also encountered a good bit of domestic opposition from 
Colombians. About 10,000 people protested Bush's visit with a march through 
Bogota on Wednesday, burning U.S. flags and setting off firecrackers. 
An estimated 1,500 journalists and technicians will cover the Cartagena summit. 
But few will get close to the presidents, who are to meet in a colonial fort at 
the heavily guarded Colombian naval academy on Manzanillo Island. 
Nearly surrounded by the waters of Cartagena Bay, the site can be reached by 
single road over a narrow neck of land. As pre-summit security intensified 
Wednesday, armed Colombian marines guarded the entrance while others patrolled 
the bay in motor launches. 
Authorities said 5,000 troops and police are deployed around Cartagena, which 
was a heavily fortified port in Spanish colonial times. Much of this week's 
security activity is concentrated around Cartagena's sprawling convention 
center, from where many reporters will watch the summit on closed circuit 
television. 
In addition, the U.S. Navy moved a destroyer and an amphibious assault vessel, 
complete with Marines, helicopters and fighter-attack jets, to the waters off 
the coast. 
Despite some recent press reports in the United States that an attack on Bush 
by drug traffickers was feared, Colombian officials said they expected no 
problems. 
"We do not have serious evidence that would permit us to think of the 
possibility of an attack on the presidents," Miguel Maza Marquez, head of 
Colombia's police intelligence agency, said in a press conference Wednesday. 
Colombian drug traffickers have been accused of killing thousands of people, 
including government ministers, police officials and judges, in retaliation to 
a government crackdown against them. In the last four months of 1989, they set 
off scores of terrorist bombs around the country, including one that killed two 
people in the Cartagena Hilton last September. 
Another bomb demolished a domestic airliner leaving Bogota with 107 people 
aboard, and yet another devastated a large area around the police intelligence 
headquarters in Bogota, killing 67 people. 
On Jan. 17, however, "The Extraditables" said they were suspending their 
campaign of violence. They promised to release kidnaped hostages, turn in arms 
and explosives, and surrender clandestine drug laboratories in return for 
"legal and constitutional guarantees." In a series of gestures since then, the 
traffickers have released several hostages and turned over a ton of dynamite. 
Analysts said their main goal apparently is to persuade the government to stop 
the extradition of Colombians to the United States for trial there on drug 
charges. 
In announcing the surrender of the cocaine laboratories in northwestern 
Colombia, the traffickers said the three installations had a combined 
production capacity of 20 tons a month. Over a year, that would amount to 40% 
of the 600 tons that U.S. officials estimate as Colombia's total cocaine 
exports. 
One American official suggested Wednesday that the capacity of the surrendered 
labs was exaggerated and that their surrender was a token gesture. 
"I don't think they have quite turned over everything," the official said. 
"When they start turning themselves in, I'll start paying attention." 
Maza Marquez, the police intelligence chief, told reporters that the three 
laboratories were no longer in use when they were turned over. 
"We are not convinced by this gesture," he said. 
Radio reporters who saw the laboratories, however, said they were complete with 
functional power plants to operate elaborate refining equipment and even to run 
air conditioners in some rooms. They said they found refrigerators still 
stocked with cold beer. 
Escorts told the reporters that the laboratories had cost $20 million and 
employed 150 people. The three installations, miles apart from one another, 
were deep in swampy forests near lagoons where hydroplanes could land, the 
reporters said. 
The surrender of the laboratories followed the pattern of a publicity campaign 
that Carlos Lemos Simmonds, the minister of government (roughly equivalent to 
interior minister in other countries), said is aimed at convincing Colombians 
that the traffickers have become worthy of public trust and government 
leniency. Lemos told two foreign correspondents Tuesday in Bogota that the 
campaign also carries an implicit threat that if there is no positive response 
by the government, "narco-terrorism" may resume. 
"They do not lose hope that the Colombian government, under public pressure, 
will make concessions to them," Lemos said. 
Among the concessions that the traffickers hope for is an end to extradition, 
he said. Since August, when the government issued an emergency decree 
permitting extradition, 14 accused traffickers have been sent to the United 
States for trial. 
Lemos said 14 more extradition requests are being processed, and the government 
does not intend to negotiate with the traffickers on that or any other issue. 
BACKGROUND 
Coca, a shrub sacred to Andean highlands Indians who have chewed its leaves for 
centuries to counter hunger and thirst, is the natural resource of an illegal 
international industry worth billions of dollars. Chemically processed into 
cocaine, coca grown in the Andes can be harvested three or more times a year, 
experts say. Peru and Bolivia grow most of the world's coca, but Colombia 
dominates in producing cocaine and smuggling it to other countries, especially 
the United States. Peru's annual coca production is about 115,000 tons, U.S. 
officials say, and Bolivia produces an estimated 130,000 tons. Police experts 
estimate that Peruvian drug gangs earn about $1.2 billion a year from the drug 
trade. They add that about $200 million is paid annually to guerrilla groups 
for protection of processing labs and the planes that transport the coca base. 
