WARNER RIDGE PLAN OKD WHILE BRADLEY IS AWAY; 
POLITICS: UNCERTAIN OF THE MAYOR'S INTENTIONS, COUNCILWOMAN PICUS GETS ACTING 
MAYOR FERRARO TO APPROVE THE CONTROVERSIAL NON-COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT.; 
POLITICS: WITH TOM BRADLEY OUT OF TOWN, CITY COUNCIL PRESIDENT JOHN FERRARO 
SIGNS INTO LAW A MEASURE PROHIBITING COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT IN WARNER RIDGE. 
Los Angeles City Councilwoman Joy Picus outflanked a developer and possibly 
Mayor Tom Bradley by getting a measure killing commercial development at Warner 
Ridge signed into law by the city's acting mayor Wednesday only hours after 
Bradley left town. 
At Picus' request, City Council President John Ferraro -- who acts as mayor in 
Bradley's absence -- signed the measure zoning the 21.5-acre Warner Ridge 
property to permit only single-family homes. The measure had received final 
approval from the council only the day before. 
Developer Albert Spound had urged Bradley to veto it. Spound and his partner, 
Johnson Wax Development Co., want to build a half-dozen low-rise office 
structures on the Woodland Hills site, while Picus has been trying for the past 
year to block the development. 
It could not be determined whether Ferraro's action reversed what Bradley would 
have done or simply did it earlier. Bradley, who was in Washington, D.C., could 
not be reached for comment. 
Bradley aides said Tuesday that the mayor had not made up his mind on the issue 
but intended to review it carefully. Until Ferraro acted, Bradley had until 
next week to do so. 
But a livid Spound said the mayor's planning deputy, Jane Blumenfeld, had 
signaled him that Bradley intended to veto the single-family plan. Blumenfeld 
and other Bradley aides, including Deputy Mayor Mark Fabiani, did not return 
phone calls about the issue. 
"We had the veto," Spound said. "We were completely robbed." 
The measure passed the council by a vote of 12 to 1. Even if Bradley had vetoed 
the measure, Picus could have overridden the veto if she held onto those votes. 
Spound said he intended to sue the city to overturn the single-family zoning. 
"We're putting the finishing touches on our lawsuit," he said. 
Picus asked Ferraro on Tuesday evening to sign the single-family zoning measure 
into law after learning Bradley was scheduled to leave town Wednesday -- the 
first day the measure would be on the mayor's desk. 
Ferraro, who sided with Picus on the Warner Ridge council votes, automatically 
becomes acting mayor when Bradley leaves the city. 
Bradley left Wednesday for Washington on an 8:45 a.m. flight from Los Angeles 
International Airport to attend an illiteracy conference and is due to return 
Friday afternoon. Ferraro said he signed the measure at 10:15 a.m., less than 
two hours later. 
"I knew John would sign it, but I had no idea what Tom would do," Picus said. 
Meanwhile, some city officials speculated that Ferraro tackled the Warner Ridge 
measure in part to demonstrate the council's displeasure with recent Bradley 
efforts to intervene in planning matters. Council members traditionally regard 
as one of their prerogatives virtual sole say-so on planning issues in their 
districts. 
Ferraro denied such speculation, saying he acted only to help Picus. "She's one 
of my constituents. She votes for president of the council," he said. 
But Ferraro, who as the council's leader is also champion of the lawmaking 
body's prerogatives, also told a reporter that he had noticed the mayor "has 
gotten very involved in planning matters recently." 
Ferraro then cited several cases in which Bradley had been at loggerheads with 
council members on planning issues in their districts. Among those cases were 
Bradley's criticism last December of Councilman Hal Bernson's plans for the 
huge Porter Ranch project above Chatsworth and the mayor's recent efforts to 
help devise a development plan for Farmers Market, an area of the Fairfax 
district represented by Ferraro. 
