NEWS ANALYSIS; 
WHEREFORES, WHYS (AND WHY NOTS?); 
WILL THE ACADEMY VOTERS CONSIDER THE YEAR'S ANGRIEST MOVIE, 'BORN ON THE FOURTH 
OF JULY,' TO BE THE BEST? DON'T BET ON IT. 
Until they were answered Wednesday, the two big questions about the Academy 
Awards nominations were which four films would join Universal's "Born on the 
Fourth of July" on the best-picture ballot, and which four directors would join 
Oliver Stone on the list of best directors. The question now is, can Stone and 
"Born on the Fourth" hold on to win? 
Given the growing sentiment for Miramax's independently made Irish film "My 
Left Foot," Disney/Touchstone's "Dead Poets Society" and Warner Bros.' "Driving 
Miss Daisy" -- three of "Born on the Fourth's" competitors on the best-picture 
ballot -- the outcome seems very much in doubt. 
"Born on the Fourth," based on the life of a man whose values were reshaped by 
his disillusionment with his and America's involvement in Vietnam, got the 
nominations predicted for it -- eight in all -- and still bears the strongest 
Oscar credentials. It is a major studio movie with social effects (much more 
popular this time of year than special effects) and is doing respectable 
business at the box office. But at a time when the Red Menace is in full 
retreat and America's political tempers are down, you have to wonder if the 
voters will consider the year's angriest movie its best. 
All four of "Born on the Fourth's" rivals are smaller, calmer pictures with 
inspirational messages that are downright sanguine by comparison. "Dead Poets 
Society" is the tale of a free-thinking English teacher's effect on 
intellectually constricted youths in a New England prep school. "Field of 
Dreams" revives traditional American ideals in a fantasy about a farmer who 
works out unsolved problems with his father by calling the ghosts of baseball 
past to workouts in his corn field. "Driving Miss Daisy" takes a leisurely look 
at black-white civility in the South through the 25-year relationship between a 
Jewish matron and her sagely chauffeur. "My Left Foot" manages to make both 
uplifting and entertaining the life of the severely disabled Irish author and 
painter Christy Brown. 
On mood alone, any one of these films might beat "Born on the Fourth." But 
traditional voting patterns with academy members give "Dead Poets Society" and 
"My Left Foot" the best chances. Like "Born on the Fourth," they were also 
nominated for best director and best screenplay, a trifecta that's almost 
imperative for a best-picture winner. 
In analyzing the nominations, it's important to remember that except for the 
best-picture category, the nominations are made by the individual branches of 
the academy. That explains how Woody Allen received nominations for both best 
director and for best original screenplay while his opinion-splitting "Crimes 
and Misdemeanors" was overlooked for best picture. 
There were notable omissions Wednesday, as usual. "Roger &amp; Me" didn't make 
the documentary-feature slate and the two Jacks -- perennial Oscar nominees 
Jack Lemmon and Jack Nicholson -- did not make the final five among best 
actors. Rob Reiner's highly popular "When Harry Met Sally" received just one 
nomination, for Nora Ephron's screenplay. Gus Van Sant's "Drugstore Cowboy," a 
small but very accessible film that won the Los Angeles, New York and National 
Society of Film Critics' awards for best screenplay, was shut out altogether. 
The failure of the directors' branch to nominate any one of the three directors 
of black-themed films -- "Do the Right Thing's" Spike Lee, "Glory's" Edward 
Zwick and "Driving Miss Daisy's" Bruce Beresford -- is a troubling footnote to 
the list of the year's best achievements. 
Lee's omission is the one surest to rile most film critics. In a 
soon-to-be-published American Film magazine poll of 80 critics, Lee topped the 
list of directors and "Do the Right Thing" led all pictures. Lee did get a 
nomination Wednesday for his screenplay, but it was his boldness as a director 
taking an uncompromising look at race relations in inner-city Brooklyn that 
most influenced critics. 
"Glory," whose combination of history lesson, spectacle and critical success 
made it a perfect Oscar candidate, was omitted from the best picture, director 
and screenplay ballots, though the film received five other nominations. The 
fact that two black actors were nominated -- Morgan Freeman for "Driving Miss 
Daisy" and Denzel Washington for "Glory" -- hardly reflects a year that 
produced the most first-rate, mainstream black-themed films in history. 
But the most glaring of all the omissions was Bruce Beresford from the 
best-director list. "Driving Miss Daisy" led all films with nine nominations, 
and could have taken the front-runner label away from "Born on the Fourth" had 
Beresford also been nominated. The last time a movie received as many 
nominations without receiving one for its creative leader was in 1986 when "The 
Color Purple" (another black-themed film with a white director) got 11 
nominations but failed to land Steven Spielberg on the best-director list. 
"The Color Purple" did not win any Oscars, but the snub of Spielberg was 
mitigated personally by his winning the Directors Guild of America award that 
year. Beresford failed to get a nomination from either group. 
Only three of this year's DGA nominees made it onto the Oscar ballot. DGA 
nominees Rob Reiner ("When Harry Met Sally") and Phil Alden Robinson ("Field of 
Dreams") were displaced on the academy's best-director list by Kenneth Branagh 
("Henry V") and Jim Sheridan ("My Left Foot"). 
If the academy's 4,800 voting members follow traditional patterns, they will go 
for one of the three movies whose directors were also nominated. Tradition also 
favors films whose directors win the DGA award (only three times since 1949 has 
the DGA winner not also won the Oscar). That would make Oliver Stone's "Born on 
the Fourth" and Peter Weir's "Dead Poets Society" the leading contenders for 
the Academy Awards. 
But in a year that has seen five pre-Oscar best-picture awards -- from four 
critics groups and the Hollywood Foreign Press Assn. -- go to five different 
pictures, all bets are off. This year's Oscar show could go the way of 1982's, 
when "On Golden Pond" and "Reds" split several of the major awards and 
"Chariots of Fire" slipped in to win for best picture. 
The wise money in office Oscar pools, as at race tracks, will be on the 
favorite, which still figures to be "Born on the Fourth of July." But the odds 
are not as prohibitive as they seemed a few weeks ago. "Born on the Fourth" is 
not the runaway box-office hit that made Stone's "Platoon" impossible to ignore 
in 1987. 
Among the best-picture nominees, "Dead Poets Society" is the top wage earner, a 
summer release that grossed $96 million (10th best on the year's box-office 
list) and overcame the industry's infamously short memory during the 
nominations period. 
"Driving Miss Daisy" has been surprisingly commercial, considering its subject 
matter, and is getting a boost at just the right time. Warner Bros., which 
elsewhere suffered disappointments with the shut-out of "Roger &amp; Me" and 
the general dismissal of "Batman," has just eased "Driving Miss Daisy" into 
wide national release. Its continued popular success could persuade enough 
voters to forsake their director/picture tandem voting behavior and drive "Miss 
Daisy" all the way. 
But don't be surprised if the smallest film in the field, "My Left Foot," ends 
up with the biggest prize. Its nominations for best screenplay and best 
direction were not unusual, since the director and writer branches of the 
Academy are small. But the fact that it received enough votes from the general 
membership to place it on the best-picture ballot indicates more support than 
almost anyone imagined it had. 
