A JUROR'S TRIALS; 
MARK BASSETT THOUGHT JURY DUTY MIGHT BE A LARK. AFTER THE MCMARTIN TRIAL, HE 
KNEW BETTER. 
Mark Bassett was actually rather pleased when he received a summons to jury 
duty, his first ever, back in March, 1987. Things had been "kind of hectic" at 
work and, he says, "I kind of looked at it as a vacation," a couple of weeks 
sitting in the jury room, maybe a few days on a case. 
Fellow employees at Symult Systems, a scientific computer company in Monrovia, 
suggested the possibility of his being chosen as a juror for the 
much-publicized McMartin Pre-school child molestation case, which promised to 
be drawn out. "Wouldn't it be funny if I got on . . . " Bassett said. 
In July, nine weeks after he reported for jury duty, and having to his surprise 
survived a rigorous selection process during which many (500) were called but 
few were chosen, Bassett, a research scientist, found himself seated as an 
alternate McMartin juror. 
He was the final alternate to be picked, one of six ready to replace any of the 
12 jurors should it become necessary. 
Little did he know that he had just become a player in what would be the 
longest and most expensive criminal trial in history. By the time it ended, it 
would have cost the taxpayers close to $15 million. 
What was the cost to one juror, Mark Bassett? 
For starters, he lost his job when the company for which he had worked for six 
years went bankrupt; unlike the other employees, Bassett was not free to look 
for another. 
And, he says, the trial was "very draining. You're dealing with extremely 
emotional issues. And there's no one in the whole world you can talk to and 
say, 'This is rough,' and why." 
He remembers in vivid detail the "riveting" testimony of the McMartin children, 
the anatomically graphic exhibits, the sobs from their parents as the "not 
guilty" verdicts were read. 
"There were a whole lot of issues I've had to deal with (that) the average 
person would not have to deal with," he says. "This case took the jury through 
all the aspects of human experience." 
He says he became really aware for the first time of "the trauma child abuse 
has on families. If I were to become a parent someday, that would be something 
that would be a lot more on my mind." 
Although, on reflection, he says, "I really would rather have not been on" the 
jury, he views the process as a positive experience, one that gave him added 
self-confidence, taught him "a bit about trying to be tactful," about the 
subtle art of negotiation, about learning to "think critically." 
They were a diverse lot, these jurors. They included a supermarket checker, a 
Pacific Bell employee, a biomedical technician, a meat packer, an engineer, a 
mechanic, a federal government employee and a stock clerk. Few among them, 
Bassett acknowledges, were people who otherwise might have touched his life. 
Like them, he had passed intense scrutiny by prosecution and defense attorneys 
and by Superior Court Judge William R. Pounders, who presided at the trial -- 
"Were you ever molested as a child? Have you ever molested anyone? What do you 
read?" 
What did he know about the case, they had asked Bassett. The truth, he says, is 
that all he knew was "that it was kind of a mess." 
Did he have close friends or relatives, they wanted to know, who worked with 
abused children? He acknowledges, "I did kind of make a list of people I knew 
in child care, which I assumed would get me off." And, yes, there was a good 
friend in Memphis, a psychologist who works with abused children; at the time 
Bassett was making plans to attend his wedding. 
That probably clinched it, he remembers thinking to himself -- he wouldn't be 
able to buy his way onto this jury. 
Besides, he says, "I always heard that lawyers tend not to like intelligent 
people" on juries. And here he was, with an undergraduate degree from Princeton 
and a Ph.D. in chemical engineering from CalTech. 
Pounders had told prospective jurors that the trial was apt to last close to a 
year, and, Bassett says, "I saw it as a great imposition." Nevertheless, he 
answered the questions honestly -- "I didn't think they'd believe I didn't 
understand the concept of reasonable doubt," for example, he says. Some other 
would-be jurors stated outright they didn't want to serve; despite that, some 
were picked. 
Bassett smiles and says, "I guess the attorneys' attitude was that it's a dirty 
job, but someone has to do it." 
He was less than overjoyed, as was his employer, who would continue to pay his 
salary, when told he could be off the job a year. Still, he says, the personnel 
people were "understanding and very supportive" of him but "kind of mad at the 
court system." 
The McMartin trial got under way on July 13, 1987. Two years and six months 
later -- on Jan. 18, 1990 -- their job done, the jurors would leave the 
courtroom to resume normal lives. 
During the course of one life, many things happen in 2 1/2 years. Among the 12 
original jurors and six alternates, there were illnesses, personal tragedies 
and moments of joy. 
Juror John Breese lost his wife and remarried. Juror Brenda Williams was 
married. There was a recess after the death of one juror's father. One juror 
had back surgery, another suffered a stroke, another had a gallbladder 
operation. 
One juror was dismissed for failing to be attentive. "He was actually asleep in 
the jury box," Bassett says. "The other jurors had to keep waking him up." 
Before the trial ended, half of the original 12 jurors had been replaced by 
Bassett and the other alternates. At one point, the judge told the media that 
the situation for jurors was nearing "desperate straits." 
In April, 1989, Bassett, who two months earlier had replaced a regular juror 
excused because of job problems, learned that his company was bankrupt and had 
decided to "fold it up." He might have to quit the jury and find a job. 
If his soon-to-be-unemployed status was alarming news to him, it was equally so 
to Pounders, because there were no alternates left and the judge faced the 
possibility of a $15-million mistrial. So, he arranged for Bassett to go on the 
county payroll as of July 1. 
When court was in session, juror Bassett was in court. When court was not in 
session, he was a senior computer program analyst for the county, earning 
$22.72 an hour. 
"It really was very sporadic," he says. Ordinarily, he would have provided 
computer trouble-shooting to judges, among others. But, he says, "as a juror, I 
couldn't have any contact with judges." 
He hasn't been on the county job since October, he says, though the county has 
continued to carry him. But as of the end of February, he will no longer be a 
county employee. Wednesday, as District Attorney Ira Reiner announced that he 
would re-try Buckey, Bassett was on his way to San Diego for a job interview. 
At age 33, he wonders how much his high-tech field may have changed in the 2 
1/2 years that he wasn't on the front lines. Is it possible that he is no 
longer on the cutting edge? 
"I don't really know what the impact has been," he says. "I should have been 
out there doing things, making contacts. In a technical field, what's modern 
now in two years will not be as modern." 
For Bassett, a bachelor, a soft-spoken, somewhat reticent man who, probably not 
by accident, chose a career field that is technology-oriented rather than 
people-oriented, a man who joined Toastmasters to learn to present himself 
"more assertively," being a McMartin juror was a lesson in human dynamics. 
Not that all the jurors wound up fast friends. There were, of course, cliques, 
little groups that lunched together, little groups that chatted together in the 
hall during breaks. Bassett often ate in Chinatown with Luis Chang, an engineer 
who was to be elected jury foreman. 
These were people who understood that, by chance, they were tapped to share an 
extraordinary experience. There were ties that bound. When juror Breese, a 
biomedical technician widowed during the trial, remarried in mid-November, 
Bassett was among the half-dozen juror-guests at the wedding. When juror John 
Duggan suffered a stroke, Bassett and some of the others visited him in the 
hospital. Duggan later dropped by the courthouse to say hello. 
In their 30 months in court, the jurors shared each others' joys and tragedies. 
Often, they laughed together. Sometimes, they acted silly. Some jurors 
developed a little ritual, Bassett recalls: On the 15th of each month, jurors' 
payday, they "would ask the clerk of the court where their checks were. And 
he'd say 'the check's in the mail.' " They each earned $10 per diem, plus 
mileage one way.) 
In early January, a few of them created a flap when, while passing time in the 
jury room, they helped a colleague come up with a catchy vanity license plate 
for a new car. On the blackboard, they wrote some suggestions: Jurypro. 
Hungjury. Hangman. 
Neither the judge nor the attorneys were amused. "The judge called us in one by 
one and asked us, 'Did you participate in this? What did the things written 
down mean to you?' " 
On the second anniversary of their service, the jurors all chipped in and feted 
themselves with a cake. "Kind of an obvious message to the judge," Bassett 
says. 
And, of course, the inevitable happened to several jurors during the trial: 
Several of them received summonses to jury duty. 
"In a story of children against adults, if Hollywood were doing the script, the 
children would win," Bassett says. 
But the McMartin case wasn't Hollywood, where the action is quick and dramatic, 
the plot straightforward, every minute in the courtroom action-packed. 
Bassett has to smile as he compares the reality of the McMartin trial -- hours 
of boredom punctuated by moments of emotion -- with the movies' depictions of 
dramatic events. He observes that the escapades of an Indiana Jones may sell 
tickets but in real life you can't tell "an unbelievable story" and expect to 
be believed. 
And ultimately, Bassett and the other jurors -- at the end, eight men and four 
women -- found the prosecution's story too hard to believe. There simply was no 
evidence, he says, that "all this bizarre stuff" charged by the prosecution 
actually happened. 
Jurors sat through 60,000 pages of testimony, heard 124 witnesses and viewed 
more than 900 exhibits. At times, their heads reeled. 
He turned to copious note-taking as a way of venting his feelings. "You're not 
allowed to tell anyone how frustrated you are," he says. 
Observing the action from his seat, fourth from the witness stand, second row 
of the jurors' box, Bassett became fascinated with the "theatrics" of the 
court, with the way seemingly unrelated and at times superfluous snippets of 
information fit together as parts of opposing attorneys' grand plans. 
But he's still puzzled about the turtle caper. A great fuss was made over some 
turtle shells dug up in a vacant lot next to the Manhattan Beach preschool and 
entered as exhibits, presumably to bolster the prosecution contention that 
there were satanic animal sacrifice rituals at the school. But in the final 
arguments, Bassett says, "They never mentioned them." 
He believes he set the record on this jury for most steno notebooks filled, 20, 
on both sides. They're packed in a cardboard box that he calls "my repository 
of McMartin memorabilia." 
He acknowledges, "I'm kind of a sentimental guy." 
The box also contains a bound copy of media coverage of the trial, a gift to 
each juror from Judge Pounders that Bassett is still reading through, and 
Polaroid snapshots of the bailiff and court clerk, both "pretty agreeable 
guys." 
Bassett's memories include a glimpse of Pounders, during a recess, polishing 
the attorneys' lectern. They also include his continual fear that during a long 
session he would have to excuse himself to use the bathroom. "It would have 
been so embarrassing if you had to raise your hand in front of all those 
people." 
The trial ground on. 
As jurors waited for sessions to begin (often late), and during court delays, 
they whiled away hours in the jury room. Three were dedicated crossword puzzle 
buffs. The first few days someone brought in a Uno deck; everyone played. 
"Then," Bassett says, "people got tired of that." Later, he brought a chess 
set. And there was a cribbage tournament, but, he says, "I don't think there 
was ever a winner declared." 
Outside of court, did the trial take over his life? "It really did," he says. 
"There was so much stress." On weekends and during breaks, he went into the San 
Gabriel Mountains to "find a stream and hike along it, just to kind of get away 
from it all." 
Some nights, he combatted the tension and frustration by jogging on the CalTech 
track, near his home, or by working out in the CalTech weight room. Sometimes 
he simply stayed home and indulged in "mindless recreation," including 
Nintendo. 
His roommates, a teacher's aide and an engineer, understood that he could not 
discuss the case. 
At home, of course, he had to make a point of avoiding reading about or seeing 
television coverage of the case. The latter presented no problem, he says, 
because he rarely watches anything except "sports and national news." He judged 
by the number of reporters and cameras in the court on a given day how likely 
it was there would be newspaper coverage the next day. If the gallery was full, 
he says, "it was probably best to avoid reading the paper.' 
As he drove home each night in his tan Ford Escort, the judge's daily 
admonition to jurors rang in his head: "It is your duty not to converse among 
yourselves, or with anyone else," the sign-off line that he knew by heart. 
During mini-breaks in the trial, he backpacked in the Sierra. Each Christmas, 
he flew home to Pittsburgh to see his parents. 
And, insofar as possible, he kept up his routine, which includes Bible study at 
Lake Avenue Congregational Church in Pasadena, two nights a month at Cal 
Tech/JPL Toastmasters, and one night a week as a volunteer at Harambee, a 
private Pasadena foundation providing tutoring and computer education to 
disadvantaged youngsters. 
The judicial system, Bassett observes, is "not designed for trials running this 
long." Often, he wondered, "Why can't these guys hurry up and get the show on 
the road and let us go off and live our own lives?" 
During summer, 1988, he received a call from a headhunter in Houston wanting to 
talk with him about a job. Pounders then was estimating "we'd certainly be done 
by April, 1989. He thought it would be sooner than that." 
The estimate proved to be unduly optimistic. 
Finally, on Nov. 2, 1989, the McMartin jurors retired to deliberate, taking 
their places around an octagonal table in a 15th-floor Superior Court room 
about 20 by 20 feet. 
After choosing Chang as foreman, they reviewed the long hours of testimony. "We 
started with the child who started the case, then requested all exhibits 
relevant to him and made a list of the testimony and discussed what was 
relevant." 
Starting typically at 9:30 each morning and continuing until about 4 in the 
afternoon, when, Bassett says, "you could tell people were just kind of wearing 
down," they repeated the procedure, day after day, child by child. 
In the end, the jurors found the defendants, Raymond Buckey, 31, and Peggy 
McMartin Buckey, 63, not guilty of 52 counts of molestation; they deadlocked on 
13 counts against Raymond Buckey, who will be retried on those counts. 
There was no single moment of enlightenment for jurors, Bassett says; it was, 
rather, a long sorting out, sifting out process. "There were times," he says, 
"when things got heated, when people's tempers got short." 
But what became evident to him was that each juror felt "a certain respect for 
the others for having gone through all this." 
These 12 were, in short, survivors. They had managed to grasp what Bassett 
defines as "a certain ownership of the system. In order to stay sane, you had 
to convince yourself that it was somehow worthwhile." 
And he believes that it was. 
Bassett has little interest in debating the verdicts. Asked if he believes Ray 
Buckey was innocent or guilty, he says he cannot give "yes" or "no" answers. He 
has, he says, "a feeling of confusion . . . so many good people locked in such 
implacable conflict. . . . " 
He adds "Gee, it would be nice if we could hop in a time machine and zip back 
and go and watch and see if anything happened" to the children. But "given the 
limitations of the evidence we had to rely on," he is convinced the jury did 
its job. 
Some McMartin parents, voiced outrage about the verdicts, have been campaigning 
for the retrial. Bassett says he understands what they have been going through. 
Public opinion, clearly, has been in conflict with the jurors' decision. 
Bassett, however, says he is at peace with the verdicts. 
Hearing of prosecutors' decision to retry Buckey, Bassett said, "Here we go 
again, for another 2 1/2 years. . . . I have to agree with the judge that this 
case is really poison to everybody that's come in contact with it." 
Jury-bashing has been rampant, Bassett says: "I think a lot of it really is 
unfair. I mean, people with a particular point of view can just put their side 
of the evidence forward and say, yes, this is the evidence and why didn't the 
jury agree with us. There's no one to put forth the other side." 
When the trial ended, "I thought I would just basically disappear and never be 
heard from again," he says, adding, "I'm a private person." 
But when he arrived home the afternoon of Jan. 18, there were already six 
messages on his answering machine, three from the media. Geraldo has called, as 
has 60 Minutes and People magazine. 
Bassett still is weighing the experience of being a McMartin juror, and, thus, 
a footnote to history. 
"Right now," he says, "I'm just trying to repair the damage and get life back 
to normal. I have a feeling that, five or 10 years down the road, after all the 
immediate damage has been repaired, it'll probably be something I look upon as 
a worthwhile experience. 
"There's kind of a satisfaction in feeling that 12 of us who were chosen 
randomly could end up being a team, that we could deal with all that evidence 
and hopefully, at the end, make some rational sense out of it." 
He says of the experience, "It'll be something to tell my grandchildren about." 
And if he were to receive another summons to jury duty? 
Bassett smiles and says, "I would probably make some effort to be excused." 
