DIANNE KLEIN: AN OIL-SOAKED BIRD IS A SORROWFUL SIGHT 
Up the road, tourists, high school kids and the locals crowd around outraged 
environmentalists demanding accountability and change. 
The environmentalists rail against offshore oil drilling and greed. They point 
to the oil-slick sea beyond the Huntington Beach pier. Television cameras bear 
down. Microphones and sound booms reverberate with angry noise. 
Here inside a cluttered lifeguard storage garage about a mile away, it is 
quieter, but the smell of oil is so heavy you can taste it. 
Millicent Wood of the International Bird Rescue Research Center pulls a western 
grebe, its feathers dull with crude, from a cardboard box. 
The red of its eyes, terrified, cut like unblinking lasers. Its cry is sharp 
and loud, bone chilling in its pain. The bird urinates and tries to fight back, 
but Wood's hand has clamped firmly around its long, thin beak. 
About 300,000 gallons of oil spilled into the ocean off Huntington Beach from 
the hull of the American Trader, carrying British Petroleum crude oil. It was 
an accident. 
Here in the storage garage, though, one can see what carelessness really means. 
So far, 25 oil-drenched birds, alive and suffering, have arrived. Eight others 
were dead from the spill. 
These numbers, of course, will surely change. The estimates are that they will 
get worse. 
Soon, I am sure, people will begin to put this in perspective. They will say 
that the animal death toll at Huntington Beach is, comparatively, not bad. 
Nearly 500 sea otters were killed in Valdez waters, more than 2,800 birds. The 
oil that blanketed Alaska's Prince William Sound congealed with the cold. In 
Surf City, evaporation from a warm sun may lessen the harm. 
But when I see these birds, all of this becomes an abstraction, only marginally 
meaningful to the sorrow at hand. The oil has clogged the aquatic lifeline. 
Here is only the most visible proof. 
When a bird is coated in oil, its feathers lose their ability to protect the 
creature from the cold. Its waterproofing protection is ruined. 
Birds such as the grebe, which dive for their food, find themselves unable to 
fly away. Those that are able to swim try desperately to hold their heads above 
the water. 
Here in Huntington Beach, human arrogance and bumbling has, once again, brought 
environmental tragedy close at hand. 
Jon Fischer, an officer of the state Department of Fish and Game, reaches 
inside a cardboard box for another blackened grebe that a volunteer has found 
on the shore. The bird screams and tries to bite, which is a good sign. There 
is life worth saving. 
The bird is weighed and its temperature taken rectally, as one would do with a 
small child. Its leg is tagged and then Millicent Wood fills a syringe with 
Pedialyte, an electrolyte-rich solution for sick children, and places the thin 
rubber tubing down the bird's throat. It drinks. 
In a minute, the bird will join the others in a long plywood box, like a crude 
coffin, which is cushioned with crushed newspaper and draped with a white 
sheet. Here the birds rest and regain some of their body heat. 
The oil fumes will lessen with time. Perhaps some of the sea creatures will 
eat. People are to be kept away. In about 24 hours, after the birds have calmed 
down, they will be washed with a solution of water and Dawn detergent, the one 
that experience proves works best. 
This, now, is the procedure, grimly calm and assured. Wednesday night, before 
British Petroleum agreed to pay the Berkeley-based bird rescue center to take 
charge, volunteers scrubbed off the first six birds right away. 
Volunteers have been quick to offer their help in Huntington Beach. Mothers and 
fathers have come with their children. People have taken off work. 
As I watch, one woman brings in a pigeon which she thinks has been damaged by 
the spill. 
Jon Fischer looks at it, holding it in his hand, and determines that it is 
merely ill. Then he picks up a dead grebe, limp and slick, and shows the woman 
what she should look for. She nods, and leaves to find something else. 
Then one of the volunteers says that she has gotten a call from Shell Oil, 
offering a place to house more sick birds. Everyone laughs at that one, and 
soon they start imagining the public relations benefits the company would reap. 
"I can just see it," says one Fish and Game officer. " 'We care' the ads will 
say." 
Just before I leave the garage, I ask Jon Fischer how he keeps his anger in 
check. 
"Sure I'm angry," he says. "Aren't you? It's really upsetting to see this 
happen. . . . But maybe people will get upset enough to put some safety 
measures in place to protect our resources. If that happens, then it is 
possible that this, at least in some regard, could be a good thing." 
