ANN CONWAY: GALA OPENS DECORATIVE ARTS CENTER 
"We're really not about parties," whispered Gep Durenberger, knee-deep in a 
crush of revelers at the gala opening of the Center for the Study of Decorative 
Arts in San Juan Capistrano. "But you need them to get things going. We're 
about home -- studying about preserving beauty in the home." 
Well, everyone knows there's no place like home for a cozy, elegant party, and 
the guest list proved it on Saturday night. That's when such members of the 
rich-and-famous set as producer Norman Lear, mega-developer Donald Koll and 
business magnate Gavin Herbert -- each an admirer of Durenberger, the 
antiquarian who started it all -- swept into the new center to peruse period 
vignettes and polish off paella, French chocolate cake and white-chocolate ice 
cream. 
And such a home. The second you set foot on its tiny porch, you knew it was 
going to be a party package wrapped in style: the scalloped canopy that framed 
the doorway was festooned with bouquets of flowers and centered with a 
twinkling chandelier. White camellias drifted in a gushing patio fountain. 
Inside, fires roared. Classics by Porter and Gershwin were played on a 
mirror-finish grand piano. And champagne and appetizers were proffered from 
gleaming silver trays. 
"I feel like I've given birth," said Durenberger, brown eyes dancing as he 
drank in the richly appointed center, the first of its kind on the West Coast. 
"Really! We've had twins here! Maybe even quintuplets." 
John Saladino, the revered New York interior designer who was a school chum of 
Durenberger at Notre Dame (and is now busy-busy creating lush looks for Lyn and 
Norman Lear's new Los Angeles mansion), said the center is unique in the 
nation. 
"You see this kind of thing in Europe, but for the West Coast, this is a rare 
opportunity for people to expand themselves culturally and at the same time 
learn about what their great-great-grandmother may have lived with and what 
they may now own." 
On view through May 6 is an exhibit entitled "California Style: Collectors and 
Collections," which includes such items as the 18th-Century cherry highboy 
loaned by locals Lori and Bob Warmington. "We've been collecting furniture 
since we were first married," Lori said. "The pieces are like children, a very 
special part of our lives." 
Art Birtcher, director of development for the center, and his wife, Gaye, 
honorary chairwoman of the gala, loaned their tabernacle, circa 1500, to the 
Renaissance vignette. Carved heads of a man and a woman decorate the sides of 
the rare piece, and a carved Cross of Godfrey of the Knights of the Holy 
Sepulchre embellishes the front. 
"How perfectly appropriate to have the center in San Juan Capistrano, where we 
have so much history," said Gaye, greeting guests with a mink tossed over her 
bare shoulders. (Fur was the wrap of choice. It was cold outside.) 
Gala chairwoman Electa Anderson wowed the crowd in an ecru opera coat that once 
belonged to her great-great-grandmother. She said she decided to become 
involved with the center after meeting Durenberger only a few months ago. "I 
could see right away he was the kind of man who makes dreams come true." 
Electa had a secret: She and her husband, Norman, were celebrating their 24th 
wedding anniversary at the affair. Underneath her lace-inset coat was her 
pearl-trimmed wedding dress. "I'm all CONWAYfor family," she said. "And I'm all 
for establishing a purpose for beautiful decor and an attachment to it." 
Durenberger said he thinks that the center's supporters must have been taught 
about beauty in their childhoods. "And learning about beauty makes you a better 
person. There's something very basic about it . . . a reverence. You don't even 
have to understand it." 
Also at the center of things: Lyn Lear, Norman's newish, young and charming 
wife, who said that the couple collect "a lot of modern art" and that their new 
home is going to be a mix of modern and classic; Marguerite Holub, who, during 
dinner, sat next to Norman Lear and told him that she remembers meeting his 
first wife, Frances (publisher of Lear's magazine); and designer Martha 
Gresham. 
Plus, David and Bette Auerbach (in the night's sartorial showstopper: a 
black-jet-beaded fuchsia silk ball gown by Nina Ricci) and Marsha and Phil 
Schwartze, who said he had been to San Juan Capistrano's sister city Petra (in 
Majorca), birthplace of Junipero Serra, and that it is so much like Capistrano, 
"with its swallows and rollings hills, that Father Serra must have felt right 
at home here." 
Other faces in the crowd: San Juan Capistrano Mayor Gary L. Hausdorfer; Jack 
and Jody Pike; Chris and John Luhrs; Harry and Diane Johnson (the designer who 
worked with Don and Dorothy Koll on their breathtaking chateau-by-the-bay in 
Newport); Joyce Mac Rae, an editor of House and Garden magazine, and Phil 
Jacoby, president of Marbella Golf and Country Club, who helped underwrite the 
affair. 
Special favors of fragrance were provided by Tiffany &amp; Co. 
