LITTER ON THE ROAD -- IT JUST BUGS EXPERT 
On a drizzly winter afternoon Dan Syrek stalks the edge of a city street, 
sloshing through mud puddles and dodging chuckholes, when he spots a piece of 
plastic sheeting beneath a bush. He clicks a hand counter to record the 
finding. 
A few feet away he spots a few shards of plaster. Click. A large sheet of 
cardboard. Click. Scattered pieces of wood. Click. 
To the uninitiated, the items being recorded are merely trash, the random 
detritus of a mobile society. But to litter expert Syrek, they represent a 
significant trend. 
The plastic sheeting, the cardboard and the plaster are categorized by Syrek as 
"accidental litter," items that he assumes flew off the beds of uncovered 
pickup trucks. So for the next 10 minutes, to confirm his litter hypothesis, he 
studies the traffic flow. 
His hypothesis is confirmed. About 15% of all vehicles traveling on this 
particular street are uncovered pickup trucks -- an unusually high percentage. 
"Encourage more truck drivers around here to put covers on the backs of their 
trucks," Syrek says, "and you'll cut litter on this street significantly." 
Syrek, widely viewed as the nation's foremost authority on roadside litter, is 
the man that communities turn to when they have a litter problem. 
When highway officials in Texas wanted to reduce the state's roadside litter, 
they called Syrek. He spent months spying on Texas litterers and determined who 
was doing most of the littering (18- to 34-year-old men), and where (rural 
highways). The state then knew who to design their anti-litter campaign for and 
where to place the ads. 
In Hawaii, Syrek discovered that tourists did much of their littering at 
roadside spots with sweeping ocean views. The state placed trash cans at these 
spots and significantly cut litter. 
And in Washington state, he helped officials cut down on accidental litter by 
suggesting that public landfills charge owners of uncovered pickup trucks 
double the standard dumping fee. 
"Syrek's unique in his field -- he's the only full-time independent litter 
consultant around," said Don Clark, a director for the Texas State Highway 
Department. "When we were looking for someone to help us with our litter 
program, I asked around to other states and everyone gave Syrek high marks." 
Syrek has conducted litter studies in 17 states and three Canadian provinces. 
Based on his research, he has little good to say about his home state's 
litter-control efforts. He has determined that while California is the leader 
in many environmental areas, it is sadly deficient in its litter program. 
"When I go around the country doing work, I'm embarrassed to tell people I live 
in California," says Syrek. "We're got a real litter problem here." 
The amount of litter in California has gone up about 25% in the last decade, 
Syrek said, while state funding for cleaning up litter has dropped. With 
environmental issues such as global warming, oil spills and toxic chemicals 
dominating the news, the environmental community in California has neglected 
the growing litter problem, Syrek says. 
When asked why litter is so important, Syrek bristles. The man who has made 
litter his life's work holds out a forefinger and begins listing the ways 
litter plagues society. 
"Litter is expensive -- the cleanup bill in California is at least $100 million 
a year. Litter diverts resources -- people employed to clean up litter could be 
doing other important things. Litter affects property values -- nobody wants to 
live in a neighborhood filled with broken bottles and fast-food wrappers." 
After 17 years as a full-time litter consultant, Syrek still has not lost his 
enthusiasm for roadside refuse. He talks tirelessly, hour after hour, in a 
manner closer to a monologue than a conversation, about accidental litter, 
accumulated litter, fresh litter, visible litter and total litter. 
The office in his Sacramento home is filled with 300 computer disks containing 
litter data and dozens of folders jammed with litter charts, litter graphs and 
litter reports that he has written, such as "Summary of Recent Developments in 
Litter Control," and "Changes in Visible Litter since 1985." 
Syrek becomes irritated when litter is referred to as trash or garbage or junk. 
"Trash," he said, scowling, "is a very poor word. Trash is what's in a trash 
can. Garbage is related to food. Junk is something like an old car." 
Fixing a visitor with an intent stare, he declares somberly: "What is litter? 
Litter is solid waste in the wrong place." 
Syrek has dozens of arcane litter statistics at his disposal. During the course 
of a conversation, he said that 27% of all litter is from fast-food 
restaurants. Littering declines 50% in the rain. Seventy-five percent of all 
litterers are male. Animals tipping over trash cans represent 1.1% of the 
nation's total litter. 
Syrek's plethora of litter data enabled Texas highway officials to devise one 
of the nation's most successful litter programs. In the mid-1980s, Texas was 
spending $20 million a year cleaning up roadside litter, and the amount was 
increasing by $3 million a year. 
Based on Syrek's data, Texas designed a campaign that reduced litter from 1985 
to 1989 by 60%, saving the state millions of dollars, said Clark, the Texas 
highway official. 
In the past, most anti-litter ads politely asked people not to litter, Syrek 
said, and featured cute little animals. But the typical litterer in Texas, 
Syrek determined, would not be influenced by this approach. 
"We're talking about a guy named 'Bubba,' who drives a pickup truck, watches 
football all day and drinks a lot of beer . . . in short a total slob," Syrek 
said. ". . . If this guy sees a billboard with a cute little owl asking him not 
to litter, he'll throw a beer can at it." 
So Texas devised a macho advertising campaign with the menacing slogan, "Don't 
Mess With Texas." It featured professional football players such as Ed (Too 
Tall) Jones and gravel-voiced country-Western singers. The program was so 
successful that Oklahoma soon launched a similar campaign with another 
no-nonsense slogan: "Don't lay that trash on Oklahoma." 
Syrek, who has an undergraduate degree in industrial engineering, was working 
for a research foundation near Sacramento in the early 1970s when he was named 
project manager of a litter survey. By the time the survey was completed, Syrek 
was so fascinated by the many facets of litter that he entered the field full 
time. 
"I saw at once that this was a field where no serious scientific research had 
ever been done . . . it was virgin territory," Syrek said, eyes shining. "And 
unlike most scientific fields, I didn't need any expensive laboratory 
equipment. With litter, you just go out on the street and count it." 
Now he earns about $50,000 a year as a litter consultant and has more work than 
he can handle. He has already agreed to conduct litter surveys this year in 
Louisiana, Florida, Minnesota and Alberta, Canada. 
Syrek, small and intense, wears a yellow hard hat and orange fluorescent vest 
while conducting litter surveys. On a recent afternoon, as he was preparing for 
a litter count at an empty lot in North Sacramento, he turned to a visitor and 
said, "Don't say anything until I'm through counting. I've got to concentrate." 
Since 1981, he has been monitoring seven sites in Sacramento for litter trends. 
In addition to charting standard litter data, Syrek also feels he is on the 
cutting edge of societal behavior. He said he was among the first to know that 
condom use had risen sharply. He knows cigarette consumption is down because he 
finds fewer empty packs. And he knows all about the crack epidemic from the 
thousands of small plastic bags he finds in the streets. 
He is constantly amused by the love notes he finds during his litter patrols 
and he stores them all in a file folder. They range from the torrid -- an 
assignation note blown off a windshield -- to the ebullient -- "I'm so glad I 
met you, baby" -- and the poignant -- a letter from a boy to his girlfriend's 
mother, conveying his honorable intentions and his hope that the mother would 
no longer try to keep them apart. Syrek found the letter torn in half, 
unopened. 
"These little slices of life, these random samples of America make my work 
interesting," Syrek said. "Most scientists are stuck in their cubicles all day, 
but I enjoy being able to get out of the office for my research. And, you 
know," he said earnestly, "you can really learn a lot about a place through its 
litter." 
