BUSH CAUTIONS AGAINST GLOBAL WARMING STEPS THAT BURDEN INDUSTRY 
President Bush cautioned an international gathering of scientists today against 
seeking solutions to global warming that would burden major industries. 
Bush promised U.S. support for "aggressive and thoughtful action" to solve the 
problems posed by global warming and announced that he is calling a meeting at 
the White House this spring bringing together top environmentalists, economists 
and ecologists to grapple with the issue. 
But he sounded a note of caution against scientists and environmentalists who 
believe that the warming of the Earth's atmosphere is already serious enough to 
warrant severe antipollution controls. 
"Wherever possible we believe that market mechanism should be applied and that 
our policies must be consistent with economic growth and free market principles 
in all countries," Bush said in his address before the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, a U.N.-sponsored group opening a three-day meeting at 
Georgetown University. 
Environmentalists from the United States and Europe were quick to criticize 
Bush for not making a clear commitment to immediate action aimed at dealing 
with global warming. 
"It was a gross disappointment. There was more talk in the speech about 
economics than about the environment," said Daniel Becker of the Sierra Club. 
Stewart Boyle of the Assn. for the Conservation of Energy in Great Britain said 
Bush's remarks demonstrated "a leadership crisis" on the global warming issue 
at the White House. "About the only thing we can say about it is he turned up" 
at the conference, Boyle said. 
The cross section of environmentalists are attending the conference as 
observers. They said they would have liked to have seen Bush present specific 
U.S. commitments toward energy conservation and specific goals on reductions in 
carbon dioxide pollution, which is the major contributor to global warming. 
In his speech, Bush said, "We all know that human activities are changing the 
atmosphere in unexpected and in unprecedented ways." 
He said that "some may be tempted to exploit legitimate concerns for political 
positioning." 
"Where politics and opinion have outpaced the science, we are accelerating our 
support of the technology to bridge that gap," Bush said. 
White House Chief of Staff John H. Sununu reportedly ordered changes in the 
text to mute U.S. concerns about global warming. Sununu acknowledged Sunday 
that he had made some changes, but said they were simply to make the speech 
"reflective" of Administration policy. 
Sununu also criticized "faceless" environmental bureaucrats he said want to 
force Americans to give up their cars. 
