HIGH SCHOOL BOYS' BASKETBALL PLAYOFFS; 
MIRA MESA IS STRIKE THREE ON FALLBROOK 
Fallbrook High lost its big man -- senior Travis Teagle -- a day before the 
regular season final. Strike one. 
Its best outside guy -- sophomore Chris Miller -- had a 103 degree temperature. 
Strike two. 
Its opponent Tuesday night in the first round of the San Diego Section Division 
I boys' basketball playoffs -- Mira Mesa -- executed a terrific game plan to 
near perfection. Strike three. 
Fallbrook is out of the playoffs. 
Mira Mesa, with a 66-52 victory at home, advances to the second round where it 
will play No. 1 Sweetwater, an easy winner over Granite Hills. The Marauders 
(18-8) have won five in a row. Fallbrook (16-11) lost its last four. 
Mira Mesa Coach Tim Cunningham knew of Fallbrook's condition and hoped his team 
would not relent. He need not have worried. 
Mixing things up at both ends of the court, Mira Mesa kept the Warriors on 
their heels nearly the entire game. Cunningham deployed three different zone 
defenses and a full-court press and got balanced scoring on offense. 
Mira Mesa's Shed Smith made four of four three-pointers and scored all 14 of 
his points in the first quarter. "I just hit my first and had confidence after 
that," Smith said. 
Marc Ziegler had eight points in the second quarter and 10 in the fourth to 
finish with a game-high 18. Cal Chatham added 11 and J.J. Rowlett and Chris 
Crane nine apiece. 
A weary Miller, who was averaging 18.6 points, had nine points in the first 
half and zero in the second. Senior forward Darnell Lee picked up the slack 
with 16 points and 10 rebounds. Teagle, who suffered a knee injury Thursday in 
practice, was dearly missed as Mira Mesa controlled the inside game. 
"You've got to give them credit," Cunningham said. "(Lee) posted up well and 
made some real nice soft shots." 
The Marauders trailed just once, 8-7, five minutes into the game. Mira Mesa 
scored the first seven points, Fallbrook the next eight, and Mira Mesa the next 
10. The Marauders led by nine at the end of the first quarter and eight at the 
half. 
Fallbrook rallied late in the third and early in the fourth to pull within, 
44-42, but Mira Mesa quickly regained a 10-point advantage. "We made a run, and 
I thought we had them for a while," Fallbrook Coach Russell Keith said. 
Free throws played a big part, too. Fallbrook went to the line seven times and 
missed the first one each time. It finished five for 13. Mira Mesa made 16 or 
21, including 10 or 12 in the fourth quarter. JIM LINDGREN 
