RESCUER'S DEATH IS DARK DAY FOR SUNNYSLOPE 
Most of his friends figured he would die a hero, because when disaster erupted 
in the eastern Sierra Nevada, Vidar Anderson was almost always there. 
Forest fires, plane crashes, mountain rescues -- these were like a call to arms 
for Anderson, 58, a volunteer member of the Long Valley Fire Department. Tall 
and wiry, the retired school bus driver would invariably be the first on the 
scene. He was aggressive, friends and colleagues said, selfless, and ever calm 
in the face of danger. 
"He was fearless," Ray Turner, a fellow firefighter, recalled Tuesday as he sat 
in the local fire station, weary, grimy and subdued. "He would risk his life in 
a minute." 
On Monday, Anderson met his match on the treacherous, frozen surface of Convict 
Lake. As he struggled to reach others drowning in the frigid waters, Anderson 
crashed through the ice, slipping into the dark of the mountain lake. 
A diver from the June Lake search and rescue team managed to slide a rubber 
boat across the ice and save another would-be rescuer, Cris Baitx, but Anderson 
had dropped from sight before he could be reached. 
News of his death struck like a painful spasm in Sunnyslope, a small community 
just south of Mammoth Lakes where Anderson lived with his wife and one of his 
two daughters, and in neighboring towns. The loss of this beloved man -- 
described as the "classic good Samaritan" by one friend -- seemed unfathomable. 
"Damn, I hate to hear this," said Ed Cereda as he brushed back tears and kicked 
a boulder of ice outside the general store he manages in Tom's Place, a tiny 
town along U.S. 395. 
"There are only so many of those kind of guys around," Turner said. "Maybe he 
was the only one we had. Now we've lost him. It's a hell of a loss." 
A former Encino resident, Anderson moved with his wife, Ruth, and daughters to 
the Mammoth Lakes area in 1980. The region was ideal for Anderson, an avid 
hunter and outdoorsman. The family settled in Sunnyslope, where Anderson built 
a two-story house and landed a job driving buses for a local school district. 
Anderson -- whose lean face was distinguished by what one friend described as 
"permanent smile lines" -- became a familiar figure around town. He was the 
type who loved to stop and chat. 
"He was always out and around," recalled Paul Burns, a deputy with the Mono 
County Sheriff's Department. "You'd talk to him at the doughnut shop, at fire 
scenes." 
Anderson's reputation for selflessness was well-known. After a hunting trip, he 
would share whatever meat he brought back with local nursing homes and needy 
families, friends recalled. 
In 1982, Anderson joined the volunteer fire department, and he proved to be a 
gung-ho member. He typically beat everyone else to a disaster scene -- 
including a fiery plane crash that killed three people last month -- and often 
took a lead role in risky rescue operations. After retiring recently from the 
school district, his work with the fire department increased. 
"Either he or I was always the first on the scene of an accident," Burns said. 
Another friend recalled that Anderson "always liked to be the guy on the 
nozzle" of a fire hose. 
As divers prowled beneath the ice on a grisly search for Anderson's body 
Tuesday, friends acknowledged that they often feared he would lose his life 
while seeking to save another. 
"He was not the kind of guy we ever thought was going to die in a nursing home 
of old age," Turner said. 
His daughter, Tina Anderson, 38, agreed. And, despite her grief, she said she 
is proud of all her father accomplished. "I'm glad he died a hero," she said. 
Warren reported from Los Angeles and Sappell from Sunnyslope. 
