THE ENVIRONMENT: TV COMES DOWN TO EARTH; 
TELEVISION: NBC'S 'HUNTER' TAKES ON TOXIC WASTE TONIGHT, ALF TAPES AN EARTH DAY 
SPOT, KCBS LAUNCHES A DAILY REPORT AND KTTV DECLARES ITSELF A 'MODEL' STATION. 
"I'm already from another planet; I'm not anxious to leave another." 
Late Thursday afternoon, as news reports rolled in about a 300,000-gallon oil 
spill off the coast in Orange County, Alf, the furry extraterrestrial from 
NBC's comedy series "Alf," was taping this public-service announcement, to be 
shown on the network on Earth Day, April 22. Alf was encouraging viewers to 
protect their environment -- before it's too late. 
At 10 tonight, on NBC's "Hunter," the crime-fighting heroes take on a chemical 
company, investigating the head of the plant for murder after a child dies from 
breathing toxic gas created when cyanide waste is illegally dumped in a 
neighborhood sewer. 
These are just two examples of the many environmental messages that TV watchers 
will be seeing in coming months. 
Like last December's "Prime Time to End Hunger" week, and last year's 
"designated driver" campaign to combat drunk driving, various ecology-minded 
organizations are pushing to make 1990 TV's year of the environment. 
"I can't speak for the TV industry, but there is definitely a feeling on my 
part, and the part of our writing staff, that people have to become more aware 
of their environment," said Fred Dryer, the executive producer and star of 
"Hunter." 
"You hear stories about toxic waste and dumping, and the half-life of these 
chemicals; it makes it difficult to comprehend how unconscionable some of these 
companies are," he continued. "They should be held accountable for it." 
While Dryer said that "Hunter" staffers had decided to do an environmental 
story on their own, new activist groups have sprung up to goad other Hollywood 
producers into action, joining with the continuing efforts of such 
organizations as Greenpeace, the National Resources Defense Council and the 
Sierra Club. 
Last April, a group of Hollywood heavyweights -- including producer Norman 
Lear, Disney Chairman Michael Eisner and Robert Redford -- founded the 
Environmental Media Assn. in Culver City; also new to the scene are the Los 
Angeles-based Earth Communications Office and Ted Danson's American Oceans 
campaign. The groups organize fund-raisers and meet with studio chiefs and 
producers about getting more environmental information into their programs and 
feature films. 
Even without specific environmental plot lines, expect TV's characters to 
recycle their bottles, cans and plastic containers, to car-pool, to wear 
T-shirts featuring the logos of environmental organizations, to worry about 
global warming and deforestation and to demand paper bags instead of plastic at 
the supermarket. 
Andy Spahn, president of the Environmental Media Assn., said that his group 
serves as a "clearinghouse for information" for producers, rather than trying 
to exert creative control. The group does, however, offer story suggestions in 
meetings with producers and has been asked to review some scripts. 
"We're here as a resource," Spahn said. "Simple behavioral changes like 
recycling or energy conservation, what kind of bag you take at a supermarket, 
all those kinds of things are very easily depicted within the context of a 
show. . . . In this case, there is such a tremendous level of concern about the 
environment, people want to know what they can do. The industry is reflecting 
what is happening." 
1990 will host a long list of special ecology programming. On Earth Day, ABC 
will present a two-hour "Earth Day Special" featuring Quincy Jones, Bette 
Midler, Meryl Streep and Kevin Costner, among other stars. Cable's MTV will 
feature animated public-service announcements to appeal to young viewers; HBO 
and Turner Entertainment Network both plan movies with environmental themes. 
"Profit the Earth" will air April 16 as part of a programming campaign that PBS 
has dubbed "Year of the Environment." 
Locally, KCBS Channel 2 has launched a daily environmental spot, "Steve Rambo's 
Daily Planet," during its 5 p.m. newscast, and KTTV Channel 11 has declared 
itself "a model environmental station," altering its office operations to 
reflect a new dedication to the environment, as well as adding more 
environment-themed programs to its schedule. 
CBS may even introduce a prime-time series about environmental crusaders called 
"The Elite." Richard Chapman, co-executive producer of the two-hour pilot with 
Bill Dial, said that the intent is to focus not only on environmental crimes, 
but also on natural disasters brought about by misuse of environmental 
resources -- such as an avalanche in Switzerland triggered by deforestation, 
which leads to a group of train passengers being trapped beneath the snow in a 
tunnel, or the near-extinction of Indian tribes in the Brazilian rain forest as 
a result of a modern-day gold rush. 
"The media is saturated with these large, bewildering issues," Chapman said. 
"We have the charge of boiling it all down into human terms." 
David Simon, a producer of NBC's "My Two Dads," said that working with the 
Environmental Media Assn. has only solidified his own concerns. 
"I have this theory that the '60s are here again," he said. "In the '60s, we 
were kids -- we were concerned, but there was nothing we could really do about 
it. But now we're in positions in government, and in the media, to do something 
about the things we care passionately about." 
Simon and other producers acknowledged that environmental themes may sometimes 
conflict with the goals of TV's advertisers. 
An upcoming "My Two Dads" episode, for example, deals with trying to kill a 
cockroach without using pesticides. "What if the sponsor were Raid?" Simon 
said. To avoid such potential conflicts, he explained, "You color all of your 
product references, you make indirect statements -- you have to protect where 
the buck is. This is a capitalist society." 
On "Hunter," too, said Dryer, "We don't name companies. Every major company has 
toxic waste problems; we're not asking people not to buy products because of 
that." 
At "thirtysomething," co-executive producer Marshall Herskovitz has a different 
concern. His ABC series called on the Environmental Media Assn. to help develop 
a story line this season involving a protest against the construction of an 
incinerator. Ironically, the incinerator episodes were also touted as part of 
the "Prime Time to End Hunger" campaign last December because they dealt with 
volunteerism. The show also ran an 800 number for cancer information on recent 
episodes about a character's bout with cancer. 
"All of a sudden, we're in danger of looking like the very thing that I've 
feared -- that we have some sort of pro-social agenda, that the show wants to 
change people's minds about things," Herskovitz said. 
"We are basically going about our business, telling the stories we want to 
tell," he maintained. "But in the course of that, we've been able to help out 
certain very benign groups. It's not like we're trying to follow some trend." 
