MOP-UP 'TURNS CORNER' AS MORE SHORE REOPENED; 
OIL SPILL: BIOLOGICAL TESTS FIND NO PUBLIC HEALTH THREAT. OFFICIALS SAY BEACHES 
IN MANY AREAS ARE CLEANER THAN BEFORE THE DISASTER. 
About a mile of beach between the Newport and Balboa piers was reopened Tuesday 
after a battery of biological tests found no public health threat from crude 
oil that blackened long stretches of Orange County shoreline after the Feb. 7 
spill. 
Officials announced that several more miles of shoreline in Newport Beach and 
Huntington Beach could be reopened to sunbathers and surfers today, a sign that 
the massive $12-million cleanup of the 394,000-gallon spill from the tanker 
American Trader may soon end. 
"We've definitely turned a corner," said a smiling but exhausted Huntington 
Beach Fire Chief Raymond C. Picard. 
Mop-up operations have been so thorough that Picard and others say beaches in 
many areas are cleaner than before the spill -- a bonus to beach-goers who have 
been banned for three weeks from 10 miles of some of California's most popular 
strands. Gone are bottle caps, cigarette butts and candy wrappers. "It's 
amazing," said one Newport Beach lifeguard. "It's never been this squeaky 
clean." 
Picard said that repeated sanitizing of beaches with heavy machinery has 
removed oil globs and even "fluffed" the sand. 
"If you pick this sand up and put it on a slope, you could ski on it," said 
Picard, the city's oil spill operations commander. 
As beaches began reopening, British Petroleum Tuesday consolidated its cleanup 
operations at the lifeguard headquarters at Huntington State Beach near 
Magnolia Street, about a half mile from the Santa Ana River where scores of 
workers scrubbed oil-stained rock jetties. 
At a press conference in Long Beach, Admiral Paul A. Yost, commandant of the 
U.S. Coast Guard, said the spill recovery effort stands as "a textbook case of 
an excellent cleanup. . . . The job is basically done. There is very little 
left." 
In Huntington Beach, concern eased about damage to a newly restored wildlife 
habitat fouled last weekend by a thin layer of oily residue carried into the 
marsh by high tides. Most of the oil sheen in the channel linking the marsh 
with the ocean had been removed by Tuesday, and biologists decided to leave the 
brownish residue that lightly coated several of the wildlife nesting islands, 
fearing that cleanup efforts might disturb the ecologically sensitive mud 
flats. 
"We're going to let it dry and bake in the sun and hope nature takes care of 
it," said Gary Gorman, executive director of the Huntington Beach Wetlands 
Conservancy. 
Along the shoreline, public health and safety remained the chief concern, and 
the release Tuesday of the first results from tests on samples of sand fouled 
by the spill were encouraging. The tests are required by local municipalities 
and county health officials as the last step before bans on beach use from 
Newport Harbor to Bolsa Chica State Beach near Warner Avenue could be lifted. 
State and local officials have agreed that a beach is safe for public use if 
the average levels of petroleum hydrocarbons -- including benzene and toluene, 
both cancer-causing agents -- are below 100 parts per million. The average for 
84 samples -- taken every 500 feet between the Newport and Balboa piers -- was 
14.3 parts per million, said Richard Wade, president of Med-Tox Associates 
Inc., an Anaheim-based environmental health firm hired by British Petroleum to 
conduct the tests. 
"We are satisfied that the beach is safe," said Newport Beach Fire Capt. Randy 
Scheerer. "We opened the beach about noon. It's a step in the right direction." 
More beaches may reopen today when test results are expected for a stretch of 
shoreline from the Balboa Pier to Newport Harbor and for much of Bolsa Chica 
State Beach. It takes about 30 hours to complete the tests on sand collected at 
depths ranging from six to 10 inches below the surface, Wade said. Chemists 
took samples in Huntington Beach on Tuesday for the first time, and officials 
said some of the city's shoreline there may be reopened, if tests are 
favorable, on Thursday. 
Once beaches reopen, Ronald Rasmussen, an associate adjunct professor of 
community and environmental health at UC Irvine, said exposure to any leftover 
oil could cause minor skin irritation. But he emphasized that any oil residue 
on the beach would not cause long-lasting toxic effects. 
ON THE BEACH 
Officials began Tuesday to open more portions of the Orange County shoreline 
that had been tainted by Alaskan crude spilled Feb. 7 by the tanker American 
Trader. 
WHAT'S OPEN 
All beaches south of Corona del Mar 
About a mile of beach between the Newport and Balboa piers 
All beaches north of Bolsa Chica State Beach from Warner Avenue to the 
Orange-Los Angeles county line. 
WHAT'S CLOSED 
Bolsa Chica State Beach 
All city and state beaches in Huntington Beach 
Newport Beach from the Santa Ana River to Newport Pier and from Balboa Pier to 
Newport Harbor 
Source: County and city officials. 
