PEOPLE'S PHARMACY: VITAMIN C ISN'T CURE TO COMMON COLD, BUT IT MAY HELP 
Q. Does Vitamin C really work for colds? Yesterday I saw my doctor, hoping he 
could prescribe an antibiotic for the awful cold I've got. He said that I 
needed Vitamin C, rest and fluids instead of any medicine he could prescribe. 
When I asked him how much Vitamin C, he suggested around one or two grams. 
My pharmacist said Vitamin C was worthless and recommended Alka-Seltzer Plus 
Cold Tablets. Who should I believe? 
A. Your doctor was right not to prescribe an antibiotic against this viral 
infection. It wouldn't have worked. Vitamin C, however, just might be helpful. 
Dr. Elliot Dick of the University of Wisconsin is one of the country's leading 
cold researchers. He has discovered that 500 milligrams of ascorbic acid taken 
four times a day helps relieve cold symptoms. 
Dick has found that the amount of Vitamin C that gets into white blood cells is 
highly variable. Some people need to take much more than others to achieve 
adequate levels within the cells. Dick is launching a new study to determine 
the effectiveness of varying amounts of Vitamin C against cold symptoms. 
Q. I was first diagnosed with seborrheic dermatitis back in 1922, and I have 
suffered with it ever since. None of the special dandruff shampoos or 
treatments dermatologists prescribed ever did much. 
Just on a hunch this year, I tried a couple of sample tubes of Nizoral my 
doctor had given me for a different problem. I had enough to rub it on my scalp 
for four days, and it stopped the dandruff short in its tracks. Six weeks 
later, I saw the doctor again, and although he inspected the scalp closely, he 
could find no evidence of the seborrheic dermatitis. 
He prescribed a regular-size tube of Nizoral, and I used it for 10 days. That 
was several months ago, and I still can't raise any dandruff at all. I know 
that one case is not scientific, but thought you'd like to hear about my 
success. 
A. We love good news. Researchers are discovering that bad dandruff and 
seborrheic dermatitis may be caused by a yeast infection that responds nicely 
to antifungal drugs like Nizoral (ketoconazole). 
It is kind of messy to rub the cream onto your scalp. But the maker of Nizoral 
has a special shampoo formulation that is marketed abroad. It is awaiting 
approval from the Food and Drug Administration and will be available sometime 
this year. 
