BRADLEY TO REVIEW CITY DEPARTMENTS 
Mayor Tom Bradley said Friday that he will review the performance of 21 city 
departments, beginning with the Community Development Department, where 
problems have been noted over the last month. 
Each month, beginning in March, one department will be the subject of a two-day 
hearing before a panel selected by his office, Bradley said at a news 
conference. 
Bradley said that problems regarding the Community Development Department that 
had been brought to his attention involved "shortfalls" in the expenditure of 
state and federal grant money by the department and community-based agencies. 
He said he had learned that the department had "failed to monitor 
subcontractors." 
The plan drew sharp criticism Friday from Councilwoman Joy Picus, who said she 
was "upset" that the City Council was excluded from the process. 
"We are the connections between the departments and the citizens," Picus said. 
The panels will be made up of a deputy mayor, another member of the mayor's 
staff who serves as a liaison to the department involved, representatives of 
the city administrative office and the chief legislative analyst's office, an 
independent expert from the field under review, a volunteer management 
consultant and a "citizen-at-large." 
Bradley on Friday ordered the removal of Ralph Esparza as acting director of 
the housing division of Community Development and temporarily assigned his 
duties to Parker Anderson, the general manager of the department. Bradley also 
ordered a nationwide search for a new director of the housing division. 
Both Esparza and Anderson said Friday that they were unaware of any problems 
with Esparza's performance. He has been deputy director of the housing 
department for 10 years and will remain in that position, they said. 
Bradley also moved William Bruce, head of the CDD's job-training programs, to a 
new position and replaced him with Steve Porter, assistant general manager of 
the CDD. 
Bruce will head a new division responsible for internal audits, planning of 
innovative programs and solicitation of grants. 
