MANY CANDIDATES BUT ONLY 1 PLATFORM IN LITHUANIA; 
SOVIET ELECTION: THE REPUBLIC MUST BE INDEPENDENT, MOST AGREE. AND THAT MAKES 
FOR A LACKLUSTER CAMPAIGN. 
A visitor doesn't have to go any farther than the Central Square in front of 
Communist Party headquarters here in the Lithuanian capital to grasp the 
significance of today's republic-wide elections. 
Twin signs in the national colors of red, yellow and green -- one in Russian, 
one in Lithuanian -- proclaim, "A Lithuania without sovereignty is a Lithuania 
without a future." 
As little as two years ago, the idea of Lithuanian independence from the Soviet 
Union was still too radical for public discussion. And it was only a year ago 
that the powerful grass-roots reform movement known as Sajudis clearly embraced 
the cause. 
Now, most Lithuanian Communists proclaim independence as their goal. And it is 
clear that the republic's new Parliament, to be chosen today in the Soviet 
Union's first real multi-party elections since 1918, will be pioneers, 
attempting an unprecedented peaceful secession from the world's last great 
empire. 
"Of course, the new Parliament will want to put itself in the pages of history 
and declare independence," commented Algis Zukas, an aide to Lithuania's reform 
Communist president, Algirdas Brazauskas. 
More than 80% of the nearly 500 candidates competing for 141 seats in the new 
Parliament are running on platforms calling for independence. The mood of the 
ethnic Lithuanian majority in the republic is also clear. 
At a campaign debate at a school in the Kosmonautu district of Vilnius the 
other night, a disgusted Lithuanian woman stormed out after an ethnic Russian 
candidate running as an unreconstructed Communist rejected a questioner's 
contention that the republic is occupied by Moscow. 
"I just don't have the patience to listen to them," the woman explained. "They 
just don't understand Lithuanians." 
Agreement on the independence issue is so widespread, in fact, that the 
election campaign itself has been relatively unexciting. There are campaign 
posters around, a lot of political advertising on television and daily public 
meetings at which opposing candidates answer questions from the constituents. 
There is a faint hint of American-style political glitz, such as the reform 
Communist whose official campaign portrait shows him riding a bicycle in his 
track suit, or the ethnic Russian who is depicted snuggling his young daughter. 
Generally, however, there is such a lack of street rallies or other signs of 
public enthusiasm that some politicians say they expect many voters will simply 
stay home. 
There aren't even any juicy vote-rigging scandals or other types of campaign 
skulduggery so far, according to Election Commission officials. 
Recalling the heady political atmosphere that reigned here when Sajudis-backed, 
non-party candidates trounced the Communists in voting for the national 
Congress of People's Deputies last March, editor and People's Deputy Algimantas 
Cekuolis commented: "It's as if a person was hungry for weeks or months. Then 
he gorged himself, and now he doesn't want to think of food." 
The political scene has also gotten a lot more complicated here since those 
earlier elections. The Lithuanian Communist Party split in December after 
reformers under President Brazauskas divorced themselves from the policies of 
the national party leadership in Moscow. They jumped aboard the independence 
bandwagon for fear that otherwise they would be wiped out in today's elections. 
The move won the reformers an immediate boost in the opinion polls and the 
endorsement by Sajudis of 32 of their candidates for the republic's Parliament. 
Brazauskas, whose campaign literature doesn't even contain the word communism 
any more, suddenly has an unprecedented 85% public-approval rating. 
Brazauskas aide Zukas said in an interview that the reformed party hopes to win 
30% to 40% of the seats in the new legislature. 
A half-dozen credible new parties have also appeared since Lithuania became the 
first Soviet republic to approve a multi-party system late last year. Sajudis, 
which prefers to remain an umbrella movement rather than become a political 
party itself, has also endorsed some candidates from those new parties, as well 
as 92 non-party candidates. 
"We are the Alice-in-Wonderland country," quipped Cekuolis about the profusion 
and confusion of candidates. 
Except for those Communists who still swear allegiance to Moscow -- mostly 
members of the ethnic Russian minority living in Lithuania -- the only 
difference among the rest of the parties is over the form of independence they 
seek and how hard they are ready to push for it. 
"This election will decide at what tempo and what grade of determination we 
will go to independence," said Vytautas Landsbergis, chairman of the Sajudis 
Executive Council. 
The reform Communists are cautious. 
"Even in the United States, it took years after the Declaration of Independence 
for this independence to become a fact of life," Brazauskas said in an 
interview with a Lithuanian newspaper earlier this month. "So, I am ready for a 
difficult road ahead on the way to our goal." 
"The question is not independence," Zukas said. "It's more how we are going to 
achieve it. The (reform) Communist Party is for achieving it in small steps." 
The Social Democrats, under economist Kazimieras Antanivicius, 52, have no 
apparent quarrel with the reform Communists' program but are anxious to 
disassociate themselves from any part in the old system. 
"We're for getting rid of the kind of socialism that existed here for 70 
years," Antanivicius told about 150 people at a defense-plant social club the 
other day. "That socialism was slavery. It was worse than feudalism." 
More to the right are the Christian Democrats, Democrats and the most radical 
Lithuanian Freedom League, which argues that the current leadership of both the 
reformist Communists and Sajudis have so discredited themselves by past 
compromise with the system that they are unfit to lead the way to independence. 
With so few issues involved, the race focuses heavily on personalities. 
The final list of candidates makes it clear that the largely inexperienced 
politicians who will be trying soon to negotiate Lithuania's independence will 
be a highly educated, mostly male and middle-aged lot. 
Nearly 94% of them have college degrees, an extraordinary figure in a country 
where workers and peasants have long been allotted seats in government. 
Only 28 of the candidates are women. "This is different from all previous 
elections, when the number of women was fixed from above," said Sajudis 
Election Committee official Angonita Rupsyte. Also, she said, noting the 
hardships of everyday life in Lithuania, "it's very difficult to harmonize a 
family and politics in our conditions." 
About one-third of the candidates are under 40, another third 40 to 50 and the 
rest over 50. 
Final results of the elections may be some time coming. Run-offs may be 
required in many constituencies if fewer than half the registered voters turn 
up or no candidate manages to win more than 50% of the votes. 
It is expected that the elections will result in the first coalition government 
in the Soviet Union since shortly after the Bolshevik Revolution. And that 
government will try to negotiate the terms of Lithuania's independence with 
Moscow. 
Perhaps the most encouraging news on that front came out of Paris this week, 
where an aide to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said no one could prevent 
Lithuania's seceding from the Soviet Union. 
Aide Andrei Grachev said he hopes that all three Baltic republics can be 
convinced that it is in their interest to remain in a revitalized Soviet 
federation. 
"But if this discussion doesn't convince the Lithuanian people that their 
interest is to remain within a renewed federation, they make the decision, and 
no one can prevent them from fulfilling it," Grachev said. 
BACKGROUND 
The Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia were independent countries 
from just after World War I until they were annexed by the Soviet Union in 
1940. Under a secret protocol to a 1939 nonaggression treaty between Josef 
Stalin's Communist regime and Adolf Hitler's Nazi Germany, the Communist and 
Fascist powers had conspired to carve up Eastern Europe into areas of control. 
Soviet military units began occupying the three nations that year. Annexation 
was completed after "elections" that purportedly supported the Soviet takeover. 
The nonaggression pact was abrogated on June 22, 1941, when Nazi forces 
attacked the Soviet Union. 
