FICTION IN BRIEF: PARTING IS ALL WE KNOW OF HEAVEN BY MOLLY MOYNAHAN (HARPER 
&amp; ROW: $16.95; 288 PP.) 
A smart-alecky novel of contemporary life in New York, "Parting" concerns 
29-year-old Cordelia, who can talk about T. S. Eliot in one breath ("April is 
not the cruelest month," she concludes, as she tries to get out of bed in 
February) and "Poltergeist" and "The Twilight Zone" in the next. Her realism is 
from the pages of women's magazines: A friend congratulates her on hitting the 
Big Three-Oh when she's only turning 29; momentary deep depression ensues. 
She's a sucker for beautiful men, which might make her job as receptionist at a 
health club a tad difficult, but an obvious choice for earning rent while she 
waits for her big acting break. One of Cordelia's lovers is a Hungarian 
musician "with the moral integrity of Fritz the Cat." 
Into this normally neurotic world comes disaster. Her eldest sister, Cynthia, 
is raped and murdered. Cordelia, the youngest, is thrown into despair. The 
story becomes a psychological study of bereavement, as Cordelia fights to 
re-establish her balance. There are intelligent and moving observations about 
how people come to terms with inexplicable loss. But the pervasive humor in 
"Parting" is a bit difficult to read: How much tongue is in cheek? The silly 
choice of names for the sister trio, for instance -- Cordelia, Amelia, Cynthia 
-- undermines the observation of a family dealing with tragedy. The author 
packs in at least a dozen too many of the ills known to young upwardly mobile 
women, from abortion to eating disorders to rough sex. In addition, it's 
difficult to take "Parting" seriously as a study in grief and self-loathing -- 
as it seems to want to be taken -- when the story is filled with too much witty 
New York banter and stories like the following: Cordelia and her best friend 
pick up young Wall Street types at a trendy club: "They had a pretty dull time 
except for one hysterical trip to the ladies,' where they discovered that 
neither of them knew which banker was named Doug and which was Brad. They 
solved their dilemma by calling one Boug and the other Drad. The men were not 
amused, and they finally left for the South Street Seaport in search of more 
upwardly mobile, well-behaved young women." 
