BRAZEN BANDIT; 
POLICE SAY IT WILL BE TOUGH TO CAPTURE DARING OUTLAW WHO BROKE OUT OF ORANGE 
COUNTY JAIL 
On a wall in his island home on Puget Sound, Michael Taylor hung a picture of 
himself posing in front of posters of the FBI's 10 Most Wanted fugitives. 
Police who searched the place saw it as an expression of an ambition, which 
they found unsettling. 
"It seemed like it would make his life to be on that 10 Most Wanted list," said 
Newport Beach Police Detective John Desmond. 
Today, Taylor may be a candidate for just such a distinction. He is the target 
of an intense nationwide manhunt that began last November when he and four 
other inmates escaped from the Orange County Jail by rappelling from the roof 
of the four-story structure with a rope of braided bed sheets. 
Almost immediately, authorities concluded that Taylor was the mastermind of the 
daring jailbreak. Almost 3 months later, he is the only one of the five 
escapees who is still at large. 
Taylor has a reputation as a self-confident thrill seeker who has been an 
extraordinarily successful outlaw because he is also intelligent and a 
perfectionist. The jail breakout, like other brazen escapes in his past, fit 
the profile. 
Police say that Taylor, 35, has made a career out of armed jewelry robberies 
and that he goes about it like a corporate employee bucking for a promotion. 
He's usually well dressed -- sometimes in a three-piece suit -- and he uses 
rented, full-sized American cars for getaways. 
Last week, police say, Taylor committed yet another bold robbery, holding up a 
jewelry store near Chicago in which he and an accomplice made off with about 
$450,000 in gems. 
The fact that his picture is being passed around at police roll calls all over 
the country -- including his native Chicago -- has not seemed to deter him. In 
fact, the element of high risk is almost part of Taylor's signature. 
Since 1987, police estimate, Taylor has stolen about $2 million in jewels from 
almost two dozen Southern California stores, including seven in Orange County. 
In the adrenalin-charged minutes of the robberies, police say, it is Taylor who 
barks assignments to his partners, keeps track of the clock and quickly gathers 
the loot. 
"He is not an emotional robber," said Jack Price, owner of Designer Jewelers 
Inc. in Huntington Beach, who was the victim last year of a $450,000 holdup 
allegedly committed by Taylor. "It's a business for him. I was in the Army 
Rangers in Vietnam, and we were taught to do everything click, click, click; he 
was that kind of a methodical guy. He knew what he was doing . . . and he was 
good at it." 
What police fear most is Taylor's cool temperament and cold-blooded character. 
He has never been charged with shooting anyone, although police say he has been 
armed in all of the robberies he has pulled -- and two of the Orange County 
heists erupted into shoot-outs. 
"You've got a potentially dangerous person -- there's no doubt about it," said 
Huntington Beach Police Detective Tom Gilligan. 
Both the authorities and inmates who knew Taylor in jail distinguish this man 
from most people in the system. 
He doesn't drink and he doesn't use drugs, they say. He has a middle-class life 
style with a live-in girlfriend and two kids, one of which he fathered. After 
the string of robberies in Southern California, the family moved into a 
waterfront house on Vashon Island in Washington state with a hot tub on the 
rear deck and a private dock. 
Police who searched the house found -- in addition to the photograph on the 
wall -- an aquarium in which the gravel was sprinkled with stolen rubies. 
Taylor is glib, friendly and a master at assuming fake identities. 
Fake Identities 
He has used numerous fake identification cards, including one that said he is 
an employee of a bogus company called the Criminal Research Assn. in Chicago. 
Another pictures him as the owner of the California Home Improvement Co. in 
Long Beach. 
Taylor, who has been known to carry an 18-karat gold handgun, assumed the alias 
of Anthony Gianetti so effectively that some police departments still don't 
know his real name. The Orange County Sheriff's Department released the 
Gianetti alias when he escaped from jail. His former jail mates still call him 
Tony. 
"I would probably describe him as the kind of person you'd find selling 
automobiles or real estate," said Huntington Beach Sgt. William Van Cleve. 
"He's very outgoing, very friendly and he has a tendency to be charming in a 
phony way." 
Newport Beach Police Detective John Desmond tracked Taylor for months, and 
traveled to Washington for the search of his home. 
"I think he's not driven like a lot of guys are because they're addicted to 
drugs," Desmond said. "He's doing the best way he knows to make money; he's 
just going about his business. And he's good at what he does. 
"I don't know if his ego is so big that he does it for notoriety too, but 
that's a possibility." 
No Doubt of Mastermind 
When they heard Taylor was involved in the escape last Nov. 20, detectives 
Gilligan and Desmond had no doubt that he was the mastermind. Desmond said 
Taylor had boasted that he was going to break out. 
The district attorney had told Taylor he was facing more than 40 years in 
prison for the seven Orange County robberies, and Los Angeles prosecutors were 
planning to charge him with an additional 10 armed robberies. 
Taylor was in a five-man cell in the Orange County Jail along with two other 
inmates involved in the escape, Steven Wilson and Richard Fluharty. Sources 
said the two other inmates who broke out with Taylor, Wilson and Fluharty were 
not involved in planning the escape but joined in at the last minute. 
One of those two broke his leg when he fell from the roof because the makeshift 
rope ripped on barbed, razor-wire. He was captured outside the jail that night. 
The other, who was in jail facing a murder charge, turned himself in on 
Thanksgiving Day. 
The five inmates involved in the escape made off from a rooftop recreation area 
after cutting through a chain-link fence. Contrary to policy, they were not 
searched for weapons or tools before being taken to the recreation area that 
night. 
Deputies Miscounted 
And, as the Orange County grand jury found later, the deputies on duty at the 
jail that night miscounted the 68 inmates as they left the roof, so the escape 
was not discovered for several hours. A neighborhood caller told police he had 
seen men running down the street in jail clothing. 
The two deputies assigned to the rooftop area that night are still on 
administrative leave pending the outcome of an internal Sheriff's Department 
investigation. 
After their escape, Wilson, Fluharty and Taylor stripped to their shorts and 
convinced a bystander that they needed a ride to a hospital. Once inside the 
car, police said, the escapees displayed a jail-made knife and threw the driver 
out of the car. 
Two weeks later, Wilson and Fluharty were arrested in Denver with the same 
getaway car. 
For Taylor, it may have been his most daring escape, but it only added to a 
longtime reputation. After Taylor's arrest in Huntington Beach, police there 
considered him so slippery that they warned the Sheriff's Department, which 
runs the county jail, in writing: "Given a chance, he will escape." 
"Escape is kind of his middle name," Desmond said later. 
Jumped From Car 
Last June, Taylor had eluded Seattle police who spotted him on a ferry. Police 
say Taylor escaped during a chase by jumping from his car while turning the 
wheel over to his girlfriend. 
A few weeks later, police say, he slipped away from the Border Patrol in New 
Mexico when he was stopped at a checkpoint while driving a stolen pickup truck. 
He ran more than 10 miles across the desert before police search dogs found him 
buried in the dirt trying to hide from helicopters. 
Taylor also escaped from California's Chino state prison in 1975 while he was 
serving a sentence for an armed robbery committed when he was 21. 
His history of escapes has caused some to question whether he should have been 
treated as a greater security risk at the Orange County Jail. 
There are four security categories in the jail that are designated by colored 
wristbands worn by the inmates. A white band calls for minimum security, and 
the grade increases through yellow, orange and red. Red-banded inmates are 
isolated from the rest of the prison population. 
Taylor wore an orange band. 
Won't Discuss Security 
Sheriff's Lt. Richard Olson said that overcrowding at the jail prevents the 
department from designating very many red-band prisoners. But he would not say 
whether the overcrowding was a factor in classifying Taylor. 
"The security is something that we generally don't talk about," Olson said. 
"All I can say is that I don't want to get into that." 
The search for Taylor now involves dozens of police agencies across the 
country, including the FBI. The day he allegedly staged the robbery last week, 
Chicago's rank-and-file police officers had just been shown his picture and 
heard a lecture about his typical "method of operation." 
Because of his cunning, police say, he is going to be difficult to capture. But 
also, partly because of his confidence, they are convinced he will be caught. 
"He is certainly brazen," said Los Angeles Police Detective Jim Barry. "It's 
going to be difficult to catch him . . . he's obviously very transient -- from 
Los Angeles to Seattle to New Mexico -- but I don't doubt that he'll make a 
mistake somewhere along the road." 
