MOVABLE FEASTS: POSITIVELY 4TH STREET POSITIVELY WORTH A TRIP 
I don't know whether it's these stuttering earthquakes or too many overcast 
days but my curmudgeon quotient has hit an all-time February high. So when I 
went to check out Positively 4th Street on a positively busy stretch of, yes, 
4th Street in Santa Monica, and saw that it was in the middle of a no-parking 
zone, I bristled at having to park (perish the thought) half a block away. 
Since this deli/restaurant/take-out/catering establishment looks rather 
anonymous from the outside, I was about as pleased as Punch and Judy to find a 
smart, changing-weekly menu packed full of inviting things to eat: Freshly made 
caponata. Thai-roasted chicken breast. Pan Bagna. Flourless chocolate cupcakes. 
Homemade soup. 
While it may have been the effects of Positively's pink neon lighting 
(identical, no doubt, to the lamps scientists are using to combat that winter 
light deprivation disorder, SAD), I think my mood changed when I tried the 
homemade vegetable soup, a rich, dark, distinct chorus of pureed herbs and 
roots ($2 a cup, $3.25 a bowl). 
There are usually eight or nine cold salads to choose from, available by weight 
or by the plate. Served with green salad and pesto-smothered bread, two salads 
are $5.95; four cost $8.25. Thai noodle salad is a bounty full of peanuts and 
sesame seeds; caponata (really just chunks of eggplant with capers without the 
usual red peppers or tomatoes) is freshly sauteed and pleasantly oily. The 
cooks seem to have an affinity bordering on addiction for minced red onion. 
They turn up over and over again but happen to work well in the lush German 
potato salad accented with well-smoked bacon. 
The Santa Fe-style black beans and the lentil salad, despite their onions, are 
blandsville. The southern French pan bagna ($5.25), a wonderful crusty slab of 
bread piled high with good tuna, olives, egg, capers, and, natch, minced red 
onion, makes a swell lunch. 
Hot platters include crisp, smooth, oniony crab cakes, and a honey of a moist 
ginger-flecked Thai roast chicken breast (both are $7.25). Large ravioli 
stuffed with ricotta and ground walnuts are a subtle delight, bathed in a thin 
slip of lemon-zested vodka cream. 
Just when I thought the curmudgeon in me had taken a walk, the voice rose again 
from the deep. "Well," it said, sounding just like Jack Benny, "the only time 
they're open for dinner is on Friday nights." And some of the best desserts are 
gone if you get there too late. But if you get there too early, not all of the 
salads are ready to go. Even if I do concede that the "spa special" (poached 
baby salmon) was certainly moist, would you ever want that nondescript red bell 
pepper sauce again? 
Then I tasted Positively's superbly tender grilled swordfish with its quiet 
orange-cilantro butter sheen, a glorious cheesecake with crunchy brownie crust 
and a completely delicious, flourless, serious-chocolate cupcake. 
"They're open for breakfast," I countered. Besides, they do catering when 
they're closed. And the priciest entree here is $7.95. "Anyway, remember that 
fabulous vegetable soup?" 
"Well," the curmudgeon said, "You're right. And maybe next time you'll see that 
public parking structure across the street and save us a walk." 
 Positively 4th Street, 1215 4th St., Santa Monica. (213) 393-1464. Open 
Monday-Thursday 7 a.m.-4 p.m., Friday, 7 a.m.-8 p.m. Personal checks and cash, 
no credit cards. Lunchtime delivery in downtown Santa Monica area available. 
City parking structure across the street. 
