618 ARRESTED IN S.F. VALLEY GANG SWEEPS; 
CRIME: POLICE CALL IT MOST SUCCESSFUL OPERATION EVER. BUT VIOLENCE PLAGUES 
SOUTHLAND AS AT LEAST 15 PEOPLE ARE REPORTED SLAIN. 
In the most extensive crackdown ever on gangs operating in the San Fernando 
Valley, police during the weekend arrested 618 people -- including 270 alleged 
gang members -- for crimes ranging from possession of narcotics to unpaid 
parking tickets. 
About 200 Los Angeles police officers were assigned to the anti-gang task force 
"Operation Hammer," which from Friday night until Sunday swept through known 
gang hangouts. About 14 pounds of illegal drugs were confiscated, along with 51 
vehicles, officers said. The sweep came in response to citizens' complaints 
about growing gang problems, police said. 
"The public is complaining all the time about gang members hanging out in front 
of liquor stores and apartments, selling narcotics and scaring people that are 
walking by," Sgt. Frank Stilo said. 
Recent police crime statistics show that gang-related crimes in the Valley 
during 1989 more than doubled from the previous year, from 510 to 1,191. 
Last July, in what had been the largest Valley gang sweep, police arrested 267 
people, including 94 suspected gang members. Police said the latest Valley 
sweep, their most successful ever, netted 115 felony arrests and 503 
misdemeanor arrests. Forty-one people were booked on suspicion of driving under 
the influence of alcohol or drugs and 48 were arrested for investigation of 
possessing narcotics. 
"The sweep, in my opinion, appears to have been very successful," Stilo said. 
Meanwhile, violence plagued other parts of the Southland, as at least 15 people 
were reported slain during the weekend, including a young woman allegedly 
gunned down by her stepfather in Santa Ana. 
The woman, Olivia Bohaman, 21, and a younger sister were found wounded in the 
living room of their house Saturday afternoon, Santa Ana police said. Bohaman 
died of head wounds and the sister was treated for wounds to her arms and back. 
Police said they were seeking Jose Lopez Perez, 32, the estranged husband of 
the victims' mother, who was seen driving away from the house. 
Elsewhere, two men were shot at a hamburger stand near MacArthur Park about 5 
a.m. Sunday, Los Angeles police said. One died and the other was hospitalized 
in serious condition. The victims were shot by a man who got out of a car, 
walked up to them and fired, police said. 
An unidentified man was found shot to death in his La Puente home at 12:15 a.m. 
Sunday, Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies said. In South Los Angeles, an 
unidentified man was stabbed to death early Sunday, police said. 
On Saturday, an unidentified 22-year-old man was shot and killed in South Los 
Angeles and another unidentified man was shot to death in southwest Los 
Angeles, police said. An unidentified man was shot as he stood on the sidewalk 
in the Los Feliz area early Saturday morning, police said. 
A 15-year-old boy was shot to death in an unincorporated area near Whittier 
just before 1 a.m. Saturday. And a second 15-year-old boy was stabbed to death 
later in Pico Rivera. Sheriff's deputies said both crimes appeared to be gang 
related. 
In Hacienda Heights, Joseph Sanchez, 21, was shot to death Saturday in his 
garage, sheriff's deputies said. Witnesses said they saw two men leaving the 
scene on foot, but no arrests were made, officers said. 
Police reported five more deaths Friday night. 
