BILL SHOEMAKER'S FINAL RIDE; 
SHOEMAKER IN JOCKEY ROOM: HIGH JINKS TO THE END; 
SCENE: DELAHOUSSAYE MAY HAVE KEPT SHOE FROM WINNING HIS LAST RACE, BUT THE 
LEGEND GOT THE LAST LAUGH. 
For the past 41 years, Bill Shoemaker's second home has been the jockeys' room 
-- any jockeys' room, from Santa Anita Park to Pimlico and points in between. 
For Shoemaker, the room was more than a place to change his silks and polish 
his boots. He ate there, slept there, played cards, Ping-Pong and pool there 
and smoked his skinny, little cigars. 
Even on days when he had only one mount he would show up early, don his white 
terry cloth robe and settle in for a marathon round of race track rummy with 
valets and fellow jockeys. 
On Saturday, Shoemaker closed up shop in the Santa Anita jockeys' room, leaving 
a huge hole where his 4-by-6 foot cubicle used to be. He packed up his tack 
box, his shower shoes and his extra boots -- a good starter set for any racing 
hall of fame. 
Down came Shoemaker's faded newspaper photo with his daughter, Amanda, taken 
after his victory in the 1985 Santa Anita Handicap on Lord at War, the race 
that made him the first to win $100 million in purses. Down came the six-inch 
strip of masking tape that read, simply, "Shoe," a truly modest label for what 
was literally the center of the horse racing universe on this day. 
An hour before Shoemaker's last ride, his usually spartan cubicle was packed 
with flowers: boxes full of long-stemmed red and white roses and a bouquet from 
the management at Beulah Park in Ohio that dwarfed the rider as he read the 
card. 
Shoemaker arrived in the room Saturday morning at 10 o'clock for a television 
interview. He knocked back a plate of ham and eggs, then killed some time at 
the card table, winning one, losing one and paying off from a wad of bills in 
his pocket. 
All day long, the other riders swirled around Shoemaker, pressing him for one 
last autograph, posing with him for one last snapshot. Luis Jauregui, Dave 
Patton, Frankie Detorri, Jesus Castanon -- they all wanted something to show 
their grandchildren someday. 
Jimmy Hood, Shoemaker's valet for more than 25 years, came by to be with him on 
the big day. Hood, who rode against Shoemaker as his career began, knew better 
than anyone what was going on between those gray temples. 
"He's going to miss the room most of all," said Hood, now retired. "He liked 
nothing better than to spend time just being here with the other guys." 
At 2 p.m., about 45 minutes before the final ride, Shoemaker slipped on a set 
of mustard gold racing silks, adorned on the back with a red "SS" -- for 
Sully's Stable -- and trimmed with red epaulets. Across the room, Fernando Toro 
was getting a razzing from Corey Black. 
"Starting tomorrow, Bull, you'll be the oldest guy in the room," Black said to 
the 49-year-old Toro. "I call Bill 'Papa Shoe,' but we've got to call you 
Grandpa, don't we?" 
Shoemaker gave Toro a sympathetic smile. 
"Don't let them give you a hard time, Bull," said Shoemaker. "It's great when 
you turn 50. You get to flirt with all the girls and nobody minds. They think 
you're just a harmless old man." 
At 2:15 p.m., Shoemaker weighed in for the final time. As he stepped onto the 
scale, valet Bobby Markus handed him 20 pounds of saddle and lead-filled pads, 
the difference between Shoemaker's 98 pounds and the 118 assigned to Patchy 
Groundfog. 
"Unhhhh," Shoe groaned in mock stress as he leaned backwards under the weight. 
"That's the last time for that." 
Shoemaker let off a little nervous energy with some stretching exercises. Right 
leg, left leg, then a few deep bends to the floor. His game face was in place, 
and it was time . . . for cake. 
Santa Anita head chef Tony Pope hustled the jockeys into the pool and ping-pong 
room for the obligatory sheet cake, a table-sized creation of chocolate, cherry 
and vanilla that only Shoemaker could eat without blowing his riding weight. 
Flanked by Pope and fellow rider Eddie Delahoussaye, Shoe grinned one more time 
for one more bank of cameras. 
"No, Eddie, no! Don't push his face in the cake," a rider yelled from the back 
row. 
"No way, man," Delahoussaye said. "Not while he's holding that knife." 
As Shoemaker plunged the blade into the pastry, Delahoussaye scooped up a 
finger of frosting and plopped it in the middle of Shoe's nose. A bit dribbled 
to the front of the silks and was quickly wiped away. 
A few minutes before it was time to head for the paddock, the other jockeys in 
the Legend's Last Ride gathered around Shoemaker for a group photo. They mugged 
and giggled like school kids, and, just as the shutter snapped, Chris McCarron 
slapped a handful of shaving cream on top of Shoemaker's helmet. 
"I figured one of you guys would try something like that," said Shoemaker, a 
world-class prankster. "I tried it on a guy earlier, but he was too fast for 
me." 
The moment finally had arrived. At 2:27 p.m., Bill Shoemaker, the dignified 
dean of thoroughbred race-riding, walked out of a jockeys' room as a jockey for 
the last time, sporting a trace of shaving cream on his helmet, a cake stain on 
the front of his silks and a relieved smile at the thought that his longest day 
would soon be over. 
A half-hour later, Delahoussaye returned to the jockeys' room after slipping 
through inside Shoemaker and winning the Last Ride on Exemplary Leader. 
"I'll never forgive you, Delahoussaye," a fan screamed as he walked back 
through the crowd. 
Shoemaker was hip deep in post race interviews, but it was business as usual 
for Delahoussaye and the other riders as they suited up for the next race. 
Delahoussaye shed his winning colors, picked up a new set of silks for the 
sixth race and eased them on. 
"Damn!" he shouted as his hand appeared at the end of the sleeve covered in 
shaving cream. He tried the other sleeve. Same result. 
"OK, who did it?" Delahoussaye demanded. "Was it you, Sibille?" 
Ray Sibille smiled and pointed to someone else, who pointed to someone else. 
"At least I can be sure of one thing," Delahoussaye added. "This time, for 
once, I'm pretty sure it wasn't Shoemaker who did it. 
"But I'm not saying it wasn't his idea." 
