'HOW TO READ A DIRTY MOVIE' AT THE NUART; 
MOVIES: CRITIC SUSIE BRIGHT'S COMMENTARY WITH FILM CLIPS IS DESIGNED TO COMBAT 
'SEXUAL ILLITERACY.' 
Susie Bright, like many feminists, has a strong point of view about 
pornographic films, but it's not what you think. She is in favor of them. In a 
big way. And she loves to talk about them, which she will do tonight and 
Thursday at the Nuart, in a presentation titled "How to Read a Dirty Movie." 
The program is a combination of hard-core film clips and commentary designed to 
help curb what Bright sees as the "sexual illiteracy" or "erotophobia" plaguing 
the moral left as well as the right. It's educational, all right -- you'll see 
oddities in her clips they'd never show you in anatomy class -- but her 
"literacy" lesson is not for Barbara Bush, or the faint of heart, or really for 
anyone at all besides the terminally curious or already-converted sexual 
libertarians. 
As "erotic movie critic" for Penthouse Forum magazine (as well as editor of On 
Our Backs, a lesbian sex journal), Bright often finds herself, as she proudly 
explains, "the lone woman in the Pussycat Theatre." She is unlikely to lure too 
many more converts there from the feminist mainstream with this dissertation. 
Her lecturing has a vaguely political veneer, but basically, she considers 
pornography to be successful art if it's successfully arousing. 
For all the rigmarole, it seemingly comes back to this: You either enjoy 
watching people do the wild thing for the wild thing's sake or you don't. 
Bright clearly does, and her banter -- sometimes funny and perceptive, 
sometimes unintentionally disturbing -- runs the gamut from professorial to 
unabashedly voyeuristic. One minute our narrator is offering erudite commentary 
on how societal gender differences are reflected (or subverted) in porn, an 
honestly interesting subject; the next she is fannishly wowing over actress 
Georgina Spelvin's ability to simultaneously service a horde of demons in "The 
Devil in Miss Jones, Part 3." 
Bright is hardly your typical apologist for the porn industry; she barely 
mentions production values or the quality of the stories. Sex scenes are what 
she is most interested in, whether from 35mm films or zero-budget underground 
videos. ("There've been so many times I've seen an R-rated movie and wanted 
them to go one step further," she says.) 
Her big gripe as a "sexually radical feminist" isn't that porn degrades women, 
but that it doesn't portray nearly as many women's orgasms on screen as men's. 
But in spite of this sexism, Bright still cheerfully accentuates the positive, 
surveying a wide scope of modern sexploitation -- sadomasochism and all -- and 
showing "outstanding" clips from her private collection that have "a spark of 
originality, creativity or rebelliousness." 
But these "positive" examples she puts up on screen may be what is most 
damaging to her case with an audience: Many of the clips involve what most 
viewers of any sexual persuasion would consider unconscionable cruelty. These 
range from the usual spankings and such to severe verbal abuse, to an 
unbearably protracted sex-and-murder scene (with Jamie Gillis doing the 
strangling). Don't expect any moralizing from Bright; she likes porn films that 
raise "ambiguous feelings." 
"Ed Meese and Jesse Helms are the only ones who get to talk about pornography 
on a public scale," Bright says. Her screenside chats are her way of balancing 
the ledger. And though she is too ingenuous to be really pushy in her 
radicalism, you're still made to feel that if you have a hang-up about, say, 
the intermingling of sex and violence, you're more a Meese than a man. Even 
viewers well to the left of her Republican nemeses may still come away feeling 
they learned how to read Susie Bright better than they learned how to look 
between the frames of her dirty movies. 
The program begins both nights at 8. Information: (213) 473-6701. 
