LAWNDALE REFERENDUM SOUGHT ON VOTER APPROVAL OF CITY'S GENERAL PLAN 
The Lawndale Planning Commission will ask the City Council to hold a citywide 
referendum in November on a much-debated ordinance that requires the city to 
submit its General Plan to a vote of the electorate. 
The City Council is expected at its March 16 meeting to decide whether to put 
the controversial law, known as Ordinance 82, on the Nov. 7 ballot. 
Ordinance 82 was adopted by the City Council in 1963 in response to a 
successful petition drive. It requires the city to seek voter approval for 
Lawndale's General Plan, a formal document that sets forth the city's 
development goals and development guidelines. 
If there is a vote in November and Ordinance 82 is approved, the General Plan 
could go before the voters in April, 1990. 
Although it was adopted in 1963, Ordinance 82 was never followed because the 
state attorney general's office in 1974 issued an opinion stating that the law 
was unconstitutional. Relying on that opinion, the City Council in 1976 adopted 
the city's first General Plan by a 4-1 vote. It did not go before the 
electorate. 
In the past year, Lawndale activists Steve Mino and Herman Weinstein have 
challenged the 1974 state ruling, saying that a legal opinion cannot overturn a 
law adopted by initiative. 
Mino and Weinstein urged city officials to seek a re-evaluation by the state. 
They were elated when, in December, state legal officials reversed themselves 
and issued a finding that the 1974 opinion was "erroneous." 
The December opinion, written by Deputy Atty. Gen. Rodney O. Lilyquist, has 
broad implications that could affect all development in Lawndale, according to 
City Atty. David J. Aleshire. 
"Ultimately, we believe this issue must be resolved either through the courts 
or through the ballot box," Aleshire said in a 15-page analysis prepared for 
the Planning Commission's meeting Wednesday night. 
The new opinion raises a number of significant legal and practical questions, 
including whether voters today would agree with the thrust of the 1963 
petitions, Aleshire said. "It is unclear whether Ordinance 82, which was never 
voted upon (by the electorate), would reflect the political sentiments of 
Lawndale residents today," he said. 
Also at issue, Aleshire said, is whether Lawndale has a valid General Plan 
since it was not adopted by the electorate. State officials have declined to 
express an opinion on that, Aleshire said. 
In his memo to the commission, Aleshire argued that the four-year time limit 
for residents to challenge the plan has expired. "Applicable statutes of 
limitations bar any challenges to the 1976 General Plan," he said. 
Mino, in an interview Thursday, said he supports the Planning Commission's 
recommendation that Ordinance 82 be placed on the Nov. 7 ballot. 
He said he does not oppose the plan itself, but believes residents should be 
able to vote on whether to adopt it. He said plan changes such as variances and 
zone exceptions are made too readily by the council, and should also be subject 
to a citywide vote. 
City officials and residents generally agree that, as Aleshire said, the 1976 
plan "is out-of-date and needs major revision." 
A series of hearings should be held to solicit public comment and help achieve 
community consensus on development goals, said Gary McDonald, chairman of the 
Planning Commission. 
Revised General Plan 
Regardless of the outcome on Ordinance 82 -- whether or not the General Plan is 
subject to voter approval -- the city should proceed as rapidly as possible in 
updating the General Plan, McDonald said. 
If the council puts Ordinance 82 on the November ballot and voters ratify it, a 
revised General Plan could be ready for voter consideration in April, 1990, 
McDonald said. 
It could cost as little as $5,000 to put Ordinance 82 on the Nov. 7 ballot, 
which also will list local school district candidates, he said. But if each 
resident is to be provided a copy of the voluminous General Plan, the city's 
costs could mount to as much as $200,000, he said. 
The commission Wednesday ducked the question of whether amendments to a future 
General Plan, or to the General Plan adopted in 1976, should go to voters. 
The recent state opinion said that Ordinance 82 does not contain a requirement 
for a citywide vote on plan amendments. 
In an attempt to cover amendments, Aleshire drafted a proposed ordinance that 
would require a vote of the electorate on "major" plan changes, which he 
defined as those that would affect more than five properties or a substantial 
part of any portion of the plan. 
But the Planning Commission voted 5-0 to reject the proposal. Now the City 
Council must decide whether plan amendments should be submitted to the 
electorate. This would be a cumbersome process that could drastically slow down 
development in Lawndale, Aleshire said. 
