SENATE PANEL PROBES INDIAN PROBLEMS; 
PAYOFFS, KICKBACKS CALLED ROUTINE IN NAVAJO SYSTEM 
John Paddock, a construction contractor hoping to land work on the Navajo 
reservation, said he picked up the $700 tab when Peter MacDonald and his wife 
flew to Las Vegas two years ago to celebrate MacDonald's reelection as chairman 
of the Navajo Tribal Council. 
It was one of several payments and gifts to MacDonald that Paddock estimated 
eventually cost him more than $110,000. "I felt it was just the price of doing 
business," Paddock told congressional investigators. 
Similar stories told to a Senate special investigating committee have raised a 
furor on the Navajo reservation, where MacDonald and his critics are now 
struggling for political control. 
The hearings, which resume today, are examining problems on the Indian 
reservations. They have prompted widespread concern about the laws and 
regulations that govern Indian affairs. 
Gap in Law Seen 
"(The hearings) point out a serious gap in federal law that allows bribes and 
kickbacks in the Indian country" to go unpunished, Sen. Dennis DeConcini 
(D-Ariz.), chairman of the subcommittee, said. "Tribes need to have an 
independent court system and independent law enforcement." 
The subcommittee is trying to determine whether new laws are needed to combat 
corruption, sexual abuse of children, ties to organized crime, inadequate 
medical services and other problems on reservations. 
The first round of hearings started Jan. 30. A second round is to open in 
March. 
"The long-term solution is self-sufficiency," said Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), 
one of the subcommittee members, "but we must (act now) to change the policies, 
regulations and laws that govern the Bureau of Indian Affairs and other 
agencies." 
The BIA is the largest of the 17 government agencies that manage Indian 
affairs. 
The need for new laws is disputed by some legislators, BIA officials and 
Indians who believe that more legislation will only aggravate their problems. 
"Needless to say," said Russell Means, an Indian activist who has called for 
abolition of the BIA, "every time the U.S. government has interfered with 
American Indian life styles, it has proven to be disastrous." 
The debate centers around the conflict between the tribal leadership and the 
federal government that has raged since the Indians were forced onto 
reservations in the late 1800s. 
At that time, the North American tribes represented a variety of beliefs, 
languages and organizations. "(The government's attempt) to make them all 
conform to one model was part of the problem" said Rayna Green, a Cherokee who 
directs the Smithsonian Institution's American Indian program. 
Many Indians say that federal policy toward the Indians has been a failure from 
the beginning. 
Switchbacks in Policy 
In the early 1900s, the government tried to integrate the reservation Indians 
with the general population. Then in 1934, Congress passed the Indian 
Reservation Act, urging the tribes instead to develop their own governments and 
written constitutions. 
The Dwight D. Eisenhower Administration sought to cancel many federal 
obligations to the Indians. That policy gave way during the Richard M. Nixon 
Administration to promotion of self-determination, and the tribes were pushed 
to become independent and self-sufficient entities. 
Green said that most Indians want the government to continue to fulfill 
obligations to tribal Americans established through more than 300 treaties. She 
drew a distinction, however, between fulfilling obligations and meddling in 
Indian affairs. 
"The government should fulfill their treaty obligations to us as we have 
mutually defined them," she said. "What they should not do is redefine those 
obligations" without consulting Indian officials. 
While few Indians are calling for withdrawal of government aid, many say they 
fear that new laws respecting the tribes would only aggravate conditions on the 
reservations. 
The federal government, they say, is not in a position to know what is best for 
any given tribe, and should allow Indian governments to manage their own 
affairs locally. 
Rep. Ben Nighthorse Campbell (D-Colo.), the only Indian serving in Congress, 
said that laws intended to help the Indians often have the opposite effect. 
Frequently, Campbell said, "whatever they are going to propose is not going to 
solve the problem." He said that Congress needs to adopt a more "hands-off" 
attitude toward Indian affairs. 
DeConcini said he believes there is a middle ground. 
He said the committee is likely to propose making tribal leaders subject to the 
same criminal laws as city, county and state officials, but that legislators 
should keep in mind the goal of reducing tribal dependence on the federal 
government and the goal of self-sufficiency. 
Wilma Mankiller, chief of the Cherokee Nation in Oklahoma, said that any new 
federal legislation should promote local control by tribal leaders. 
Mankiller, who is known for her willingness to work with the federal 
government, called the Bureau of Indian Affairs "an anachronism." She said 
Congress should streamline the agency to "make it more responsive to the 
communities." 
Critics of the bureau, which employs nearly 14,000 people and has an annual 
operating budget of about $1.5 billion, say that mismanagement is pervasive. 
"The complexity of the . . . Interior Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs . . 
. is paralleled only by their Byzantine accounting, auditing and record-keeping 
practices," DeConcini said in his opening statement at the hearings. 
McCain called it "well-meaning incompetence." 
Pat Ragsdale, the agency's interim director, disputed McCain's characterization 
and compared the bureau to a car that simply needs a tune-up. 
The outgoing BIA director, Ross Swimmer, acknowledged the bureau's shortcomings 
and said he hopes its involvement in Indian affairs eventually can be reduced. 
Swimmer, a former chief of the Cherokee Nation, called for a "simple transfer 
of authority and responsibility" from the BIA to tribal governments over the 
next 10 years. 
