EX-MORTICIAN CHARGED IN OLEANDER POISONING 
In what is believed to be the first murder prosecution in American history for 
oleander poisoning, authorities filed charges Friday against a former Pasadena 
funeral home worker accused of using the lethal plant's leaves to poison a 
rival mortician. 
David Wayne Sconce, 33, was charged with poisoning Timothy R. Waters, 24, a 
rival Burbank mortician, in 1985. The motive, according to Los Angeles County 
Assistant Chief Deputy Dist. Atty. Harvey Giss, was to keep Waters from 
exposing activities at the Lamb Funeral Home where Sconce worked. 
Sconce is now serving a five-year prison term after pleading guilty last April 
to 21 criminal counts involving the mingling of human remains, the theft of 
body parts and the removal of gold teeth from cadavers at the funeral home. It 
was these activities that Giss alleges Sconce was trying to keep secret by 
poisoning Waters. 
Sconce's parents, Laurieanne Lamb Sconce and Jerry Sconce, are awaiting trial 
on charges of mingling remains and other charges connected with activities at 
the funeral home. The allegations amounted to the "worst scandal I've ever 
seen, or that I could ever imagine," California Cemetery Board Executive 
Officer John W. Gill said in 1988. 
Bruce Lamb, an uncle of David Sconce who is now running the family mortuary, 
said he believes in his nephew's innocence. He said the murder charges, on top 
of the earlier accusations, have "devastated" the family. 
According to Giss, the case began in the 1970s when Laurieanne Lamb Sconce took 
over the operation of the 67-year-old Lamb Funeral Home. 
In 1982, according to Giss, David Sconce took control of the Pasadena 
Crematorium in Altadena, a part of the family operation. He started a business 
called Coastal Cremations Inc., taking in bodies for cremation on behalf of 
other mortuaries throughout Southern California for as little as $55 each. 
"They tried to corner the market," said Joe Estephan, the funeral director of 
the Cremation Society of California. 
At the same time, Waters began operating the Alpha Society cremation service in 
Burbank, Giss said. In January, 1985, Giss said, Waters told a friend, Richard 
Gray, that the Lamb Funeral Home was doing multiple cremations -- packing more 
than one body into the ovens, making it impossible to be sure whose remains 
were delivered to survivors. 
Giss said Gray relayed the information about Waters to Sconce. Giss also said 
Waters was intending to turn Sconce in to state funeral regulators. 
In February, 1985, Waters was beaten at his office, and Sconce was charged with 
assault. He pleaded guilty. 
Then in April, 1985, Waters died at his parents' home in Camarillo after 
becoming ill while baby-sitting for his sister in Malibu. The cause of death 
was originally listed as a heart attack. 
But Dr. Fredrick Rieders, a Pennsylvania expert on oleander poisoning brought 
in by Los Angeles authorities, later said after an analysis of blood samples 
from Waters' body that oleander poisoning was the true cause of death. 
While one witness said that he saw Sconce slip an unknown substance into 
Waters' drink at a restaurant, prosecutors said they were uncertain how the 
alleged poisoning occurred. 
Deaths from oleander poisoning are rare, but a number have occurred over the 
years. Some cases are accidental, as in a California case several years ago 
when a woman died after brewing an oleander tea from what she thought were 
harmless leaves. 
Giss said he believes that this is the first time anyone has been prosecuted 
for using oleander as a murder weapon in the United States, although there had 
been at least one prosecution involving the use of oleander as a folk medicine. 
