SACRAMENTO FILE: ASSEMBLY 
Bill Introductions: 
Firearms: AB 669 by Assemblywoman Jackie Speier (D-South San Francisco) would 
prohibit convicted felons from owning or possessing any kind of firearm. 
Current law just bars them from owning handguns. AB 615 by Assemblyman Johan 
Klehs (D-San Leandro) would require people convicted of criminal offenses 
involving automatic or semiautomatic weapons to register with law enforcement 
officials. 
Lobbying: AB 600 by Assemblyman Byron D. Sher (D-Palo Alto) would prohibit 
former employees of the executive branch of state government, ex-legislators 
and ex-legislative employees from lobbying their old bosses for one year after 
leaving their jobs. 
Doctor Fees: AB 675 by Assemblywoman Speier would add charging "excessive fees" 
to grounds for possible disciplinary action against physicians and surgeons. 
Food Labeling: AB 618 by Assemblywoman Speier would require labels of 
prepackaged food to show specified nutritional information, such as fat and 
cholesterol content. 
Handicapped: AB 643 by Assemblyman Charles M. Calderon (D-Whittier) would 
require banks to provide handicapped access to automatic teller machines. 
C-Sections: AB 686 by Assemblywoman Lucille Roybal Allard (D-Los Angeles) would 
require a doctor to obtain written informed consent from the mother before 
delivering a baby by Cesarean section. 
Senate 
Bill Introductions: 
Judges: SB 472 by Sen. Ed Davis (R-Valencia) would authorize 70 new judges for 
the Los Angeles Superior Court, 15 additional judges for the Los Angeles 
Municipal Court, one additional judge for the East Los Angeles Municipal Court 
and five additional judges for the Compton Municipal Court. 
Parole: SB 482 by Sen. Don Rogers (R-Bakersfield) would require prison parolees 
who commit violent crimes to be reimprisoned for the remainder of their parole 
period. 
Bonds: SB 484 by Sen. John Seymour (R-Anaheim) would place a $1-billion K-12 
school construction bond issue on the November, 1990, ballot for voter 
consideration. 
Junk Fax Advertisements: SB 487 by Sen. Quentin L. Kopp (I-San Francisco) would 
make it a misdemeanor to send unsolicited advertising material to facsimile 
machine receivers. 
