OFF-ROADERS DON'T BELONG IN ANZA-BORREGO DESERT 
Next month, when the state's Off-Highway Motor Vehicle Recreation commissioners 
come to town, they will be touring the latest additions to the Ocotillo Wells 
Off-Road Vehicle Park in eastern San Diego County. Using off-road vehicle 
registration fees, the state has recently more than doubled the size of the 
park, adding 20,000 acres to the existing 14,000. 
But that doesn't satisfy off-roaders. They also want access to Anza-Borrego 
Desert State Park next door, and the commissioners will be considering such a 
proposal at their March meeting in Borrego Springs. If approved, it would have 
to be ratified by the state Parks and Recreation Commission. 
Under the proposal, groups of four to 20 riders of unlicensed vehicles would be 
allowed on 75 miles of roads in the eastern part of the park, although they 
would still be banned on the other 425 miles of Anza-Borrego roads. A 
designated member of each group would have to complete a desert-awareness 
program and each rider would have to agree in writing to stay on trails or pay 
a $250 fine. Group leaders would wear bright orange vests to make them easier 
for rangers to spot, and two more rangers would be hired with off-roaders' 
registration fees. 
Although the proposal is relatively modest, the encroachment on the fragile 
desert park should not be allowed. 
Over and over again, off-roaders have demonstrated that dirt bikes and 
all-terrain vehicles are more for sport than travel. People buy them primarily 
for the thrill of conquering tough terrain. The temptation to ignore the rules 
and stray from designated paths proves too great for too many. That's why 
there's Ocotillo Wells. 
Anza-Borrego has a different purpose. The 426,000 acres of parkland were set 
aside to preserve and protect an area of outstanding natural beauty. People go 
to Anza-Borrego to camp or hike or explore, and to enjoy the exquisite desert 
quiet -- activities incompatible with off-road vehicles. 
The vehicles were banned from the park in 1987 because of the damage they were 
causing to plant and animal life and to archeologically sensitive sites when 
riders went off the trail. That damage heals slowly, if ever, in the desert. 
Licensed four-wheel-drive vehicles and motorcycles are allowed on the park 
roads -- often just dirt trails -- and, admittedly, they, too, can cause damage 
if taken off road. But rangers say that rarely happens. Drivers tend to use 
them for transportation, not play. 
The federal Bureau of Land Management, which has a fairly liberal policy on 
off-road vehicles -- allowing casual use in many areas and competitive use on 
500,000 acres in California -- knows about the damage off-roaders can cause and 
how much it costs to police them. The bureau has had to more than double the 
number of its rangers, in large part because of the demands of policing 
off-roaders. 
And recently, the bureau banned four races in the California desert because of 
the damage caused during the Barstow-to-Las Vegas race and the amount of staff 
it took to police the races and protect the endangered desert tortoise. 
Off-roaders do not need Anza-Borrego. They have approximately 1 million acres 
of BLM and U.S. Forest Service land and 85,000 acres of state land, including 
the 34,000 acres at Ocotillo Wells to ride in. And Anza-Borrego and its 800,000 
visitors each year don't need off-roaders. 
