PLAYWRIGHT-ACTOR TRANSMUTES A PAINFUL TIME INTO A FUNNY, PROFANE PLAY 
She clobbers him. He bites her. She pours hot water over his head. He slashes 
his wrist and flicks the blood on a qcanvas he's painting. She reads. He stomps 
on broken glass. She sneers. He screams. She has another cup of tea. 
Such is life in the very personal landscape of Raymond J. Barry's 
semi-autobiographical play, "Once in Doubt," at the Cast-at-the-Circle Theatre 
in Hollywood. It is an arty, self-conscious and unabashedly profane study of an 
artist's obsessive relationship with his work, his lady and the quizzical 
neighbor who wanders into their love/hate nest. 
"There are some nights when the audience howls with laughter when I start 
making a collage out of my own blood," said the playwright, who co-stars in the 
production with Kim O'Kelley and Harvey Perr. "I love it when they laugh -- 
because it is funny. But the point is, I know where that idea came from. I went 
through that pain." 
The product of a self-described "dysfunctional family" (both parents were 
alcoholics), Barry, 49, remembers himself as a young overachiever, a "serious 
jock" who majored in philosophy at Brown University -- and upon graduation, 
found himself drafted by the New England Patriots and accepted at the Yale 
Drama School. He chose Yale, but soon found that acting was a bumpy ride. 
 -- -- 
At 24, a bottomless anxiety attack sent Barry reeling. He taught high school, 
then worked as a longshoreman. He immersed himself in drawing, painting and 
sculpture. But by 1968, he was touring Europe as part of Joseph Chaikin's Open 
Theatre. 
Back in New York, he co-directed the Puerto Rican Writer's Workshop with the 
late Miguel Pinero. He also appeared in more than 75 stage productions, picking 
up two Obie awards -- for "Leaf People" and "Molly's Dream." 
His most recent role was Tom Cruise's father in the upcoming Oliver 
Stone-directed film, "Born on the Fourth of July," the story of disabled 
veteran/war protester Ron Kovic. 
"You get so saturated with the subject matter," the actor said wearily. "I'm 
glad to get away from that experience. I can't even read about it now. It was a 
real heavy-duty trip. But politically, it was very important to me. I've never 
been in a film so important. 
"I'm not your typical film actor," he said. "I came here for whatever reasons. 
It began to get crazy in New York. I needed money. I was evicted from my loft." 
Although he once turned down roles in 13 consecutive plays he "didn't love," he 
said yes to Michael Cimino's 1985 film "Year of the Dragon" -- and later, 
"Dragon" co-writer Oliver Stone remembered the actor for "Born on the Fourth of 
July." 
Other Barry credits include the crooked cop chasing Anthony Michael Hall in 
"Out of Bounds," an evil senator in "Three for the Road" with Charlie Sheen, 
and "the bad guy" in the Eric Roberts made-for-cable film "Slow Burn." 
Barry makes no apologies for his commercial detour. "One day you turn around 
and you're 40, and you're broke," he said. "And you think, 'Hey, maybe I should 
make some bread.' " In 1985, he moved to a duplex in the Fairfax district -- 
and has been living happily ever after. 
 -- -- 
"See how quiet this place is," he said, gesturing to the art- and 
sculpture-filled room around him. "I've done all these drawings since I've been 
here. I've done books and books of writing. You know why? Because I can isolate 
here. Nobody cares about you; you just kind of fit into your little cubbyhole. 
Of course, you have to hustle for work, but in a modest kind of way." 
Barry continued, "The most I ever made in New York was $27,000. Last year, I 
made 150 grand. I did a TV series, 'The Oldest Rookie,' with Paul Sorvino. It 
was lousy, it stunk, it was the dumbest thing I ever did in my life, but," he 
said with a laugh, "I made a hundred grand doing it. What can I tell you? 
"I'm old enough, so I don't take it all so seriously," Barry said. "But the 
fact is, I am serious -- maybe too serious. I know I'm contradicting myself. 
I'm serious about all the work I do. That's the honest truth. It doesn't matter 
what it is. And that gets in my way. 'Cause I'll do something like 'Oldest 
Rookie' and try to make it work -- and there's no substance in the material. 
And I'll end up frustrated, whipping myself, unhappy." 
Now, looking at his 50th birthday, Barry (who has a 16-year-old daughter, Oona, 
by an earlier marriage) says he has come to terms with his actor's life. 
"Theater is my metaphor for learning and experiencing this thing we call life," 
he said. "I could've been a painter or a writer or a football coach, but this 
is what I chose. And I take everything that comes with it." 
The pain that's all-too-evident in the play, Barry added, is long past. "I took 
me six years to write that," he said. "I started writing those scenes between 
the man and the woman in the aftermath of breaking up with a woman I had been 
living with. But all this happened a long time ago. So sometimes now I feel 
that I've outgrown it. I wrote it, choreographed it; I'm acting in it. But to 
some degree, it's a past life." 
Still, Barry allows, some aspects remain. "I feel different from most people," 
he said. "There's something that makes me . . . different. I have a very high 
threshold for pain. I know I went through a lot. And I have it in my mind to 
produce some statement about myself. I don't care if it's a drawing, painting, 
sculpture or play. It's like 'Hey, everyone, this is my life. Come on over, the 
joke's on me.' " 
