A TALE OF NOISE AND ANNOYANCE; 
ONE OF MILAN'S OLDEST RESTAURANTS STOOPS TO CONQUER L.A. 
Bice, 301 N. Canon, Beverly Hills. (213) 272-2423. Open for lunch and dinner 
daily. Full bar. Parking in building. All major credit cards accepted. Dinner 
for 2, food only, $50-$90. 
Bice is the kind of restaurant where two people can have an awful argument at 
the other end of your own table and you won't even find out about it until the 
next morning. 
It happened to me. But then, I was pretty busy fending off a waiter who missed 
his calling as a used car salesman. While my friends were deciding never to 
speak to each other again, my waiter was trying to talk me into buying wines I 
couldn't afford. And that was just his opening act. 
He began by happily informing me that he didn't think the $25 bottle of wine I 
had ordered was in the cellar. It wasn't. I chose another at the same price. He 
didn't think I'd like it very much. Pointing to a different wine he said, "Try 
this. It's a much better bottle." 
"At $40," I replied, "it should be." 
"OK," he said, "here's a $35 wine that's not so expensive and is really good." 
I shook my head. He tried again. "I really think you'll be much happier . . ." 
I said I thought the $25 wine would bring me sufficient happiness. 
This didn't bring him happiness, but he did bring us the wine. Having poured it 
he doled out menus, suggesting that we might have a little bite, maybe some 
antipasti, while we decided what to eat. I said I thought that would be nice. 
This decision, I was later to discover, set me back $72. 
How did this make me feel? Like an idiot touring Italy 20 years ago, when 
Americans were rich, ugly and convinced that they were being taken for a ride. 
It's the kind of treatment we used to take for granted in French restaurants in 
America, back in the days when we still believed that the waiter's main job was 
to make us feel inadequate. 
It's rare for a waiter in an Italian restaurant to make you feel this way. But 
then, these waiters have been imported especially from Italy. Perhaps this is 
how they behave back home in the original Bice? I doubt it; Bice has been a 
popular Milanese meeting place since 1926, and the Italians have never been 
known for masochism. 
The service is not the only thing that seems designed for America. So does the 
space; visually Bice is pure Beverly Hills. It is a vast theatrical room where 
people enter and exit on a sort of stage, often pausing to pose on the ramp as 
they make their descent from bar to restaurant. Even those who go up to the 
restrooms can be seen preening on the glass balcony that floats above the 
dining room. Clothes are important here: the more casual, the more up-to-date 
and the more expensive, the better. 
Then there's the noise factor. Would an Italian diner put up with this din? 
It's unlikely. This must be one of the loudest restaurants in a town filled 
with loud restaurants. Eating dinner with six friends one night, I found it 
virtually impossible to hear what was being said at the far end of the table. 
(This was a blessing, but I didn't know it at the time.) And while I'll admit I 
once watched a man pull a phone out of his briefcase and attempt to make a call 
while eating dinner, he had the phone pressed tightly against one ear and a 
finger pressed tightly against the other. And I'd bet money he still couldn't 
hear what was being said on the other end. 
But you came to eat, right? Well, probably not. There is better Italian food in 
lots of other restaurants in town. 
Consider that antipasto the waiter unloaded on me. Each plate contained the 
following: one large, chilled and totally tasteless shrimp with a little bit of 
endive and avocado; a slice of bresaola with very acidulated shavings of raw 
artichoke and very delicious chunks of Parmesan cheese; slightly bitter 
mozzarella served on top of cottony slices of tomato. Over the past few years 
I've come to trust waiters, but this particular plate made me remember the days 
when I was wary of asking for recommendations because I knew that the waiter 
would just tell me to order whatever the kitchen wanted to get rid of. 
But the dishes we chose ourselves weren't much better. There was a rather 
ordinary plate of penne alla arrabbiatta. And an equally ordinary plate of 
penne with eggplant. I'll admit a dish of risotto with spinach and mascarpone 
was delicious, but at $19 it has to be the most expensive risotto in town. (You 
probably won't notice the little line on the menu which says that pasta served 
as a main course costs an additional $5. You will, however, notice when the 
bill comes and your $10 pasta has made the leap to $15.) 
The entrees themselves are rather reasonable -- most are under $20. But in the 
course of four visits to the restaurant, few of them tasted very good. Pheasant 
with liver sauce was dry. Roast veal arrived in a sauce that tasted as if it 
had come out of a bottle. Swordfish was so smothered in capers you couldn't 
taste the fish. Grilled flattened chicken was dry. In fact, of all the entrees 
I've tried at Bice, the only two which really impressed me were something 
called "Robespierre" -- thin rare slices of steak topped with arrugula -- and a 
simple breaded veal cutlet Milanese. 
I did have one other impressive dish at Bice; unfortunately it has gone out of 
season for another year. When the restaurant opened, the menu featured a truly 
spectacular white truffle risotto. It was served in a large shallow dish so 
that the creamy, slightly al dente rice spread out into a thin layer. All 
across the top were slices of truffle shaved so thinly they were almost 
translucent. The result was that the proportion of truffle to rice was 
practically perfect: each spoonful brought a powerful jolt of flavor. 
The dish was so good that I'd gladly go back for it. I'd put up with the noise, 
the rude waiters and the high prices. I'd put up with fighting friends. I'd 
even put up with feeling like a callow tourist. 
But I can't say I'm sorry that I'll have to wait a year until I do it. 
