DRUGS THE ABSTINENCE ERROR; 
DROP THE IRON FIST AND TRY RULES OF MODERATION; 
CULTURES THAT TEACH CHILDREN ABOUT DRINKING BUT FROWN ON ADULT DRUNKS HAVE 
LOWER RATES OF ALCOHOLISM. THE LESSON SHOULD TRANSLATE TO DRUGS. 
Faced with the complexities of drug use, many people are tempted by simple 
formulas: Don't try to distinguish moderation from abuse; settle only for "zero 
tolerance." Don't separate illegal drugs that are beneficial from deadly ones; 
forbid them all. Don't let the kids have an ounce of wine; it will make them 
alcoholics. Just say no. 
The most ironic consequence of these efforts to rein in drug consumption is 
that they actually increase the chances of abuse. There are two reasons for 
this: Policies of abstinence do not teach how to use drugs in moderation; and 
by focusing on the drugs themselves, they ignore why people use them. 
For individuals and for society, such policies are mistakenly thought to be the 
best defense against abuse. In fact, the opposite is true. Lower rates of 
alcohol and drug abuse have been associated with approaches that emphasize 
moderation and education -- in which young people learn responsible use of 
alcohol and "social drugs" in controlled settings, with less potent forms of a 
drug and with information about the hazards of excess. 
Cultures in which people drink moderately with their meals -- and where 
children, in the presence of their parents, learn the social rules of drinking 
-- have much lower rates of alcoholism than those in which drinking occurs in 
bars, in binges, or mostly alone. Study after study has found that alcoholism 
is much more prevalent in societies that forbid children to drink but view 
adult drunkenness with amused tolerance or as a sign of masculinity (such as 
Ireland and the United States) than in cultures that teach children how to 
drink responsibly but frown on adult drunkenness (such as Italy and Greece). 
With other drugs, too, moderate use -- the Peruvian Indian custom of chewing 
coca leaves, the occasional use of marijuana for social and medical purposes -- 
does not lead to addiction or social problems. 
When a person tries any drug without knowing the rules for its use, he or she 
typically uses it stupidly -- the way teen-agers and college students binge on 
liquor, for instance. Prohibition was supposed to keep adolescents free from 
liquor's contaminating influence (a rationale of today's drug policies). 
Sociologist Joan McCord of Temple University has documented how this rationale 
backfired: Males who were teen-agers during Prohibition were later more likely 
to be problem drinkers and to commit many more crimes than men who were adults 
during that time. The former, never having learned how to drink, overdid it 
when given the opportunity later on. 
An individual's responses to a drug depend on his or her mental set -- 
expectations of what it will do and on what he or she wants it to do. Studies 
have shown, for example, that there is nothing intrinsic in alcohol or crack 
that makes consumers violent -- but violent, angry, frustrated individuals tend 
to be drawn to these drugs. 
Similarly, the physical and social settings shape an individual's responses. A 
century ago in this country, marijuana was used as a mild sedative. Cocaine was 
widely touted as a cure for everything from toothaches to timidity. When 
cultural outsiders began using marijuana and cocaine for "mind-altering" 
purposes, society responded by making the drugs illegal. That was the first 
step toward making them major social problems. 
When an approach to a problem is repeatedly tried and repeatedly fails, it is 
time to experiment with alternatives. The alternative to prohibition and 
enforcement is not legalizing drugs and crossing our fingers. It is drug 
education, training in the moderate use of some drugs and continued social 
sanctions against abuse. 
What would a legalization and education program look like? Elements of it are 
apparent in the case of cigarettes. Cigarette smoking has significantly 
declined because of a combination of factors -- limits on advertising, rapidly 
changing social attitudes toward smoking and regulations restricting when and 
where people may smoke. As is the case with tobacco, legalizing marijuana, 
cocaine and heroin would not signify an endorsement of their use. Society could 
continue to prohibit drug abuse on the job, drug advertising and the use of 
narcotics while driving a motor vehicle or in certain public settings. 
But most important, as physician Andrew Weil observed years ago, legalizing 
drugs must be accompanied by real drug education on a widespread basis. "What 
passes for education today," he said, is "a thinly disguised attempt to scare 
people away from drugs we don't like by exaggerating their dangers." A more 
truthful program must avoid this hypocrisy. Children would learn that not all 
drugs are equally hazardous and that some illegal drugs are safer than legal 
ones. For example, marijuana has some important medical properties -- it 
lessens pain and reduces the swelling in glaucoma -- whereas tobacco poses 
unacceptably high health risks. The dangers of both alcohol and crack would be 
taught, and children would learn the positive reasons -- relaxation, 
meditation, socializing -- for moderate use. 
Education would also spotlight the risks of what Weil calls "problem sets" -- 
consuming drugs to alter bad moods -- and "problem settings" -- in which drug 
or alcohol abuse is compulsory. Lessons about moderation and "self-control" 
will depend on the reason a person drinks or abuses drugs in the first place. 
In order to pass for 21 in a bar? To join a fraternity or gang? To escape 
illiteracy or hopelessness? To quiet the despair of a dead-end life? 
Many people worry that legalizing drugs would mean that everyone would choose 
to be "high" all the time. Perhaps some would for a while, just as dieters 
sometimes binge on chocolate and involuntary teetotalers binged after 
Prohibition. And perhaps some people, like the sad, lost youths who inhabit the 
legal-drug parks of Europe, would give over their lives to pursuit of the 
constant high. There are costs to any policy decisions we make. But the 
evidence suggests that there will be fewer human, economic and social costs to 
a policy of legalization-and-education than to continued escalation of an 
unwinnable war. 
