CHILDREN OF DIVORCE FORCED UP IN THE AIR 
Michael Bullard belongs to three frequent flier clubs and has accumulated 
enough miles in the air, he says, for "oh, about 43 free trips to China." 
So excuse him if he's a little tired of flight attendants who think they're 
teaching second grade. 
"They squeak their voices, and they say, 'Now, this is how you fasten your seat 
belt,' " says Michael, a guy with an earnest, freckled face and glasses perched 
on the tip of his nose. "Then they make you read the safety instruction card. 
I'm like, I've read it a million times. I could draw the card for you." 
"God," he says, rolling his eyes, "they treat me like I'm 7 years old." 
Since Michael turned 11 last December -- well, the magnitude of the insult is 
evident. Michael, who lives with his mother and stepfather in Sherman Oaks, 
flies several times a year to visit his father in upstate New York. He's one of 
a growing segment of the passenger population: kids who commute by themselves 
between divorced parents. 
Airline officials are reporting a dramatic increase in the number of children 
between 5 and 11 who fly unaccompanied by an adult. United Airlines carried 
200,000 unaccompanied minors in 1989, up from 100,000 in 1987. Based on 
conversations with the young passengers, United estimates that more than half 
are flying between divorced parents. Other major airlines, including American, 
TWA and Delta, report an increase but say they don't keep written statistics. 
Paul Carlson, a child psychologist who practices in Tarzana, says he has 
noticed more of his young clients are commuting by themselves between parents. 
Until a few years ago, he says, "a parent would either go along with the kids 
or send an aunt or a nanny along. Now, kids have a great amount of 
responsibility placed on themselves." 
Some, like Michael, handle it well. They're grateful for the chance to visit 
the other parent, and they seem to gain a sense of independence from traveling 
alone. To them it's as easy as traversing the Valley on the Ventura Freeway, 
only a bit more exciting. "Especially the turbulence," Michael says. 
But for others, the commute isn't so simple. Some kids are afraid of flying, 
some are intimidated by strangers in an unfamiliar setting, and some don't want 
to leave the parent they're living with. 
Still others do want to leave. In January, a 12-year-old boy, tired of bouncing 
between his mom in Boston and his dad in Ft. Lauderdale, decided that he wanted 
to live with his dad instead of his mom. He was such a veteran of air travel 
that -- without his mother knowing -- he was able to catch a cab to Logan 
Airport, slip past gate attendants and stow away on a Delta Air Lines flight to 
Florida. 
Michael isn't planning an escape from Sherman Oaks, but he's no slouch either 
when it comes to airport knowledge. 
"O'Hare, that's the worst," says Michael, who has commuted since age 5. "They 
have H1, H2, H3, H4, H5 and they go all the way through the alphabet with 15 
numbers for each gate. But I like LAX because it's organized, and in Austin 
there's just 12 gates. Atlanta and Pittsburgh, you can handle them because 
there's no one there. But a place like Dallas-Ft. Worth, there's too many 
people -- it's crazy." 
So many kids are flying alone these days that in some cities many airlines, 
including United, TWA and American, have established special rooms where they 
supervise kids during layovers. 
Mary Taylor, who supervises the unaccompanied minor room at United's Denver 
hub, has seen many children of divorce pass through. 
"I had one little boy who had just come from visiting his dad in Florida, and 
he started telling me, 'I'm gonna move back with my Dad. My Dad wants me.' He 
was just on cloud nine." 
Some of the older kids resent having to stay in the room with younger kids, 
Taylor says. "They say, 'I'm big enough. I know what I'm doing.' I think a lot 
of it has to do with the kids feeling like they're being used. . . . And I'm 
sure they're frustrated with the fact that mommy and daddy can't be together." 
Because air travel can be such a hassle, airlines prohibit kids under 5 from 
flying alone. And those between 5 and 7 can take only direct flights. Some 
airlines charge $30 for escorting kids to connecting flights. 
In addition, the adult who brings the child to the airport must provide the 
name, address and telephone number of the adult on the other end. The person 
picking up the child must show identification, which is especially important if 
there's a custody dispute, says United spokeswoman Sara Dornaker. 
Carlson says parents need to prepare their children for the experience or 
problems are bound to occur. 
"Many kids don't know they ought to be drinking liquids and snacking, and they 
sometimes forget to go to the bathroom," Carlson says. 
And some of them end up very fatigued. "Adults have trouble understanding the 
time perception of kids," he says. "A 5 1/2-hour flight can seem like a 15 
1/2-hour flight to a kid." 
Carlson says it's helpful to explain the concept of air travel in a concrete 
manner, perhaps with a toy airplane. It's also useful, he says, to make a 
cassette tape "saying aunt so-and-so is going to meet you at LaGuardia." 
While flying alone can be troublesome, for some kids it also has benefits. 
Jenna Ferer, 20, thinks commuting alone gave her an unusual sense of 
independence, which later fueled her desire to travel worldwide. 
"It gave me traveler's blood," says Ferer, who spent last year traveling alone 
through Israel, Egypt, India and Nepal. 
From the time Ferer was 5, she flew to see her dad in San Francisco and to 
vacation with him in Cabo San Lucas. While traveling as a child in the United 
States was no problem, she says, "The airports in Mexico were just a big mess. 
I remember going through customs. It felt like being in a movie, with bamboo 
and palm leaves on the roofs and a dirt floor in the terminal. 
"I thought it was really cool," says Jenna, who often traveled with her 
brother, who is a year older. 
But Jenna often feared her father wouldn't be there to pick her up. 
"We were put on a plane without anything being explained, and we were expected 
to intellectualize it. I learned not to trust my feelings. . . . I think I was 
upset about it, but I stuffed it down," she says. 
Some kids don't hide their feelings. Dornaker, United's spokeswoman and a 
former flight attendant, says she saw a 7-year-old girl and her 5-year-old 
brother break into tears just after takeoff. 
"They just sobbed their little eyes out after departure. I think it was the 
first time they had been separated from the parent they were living with. It 
was heart-rending." 
The flight attendants tried to comfort the kids by serving their meal as 
quickly as possible, and they soon cheered up. After the meal, Dornaker says, 
the girl came up to her and said, "Did you find the tip we left on your tray?" 
Michael is anything but anxious on a Thursday in February when he's flying to 
Austin, Tex., to meet his dad for a short vacation. 
Carrying a big black bag full of "junk my mom packed," Michael trudges through 
the Continental terminal at LAX. "It's just a regular thing to me," he says. 
While his mom, Laverne Maule, checks him in, Michael sits on a bench and draws 
cartoons. A few minutes later, Maule gives him his ticket and pins an orange 
badge onto his shirt, signifying that he's flying alone. Michael isn't pleased. 
"It makes you feel really geeky," he says, scrunching his face. 
When it's time to board, Michael and his mom walk up a ramp that leads to the 
door of the plane. 
"Guess I'll see ya Monday," Michael says, shrugging his shoulders. 
"Yeah," Maule says, giving her son a kiss on the cheek. "Guess I'll see ya 
Monday." 
Michael acts as if he's going no farther than the bathroom. He's planning to 
pass the time reading, playing Nintendo and talking to the other passengers. 
For Maule, the trip is tougher. 
"It would be better if he didn't fly so much," she says. "It's time consuming 
and expensive, and there's some fear of problems happening. I worry until he 
gets there, and I worry until he gets back." 
