INGLEWOOD RACE SEES INCUMBENT DEFENDING HONOR 
Two-term Inglewood Councilman Anthony Scardenzan faces three challengers in a 
race where the issues include crime, growth, the city's power structure, and 
honesty. 
Mark Ganier, Scardenzan's main challenger in Tuesday's election, has accused 
the incumbent of traveling at city expense to his hometown in Italy as part of 
Inglewood's Sister Cities program. Ganier has offered no proof of this, and 
city travel records show Scardenzan paid his own way. 
Despite his incumbency, Scardenzan, 60, who owns a Gardena tool and die shop, 
trails Ganier in fund raising, having raised $13,835 as of last week. Ganier, 
53, a maintenance supervisor for the Inglewood schools, reported raising 
$14,585. 
Also Running 
Also running in the District 2 race, but far behind in fund raising, are Andrew 
Chapralis, 63, the owner of an Inglewood burglar alarm company who ran 
unsuccessfully in 1985, and Daniel Checo Langston, 46, a management consultant. 
Last year, Scardenzan spearheaded a drive to fight gangs and drugs by hiring 20 
new police officers through a tax assessment, saying the extra police were 
worth the political risk of promoting higher taxes. Voters overwhelmingly 
approved the measure in November. 
"I fought the longest for it," Scardenzan said. "I'm doing everything I can to 
fight crime, not just talking about it." 
Ganier, however, has labeled Scardenzan an "instigator of crime," accusing the 
councilman of allowing widespread development of apartment complexes that cause 
congestion, crime and overcrowded schools. 
Housing Blamed 
"The housing pattern in the district has created crime," Ganier said in an 
interview. "People are being treated like cattle. They're packed in on top of 
each other. It's unhealthy. There's dissatisfaction with Scardenzan. He's 
provided absolutely no service." 
In response, Scardenzan said he sponsored an emergency moratorium on 
construction in the city last year, then pushed for passage of last year's law 
that reduced density throughout Inglewood. At Scardenzan's request, the law 
imposed a particularly tough rezoning in his north Inglewood district, reducing 
allowable building heights by half and increasing setbacks, parking 
requirements and minimum property size for construction of new units. 
Scardenzan emphasizes his record of independence. In 1984, he was the only 
council member voting against an $11-million refuse contract awarded to Western 
Waste Industries, a contract that Scardenzan and many residents opposed because 
it was awarded without competitive bidding. 
Scardenzan also was the only council member to actively oppose Proposition 1, a 
ballot initiative defeated in 1987 that would have given Inglewood a full-time 
mayor with four times the mayor's present $10,800 annual salary. 
Ganier has criticized Scardenzan for his recent vote to grant City Manager Paul 
Eckles a three-year contract extension -- approved three to one by the council 
-- which raised Eckles' salary to about $122,000 a year. 
Ganier said he favors making council members full-time officials, saying they 
have more of a stake in the city than administrators, many of whom live 
elsewhere. 
Scardenzan called the idea of a full-time council for a city of 104,000 
residents a waste of taxpayers' funds and questioned Ganier's motives. 
"People that run for office should have their own job," Scardenzan said. "They 
should feel like they are giving something to the city, not taking something 
from the city. He's looking for job security for himself, not good government 
and administration for the city." 
The union representing the city's police officers has endorsed Scardenzan, as 
have Los Angeles County Supervisor Kenneth Hahn and State Sen. Diane Watson 
(D-Los Angeles). 
Ganier has the backing of Assemblyman Curtis Tucker Jr. (D-Inglewood). Although 
Ganier has been a political contributor to Mayor Edward Vincent in the past, 
Vincent has recently spoken well of Scardenzan -- who has been an occasional 
rival. Vincent has not made an endorsement. 
Ganier is making his first bid for public office, but he is no political 
neophyte, as evidenced by his well-financed campaign. Ganier's past political 
involvement includes working on the 1987 campaign of Councilman Ervin (Tony) 
Thomas, whose election was later annulled because of widespread Election Code 
violations by Mayor Vincent and other campaign workers. 
Ganier said that he did not participate in any of those violations, and that he 
opposes a recent decision by the council to appeal that election annulment to 
the state Supreme Court. 
Ganier's allegation that Scardenzan traveled to Italy at taxpayer expense is 
made in a campaign brochure. It says the trips were taken as part of the Sister 
Cities program that Scardenzan initiated with his birthplace, Pedavena. 
But city records show that Scardenzan used his own money for the two trips he 
has taken to Italy since the program of student exchanges began in 1985. The 
program is financed jointly by the city of Inglewood and private contributors. 
Scardenzan said: "He keeps on lying. He's doing it with a malicious intention 
because he wants to discredit me, not because I've done something wrong." 
Ganier would not provide proof of his allegation, saying: "Let him sue me. I 
stand by what I've printed." 
Doris Haisler, chairwoman of the Sister Cities Committee, said Scardenzan has 
housed and entertained students and other participants in the program at his 
own expense. 
"For him to be accused of this is absolutely outrageous," she said. "It is an 
absolute lie. He has done just the opposite. He has been incredibly generous." 
When asked about the aggressive tone of his campaign, Ganier said: "He's got to 
do what he's got to do, and I've got to do what I've got to do." 
Another disputed element of the campaign is an October, 1988, letter on 
Inglewood Unified School District stationery, signed by Ganier. The letter, 
addressed "Dear Neighbor," complains about problems caused by construction in 
the council district and criticizes Scardenzan, but does not say that Ganier 
planned to challenge him in Tuesday's election. 
Scardenzan says Ganier's use of school district stationery for political 
literature is a misuse of public funds. 
Ganier acknowledges writing the text of the letter but said someone copied his 
original letter onto district stationery in an effort to discredit him. 
Other Candidates 
Langston appeared at a candidate forum recently, and his signs are visible in 
the district. But he has failed to file any campaign spending reports and has 
been notified by City Clerk Hermanita Harris that he risks fines for missing 
two reporting deadlines. 
Langston said his treasurer had not been aware of the deadlines and said he 
would file his statement this week. He estimated that he had raised about 
$1,500. 
He said he is better qualified than Scardenzan because he has a background in 
management and runs a management consulting firm. He joined in the call for a 
full-time council that would decrease the city manager's power. 
"I think the city has grown, and there is a different need," he said. 
"Everything right now is concentrated in the city manager. You could better 
utilize resources and fund four full-time councilmen and a mayor with the city 
manager's salary." 
Chapralis, a security consultant, said he is a 45-year resident of Inglewood 
and is running for the council for the third time because he perceives 
dissatisfaction with Scardenzan. 
"I can remember when this was a growing city," he said. "I want to make it that 
way again." 
Chapralis, who filed a short form indicating he will not spend more than 
$1,000, said he thinks the police should put more officers on the street to 
curb gang activity. 
