WHOSE SEX SECRET IS IT?; 
DO WE HAVE A RIGHT TO KNOW A PUBLIC FIGURE'S SEXUAL ORIENTATION? RECENT 
DISCLOSURES BY GAY ACTIVISTS, MEDIA FUEL A BITTER DEBATE 
Malcolm Forbes, the flamboyant publisher known for his relationships with 
hot-air balloons and Elizabeth Taylor, had been dead only a week when rumors 
about his sexual orientation hit the mainstream media. 
In a USA Today gossip column, Forbes, the divorced father of five children and 
grandfather of nine, was described as "leading a gay lifestyle for at least the 
last five years." 
People magazine quickly offered similar observations, saying, "In recent years, 
Forbes' exuberant night life generated persistent if unproven rumors of his 
homosexuality" -- to which Forbes' son Robert offered no comment except, "Well, 
I don't like to see things about people's private lives in print." And last 
week, New York-based OutWeek, a gay-oriented weekly, followed with explicit 
details on the publishing tycoon's reported sex life. 
Though deceased, Forbes has become the latest target of "outing," a growing 
practice in which alleged gay men, lesbians or bisexuals are involuntarily 
yanked from the sexual closet, typically by activists in the gay community. 
But outing, or "tossing" as it's also called, is not confined to dead folks 
incapable of having their privacy invaded or being libeled and retaliating with 
lawsuits. In the last two years, the hotly debated tactic has flourished, 
flinging more and more living celebrities out of their private sexual sanctums 
and into newspapers and magazines, primarily the gay press and supermarket 
tabloids but, increasingly, mainstream media as well. 
In virtually all cases, outing is reserved for people who are already well 
known. Actors, politicians, gossip columnists and fashion designers have been 
named, usually by proud, open gays who, in some cases, claim to personally know 
the purported sex partners of those they expose. Well-known writers, 
entertainment moguls, professional athletes, Olympic medalists, rock musicians 
-- or sometimes their reportedly gay or lesbian children -- also have been 
tossed. Long practiced in private conversations in gay circles, outing now 
occurs on public placards at AIDS demonstrations. It happens in lectures. And 
it appears regularly in the gay press, in interviews with activists and in 
OutWeek's notorious "Peek-a-Boo" feature, which is simply a list of names of 
famous people supposedly in the closet. 
The practice is generating vigorous debate. In the gay community, outing -- or 
the threat of it -- is criticized by some as a form of psychological terrorism 
and hailed by others as a powerful political tool. While opponents argue that 
revealing anyone's sexual orientation is an inexcusable invasion of privacy, 
many say outing represents the cutting edge of gay activism in the '90s. 
Perpetrators contend that if the sexual orientation of respected, 
high-visibility gays and lesbians were revealed, others who are in or out of 
the closet would have more role models to consider -- not just deceased media 
stars such as Rock Hudson, Liberace, attorney Roy Cohn, fashion designer Perry 
Ellis and National Conservative Political Action Committee founder Terry Dolan, 
all of whose sexual orientations were exposed as a result of AIDS. 
Award-winning playwright Larry Kramer, an advocate of outing whose plays "The 
Normal Heart" and "Just Say No" obliquely reveal allegedly closeted gays in 
politics and in the entertainment industry, claims the large number of people 
hiding out is the reason gays lack the political clout other minorities have 
achieved. 
"I'm HIV-positive and I haven't got time to wait for 25 million (gay and 
lesbian) people to get their act together to help make the government pay 
attention to my illness and help save my life," Kramer insists, volunteering, 
incidentally, that he hates the term outing. 
"I'm not going to do it to a school teacher or someone like that, but I get 
very angry with people who are in a position to do good, like heads of studios, 
famous stars, politicians certainly, authors, sports stars -- people who could 
be role models for a community that desperately needs them," adds Kramer, who 
is also founder of the militant AIDS activist organization ACT UP. "We're 
fighting for our lives now." 
Some supporters of outing are elected officials in high political office. U.S. 
Reps. Barney Frank and Gerry Studds, both of whom are openly gay, strongly back 
individuals' rights to privacy but believe that outing is justified in certain 
instances. 
"Where there are gay people who are engaged in gay bashing, they forfeit their 
right to privacy in general. They're hypocrites and they should be brought 
out," says Frank (D-Mass), noting that he voluntarily disclosed that he was gay 
after the press asked him about it in 1987. 
Last June, Frank threatened to do some political outing of his own. He warned 
that he might name the names of secretly gay Republican officeholders after a 
Republican National Committee memo falsely implied that House Speaker Thomas 
Foley, a Democrat, was gay. 
Frank never followed through with his closet shakedown. But two months after he 
threatened to expose others, a sexual secret of his own was revealed in the 
news. Responding to published accusations by a former personal aide, Frank 
admitted he had employed the man as an aide, then fired him after learning he 
was using the congressman's apartment as a house of prostitution. 
Like Frank, Studds represents Massachusetts. He has survived a gay sex scandal 
(he was censured in 1983 for acknowledging having had sex with a teen-age male 
page). And he, too, has been reelected since declaring he is gay. 
"It seems to me an ethical case could be made for denying someone their right 
to privacy if their conduct threatens other people's lives," reasons Studds. He 
offers, as an example of a potential outing candidate, a politician who is 
"actively and effectively lobbying against AIDS legislation or AIDS education 
legislation." 
Forced from the closet himself when the page scandal broke seven years ago, 
Studds says he would have preferred to have come out voluntarily than to have 
been outed by the disclosure. 
"No, I certainly wouldn't have chosen that method or timing," he allows. And 
though Studds doesn't recast his experience as a blessing in disguise, he does 
say that "what could have been an unmitigated disaster has been turned into a 
positive." 
But before anyone else is abruptly exposed the way he was, Studds would like to 
see other strategies tried first. "If the hypocrisy reaches a certain level, 
the proper thing is to send someone quietly to speak with them, to give them 
fair notice," the congressman recommends. "And if they continue to do things 
that really threaten, then I think you could make a case for outing." 
The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force's Robert Bray has engaged in some of 
the alternative tactics Studds suggests. 
"The policy of the task force is we uphold privacy in all cases no matter who 
the individual is or what their status is," says Bray, the task force's public 
information director. "The central issue of the national gay and lesbian 
movement is freedom, and we believe that coming out of the closet is an 
entirely personal and private decision that only an individual can make." 
At the same time, Bray points out that there is pervasive discrimination and 
defamation against gays throughout the country -- "some of it perpetrated by 
gays who are in high public office." 
Thus, when Bray was dancing at a gay club in the nation's capital and 
recognized a member of Congress who had voted against pro-gay legislation, he 
took action. 
"I spotted this gentleman dancing with his boyfriend. . . . Instead of tossing 
or outing this congressman, I introduced myself on the dance floor and called 
to his attention the hypocrisy that he had been legislating against gays. He 
left the bar. He didn't say anything. But I think he got the message. He 
started voting pro-gay and has been ever since. Outing would have been 
inappropriate in his case." 
Some well-known outing activists such as San Francisco-based novelist Armistead 
Maupin claim to have been exposing famous gay or lesbian hypocrites for as long 
as 12 years. (Among those Maupin revealed last year during an interview in San 
Francisco-based Gay Book magazine were a top Hollywood studio head, a popular 
record producer, several married actors, a real estate mogul and a married 
fashion designer. Maupin declined to be interviewed for this article, saying, 
through a spokesman, that he didn't want to be known as a premier outing 
activist.) 
In the meantime, as outing becomes more high-profile, the debate over whether 
it should be done "is just getting under way in the gay and lesbian community," 
says OutWeek Editor Gabriel Rotello. 
Bray recalls the first time outing was seriously discussed at a national forum: 
"In 1987, the issue of homophobic homosexual leaders was brought up at the 'Gay 
and Lesbian War Conference' in Washington, D.C., a convening of a couple of 
dozen gay and lesbian and AIDS leaders nationwide to discuss strategy. The camp 
swarmed (on the issue of outing)." 
Today, he says, the ranks remain divided. In fact, many gays find the notion of 
outing disturbing and counterproductive. 
"Heavily closeted gays and lesbians who have to be dragged kicking and 
screaming from the closet don't make very good role models," advises gay 
psychologist Paul Froman, a Los Angles-based member of the California State 
Task Force to Promote Self Esteem and Social and Personal Responsibility. If 
people need help in coming out, he suggests participation in National Coming 
Out Day each October, a celebratory occasion on which Froman says thousands of 
individuals have revealed their sexual orientation. 
Stuart Kellogg, the former editor in chief of The Advocate, the biweekly gay 
news magazine based in Los Angeles, agrees that forced disclosures of sexual 
orientation do more harm than good. 
"If people voluntarily come out of the closet that can go a long way towards 
saving young people's lives," says Kellogg, who resigned from his post last 
week to write books. "Many (closeted) gay people either live . . . dishonestly 
unhappy lives, kill themselves or do something close to killing themselves 
because of their depression. If someone they already honor comes out, and comes 
out voluntarily, it illustrates that homosexuality is not something to be 
apologized for. But if somebody is discovered to be gay, it just underscores 
the (perceived) need for people to be secret." 
Kellogg, whose publication generally avoids outing but printed the name of an 
anti-gay politician subjected to it, also notes that gay people have 
considerable investment in privacy law. "That's where we're going to get 
effective gay-rights laws," he predicts. "If we don't want Georgia policemen, 
for example, coming into our private bedrooms, we'd better look out for other 
people's privacy as well." 
Robert Peterson, The Advocate's Western region correspondent, has repeatedly 
reported on outing and says he understands the anger and frustrations from 
which it springs. Yet he still disapproves: "I think there's going to be an 
incredible reaction within the gay community at these tactics and their 
destructiveness. There's nothing to be gained from outing. . . . And the public 
at large will never respect a group of people that cannibalizes its own." 
Responds Michelangelo Signorile, the OutWeek feature editor who wrote the story 
on Forbes, "I see (outing) as teaching our own. I want to be able to tell the 
kids who are gay who they can look up to." 
In the meantime, are publications that name closeted gays opening themselves to 
lawsuits? Signorile says no libel or invasion-of-privacy suits have been filed 
or threatened against OutWeek. 
Floyd Abrams, a highly regarded New York-based constitutional attorney, says 
it's hard to tell whether, if filed, such suits would be successful: "It would 
not be a frivolous claim for someone who leads an entirely private gay life -- 
and whose sexual orientation is disclosed solely for the purpose of disclosure 
-- to bring an action claiming a violation of his rights. There could be a very 
serious First Amendment response because this area has not been ruled upon by 
the Supreme Court. Even if someone were a public figure . . . there would be a 
good deal of jockeying in the courts before we knew the answer to the question 
about his rights." 
In the case of Oliver Sipple, the gay Vietnam veteran who became a public 
figure in 1975 when he knocked away the revolver fired at President Gerald Ford 
by Sara Jane Moore, the legal jockeying lasted several years. 
After Sipple was lauded as a hero, his friends disclosed to newspaper reporters 
that he was active in gay social and political circles. The stories, in effect, 
outed Sipple and were big news to his family back in Detroit. Sipple sued seven 
major newspapers, including the Los Angeles Times, claiming his privacy had 
been invaded. 
He testified that the revelation increased his psychological problems, created 
an estrangement from his parents and was responsible for his increased 
drinking. His lawsuit was thrown out by a San Francisco Superior Court judge. 
But the case dragged on. In 1985, he lost again when a state Court of Appeal 
held that Sipple had become newsworthy and that his sexual orientation was part 
of the story. 
Sipple was found dead last year in his $344-a-month San Francisco apartment, 
surrounded by bottles of bourbon and 7-Up. 
Meanwhile, exposures of sexual orientation increase, and both the straight and 
the gay media are grappling with the ethical issues. 
"If a person is gay and is in a successful undertaking, what right do we have 
to probe into that (sex life) as long as the person is doing a responsible 
job?" asks press critic Norman Issacs, the former associate dean of Columbia 
University's Graduate School of Journalism and author of "Untended Gates: The 
Mismanaged Press." 
"We're so damn careless all the time. It looks to me as if Western society is 
kind of on the brink of withdrawal from the whole system of values and 
obligations. . . . The cruddy press (supermarket tabloids) is starting to be 
the tail that wags the dog. Every time they come up with something, boom, there 
we (mainstream media) are. We start to quote them as if they're important." 
Last week, for example, in a story on the outing phenomenon in the San 
Francisco Chronicle, the names of an allegedly closeted gay fashion designer 
and the reportedly undeclared lesbian daughter of a famed pop star were named. 
The article repeated a name that appeared in OutWeek magazine and another from 
a supermarket tabloid story. The Chronicle report did not include evidence to 
substantiate the claims of sexual orientation and did not offer responses from 
the individuals who were named. 
"We wrote this story because there is a debate taking place in the gay 
community and there's a sizable gay community in San Francisco," says Chronicle 
City Editor Dan Rosenheim. "People were mentioned in passing. All of the people 
have been the object of articles in the gay and the straight press. . . . 
"We didn't feel we were telling anybody anything that's new by mentioning that 
these people's names came up in the debates," notes Rosenheim, adding that 
millions of people had already read about the pop star's daughter in 
supermarket tabloids and that the fashion designer's supposed sexual 
orientation had been written about "extensively" in the gay press and also in a 
gossip column by Liz Smith of the New York Daily News. 
"Our policy is not to intrude into the private lives of people," he says. "Our 
interest was not in spreading rumors but in airing those aspects of a debate 
that is growing and important and significant." 
USA Today Editor in Chief Peter Prichard, whose newspaper appears to be the 
first mainstream publication to disclose the information on Forbes' reported 
sex life, says his paper has no overall policy on outing. 
"That's the kind of story you have to judge on a case-by-case basis," Prichard 
says. "I thought it was newsworthy because there were books coming out that 
dealt with the topic, and there are certainly few people in America who led a 
more public life than Malcolm Forbes. 
"Here was something that was new, that he had kept private, but that other 
organizations and publications within the gay community thought that he should 
have gone public with. They were going to make that an issue in OutWeek and saw 
this as an emerging issue in the '90s. We talked about it and thought it was 
newsworthy." 
As difficult as such decisions concerning ethics and newsworthiness may be, 
equally challenging are the public relations issues that outing raises for the 
gay community, in the view of Hunter Madsen, who, with Marshall Kirk, 
co-authored "After the Ball: How America Will Conquer Its Fear and Hatred of 
Gays in the '90s." 
Madsen and Kirk have recommended that gays adopt a program of tact, 
self-restraint and empathy for the fears and concerns of straight people. 
Outing, says Madsen, is the opposite strategy: "a form of psychological 
terrorism that looks ugly both to gays and to straights." 
"Coming out is the major trauma in every gay person's life," explains the 
author, a San Francisco-based advertising executive who is openly gay. "To 
raise the specter of a witch hunt by your own community only makes that process 
more difficult. Blackmail has long been used by straights against gays to get 
what they want. It's not surprising that blackmail should occur as a technique 
among the most radical gays. 
"I cannot support a society which routinely resorts to blackmail of its 
citizens to get what it wants, whether that society is the United States or the 
gay community within it. It takes a certain coldness, a certain hardness of 
heart about the personal trauma of coming out to insist that others do it or 
else." 
"A lot of people are desperate," replies OutWeek's Signorile. "When your best 
friends are dying all around you and you turn to actor B and he's doing nothing 
about it, but he's making millions of dollars, you get very resentful. This is 
going to be the debate of the '90s in the gay community. Everybody thought that 
the issue of domestic partnership versus marriage was going to be the big 
debate. But this is the debate." For now. While proponents and opponents of 
outing expect the phenomenon to intensify for a while, they also see the tactic 
eventually becoming unnecessary. 
"The closet is now an archaic relic of the past and it's existing on its own 
momentum," reflects OutWeek editor Rotello. "Someone's just going to have to 
break that logjam. Once it breaks, gays and lesbians will come flying out of 
the closet and people will see that they're everywhere." 
Madsen figures that outing will be "rendered irrelevant, unnecessary within the 
decade" because large numbers of gays are now coming out. 
"Very soon, a level of legitimacy will be gained," he enthuses. "It doesn't 
take much. It only takes the sense that gays are coming out everywhere for 
those sitting on the fence to reason that perhaps the risks are not so great 
after all." 
Times Staff Writer Victor Zonana contributed to this story. 
