ISRAELI PARTIES TRADE CHARGES AS VOTE NEARS; 
POLITICS: THE OUTCOME OF NO-CONFIDENCE MOVE AGAINST SHAMIR'S GOVERNMENT IS SEEN 
AS TOO CLOSE TO CALL. 
Israel's Likud and Labor parties, embittered respondents in an ugly divorce, 
blamed each other Wednesday for the break-up of the coalition government and 
prepared for today's preliminary decision on who gets the house. 
This morning, the 120 members of the Knesset, Israel's Parliament, are 
scheduled to vote on a Labor-led no-confidence motion against the rump 
government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, the Likud leader. 
The balance of forces appears to be razor-thin, and the decision rests with one 
or two small ultra-Orthodox Jewish parties, excluding the possibility of a 
last-minute coalition reconciliation, which Israeli political analysts say 
would take "a miracle" that neither side wants. 
If today's vote goes against Shamir, he will be left as head of a caretaker 
government, beginning a process in which both he and Labor leader Shimon Peres 
may be offered the opportunity to put together a ruling majority. If Shamir and 
his loyalists defeat the no-confidence motion, he will remain prime minister 
with a fragile majority. 
Tuesday's collapse of the 15-month-old coalition left bitter feelings 
throughout Israel's political family. Editorialized Yediot Aharonot, the 
country's largest newspaper: "One cannot ignore the damage this whole ugly 
affair is doing to the foundations of democracy in Israel." The paper noted 
that instead of mending fences, "everyone is drawing battle lines and making 
tough statements." 
One of the roughest came from Yigal Bibi, a member of Parliament from the 
National Religious Party, which was aligned with Likud in the now-split 
coalition. 
"We should vote no confidence in Shamir," Bibi told the Jerusalem Post. "He has 
no spine; he is not honest. He is an indifferent man with no trace of 
tradition." 
Several Likud Party members called on the prime minister to resign in order to 
strengthen his party's hand in the no-confidence vote and the political 
struggle that will follow. Shamir had rejected the suggestion late Tuesday 
after his firing of Peres as deputy prime minister and finance minister led to 
the resignation of all Labor ministers in the Cabinet and the collapse of the 
coalition. 
Shamir himself led the attack on Labor on Wednesday. He blamed the break-up on 
Labor's insistence for a positive response to an American-proposed formula for 
getting Israeli-Palestinian peace talks under way. He insists the formula would 
invite Palestine Liberation Organization influence and raise questions about 
the legitimacy of Jerusalem as the indivisible and sovereign capital of Israel. 
And he took another shot at American mediation in the proposed talks, designed 
to unstick his own stalled peace plan. 
In a statement to Likud's caucus in Parliament, the prime minister said: "Our 
initiative (the May, 1989, peace plan) clearly intended to take the PLO out of 
the arena. But the State Department put all its energy into focusing on the 
PLO, and the Labor Party said nothing would move without the PLO." 
After years of refusal to do so, the United States began limited talks with the 
PLO after its leader, Yasser Arafat, announced in late 1988 that he accepted 
the existence of Israel and opposed the use of terrorism. Israel, however, 
refuses to negotiate with the PLO, which it officially regards as an 
unrepentant terrorist organization. 
"Arab residents of Jerusalem will not participate in any form in elections for 
autonomy because this would endanger Jerusalem's status and her future as the 
capital of Israel," Shamir continued. "On this issue we will not negotiate a 
compromise. The heart of all of us and our consciences will not allow it." 
Peres, whose party agrees that Jerusalem should remain undivided and Israeli, 
would endorse participation by East Jerusalem Palestinians in electing 
representatives for peace talks. He told Israel Radio, "There won't be peace so 
long as Shamir heads this government." 
While the leaders restated their positions on peace, the fundamental issue that 
broke up the coalition, Likud and Labor politicians worked hard on the more 
immediate problem, the no-confidence vote. Top political operatives called on 
the rabbis who guide the religious parties. 
With the swing votes in their hands, the religious leaders were expected to 
base their allegiance in part on demands they have made in past 
government-building efforts here: more money for religious schools, stricter 
observance of Jewish holidays and influential posts in government to carry out 
their favored programs. 
The Knesset test of Shamir's government was assured for this morning when Labor 
attempts to hold it Wednesday were blocked. Labor supporters tried that avenue 
in a bid to keep Labor ministers in a caretaker government if Shamir loses the 
vote. 
The ministers quit Tuesday, but the resignations were not effective for 48 
hours. A successful no-confidence vote on Wednesday would have left them in a 
transitional regime. 
