RETHINKING THE MULTICULTURAL IDEAL; 
DO IMMIGRANTS FIT IF COMMUNITY NEEDS COMMONALITY? 
The gravest issue posed by the Salman Rushdie affair is that of cultural 
collision inside the Western countries. The subject tends to be shunned for 
fear that its identification may promote an invidious discrimination -- as 
indeed it may. Yet it is a fundamental issue in the countries with big 
immigrant minorities radically different from the host populations in religious 
or political-cultural convictions. 
Rushdie's problems began, after all, in Britain, not Iran. India quietly banned 
his book after it was published last fall. It was when Muslims in the city of 
Bradford, in the north of England, where one in seven of the population is of 
Indian or Pakistani origin, organized a public burning of "The Satanic Verses" 
in January that the affair gained international notoriety. Without that event, 
one may think that the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini might never have heard of 
Salman Rushdie or of his book, written in the English language and the Western 
intellectual and aesthetic idiom, meant for a secular and Western readership. 
He did hear of it, and as a result at least 18 people are now dead and there is 
uproar in a score of countries. Rushdie was burned in effigy on Fifth Avenue in 
New York last week. Home Secretary Douglas Hurd has felt obliged to warn 
Britain's Islamic community that violence or the threat of violence in protest 
against Rushdie's writings is intolerable. In France, Prime Minister Michel 
Rocard has formally warned that "appeals for murder, under whatever form, will 
be prosecuted." 
Many have observed that these events have drastically undermined the efforts 
that have been made for the peaceful integration of Islamic immigrants in 
Western Europe -- efforts conducted, as a writer in Le Monde has said, against 
the opposition of those who oppose immigration on grounds "of a pretended 
non-assimilation of Islam into a secular society." It is not, though, a 
"pretended" problem; it is a real one. 
Every political community rests on a general acceptance of certain beliefs 
about social and political values. In immigrant countries, that consensus can 
be achieved in several ways, all painful for the immigrant group. 
The United States, the leading immigrant nation, has, historically, broken down 
and assimilated its immigrants to "Americanism" by means of a public education 
system that never questions the primacy of American political values, and 
through the exercise of a powerful social conformism. Popular culture in 
America has also proven to be an overwhelming assimilative force, as it has 
elsewhere in the West. It is America's peculiar good fortune that its 
immigrants have nearly always wanted to assimilate. The first generation might 
cling to "foreign" ways, but the second generation has nearly always 
Americanized itself with a vengeance. 
In Europe, France is the country that has taken in the most immigrants during 
the 19th and 20th centuries. Assimilation has been enforced by a state 
education system that teaches French civilization and political values without 
compromise, starting out by sitting each immigrant child down to learn about 
"his" ancestors, the ancient Gauls. 
Not all national societies have this confidence in themselves, or this 
arrogance. Britain has taken a different course. Since the breakup of the 
British Empire after World War II, it has admitted large numbers of 
Afro-Caribbeans and Indo-Pakistanis from its former colonies. It has adopted 
the goal of a "multicultural" society as government policy. There has not been 
any express attempt to assimilate immigrants to the ideas and attitudes of the 
British majority. 
The same policy is increasingly called for, or followed, in Australia, Canada, 
the United States and the other countries that continue to accept large numbers 
of immigrants. In the United States, it is posed in the demand for multilingual 
education. 
This policy is defended as a matter of justice as well as of respect for the 
beliefs and cultural legacies of others. Why should people be expected to 
abandon their children to ideas and values alien to themselves? What cultural 
superiority does the accepting country possess that it should dictate on such 
matters to the immigrant? Is this not "cultural chauvinism?" Indeed, is it not 
racism, or something uncomfortably close to that? 
The fact is that without a community of values and cultural assumption there is 
no community at all. Do you believe that Rushdie, or anyone else, has the right 
to say and publish whatever is on his mind? Do you think that the freedom to do 
so is essential to the political community in which you wish to live? Or do you 
believe that God's truth, as you understand it, should be enforced against 
false ideas -- or even that offenders against that truth deserve to die? 
You can believe the one or the other. You can't believe both. A coherent 
political community cannot exist without a consensus of agreement on one or the 
other. That is the problem that Salman Rushdie and his book are forcing people 
to confront. 
