MYSTERIOUS TARGET OF FRAUD PROBE SHOT DEAD AT ESTATE 
A former California Highway Patrol officer, under investigation for tax fraud 
in connection with four Los Angeles nude and topless bars, was killed in a hail 
of gunfire early Thursday as he arrived at the gate of his remote Orange County 
home in his chauffeured limousine. 
Horace Joseph McKenna, 46, was killed only hours after Los Angeles Superior 
Court records were made public detailing the Los Angeles County district 
attorney's investigation of him and a suspected business partner, Michael 
Woods, also a former CHP officer. The documents identified several people 
associated with both men. 
"Judge J.D. Smith released (the court records) yesterday. The thing goes down 
today. You can draw your own inferences," district attorney's spokesman Andy 
Reynolds said Thursday. 
McKenna, a body builder whose sprawling Brea estate reportedly was sometimes 
guarded by men with machine guns, died instantly in the gangland-style ambush 
at 12:30 a.m., Brea police said. 
The shooting broke out as McKenna's chauffeur, Bob Berg, 42, was returning to 
the car after unlocking the gated entrance to the estate, known as "Tara 
Ranch," in the 6200 block of Carbon Canyon Road, police and employees at the 
ranch said. 
McKenna, a hulking 300-pound man who had been asleep in the car, died of 
numerous gunshot wounds, possibly from automatic or semi-automatic weapons, 
police said. The motive was unknown and no suspects were in custody. 
It was not clear, according to police accounts, how Berg escaped the gunfire. 
Unhurt, he drove the limo to the house, a mile and a half up a winding 
driveway, immediately after the shooting and notified authorities. 
Reached by phone Thursday night, Berg, his voice trembling, said he would have 
no comment "until I talk to a lawyer. I don't want to talk about it, I've had 
enough." Berg was identified in court documents as one of the alleged 
conspirators in the tax case. 
Late Thursday, the Los Angeles County district attorney's office released 
investigators' search warrant affidavits that had been unsealed in court 
Wednesday at the request of McKenna's attorney, Michael Nasatirs. The 300-page 
document named several associates of Woods and McKenna, including at least 
eight who allegedly conspired with them to hide profits and skim money. 
The warrants identified McKenna and Woods as the alleged hidden owners of 
several nude and topless bars in the Los Angeles area. 
Several law enforcement agencies -- including Los Angeles and Long Beach 
police, Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies and the FBI -- had monitored 
McKenna and Woods' suspected hidden interests in the bars, as well as alleged 
illegal gambling, narcotics and prostitution activities, according to the 
documents. 
Investigators said in the warrants that the two men "have maintained 
associations with terminated, retired and currently employed law enforcement 
officers, thus making this investigation extremely sensitive. 
Authorities had no comment on the whereabouts of Woods Thursday. 
Extravagant Life Style 
"McKenna appears to live a life style," investigators wrote, "which apparently 
exceeds his reported income." For example, when McKenna and a girlfriend rented 
an apartment in El Segundo in 1987, they noted, McKenna listed his annual gross 
income as $44,431. 
The Brea property, purchased in February, 1986, cost $825,000 and investigators 
estimated mortgage payments to be $70,000 per year. In addition, they said, 
McKenna employed groundskeepers to maintain the horse training track at his 
"Gone With the Wind Arabian Horse Stables," a western movie set, grounds and 
residence. 
"Both estimated monthly payments and employment costs well exceeds McKenna's 
reported income of $44,431 . . . and strongly suggests that the McKennas were 
involved in a fraudulent loan application scheme or received funds from 
unreported income," investigators said. 
Sherry McKenna, McKenna's former wife, has no other source of income, they 
added. 
Los Angeles County authorities said Thursday that they were close to filing 
charges against Horace McKenna, who records showed had a criminal history -- 
including a federal conviction for conspiracy to counterfeit in 1976, a Los 
Angeles conviction for assault with a weapon in a San Pedro Bar in 1982, and a 
record of arrests for running what was described as a large prostitution ring 
in 1975. 
A native of New Orleans, McKenna joined the CHP in June, 1968, working 
generally in West Los Angeles until he resigned in June, 1972, a CHP spokesman 
said. 
On April 14, 1976, McKenna surrendered to sheriff's deputies investigating what 
they said was a prostitution ring centered in the Inglewood and Lennox areas. 
McKenna, deputies said, was the suspected kingpin of the ring. 
They linked McKenna and the prostitution operation to establishments called 
"The Institute of Oral Love," "Sexual Relief Center" and "Wild Mary's." The 
outcome of that case was not known Thursday. 
McKenna was sentenced to six years in prison in the counterfeiting case, but it 
was not known Thursday how much time he served. 
On Thursday night, at the New Jet Strip in Lennox -- one of the bars in which 
McKenna allegedly was a secret owner -- a woman bartender remarked: 
"What a weird night to be working. I didn't think we would be working tonight." 
She elaborated: "Because the owner was killed last night. He was all over the 
news." 
When asked for more information about McKenna, the woman declined and refused 
to give her name. 
"I can't talk about it," she said. "I'm too upset." 
At 6-foot-5, McKenna was known as "Mac or Big Mac or just Big," said 
associates, who described him as a flamboyant and mysterious character who kept 
exotic animals on his ranch, where he also often entertained nightclub dancers. 
According to Sherry McKenna's attorney, Richard Debro, she feared for her life 
because her former husband had threatened to kill her. He said his client has 
been in hiding. 
The attorney said McKenna "used drugs and became incredibly violent." 
"I've seen her after she had been beaten up (by McKenna), the black eyes, 
things like that," Debro said. "The law didn't mean anything to him. 
"She said she had no doubt in her mind that he would kill her, or have her 
killed" if she insisted on fighting their divorce settlement, the attorney 
said. "He had threatened to kill her with a gun to her head." 
Neither Bill Gray, 42, owner of a gym in Brea where McKenna worked out, nor 
other friends and associates contacted Thursday had any idea who would have 
wanted to kill him. They described McKenna as a big, lovable man who was 
building a Shangri-La on his ranch for the pleasure of friends and their 
families. 
"There wasn't a mean bone in his body," Gray said. "He would take people's kids 
up (to the ranch) and give them horseback rides." 
Since buying the property, McKenna had stocked the ranch with prize Arabian 
show horses -- some worth as much as $20,000, friends said. He remodeled the 
property's sprawling, ranch-style home, installed a swimming pool and rose 
garden and was in the process of completing an Old West-style "ghost town," 
complete with "Main Street" and facades of a saloon, blacksmith shop and bank, 
they said. 
Mike Tutty, 31, a longtime friend of McKenna and a member at the 4 Star Gym in 
El Segundo, which KcKenna owned, described him as "a very intimidating person. 
. . . 
"He was a person who commanded attention. He wanted people to know who he was. 
He had a big ego and he needed fodder for that ego. And he pretty much got it." 
Moreover, Tutty said, "he liked the ladies, there's no doubt about it. He was 
very gracious to the ladies." 
According to Dana Sermas, one of several woman horse trainers McKenna employed, 
he often entertained friends and business associates by taking them on 
horseback rides and giving them "guided tours of his 'ghost town.' " 
McKenna also regularly entertained a group of young women whom he laughingly 
referred to as "his bimbos," because they worked as dancers at nightclubs in 
the Los Angeles area, according to Sermas and Ingrid Locken, another horse 
trainer. 
Both women said they were under the impression that the clubs featured topless 
or nude dancing, and they added that the women whom McKenna brought to the 
ranch "dressed in sleazy outfits." 
Pete Cahill, 35, another member of the El Segundo gym, described McKenna as 
"the most lovable gangster in the world. If he was a gangster, I guess that's 
the way you've got to go." 
Cahill said that at the club it was understood that McKenna "owned a lot of 
topless places. It was an unspoken thing everybody knew but nobody talked about 
it." 
Sermas said McKenna was in the process of installing an electronic gate at his 
home so the chauffeur would not have to get out of the limousine every time 
they entered. She said the gate was about to be hooked up by utility crews. 
While police tried to piece together details of the slaying, one neighbor said 
she thought nothing when three visitors came to McKenna's home on Wednesday 
night, although now it seems ominous. 
About 6:55 p.m., the neighbor said, she watched three people, one with a 
flashlight, "going over the fence." 
Police would not immediately comment on the woman's statement or other details 
of the case. 
Times staff writers Richard Beene, Jim Carlton, Dianne Klein, Eric Lichtblau 
and Nancy Wride in Orange County, and Richard Colvin, Hector Tobar, Boris Yaro 
and Sebastian Rotella in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 
