BANK REGULATORS ISSUE WARNINGS ON 43 FACILITIES 
Federal authorities warned banks across the country on Thursday to exercise 
caution in dealing with 43 entities that may be conducting banking business 
illegally. 
Four institutions in Los Angeles and one each in San Diego and San Francisco 
were among the names on a list sent out by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., 
which regulates banks and insures bank deposits. 
The FDIC notice said these "banks" apparently were operating illegally and 
added: "Any proposed transactions involving any of the listed entities should 
be viewed with extreme caution." 
A federal banking regulator said a bank in the Southwest discovered Thursday 
morning that it had lost $36,000 in a scheme involving a fraudulent cashier's 
check drawn on one of the institutions, located on Montserrat in the West 
Indies. The regulator declined to identify the victimized bank and asked that 
his name be withheld. 
Few Legitimate Uses 
The regulator said the number of entities operating as banks in the United 
States without proper authorization or license has increased substantially in 
recent months. 
Many banks on the FDIC warning list are located in Montserrat, where 
authorities have sold more than 200 bank charters in recent months, according 
to U.S. regulators. The names on the charters sound official and are often 
similar to those of established institutions. 
The charters are re-sold at high mark-ups by organized businesses to U.S. 
citizens, who then operate them in this country, according to testimony at 
congressional hearings conducted in 1985. 
Although neither selling nor buying such a charter is illegal, experts told 
Congress there are few legitimate uses for these banks and they said many are 
used in illegal schemes, including issuing worthless cashier's checks and other 
types of financial instruments. 
In the case that came to light Thursday, a customer at the Southwestern bank 
cashed a $36,000 cashier's check drawn on Lux International Bancorp in 
Montserrat. The U.S. bank held the check for several days, assumed that it had 
cleared and gave the customer the cash. 
By the time the bank discovered that no funds had been received to honor the 
check, the customer had disappeared. 
For several months, federal law enforcement officials in California and other 
states have been investigating similar schemes involving worthless certified 
drafts drawn on nonexistent Mexican banks, including two of the 43 entities 
cited by the FDIC. 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in Washington also is 
investigating off-shore banks and provided the names that the FDIC issued 
Thursday. 
James R. Dudine, an enforcement official with the FDIC in Washington, said the 
number of successful frauds pulled off using the questionable banks is 
relatively small. 
"Most banks are astute enough not to get caught with this sort of stuff. But 
there are some real dangers," he said. 
Most of the U.S. names on the list were not listed with telephone operators. 
One institution on the list is Banco Commercial Arabe in Los Angeles. Robert M. 
Talcott, an attorney for one of the institution's principals, said it does not 
function as a bank, but as a financial services company that arranges loans and 
joint ventures. He said the company is in compliance with appropriate 
regulations. 
No telephone listings could be found for the three other Los Angeles entities 
-- Churchill International Bank, European Industrial Development Bank and 
Western Pacific Overseas Bank. 
There also was no listing for First International Bank &amp; Trust in San 
Diego. Officials said that entity should not be confused with a licensed, 
FDIC-insured bank with a similar name, First International Bank in Chula Vista. 
Several in the West 
A woman who identified herself as Julie Bone said Midcontinental Bank &amp; 
Trust in Atlanta, another name on the list, is a legal entity, but she refused 
to provide any more information. 
Below are the institutions on the FDIC list: Banco Commercial Arabe, Los 
Angeles; Banque Commerciale D'Haiti, Jamaica, N.Y.; British Bank of Commerce, 
Plymouth, Montserrat; British Bank of Commerce, Reno, Nev.; Caribbean Bankers 
Trust, Philipsburg, St. Maarten; Cayman Overseas Bank &amp; Trust, Georgetown, 
Grand Cayman; Churchill International Bank, Beverly Hills; Citizens Bank &amp; 
Trust, Anguilla; Crown International Bank, Plymouth, Montserrat; and European 
Industrial Development Bank, Los Angeles. 
Also: European Industrial Development Bank, Plymouth, Montserrat; First 
Integrity Bank, San Francisco; First International Bank &amp; Trust, San Diego; 
First Morgan Bank, Columbia, S.C.; First Morgan Bank, Montserrat; Gibraltar 
Overseas Bank, Rosemont, Ill.; Gibraltar Overseas Bank, Plymouth, Montserrat; 
Global Credit Reserve, Acapulco, Mexico; Industrial Trade Bank, Plymouth, 
Montserrat; Internationale Financial Trust, Acapulco; Lux International 
Bancorp, Plymouth, Montserrat; Manufacturers International Bank, Tampa, Fla.; 
Midcontinental Bank &amp; Trust, McLean, Va.; and Midcontinental Bank &amp; 
Trust, Atlanta. 
Also: Northern International Bank, Sparks, Nev.; Northern International Bank, 
Reno, Nev.; Plymouth International Bank, Plymouth, Montserrat; Plymouth 
International Bank, Lake Havasu City, Ariz.; Regal Bank of Montserrat, 
Plymouth, Montserrat; Wellington International Bank &amp; Trust, Montserrat; 
Wellington International Bank &amp; Trust, Coral Gables, Fla. 
Also: Western Pacific Overseas Bank, Los Angeles; Western Pacific Overseas 
Bank, Montserrat; World Arbitrage Bank, New York City; World Arbitrage Bank, 
Atlanta; Union Commercial Bank, New York City; United Bancorp International, 
Miami, Fla.; United Bancorp of Minnesota, Minneapolis; United Security Bank, 
Elmhurst, Ill.; United Security Bank, Plymouth, Montserrat; Union Bank of 
Commerce, Plymouth, Montserrat; Union Commercial Bank, Plymouth, Montserrat; 
and Windward Island Credit Exchange, Philipsburg, St. Maarten. 
