IRS AUDITS 23 TELEVISION MINISTRIES; 
COULD JEOPARDIZE TAX EXEMPTION OF SOME TELEVANGELISTS 
The Internal Revenue Service is auditing the finances of 23 television 
ministries and expects the probe could jeopardize the federal tax exemption of 
some evangelists. 
"The service is continuing to devote significant examination resources to media 
evangelist cases," Robert I. Brauer, assistant IRS commissioner in charge of 
exempt organizations, said in a letter to Rep. J. J. Pickle (D-Tex.), chairman 
of the House Ways and Means oversight subcommittee. Pickle released the report 
today. 
Because of privacy laws, the report did not mention the ministries by name. 
Identifying them only by number, Brauer outlined key issues against the 23, 
most of which are suspected of not fully reporting their income, engaging in 
political activities, or allowing their earnings to benefit officials of the 
ministry. 
The IRS stepped up its examination of TV ministries after the well-publicized 
sex-and-bribery scandal at the PTL organization headed by Jim Bakker. 
'Move to Final Stages' 
PTL, which apparently is ministry No. 15 in the report, is in bankruptcy court, 
where the IRS is pressing claims that Bakker and his associates failed to pay 
tax on unrelated business income, such as from rental of PTL's satellite 
network; failed to report some income, and used PTL contributions for their own 
enrichment, including acceptance of salaries that the IRS contends were 
excessive. 
Brauer said he expects several of the TV ministry cases "will move to the final 
stages of the examination process this year." 
"We also anticipate that some of these cases will present serious issues 
relating to continued federal income tax exemption," Brauer said. 
Brauer's cover letter said two organizations connected with former Republican 
presidential candidate Pat Robertson have refused to provide records of the 
type that other TV ministries have provided voluntarily. 
Because the Freedom Council and the National Freedom Institute would not 
cooperate, the letter stated, the IRS had to go to federal court in Norfolk, 
Va., to seek to enforce a summons for the records. 
"The degree of cooperation received by the service varies from case to case 
and, in one case involving a prominent evangelist, the service has reached 
agreement on federal tax issues for the years 1980 through 1983, including 
payment of substantial federal income tax, interest and penalties," Brauer 
wrote. 
Here are some highlights of the report, which was current through Dec. 31: 
 -- Ministry No. 1 was engaged in a life style that led the IRS to believe that 
some income was not reported. Acting on an informant's tip, the Criminal 
Investigation Division prepared a case that has been referred to a federal 
grand jury. 
 -- No. 4: IRS agents are reviewing content of TV broadcasts to determine 
whether they were primarily political. 
 -- No. 8: A team of auditors and a computer specialist are investigating 
allegations of political activities, lobbying and personal enrichment from 
ministry funds. 
 -- No. 16: The IRS has completed review of the books and records for this 
ministry for 1984 through 1986. The chief issue is whether tax-deductible 
contributions to the ministry flowed to the benefit of the founder and his 
family. 
