MIKE DOWNEY: ORTIZ DOESN'T RUN OUT OF TIME; 
A NATION IS GIVEN LONG-DISTANCE LIFT 
Coke and coffee, coffee and coke. Colombians understand that they are lumped 
with these exports. They know it and are leery of it, weary of it. They long to 
be known for producing more, be known for supplying the likes of Pedro Ortiz, 
champion of Sunday's Los Angeles Marathon, be known for growing more on 
Colombia's fertile soil than just rich and potentially life-endangering beans. 
"Everybody is told that Colombia is bad news," said Carlos Pilo Godoy, the La 
Crescenta businessman who coaches Ortiz. "Bad in this, bad in that, bad in 
this. Colombia is good in soccer, good in providing talented runners, tennis 
players, riders in equestrian events. And now, a Colombian is the winner of the 
1989 L.A. International Marathon. So please, put this in your headlines. 
"There are 34 million persons in Colombia. Not all of these 34 (million) are 
bad. Colombia has good, hard-working citizens. Colombia has good musicians, 
good salsa. It has the winner of the prize Nobel, Gabriel Garcia Marquez. And 
now it has this man, Pedro Ortiz. We would like to see you put big headlines 
that a Colombian has won the L.A. Marathon. Put very big headlines in your 
newspaper to tell everybody not all Colombians are bad news." 
Still wearing laurels hours after hitting the finish line, Pedro Ortiz nodded 
and agreed. Through his coach, he said he felt proud to win the race "for all 
my fellow Latinos here in Los Angeles." 
Californians had a right to be every bit as much in his corner as Colombians 
were. Maybe that's why they lined the avenues from Figueroa to Echo Park, from 
Hollywood to Vine, standing in the rain, cheering him along. Ortiz is a 
resident alien, a U.S. taxpayer with a driver's license who boarded with Godoy 
when he wasn't training for the last America's Marathon in Chicago, where he 
ran second, or for the last three L.A. races, or for the next New York 
Marathon, on which he has now set his sights. 
He has a support group here. As the L.A. Marathon president, Bill Burke, said: 
"Los Angeles is famous for people staying home when it rains. But I couldn't 
believe the numbers that were out there today, cheering for Pedro." 
As for Colombia's government or athletic federation, what sort of support is 
Ortiz given? 
"None," said Godoy. "Nada, nada and nada." 
Even when the two of them traveled back to the high altitudes of Bogota to 
train in the hills for four weeks, preparing for the Los Angeles race that 
meant so much to them, they wondered what sort of elevated stature, if any, 
Ortiz would attain if he ever came home a conquering hero. His coach bet 
Colombians would regret not taking more of an interest in him. 
"I think there are many people not sleeping very well there now," said Godoy. 
After all, Colombia has itself a worthy contender, it would appear, for the 
1991 world championships and 1992 Summer Olympics in Ortiz, who is in prime 
shape, a little on the muscular side, and at a prime age, 32, to be coming into 
his own as a world-class distance runner. Back in his hometown of Bucamanga, it 
is only now becoming clear what sort of possibilities await him. 
And, if it seemed as though Ortiz was running Sunday with a vengeance, perhaps 
he was. He and his coach resented it greatly in 1989 when they had to pay their 
travel and entry fees after placing 10th in the previous year's L.A. race. When 
Godoy telephoned, seeing the invitation that never came, he acknowledged 
telling the voice on the other end "in some very rude words" what he thought of 
this snub. 
Ortiz went out and ran second. In so doing, he missed out on the sort of 
opportunity that recently was afforded the champion of the Daytona 500 auto 
race, who took advantage of the late collapse of the leader. Ortiz was dawdling 
27 seconds behind Art Boileau of Canada when the pacesetter, Gidimas Shahanga 
of Tanzania, withered and withdrew. Had he stayed closer, Boileau might not 
have won. 
Ortiz said he decided to train this time to make up one second per mile, 27 
seconds over 26.2 miles, to get where he was going. 
To do so, he looked over his shoulder constantly, fought off every challenge, 
even used his elbows and hips if necessary to keep them at bay. Said 
third-place finisher Peter Fonseca of Canada: "Ortiz would get a little mad and 
give you a look or a bump and I'd go: 'Whoa, dude."' 
That's how badly Ortiz wanted to win. He wanted the money, the Mercedes, the 
memory that went along with winning. And mainly he wanted that headline: NOT 
ALL COLOMBIANS ARE BAD NEWS. Even for those who already know this, the time 
seems right for a reminder. 
