STUDENT MURALS ON THE WALL OF A UCI CONSTRUCTION SITE 
T.A. Heppenheimer's letter of March 11 criticized the temporary construction 
site wall mural at UC Irvine as "having nothing to do with what a 
university-level art course, particularly at the junior or senior level, should 
be pursuing." 
My question is, what is worthy of an intermediate painting class pursuit? Is 
transferring sketches to scale, color theory, paint application techniques, 
collaboration for the expression of personal histories out of the territory 
that would be deemed appropriate artistic pursuit? Twenty years of experience 
as an art educator has brought me to the conclusion that these issues are 
perhaps among the most important for students. This is particularly important 
at a time when isolation and alienation for an increasingly ethnically diverse 
student population threatens their success rates. 
Or is it the mural form itself that is "unworthy" because of its association in 
the 20th Century with social movements or ethnicity? Clearly history has 
sustained murals as a worthy artistic pursuit from the caves of Lauscaux to the 
Mayan pyramids to the Italian Renaissance to the Mexican muralists of the 1920s 
to the U.S. Works Progress Administration public murals of the '30s, and 
finally to the more recent explosion of the '70s and '80s across our country. 
By the way, the "unschooled street artists of East L.A." who produced many 
murals during the latter period were mostly schooled in our universities and 
struggled to find voices that spoke to their own cultural experiences and 
audiences. 
It is the university's job to pursue an "academic environment," which I take to 
mean a safe place for experimentation and research, in short, "learning." 
Which, if any, creative person is able to step forward into the world fully 
articulate? 
Sketches are only diagrams for another completed product and as such they are 
in themselves not completed artworks to be critiqued. That is not to say that 
my expectations of my students are not high. I expect them to produce "class 
work" that takes risks, possibly even makes the passionate mistakes necessary 
to learn self-expression. As a faculty member I promise, in return, support for 
these efforts and encouragement to grow. 
Last, as to the matter of "taste" in this time of a multiplicity of tastes in 
which acceptance of diversity should be our goal, which "taste" are we to 
teach? 
It is not my students who are guilty of a poverty of imagination or of being 
oracles of the obvious. 
JUDITH FRANCISCA BACA 
Assistant Professor 
Studio Arts School of Fine Arts 
University of California, Irvine 
