LIVING DOWNTOWN; 
IT'S NOT ALWAYS CHEAP OR EASY, BUT A SKYSCRAPER HOME MEANS LESS SMOG AND NO 
COMMUTE 
After working late, lawyers Christian E. Markey Jr. and his wife, Mickey 
Byrnes, often slip into an outdoor Jacuzzi and stare up peacefully at a 
"lighted forest" of skyscrapers looming overhead. 
"To me, it's like Christmas all the time," said Markey, 59, who with his wife 
last year joined a growing cadre of upper-middle-class professionals -- an 
ethnically diverse mix of singles and couples with few or no children at home 
-- who chose to escape into the city after work, rather than from it: 
They moved downtown. 
Officials with the Central City Assn. and Community Redevelopment Agency 
estimate that more than 10,000 people now live in downtown Los Angeles -- most 
in subsidized apartments or hotel rooms for the elderly or low-income, and some 
on the streets. 
But about 3,000 do so strictly by choice, paying market-price rentals or 
mortgages for the 1,500 apartments and condominiums in complexes on Bunker Hill 
or the 200 in Skyline, the first outpost in the city's long-promised South Park 
development near the Convention Center. 
The number of available units has doubled in the 20 years since Bunker Hill 
Towers first opened, and it is expected to double again in the next decade. 
"Downtown living is just in its genesis," said Doug Sheldon, 60, who with his 
wife, Dixie, also 60, commutes by elevator from their Bunker Hill Towers 
condominium to the office of Bunker Hill Real Estate Co., which they started as 
a retirement adventure. "We have weathered the storm and are becoming a mature 
downtown community." 
A Solid Foothold 
Urban planners agree downtown living has established a solid foothold in Los 
Angeles, but they caution that the roads to downtown will not be clogged with 
moving vans anytime soon. 
Rather, they see a slow, steady migration of middle- and upper-class 
professionals into downtown, defined roughly by the Hollywood and San 
Bernardino freeways, Beaudry Avenue, 12th Street and Olive or Hill streets. 
Fueling the movement are many factors: increasingly congested freeways, which 
can make commutes an exercise in frustration; a nationwide gentrification 
process encouraged by publicly funded urban-renewal projects; infusion of 
foreign capital, and a determination by the city to create downtown housing for 
upper economic classes to support restaurants and retailers, ease traffic and 
reduce air pollution. 
At work, too, is a desire to form an identifiable center in a city seen mainly 
as a monument to suburban sprawl. 
"A lot of people felt 20 years ago that we could build a core and we could make 
a lot of money and everyone would have a Los Angeles identity," said Michael 
Dear, USC professor of geography and urban planning. "So Bunker Hill Towers 
(three high-rises with 700 units bounded by 1st, Figueroa, 3rd and Hope 
streets) was built. Since then, we have been creating a downtown." 
Planners for the Community Redevelopment Agency -- which guides development in 
certain sectors of the city, including downtown -- eventually want at least 20% 
of the downtown work force to live there. 
They envision 10,000 new residential units in Central City West (roughly the 
five blocks on the west side of Harbor Freeway between the Hollywood Freeway 
and Olympic Boulevard) and 10,000 for South Park (9th to 12th and Figueroa to 
Olive Streets). Working with the USC Redevelopment Corp., they hope to create 
middle- and upper-income residences from South Park all the way to USC at 
Exposition Boulevard. 
"For downtown Los Angeles to be the hub of a major world-class city," said Don 
Spivack, CRA director of operations for the Central Business District, "it 
needs to be much more like other world cities, which have a downtown 
residential component. We will have that by the 21st Century." 
Certainly, there is a long way to go. Today only a handful of Los Angeles 
County's 8.4 million residents live downtown, and the proportion never will be 
overwhelming. 
Downtown residences are small and expensive and have not emerged as terrific 
investments. They offer no back yard, and usually can be reached only by 
elevator. There are panhandlers and those who live downtown share a universal 
quest for economical groceries. 
But for those who already have chosen the downtown life style, an era of urban 
pioneering appears to have ended. "It is not a mystery like it used to be. The 
curtain has been lifted," said Leo Benizio, manager of Bunker Hill Towers 
Condominiums, who lives in distant Yorba Linda with his wife, Joyce, former 
manager of Skyline. "I think those who live downtown now know what they have to 
do to survive in an urban environment." 
What they must do is drive less and walk more -- to work, to play, and to run 
routine errands -- and they seem to like it. 
Most of several dozen downtowners interviewed said they chose their life style 
to avoid what a recent Times Poll of Los Angeles residents identified as the 
No. 2 drain on the city's quality of life: traffic. 
"The one single greatest cause for living here," said Sheldon, who moved 
downtown in 1976 to be close to his former job with a real estate investment 
department, "is the convenience and eliminating the commute." 
Criminal defense lawyer Michael R. Yamaki, a bachelor, gave up Malibu beach 
life for downtown in 1981: "I had to wake up before the sun got up to get into 
town. Now I can get up at 8, shave, shower and eat breakfast and get into court 
by 9." 
Some people like downtown so much they retire there, even when they could 
afford to go elsewhere. Imogene Dewey, 83, moved to Bunker Hill in 1971 after 
retiring as clerk of the Justice Court in Tehachapi. The energetic widow wanted 
access to theaters and childhood friends without learning to drive. 
Most downtowners own cars, although many couples cut from two to one and drive 
less than suburban counterparts. When they must drive, they say, they usually 
do so against traffic. 
Jesica Baker, 38, a sales representative for a health-care network, commutes 
from downtown throughout Southern California or to visit her office in Long 
Beach. 
"People say, 'Don't you have this backwards?' " she said. "But for me it's 
perfect. And on weekends, I am absolutely enthralled with the idea that I can 
walk to major shopping, to the post office, to the shoe repair, to the Y(MCA), 
to the Music Center, to the movies, even for limited groceries. I can do almost 
anything I want to do or need to do without getting in my car." 
Urban Benefits 
They move for convenience but downtowners have discovered benefits they never 
suspected and suburbanites rarely associate with urban living. 
"This is one of the nicest, quietest, least congested places in Los Angeles on 
the weekends," Sheldon said. 
An unexpected fountain of youth, downtowners say, springs from the increased 
physical activity and reduced mental stress that comes from walking rather than 
driving, and from being in the thick of a city. 
"Just walking the downtown streets at noon and watching Los Angeles move toward 
the European life style makes me 20 years younger," said William H. Weber, 68, 
who "retired" to Skyline with his wife, Sue, 63, three years ago, only to help 
start Wilshire Realty Inc. 
Downtown residents also boast of a small-town sense of community. "Most of us 
moved to Los Angeles from elsewhere and have no real family here. So we made 
our own family," said Nan Aune, 45, as she received her weekly manicure at a 
Bunker Hill salon. A downtown resident since 1971, Aune drives 35 miles daily 
to teach computer programming at Westminster High School in Orange County. 
John Hinchliffe, 22, the lunch host at Stepps restaurant in Wells Fargo Center, 
began renting his parents' Bunker Hill condominium last December. He still 
marvels at the reception he received. 
"One of the nicest things about living here was moving in here," he said as he 
stopped for a haircut at Jacques Michel Salon. "When we showed up, there was 
someone there to help us -- neighbors!" 
Downtowners say they find plenty of things to do in their leisure. Within 
walking distance are two prime athletic facilities, the Music Center, the 
Museum of Contemporary Art, Chinatown, Olvera Street, Little Tokyo, and a small 
but growing gallery of restaurants. 
L.A. on Foot 
A favorite pastime is simply to explore downtown on foot. A system of skywalks 
lets pedestrians move throughout much of downtown without setting foot on 
streets outside. 
They adopt almost a proprietary interest in new buildings and the subway, 
considering the construction entertainment. 
"I just walk through downtown every couple of weeks -- about five-six miles -- 
to see what is going on in Chinatown and Little Tokyo and see how the new State 
Building (at Spring and 3rd streets) is doing," said Jim Norton, supervisor of 
travel publications for the Automobile Club of Southern California. 
The 49-year-old bachelor was one of the first to move into Bunker Hill Towers 
when it opened in 1969 and the first to buy a condominium at Skyline when it 
opened in 1983. 
Downtowners seem to have little trouble finding everyday services and places to 
shop, although some venues -- the garment district for wholesale clothing or 
the flower market where Baker buys two dozen carnations for $4 -- definitely 
are not commonplace. Dry cleaning, haircuts and convenience markets are 
available in residential or office complexes. Clothing and gifts are found in 
major department stores on 7th Street or in 7th Market Place. 
The one necessity that's missing, downtowners agree, is a major grocery. While 
they wait for one the CRA promises will be built in South Park by 1991, they 
adjust, paying higher prices at a convenience market in Bunker Hill Towers or 
driving to supermarkets in Little Tokyo or Pasadena. 
Concerned Parents 
For the few young couples concerned, there are concerns, including adequate 
public schools. 
"What's missing for children, besides diapers, are parks and playgrounds, other 
children and space," said Marilyn Wagner, 27, who moved from Washington, D.C., 
two months ago with her husband, lawyer William Wagner, and 5-month-old Nicole. 
They chose a studio rental apartment on Bunker Hill to save money by 
eliminating their car. 
"When Nicole is a toddler," she said, "I would rather be in a neighborhood 
where she can be out playing in the yard with other children." 
Despite real problems, downtowners seem unfazed by the other perceived perils 
peculiar to their life style -- high cost for little space, crime, earthquakes, 
fire, noise and smog. 
The apartments and condominiums are small -- 900 to 1,400square feet for two 
bedrooms and 2,000 square feet for the largest penthouses. In terms of 
square-foot cost, they are pricey. The Sheldons say the low condominium prices 
in the area are $90,000 for studios, $155,000 for a one-bedroom, $275,000 for 
two bedrooms, and around $550,000 for combined units or penthouses. 
Rentals in Grand Promenade, the 27-floor, 372-unit complex expected to open 
atop Bunker Hill this spring, range from $775 a month for the lowest studio to 
$2,295 for a top two-bedroom apartment. 
Nighttime Strolls 
As for safety, downtowners agree they wouldn't walk Main Street at midnight but 
they do feel comfortable strolling to the Music Center or to restaurants after 
dark. They choose routes carefully and are comforted by the security guards in 
residential and office complexes. 
And as for earthquakes, the Oct. 1, 1987, temblor, and Oct. 4 aftershock tested 
the mettle of those who live in the downtown high-rises. One 42-year-old 
librarian put his 12th-floor Skyline condominium on the market and moved to 
Pasadena when the aftershock jammed his entry dead bolt, trapping him for five 
hours. 
Elena Renner, 48, a psychologist who lives in one of Los Angeles' four loftiest 
dwellings, a 32nd-floor penthouse at Bunker Hill Towers, was thrown to the 
floor by the quake. Antique furniture fell or skidded, and expensive Chinese 
porcelains shattered. 
But she and her husband, Dr. Ian Renner, 50, a gastroenterologist who met at a 
building party and married two years ago, remain downtowners. They bolted their 
furniture to the walls and attached the rest of the porcelain collection to the 
furniture. 
"I am still living here because I learned the reason we swayed so much is that 
the building has a 3-foot displacement," said Elena Renner. "The building 
structure is good." 
Peaceful Sleepers 
Downtowners also seem to have little fear of fire, despite the deaths of three 
people in a 1979 fire in West Tower of Bunker Hill Towers. Many point to 
sprinklers or plans for them, and note that the Los Angeles Fire Department has 
a station at 1st and Figueroa streets. 
Noise is a problem only to those who haven't learned to sleep through fire 
sirens or hovering helicopters. The Webers, Norton and other Skyline residents 
have even stoically endured night construction cacophony on the adjacent 
Metrorail project because they believe Los Angeles needs a subway. 
"We call the traffic noise 'white noise,' " said Elaine S. Stewart, 45, retail 
consultant for Central City Assn., who lives with her husband, Greg, 31, in a 
Carroll Avenue Victorian duplex. "We tell our friends from Oregon that it 
sounds like the Pacific Ocean." 
Smog is another would-be problem that downtowners rarely worry about. "The air 
is better here than where I used to spend all my time in San Marino," Markey 
said, echoing neighbors who claim that pollution is worse in most other 
desirable residential areas. 
Bill Kelly, spokesman for the South Coast Air Quality Management District, 
offers support for their views. In 1988, he said, downtown had three 
first-stage alerts, when ozone exceeded .20 parts per million and curtailed 
physical activity was advised. By comparison, Reseda in the San Fernando Valley 
had four, Pasadena 19, and Glendora, the worst area in the San Gabriel Valley, 
58. 
Rare Interactions 
Most who live downtown rarely interact with Latinos who come in droves on 
weekends to shop and attend movies along Broadway. The downtowners cling to 
higher-priced restaurants or the movie complex and stores in the 
Figueroa-Flower corridor between 1st and 9th streets. Many seem to be unaware 
of the Broadway activity, including the bustling Grand Central Market. 
Just as downtowners are divided into low- and high-income groups, they adhere 
to a natural geographic division, with the upscale roaming west of Hill Street 
and their low-income counterparts flocking to shop, eat or entertain themselves 
east of Hill. Sue Laris, publisher of the Downtown News, which downtowners 
embrace as their hometown weekly, can only see her resident readership growing. 
"Two things will impel downtown residential housing," she said. "One is that 
traffic is getting worse incrementally, and the other is that the incredible 
price of (suburban) homes, which has shot up dramatically in the last two 
years, is making the square-foot cost of downtown look better." 
When her youngest child finishes school in Pasadena, Laris may even move 
downtown herself. 
