VALLEY HOLDS OFF IMPROVING MISSION 
Granted, none of Valley College's top-of-the-line pitchers took the mound 
Tuesday. And yes, a few Monarch regulars did sit out the nonconference baseball 
game against Mission. 
It would be easy, therefore, to call Mission's 11-7 loss to Valley just one 
more in what has historically been a self-fulfilling prophecy of defeat for the 
Free Spirit. 
It also would be wrong. 
Despite its 5-13 overall record, Mission is experiencing the beginning of a 
turnaround under first-year Coach John Klitsner, who took Sylmar High to the 
City Section playoffs in all six years he was head coach. 
Klitsner, 37, knew what he was up against when he replaced Lee Fisher as coach 
of the beleaguered program last summer. 
Mission, unlike neighboring Valley, Pierce and College of the Canyons, does not 
have a campus baseball facility on its San Fernando campus. The Free Spirit 
practices at Bluebird Field in Sun Valley and plays home games at Valley. 
Klitsner's main selling point to potential recruits is simply the opportunity 
to play junior college baseball. 
"One of the goals for this season is to get some respect for this program," 
Klitsner said. 
Sharp, new pin-striped uniforms have taken care of outward appearances. 
However, it has been the Mission players' performance and attitude, despite the 
team's record, that has convinced opponents that a game against the Free Spirit 
does not necessarily mean a free victory. 
Mission is only one win shy of last season's total (six) under Fisher. And the 
Free Spirit, at 3-4 in the Southern California Athletic Conference, is still in 
contention for its first playoff appearance. 
"Even if we lose, we've gotten respect," said Mission center fielder Art 
Monreal, who had one hit Tuesday and is 12 for 23 in the past six games. 
"People say, 'Hey, those guys have been in our face the whole game. They never 
gave up.' " 
That was the case Tuesday as Valley -- with the aid of two misplayed fly balls 
by Mission outfielders -- put together a six-run second inning that helped give 
the Monarchs a 9-0 lead after three innings. 
Mission held Valley to two runs the rest of the way. The Free Spirit rallied 
for one run in the fourth, two in the fifth, one in the seventh and three in 
the eighth before Valley reliever Mike Roberts retired the side in order in the 
ninth. 
"I saw John Klitsner do some very good things at Sylmar High, sometimes without 
a whole lot of talent," said Valley Coach Chris Johnson, whose team improved to 
18-3-1. "I knew the Mission program would get turned around. Heck, it is turned 
around. That's another guy who's going to be recruiting the same kids we are. 
"It's going to be a little tough for John because Canyons is Canyons and we're 
a little bit established now. But from a coaching standpoint he's got it 
going." 
