THE BLOODY CONTEST OF PEN AND SWORD; 
JOURNALISM: THE DEATH TOLL IS LEAPING UPWARD AMONG THOSE REPORTING ON THE 
BATTLES FOR DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS. 
Sixty-three journalists were killed on the job in 22 countries last year, the 
highest toll since records have been kept. And now with the execution in Iraq 
of Farzad Bazoft of the London Observer, 1990 already has the makings of 
surpasssing it. In the last three months, journalists have been killed in El 
Salvador, Brazil, Romania and Turkey. 
Bazoft met his gruesome death on the orders of President Saddam Hussein, on an 
unproven charge of spying. Only a week before, an extraordinarily brave Turkish 
journalist, Cetin Emec, chief editor and columnist of the Istanbul daily, 
Hurriyet, was shot to death by marksmen as he left home for work. In what 
turned out to be his last column, Emec wrote of his fears of the resurgence of 
terrorism in Turkey and the role of Syria in promoting it. He also argued that 
Damascus was behind the bombing of the Pan Am jumbo jet over Scotland in 
December, 1988. 
In 1982, only nine journalists were killed. In 1983, it was 14. (Among them was 
The Times' Dial Torgerson, who was ambushed while driving on the 
Honduras-Nicaragua border.) In 1984, the toll was 21; in 1985, 31; in 1986, 19; 
in 1987, 32; in 1988, 46; last year, 63. The number arrested or detained has 
also shot up, from a low of 72 in 1984 to 225 in 1989. These are the carefully 
compiled figures of Freedom House in New York. They clearly suggest something 
is awry, but what? 
Journalism has always been a dangerous profession. During the Vietnam War, more 
journalists were killed (proportional to their numbers) than American soldiers. 
A few years ago, West German insurers gave the longevity of the average 
journalist as somewhere in the late 40s. 
But something rather different, without precedent, is afoot today. It is 
occuring in too many countries for there to be one catch-all explanation. What 
is happening, I believe, is a worldwide sea change in how journalists perceive 
their craft. Over the last decade they have become more and more disrespectful 
of those who abuse their power, whether they be governments or guerrilla 
movements. Increasingly, they insist on the hard questions, particularly ones 
that challenge an authority's conduct if it appears to have no democratic base 
and abuses the rights of those with less influence. 
This maturation of the journalistic mind is part of the harvest reaped after 30 
years of civil- and human-rights agitation in the Western world. That influence 
has moved like a wave through Western-educated and Western-oriented younger 
people all over the world. Not least, it has affected journalists who occupy 
that highly sensitive and fine-tuned midway point between politics and 
literature and have always wanted to believe that the pen is mightier than the 
sword. The post-1950s movement toward liberty and democracy has encouraged them 
to confront with growing confidence those who use power, wealth or guns for 
ignoble ends. But a price is paid for touching the nerve ends of those who have 
no compunction about being ruthless. The morbidity figures seem to suggest that 
journalists have pushed the frontiers of free reporting so far that they have 
made themselves frighteningly vulnerable. 
The determination to fight with the pen is certainly what drives the Colombian 
journalism fraternity, which has made a greater sacrifice than any other 
national group: 19 journalists were murdered by the Colombian drug mafia last 
year, 86 in the last decade. Along with a number of judges and political 
leaders, the journalists have taken the brunt of the drug lords' effort to 
intimidate Colombian society into cowed submission. Make no mistake about it, 
the Colombian journalists are imbued first and foremost with a sense of 
mission, not to save the bodies and souls of drug consumers in the United 
States, although of course they would be glad to see that happen, but to save 
their own precious institutions of democracy and justice. 
Democracy, too, is what drove Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, general director of 
the Nicaraguan newspaper La Prensa, to fight the totalitarianism of the 
Sandinistas. Now, victorious at the polls, she is president-elect. 
And democracy is what drove a large number of journalists, Chinese and foreign, 
to cover the demonstrations and protests of Tian An Men Square last June with 
an intimacy and daring that was breathtaking. By year's end, at least 56 
Chinese journalists, including some of the most prominent, had been arrested. 
But there remains a strong underground of journalists active in China, working 
by new-day fax and old-day samizdat to keep the cause of democracy burning. 
Across much of the world, the battle for democracy and human rights has reached 
a crescendo, and journalists are on the cutting edge, capturing and shaping the 
mood. As the wave spreads, in China again, and in Africa and the Middle East, 
journalists will be there, too, and there will be more casualties. 
