LETTERS TO THE TIMES 
Over the years, The Times has consistently urged government to invest enough in 
schools, transportation networks and other public services to keep pace with 
California's phenomenal growth. Its hope has been for public services that 
would nurture commerce, industry and people and to protect the unique natural 
resources that make California the Golden State. 
In a recent letter, Gov. George Deukmejian complained that The Times' editorial 
policies call for growth in government programs but never describe where 
government can put its hands on the money necessary to support those programs. 
He challenged The Times to "put up or shut up." It is a fair challenge that The 
Times accepts. 
Today's editorial is the first of a series of three in which The Times will 
examine the need for new and expanded programs for schools, universities, 
health care, transportation and all others essential to the state's future. 
Consistent with the challenge, the series will specify the programs that 
California needs to grow and prosper, the cost of the programs and the tax 
increases it would take to finance them. 
THE TIMES' RESPONSE 
Fulfilling the Promise 
Gov. George Deukmejian is correct when he says that few places on Earth can 
match California's quality of life and opportunities for personal fulfillment. 
But he is wrong when he says that his Administration is maintaining a superior 
level of public services, let alone making the investments that will allow 
California to forge into the 21st Century with a healthy economy and a vibrant 
society. 
We will accept Deukmejian's statement that California has enjoyed a 73% 
increase in state revenues and a 65% increase in expenditures during his six 
years in office, roughly tracking the cost of living and population growth. To 
settle for such levels is to relegate California to a constant, losing battle 
of trying to keep up with demands for services and facilities. 
Never before has California been willing to settle for average. 
California's problems do not respect statistical curves and averages such as 
those cited by the governor and imposed by the Gann limits on state spending, 
adopted by voter initiative in 1979. School enrollment is growing faster than 
the general population, and will accelerate in coming years as baby boom 
children move through the system. The prison population has nearly tripled 
since 1980. 
Deukmejian budgets, and particularly the 1989-90 budget of $46 billion that was 
the focus of the Feb. 17 editorial to which the governor refers, have scrimped 
on critical programs ranging from a $4.5-billion shortfall in transportation 
spending over the next five years to the governor's proposed elimination of the 
state Office of Family Planning at a saving of $36 million. The family planning 
cut might help balance the budget, but it would cost the state compounded 
millions in coming years. The University of California estimates that every 
dollar invested in family planning saves $6.60 in future social services, 
welfare and health costs. 
One reason California is suffering severe financial problems is that voters 
over the years have squeezed the system with initiative measures such as 
Proposition 13 of 1978 and Proposition 4 of 1979, which imposed the Gann 
spending limits. Voters understandably found the opportunity to cut taxes and 
limit spending appealing. They could not know at the time -- judging the 
measures in isolation -- the destructive effect the initiatives ultimately 
would have on public services they count on. 
The future provides California with not only the promise of economic growth and 
jobs, but also the chance to develop a unique society of cultural, educational, 
technological and artistic diversity. To do so, California must invest now in 
the necessary public support structure. Few jobs will be created if 
Californians cannot get to them on clogged freeways. Talented people will not 
move to California if they have no hope of buying a house, and many are leaving 
the state now for this reason, not to mention air pollution, congestion and 
others. The new immigrant Californians will not realize their potential if they 
cannot obtain adequate health care or if they have special difficulties making 
their way into and through the public education system. 
Government spending is not the solution to all of California's problems. Nor 
are all the current problems Deukmejian's fault. But unless state government 
acts aggressively now to correct the deficiencies of recent years, California 
cannot boast of the services that are essential if the Golden State is to lure 
new businesses and their employees. 
As a minimum investment in a program of returning to excellence, The Times 
proposes this basic spending plan, including a state gasoline tax increase and 
about $1.3 billion in new general fund revenues to offset proposed 1989-90 
budget reductions: 
TRANSPORTATION -- California is suffering a transportation crisis. The proposed 
new budget has a $700-million highway construction and maintenance shortfall, 
and there is a $4.5-billion deficit in the 5-year State Transportation 
Implementation Program of priority projects. 
Deukmejian has opposed an increase in the present 9-cent-a-gallon state 
gasoline tax, the traditional and logical source of transportation funds, which 
has been raised only once since 1963 -- by 2 cents in 1982. The California tax 
now is 5 cents a gallon less than the national average, and California ranks 
50th among the states in transportation finance as a proportion of personal 
income. Delays and congestion cost California an estimated $800 million a year 
-- a conservative estimate, some experts contend -- and safety becomes a 
concern as roads deteriorate. There has been no significant expansion of a 
freeway system built for 20 million residents in the late 1960s although the 
state's population has grown by nearly 10 million since then. Transportation 
planners say that freeway speeds in Southern California will decline from an 
average 31 m.p.h. now to 11 m.p.h. by the year 2010 under existing construction 
schedules. 
The state urgently needs a 10-cent-a-gallon increase in the gasoline tax, 
producing an estimated $15 billion to $20 billion over the next decade. The 
deficit in state transportation finance during that period is expected to be 
about $20 billion. 
EDUCATION -- California has pumped large amounts of new money into education 
for pupils in kindergarten through the 12th grade during the Deukmejian years. 
And, finally, the improvements are being reflected in slightly better grade 
scores. Still, California spends less per pupil than the national average. 
There are special problems in California because so many of the 140,000 
additional students entering the system each year are immigrant children who 
speak little or no English. Class size is a disgrace: Only Utah burdens its 
teachers with a larger average class size. Teachers need to be paid more. Many 
school districts do not have enough money to buy new texts. Per-pupil spending 
has leveled off, and further improvement in the state's system will be 
difficult or impossible without more money. 
California still is known for its excellent higher- education system, but both 
the University of California and California State University are facing 
tremendous problems in maintaining that reputation, with 63,000 additional 
students expected at UC by the year 2005 and 60,000 at Cal State. Part of this 
year's costs would be offset by increasing application fees and student fees at 
both systems. This ought not be done. Also, California's 1.1-million community 
college system must have more money to institute necessary reforms approved by 
the Legislature. 
The Times proposes that the education budget be increased by $412 million to 
restore program reductions, eliminate the student fee increase and to advance 
community college reforms. 
HEALTH CARE/SOCIAL SERVICES -- In the past, state budget cuts used to hurt 
mostly poorer Californians. Recently, however, the entire population has 
suffered from the overcrowding, closure or threatened closure of hospital 
emergency rooms and trauma centers for lack of funds, affecting as many as nine 
Los Angeles hospitals at one point last summer. The key element in the health 
safety net in California is the Medically Indigent Services Program through 
which the state helps counties pay the costs of poor people. Measured against 
the medical inflation rate, state financing for this program has declined $474 
million in the past six years. Uncollected hospital charges during 1986-87, the 
last year for which figures are available, exceeded costs by $1.1 billion. Fees 
paid by Medi-Cal, the state-federal program of health care for the poor, are 
compensating doctors -- those who still will treat Medi-Cal patients -- at only 
about 40% of their normal charges, and hospitals, 68% of their costs. 
The governor's new budget also would eliminate $272 million in normally routine 
cost-of-living increases in Medi-Cal; county health services; supplemental 
income for the aged, blind, disabled and welfare recipients. The budget for the 
new workfare program, GAIN, has been cut by $65 million. These and other 
reductions should be restored at a cost of $857 million. 
GENERAL GOVERNMENT -- Because of the Gann spending limit, government programs 
cannot grow to meet demands and needs. Whenever a program does expand, the 
funds must come from elsewhere in the budget. For one example, with the cost of 
operating the prison system expected to double to $3.1 billion in the next five 
years, other portions of the budget would have to be reduced by $1.5 billion if 
the Gann limits remain in place. This would be devastating to some programs 
that already have been cut back or held static. For example, the state park 
system has the same number of rangers as it did in 1980, even though park 
visits and acreage both have increased by nearly one-third. The new budget 
would increase the pesticide regulation program by only 1.3%. The program to 
investigate and halt ground water contamination would be reduced by $1.8 
million and 27 staff positions would be eliminated. The budget of the 
California Arts Council would be cut 19%, to just $12.6 million. The cost of 
restoring these and other programs would vary and depend on the amount of new 
revenue available. 
REVENUE -- The 1989-90 budget cuts can be offset in part by using some of $1 
billion the governor proposes for immediate restoration of the state's 
emergency fund. We would replenish the fund over several years, thus freeing at 
least $500 million for the 1989-90 budget. About $300 million more would be 
raised by conforming state law to the most recent federal tax law changes -- 
something Deukmejian briefly proposed to do last year. 
Then, the Legislature should pass a general tax increase such as Senate Bill 
520 sponsored by Sen. Alfred Alquist (D-San Jose) to restore the 11% bracket of 
the state income tax, which was reduced to 9.3% in 1987. The 11% levy, 
applicable only to taxable income of $100,000 or more, would raise at least 
$600 million. 
Other major sources of new state funds could be realized without putting an 
undue burden on California taxpayers or the business and corporate community. 
They include the closing of loophole-exemptions in the state sales tax, a 
partial restoration of the inheritance tax, taxing certain services such as 
lawyer's fees, and the creation of a split roll so that businesses could pay a 
higher level of property tax than homeowners. 
A modest investment of new revenue in California's future will pay untold 
dividends for years to come. Failure to do so now will mean the state is 
abdicating its reputation for excellence and its tradition of building together 
so the California dream can be a reality. 
BY THE NUMBERS 
With one exception, the percentage increase in state spending has declined over 
the past five years (below left), while the state's population has grown at a 
relatively even pace (bottom left). As a result, state spending is spread too 
thin. 
 Services do not lag because the state cannot afford them. California's share 
of national income is higher than it was a decade ago (below right). 
 The chart at bottom right compares a budget that The Times calculates would 
provide adequate growth in services with the budget proposed by the governor. 
Annual Percentage Change In General Fund Expenditures 
In 1985 dollars 
1985-'86 through 1989-'90 
1985-'86: 8.5 
1986-'87: 5.4 
1987-'88: 1.3 
1988-'89: 2.9 (Estimated) 
1989-'90: 1.2 (Projected) 
Source: Legislative Analyst 
California's Share of U.S. Personal Income 
1978 through 1990 
1978: 11.9 
1989: 13.1 (Estimated) 
1990: 13.1 (Projected) 
Source: Department of Finance 
Annual Growth in Population 
Percent increase 
1985: 2.24 
1986: 2.44 
1987: 2.41 
1988: 2.39 
1989: 2.11 (Estimated) 
1990: 1.94 (Projected) 
Source: Legislative Analyst 
The Times Recommendation 
The governor proposed a budget for general revenues of $38 billion for fiscal 
1989-'90, represented by the column on the left. The Times proposed an increase 
in that budget of 3.4% ($39.3 billion) as represented by the column on the 
right, to fully fund essential public services. 
Sources: Governor's Budget, Los Angeles Times 
