LIZ SMITH: CHAPLIN ON FILM, PEPPERY PECCADILLOES AND ALL 
CHARLIE CHAPLIN's widow, Oona O'Neill, has resisted, for the 12 years since her 
husband's death, all attempts to bring the great comic's life to the screen. 
Now she has finally given Sir Richard Attenborough the go-ahead. 
It is believed that Lady Chaplin was afraid her husband's biography would be 
unnecessarily sensationalized, given his well-publicized sexual peccadilloes 
with very young ladies. Some he married. His first two wives were 16 when they 
became his brides. Some he did not. (Joan Barry, who brought a successful 
paternity suit against him in the 1940s.) 
Chaplin, who was born in London and never acquired U.S. citizenship, also fell 
victim to the McCarthy communist witch hunt of the early '50s. He was virtually 
hounded out of the United States, much to the delight of gossip columnists 
Hedda Hopper and Louella Parsons, who had never approved of his romantic 
escapades anyway. Chaplin did not set foot on American soil for 20 years, and 
only then to accept a special Academy Award in 1972. 
However, Attenborough says, "Lady Chaplin has given me access to all his 
private papers and letters and has given me carte blanche to make the film the 
way I want." Filming starts in London in November. It is to be directed by 
Bryan Forbes. The role of Chaplin has yet to be cast, but Attenborough 
cautions: "He can't be more than 5-foot-something and he will have to age from 
18 to 76." 
ELAINE STRITCH is just zipping along. Miz Stritch, so good in the recent PBS 
American Playhouse production "Sense and Sensibility," and who has popped up in 
such diverse entries as the sitcom "Head of the Class" and the TV movie 
"Sparks" with Victoria Principal, may be on the tube regularly. Elaine has been 
signed to play the Shirley MacLaine role in the projected "Steel Magnolias" 
series for CBS. Elaine says she hopes it's a "go" because she wants to buy a 
house. "Anything I get from this is 'house money.' " Before shooting starts on 
the "Magnolias" pilot, Elaine performs A. R. Gurney's "Love Letters" with Jason 
Robards in Boston, later this month. 
CHICAGO'S RED HOT Steppenwolf Theater Company arrives in previews at Broadway's 
Cort in New York today with their adaptation of John Steinbeck's "The Grapes of 
Wrath." Director Frank Galati also did the work transforming Steinbeck's famous 
novel of the Great Depression into a stage production. This "Wrath" stars Gary 
Sinise, Terry Kinney, Jeff Perry and Lois Smith. Steinbeck's widow, Elaine, has 
traveled extensively with the show through its acclaimed engagements in 
Chicago, California and London. 
DON'T MISS attorney Raoul Lionel Felder's editorial in Newsweek titled "Look 
Out, Donald!" Felder has done a witty and considered take on why he thinks 
"L'Affaire Trump" is not necessarily good for business, as Donald says it is. 
Felder also notes the new fly in the ointment -- Ivana's "handhold on a 
slippery ledge which may not be enough to win her case, but enough perhaps to 
cause Donald, for all practical purposes, to lose his." This revolves around 
the last contract between the couple in which Trump's lawyers failed to 
distinguish between "marital property" and "separate property." Felder notes 
that, in any event, even if Ivana loses on this point, her case cannot be 
thrown out of court before extensive financial disclosure. That is just what 
Trump doesn't want. 
