SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA JOB MARKET; 
REPORTS FORM THE FIELD; 
LEARNING A TRADE WITHOUT COLLEGE 
After graduating from high school in his native Canada, Chris Pepper took a few 
college courses and "did a little bit of everything" to make a living, 
including working for his father making contact lenses. When Pepper finally 
decided on a career, he didn't want to take the time to go to college. 
Instead, he said recently, he enrolled in a program of mainframe computer 
operations and management at Computer Learning Center in Los Angeles -- a 
for-profit trade school. Five years after completing the program, he is a 
senior manager at Errico Technologies, a Los Angeles software research and 
development company recently purchased by Price Waterhouse. 
The American workplace is changing rapidly -- increasingly requiring 
better-educated workers but not necessarily college-educated workers. The route 
to high-paying jobs taken in years past by high school graduates -- assembly 
line work in heavy industry -- isn't much of an option today. 
At the same time, technology has taken on greater importance, creating 
opportunity for those who can operate computers and sophisticated machinery, 
and for those who can read well and comprehend instructions. 
Computer operators and technicians in health care and other fields are examples 
of plentiful jobs that do not require a four-year college degree. The best of 
these jobs do require, however, a willingness to spend a couple of years in 
community college or a few months in a trade school. 
Some industries and many labor unions also offer on-the-job apprenticeship 
programs. Many electricians, for example, entered the profession through 
apprenticeships. Southern California Edison fills many vacancies in skilled 
areas from entry-level workers who have been placed in an in-house training 
program. 
The challenge for students looking at for-profit trade schools is to determine 
which will be useful and which are "diploma mills," primarily in the business 
of collecting tuition rather than dispensing education. 
"Reputable schools will want to provide information on attrition rates, 
graduation rates and provide references," said Dan Parker, spokesman for the 
California Student Aid Commission. 
Another tip: Ask companies in the industry you want to work in, 'Do you hire 
graduates from XYZ school?' " Parker said. 
For those who gain the skills, job opportunities await. Many computer operators 
are starting at $23,000 a year, said Richard Perry, a Thrifty Drugs computer 
operator, who graduated from Computer Learning Center last September. 
In addition, health care is aching for a variety of workers, said Kathy Barry, 
director of the Health Careers Information Center. The center was established 
by the Hospital Council of Southern California to cope with labor shortages in 
various positions, including many that require a year or two of specialized 
training. 
The center has a public information program to make prospective workers aware 
of job requirements. "Our goal is to increase the supply of workers for our 
hospitals by encouraging people to enter health care professions," she said. 
Radiologic technicians and medical records technicians are among the most 
difficult health care positions to fill, Barry said. Employers generally hire 
radiologic technicians who have completed a community college program, she 
said, but some hospitals train their own. 
A beginning technologist in Southern California will make about $11.50 an hour, 
Barry said. But a radiologic technologist trained in a specialty -- such as 
ultrasound technology -- will begin at a higher salary, she said. A community 
college-trained medical records technician will start at about $10 per hour. 
Also, the health care industry has a critical need for laboratory assistants 
and technicians, and medical assistants to help doctors and nurses perform 
patient tests, review medical records and report changes in patient vital 
signs, said Judi Hansen, director of regional recruitment services for Kaiser 
Permanente, the large health maintenance organization. 
Entry-level salaries for medical assistants range from $17,600 a year to 
$20,800, she said; entry-level salaries for laboratory assistants and 
technicians range from about $17,000 to $23,000. 
To help increase the supply of nurses, the information center has referred many 
prospects to County-USC Medical Center, which operates the only remaining 
hospital-based diploma program for registered nurses west of the Rockies. The 
two-year program is similar to nursing associate degree programs at numerous 
Southern California community colleges, said program director Marilyn Grafton. 
Students must be residents of Los Angeles County or a neighboring county. 
The major difference between RNs trained in two-year programs and those with 
four-year college degrees is in the opportunities to advance into management, 
Barry and Grafton said. "You need a BA to be a head nurse. Generally, a 
master's degree is required to be head administrator," Barry said. 
