U.S. TO HALT ALL AK-47S AT THE BORDER; 
ACTS UPON LEARNING OF LICENSES FOR 400,000 IMPORTS 
A Treasury Department agency, stunned when it discovered that it had given gun 
dealers permission to import more than 400,000 AK-47s and other assault rifles, 
has ordered the Customs Service to halt all shipments of the weapons at the 
nation's borders, The Times has learned. 
The action goes far beyond steps taken earlier this month, when the 
Administration announced a temporary moratorium on issuing new permits for five 
types of assault weapons, including the AK-47. 
It essentially revokes licenses that already had been issued to gun importers, 
a step almost certain to be challenged in court. 
Controversial Move 
William T. Drake, a top official at Treasury's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and 
Firearms, acknowledged in an interview that the move would be controversial. 
But he said that an internal audit detailing the vast extent of imports already 
authorized had persuaded the agency to take the emergency action. 
The bureau refused to disclose how many weapons have been approved for 
importation, but a knowledgeable Customs Service source said the number is 
420,000. 
These weapons were not affected by the moratorium two weeks ago, which only 
blocked approval of new applications for weapons imports. When the action was 
taken, new applications for importation of 110,000 assault weapons were 
pending. The moratorium will be lifted only if importers can prove that the 
weapons are used generally for sporting purposes. 
About 70,000 assault rifles have been imported into the United States in the 
last three years, according to bureau officials. 
In announcing the moratorium on new permits, the officials indicated that they 
had no power to restrict imports of weapons for which permits had already been 
granted. But Drake said that the agency, which has been trying to persuade 
importers to halt assault-gun shipments voluntarily, believes that it has the 
authority to make that ban mandatory. 
'God Taketh Away' 
The authority comes, he contended, from the Gun Control Act of 1968, which 
empowered the bureau to grant licenses authorizing gun imports. "What God 
giveth," Drake said of the permission to import weapons, "God can taketh away." 
The bureau's order, transmitted orally Thursday and made formal in a directive 
issued by Drake Friday afternoon, officially bars five types of assault weapons 
from entering the United States. 
They include a wide variety of AKS-type weapons, including the Chinese-made 
AK-47 and Finnish M-76, the Israeli Uzi carbine, the Belgian FNC, Austrian and 
Belgian FAL-type weapons and German Aug-type weapons. 
Customs agents across the country were ordered Friday to begin enforcing the 
order and were equipped with lists of assault-gun importers so that they might 
more easily identify the weapons shipments. As of Friday evening, however, no 
new shipments of assault weapons had arrived at U.S. ports, Administration 
officials said. 
Under arrangements worked out by Customs and the Treasury agency, any of the 
banned weapons that do arrive in the United States will be barred from entry 
until it is determined whether the weapons are generally used for sporting 
purposes. Only such weapons may be imported under U.S. laws. 
Bond Will Be Required 
Until that decision is reached, importers will be permitted to store the 
weapons in their own warehouses. The weapons will remain under Customs Service 
jurisdiction, however, and the importers will be required to leave a 
substantial bond on deposit with Customs. 
The effective confiscation of the rifles is almost certain to result in legal 
action as furious gun importers attempt to overturn the directive, 
Administration officials warned. 
The importers, they noted, stand to profit enormously in what has become a 
seller's market for assault weapons across much of the country. 
In the wake of the Administration ban and the decision by Colt Industries to 
take its AR-15 rifle off the market, gun enthusiasts -- fearful that the 
weapons might be banned altogether -- have bought up most of the assault rifles 
available. As demand has boomed, prices have skyrocketed. 
Painstaking Search 
When the ban on new permits was imposed two weeks ago, bureau officials said 
that they had no idea how many assault weapons might still be imported under 
existing authorization. The discovery that the number exceeded 400,000 resulted 
from a painstaking two-week search of the agency's files, which are not 
computerized. 
Although refusing to confirm that figure, Drake said the fact that permission 
to import had already been granted for a large number of weapons did not 
necessarily mean that the weapons would have been imported. 
Often, he said, gun dealers who plan to import fewer than 100 weapons file 
"Form 6" documents requesting permission to import 10,000 or even 20,000. The 
agency has no authority to ask dealers to modify such requests. 
Officials said they were worried, however, that the increased demand for 
assault weapons might have prompted dealers to place orders for all the guns 
they were authorized to import. 
Concerns Eased 
Customs Service officials initially expressed qualms about the new import ban. 
But their concerns were eased when the bureau, with its directive Friday, took 
full responsibility for the order. That would make it likely that the bureau -- 
not Customs -- would face court challenges, sources said. 
Drake said that the decision had been taken by the bureau under consultation 
with Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady. 
