BUSH REITERATES U.S. SUPPORT OF POLISH BORDERS 
President Bush today reaffirmed U.S. support for Poland's present borders and 
assured Warsaw that it will have a voice in any issues, including German 
reunification, that affect Poland's future. 
"In all decisions affecting the fate of Poland, Poland must have a voice," Bush 
said at a state welcoming ceremony for Polish Prime Minister Tadeusz 
Mazowiecki. 
Bush, who met with Mazowiecki for more than one hour and asked the prime 
minister to come back for further talks Thursday, restated Washington's backing 
of Poland's borders. He pledged to work for "a new Europe in which the security 
of all European states and their fundamental right to exist secure within their 
present borders is totally assured." 
In a bid to attract investment into Poland, Bush and Mazowiecki signed an 
agreement committing Poland to standard Western business practices regarding 
expropriation, currency transfers, patents, intellectual property and other 
matters. 
Bush, who pledged continued U.S. aid to help Poland's movement toward a market 
economy, also approved the opening of a Polish consulate in Los Angeles and 
lifted all travel restrictions on Polish diplomats in the United States. 
His border comments were a bid to allay Warsaw's fears that a powerful, 
reunified German state might make demands on Polish territory that once 
belonged to Germany. 
But White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater made clear that the United States 
opposed Polish admission to the so-called "two plus four" German unification 
talks among the two Germanys and the four World War II victors -- the United 
States, the Soviet Union, France and Britain. 
"We believe the current structure is the correct one. That it should remain two 
plus four, not two plus five or six, not additional countries," the spokesman 
said. 
Assistant Secretary of State Raymond Seitz, who briefed reporters after the 
talks, described Bush's promise to give Poland a voice as "simply a statement 
that we understand Polish concerns and we will listen to Poland's concerns and 
we will respond to Poland's concerns." He said there are a number of forums in 
which Warsaw could be heard. 
