ANTONOVICH ASKS SUPPORTERS TO GIVE MONEY TO PICUS FOE 
Los Angeles County Supervisor Mike Antonovich has written to 2,500 of his 
campaign donors, urging them to contribute to Jeanne Nemo's under-financed 
campaign to unseat City Councilwoman Joy Picus. 
The letter could help close the fund-raising lead that the San Fernando Valley 
councilwoman has over her five challengers in the April 11 Los Angeles city 
election. Nemo has raised $25,000 to Picus' $150,000. 
Antonovich, a Republican, has access to contributors who might be willing to 
support Nemo, another Republican, against Picus, a Democrat, even though the 
council is a nonpartisan office. Television commentator Bruce Herschensohn, an 
unsuccessful GOP candidate for U.S. Senate in 1986, is preparing to write to 
supporters on Nemo's behalf, Nemo said. 
In his letter, copied on Board of Supervisors' stationery but paid for by Nemo, 
Antonovich urges supporters to send Nemo "your maximum contribution." A 1985 
voter-approved city law limits contributions to council candidates to $500 per 
donor. 
'Finding Solutions' 
"As your City Council representative," Antonovich wrote, "Jeanne will work to 
increase the Police Department and eliminate the drugs and gangs from our city. 
She is also committed to improving traffic flow, supporting planned growth that 
maintains the integrity of neighborhoods and finding solutions to problems we 
face with affordable housing, the homeless and our deteriorating 
infrastructure." 
The text of the letter does not mention Picus by name but says, "The Los 
Angeles Police Department has been hampered by politicians who have 
deliberately kept the Police Department understaffed." 
"Today, we have a serious crime problem, yet Los Angeles is the most 
under-policed city in the nation," the text says. "Since the early 1970s, the 
population has increased from 2.8 million to 3.4 million, while the police have 
had their hands tied by not being allowed to increase with this growth." 
According to Antonovich, the Police Department had 7,145 officers in 1976. The 
Department now has 7,677 officers, a police spokesman said, but is expected to 
be up to 7,900 by July. 
A spokesman for Police Chief Daryl F. Gates said Picus has been supportive of 
efforts to increase funding for additional police officers. Gates, however, 
does not endorse candidates in council races, the spokesman added. 
Nemo said in an interview that she would consider establishing a rubbish 
collection tax on single-family homes to raise money for additional police. 
"We are about the only major city that subsidizes trash collection," Nemo said. 
"I think that it is time that we started charging for that if that is the only 
way we can raise money to hire sufficient number of police. 
"Fear of crime is the No. 1 issue," she said. "I think a significant increase 
in the number of police not only reduces street crime, but it makes people feel 
safer." 
Picus called Antonovich's letter "campaign rhetoric." 
She said she supports a plan to increase the police force to 10,000 officers by 
1993. She did not say how she would pay for the additional officers, adding 
that she would need to "look at all the options" before considering a rubbish 
collection charge. 
"The last time a refuse collection fee was proposed, it was extremely unpopular 
in my district," Picus said. 
Nemo ran against Picus in 1985, finishing second in a field of five candidates 
with 21% of the vote. Picus won with 56% of the vote. 
