U.S. MILITARY ATTACHE IN MOSCOW IS EXPELLED; 
ACCUSED OF SPYING AND ORDERED OUT LESS THAN A WEEK AFTER WASHINGTON OUSTED 
COUNTERPART 
The Soviet Union accused a U.S. military attache of spying and ordered him to 
leave the country Wednesday, less than a week after his Soviet counterpart was 
ousted from Washington on similar charges. 
The Foreign Ministry said the attache, Lt. Col. Daniel Francis Van Gundy III, 
"attempted to enter a closed area, deliberately diverting from the officially 
permitted route, and clandestinely photographed military facilities." Van Gundy 
was given 48 hours to leave. 
But chief ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov also appeared to tacitly 
acknowledge the retaliatory nature of the expulsion order, saying the ousting 
of Van Gundy was a "response to the provocation of the U.S. special services." 
"We were not the ones to initiate this process," Gerasimov said. "Now that the 
new Administration in Washington is reviewing its policies, we have some spy 
mania again." 
Van Gundy, 42, was assigned to Moscow in November, 1987, and was midway through 
his scheduled tour of duty here. He lives on the embassy compound with his wife 
and two of their three daughters. The family is expected to leave today. Van 
Gundy himself declined Wednesday to answer questions. 
U.S. Embassy spokesman Richard Gilbert rejected the charges as "unwarranted, 
inappropriate, without justification and certainly in no way in keeping with 
the positive tone of the U.S.-Soviet relationship." 
"It clearly appears to us to be a tit-for-tat reaction," Gilbert said. "We are 
considering our response," he added, declining to elaborate. 
In Washington, State Department spokeswoman Nancy Beck also called Van Gundy's 
expulsion "unwarranted." 
She declined to say if Washington will continue the tit-for-tat expulsions or 
permit the situation to cool down. 
"We are considering our response," Beck said. "There is a range of options 
available to us but I am not going to comment further on this matter at 
present." 
The expulsion comes less than a week after the U.S. government announced March 
9 that it was ousting Soviet Lt. Col. Yuri N. Pakhtusov after a six-month sting 
operation by the FBI. 
The United States said Pakhtusov, 35, contacted a civilian American worker at a 
computer company last August in an effort to obtain sensitive information about 
how the U.S. government protects computer secrets. The employee contacted the 
FBI, which then began its investigation, according to U.S. officials. Neither 
the employee nor the company was named. 
A U.S. source said Pakhtusov was a member of GRU, the Soviet military's 
intelligence arm. Soviet officials last week declined to comment on Pakhtusov's 
alleged affiliation with GRU. 
Called a Provocation 
On Wednesday, Gerasimov called the expulsion of Pakhtusov "a provocation, 
uncalled for and unjustified." He said the accusations of espionage against the 
Soviet officer were based on "an artificially cooked scenario staged rather 
clumsily by the FBI" and that his expulsion was "not in line with the spirit of 
peaceful cooperation in U.S.-Soviet relations." 
Gerasimov said Pakhtusov was arrested after he left his apartment to take out 
the garbage and a neighbor in the building asked him to come inside his 
apartment "under the pretext that he wanted Pakhtusov's advice concerning the 
repair of a TV set." 
Gerasimov said the neighbor then "attempted all of a sudden to give Pakhtusov a 
parcel, which he refused to take. At that very moment, FBI agents broke into 
the flat and, resorting to force, handcuffed Pakhtusov." 
The last expulsions of American diplomats from the Soviet Union were in 
October, 1986. Then, the Kremlin expelled five American diplomats after 25 
Soviet diplomats were ordered out of the Soviet U.N. Mission in New York. 
