JERRY HULSE'S TRAVEL TIPS 
If the pressures of the '90s are bearing down, keep heart. In Alaska, McCarthy 
Wilderness B&amp;B welcomes vacationers in search of peace. (Just don't expect 
luxury.) No television, no electricity, no telephones, no running water, 
outdoor plumbing. Mail is delivered by bush plane once a week. But Bob and 
Babbie Jacobs promise vacationers the opportunity to turn back the clock 100 
years at Wrangell/St. Elias National Park (about eight hours by car outside 
Anchorage). Guests bathe in a wood-fired log sauna. Communication with the 
outside world is via a message system played daily over a radio station. (In 
this northern wilderness, the sun never sets between June and August.) The 
McCarthy B&amp;B accommodates 10 persons in a log cabin. Other rooms overlook a 
creek. Rates: $55 double B&amp;B. McCarthy is accessible by road from 
Anchorage. 
Besides their B&amp;B, Bob and Babbie Jacobs operate St. Elias Guides, 
providing rafting, glacier exploration, fishing, hiking, mountaineering. 
McCarthy Wilderness B&amp;B and St. Elias Alpine Guides, Box 111241, Anchorage, 
Alaska 99511. Telephone (907) 277-6867. 
More on Alaska: In Alaska, Jean Parsons operates a B&amp;B reservation service 
she calls "Stay With A Friend." Accommodations in Anchorage and other Alaskan 
communities. Suggestions for sightseeing trips, fishing, hiking, biking, 
touring. Says Parsons: "We take pride in placing guests in compatible 
arrangements." Accommodations for both smokers/nonsmokers. Dozens of choices. 
(In Anchorage, Parsons will book you into a split-level family home with a 
mountain view for $40/$65.) Contact Jean Parsons, c/o Stay With A Friend, 3605 
Arctic Blvd., No. 173, Anchorage, Alaska 99503. Telephone (907) 344-4006. 
Vermont's Green Mountains: Ex-Californian Nicholas Newton and his wife Joyce 
are hosting guests at an ancient inn in central Vermont. A two-story farmhouse 
featuring period furniture, antiques, crystal/Venetian chandeliers. A river 
flows through the 52-acre property, and there's a swimming hole for hot summer 
days. The inn is surrounded by Vermont's Green Mountains. Only minutes from the 
historic village of Waitsfield. Rooms with private baths, fresh flowers, 
European down quilts, Victorian wallpaper. The Newtons promise an "epicurean" 
breakfast. Rates: $75/$95 double (subtract $10 for singles). 
Newton's 1824 House Inn, Route 100, Box 159, Waitsfield, Vt. 05673. Call (802) 
496-7555. 
Australia Guide: Australia's Tourist Commission reminds readers that the 
Commission is still mailing copies of the 1990 "Destination Australia" book. A 
surprising giveaway (128-pages) that's packed with details on beaches, air/bus 
service, motoring, rail journeys, camping, adventure holidays, accommodations. 
Covers Sydney, Brisbane, Cairns, Canberra, Melbourne, Adelaide, Hobart, Darwin, 
Alice Springs, Perth, Tasmania. Maps, tips on tours throughout Australia. Other 
facts on the Great Barrier Reef, wildlife parks, alpine regions, shopping, 
resorts, fishing, car rentals, farm holidays. 
Copies from the Australian Tourist Commission, 2121 Avenue of the Stars, Suite 
1200, Los Angeles 90067, toll-free (800) 678-8022. 
British Columbia: Californians focusing on Canada are booking passage on 
British Columbia ferries in record numbers. Thirty-eight vessels call at 42 
ports along the B.C. coast. Journeys to the Gulf and Charlotte Islands, the 
Inside Passage. Frequent service. (These vessels also carry cars, RVs.) 
Cafeterias, snack bars, gift shops on board. 
For a free copy of the 1990 B.C. ferry schedule, write to B.C. Ferries, 1112 
Fort St., Victoria, B.C. Canada V8V 4V2, or see your travel agent. 
French Cruise Line: A luxury cruise ship will sail the Rhone and Saone rivers 
in France this spring/summer/autumn. One-week journeys between Burgundy and 
Avignon. Departures every Saturday beginning March 31. The Arlene carries 100 
passengers. All outside cabins. Large picture windows, two decks. Visits to 
cities, small wine villages. In Tournon passengers will board a steam train for 
a journey to Ardeche. Other side trips to Lyon, Vienne, Valence, Viviers and 
Arles, where Vincent Van Gogh created several of his celebrated masterpieces. 
The ship's restaurant (listed by the illustrious "Chaine des Rotisseurs") turns 
out memorable meals. 
Your travel agent or French Cruise Lines, 701 Lee St., Des Plaines, Ill. 60016. 
Telephone toll-free (800) 222-8664. 
On the Wild Side: My idea of a vacation is to download the stress circuits. I 
don't want to be up at dawn boarding a bus or scaling a mountain. Give me a 
peaceful beach. Or a grassy meadow with the voice of the wind humming through a 
forest. But my particular formula doesn't satisfy everyone. A growing number of 
vacationers are seeking the active life. Which is why Rock Creek Pack Station 
in Bishop, Calif., is busy taking reservations. The idea at Rock Creek is to 
track wild mustangs. A Western adventure in the Inyo National Forest. "All you 
need is a bed roll," says Dave Dohnel of Rock Creek. "We supply the rest." At 
Rock Creek, vacationers work as ranch hands and join annual horse drives 
(spring and fall). Other Rock Creek wranglers lead trail rides and pack trips 
during summer months into John Muir, Golden Trout and Ansel Adams Wildernesses, 
Yosemite and Sequoia/Kings Canyon National Parks. 
Rock Creek Park Station, P.O. Box 248, Bishop, Calif. 93514. Or call Dave 
Dohnel at (619) 872-8331. 
London Hosts: If you're traveling to London, you might want to check out The 
Bulldog Club. This is an upscale B&amp;B group. Accommodations on quiet 
streets, but within minutes of London's Underground and bus stops. Shops, 
restaurants nearby. Guest rooms feature flowers, color TV, coffee/tea, bottled 
waters. Copies of the London Times delivered daily. Guests of The Bulldog Club 
are given a packet of information, including a map pinpointing homes, parks. 
Hosts provide details on public transportation, theaters, museums, shops, 
antique markets. 
The Bulldog Club, 35 The Chase, London SW4 0NP, or else contact the North 
American representative, Bev Boyle, 6 Kittridge Court, Richmond Hill, Ontario, 
Canada L4C 7X3. Call (416) 737-2798. 
Reader Recommendations 
 Arizona -- Pat and Dick Latimer, Claremont: "A delightful B&amp;B, The Little 
House, 341 Sonoita Ave., Patagonia, Ariz. 85624. A remodeled old adobe. 
Gracious hosts. Rate: $60 double, with gourmet breakfast." 
California -- Julio Pasco, Fayetteville, Ark.: "On our vacation to California 
we stayed at Pickford House Bed &amp; Breakfast, 255 McLeod Way, Cambria, 
Calif. 93428. Large bedrooms, fireplaces. Only 10 miles from Hearst Castle." 
Hawaii -- Terrie Von Doymi, San Anselmo: "Recommend Ridge Rentals, a group of 
villas at Kapalua Bay resort on Maui. Elegantly furnished. Spectacular views of 
Molokai and Lanai. Rates: one-bedroom/two-bath villa, $102 a night for seven 
nights or more; two-bedroom/three-bath villas, $160 a night. Contact Terry 
Craven, 21 Ward St., Suite 1, Larkspur, Calif. 94939, toll-free (800) 
869-7971." 
Washington -- Michael and Bonnie Bray, Malibu: "For the couple or family 
looking for total privacy, contact Northwest Vacation Homes, P.O. Box 160, 
Clinton, Wash. 98236. Privately owned homes, complete with everything anyone 
could need: kitchens with microwaves, dishes, washers/dryers, TVs, VCRs. All 
overlook Puget Sound. I cannot tell you how peaceful it is!" 
Greece -- James and Lucretia Duncan, Palos Verdes Estates: "Enjoyed an 
'economical island adventure' on Zakynthos in Greece. Friendly, sparsely 
populated. Found a nice beach-front apartment for $20 U.S. nightly, less weekly 
(April through mid-June). Write to Marinos Xenos Krioneri-Akrutiri, 29100 
Zakynthos, Greece." 
