WITNESS SAYS POINDEXTER DID NOT HIDE MISSILE DEAL; 
IRAN-CONTRA: BUT CIA OFFICIAL TESTIFIES FORMER WHITE HOUSE AIDE OMITTED FACTS 
DURING BRIEFING OF LAWMAKERS. 
A veteran CIA official testified Friday that former National Security Adviser 
John M. Poindexter did not attempt to cover up a controversial 1985 shipment of 
U.S. Hawk missiles to Iran that led to the Iran-Contra scandal. 
But Norman H. Gardner Jr., a congressional specialist for the CIA who was 
present when Poindexter briefed members of Congress in 1986, said that 
Poindexter omitted some facts during the session, including former President 
Ronald Reagan's written authorization of the shipment. 
Gardner appeared as a defense witness as Poindexter's trial completed its third 
week. The former White House official is charged with five felonies for 
allegedly conspiring to cover up the scandal, obstructing congressional 
inquiries and making false statements to Congress. 
Three of the counts involve charges that Poindexter misled members of the House 
and Senate intelligence committees by falsely claiming that neither he nor any 
other U.S. official had prior knowledge of a shipment of U.S. Hawk missiles 
from Israel to Iran in November, 1985. The arms shipment was intended to help 
free U.S. hostages in the Mideast. 
Although the prosecution presented earlier witnesses to back up the charges, 
Gardner said that Poindexter told legislators during the Nov. 21, 1986, meeting 
that "we did not have all the facts about that flight" and that some U.S. 
officials may have had prior knowledge of it. 
Gardner conceded that Poindexter, however, never told members of Congress about 
Reagan's written authorization for the 1985 shipment, known as a presidential 
"finding." 
"Did anyone ask him about a finding?" inquired Joseph Small, a lawyer for 
Poindexter. 
"No, they did not," Gardner replied. 
Gardner said that Reagan signed the finding, which was drafted by the CIA, two 
months after the shipment on Jan. 17, 1986. Other witnesses have said the CIA 
recommended the presidential action because Congress had forbidden any shipment 
of U.S. arms to nations that supported terrorism unless the President issued a 
finding that such a shipment was in the national interest. 
Previous evidence at the trial has shown that Poindexter tore up the finding in 
late November, 1986, because it linked the arms shipment to attempts to free 
U.S. hostages, a statement that conflicted with Reagan's pledge that he would 
not negotiate for hostages. 
Gardner drew an expression of skepticism from U.S. District Judge Harold H. 
Greene when he said a chronology that Poindexter had helped prepare stated 
truthfully that the CIA believed the shipment contained oil-drilling equipment. 
"The CIA shipped something to Iran, to a hostile country that was almost at war 
with the United States, and the CIA didn't know what was in there?" Greene 
asked, frowning. 
"That's right," Gardner replied. 
He said that at the request of Marine Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, an aide to 
Poindexter, the CIA arranged for one of its chartered airlines to fly the 
shipment from Israel to Iran. North had described the cargo as oil-drilling 
equipment, Gardner explained. 
At the last moment, however, the crew of the airplane became aware that the 
cargo was actually missiles and reported that information to CIA headquarters, 
he testified. 
But on cross-examination, associate prosecutor Christian Mixter pointed out 
that one CIA chronology reported that the agency first learned of the cargo 
from the Iranians. 
Gardner testified this was incorrect, declaring: "There was a great deal of 
confusion about the flight." 
