TOXIC WASTE COULD COST FIRM $162,000 
A national construction company was ordered Thursday by a Los Angeles Superior 
Court judge to pay cleanup costs and fines that could top $162,000 for burying 
up to 50 barrels containing toxic residue at its former branch in Arcadia. 
Kiewit Pacific Co. pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor charge of unlawful 
disposal of hazardous waste and must pay for removal and cleanup costs at the 
five-acre site, Deputy Dist. Atty. Bill Carter said. 
Judge William Klausner fined the Nebraska-based company $50,000 plus $12,000 in 
restitution to the property's current owner, the Arcadia Redevelopment Agency, 
and placed Kiewit on a year's probation. 
The agency bought the parcel at 301 E. Santa Clara St. in September, 1986, when 
Kiewit moved its offices to Santa Fe Springs. The flattened drums with traces 
of a cement curing compound were discovered last March, when the agency began 
excavating the site for development. The slurry-like material, used to set 
cement, is mildly toxic and contains flammable solvents, Carter said. 
The cost of disposing of the barrels and removing the contaminated soil that 
surrounded them will exceed $100,000, said Shahin Nourishad, the county Health 
Services Department's hazardous materials specialist who is supervising the 
cleanup. 
This is not the firm's first run-in with the department. 
Employees buried between 35 to 50 barrels of the same compound and waste oil in 
1981, Carter said. Workers in an office across the street reported the activity 
and the health department ordered the company to dig up the barrels. 
The second burial -- in 1985 -- occurred before dawn, Carter said. Using 
bulldozers already on the site, "they dug a huge hole in the same location, 
pushed the barrels in and covered them with dirt," he said. 
The employee responsible had probably misunderstood an order to clean up the 
yard, Kiewit attorney Stephen Sadowsky said. "He was acting without company 
knowledge and approval," Sadowsky said. 
