ROTH CRITICIZES GOVERNOR ON MEDFLY; 
SPRAYING: SUPERVISOR SAYS DEUKMEJIAN HAS PUT BOARD IN AN UNTENABLE POSITION AND 
CALLS GOVERNOR'S LETTER ON THE ISSUE "A SHAM." . 
An angry Board of Supervisors Chairman Don R. Roth criticized Gov. George 
Deukmejian and state officials Tuesday for forcing county leaders into the 
politically uncomfortable position of having to repeatedly approve an emergency 
declaration in the state's battle against the Mediterranean fruit fly. 
"I'm frustrated that there has been no correct answer from the state on this 
issue," Roth told other supervisors. "I'm tired of taking these actions every 
two weeks." 
Supervisors are required by state law to renew the declaration of emergency 
every two weeks or lose protection against possible liability claims from the 
aerial spraying of malathion. Board members have been trying to find ways to 
avoid dealing with the controversial issue of whether the pesticide spraying by 
helicopter poses any health or safety risk. Supervisors Roth, Thomas F. Riley 
and Gaddi H. Vasquez have supported renewal of the declaration since last 
November, and Roger R. Stanton and Harriett M. Wieder have opposed it. 
In a March 8 letter to Roth, Deukmejian wrote that other jurisdictions faced 
with the same review requirement used a "less formalized process than has 
Orange County." The governor suggested that the supervisors talk with the other 
jurisdictions and find out how they are doing it. 
Roth said that other counties were contacted and that "we are doing the same as 
anybody else." He added, "I am disappointed in the governor's letter to us in 
which he did not spell out some other alternative where we would not have to do 
this every two weeks." 
"Here we have Sacramento 500 miles away, and we are unable to communicate 
exactly what the problem is. The governor's letter was really a sham, telling 
us, 'Why don't you do like other counties do and you won't have any problems,' 
so it appears to me they don't know what they are doing either." 
Roth said he was concerned that this illustrated the way state government is 
"being run up and down the State of California." 
The state began malathion spraying in parts of Orange County last December 
after pregnant female Medflies were found. But state officials announced last 
week that they expect to end the aerial spraying in the county as of May 3, a 
month early. 
Supervisor Stanton, an outspoken critic of the aerial spraying, summed up why 
the issue is politically controversial. 
"No one on this board favors spraying," Stanton said. "There is a little bit of 
confusion when people read the vote on this issue." 
Vasquez said "this experience" with the Medfly has shown that there are "some 
problems and inconsistencies with the concept of the declaration of 
emergencies." 
"Whether it's the Medfly or something down the road we may not be able to 
foresee right now . . . it's imperative that we engage in a strategy so we can 
resolve this issue," Vasquez said. He added that the board has to face the "now 
famous two-week review" without having "any right of refusal." 
In a related development, state officials, responding to concerns raised by 
Orange County malathion critics, have decided to take no action on the idea of 
requiring hotels and motels in the spray zones to notify their guests about 
upcoming aerial applications. 
In a letter addressed to Assemblyman Curt Pringle (R-Garden Grove) and released 
Tuesday, Isi A. Siddiqui, assistant director of the state Department of Food 
and Agriculture, said the hotels and other businesses are being notified of 
sprayings. 
"Therefore, your suggestion that the state supply treatment information to 
these establishments is duly noted, and we are glad to report that it has been 
done all along and will continue to be done," he said. 
But the response does not address the specific question of requiring the hotels 
to notify their guests, an idea that state officials had previously rejected. 
"They totally missed the point," said Garden Grove resident Bob Taylor, an 
anti-malathion organizer who, along with Pringle, had called for the 
notification requirement. "We made clear what we wanted, and they chose just to 
ignore us." 
Meanwhile, state agriculture officials have rescheduled the malathion spraying 
in North County for this Friday. 
Times staff writer Eric Lichtblau contributed to this report. 
Safety PROBLEMS:Firm hired to spray malathion has a history of acccidents. A3 
