2 LEADERS FORGIVE AND FORGET OVER A BEER; 
EUROPE: THE CZECHOSLOVAK AND WEST GERMAN PRESIDENTS AGREE TO RECONCILE AFTER 
THE WRONGS OF WORLD WAR II. 
Two of Europe's most extraordinary statesmen sealed a highly symbolic 
understanding between them in a most unstatesmanlike way here Thursday -- over 
a friendly beer in a local pub. 
The statesmen: West German President Richard von Weizsaecker and his 
Czechoslovak counterpart, Vaclav Havel. They chose the 51st anniversary of the 
Nazi occupation of Prague to put an end to one painful chapter in the 
1,000-year-old relationship between their two countries and to begin a new, 
more hopeful one. 
"I'm a fan of symbols in politics," Havel, the former dissident playwright, 
said of the date he chose to invite Von Weizsaecker for a 10-hour state visit. 
And after their formal talks and presidential speeches in the cavernous 
Vladislav Hall of Prague's Hradcany Castle, Havel, who doesn't think presidents 
should take themselves too seriously, initiated a surprise detour from the 
official program. 
About halfway through a scheduled "walkabout" from the castle to the famous 
Charles Bridge, the Czechoslovak president propelled his apparently delighted 
guest through the doors of the "Two Suns" pub on cobblestoned Neruda Street and 
ordered steins of light beer for them both. 
Startled security men and photographers, who weren't getting along all that 
well anyway, tripped over one another as they scrambled none too successfully 
to keep up with their quarry. They cheered up only slightly when somebody 
passed a couple of tankards to those stuck outside. 
Jiri Duffek, 69, a retired lawyer, had tears in his eyes as he watched the 
happy scene from a few yards away. In contrast to Thursday's warm sunshine, the 
streets were cold and snow-swept on March 15, 1939, when he and the rest of the 
city awoke to find Nazi tanks and occupation troops everywhere. 
"It was a very bad day," Duffek recalled, and worse days were to come during 
the three years he would spend in a forced labor camp in Berlin. 
German dictator Adolf Hitler surveyed his army's latest conquest that day 51 
years ago from the same hilltop castle from which Von Weizsaecker briefly 
greeted a crowd of several hundred Czechoslovaks and foreign tourists Thursday. 
The contrast couldn't have been greater Thursday, the Duffeks agreed, during a 
symbolic national reconciliation presided over by two very different men who 
nevertheless speak a common, visionary language. 
The silver-haired, patrician Von Weizsaecker looks like he was born in an 
expensive suit, and the gravelly voiced, puckish Havel always looks somehow as 
if he has never worn one before. 
"Our first attempt at democracy came to an abrupt end on March 15, 1939, when a 
certain madman in high boots broke into this castle to announce to the world 
that violence conquers freedom and human dignity," Havel told several hundred 
invited guests at Vladislav Hall. 
"The messenger of war broke in," the former political prisoner continued. "The 
messenger of crudity; the messenger of lies; the messenger of pride and evil, 
of injustice and cruelty. A mass murderer broke in, a murderer of nations." 
By contrast, Havel said, as Czechoslovakia begins its "second attempt at 
democracy . . . we welcome to this castle another guest: a representative of 
German democracy, a messenger of peace, a messenger of decency, a messenger of 
truth, a messenger of humanity -- the announcer of the news that violence must 
never again win over freedom, lies over truth and evil over human lives." 
"It was a noble initiative of Vaclav Havel that he invited his neighbor from 
the Federal Republic of Germany on March 15 to Prague," responded Von 
Weizsaecker. "Each of us at home understands the profound symbolism of this 
peaceful step. We are taking it, in conviction, together." 
He spoke of the "profound injustice" that the Nazis perpetrated on 
Czechoslovakia and the "unspeakable suffering" of the World War that soon 
followed. And he said he was grateful "for the confidence you have shown us 
Germans by receiving us here." 
Von Weizsaecker, who is often cited as the likely first President of a 
reunified Germany, said of negotiations toward that end now under way: "We 
Germans know very well how important it is that through our unification, we 
should not cause among our neighbors the emergence of any new or old 
anxieties." 
And in the sentence that drew the strongest applause of his remarks from those 
assembled, Von Weizsaecker added: "We have no territorial claim towards any 
neighbors." 
