TEAMSTERS COUNTER U.S. OFFER IN SUIT; 
RACKETEERING CASE PROPOSAL ALLOWS LESS OUTSIDE CONTROL 
The Teamsters Union has made a counteroffer to the government in an attempt to 
settle the massive racketeering suit filed against the union by the Justice 
Department last June, according to knowledgeable sources. 
The union's proposal, as might be expected, would give the government 
considerably less control over the union than two Justice Department settlement 
offers that the Teamsters board rejected within the last five weeks. 
In fact, the Teamsters proposal is so different from the Justice Department's 
that one East Coast source said: "It's like you're trying to buy a beach house 
and they ask a million dollars and you come back with a counteroffer of 
$100,000." 
For example, the Teamsters assert in their proposal that the union has never 
been under the influence of the Mafia or any other criminal group. The 
government proposals would require the union to acknowledge that "there have 
been past problems with La Cosa Nostra corruption of various elements of the 
IBT (International Brotherhood of Teamsters)." 
The union's proposal does state, however, that it is the policy of the 
Teamsters and its officers not to knowingly involve any criminal group in the 
affairs of the union. 
No Resignations 
Another major difference is that no current members of the union's executive 
board would be required to resign under the Teamsters proposal. Four members of 
the board -- vice presidents Joseph Trerotola of New York; Joseph Morga of 
Hallandale, Fla.; Donald Peters of Chicago, and Theodore R. Cozza of Pittsburgh 
-- would be required to resign under the Justice Department proposals. 
The union's proposal was presented to the government Thursday by five Teamsters 
lawyers, including the union's general counsel James T. Grady, according to 
knowledgeable sources. 
Grady declined to return calls Friday. Randy M. Mastro, the assistant U.S. 
attorney in charge of the racketeering suit, said he would not acknowledge 
having received the Teamsters offer. He said simply, "the government is 
preparing for trial." 
A trial in the government's case is scheduled to begin in U.S. District Court 
in New York on March 13. The civil suit, filed under the Racketeer-Influenced 
and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), charged that the union is heavily 
influenced by organized crime and is no longer responsibly serving the 
interests of its membership. 
The suit, the first such action filed against an international union in U.S. 
history, asks U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein to oust the Teamsters top 
management, place the union under court trusteeship and bar certain alleged 
Mafia figures from any contact with the union or its officers. The Teamsters 
have decried the suit as an unconstitutional attack on freedom of association. 
Under the Teamsters proposal, the government could install an "observer," 
jointly chosen by the Justice Department and the union executive board, in the 
union headquarters until its convention 2 1/2 years from now. The observer 
would be paid by the Teamsters. 
The observer would have the power to attend Teamsters board meetings, have 
access to union documents and records, make written recommendations to the 
board on alleged incidents of corruption and have a paid staff. The authority 
of the monitor would cease after the union's 1991 convention. 
The government proposed having three administrators installed at the union, 
with considerably more power, including the right to discipline officers or 
employees, institute trusteeships over local unions and veto any expenditure of 
the national union's funds or the transfer of any of its property. The 
administrators would be in power through the union's 1996 convention and the 
Labor Department would supervise all Teamsters national elections through 2011. 
The Teamsters proposal also calls for the creation of a review board of three 
persons that would have the authority to hold hearings and implement solutions 
on alleged corruption in the union. The review board would be composed of one 
member appointed by the union, one by the government and one mutually. The 
board would operate at least until the union's 1991 convention and its work 
would continue beyond that time if delegates at that convention voted to keep 
it operating. 
Prospect of Reform 
The union's offer holds out the prospect of reforming Teamsters election 
procedures, but the proposed changes would have to be approved by delegates to 
the union's 1991 convention. If the delegates approved suggested changes to the 
union's constitution, there would be a direct referendum election of the 
union's top two officers by secret ballot. 
The government's proposal also calls for direct secret ballot election of the 
union's two top officers and also calls for the union's vice presidents to be 
chosen by secret ballot at the convention. There would be no change in how 
union vice presidents are chosen under the union proposal. 
Currently, the two top officers, president and secretary-treasurer, as well as 
16 union vice presidents, are chosen by majority vote of delegates raising 
their hands at the union convention, which is held once every five years. The 
method of selecting delegates to the convention would also be changed under 
both proposals. 
One source close to the Teamsters said the union's proposal was based, in part, 
on federal court decrees that that had been entered in RICO cases brought 
against local unions in New York. 
