POP BEAT / MIKE BOEHM: THE BURGHERS WHO KILLED ROCK 
If you're an Orange County rock music fan who would like more opportunities to 
see major nightclub concerts, you owe a debt of gratitude to the Laguna Beach 
City Council for saving you from your own most self-destructive instincts. 
Thanks to the council's unanimous vote last week denying Club Postnuclear 
permission to sell beer, there will be fewer shows in the county tempting you 
to risk your neck for rock 'n' roll. Without beer sales, there are likely to be 
few, if any, major live attractions at Postnuclear to risk your neck for, given 
the economics of running a concert club. 
This is how the five Laguna Beach council members see you, the rock fan who 
might patronize Club Postnuclear: 
If you are over 21, you will guzzle too much beer, drive onto treacherous 
Laguna Canyon Road (the club is at 775 Laguna Canyon Road) and wrap your car 
around the nearest utility pole. 
If you fall into the 18-and-over, college-age bracket that Postnuclear also 
admits, the council assumes that you will filch drinks illegally and meet the 
same fate as your elders. Even if you obey the law and don't drink, you will 
somehow be corrupted by all the drinking going on around you. 
"The canyon road, alcohol and youth do not mix," was Mayor Robert F. Gentry's 
pithy summation before the council voted to cut off Postnuclear's potential to 
become a first-rate, major-league rock club. 
What the council members did not say is that alcohol, youth and the canyon road 
already mix routinely in Laguna Beach, which so far has not re-enacted 
Prohibition. Every day, bars, restaurants, grocery stores and liquor shops 
throughout Laguna Beach -- and elsewhere in Orange County -- sell alcoholic 
drinks to people who travel on Laguna Canyon Road, the coastal city's main link 
to the freeways. 
There was no council motion last week to revoke their right to dispense alcohol 
or to remove the beer and wine concession from the popular Sawdust Festival, an 
all-ages event that sets up shop each summer on Laguna Canyon Road. 
If the Laguna City Council is right, perhaps other government bodies should 
play Big Brother and force the Celebrity Theatre, Anaheim Stadium, the Coach 
House, Irvine Meadows, Pacific Amphitheatre, South Coast Repertory and the 
Orange County Performing Arts Center to dry up before they wreak more death and 
destruction on the community. All of these major arts and entertainment venues 
admit patrons under 21 while serving alcoholic beverages. 
Thus singled out for wanting to do what so many others are already doing, it is 
not surprising that Club Postnuclear's owner, William (Max) Nee, is feeling 
like a scapegoat these days. 
Nee, in fact, is not a Spuds MacKenzie kind of guy. When the wealthy real 
estate investor opened Postnuclear in the summer, he did it with a no-alcohol, 
no-smoking policy. 
Nee thought that if he could make the club sufficiently comfortable and 
attractive, it would draw a crowd without smoke and alcohol and set an 
enlightened new precedent for the nightclub industry. 
Nee thought wrong. As time went on, it became apparent that to succeed with 
live, original rock, Postnuclear would need an adult clientele in addition to 
college-age audiences -- and that those adults would want a beer during the 
evening. 
Nee has proposed to sell beer with unusual care. Drinkers would first have to 
show identification and receive a glow-in-the-dark wristband. Nee promised to 
add staff members and to train them how to serve alcohol responsibly, slowing 
or cutting service to those showing signs of becoming drunk. 
He also pledged to serve free non-alcoholic drinks to "designated drivers" who 
agree to abstain while others in their party drink beer. Furthermore, he 
promised to stop beer sales and start dispensing free coffee a half hour before 
closing. If all that failed to keep patrons sober, he proposed to send tipsy 
people home in a cab, with Postnuclear picking up part of the fare. 
It was pointed out to the council that if Nee failed to live up to his pledges, 
or if problems arose, officials could simply revoke his beer permit. 
Not good enough. 
All of this elicited not a single question, not one specific comment or 
substantive observation, from any member of the City Council during the Feb. 21 
hearing. 
Afterward, Nee, who is of Chinese extraction, wondered whether he might have 
been the victim of "subtle racism." 
"It was like a jury in the South in the '60s," he said this week. "They already 
know you're guilty. It's just a matter of going through the procedures. The 
evidence was never heard or discussed, or even acknowledged." 
Gentry denied this week that racism had entered into it. "Ethnic considerations 
were not at all a part of our decision," he said. 
But if racial discrimination is not involved here, cultural discrimination 
surely is. 
What makes Club Postnuclear suspect to the City Council is not just the sale of 
beer, it's the 499-capacity club's aim of promoting adventurous, new rock music 
on a major scale. For a substantial segment of the county community, that means 
cultural enrichment. 
But for the powers that be (and on the Laguna Beach City Council the powers 
average 52 years old), rock is something foreign and not easily controlled, 
something that signifies rebellion. Its sound is unruly; its messages challenge 
many of the conventions and beliefs of the county's burgher elite, for whom 
quiet, tidy affluence is the ideal. 
This was the vision of Laguna Beach that Gentry, an associate dean of students 
at UC Irvine, set forth in an interview last year: "Our city has always 
attracted non-traditional people, independent thinkers who wanted a different 
quality of life. We're not just another suburb, but a real town with a very 
unique character." 
On a short list of independent thinkers whom Postnuclear has brought to Laguna 
Beach in recent months, you find Jamaican Joe Higgs, a pioneer of reggae music; 
Canadian Lillian Allen, respected for her socially conscious poems set to 
reggae, and Scotsman Steve Bronski, a leader in the musical expression of gay 
pride and dignity. 
Given a chance to thrive, Club Postnuclear might have continued bringing 
vibrant, unusual examples of rock culture to Laguna Beach. But the City 
Council, like so much of Orange County officialdom, seems content to let the 
community remain just another suburb. 
Sleep tight, tidy burghers. Don't let the rock fiends bite. 
