CHINA AND INDIA ASK AID TO MEET RULES ON OZONE 
Declaring that their future standard of living is at stake, two major 
developing countries, China and India, said Monday that they want additional 
aid from industrialized countries before they are willing to sign an 
international accord to protect the ozone layer. 
In strongly worded requests before delegates from 124 nations attending an 
ozone conference here, they challenged industrialized countries to establish an 
international fund to enable them to switch to more expensive but 
environmentally desirable chemicals that do not erode the ozone layer. 
Until that time comes, they indicated, it will be difficult for them to sign 
the Montreal Protocol, an international accord that calls for a 50% reduction 
in the production and use of chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, by the turn of the 
century. 
Call by Thatcher, Bush 
President Bush and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher have called for 
even more drastic action, a phasing out of all CFCs by the year 2000. 
CFCs are extensively used in refrigeration, air conditioning and industrial 
processes considered essential by developing countries in raising their 
standard of living. But scientists say they are also destroying the Earth's 
ozone layer, which protects plant and animal life from ultraviolet radiation 
from the sun. 
The positions taken by China and India are considered crucial to the long-term 
prospects of successfully reducing the threat to the ozone layer posed by CFCs. 
While the two countries now account for about 10% of the world's production and 
use of CFCs, the potential for growth as China and India industrialize to meet 
the expectations of burgeoning populations is considered immense. 
Just hours after the conference adjourned, the developing countries received a 
royal endorsement from Britain's Prince Charles during a dinner for conference 
delegates at the British Museum. 
In a speech that Buckingham Palace said the heir to the British throne 
considered one of the most important of his life, Charles said he realizes the 
dilemma faced by developing countries. 
"While we simply must eliminate CFCs . . . we must not do so by forcing 
developing nations to forgo some of the benefits of industrialization which 
developed countries have enjoyed for so long," the prince said. 
"In this regard, the call by developing nations to the developed ones to 
provide tangible assistance, for instance through appropriate technology 
transfer, is a powerful one," he said. 
At the same time, the prince challenged political leaders to act promptly to 
save the ozone shield. 
"Since the Industrial Revolution, human beings have been upsetting that balance 
(of nature), persistently choosing the short-term options and to hell with the 
long-term repercussions," he said. 
"It seems to me that countless numbers of people are looking to their leaders 
and representatives to take bold decisions now -- decisions which our 
descendants, yet unborn, will thank us for -- and not put off those critical 
decisions that will ultimately cause our grandchildren to curse us," he said. 
During the meeting, held at a conference center directly across the street from 
Westminster Abbey, Western nations said they are generally sympathetic to the 
pleas for assistance. 
U.S. to Alter Aid Priorities 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly told 
reporters that the United States plans to "alter our priorities of foreign 
assistance." More emphasis will be placed on urging the World Bank and other 
international lending agencies to take the environment into account, Reilly 
said. 
Without being specific, he also said the Bush Administration will look at its 
own foreign aid policies. But he cautioned that in view of the federal budget 
deficit, more funds for global environmental concerns are unlikely to be added 
to the budget. Instead, he said, existing funds will be diverted from other 
programs. 
Reilly said that Japan and the 12-nation European Community, which both enjoy 
budget surpluses, should also contribute. 
Earlier, India made it clear that increasing foreign assistance for 
environmental causes at the expense of other aid is unacceptable. 
Z. R. Ansari, the Indian environmental minister, told the conference: "Any 
reduction in these resources for whatever reason would mean that the poor of 
these countries will have to wait longer for the promised freedom from hunger 
and poverty. Today, the poor are no more prepared to wait, and there will be a 
social upheaval if they are asked to wait any longer." 
Ansari also charged that industrialized countries are paying little attention 
to a provision in the Montreal Protocol that requires them to offer technical 
assistance to developing countries. 
"I would urge you to consider whether it is fair for the governments of the 
developed world to sign a protocol which contains provisions for technical 
assistance . . . but wash their hands off when it comes to the implementation 
of its provisions," he declared. 
Blunt Talk 
Minutes earlier, in unusually blunt language, Liu Mingpu, the Chinese 
environmental protection commissioner, called for an international fund that 
would allow China to receive technology being developed in the West free of 
charge. 
"Such an approach would be preferable to that of engaging in a futile exercise 
of imposing on developing countries still suffering from famine and economic 
hardship (and) telling them what to do or what not to do," Liu said. 
Thirty-one nations have signed and ratified the Montreal Protocol. On Monday, 
Iceland, Poland, Gambia, Turkey, Tonga, Brazil and Ethiopia announced they will 
sign the accord. Six other nations -- Austria, Hungary, Malaysia, Trinidad and 
Tobago, the Philippines and Zambia -- said Sunday that they will sign. 
At the same time, the Soviet delegation surprised the conference by declaring 
there is insufficient scientific evidence to justify speeding the phase-out of 
CFCs as proposed by the United States and the European Community. 
"Any decision taken under the (Montreal Protocol) should be well grounded and 
have a firm scientific basis," said Vladimir Zakharov, the ranking Soviet 
delegate. 
The Soviets said that the depleted ozone levels found over the Soviet Union 
were caused by localized weather conditions. 
The Soviet view was roundly disputed by UC Irvine Prof. Sherwood Rowland, who, 
with his colleague, Mario J. Molina, first warned that CFCs are destroying the 
ozone layer. Rowland told The Times that between 1969 and 1986, the winter 
season ozone loss over Siberia and Leningrad averaged 10%, and 6% to 7% during 
that period over Central Asia. 
U.S. officials called Zakharov's statement surprising and speculated that 
economic concerns are behind the Soviet stance. 
Sen. Albert Gore Jr. (D-Tenn.), chairman of the Senate Science and Technology 
Subcommittee, told reporters the Soviets enjoy a special provision in the 
existing protocol that allows them to build a new CFC plant, already under 
construction. 
"Then they pretend there is some uncertainty about the basic science, which 
there is not. . . . It's unbecoming," Gore told reporters. 
Reilly was more charitable. "It's an evolving picture," he said of the state of 
scientific knowledge. He said the Soviets may require more time to assess the 
data. 
But he concluded: "We believe in the United States that the scientific 
information does compel a faster phase-out of CFCs." 
