UCI, COUNTY SETTLE DISPUTE OVER ACCESS ROAD 
The County Board of Supervisors and UCI Medical Center apparently have settled 
a dispute over a road that both sides consider essential to their plans for 
more than $200 million in expanded facilities in the city of Orange, county 
officials said Thursday. 
As part of the proposed settlement, the University of California Board of 
Regents has agreed not to sue Orange County in an attempt to block a proposed 
expansion of the Theo Lacy Branch Jail in Orange. 
The supervisors last December voted to sue UCI over a parking structure it was 
building at the medical center in Orange, saying the structure would add 
unnecessary traffic and congestion to the access road that the county believed 
it owned. In a move county officials construed as retaliatory, the regents in 
January authorized a lawsuit against the county to halt the Theo Lacy 
expansion, a key element in the county's master plan to ease severe 
overcrowding in county jails. That suit was never filed. 
"It was two behemoths on a collision course over traffic and congestion," said 
Dan Woolridge, an aide to Supervisor Don R. Roth, who initiated the county 
action against UCI. "The squabble over the access road mushroomed into 
something much bigger." 
In the end, the county agreed that UCI had some legal claim to the road and 
therefore has rights to use the private, four-lane road that divides university 
and county facilities east of the City Shopping Center in an area known as the 
Manchester Complex. Initially, county officials argued that UCI had begun 
construction of a new 700-vehicle parking structure next to the access road 
without consulting the county. They filed a lawsuit requiring UCI to assess the 
level of traffic the structure would generate. 
But the suit will be dropped if the Board of Supervisors approves the 
settlement at its next meeting Tuesday. The agreement also renames the road 
Dawn Way and calls for the two sides to share the cost of maintaining the road. 
Furthermore, it sets parking limits for the county and UCI and allows for 
widening of the road if needed in the future. 
County officials intend to build a pair of multistory parking structures for 
more than 2,350 cars, while UCI has indicated it may build an additional 
high-rise parking garage for 2,200 cars. 
"It does look like we've reached a settlement," said Leon Schwartz, vice 
chancellor of administration and business services at UCI. "Both sides have 
come out of this with honor. The process enabled both of us to better 
understand each other's plans for that area." 
Roth said he was relieved that the flap did not go further in the courts. 
"Anytime you can settle a dispute without spending taxpayers' money in court, 
it's a good day," Roth said. 
County's Plans 
In addition to the jail expansion at Theo Lacy, the county is planning a new 
juvenile court facility for the Manchester Complex, which is bordered by the 
Garden Grove Freeway on the south, the Santa Ana River on the west and Chapman 
Avenue on the north. County facilities already at the complex include the 
Juvenile Justice Center and the Orangewood Children's Home. 
Despite his relief over the settlement, Roth expressed concern about the 
continuing challenge from the city of Orange over the Theo Lacy expansion. City 
officials say the expansion will cause traffic problems and jeopardize public 
safety. The project is intended to increase the capacity of Theo Lacy Branch 
Jail from 622 beds to 1,326. 
Roth said that he and Sheriff Brad Gates have met several times recently with 
Orange officials but that no agreement has been reached. 
"The longer we draw this out, the greater risk to the general public," Roth 
warned. "We have inmates who are spending only enough time in jail to get their 
pictures and fingerprints taken. We need to expand that facility." 
