FILM FESTIVAL GIVES SOVIETS LOOK AT JEWISH LIFE IN WEST; 
CULTURE: 'IT SEEMS REALLY OK TO BE JEWISH,' ONE VIEWER SAYS AFTER SEEING THE 
FIRST AMERICAN MOVIE. 
Soviet Jews, so uncertain of what it means to be Jewish after decades of being 
denied the right of religious and cultural expression, are seeing how Jews 
live, work and love in America, in Israel and in Western Europe through a 
weeklong festival of Jewish films here. 
"It seems really OK to be Jewish, really so human," a 24-year-old literature 
student, Mikhail A. Shtein, said Saturday as he watched the festival's opening 
film, "Crossing Delancey." 
"In the film, people recognize, of course, that they are Jewish. But this is 
not a burden, and they even celebrate it. . . . To us, this is amazing." 
In "Crossing Delancey," a 1988 romantic comedy directed by Joan Micklin Silver, 
the Jewish heroine tussles with her grandmother and the neighborhood matchmaker 
-- and her own conscience -- over whether to accept the proposal of a man they 
had found for her, a purveyor of kosher dill pickles, over the attentions of a 
famous novelist and another man who only visits when his wife is out of town. 
"This is everyday life, not great drama," Shtein said. "What amazes us in this 
film is that being Jewish is quite natural. . . . They accept it, others around 
them accept it, and life goes on." 
The festival, a joint project of the San Francisco Jewish Film Festival and the 
American-Soviet Film Initiative in Moscow, is intended precisely to "challenge 
all stereotypes and images of Jews," Deborah Kaufman, its director, said at the 
opening Saturday evening. 
Roman Spector, a prominent Jewish activist in Moscow and one of the founders of 
the new Confederation of Jewish Organizations and Religious Communities, added, 
"We Soviet Jews now have a real possibility to become acquainted with the life 
of Jews elsewhere -- in Israel, in Europe and America, elsewhere in the 
Diaspora -- from which we were cut off for so long." 
The isolation of Jews here led to such a loss of self-identity, other Jewish 
activists said, that it is likely to endure for a generation or two. 
For Esther Beilin, 46, an economist, the festival is an opportunity not just to 
glimpse at how individuals view their Jewishness -- "it's hardly an 
affliction," she said -- but how Jewish communities in other countries have 
managed to grow and develop where those in the Soviet Union, which has the 
world's third-largest Jewish population after the United States and Israel, has 
been so contained. 
"Many of the glories of modern Judaism are rooted here in Russia, and we know 
nothing about them," Beilin said. "This is more than a pity -- it is our shame. 
. . ." 
Janis Plotkin, the festival's co-director, said that a major goal of the San 
Francisco festival in bringing the films to Moscow was helping Soviet Jews 
recover both the personal and community sense of their Jewish identity. 
"We use these films to reach out to Jewish people and people of many other 
backgrounds to show them what is important in Jewish history, culture and 
community affairs," Plotkin said. "By sharing a film together, we create a 
community, and community helps create a more human approach to understanding 
the diversity of cultures in the Soviet Union." 
Twenty-nine films from eight countries will be shown at the festival. 
