MARYLAND HIT BY PENALTIES FROM NCAA 
The men's basketball program at Maryland was banned today from 1991 and 1992 
postseason tournaments, prohibited from appearing on television next season and 
placed on three years' probation for major violations of NCAA rules. 
The university must also return $407,378 of its earnings from the 1988 NCAA 
tournament in which the Terrapins advanced to the second round, the NCAA said 
in a statement. 
The penalties are less than the minimum prescribed for such violations, but the 
NCAA Committee on Infractions deemed Maryland's case unique, saying the school 
had conducted a thorough investigation of the program, cooperated fully with 
investigators, recommended substantial penalties at a hearing and fired members 
of the basketball staff who had violated the rules. 
Maryland remains eligible for postseason play this year. Gene Corrigan, 
commissioner of the Atlantic Coast Conference, said he did not see how Maryland 
could play in next year's Atlantic Coast Conference tournament because of the 
television ban. 
No limits were placed on recruiting visits, and the number of scholarships for 
the next two years will be limited to 13, a penalty recommended by the 
university itself. The NCAA could have severely restricted recruiting and 
eliminated scholarships for several years. 
The NCAA cited the university's "failure to meet the principles of 
institutional control and rules compliance, which are among the fundamental 
principles of the association and its members" 
University President William Kirwin said the school is disappointed that the 
penalties are so severe and will appeal. He said the sanctions would cost the 
school $3 million in lost revenue. 
"The university deeply regrets, indeed is embarrassed by, its violations of 
NCAA rules," he said. "It accepts full responsibility and believes it should 
receive appropriate penalties. I'd like to voice our great disappointment at 
the severity of penalties imposed by the infractions committee." 
He said Maryland's cooperation in the investigation appeared to make no 
difference in the severity of the penalties, nor did Maryland's previous 
unblemished record in major violations cases. 
"They have imposed all but the most insignificant of sanctions. They could have 
imposed two years of probation and a one-year ban on postseason tournament 
appearances," Kirwin said. "I'm left to wonder how different the sanctions 
would be had we had repeated violations, been uncooperative and not taken 
substantive action." 
Maryland has 15 days to appeal to the NCAA Council, which meets in mid-April. 
The sanctions penalize Maryland for the 18 rules violations that include 
inducing recruits with free clothing, providing a car for a student athlete and 
selling complimentary ACC tournament tickets. All of the violations occurred 
during the three-year tenure of Coach Bob Wade and were uncovered by an NCAA 
investigation that began last February 
Wade was forced to resign last May. The school bought out the final two years 
of Wade's five-year contract. 
