EXPLORING AN EXPLORER'S SEXUAL LIFE 
I am writing in response to Spero Kessaris' Feb. 25 letter, in which he 
condemns director Bob Rafelson for suggesting that Sir Richard Burton, the hero 
of Rafelson's film "Mountains of the Moon," might have had a homosexual 
relationship with John Hanning Speke. 
Like Kessaris, I am a "Burtonophile," one of the secretive company who believes 
this great man of the 19th Century represents everything lacking from our 
world: an insatiable curiosity for the unknown, unbounded intellectual and 
physical courage, a swashbuckling style. 
We tend to be possessive about Burton, which is why we all loathe his wife, 
Isabel, who felt the same way. In fact, she was so determined to re-create him 
that on the night of his death in 1890 she burned thousands of his papers and 
manuscripts, including his private journal. This journal might have provided 
the answers to hundreds of questions about Burton's life, including whether he 
ever engaged in homosexual acts. 
We know he had an intense interest in sexual customs -- witness his 
translations of the Kamasutra and "The Perfumed Garden," as well as his 
treatise on homosexuality, "The Sotadic Zone." We know that while in the Indian 
army he prepared a detailed report on the homosexual brothels in Kashmir, and 
this report later ruined his fortunes in the army -- his superiors wondered how 
he could have known so much about these vices without participating in them. 
Lastly, we know that Burton happily flouted all social or sexual mores -- if he 
wanted to sleep with a man, he would have done so and then blithely written a 
text on the experience. 
That his more rigid wife chose to destroy his journals gives a hint as to their 
possible contents. 
As for John Hanning Speke, he had no interest in women, and his descriptions of 
the sexual exploits of the African chieftains he visited does have a strong 
trace of revulsion for their heterosexual lasciviousness. Certainly his 
relationship with Burton was strongly emotional -- and there is no more reason 
to assume that there couldn't have been a sexual element than there is to 
assume there was one. 
PETER SAGAL 
West Hollywood 
