'GENERATIONS' DRAWS BLACKS DESPITE RATINGS 
A year after NBC introduced "Generations" as the first daytime soap opera to 
center around a black family, the program has won praise for its presentation 
of black issues but remains locked in last place in the ratings. 
According to A. C. Nielsen ratings released last week, "Generations," which 
celebrates its first anniversary Tuesday, ranks 12th out of the 12 daily soaps 
aired by the three major networks and 19th out of 21 daytime programs. It 
reaches about 2 million households a day -- about a third of the audience 
garnered by the highest ranked soap, CBS' "The Young and the Restless." 
Airing weekdays at 11:30 a.m., "Generations" chronicles the lives of two 
wealthy Chicago families, the Marshalls, who are black, and the Whitmores, who 
are white. The families have been linked for three generations -- since the 
days when the matriarch of the Marshalls worked as a maid for the matriarch of 
the Whitmores. 
Besides the typical soap fare of relationships, money and personal tragedy, 
"Generations" gives viewers a dose of themes not normally seen in daytime 
drama. Last year, one of the characters struggled with sickle-cell anemia, a 
disease that strikes blacks, and the current story line involves racial hate 
crimes that befall the Marshalls when they move into an all-white, upper-crust 
neighborhood. 
As television programs go, observed Gerald Horne, chairman of black studies at 
the University of California at Santa Barbara, "Generations" has made progress 
in portraying the black experience. 
"Relative to some of the images that have been projected -- for example, 
'Driving Miss Daisy,' which portrays blacks in an antiquated manner -- then at 
least 'Generations' is a step forward," Horne said. 
Where it falls short, Horne said, is in the fact that the Marshalls, because of 
their wealth, are less than typical. 
"I think 'Generations' and the other television programs have not really 
captured the vast majority of the black American experience," Horne said. "They 
either portray the extreme underclass or the very wealthy blacks. Most blacks 
are somewhere in between." 
NBC executives insist that the program's low ratings are to be expected after 
only one year on the air and say that the network is as committed to 
"Generations" as it was to "Hill Street Blues" in that groundbreaking series's 
difficult first years. 
Soap operas are a daily habit, and before viewers will bring a new show into 
their lives, they have to be slowly weaned from other programs, explained Sally 
Sussman, the program's creator and executive producer. She said that the show 
will not be changed to court viewers. 
"We came on the air as a landmark show fully integrated, and we've kept that 
commitment even in the face of low ratings," she said. "We just hope the 
audience will grow with us." 
One factor in the show's favor comes, ironically, from the very obstacles that 
blacks face in television. Because the job market for black actors is so 
limited, the program has managed to snag and hold on to a number of fairly 
well-known players, including Taurean Blacque, whose credits include "Hill 
Street Blues" and "The White Shadow," and Richard Roundtree, who starred in the 
"Shaft" movies of the 1970s. 
"For a long time, I've been pushed into stereotypical roles as policemen" in 
action films, said Roundtree. "I wanted to do some drama." 
"My agent turned ('Generations') down two times," said Blacque, who plays Henry 
Marshall, the entrepreneurial scion of the Marshall family and owner of a 
string of ice cream parlors. "Coming off a hit show like 'Hill Street Blues,' 
they didn't think I wanted to do a soap. But, when I read it, I saw what it 
could do for me as a black person and what I could portray to the community." 
The program's most recent addition is daytime Emmy winner Debbi Morgan, who 
left a long-running stint on ABC's "All My Children" to join the fledgling 
soap. 
For these actors, the appeal is simple: "Most of what's out there is garbage," 
said Blacque. 
"The younger generation, when they see (negative roles) all the time, they 
think maybe that is something we ought to do -- be a pimp, sell drugs, drive a 
big Cadillac," he said. "I think our responsibility to the younger people 
coming up is to project a positive image." 
NBC's motives in creating "Generations" were not entirely altruistic, however. 
Statistics compiled by Nielsen Media Research show that blacks watch an average 
of 55% more daytime television than other groups. And, before "Generations," 
NBC's daytime programming garnered fewer black viewers than the other 
networks'. 
"It was quite obvious that we were not reaching as much of the black audience 
as the other guys, the other networks," said NBC spokesman Gene Walsh. 
"Generations" ranks about equal with the other networks' major soaps in terms 
of audience composition, with 21% of its audience black. It leads NBC's other 
soaps: Just 11% of "Days of Our Lives" viewers are black, 12% of "Another 
World" viewers and 16% of "Santa Barbara" viewers. 
"One of the reasons the networks have been running more black shows and more 
black characters is (that) blacks disproportionately don't have access to VCRs 
and cable television and satellites," said Horne, the UCSB professor. 
That means they are more likely than whites to watch network advertising and 
buy the products offered for sale, Horne said. 
Ron Dobson, vice president of daytime sales for NBC, said that while 
"Generations" has not attracted advertising aimed specifically at blacks, the 
increased percentage of black viewers -- even with the show's low ratings -- 
has meant an increase in ad revenues. 
This year, commercials on "Generations" will cost 45% more than when the 
program started, Dobson said. And, even at its inception, advertisers were 
willing to pay 24% more for an ad on "Generations" than they were for an ad on 
"Scrabble," the game show previously aired in its time slot. 
One reason "Generations" is appealing to advertisers despite its low ratings is 
that black households have 13% more women in them than other households, and 
it's women that the advertisers are trying to reach, Dobson said. 
While "Generations" has afforded black actors opportunities not generally found 
in television, the people behind the scenes are mostly white. Sussman is white, 
as are four of the show's six writers. 
"I haven't found any more," Sussman said. "I don't know of any other black soap 
opera writers." 
She said that she would be open to a Writers Guild apprentice program for 
minorities and women, but "they've never contacted me." 
Blacque hopes this situation will change. "On both levels -- behind the scenes 
and in the decision-making process, the writing staff -- of course there should 
be more (blacks)," the actor said. "Because you need a black person to really 
get to the essence of our experience as black people." 
