6 MORE NATIONS AGREE TO SIGN OZONE ACCORD; 
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OPENS IN LONDON WITH FLURRY OF ACTION ON CURBING 
CHEMICALS 
Confronted with mounting evidence that the Earth faces an unprecedented 
environmental crisis, six more nations announced Sunday that they will sign an 
international accord to rid the atmosphere of ozone-destroying chemicals. 
The six nations that said they will sign the landmark Montreal Protocol are 
Austria, Hungary, Malaysia, Trinidad and Tobago, the Philippines and Zambia. 
The protocol, first approved in 1987 and signed and ratified by 32 countries, 
commits industrialized nations to cut their use and production of 
ozone-destroying chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) by 50% by the turn of the century. 
Developing countries are given an additional 10 years to comply. 
Meanwhile, the ranking environmental official of the 12-nation European 
Community disclosed that he will recommend that Europe go a step further than 
it did three days ago in Brussels, when community ministers surprised both the 
United States and Britain by endorsing a total phase-out of the chemicals by 
the turn of the century, a position Washington took the following day. 
EC Environment Commissioner Carlo Ripa Di Meana said he will push for a 
phase-out as early as 1996 or 1997, a position strongly endorsed by private 
environmental groups. 
Mexico and Switzerland also announced Sunday that they will accelerate the 
phase-out of CFCs, and Japan announced that it will host a major Asian-Pacific 
ozone conference next fall to enlist more support for the protocol. 
The fast-breaking developments came on the opening day of an international 
ozone conference called by British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. They were 
viewed as evidence of growing diplomatic momentum for prompt action to end the 
chemical disintegration of the ozone layer that protects all life on Earth from 
lethal levels of ultraviolet radiation from the sun. 
In the words of Swiss delegate Flavio Cotti, "The time has come for a universal 
response to a universal challenge." 
Pressure to Sign 
Despite careful disclaimers by Thatcher before the three-day conference that 
non-signatory governments would not be urged to make commitments to sign the 
protocol, it was clear that they were coming under intense pressure from many 
of the 124 nations in attendance. 
President Daniel Arap Moi of Kenya, who delivered the keynote address, 
declared: "Let us all accept the fact that the threat to the ozone layer is a 
global problem whose disastrous effects have no national boundaries. It calls 
for a mobilization of political will, international cooperation and genuine and 
equitable sacrifice from all of us." 
Moi's remarks as the president of a developing country took on added 
significance because many of the holdouts are Third World nations that either 
view ozone depletion and global warming as issues which pale in importance to 
the need for economic development, or want assurances before signing of 
technological and economic assistance to help them comply. 
Among the developing nations of most concern that have not signed the protocol 
are China and India. In addition, delegates from the Soviet Union said Sunday 
that more scientific data is needed before the Kremlin will consent to 
strengthening the protocol, which it has signed. 
Third World Development 
A number of countries, including the European Community group, said there is 
concern that as industrialized nations phase out CFCs, developing countries 
will take up the slack and defeat global efforts to enjoin the ozone 
destruction. 
Irving Mintzer, a research scientist with the Washington-based World Resources 
Institute, said in a recent study that if just four developing countries -- 
China, India, Indonesia and Brazil -- increase their domestic consumption of 
CFCs to the levels allowed by the protocol, CFC production on a worldwide basis 
would double from the 1986 base level. 
For that reason, both U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator 
William K. Reilly and Di Meana of the European Community said that economic and 
technological aid would be necessary to help developing countries switch to 
safer substitutes. 
While Reilly could not be specific as to funds, Di Meana said that a portion of 
the $10 billion that the community budgets for aid to 66 African, Caribbean and 
Pacific states would be earmarked for this purpose. Reilly disclosed that the 
United States has already opened talks with China and would do so with India. 
Thatcher Remarks 
In her welcoming address, Thatcher said that environmental issues have come to 
preoccupy governments and people more than ever before. She added that she is 
convinced that "we need to go further and act faster" than the protocol now 
requires. The targeted chemicals -- chlorofluorocarbons used in refrigeration, 
air conditioning, cleaning computer chips and in the manufacture of foam 
products -- are destroying the Earth's ozone layer. 
Another category of destructive chemicals are halons, which are used in fire 
suppressants. The protocol does not require a rollback in the use of halons, 
only a freeze to 1986 levels. 
Reilly announced Sunday that the Bush Administration, in calling for a total 
phase-out of the chemicals, included halons as well as chlorofluorocarbons. 
That was not made clear when the President made the announcement last Thursday 
in Washington. 
Reilly also denied that the Bush Administration was allowing itself a loophole 
on missing the phase-out deadline by conditioning it on the availability of 
environmentally sound alternatives. 
Some environmentalists have warned that without a certain deadline, industry 
may slow its pace in finding replacements. 
Reilly said that based on talks with industry leaders, he is confident 
substitutes will be found. 
Du Pont Co., one of the world's leading producers of CFCs, announced Sunday 
that it has two "long-term candidates" for replacing CFCs that are used as 
cleaning agents by electronic companies. 
Cleaning agents, used in the production of computer chips, account for about 
20% of the world market for CFCs. Du Pont Group Vice President Archie W. Dunham 
said in London that with the latest chemical candidates, the company now has 
good substitute prospects for all major CFC markets, including refrigeration, 
blowing agents, cleaning agents and aerosols. 
Danger to Continue 
Because of previous and current emissions of these chemicals, it is likely that 
the ozone layer will continue to be thinned. Scientists say that if action is 
undertaken quickly, the ozone depletion can be reduced but not reversed for at 
least 100 years. 
Before 1935, there were no CFCs in the atmosphere. But since the mid-1970s, 
atmospheric concentrations have grown annually at an average rate of 5% to 7% 
according to the EPA. There is early evidence that halons have increased at the 
rate of 20% per year during the past decade, the EPA said. 
The life of various CFCs range from 75 to 120 years, and they provoke what UC 
Irvine Prof. Sherwood Rowland called a chain reaction that destroys the ozone 
shield, with one CFC molecule destroying 100,000 ozone molecules. It was 
Rowland and a colleague who first warned in 1974 of the danger posed to the 
ozone layer by these chemicals. 
"Whatever happens to the atmosphere is going to stay for a long time," Rowland 
told a meeting here of environmentalists that preceded the Thatcher conference. 
Since a team of British scientists discovered the so-called ozone hole over the 
Antarctic in 1985, similar but less severe phenomena have been detected over 
the Arctic. 
More recently, scientists have found that there are enough chemical pollutants 
in the Arctic to deplete the ozone layer there at the staggering rate of 1% a 
day if climatic conditions are right. 
Disturbing Findings 
The Arctic findings are particularly disturbing because, unlike the South Pole, 
a good deal of the world's population resides in the northern latitudes. 
The U.S. EPA study graphically pointed out the dangers of a thinning ozone 
shield -- heightened risks of damage to the human eye, including cataracts, 
potential impairment of the human immune system and additional skin cancers. 
