OUT OF THE MOUTHS OF BABES; 
LANGUAGES ABOUND IN SAN DIEGO'S DOYLE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 
A typical morning at Doyle Elementary School finds instructional aide Nobu Baum 
talking and writing in Japanese both about that language's ideograms and about 
English consonant combinations for a group of Japanese first- and 
second-graders. 
Across the hall, a second aide, Bat-Sheva Zimran, discusses math and grammar 
problems in Hebrew with a couple of second-grade Israeli students. 
In Victoria Ingalls' regular kindergarten class, students from Japan, China, 
Korea, Denmark and Germany -- to name just a few countries -- read books and 
piece together puzzles with their American peers under watchful eyes of parent 
volunteers from Denmark, Japan and from the school's Golden Triangle 
neighborhood. 
And at recess, there is the potential babble of at least 21 different languages 
on the playgrounds. 
Unique Among Schools 
The international world of Doyle Elementary, tucked away among large apartment 
and condominium complexes just east of UC San Diego, is unique among schools in 
San Diego County and equaled only at a few similar campuses across the country. 
By virtue of its location, Doyle draws most of its population from among the 
large numbers of university graduate students and scholars at UCSD, Scripps 
Clinic, the La Jolla Veterans Hospital and adjacent research institutions who 
live in the attractive, nearby off-campus residential developments. 
Among those scholars are about 2,000 foreign residents, an increasing number 
with young children who qualify for public school education, the same as the 
offspring of American university scholars and company employees living in the 
same La Jolla Colony and University Towne Centre neighborhoods. 
The result is a school of children of highly educated and highly motivated 
parents, but where up to one-third of the 600 students may be from foreign 
lands and who come with little or no English preparation. 
"The unique richness of cultures and languages you find here is really 
extraordinary," Doyle Principal Jerry Jordan said. 
Said kindergarten teacher Ingalls, one of four English-as-a-second-language 
(ESL) teachers: "On the average, the foreign kids are here from six months to 
two years, but they pick up a tremendous amount of English in a very, very 
short time. 
"Traditionally, most teaching material for limited English-speaking children is 
aimed at an immigrant population, those children who may not have had much 
education in their native land, and who may not have had educated parents. 
"Here we've got mainly a college- or medicine-related foreign population, where 
at least one parent is highly educated and quite proficient in reading or 
writing English, and who came from outstanding educational facilities in their 
own countries." 
The largest number of foreign students are from Japan and Israel. The school 
has a growing number of Spanish-speaking students, some the offspring of 
foreign scholars and others the sons and daughters of workers in the Golden 
Triangle commercial and hotel complexes. In addition, a number of upwardly 
mobile Vietnamese and Laotian immigrant families have moved into area 
apartments during the last two years, adding to the cultural mix. 
Typical Lessons 
There are smaller numbers of students from Sweden, Korea, Portugal, Brazil, 
Finland, Iran, the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany and Hungary, with the breadth 
of international representation varying somewhat from year to year. 
All students are placed in regular classrooms at their grade level, and those 
who have limited English ability -- the vast majority -- also receive intensive 
ESL instruction, which emphasizes speaking and listening comprehension. In a 
typical lesson the other day, ESL aide Latanya Martin led five kindergarten 
students -- from Brazil, Vietnam, Japan, Iran and Israel -- through a 
conversation lesson using "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs." 
Further, the school offers native-language teaching in Japanese and Hebrew for 
up to an hour each day because of the large number of Japanese and Israeli 
students, instruction that administrators admit is highly unusual but 
nevertheless valuable and justified under the district's second-language 
curriculum. All of the district's native-language programs at other schools are 
in Spanish or one of several Indochinese languages. 
Language specialists say that primary-language instruction -- at the same time 
that the students are receiving English the rest of the day -- helps to make 
the transition to English comprehension easier. That's because the students 
become literate in their first language and therefore make a more natural 
switch to English, administrators say. They add that it also allows students to 
learn new concepts in math and social studies areas without having to sit 
through all-English instruction that they would not understand initially. 
"If you learn to read in your own language, the transition to a second is much 
easier," said Alex Belliaeff, a second-language resource teacher who helps with 
the Doyle curriculum. But Belliaeff is sometimes asked why such special 
assistance is offered to students who probably will be in the United States for 
an average of two years, as opposed to primary-language instruction for 
students who have immigrated permanently. 
"By law, we cannot ask parents whether the children are going back to Israel or 
Japan, or wherever, in a year or two," Belliaeff said, "just like we don't ask 
parents of Spanish-speaking children if they are going to return to Mexico at 
some point. 
"If the child has need for primary-language help while they are learning 
English, and the parent agrees to it, then we offer it as we have the resources 
to do it, on a 'pull-out' basis." 
The district does not have funds to provide primary language teaching in most 
cases where there are only a few students from a single country, and it finds 
that many European students already come with some English understanding, 
Belliaeff said. But it will try to add courses in Vietnamese, Chinese or any 
other language at Doyle if the need develops, he added. 
The parents of the Israeli and Japanese students at Doyle also see benefits 
from the Doyle curriculum for their children when they return to their home 
countries. 
"The school district goal, of course, is to help the students achieve better in 
English," Zimran, the Hebrew aide, said. 
"When you know your own language well enough, when you know what nouns and 
verbs are, for example, it's easier then to get the English," Zimran added, 
referring to the progress made by her own children, one at Doyle and the second 
now at Standley Junior High School. 
"But of course, we want the children to keep their Hebrew up, through grammar, 
spelling and literature. So we also read Jack London, Mark Twain, Hemingway in 
Hebrew for the upper-grade kids." 
Japanese-language teacher Baum said she helps the students prepare for the 
regular English reading program by emphasizing recognition of English consonant 
and vowel sounds, but she also provides advanced math and social studies 
enrichment similar to what the students would receive in Japan. And she 
stresses the complicated Japanese writing system, with a classroom wall banner 
in Japanese exhorting the students to "Memorize Kanji," the 1,850 ideograms 
that are the basis of the Japanese language. 
"From time to time, we talk about things happening in Japan, and about Japanese 
festivals," she said. "And I also give them tutoring in other subjects that 
they may have trouble comprehending in English, but I also give them the 
English words at the same time." 
While Baum said the Japanese parents hope their children will learn English, 
"they very much want the (Japanese) language instruction although they always 
worry that it is not enough . . . and most send their children as well to 
Saturday school (a special school paid for by the Japanese community in San 
Diego and overseen by educational officials from Japan). The feeling is that 
with the Kanji characters, you must use them or you forget them." 
'Walks a Fine Line' 
Ingalls said that the school "walks a fine line" on the primary-language 
curriculum. 
"Obviously, primary fluency is popular with parents but legally our goal is not 
to have it solely for keeping the children up on their own language," she said. 
But Ingalls said that even though most children spend two years or less at 
Doyle, a significant number become fluent enough in English to complete the ESL 
curriculum. Others become highly proficient but are unable to read quickly 
enough to achieve the necessary score on district tests to be listed as fluent. 
Despite Doyle's large number of foreign students, the school ranks 21st out of 
107 San Diego Unified School District elementaries in achievement based on 
standardized language and math tests. 
"Yes, I think I was surprised at first about my daughter's kindergarten class," 
said Dr. Kenji Ueda, a visiting Japanese researcher in the UCSD Department of 
Neurosciences. "She has much homework, and that was a little surprising." 
Bjorn Hansen, from Denmark, said his son, Jakob, enjoys American schools very 
much. 
"I had no expectations at all at first," said Hansen, a parent volunteer at 
Doyle while his wife, Julia, pursues advanced studies at UCSD in biology. "The 
level of learning is very, very high. . . . I have no problems in sending him 
here. We heard about Doyle from professors at UCSD and they told us that we 
should not worry about the public schools." 
Afreda Beverly, a neighborhood parent volunteer, said she and her husband, a 
Great American executive, almost placed their daughter, Zikarra, in a private 
school, "but after visiting Doyle and seeing how international it is, we said 
that this is a good school. . . . It offers everything but prayer, but we can 
teach that at home." 
La Jolla resident Alma Coles, who talks with many foreign parents at UCSD as a 
longtime member of the Friends of the UCSD International Center, said that 
teachers at Doyle have both experience and expertise in dealing with an 
international clientele. 
"I think that many parents are pleasantly surprised to find that our schools do 
have discipline, do have computers, that certainly there is much more than what 
they have seen on television (in their countries) or read about pregnancy, 
drugs, violence in schools," she said. 
The foreign students tend to make friends with each other more than with 
American students, however. Baum said that the foreign students all have in 
common the fact they come from elsewhere than America, that they may only be in 
the United States a short time, and that they speak English with an accent. 
"Other foreign students can't tell the accent difference so much," she said. 
Zimran added that while some friendships are made with Americans, "You find 
more my son, for example, having friends from Finland and Mexico, or my 
daughter with a girl from Iran, or between Japanese and Swedish." 
Principal Jordan said that the school has had little or no interracial tension, 
although it copes with the same problems as other schools in "trying to get 
children to accept one another for what they are" as part of the district's 
race-human relations educational programs. 
"For the most part, we haven't had many problems come up. . . . We try and take 
advantage of our international basis," Jordan said. "We take the viewpoint that 
we are preparing children for a diminishing world in terms of isolation and 
that the values we teach here for the foreign kids and our own will affect us 
in the future. 
"Look at how much a country like Japan is involved in our country today, so in 
a way we are really teaching our own kids (when we teach the Japanese) and 
hoping that the interchange will result in an advantage to us." 
