JUDGE BIDS FOR APPEALS COURT SEAT; 
JUDICIARY: GARY L. TAYLOR, ALREADY A CANDIDATE FOR A FEDERAL JUDGESHIP, NOW 
SEEKS APPOINTMENT TO STATE APPELLATE POST. 
With his bid for a federal judgeship stalled by a political standoff in 
Washington, Orange County Superior Court Judge Gary L. Taylor has entered the 
competition for a seat on the state appeals court. 
Taylor confirmed that he is a candidate for a vacancy on the 4th District Court 
of Appeal in Santa Ana. Taylor, 51, is also Republican Sen. Pete Wilson's 
choice to become a federal judge in Santa Ana's U.S. District Court, but 
President Bush has not made a nomination for that post yet. 
Taylor said he entered the state fray at the request of Gov. George 
Deukmejian's judicial appointments secretary, Terrance Flanigan, who called 
Taylor last week and asked if he would allow his name to be submitted even 
though his nomination for the federal bench was pending in Washington. 
"This wasn't initiated by me at all," Taylor said. "I just responded to a 
request. When the governor's office calls, what are you going to say?" 
Taylor said he would be "honored" to have either job. He said he first applied 
for the 4th District Court of Appeal two years ago, but that slot, a newly 
created fifth seat on the court, went to Henry T. Moore Jr. 
The vacancy on the 4th District Court of Appeal, which becomes effective April 
1, was created by the retirement of Presiding Justice Harmon G. Scoville. Susan 
Trowbridge, Deukmejian's assistant press secretary, said the governor hopes to 
make that appointment as soon as possible. But a committee of the State Bar of 
California must evaluate the candidates, a process that could take up to three 
months. 
Wilson recommended Taylor for the federal post Nov. 29, but his nomination, and 
action on a host of other judicial candidates, has languished amid a dispute 
between Bush and Senate Republicans. 
The senator of the President's party gets to recommend to the President a 
candidate for any federal judicial vacancy in his home state. Traditionally 
senators have recommended one person, but Bush is insisting that senators 
submit three candidates' names for each vacancy on the federal bench. The 
senators have balked, offended by what they view as an intrusion into their 
realm of power and discretion. 
Taylor said he informed Wilson that he was also being considered for the state 
appeals court. Wilson declined to comment on Taylor's double candidacy. But his 
press secretary, Lynda Schuler, said it reflects Taylor's outstanding 
qualifications. 
"When someone is considered a real piece of talent, sometimes you can get the 
state and the federal (systems) competing for them," she said. 
Schuler said it is not unusual for the nomination and confirmation of a federal 
judicial candidate to take several months. But usually, she said, it is because 
of the Senate Judiciary Committee, not an impasse between Senate Republicans 
and the President. 
The state appeals court post carries an annual salary of $107,964. Under a pay 
raise package approved by Congress last November, the federal judgeship now 
pays $96,600 and will jump to $120,800 in January, 1991. 
The 4th District Court of Appeal post is a sought-after one and the field of 
applicants draws heavily on Orange County Superior Court. One judge jokingly 
said that "half" the judges in that court are applying for the spot. Among the 
applicants are Superior Court Judges William F. Rylaarsdam, David G. Sills and 
William F. McDonald. 
