COUNTY PANEL OKS UNDERGROUND METRO RAIL LINK; 
TRANSIT: THE ROUTE TO LINK UP WITH METRO RAIL WOULD RUN ALONG THE SOUTHERN 
PACIFIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. SEVERAL ABOVE-GROUND OPTIONS WERE REJECTED. 
The Los Angeles County Transportation Commission on Wednesday ended nearly four 
years of often bitter debate over a proposed San Fernando Valley rail line that 
would connect to Metro Rail from downtown by selecting a route that is 
underground in residential areas of North Hollywood and Van Nuys. 
The commission's 8-3 vote for a route along the Southern Pacific railroad right 
of way, crossing the Valley from the Metro Rail terminus in North Hollywood to 
Warner Center, doesn't ensure that the line will be built. Two other areas of 
the county are competing for funds available for the next rail project. 
The commission is scheduled on March 28 to choose which of the three will get 
the money. 
Wednesday's vote pleased the coalition of political, civic, business and 
homeowner leaders who have been pushing for a 5.6-mile westward extension of 
the downtown-to-North Hollywood Metro Rail subway to the San Diego Freeway. 
They opposed rival proposals for a surface rail line along the same route, and 
a monorail along the Ventura Freeway. 
"I'm happy. We got what we wanted," said state Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana), 
who led efforts to form the coalition from previously antagonistic groups. 
Robbins, though not a commission member, lobbied on behalf of the subway plan 
right up to the vote. 
A second vote on Valley rail options was much closer. 
By a vote of 5 to 6, commissioners decided against authorizing further study of 
County Supervisor Mike Antonovich's plan to build an elevated monorail or 
magnetic levitation system on the south shoulder of the Ventura Freeway from 
Universal City to Warner Center. 
Although clearly reluctant to offend Antonovich, who also has lobbied intensely 
in recent days for his plan, the commission majority indicated it felt that the 
90 days of additional study required for the monorail plan would take the 
Valley out of contention for the next rail project. 
The two other rail projects under consideration are a light-rail line from 
downtown to Pasadena and a northward extension of the Century Freeway 
light-rail line, from El Segundo to Marina del Rey. 
The commission says it has only enough money to build one more line before the 
turn of the century because most of its rail money is committed to three lines 
already under construction: Metro Rail and two light-rail lines, the Century 
Freeway and Long Beach-Los Angeles routes. 
Several commissioners have acknowledged privately that the Valley has the 
political clout to take the funding for the next line, provided that the 
consensus on the Metro Rail extension remains firm. 
In a demonstration of that clout, the Los Angeles City Council earlier 
Wednesday voted 11 to 0 to endorse the Valley Metro Rail extension plan. 
Although the county transportation commissioners committed themselves to 
building any Valley rail line underground along the Southern Pacific freight 
line, which roughly parallels Chandler and Victory boulevards, they left open 
the possibility of using light rail or even monorail or magnetic levitation 
technology on the line. 
However, staff members speculated that the technology question was left open 
only as an effort to mollify Antonovich, who did not attend the meeting but has 
left no doubt that he strongly advocates a futuristic elevated line. 
Although the Metro Rail extension drew widespread support, about 60 people 
indicated they opposed the plan at Wednesday's two-hour public hearing. 
More than 300 people turned out in 1987 to fight a ground-level light-rail line 
along the Chandler-Victory route, which traverses a four-mile stretch of quiet 
single-family neighborhoods. 
Most of those who spoke out against the new line Wednesday live along the 
railroad right of way, which carries only one freight train a week. 
They said they view the subway proposal as a conspiracy to neutralize what had 
been well-organized opposition. Once the route is designated, "the trains will 
magically levitate and we will have our worst fear, a surface system," said 
attorney Robert Silver. 
Rabbi Marvin Sugarman, speaking for six Orthodox Jewish synagogues and 
community centers clustered along Chandler Boulevard in North Hollywood, 
opposed the Metro Rail extension, but indicated that opposition might be 
dropped if the commission supports legislation in Sacramento that would make 
construction of a subway through North Hollywood and Van Nuys mandatory. 
A bill sponsored by Robbins that would require a subway in those areas was 
fought by the commission and vetoed last year by Gov. George Deukmejian. 
"Without protective legislation," said Sugarman, "we will be at the whim and 
mercy of the LACTC." 
A 5.6-mile Metro Rail extension to the San Diego Freeway -- as proposed by 
Robbins and the other Valley leaders -- would include nearly four miles of 
tunnel, cost $1.1 billion and draw 41,000 daily passengers, according to a 
commission study. 
To meet the requirements of state environmental law, commissioners designated 
as the Valley route the full right of way from North Hollywood to Warner 
Center. However, they made it clear there would be only enough money to build 
the line as far as the San Diego Freeway. 
Antonovich's proposed elevated rail system would be 16.5 miles long and cost 
$1.8 billion. Its ridership is estimated at 48,000. 
BACKGROUND 
For nearly four years, there has been debate over what kind of mass transit 
line to build in the San Fernando Valley and where it should be located. 
Business leaders and most homeowner activists agreed that an east-west line is 
needed to keep the Valley from being bogged down in congestion as the Ventura 
Freeway and other cross-Valley arteries stagger under increasing traffic. But 
homeowner leaders have insisted that no rail line should be allowed to disturb 
the Valley's many single-family neighborhoods. They argued for a subway, which 
business leaders initially said would be too expensive. Recently, the two sides 
came together on a modified subway plan. In November, the Los Angeles County 
Transportation Commission released a study of 10 alternatives for mass transit 
in the Valley. 
