FISHING REPORT: OUTDOORS; 
LAKE CASTAIC IS THE PLACE FOR THE BEST LARGEMOUTH 
To say largemouth bass have been active at Lake Castaic would be an 
understatement. So many sizable fish have been caught this past week at the Los 
Angeles County reservoir that a spokeswoman called the week "one of the best 
ever." 
Ed Puente of Saugus, fishing with a crawfish on the upper lake, caught a 17 
1/4-pound bass. 
Terry Nagel of Sepulveda used a plastic worm on the lower lake to land a 
16-pound 15-ounce largemouth. 
LAKE MEAD -- Lower Basin producing some stripers between two and four pounds at 
45-60 feet. Anchovies best bet. 
BULLHEAD CITY -- Trout fair on river. Berkley Power Bait best bet. Crappie most 
active at Topock Marsh, biting on minnows. Striped bass in lake scattered and 
deep. Anchovies best bet. 
SALTON SEA -- Orangemouth corvina becoming increasingly active as water warms, 
biting on artificials and live shad. North Shore jetty, Niland and Red Hill 
most productive areas. Croaker bite fair from Salt Creek to Bombay Beach. 
LAKE CACHUMA -- Two recent plants of trout. Food chain rich, trout full and 
reluctant to bite. Largemouth bass fair, mainly in deep-water areas along rocky 
shorelines. 
LAKE CASITAS -- Largemouth bass picking up, biting at about 10 feet. Arrow 
Island and front side of main island producing most fish. Crawfish and 
nightcrawlers good for bigger fish; brown and green plastic worms producing 
more but smaller fish. Mike Frankland, Blossom Valley, 14 3/4-pound bass. Don 
Dusing, Canyon Country, 12 1/4-pound bass. Trout active at northeast side. 
Trollers doing best, using three-four colors and needlefish lure. 
PYRAMID LAKE -- Catfish providing most action, biting mainly at dam and 
channel. Sydney and Parchelle Moragne, Skokie, Ill., 10 1/2- and 3 1/2-pound 
catfish, caught at dam. Robert Barton, Arcata, 10- and 9 1/2-pound catfish, 
caught on anchovies in channel. Striped bass slow. Largemouth bass most active 
at Brazo's Cove and island. 
LAKE PIRU -- Trout planted recently, biting. Trollers using five-eight colors 
and bikini needlefish. Power Bait and Velveeta cheese working in Felicia Cove. 
Largemouth bass moving into shallow water to spawn. Rocky ledges and points of 
coves best bet. Catfish fair in deep water at dam. 
LAKE CASTAIC -- Largemouth bass active in both lakes. Ed Puente, Saugus, 17 
1/4-pound bass, caught in upper lake on crawfish. Peter Vincioni, Moorpark, 11 
1/4-pound bass. Phillip Catalano, Santa Monica, 10 1/4-pound bass. Douglas Del 
Gado, Van Nuys, 10 3/4-pound bass, caught in lower lake. Scott Scotton, 
Manhattan Beach, three bass, largest nine pounds. Doug Eklund, Burbank, 
eight-pound bass, caught in upper lake. Trout fair in upper lake. Rod Stauta, 
Sepulveda, 3 1/4-pound trout, caught in upper lake. John Phur, 2 3/4-pound 
trout, caught in upper lake. 
IRVINE LAKE -- Trout most active at West Shore, Sierra Cove and to the right of 
boat docks. 
PUDDINGSTONE RESERVOIR -- Trout planted recently by Department of Fish and Game 
and private hatchery -- some to six pounds. Yellow Power Bait and inflated 
nightcrawlers at swim beach and east shore producing most fish. 
PERRIS LAKE -- Spotted bass most active at lots 11 &amp; 12. Dave Neal, 
Riverside, six-pound spotted bass. Trout stocked Monday, fish biting at lots 11 
&amp; 12 and launch ramp. Other species slow. 
LAKE SILVERWOOD -- Largemouth and striped bass getting most of the attention, 
biting at various locations on various baits and lures. 
