TRIAL FOCUSES ON ROLES OF BOMB SQUAD OFFICERS IN THEIR OWN DEATHS 
The question of whether two Los Angeles police bomb experts caused their own 
deaths has emerged as a matter of dispute in the bomb-blast murder trial of a 
North Hollywood makeup artist. 
The defendant, Donald Lee Morse, is charged with two counts of murder and two 
counts of possessing explosives in the officers' deaths, which occurred when 
they tried to dismantle a bomb found in Morse's garage. 
Killed in the powerful explosion on Feb. 8, 1986, were Detective Arleigh 
McCree, 46, commander of the Los Angeles Police Department's bomb squad, and 
Officer Ronald Ball, 43. 
Could Get Life Sentence 
If convicted in the San Fernando Superior Court case, which began Monday, 
Morse, 39, a film and television makeup specialist, could be sentenced to life 
in prison without possibility of parole. 
Without the jury present, Deputy Dist. Atty. Sterling E. Norris asked Judge 
John H. Major to prevent Morse's attorney from suggesting during examination of 
witnesses that negligence on the part of the officers contributed to their 
deaths. 
Defense attorney Bernard J. Rosen insisted that he was "not saying there was 
anything negligent that caused the deaths" but added that he planned to 
introduce evidence that "other means could have been used" to handle the bomb. 
He noted that some experts transport bombs elsewhere, then explode them, and 
that others wear protective clothing when working on bombs. Earlier testimony 
had indicated that McCree and Ball did not wear special clothing. 
Norris contended that although Rosen was not using the word negligence he was 
saying the same thing in different words. 
Repeats Earlier Ruling 
Judge Major reiterated a 1988 ruling that negligence was not a defense, but 
said he would rule on evidence as it is presented. 
Norris contends that the prosecution need not show that Morse intended to kill 
the officers, only that he possessed an illegal deadly weapon that had no use 
other than to kill. 
Los Angeles police went to Morse's home to search for a pistol that had been 
used four days earlier in the shooting of an official of the Makeup Artists and 
Hairstylists Union Local 706, of which Morse was a member. 
The gun was not found, and Morse was not charged in the shooting. 
While searching the house, officers found two pipe bombs and summoned McCree 
and Ball. The two dismantled one bomb but were killed while trying to take 
apart the second. 
Police on Monday testified that Morse denied any knowledge of the bombs when 
they were discovered, and said that he had allowed friends to store things in 
his garage. 
Despite the denials, police witnesses said that inside Morse's house they found 
shotgun shells, fishing line, rubber straps and gunpowder, all identical to 
contents of the bombs. 
In opening arguments, Norris told jurors that he will introduce evidence 
showing that 10 days before the blast Morse had threatened his estranged 
brother-in-law, saying that he "was going to blow him up in his car." 
Rosen pleaded with jurors to "wait patiently" until they hear the defense case 
before reaching any conclusions. 
Morse has been in County Jail without bail since the officers were killed. 
