SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA JOB MARKET; 
REPORTS FORM THE FIELD; 
AND THE WINNER IS. . .AN ACCOUNTANT 
Tom Cruise doesn't know. Dustin Hoffman doesn't know. Meryl Streep doesn't 
know. 
But accountant Frank Johnson will know who has won this year's Academy Awards 
two days before he strides onstage with a fistful of sealed envelopes later 
this month. 
Johnson, the partner in charge of Price Waterhouse's entertainment group, has 
been the accountant responsible for tallying the Oscar ballots for the last 14 
years. He and a single colleague are the only two people with advance 
information of just what names will be inside the envelopes they hand to the 
tuxedo- and evening gown-garbed celebrity presenters who will announce the 
results to a worldwide TV audience. 
"It's kind of fun to know a secret the rest of the world wants to know," 
Johnson said. "And since my wife and I are movie fans, this job is particularly 
enjoyable." 
To outsiders, the life of an accountant may seem exceedingly dull. Branded as 
"bean counters," accountants are generally known for slogging through page 
after page of numbers, not for hobnobbing with public figures. 
Yet the stereotype can be deceiving. While some accountants specialize in tax 
preparation or estate planning, others monitor the goings on at breweries, 
banks or major league baseball stadiums. Accountants also play key, 
behind-the-scenes roles in law enforcement and in private investigations. 
Valued for their broad financial experience and intimate knowledge of the firms 
they advise, they even are picked sometimes to run well-known American 
companies. 
Take Chuck Schmidt, a former certified public accountant appointed chief 
executive of the Detroit Lions football team early this year. "For all those 
bean counters out there," he told reporters, "I want to say, 'Yo, we made it.' 
" 
More typical, of course, are accountants who spend their time checking the 
accuracy of financial records. A boring pursuit? Well, it can occasionally lead 
them to places off limits to the public. In Las Vegas, Steve Comer supervises 
chip counting -- not bean counting -- at casinos, including Caesars Palace and 
Circus Circus. 
"We're required to go through cash counts in the cages where all the money is . 
. . to determine that the company has followed good procedures and is complying 
with state regulations," said Comer, a partner in charge of the Las Vegas 
office of Arthur Andersen and Co. 
Indeed, not all accountants sit behind the same desk for decades. With the 
increasingly international flavor of business, employees of leading accounting 
firms are dispatched to locales as far off as Tokyo and Paris to inspect 
factories or examine ledgers. 
Yet the ultimate field work for accountants takes place on American shores. 
More than 1,250 FBI special agents -- roughly one-eighth of the bureau's field 
staff of agents -- hold accounting degrees. 
"Historically, we like accountants and attorneys," said FBI spokesman Fred 
Reagan. "That's been true since the FBI was established. . . . They're hired as 
regular agents and their lives sometimes become more exciting than that of the 
general CPA." 
In addition to pens and calculators, Reagan explained, "they carry a badge, a 
sidearm and handcuffs." 
With the mushrooming national savings and loan scandal, the FBI recently 
received authorization to hire 150 additional agents with accounting degrees. 
The annual starting pay is $30,000. 
In general, starting pay for accountants at medium and large public accounting 
firms begins at about $25,000 nationwide, according to a 1990 salary survey by 
Robert Half International Inc. The U.S. Department of Labor estimates there are 
945,000 accounting and auditing jobs in the nation, about one-third held by 
CPAs. 
"You make a good living and you move along at a fairly good pace," said Avedick 
Poladian, managing partner for the Arthur Andersen office in Los Angeles. "It 
also offers people at a fairly young age the opportunity to take on a good 
amount of responsibility." 
"We principally hire people right out of college with undergraduate degrees in 
accounting," he continued. "The attrition rate in public accounting is fairly 
high. A lot of people get offers from their clients because they demonstrate 
strong expertise, so they get snatched up. . . . The good news is we have a 
strong alumni network, which in many cases is our best source of new business." 
Merton Alperin, a longtime CPA and member of the Massachusetts State Board of 
Accountancy, acknowledges that "a lot of (accounting) is drudge work, don't kid 
yourself." 
But he adds that the profession is generally more people-oriented than the 
public might realize. 
"It's a business where you have a lot of human relationships. You're dealing 
with people all the time. . . . You become a psychiatrist and a psychologist 
with certain clients. . . . They call the doctor if they are sick, but 
otherwise they call their accountants. He's the business confidante . . . part 
of the team." 
While accounting may never boast the sex appeal of some professions -- after 
all, there is no discernible public demand for a TV series called "L.A. 
Accounting" -- the field appears to be one that is less tainted than many in 
regard to such issues as trust and respect. 
One factor may be the annual Academy Awards broadcast, where presenters 
painstakingly point out the strict secrecy employed by Price Waterhouse. 
Each year, six accountants help count the ballots that members of the Academy 
of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences have mailed in. Johnson and an associate 
summarize the final tallies. On awards night, the pair carry separate stacks of 
envelopes to the ceremony, in case one of them gets delayed for an unforeseen 
reason. 
And Johnson guarantees this: The winners' names do not leak. "It's part of our 
work to keep confidences and hold inside information secure. The ability to 
keep a secret and manage the process without any hitch for so many years is 
good for the business." 
