THEY CAN'T AFFORD TO STAY OUT OF JAIL; 
JUSTICE: WHO, BESIDES THE PENAL SYSTEM, WOULD PROVIDE HEALTH CARE, ROOM AND 
BOARD TO UNEDUCATED BLACK MALES? 
Residents of inner-city America probably think that a recent report disclosing 
that one out of four black males are under the control of the criminal justice 
system was at best unnecessary. 
Nobody has to tell law-abiding citizens who live with steel bars or gates on 
their windows or three or four locks on their house or apartment doors that 
crime is rife in their community. If 25% of the young men are in jail, on their 
way to jail or have been in jail, these citizens are the victims of those 
crimes. And the 25% are their sons, husbands, brothers, fathers. 
Those who live or toil in our nation's inner cities know that the vast majority 
of black adolescents there are too under-educated and uneducated to obtain 
gainful employment outside the penal system. They cannot afford to live outside 
the penal system. In any major American city, a single adult living on his or 
her own needs a minimum annual salary of $21,000, realistically speaking, to 
maintain a decent standard of living. Very few prison inmates possess that kind 
of legitimate earning power. But in prison, inmates are given free health care, 
free dental care, free room and board and free entertainment and recreation. 
The average prison inmate cannot afford to stay out of prison. Furthermore, 
prison is the only thing for which most urban American public school systems 
prepare their students, and prisons usually replicate the failure of the public 
school system -- they prepare these inmates to return to prison. 
Inmates refer to their prison cells as "my house." As any experienced parent 
can verify, it is very difficult to dislodge even college-educated progeny from 
the nest, despite a bachelor's degree with which to face the world. 
To the black youths who will populate the criminal-justice system, dealing 
drugs is considerably more lucrative and therefore more appealing than 
employment at McDonald's or Burger King; very few sane people will choose to 
work for less than $5 per hour when they can earn $200 or more a day, even at 
the risk of going to prison, especially when there are no other legitimate 
alternatives. And jail is no serious threat. In this instance, it can be 
analogized to threatening to throw Br'er Rabbit into the briar patch. A more 
effective threat would be to eliminate the illegal drug market and threaten not 
to send to jail. We must devise ways to throw them out of prison and to keep 
them out and out of criminal activity. 
Marc Mauer, author of the report by the Washington-based Sentencing Project, 
states that we now risk the possibility of writing off an entire generation of 
black men. The unabridged truth is that the deplorable situation on which the 
report focuses arose because the powers that be have been writing off an entire 
generation of African American men in inner-city public schools for the past 
four decades. 
The ramifications of this gross social injustice have been manifold and 
profound in their impact on the national black community: Dealing crack has 
become the No. 1 alternative to futile employment in low-paying jobs in 
fast-food restaurants; man-sharing is becoming increasingly popular among young 
African American women; white men are becoming more appealing to successful 
black women, and the establishment of an inner-city tradition of criminal 
pursuits as acceptable and even preferable vocations. 
I am compelled to disagree with Mauer when he says that "we really don't know 
what it will mean for the future," referring to his report, "because we have 
never had a situation like this before." 
One does not have to be psychic to know that this current social condition will 
produce a dearth of fathers and husbands for this generation and the next 
generation of African Americans. There will also be increased hostility and 
suspicion of national policy-makers by black leaders, accompanied by increasing 
acceptance by some of the black genocide conspiracy theory. 
Several years ago, while teaching a creative-writing course in one of New York 
state's correctional facilities, I met an extremely gifted inmate for whom I 
was certain I could obtain a book contract with a major publishing house. When 
I expressed my desire to write a letter to the inmate's parole board, informing 
it of Jeff's literary potential, he was obviously amused. I assured him that I 
was serious about the letter. He apologized for chuckling at my offer and said, 
"My parole board ain't been born yet." When I asked him to elaborate, he 
responded, "Man, I'm doing triple life." 
Jeff was 24 but appeared to be no more than 16. What a pity that some truly 
dedicated teacher did not discover and cultivate Jeff's talent before he killed 
three people in cold blood. 
McDonald's puts more black teen-agers to work than any other employer in 
America, including the federal government. But according to Lee Dunham, 
president of the Black McDonald's Operators Assn., 80% of the inner-city 
teen-agers employed by the chain are unable to cope with elementary arithmetic. 
"If I didn't have computerized cash registers, these kids would give the store 
away in a couple of weeks." 
Life is much easier in prison. Even the most rudimentary knowledge of 
arithmetic is unnecessary; one merely has to know how to maintain a "bad dude" 
image. Thus prison is a less challenging and intimidating environment for the 
African American youths of urban America, whom the public schools have failed. 
It is imperative that the country's urban school systems be rendered affective, 
from kindergarten up, or abolished as too burdensome, economically and in human 
costs. 
Prisons are the ideal place to begin this educational process. They have 
captive student bodies, ample time and few distractions. But we must be ready 
to pay maximum salaries for gifted teachers. Every inmate should be compelled 
to learn a salable skill or trade and earn at least a general-education 
diploma. 
They will comply if the proper motivation is provided. Major corporations 
should be given tax incentives to adopt cell blocks or other prison units whose 
inmates are from families that have never had a high school graduate; that have 
been on welfare for two generations or more; that have a history of teen-age 
parenting for three generations or more, and resolve to have those negative 
histories end with this inmate's generation and with this inmate. 
Perhaps within the next 10 years, such a program could be expanded to include 
entire prison and non-prison populations. State and federal governments could 
gradually assume sponsorship of such programs. 
A Burger King franchise owner in Detroit has instituted a program of paying 
college tuition for his young workers. He also pays to train them for better 
jobs elsewhere, such as computer programming. He will pay tuition for training 
costs of up to $10,000. With this program, he saves $41,000 a year in trainee 
costs. His employee turnover rate drops from 41 persons a year to nine, and the 
$10,000 is tax deductible. This is a great program for the nation. It should be 
advocated for all businesses. 
We must act now. If America's prison population doubles in the next decade as 
it has in the preceding decade, where will we put the inmates, and how will we 
finance their incarceration? It is more responsible and less expensive to train 
and educate that disgraceful 25%. Frankly, we can no longer afford to send them 
to jail. 
