EX-BUSH AIDE ON POINDEXTER PANEL 
Fifteen people, including a lawyer who worked for the Bush presidential 
campaign, were chosen prospective jurors today as the selection process began 
for the Iran-Contra trial of former National Security Adviser John M. 
Poindexter. 
Poindexter is charged with five felony counts -- one of conspiracy, two of 
obstructing Congress and two of making false statements to congressional 
committees -- in connection with accusations that he covered up Oliver L. 
North's secret Contra resupply network and lied about a 1985 shipment of Hawk 
missiles to Iran. 
He is the highest-ranking Reagan Administration official to go on trial in the 
Iran-Contra affair. 
U.S. District Judge Harold Greene disqualified one woman who expressed 
uncertainty when asked whether she could be fair and impartial. The judge also 
disqualified an equipment operator who said that "when the whole thing was 
going down" following public disclosure of the Iran-Contra affair, "all you 
heard was North and Poindexter." Thirteen of the first 15 in the pool were 
women. 
A total of 206 people have filled out questionnaires to be possible jurors for 
the trial, and 76 of them have said they had heard, watched or read portions of 
congressional testimony Poindexter gave in 1987 under a grant of immunity from 
prosecution based on what he said. 
The judge approved for the jury pool a real estate lawyer who worked in 
President Bush's campaign as part of a group doing background reviews of 
potential vice presidential candidates. Bush was President Reagan's vice 
president at the time. 
The woman also said one of Poindexter's defense lawyers, Joseph Small, had 
baby-sat for her when she was a child. 
Iran-Contra Prosecutor Dan Webb questioned whether she should be in the jury 
pool since she knew one of the defense lawyers. 
"Just because counsel baby-sat for her doesn't cast any doubt on her," Greene 
said. 
The woman also said a brother-in-law has worked for former Virginia Govs. 
Charles Robb and Gerald Baliles, both Democrats. Robb is now a U.S. senator. 
Also accepted for the jury pool: a clerical worker who said under questioning 
that she knew former Poindexter aide North "was on trial" in the past and that 
he had been fined and was performing community service. 
"It was a big to-do in D.C.," the woman said 
A jury of 12 people and six alternates will be selected from a pool of 
residents from the District of Columbia. Greene is expected to build a pool of 
several dozen prospective jurors from which to select a jury. 
Most of those questioned said they knew little about the Iran-Contra affair. 
A retired cook, who said she had worked for seven lawyers in the 1950s, said 
she had heard nothing of Poindexter's or North's testimony to Congress. 
