CENSUS FALLING SHORT IN O.C. WORKER POOL; 
POPULATION: U.S. AGENCY ALSO ENCOUNTERS DIFFICULTY ATTRACTING JOB APPLICANTS IN 
OTHER AREAS. IT BLAMES THE LOW UNEMPLOYMENT RATE AND A ROBUST ECONOMY. 
U.S. Census officials in California expressed concern Tuesday that the agency 
has failed so far to attract a large-enough pool of applicants to tap for the 
temporary work force needed to count heads in the state starting in April. 
Census offices up and down the state have experienced problems finding workers 
to fill posts, with the situation particularly acute in urban sections of 
Northern California as well as Orange, Los Angeles and San Diego counties, 
federal authorities said. 
Although census officials had hoped to assemble a list of about 250,000 people 
to draw from when the tally kicks into high gear in April, only about 75,000 
potential employees have signed up for nearly 40,000 jobs, census officials 
said. 
"It's widespread," said Barbara Keller, the Los Angeles-based census recruiting 
coordinator in California. "We're concerned, so we're trying everything we can 
to recruit more people." 
As part of the once-a-decade head count, the U.S. Census Bureau pulls together 
an army of about 500,000 workers nationwide to fill temporary jobs as 
enumerators, clerical workers and data processors. Most of the positions last 
only a few months, with the bulk of the workers coming aboard next month as the 
agency begins the laborious task of tracking down residents who fail to mail 
back the census form by the first week of April. 
Census officials in the state had hoped to develop a pool of applicants large 
enough to ensure that there would be no labor shortages. With the relatively 
modest wages (most posts pay about $7.50 an hour) and temporary nature of the 
jobs, many qualified employees have already moved on to other work by the time 
the Census Bureau calls. Others can't be reached or simply decide not to take a 
position. Still others take the jobs, then later quit. 
In Los Angeles County, authorities set a goal of 68,000 people in the applicant 
pool, but have attracted just 22,000 so far for the 9,000 to 12,000 jobs that 
will be filled in the weeks to come, Keller said. San Diego County has 
experienced a similar shortage, with 6,000 applicants instead of the goal of 
18,000. 
The situation is even worse in Orange County, where a list of about 3,500 
workers has been compiled, far short of the 15,000 that census officials had 
hoped for, Keller said. 
"We're starting to see our applicant pool thin out, so we're concerned that if 
this rate continues over the next two or three weeks we won't have enough 
workers come census day," said Fernando Tafoya, manager of the Santa Ana 
district office. 
"If this continues, we'll almost be at the mercy of people's good will," Tafoya 
said. "We'll be hoping that people don't resign or get other jobs." 
The dearth of applicants for the temporary jobs is probably due to the economic 
vitality and low unemployment rate in the state, Keller and other census 
officials speculate. In particular, urban areas such as Orange County enjoy 
some of the most robust economies in the nation. 
If a large enough work force isn't assembled, the shortfall could pose 
problems, authorities said. The counting process could be slowed, raising 
costs, because district offices would have to remain open longer than 
anticipated. 
Moreover, any delay in tallying the populace could color results, Keller said. 
Census workers might be put in a position of arriving at homes months after the 
official April 1 census day, only to find the occupants have moved on without 
being recorded, she suggested. 
"What we're trying to do is get a snapshot of America on April 1," Keller said. 
"If people have moved or something has changed by the time we reach them, it 
creates problems." 
She said the agency is redoubling its recruitment efforts, taking out 
advertisements in newspapers, sponsoring public service announcements on the 
radio and "hitting the pavement" with recruiters. In Orange County, for 
example, census officials plan to host a job fair at various sites around the 
county on March 31. 
Census officials in Washington were either unavailable or declined to comment 
on the agency's recruitment efforts across the country. But officials in 
various regional offices reported a variety of symptoms similar to 
California's, although not as acute. 
"In our region overall, we're doing fine," said Malee Craft, recruitment 
coordinator in the Denver region, where there are 50,000 applicants for 18,000 
jobs in eight states. "But we do have some areas where our pools are lower than 
expected." 
Roy McCoy, a spokesman for the Chicago regional office, said the Census Bureau 
has attracted about 35% of the applicants it had hoped for, but the recruitment 
efforts have just recently kicked off in several parts of the three-state 
region of Illinois, Indiana and Wisconsin. 
"I think you'll find everyone is running a little bit under what they'd hoped 
for all across the United States," he said. 
