A TEST OF FAITH; 
MONTANA EVENTS RAISE QUESTIONS ON WHEN KIDS MAY SPURN PARENTS' RELIGION 
Some aspects of his parents' religion have been more difficult to adjust to 
than others for Chris Gilbert, 16. He has managed, for instance, to tune out 
the keening chants his mother listens to constantly on a continuous-play 
cassette. 
But he has had a harder time ignoring the looming prospect that he soon may be 
forced to live under the ground. 
Gilbert's parents belong to the Church Universal and Triumphant, a religious 
group that has been in the news in recent weeks because its leader, Elizabeth 
Clare Prophet, has prophesied nuclear war in late March or April. 
In anticipation of this predicted cataclysm, thousands of Prophet's followers, 
including Gilbert's parents, have moved to Montana's Paradise Valley, where 
they have dug 45 extensively equipped bomb shelters, the largest capable of 
holding 756 people. 
When Prophet gives word that an attack is inevitable, an estimated 2,500 church 
members are supposed to descend for anywhere from seven months to seven years 
into their shelters, "like gophers down a hole," as one of Gilbert's friends 
put it. 
"I've known for a long time I wasn't going to go underground," Gilbert said in 
a recent interview at the foster home where he now lives. "When you don't 
believe in it (Prophet's teachings), and your parents and all their friends 
bombard you with it, it's real hard." 
The stress grew so great for Gilbert and at least four other children of church 
members in recent weeks that they left home rather than face the possibility of 
moving into shelters. 
While they have acquiesced to their parents' beliefs up to a point -- they have 
moved to Montana, for instance -- these teen-agers (and possibly more 
youngsters, say authorities, who note not all the cases have been reported to 
officials) have drawn the line at following their mothers and fathers into bomb 
shelters. 
And by their actions, they have thrust themselves into what has become a 
Montana tempest that tests the practice of some of the most fundamental 
American rights. 
Although no one is even close to going to court, the events in Livingston have 
raised thorny legal issues and a divisive local debate over questions such as: 
* Do youngsters have a right to religious freedom, and may they contest their 
parents' attempts to compel them to follow a particular belief? 
* And what role, if any, should the state play in cases where young people 
sharply disagree with their parents' religious beliefs? 
For Wolfgang Schwartz, 15, a non-church member who is the boyfriend of Chelsea 
Brannon, one of the runaways, the answers are plain. 
"I don't think parents should have the right to put their kids under the ground 
against their will," he said. 
Explaining her reasons for running away in interviews with area media, Brannon 
said that although her father loves her and thinks the shelters are in his 
family's best interests, "I love myself, too. I have to look out for my own 
future too, my own safety." 
Brannon is living with her mother, a non-church member, in Seattle, Schwartz 
said. 
At least one other runaway returned home. Others are with relatives or in 
foster care. 
But, while the runaways have defined clearly for themselves the limits of 
parental rights, adults here and around the country are having a harder time 
deciding where those lines should be drawn. 
The question of whether to give sanctuary to church children has divided many 
of the 12,000 residents of the mountain-fringed Paradise Valley. 
In Livingston, an Old West town full of saloons and hunting shops, an informal 
group of residents calling themselves the Network of Friends is offering 
assistance to children who wish to leave the church. 
"All we are asking is to provide them some amnesty, some space, some time," 
said Gwen Handl, one of the parents involved in helping the runaways. 
Handl and others are critical of local authorities who say the runaways must be 
returned to their homes because they have found no evidence the church children 
are being physically or emotionally abused -- factors that would be grounds for 
agency intervention. 
The Montana Department of Family Services summed up the prevailing official 
attitude in a letter to the editor of the Livingston Enterprise: "The fact that 
(Church Universal and Triumphant) members are preparing their children to enter 
bomb shelters in the event of nuclear war clearly does not fall within the 
legal definition of mental injury." 
The letter was signed by Robert L. Mullen, director, and Bill Collins, regional 
administrator of the agency. 
And Park County Atty. Nels Swandal said in an interview that the allegations of 
abuse are "pure speculation. You don't take away (parents') rights based on 
speculation." 
Defining emotional abuse is the task of the Park County Department of Family 
Services. Social worker Rob Marchetti said he looks for evidence that a child 
is likely to harm himself or herself or suffer mental illness as a result of 
the situation at home. 
Being forced to take part in a religion you don't believe in -- no matter how 
extreme -- doesn't necessarily fit that criterion, he said. 
"If a child is forced to take Communion on Sundays and does not believe in it, 
is that emotional abuse?" he asked. 
Most publicized cases in which parents' religious beliefs clash with their 
children's best interests have involved the withholding of medical treatment 
from children because of religious convictions. 
In those cases, the courts have generally ruled on the side of the children and 
their need for care, according to Rita Swan, president of Child Inc., a Sioux 
City, Iowa, organization that exists, it says, to oppose child abuse masked by 
freedom of religion claims. 
The Livingston situation is different from most, Swan said, because it hinges 
largely on the question: Can a child be abused purely by his or her parents' 
religious beliefs when there is no obvious physical threat? 
Although a conflict of belief is at the heart of the debate, church opponents 
have also called into question the physical safety of the children. Because the 
bomb shelters are stocked with weapons, some have raised concerns of a militant 
confrontation or a mass suicide such as occurred at Jonestown, the Guyana cult 
site where 913 children and adults killed themselves or were murdered at the 
command of leader Jim Jones on Nov. 18, 1978. 
Church leader Prophet, in interviews, has denied any such connection. 
"Jim Jones was obsessed with death," she has said. "We simply don't see death 
as a goal of life." 
Chris Gilbert's father, Kent Noonan, argues that church critics are saying: 
'We're going to take your child away because you think funny.' 
"When is it somebody else's business to say, 'You're out of line in teaching 
your child?' " he asked. "This is the land of the free, isn't it?" 
But Roger Powalisz, a Park High School English teacher who calls himself a 
"strong believer" in religious freedom, responded: "My understanding of that 
freedom is that it is not unlimited. I don't think the state allows abuse in 
the name of religion." 
Powalisz said he has had four or five students approach him to discuss leaving 
the church. 
One of the most outspoken allies of the runaways, Father Dick Schlosser of St. 
Mary's Catholic Church in Livingston, said authorities should give greater 
weight to what the children have to say about the situation: "I would have to 
give credibility to a child if they feel they are in a threatening position." 
Experts elsewhere, however, say local authorities are acting within the law by 
not intervening. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that parents have a constitutional right to 
control the upbringing of their children, said Erwin Chemerinsky, a USC law 
professor. That decision is based on the assumption that parents have the best 
interests of their children in mind, and, in some instances, that's a big 
assumption, he said. 
"It doesn't do a whole lot to protect children in a case such as this," he 
said. 
Howard Davidson, director of the American Bar Assn. Center on Children and the 
Law, agreed. "If it basically comes down to the parents having unusual 
beliefs," he said, "then probably the state can't forcibly intervene." 
Though all states, Montana included, have provisions for authorities to 
intervene in the home life of children who are suffering physical, sexual and 
emotional abuse, "emotional maltreatment is the vaguest and most difficult to 
define," Davidson said. 
And Gerald Larue, a USC emeritus religion professor, said fears based on 
religion alone -- even pure terror -- should not be grounds for removing 
children from their homes. 
"Many of our religions are based on fear -- 'If you're not a good boy, you'll 
go to Hell,' " he said. "The only difference here is the Hell that they're 
promising is right around the corner." 
Richard Kalar, a Church Universal and Triumphant spokesman, says Livingston 
residents simply hope to use debate over the runaways to discredit the church. 
Church critics are "looking to grab a child and make headlines with her," he 
contended. 
Dismissing the notion that children might be traumatized by church teachings, 
Kalar referred to a television movie about survivors of nuclear war and said, 
"I don't think this is anything more traumatic than watching 'The Day After.' " 
Kalar and three parents of the runaways told Park County Sheriff Charley 
Johnson that their children were being recruited by the Network of Friends in 
an "organized, premeditated effort." 
Johnson said that Kalar told him that church parents would file complaints 
against anyone harboring their children in the future. 
If the situation continued, "they said the potential for violence was pretty 
good," Kalar said. 
In response to parental complaints, county attorney Swandal has said that any 
adult who harbors church runaways will be charged with "custodial 
interference." 
Some network members admit they would be reluctant to help a runaway now that 
there have been threats of arrest and parental violence. 
Yet others are undeterred. 
"These children are really being traumatized. I wouldn't hesitate for a moment 
to help others," said Schlosser. 
April 23, 1990, is the date on which 25,800 years of karma will come due, 
resulting in apocalypse, according to Prophet, whose group, once based in 
California, began buying land in the Paradise Valley in 1981, nine years to 
doomsday. 
Preparations for The End proceeded at first at a leisurely pace on the 
33,000-acre spread near the northern border of Yellowstone National Park. 
But in recent months, as the countdown continues, work on the shelters has 
become more frenzied. Through blinding spring snows and temperatures in the 
single digits, church members have labored to complete the shelters and to 
stock them with books, boots, toys, blankets, syringes, dried food and other 
supplies. 
Church spokesmen have not denied reports that the shelters also will be equiped 
with straitjackets and Valium in case anyone gets out of control in the close 
quarters. 
Anticipating troubles with confined children, shelter covenants have also 
spelled out that misbehaving youngsters may be disciplined with food 
deprivation and cold water dunks. 
No one knows exactly how many children of church members stand to be affected 
by the specter of the shelters. 
Spokesmen say they don't know how many people are in the church, let alone how 
many children it has. 
The public schools don't keep records of religious affiliation, so they have no 
way of taking a head count, said Billie Fleming, Park County schools 
superintendent. 
Though some church children attend public schools, the church also runs its own 
schools, she said. Reported enrollment for Church Universal and Triumphant 
schools as of November, 1989, was 198. 
Fleming said church children tend to be superior students, but that in recent 
weeks, some have experienced difficulties concentrating. As the prophesied 
doomsday approaches, teachers have also reported a greater number of absences 
among church children, Fleming said. 
Steve Hopkins, an eighth-grade teacher at the Livingston Middle School, also 
has seen a change in his students as April 23 nears. Some of the church 
students "look really out of it," he said. "I think there are a lot of them in 
a panic right now, just by the looks on their faces." 
And Schlosser observed that students at St. Mary's School are "very agitated, 
anxious. They just don't know from day to day what will happen." 
To illustrate the urgency the children feel, Schlosser told a story about an 
elementary school student who showed up for class one day without her books. 
When the teacher asked where they were, she said she had already taken them 
down in the bomb shelter. 
Gilbert's father, Noonan, 36, said he talked at length with his three sons to 
allay fears they may have about the preparations for war. 
"The whole reason we're building shelters is so we don't have to fear," he told 
them. 
"We're not doing this out of paranoia. There's a possibility the Soviets could 
do something," said Noonan, who, like other church members, believes recent 
events in Europe have been incorrectly interpreted as harbingers of peace, when 
conflict is actually imminent. 
Ultimately, his son chose to leave home, not because of the shelter or the 
church, but because Chris is "a rebellious teen-ager," Noonan said. "It was 
normal kids-growing-up kinds of stuff." 
Noonan said he would not have forced Chris to go underground: "We've never 
pushed our religion on him, and we never told him he was going to have to do 
anything against his will." 
Further, he said, the shelters would not be occupied purely on Prophet's whims: 
"If we do inhabit these things it will only be because you either go in there, 
or you die." 
While church officials have said the shelters will only be occupied in event of 
nuclear attack ("No war, no shelter occupancy," said church spokesman Murray 
Steinman), critics of the church believe Prophet's power over her followers is 
such that they would go underground if she told them to -- whether or not there 
was reason to go. 
It was apparently this prospect that inspired some children to run away. 
In an interview with local newspapers, Chelsea Brannon said she decided to 
leave when her parents began making preparations to move from their home in 
Livingston to be closer to their shelter on church land. 
Brannon said the idea of being ordered into the heavily fortified shelters 
frightened her. "All those people up there with guns . . . something is bound 
to happen." 
Sheriff Johnson said one of his deputies alerted him that children were 
planning to run away from the church shortly before an anticipated full-scale 
drill at the shelters on March 15. 
Some did leave before the drill. One girl waited until the knock came on the 
door at 9 on a Thursday night, according to June Little, one of the adults in 
town who had contact with her. The teen-ager said a voice outside her door told 
her: "We're going under at midnight." 
Little said the girl found an excuse to go outside, then ran to the town of 
Emigrant, hiding in ditches along the way. 
"She just did not want to go into that shelter," Little said. "I know this 
(conflict over beliefs) happens everywhere, even in the Catholic and Mormon 
religions. But I just don't think what's happened here is right. There's got to 
be some protection for these kids." 
Though only five runaways have been officially reported, Sheriff Johnson said 
many more may have escaped by contacting friends and relatives, thus avoiding 
authorities altogether. 
And as the "fear time" approaches, some predict more children will flee. 
"I know there are other kids in my situation who want out," Gilbert said. 
Teacher Hopkins said one of his church-member students fiddles with a portable 
radio all day, listening for the emergency broadcasting signal. 
"Dozens of them feel trapped," he said. "They don't want to go into the 
shelters and they don't know what to do." 
