NOBLE RED-CROWNED CRANE ON COMEBACK; 
BIRDS: CHINESE CONSERVATIONISTS USE CREATIVE TACTICS TO PROTECT THE NATION'S 
ANCIENT AND MAJESTIC BIRD. 
There it stood, about 13 feet tall, red crown high above its black-and-white 
body -- a red-crowned crane. I had traveled more than 7,000 miles to see this 
sight. The reality took my breath away. 
From Taoist art to modern slipcovers, the red-crowned crane has symbolized 
longevity in China for centuries. Visit any of China's ancient cultural sites 
and you will surely see a statue, a tapestry, a painting, a pebble portrait 
embedded in a walkway or some other representative of the Celestian Crane, as 
it is also known. 
What's more, the same is true for modern sites. Visitors to the State 
Meteorological Administration in Beijing, source of national weather reports, 
find statues of cranes in front of the main building. They also decorate useful 
everyday items. 
After seeing the crane on tea canisters, bath towels, a funeral sheet, even a 
railroad overpass, I could believe Zhou Yuansheng, deputy director of the 
Forestry Technology Extension Service of the Jiangsu Agricultural and Forestry 
Department, who said: "The red-crowned crane is the most important animal in 
our country," adding that China's National Protection Law identifies it as 
such. 
This bird was referred to by one Chinese friend, a young office worker, as "the 
noble among creatures." Renditions of the crane are so ubiquitous that one 
might expect it to be, like China's human population, abundant. 
Not so: Between this traditional symbol of long life and China's burgeoning 
population has arisen competition for food, for space and, so far as the cranes 
are concerned, for life itself. 
The red-crowned crane is found only in China, Japan and the Soviet Union. 
According to scientists from Jiangsu's Environmental Protection Agency, the 
world's largest known flock winters in China's Jiangsu Province. 
There, amid tall tan grasses and reeds drying in Yancheng township's autumn 
sun, these striking birds with their scarlet pates find cover when they fly 
south from Heilongjiang Province in autumn. They come seeking this cover and 
open water for their winter foraging. In shallow salt waters at the edge of the 
Yellow Sea and in the muddy marshes, they hunt the small fish, tiny shrimps, 
frogs and crabs that make up their basic diet. 
But everything that the crane seeks in Yancheng is also used by human beings. 
The reeds and grasses are cut by villagers for baskets and mats. The shrimps, 
crabs, frogs and fish are food for humans as well. As a result, crane habitat 
is dwindling. 
To learn more about the red-crowned crane's prospects, I traveled to Xin 
Yanggong, the small fishing and agricultural village where the headquarters of 
the roughly 100,000-acre Yancheng Precious Birds Natural Conservation Area is. 
Established in 1983 by Jiangsu Province, this is China's first coastal nature 
reserve. Here, along with more than 200 other species of birds, the red-crowned 
crane is being studied and protected. 
With obvious love for their work, ornithologists at Xin Yanggong introduced me 
to their beloved cranes. And what a dramatic introduction it was! Chen Lan, a 
young woman from the village who is employed at the preserve, opened the door 
of a screened runway at the edge of the marsh. One after another, out stepped 
four stately birds that had been transferred by train as chicks from Zhalong 
Nature Preserve in Heilongjiang and hand-reared in Yancheng. 
Only one bore the red badge of adulthood, but the clean, white bodies of all 
glistened in the cold winter sunlight. When the adult spread its wings in 
warning against anyone approaching too closely, it was a startling sight. Black 
markings etched the lower edges of the wings, making them resemble mountain 
peaks against a cloud bank. Truly a living work of art. 
Out in the marsh a river flows. On our side, villagers from Xin Yanggong worked 
quietly, some cutting and stacking the vegetation that grows head high, others 
probing for succulent little crabs that hide under the surface just within 
reach of crane bill or crabber's stick. On the other side of the river, 
half-hidden by uncut grasses in the central refuge, someone spied a group of 64 
cranes gleaming in the noonday sun. 
Liu Xiping, deputy director of the Yancheng reserve, explained that in the 
secondary refuge, a 328-foot-wide border of the marsh, such activities are 
permitted, although no one may live there. The central refuge is devoted 
entirely to the cranes and other waterfowl. 
One important duty of the nature preserve staff is enforcement of these 
regulations. It was as though the cranes understood this, for they seemed 
oblivious to the workers beyond the narrow strip of water. Their brilliant 
bodies against the beige background seemed remote as they methodically foraged 
for food. 
With crane numbers so low, the need to be creative is apparent. Along with 
educational programs to alert local people to the need to protect the birds, 
scientists use other tactics that go beyond mere protection. One involves a bit 
of ornithological larceny. A red-crowned crane couple (the birds mate for life) 
normally produces two eggs per year, but if something happens to both eggs, the 
female will lay again. Eggs are systematically removed from nests for 
incubation at preserve headquarters. The mother crane then lays two more. 
How long will she put up with this? George Archibald, director of the 
International Crane Foundation in Baraboo, Wis., one of several international 
organizations cooperating to protect cranes, says that in captivity she may lay 
up to 12 eggs. According to Zhu Chengyao, director of the Department of Biology 
at the Jiangsu Education Institute, Chinese experience has been that in the 
wild, she will lay six or seven. In any case, this willingness to work overtime 
to perpetuate the species gives scientists a valuable tool in their work. 
Liu described a feeding program that researchers at the Yancheng reserve 
believe is causing changes in characteristics of the crane population. "We put 
fish, corn and other food in far places in the refuge, but we can't guarantee 
that it will all be found," he said. 
Conservationists hope that spreading supplementary food in remote regions will 
enable more birds to survive on smaller areas. Yancheng ornithologists are 
encouraged by the appearance in recent years of some family groups of four 
birds, two adults and two fledglings, instead of the usual groups of three. 
In August, 1988, a Beijing Review reported: "According to the United Nations 
Crane Fund, in 1987 there were 1,080 red-crowned cranes in the world. . . ." By 
February, according to Liu, the number had grown to 1,100. 
Bird and egg transfers between nature reserves within China and between 
countries, as well as field studies and public education, have contributed to 
the continued existence of this treasured bird. Will the program be successful? 
Zhou is hopeful. 
"Because the life of the people in the area has improved, it's not necessary 
for them to shoot the birds for food. Before, when they were hungry, they did. 
Now even those who hunted for fun know they must not because there are so few, 
and the government protects them." 
It is too soon to be sure that the program will succeed, but as I watched those 
elegant creatures high-stepping through the marsh, it was clear that this world 
would be a poorer place without them. 
