HEAD OF CSUN DEAF CENTER QUITS AMID BUDGET PROBLEMS 
The director of a nationally recognized program for deaf students at Cal State 
Northridge was asked to resign by campus officials for failing to properly 
manage funds that pay for classroom interpreters and other services for the 
deaf, school officials said Sunday. 
Victor H. Galloway, himself a graduate of CSUN's program for deaf students, 
submitted his resignation Thursday as director of the school's National Center 
on Deafness, university spokeswoman Ann Salisbury said. 
Galloway had met with top university officials earlier in the week to discuss 
reports that the center had spent nearly all of its $1.6-million budget for 
1989-90 and would run out of money to pay for services before the end of the 
spring semester, campus officials said. 
Herb Larson, administrator of support services at the center, has been 
appointed acting director of the center, said Dorena Knepper, CSUN's director 
of governmental and administrative affairs. 
Knepper, acknowledging the center's financial troubles, described Larson as 
particularly adept at money management. 
She said through a spokeswoman that Larson is charged with "putting the center 
back on sound footing." 
University officials said Sunday that all of the center's programs would 
continue to operate through the end of the fiscal year in June. The university 
would make up for any shortfall. 
Galloway, through his wife, declined to be interviewed Sunday. 
The National Center on Deafness, formed in 1963, rose to national prominence as 
the first program to allow deaf students to attend regular college classes. 
Last year, the center moved from the cramped bungalows that it had occupied for 
27 years to offices in the campus' new $2.7-million Jeanne M. Chisholm Hall. 
About 200 deaf students are enrolled in the CSUN program annually. They take 
classes with the assistance of specially trained interpreters and note-takers 
and study for a broad range of degrees. 
Word of the growing financial troubles at the center recently reached the 
school's deaf students, who two weeks ago called for a meeting with Galloway. 
About 150 students and interpreters attended the meeting to express concern 
over the program's finances, campus officials said. 
Galloway was criticized for spending more on staff salaries than on student 
services, campus officials said. 
He was appointed director of the National Center on Deafness in 1986 to replace 
Ray Jones, who was fired by CSUN President James W. Cleary after directing the 
center for 23 years. School officials said at the time they wanted new 
leadership with fresh ideas. 
Galloway, who has been deaf since infancy, earned a master's degree through the 
CSUN National Leadership Training Program for educators of the deaf. 
Galloway has undergraduate degrees in math and science from Gallaudet College, 
a private school for deaf students in Washington. 
While working as a research chemist at Lockheed, he started to teach deaf 
assembly workers basic math and blueprint reading in his spare time. 
Eventually, he decided to pursue a career in education of the deaf and enrolled 
at CSUN. 
Galloway was executive director of the Texas School for the Deaf prior to 
becoming the director at CSUN. 
