'I DREAM THEY ARE GOING TO KILL ME'; 
KIDNAPPINGS. DRUGS. VIOLENCE. DEATH. IN L. A. NEIGHBORHOODS DOMINATED BY GANGS, 
THE INVISIBLE VICTIMS ARE CHILDREN. A WHOLE GENERATION OF TRAUMATIZED 
YOUNGSTERS IS LEARNING HOW TO DODGE BULLETS AND SURVIVE ON THE STREETS. BUT NOT 
ALL WOUNDS CAN BE SEEN, NOR DO THEY HEAL. WHAT KIND OF ADULTS WILL THEY BECOME? 
Lucinda Green seems like a made-to-order little girl. A bubbly 8-year-old, she 
wears her hair in sprouts of brightly ribboned braids and sports a pink sweat 
shirt emblazoned with a wide-eyed pussycat. 
As a third-grader at 97th Street School in South-Central Los Angeles, she likes 
to jump rope and read stories about a high-flying squirrel and a little boy who 
discovers the world hand-in-hand with his grandfather. 
But when she is asked about gang violence, the illusion of childhood innocence 
bursts as abruptly as a spray of bullets. Her small legs paddle the air from 
the height of an adult-sized chair and her braids bob chaotically as she 
recounts, incident after incident, the terrors that are common to her life. 
"I'm afraid that someone will snatch me," she says. "So when I hear something I 
run as fast as I can. Like today (walking to school) I heard something and I 
dropped my book, and when I got to the corner I looked around and I see nobody. 
So I ran back and got my book. 
"Then there was a car coming, so I ran and hid behind that other car. The car 
went by. It was a gang-banger. He had a red rag on his window, so I thought he 
was going to shoot." 
With a gulp of air, she races on: "Friday something strange happened. Me and my 
brothers, we were going to the store and this man said do we want to smoke. He 
had his pants all sagging down and a hair band on his head. Me and my brothers 
we ran. I almost fell. I was real scared." 
But it was the gunfire on New Year's Eve that frightened her the most: "I was 
so scared. It sounded like somebody was at our door. It was going boruge! 
boruge! boruge! I went in my grandfather's room and I asked him can I sleep in 
his room. 
"Gunshots were just popping off. I didn't even get no sleep that night. I just 
stayed in the house the next day. I thought it was still going to be some 
shooting." 
For psychologists, social workers and educators, Lucinda's stories compose a 
familiar litany of a young child's experiences on Los Angeles' inner-city 
streets. Fueled by traffic in crack cocaine, gang violence has transformed 
routinely unsafe neighborhoods into urban war zones. In South-Central and East 
Los Angeles, where 134,100 children attend public elementary schools, the Los 
Angeles Police Department and the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department 
reported more than 4,000 gang-related crimes and 156 homicides during 1989. 
For many children in these violence-riddled neighborhoods, outings to parks, 
playgrounds, libraries and movies are risky and rare, and even walking to 
school can be dangerous. They learn to hit the ground at the sound of gunfire 
and which gangs wear which colors. Firearms and knives, rendered with uncanny 
accuracy, turn up in their classroom drawings, and during their 
elementary-school years many children witness bloodshed. 
A patchwork of school, community and law-enforcement programs teach children 
defense strategies against gangs and drugs and help them develop self-esteem, 
but officials say current funding and personnel do not come close to addressing 
the problem. They also point out that responsibility for the youngsters' safety 
ultimately lies with their parents -- a task families are not always able to 
fulfill. 
Allowed to slip through the system's cracks, many inner-city children are left 
largely to learn survival skills on their own. With insufficient protection and 
guidance, a generation of inner-city youngsters are growing into adolescents 
who are street-wise, hardened and, in some cases, may be psychologically 
disabled. 
"It's like living in Vietnam in the '60s," psychologist Sandra Cox says of 
their environment. A staff member of the Los Angeles Unified School District's 
School Mental Health Center clinic in South-Central Los Angeles, she adds, "The 
children realize this is a battle zone." 
At 102nd Street School, the nurse, Gladys Cormier, tells of children who sleep 
fully dressed on bare floors because they are afraid to go upstairs to bed. In 
shooting sprees, the children know, bullets are fired into the air, making 
their bedrooms places of danger. 
"It's like they're not little kids anymore," she says. "I cry every day for 
them." 
At the Westminster Neighborhood Assn., a community center in Watts that 
operates the Creative Child Project to help troubled children after school, 
10-year-old Luis Hernandez next takes the seat to talk about his daily life. 
Luis (whose name, like those of the other children, has been changed to protect 
his privacy) is a quiet fifth-grader at 102nd Street School who sucks his thumb 
and answers questions with a "yeah" or "unh-uh." 
Asked about the violence that troubles him, however, he becomes talkative and 
animated. While standing in front of his house early one evening, waiting for 
his mother to open the door, he watched gang members drive up, jump out of 
their car, attack and shoot an elderly man. 
On a Saturday, as Luis was leaving his home to play football, a group of young 
men jumped another group in front of his house, robbed them and ran away 
through the neighbors' yards. 
"I just went back in. I went back to sleep." But even sleep is not a certain 
escape from violence. "I dream they are trying to go after me and kill me," 
Luis says. 
According to Sharon Robinson, who has worked as a supervisor and an educational 
psychologist in the L.A. school district, young children cope with the presence 
of violence by taking one of two defensive routes: They emulate aggressive gang 
behavior or they retreat from it, often refusing to go out to play or go to 
school. 
In both cases, the motivation is fear -- fear of gangs, of their classmates, 
even of police. 
"You see it if you ask them to do a drawing," says Robinson. "They might do a 
drawing of a policeman putting a gun to a gang member's head." 
In adolescence, perceptions of society become further confused. "Gang members 
are big shots, and the children want that identity," says Robinson. But, she 
stresses, "many of them act like they belong to gangs because they think it's 
cool and tough, when really they have none of this violent behavior in them." 
Dr. Quinton James, a child psychiatrist with the School Mental Health Center 
and with the Centinela Child Guidance Clinic, sees many signs of stress, 
ranging from anxiety-induced headaches and stomachaches to a change in goals 
and misperceptions of reality. 
"They get to the point where they tend to distort the environment and say 
everything is fine when it's not," he says of his patients, who are as young as 
5 years old. "But if the neighborhood is very unsafe, you've got to somehow 
rationalize to the point that you feel it's safe to go out there." 
When James asks the youngsters what they imagine themselves doing when they are 
18 years old, "They say, 'I don't think about it.' They don't give thought to 
their future." With no sense of direction, he says, they are susceptible to 
psychiatric illnesses and poor adjustment to society, as well as to 
drug-addiction, alcoholism and a life of crime. 
When Horatio Prichard was in the third grade, Westminster personnel say he was 
"a living terror," a bellicose child who bullied his classmates. "I used to 
fight a lot," the 10-year-old says. On the playground at Compton Avenue School 
in South-Central Los Angeles, he says, "It's hard not to. 
"They call your mother names. They say she uses the pipe. They just be waiting 
to start you fighting." Encircled by watching classmates, Horatio declares, 
"You can't get out." 
Through Westminster and programs in his school, he has learned to walk away 
from the rough playground crowd, but the real test comes out on the streets. 
"They run home and get their big brothers," he says of his classmates, 
explaining that to reach his house he must cut through a dangerous housing 
project. "That's when they be trying to jump you." 
On Fridays when he does not go to Westminster after school, Horatio takes his 
7-year-old brother in tow and confronts a nightmarishly long walkway in the 
project that for him is "like an alley. I don't walk, I run," he says. "I feel 
scared." 
To help the children who live in gang-infested areas, schools, police and 
community groups have developed programs that deal with self-esteem, child 
abuse, drugs and gangs. 
Youngsters are in danger from gang recruiting as early as the third grade, says 
V.G. McGuinses, who heads a state-funded anti-gang project, SEY YES (Save Every 
Youngster/Youth Enterprise Society). Gangs need young children as hit men, he 
explains. They scrawl their names on building walls preceded by li for little, 
which usually indicates they are in elementary school. 
McGuinses shows the children how to avoid gang overtures by projecting a 
neutral attitude. When a gang member accosts a child with "What's up, cuz," he 
warns, "You can't say it's none of your business. If you can't control your 
temper you'll have a short life." 
Children should not act tough. "If you get a kid out there who wants to be 
tough and bad, they'll say, 'Come on and join the gang, punk. Show us how bad 
you really are.' " 
McGuinses' most effective tactic to dissuade young children from joining gangs 
is to tell them their mothers and sisters could become victims of violence. 
"Kids need to understand that gangs aren't just some happy, big deal," he says, 
emphasizing that it is essential to reach them in their elementary years. "When 
kids start getting older they don't care about anything, especially if they're 
on crack." 
Cox, who conducts weekly self-esteem counseling at 97th Street School, says 
girls as young as 9 complain about harassment by Anglo "johns," who cruise 
South-Central streets looking for prostitutes. 
She instructs the girls to walk in groups, never to get into a stranger's car, 
and if they are molested, to run and tell an adult. She also imbues all of her 
students with a sense of their African-American history and culture. "We try to 
make sure they understand that they are not rootless, that they do not live in 
isolation. When we can tie them to their ancestors and relatives they are less 
likely to commit antisocial acts." 
Existing programs can only do so much, however, and education officials 
recognize a need for expanded safety instruction and protection. 
"It's a hit-and-miss kind of thing," says 95th Street School principal Charles 
Proctor. "If something happens on the news, we start talking to the children 
about being careful around adult strangers. If a child is hit by a car, we 
might stress automobile safety. But there needs to be an organized, systematic 
effort that prepares children for the real world." 
However, more comprehensive programs on a districtwide basis would require 
resources that, educators say, are unavailable. 
"We're not fiscally well. And I don't know how we will recover, if ever," says 
assistant superintendent for the district's Office of Elementary Instruction, 
Barbara Smith, referring to Gov. George Deukmejian's proposed budget for fiscal 
1990-91, which leaves the Los Angeles district with a shortfall of $50 million 
in revenues. 
In February, Dr. Lilia (Lulu) Lopez, coordinator of instructional planning and 
development for the district's elementary schools, launched a pilot curriculum 
for the third and fourth grades to teach children everything from self-respect 
to letter-writing techniques to lobby politicians for more inner-city 
recreational facilities. But funds needed to train teachers and expand the 
program to all grades citywide have already been frozen. "One of my goals (with 
the pilot curriculum) was to bring the various school programs together so we 
don't leave holes," she says. "It's very frustrating." 
Meanwhile, schools struggle to provide their students with safety as best they 
can. At 102nd Street, Principal Melba Coleman has gone to the City Council to 
obtain a guard to watch over her 1,200 students as they arrive and leave from 
school. According to city Department of Transportation guidelines, a guard is 
not needed because there is a traffic light a block away from the school. But, 
Coleman protests that her students live in projects across the street from the 
school. She notes wryly that previous principals have been trying to procure a 
guard for 19 years. 
The police also have programs that address the issue of safety. Officers take 
the DARE (Drug Abuse Resistance Education) program to fifth-grade classes and 
make a half-hour presentation, called CASEY (Crime Awareness Safety Education 
for Youth) to children in kindergarten through the third grade to tell them how 
to dial 911 and watch out for strangers. 
Both programs are booked months in advance, and, says Sgt. Christopher West, 
the officer in charge of the LAPD's crime prevention unit, "we don't have 
remotely close to the resources" to establish more comprehensive programs. 
Besides, he questions, "How do you teach somebody street smarts? It's too 
esoteric a subject to quantify and teach in the schools." 
The ideal place for children to learn about life is in the home, police and 
school officials agree, but children frequently do not obtain information 
there. 
"A lack of attention at home is a primary problem for many children," says 
Westminster director Grace Payne, who sees teen-age mothers, many of them 
single parents with only an elementary school education and an income from 
welfare. "They leave the children to grow up like weeds. Children aren't able 
to guide themselves and the parents aren't either." 
Even parents who work hard to protect their children find that the going is 
difficult. From Watts, many commute long distances to work and may not see 
their children for 12 hours a day. When they return at night they are worn out, 
Payne points out. Also, she says, "The mothers aren't going to tell the 
children these things (specifics on local gangs), because they don't know about 
them. It's the children who are out where they are exposed to them, not the 
parents." 
The solution for caring parents generally is to keep their children indoors. 
"If I have to, I'll keep them constantly in the house," says Diane Moore, who 
raises her 8- and 13-year-old sons in Watts. "They always ask, 'Mom, why we 
never go anywhere? We always stay in this boring house.' But I don't want to be 
out there in the environment." 
At Westminster, officials say the Creative Child Project is proof that positive 
approaches to helping children can have dramatic results. "Our solution is 
love, attention and listening," Payne says. In the afternoon hours, the danger 
zone for latch-key children, 50 8- to 12-year-olds from the neighborhood's 
schools are shepherded through academic lessons as well as instruction in 
social manners and habits by a teacher, three volunteer "foster grandparents" 
and a social worker. Children remain in the Creative Child Project for only two 
years, but since the program began in 1971, Payne says, 90% of her youngsters 
have finished high school, and 20% have graduated from community colleges. 
Educators agree that given half a chance, children will respond positively to 
the support they are given. "Kids don't want to get hurt," says McGuinses. 
"They want to have fun and be happy and live in a safe environment." 
At Westminster, Lucinda says she wants to grow up to be a nurse "to try to save 
people from dying." Horatio wants to be President of the United States, and 
Luis wants to be a king. One of his royal edicts would prevent children from 
playing on the streets after dark. "The gangs could drive by and shoot them," 
he explains. 
