HEALTH; 
UPDATING BIRTH CONTROL; 
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE, RESEARCHERS EXAMINE EFFECTS OF NEW METHODS 
Birth control research moves slowly, but it is moving, researchers say. 
Among the technologies working their way through the investigational pipeline 
are: 
Norplant: An implantable contraceptive that inhibits ovulation and also 
thickens cervical mucous, impeding sperm penetration. Six match-size silastic 
capsules are implanted in the upper arm and release the ovulation-inhibiting 
hormone levonorgestrel over a period of five years. 
The Population Council, the New York-based nonprofit organization that 
developed Norplant, filed for FDA marketing approval last August, but has not 
yet received it, spokeswoman Sandra Waldman said. 
A potential drawback: A change in bleeding, including prolonged menstruation or 
"breakthrough" bleeding, said Dr. Donna Shoupe, a USC assistant professor of 
obstetrics and gynecology who's studied Norplant. 
 Expected effectiveness: 97%-99%. 
 RU-486: Perhaps the most controversial technique under study in the United 
States, RU-486 is manufacturer's shorthand for a drug that interrupts pregnancy 
in early stages. In France, it was withdrawn from the market in October, 1988, 
after a campaign by pro-life advocates. Two days later, however, the government 
ordered the drug back on the market. 
A so-called anti-progestin, RU-486 works by "blocking the effects of 
progesterone, the hormone that supports pregnancy," said Dr. David A. Grimes, a 
professor of obstetrics/gynecology and preventive medicine who's studying the 
drug at USC. In the absence of progesterone, the lining of the uterus breaks 
down as it would in a normal menstrual cycle. 
In the last four years, 13 different regimens have been tested on 300 women in 
USC studies, Grimes said. Most promising: a single 600-milligram dose that 
interrupted pregnancy 90% of the time in 50 women studied. 
Taken within two weeks of a missed menstrual period, the drug is 80% effective, 
according to a new report by Washington's nonprofit Population Crisis 
Committee, and even more so when combined with synthetic prostaglandins. 
Possible side effects include hemorrhage and incomplete or failed abortion. 
 Expected effectiveness: 95%. 
 Nonscalpel Vasectomy: Under study by the Population Council and VasTech 
Medical Products Inc., of New Brunswick, N.J., nonscalpel vasectomy promises 
almost immediate recovery. After a local anesthetic is administered, scrotal 
skin is punctured with a Vasocclude, a device much like a stapler with 
preloaded clips, and the device is maneuvered near the vas deferens or 
spermatic duct, which is sealed off by a clip. 
Clinical studies are scheduled to start this year. 
 Expected effectiveness: 99%. 
 Plug Sterilization: In this potentially reversible male sterilization 
procedure, two tiny puncture holes are made in each vas deferens, then two 
silicone plugs are inserted into the ducts. A tiny space between the two acts 
as a trap for sperm that may have gotten past the first plug. 
"The vas is hardly damaged," said Dr. Lourens Zaneveld , a professor of 
obstetrics and gynecology at Chicago's Rush University. "When the plugs are 
removed, a small suture recloses the duct and the hole closes almost 
immediately." 
Preliminary clinical studies, under way here and in South America, showed a 
third of the men were sterile but in two-thirds, some sperm still passed by the 
plugs. 
 Expected effectiveness: 99% as contraceptive; 90% reversibility. 
 Anti-Sperm Vaccine: Human studies are expected to begin this year or next for 
a vaccine that attacks sperm and reduces their "fertilizability," said 
Northwestern researcher Dr. Gerald Zatuchni , a professor of obstetrics and 
gynecology at Northwestern University in Chicago, Ill. First, an enzyme called 
lactic dehydrogenase is extracted from the sperm and injected into his partner. 
She, in turn, develops antibodies that attack the sperm, reducing motility and 
ability to fertilize eggs. 
 Expected effectiveness: 90%. 
 Injectables for Women: A biodegradable microcapsule of norethindrone, the same 
synthetic hormone found in most oral contraceptives, is injected into the 
buttocks, allowing for slow release of the hormone. Farthest along in clinical 
trials is a 90-day capsule; 30-day and 6-month systems are also being 
developed, said Zatuchni. 
 Expected effectiveness: 99%. 
Injectables for Men: Periodic injections of a synthetic version of the hormone 
testosterone may reduce sperm counts to zero or other safe levels, researchers 
say. Testosterone inhibits sperm production much like oral contraceptives 
inhibit ovulation, said Dr. C. Alvin Paulsen, a researcher and professor at the 
University of Washington. 
Other researchers, including Dr. Ronald S. Swerdloff, director of the UCLA 
Population Research Center and professor of medicine at Harbor-UCLA Medical 
Center in Torrance, are studying injections of testosterone combined with other 
substances that together "turn off" the sperm production system. 
 Expected effectiveness: Unknown. 
 Female Condoms: "When people first look at a female condom, they're not too 
impressed," said USC's Shoupe, one of several researchers investigating various 
types of female condoms, also called intravaginal pouches. The one she's 
studying looks like a plastic tube with a ring at each end. The upper ring is 
inserted like a diaphragm to prevent sperm passage while the other is 
positioned near the vaginal opening. Prelubricated with the spermicide 
nonoxynol-9, such condoms may help prevent the spread of sexually transmitted 
diseases, researchers say. 
 Expected effectiveness: 88%-96%. 
