O.C.'S MATER DEI HIGH HAS BIG REPUTATION, EVEN BIGGER AMBITION 
Tuition is $3,200 a year. It takes high entrance exam scores to get in, 
although family connections help. Some years, as many as 900 qualified 
applicants have been turned away. 
Athletic teams, supported by enthusiastic, generous alumni, have national 
reputations. Baseball and basketball teams have been ranked No. 1 in the 
nation. Despite complaints about recruiting violations, the athletic department 
never has received more than a one-year, wrist-slap probation. 
The school's top administrator has hired professional fund-raisers and says he 
is "very confident" about raising $15 million for new buildings and an 
endowment fund. 
Not bad for a medium-size college. 
But this is a high school -- Mater Dei in Santa Ana. It is one of the biggest 
Catholic secondary schools in the nation and the biggest west of Chicago. 
At age 40, the 18-acre campus is bursting with more than 2,100 boys and girls. 
It is also bursting its buttons at the moment over its basketball team, which 
is playing tonight in Oakland for the state championship, to the surprise of 
hardly anyone. The team has won the state title before -- as recently as 1987. 
Perhaps as remarkable, about 3,000 Mater Dei rooters are expected to make the 
450-mile trip to see the game. In a sample of one Mater Dei classroom this 
week, 19 of 22 students said they would attend. 
"Sports are put on a pedestal here. Everything is centered around sports," said 
Chris Heiser, a 16-year-old student. 
And who's responsible for that? "We are," answered the class, almost in unison. 
"It's easier to get involved here than at a lot of other schools," Becky 
Berardini, 17, said. "Mater Dei is really competitive. The desire to succeed is 
really something that keeps you going. It just keeps you motivated." 
School officials say the quality and enthusiasm of their students is evident in 
areas other than athletics. 
Honors-class enrollment tops 1,200. About 95% of the graduating seniors go 
directly to universities and to four- and two-year colleges. Mater Dei students 
consistently score higher than average on the SAT college entrance exams. Last 
year the school's combined average score was 1,010 points, compared to 906 
statewide. 
University of California admissions director Ed Apodaca said Mater Dei is a 
familiar name in his office. The campus is one of the state's major sources of 
UC students, "probably in the top 10%" statewide. "They should be very proud of 
the number of students they send us," Apodaca said. 
They are, and they do it while providing fewer teachers per student than the 
typical Orange County public high school. At Mater Dei, there is on the average 
of one teacher for each 35 students. By contrast, in Fullerton and Huntington 
Beach high schools, the average is about one to 28. 
"Our ratio might be a little higher, but the quality of our students and 
teachers kind of compensates," said Mater Dei's principal, Father John B. 
Weling. 
Public school educators say the reason for Mater Dei's high academic 
performance is the same as for its athletic superiority: The school can pick 
and choose its students from all of Orange County because, unlike public 
schools, it is not restricted by residency requirements. A scholar from La 
Habra or an athlete from San Clemente need not move to Santa Ana to attend 
Mater Dei. 
In the case of academics, Mater Dei selects the cream of college-bound students 
whose families can afford the substantial tuition. The school promises parents 
a "holistic" education for their children stressing not only academic 
instruction but spiritual training and strict discipline. 
Besides taking the usual college-prep curriculum, Mater Dei students must take 
40 units of religious studies spread throughout their four high school years 
and perform at least 80 hours of "community service," such as helping at 
hospitals and visiting the elderly. 
Four deans are assigned full time to discipline and spend much of it enforcing 
a strict and detailed dress code. The code's small type covers most of two 
pages in the student handbook, specifying dress for virtually every occasion 
from classroom to football games to banquets to the prom. 
The aim is clearly stated: to avoid "exaggerated or faddish" appearances that 
"draw unfavorable attention to the wearer." Students are reminded that 
"attending Mater Dei is a privilege." 
The overall result has been a bright, obedient student body and a corps of 
success-oriented parents who have the means and desire to help with the 
hundreds of extras, like bus fare for the debate team or sheet music for the 
choir. 
Or support for winning teams. Mater Dei can give breaks to great quarterbacks, 
forwards and pitchers, attracting them from both Catholic and public schools 
with the promise of high-profile athletic programs sure to attract college 
scouts. In basketball alone, 19 Mater Dei players have gone directly to major 
college teams in the past seven years. 
A few scholarships are available to help promising students who could not 
otherwise enroll. 
These attractions have proved to be substantial. In 1984, for example, when the 
Mater Dei Monarchs were arguably the best basketball team in Orange County 
history, four of the five starters were not Catholic and came from as far away 
as Cerritos. In 1987, a quarterback from Corona del Mar High School transferred 
to Mater Dei, and interscholastic sports authorities put Mater Dei on one 
year's probation for alleged recruiting irregularities -- a misunderstanding, 
according to Weling. 
Criticism from rival basketball coaches was unusually harsh and open in the mid 
'80s, when Mater Dei Coach (and now also athletic director) Gary McKnight had 
some of the best teams ever and set them to running up lopsided scores of 
103-46, 91-37 and 92-31. 
Some charged McKnight cared only about his team's ranking in polls. An athletic 
director at a Los Angeles Catholic high school published a letter questioning 
McKnight's "responsibility as a Christian educator. 
"After all," wrote Bob Fish of Cathedral High School, "where is the compassion 
for the other team?" 
A few years later, McKnight said his youth (he was in his late 20s) had made 
him overzealous. He had mellowed since then, he said. On the other hand, the 
enthusiasm of and for his teams has hardly abated. 
The intensity of students and boosters is remarkable for the high school level. 
An extraordinarily large pep squad, sometime practicing longer hours than 
sports teams, has won national championships. They and rooters travel great 
distances for away games, throw tailgate parties, buy and wear "Monarch Mania" 
T-shirts. 
Those willing to write checks as well as cheer have formed the Quarterback 
Club. Consequently, players have the best of equipment and uniforms, and the 
baseball field got the first electronic scoreboard on an Orange County high 
school diamond, a gift of alumnus and then-New York Yankees shortstop Bobby 
Meacham. 
"It's almost like a college situation," McKnight said. 
Game crowds are so large and the campus so cramped, however, that Mater Dei 
plays few of its home games at home. Virtually all of the school's departments 
are aching for space. Mater Dei officials are hoping that the past generosity 
of sports boosters signals smooth sailing for a building-fund campaign. 
"I don't think it's going to hurt -- put it that way," Weling said. 
Opened in 1950 as part of the Southern California postwar boom in Catholic 
education, Mater Dei was designed for a student enrollment of only about 800. 
It was the only coeducational Catholic high school in Orange County, and 
applications soon began to rise. The enrollment began its steep climb in 1956 
and by 1964 had jumped to 1,800. 
Mater Dei was refusing as many as 900 applicants each year until 1987, when the 
county's second Catholic co-ed high school, Santa Margarita, opened in Rancho 
Santa Margarita and relieved some of the pressure. With an enrollment holding 
at about 2,100, Mater Dei now turns away about 200 applicants a year. 
In the meantime, a former bank building was acquired and temporary classrooms 
were brought in. More affluent students meant more cars to park. Students' cars 
line neighborhood streets and cover the outdoors basketball courts, which must 
be cleared by the time ROTC drill begins. 
There are two lunch periods so that only 1,000 students at a time cram the 
"lunchroom," merely row after row of outdoor benches. If it's raining, the 
diners take over the gym. 
Fund raising to relieve Mater Dei's crowding was postponed while the diocese 
concentrated on financing the new Santa Margarita campus. 
It was the first campaign to build a new Catholic school in Orange County since 
the '40s and the first new Catholic high school in the nation in a decade. 
Fund-raisers received a pleasant surprise. Not only did they raise the required 
$26 million, but the three largest contributions, all more than $1 million, 
came from non-Catholics. 
Not surprisingly, Santa Margarita's subsequent enrollment policies have 
permitted an unusually high non-Catholic enrollment -- about 25%. Mater Dei's 
is only about 5%, but consultants say that could change if studies show it 
would be a fund-raising advantage. 
"Successful fund raising promotes more successful fund raising," said Father 
Michael Harris, Santa Margarita's principal and former principal at Mater Dei. 
Weling -- a Santa Ana native and former Mater Dei student, teacher and freshman 
football coach -- has been principal of Mater Dei for three years. Nearly half 
the time has been spent trying to figure a solution to the space problem. 
Weling said some have suggested moving the campus at Edinger Avenue and Bristol 
Street because the neighborhood has become increasingly poorer and run-down. 
But the school's tradition and his fondness for his hometown Santa Ana make him 
want to keep the school where it always has been, he said. 
Still, if about eight more acres cannot be obtained, staying there would be 
very difficult, Weling said. The best hope would be obtaining the land as part 
of possible city-sponsored redevelopment of the area, he said. 
Otherwise, the campus might be moved to somewhere close by -- preferably within 
Santa Ana but perhaps in the South Coast Plaza area, Huntington Beach or 
Tustin. 
"We have casually looked around," Weling said. "Of course, it's up to the 
bishop to decide." 
The most telling factor, however, is bound to be money. Weling says he is new 
to fund raising, but beginning next fall he will dive into it as the school's 
new president. Someone else will be hired to succeed him as principal, perhaps 
a lay person -- which would be a first for the school. 
Already at work is the Robert B. Sharp Co. of Santa Ana, the fund-raising 
consultants for the Santa Margarita High School project. 
Bob Sharp said his firm will interview the sort of people who make such 
donations to gauge the feasibility of Mater Dei's hopes. Surprisingly, Sharp 
said he doesn't consider the athletic department's fund raising and victory 
record much of an asset. 
"Generally speaking, strong (athletics) programs really only yield 
athletics-fund giving. They have very little effect on building-fund programs," 
Sharp said. 
"Ironically, we're seeing some skepticism from major donors when it comes to 
putting big bucks in athletic programs if some money won't be available to the 
school in general," he said. "There is a real concern now over faculty salaries 
in Catholic schools," which at Mater Dei average $6,000 to $10,000 a year below 
public school levels. Not surprising, part of the fund-raising goal includes 
endowment funds to increase teacher salaries, according to Weling. 
"It gets down to a belief in the ideals and the benefits the institution seeks 
to provide," Sharp said. "Every institution is a little bit different. We hope 
to find that at Mater Dei the alumni have a tremendous love for it, respect for 
it." 
Weling is optimistic. "After 40 years, we have a well-established alumni . . . 
," he said. "We're just hoping that corporations will help us too." 
Times staff writer Tom Hamilton contributed to this story. 
