L.A. CATHOLIC ARCHDIOCESE PROJECTS $8-MILLION DEFICIT 
The administrative arm of the Los Angeles Catholic Archdiocese has had a 
moratorium on hiring and new programs for the last eight months and faces a 
budget deficit of up to $8 million by June, according to its chief financial 
officer. 
The projected shortfall has been caused primarily by increased subsidies to 
inner-city parishes and schools, as well as sharply rising health insurance 
costs, Jose Debasa said in an interview this week. 
"We're doing more than we can afford to do," said Debasa, who oversees yearly 
expenses of $111 million for the chancery, as the archdiocesan central offices 
are called. But he said the deficit could be smaller, depending on other 
sources of income. 
The disclosure comes on the heels of the release this month of a more upbeat 
financial report for the fiscal year that ended June 30, 1989. A church 
spokesman said at the time that "the financial condition of the archdiocese is 
healthy, but . . . could be much better." (In addition to the chancery, that 
report covered another $200 million handled independently by parishes and 
parish-run schools.) 
The most troubling trend in the archdiocese-wide report for fiscal 1989, Debasa 
said, was that expenses of $301 million represented an increase of 4.2% from 
the previous year while income rose less than 0.5%, to $325 million. At the 
same time, there was a 10% rise in contributions from parishioners. 
If more parishes and schools cannot make ends meet, more of them will be 
seeking financial aid from the chancery budget, Debasa said. 
This year is the first time that the chancery has imposed a budget cutback or 
spending freeze on its departments. Debasa said this indicates that financial 
problems, while not grave, are growing. 
"We are holding down expenses but not getting the income we should, considering 
the size and importance of this archdiocese," he said. About 300 people are 
employed in the chancery. Debasa said the only major exception to the freeze on 
new programs was the recent approval of an expansion of the Tidings, the 
archdiocesan newspaper, including creation of a Spanish-language paper. 
A 29% rise in medical and health insurance costs last September prompted Debasa 
and other chancery officers to ask each department to cut back 16% in their 
expected spending for the year ending June 30, 1990. The departments achieved 
only a 13% reduction because health costs increased an additional 12% on Jan. 
1, he said. 
The archdiocese, the most populous in the country with 3.4 million Catholics in 
285 parishes, provides financial subsidies to 51 inner-city parishes. 
"When I came here four years ago we gave a little more than $3 million to help 
inner-city parishes. Today that subsidy has doubled," Debasa said. Among the 
biggest expenses are improved teacher salaries, insurance, earthquake code 
compliance and rehabilitating older buildings, he said. 
Debasa estimated that the chancery deficit by the end of June will be between 
$5 million and $8 million. 
"If we don't have the cash, we have to go to our reserves," he said. However, 
he added, a deficit is not certain if market investments or other sources of 
revenue bring more than expected. 
Archbishop Roger M. Mahony has expanded the chancery bureaucracy manyfold since 
succeeding Cardinal Timothy Manning in 1985 as archbishop of Los Angeles. 
"We've grown awfully large very fast," Debasa said. The freeze on hiring and 
new programs will continue until final reports from consultants analyzing what 
services might be trimmed are in place, he said. 
