FASHION 89; 
3 DESIGNERS OFFER MEDLEY OF MESSAGES 
The classics of Hermes touched knees Tuesday with the more decorative designs 
of Valentino and Emanuel Ungaro as all three fashion houses showed their fall 
styles within a 24-hour span. 
Hermes, undergoing great expansion in Europe these days, is trying to update 
its fashion image without losing its traditional charm. The results are a 
quaint blend of prim and progressive. 
The firm's famous silk twill scarf prints have been incorporated into shirts, 
sweaters and vests, which will probably become collector's items. They are 
teamed with slim leather pants, knickers and timeless tweed suits with an old 
money look. Colors for these are in the classic category, too: deep red, dark 
green, warm brown and camel. 
Some pants and coats have Kelly fastenings (named for the late 
actress-turned-princess, Grace Kelly), which have been used for decades in the 
company's luggage and bags. Updated looks include swingy fleece jackets that 
reverse from green to pale pumpkin, slate blue to gray and wine to taupe. A 
pants outfit is executed in three fabrics of the same pale sky blue shade: 
corduroy pants, slubbed wool jacket and leather coat. 
Skirts were just below the knee or longer for day and evening wear, which 
included gracefully slim black coat dresses and loose, black or white satin 
jackets to toss over skinny black satin pants. 
The new design team here consists of Claude Brouet, a French former fashion 
magazine editor; and designers Myrene de Premonville, Tan Giudicelli and Thomas 
Maier. 
Bright and Busy 
Ungaro's look is bright and busy by comparison. It is a melange of mixed 
patterns, shiny bright satins and velvets, iridescent taffeta and tri-color 
outfits with bright shades used for jackets, blouses and skirts. In among these 
mixed messages were elegantly simple, wool tweed and black leather suits. A big 
group of the designer's signature dresses in bright colors, draped and shirred 
from shoulder to knee, received enthusiastic applause Tuesday. They looked 
positively simple amid all the other Ungaro clothes. 
The frill was definitely not gone from this designer's drawing board. His final 
group of evening wear featured short, iridescent taffeta, igloo-shaped capes 
above short, slim strapless dresses bedecked with huge rows of ruffles 
traveling every which way. 
Italian designer Valentino seemed to leave no trend untapped in his 200-outfit 
show Monday, the longest of the season so far. Long, quilted circle skirts with 
button fronts, slim skirts in above-the-knee and ankle lengths, cuffed 
trousers, tufted or quilted jackets, plaid suits and short, sexy, draped 
dresses were all on the menu here. 
Contrasts in Color 
Colors were very bright or subdued. Hot pink or bright blue silk-quilted 
jackets appeared above slinky brown sequined dresses. Black cashmere jumpsuits 
featured filmy lace bodice inserts and lace turtlenecks. Black velvet dresses 
and theater suits were ornamented with frilly white ruffled collars and cuffs. 
The designer's signature fabric this season is a mosaic of tiny geometric 
shapes, which look sewn together by hand, as if for a quilt. This fabric, in 
brights or shades of brown, showed up in skirts, jackets and coats throughout 
the collection. 
The French culture minister invited visiting buyers and press on Monday night 
to the Gauguin art exhibit, which recently toured the United States and is on 
display here. On Sunday night, designer Yves Saint Laurent hosted a museum tour 
of Russian costumes lent by the Hermitage. Saint Laurent ends the week of fall 
fashion shows with his presentation today. 
