ORNELAS HAS NO RECALL OF FATAL CRASH, LAWYER SAYS 
Danny David Ornelas, on trial for murder in the vehicular death of a Newport 
Beach mother last September, has no memory of the incident, his lawyer said 
Tuesday. 
The attorney, Ralph Bencangey, said in an interview that Ornelas cannot 
remember anything about driving a car in a narrow alley on Balboa Peninsula and 
striking and fatally injuring Debbie Killelea on Sept. 1. 
An expert witness has also testified that Ornelas had told him he was unable to 
remember anything about the fatal crash. "He (Ornelas) said he can't even 
remember turning on the ignition," said the witness, Ted A. Mitchell. 
Ornelas, 19, of Huntington Park, is on trial in Orange County Superior Court in 
Westminster on a charge of second-degree murder. One of the closely watched 
aspects of the trial has been whether the young defendant would take the stand 
to give his version of the fatal collision. 
On Tuesday, Bencangey completed his presentation of the defense's case, and 
Ornelas was not called to testify. Bencangey, however, said he may still call 
him Wednesday. 
"I'm not going to disclose what we plan to do," said Bencangey, in an interview 
outside the courtroom. 
The prosecution has accused Ornelas of drunkenly driving a speeding car into 
the alley and deliberately running down Killelea, 37, as she stood with her two 
young sons. 
Judge Luis A. Cardenas several times on Tuesday prohibited Bencangey from 
questioning another witness about the effect of alcohol intoxication on memory 
loss. Deputy Dist. Atty. Thomas Goethals had objected and the judge agreed, 
ruling the witness was not an expert in psychology or memory loss. 
Bencangey later said the ruling did not hurt the defense because Mitchell, on 
Monday, had already testified that Ornelas is unable to remember the car 
collision. 
Mitchell, an automotive engineer who is an expert in analyzing car accidents, 
testified Monday that people in such accidents often repress memories of the 
event. Ornelas only has "nightmares and dreams but no specific recollections," 
Mitchell told the jury. 
On Tuesday, Darrell Clardy, an expert in analyzing behavior of drunk drivers 
and a toxicologist formerly employed by the Orange County Sheriff's Department, 
said he believes Ornelas only had a 0.04 blood-alcohol level at the time the 
collision occurred -- 5 p.m. Sept. 1. 
Ornelas, who was arrested 35 minutes after the collision, had a blood alcohol 
level of 0.18 at 6:43 p.m. when a blood sample was taken, law enforcement 
experts have testified. Under state law, anyone with a blood alcohol level of 
0.10 is considered intoxicated. Ornelas thus registered almost twice the level 
of legal intoxication. Clardy's testimony in effect challenged whether Ornelas 
was that drunk when the impact took place. Clardy noted that Ornelas and two 
friends were drinking strong rum at the beach shortly before Ornelas went to 
the car to drive it down the alley. Clardy said strong intoxicants sometimes 
are not absorbed into the bloodstream until long after being consumed. 
Bencangey attempted to ask Clardy several questions about how some car accident 
victims lose memories of the events, but the judge would not allow the 
questions. 
