U.S. EXPELS SOVIET ATTACHE FOR SEEKING COMPUTER DATA 
A Soviet military attache, carefully monitored by the FBI for seven months 
while he allegedly tried to obtain sensitive information on U.S. computer 
systems, was ordered expelled from the country Thursday on charges of accepting 
a package of classified documents from a computer company employee. 
State Department spokesman Dennis Harter said Lt. Col. Yuri Nikolayevich 
Pakhtusov, 35, was declared persona non grata and ordered to return home for 
"activities incompatible with his diplomatic status," the usual charge for 
diplomats caught spying. 
According to an FBI spokeswoman, Pakhtusov attempted last August to obtain 
classified information from an employee of a private firm that handles computer 
security programs for the government. The employee immediately contacted the 
FBI and followed the bureau's instructions on future contacts with the Soviet 
official. 
Receives Documents 
Barbara Wallace, the spokeswoman, said Pakhtusov was arrested Wednesday night 
in suburban northern Virginia after he received classified documents from the 
employee. She declined to name the employee or his company because "if you 
release the identities then these people will not be approached again by the 
Soviets." 
She said that Pakhtusov was arrested before he had an opportunity to examine 
the documents. 
"The FBI has a policy of talking to business and individuals who may be 
approached by Soviets and other spies," Wallace said. "We request these 
individuals and companies to notify us immediately of any such request. In this 
instance, we were very lucky to have an individual who did his or her patriotic 
duty by informing us immediately about the approaches made by this Soviet 
attache." 
Although there is no indication that classified information was compromised, 
the incident underlines a continuing Soviet campaign to penetrate Western 
computer networks and to intercept computer communications. 
"I don't think they (the Soviets) have the technical means that we have to deal 
with encoded material," said Stephen D. Bryen, a former Pentagon technology 
security expert now with Delta Tech Corp. in Washington. "They lack 
supercomputers. From their point of view the only way in is to find a trap door 
that would let them get around the encryption." 
Bryen said that Moscow relied for several years on the family spy ring led by 
former U.S. Navy Warrant Officer John A. Walker Jr., who was arrested in 1985. 
"For a very long while they had free access to our stuff," Bryen said. "Lately, 
they have been running dry, and I am sure there has been a lot of pressure on 
the KGB and GRU to get another source." 
U.S. officials said Pakhtusov was an officer of the GRU, the Soviet military 
intelligence agency. 
An FBI statement said the documents involved in the arrest "dealt with how the 
U.S. government protects classified and other sensitive information contained 
in its computer systems." FBI officials refused to be more specific. 
A State Department official said the department uses a system similar to that 
which Pakhtusov apparently was trying to penetrate. 
The FBI said the case had no connection to the arrest last week of several West 
German "hackers" accused of selling computer access codes to Soviet 
intelligence agents. 
Pakhtusov is listed as an assistant military attache at the Soviet Embassy in 
Washington, a position that provides him with full diplomatic immunity from 
prosecution. He has been assigned to the embassy in Washington since last June. 
Almost all embassies throughout the world employ attaches who act as liaisons 
with the military organizations of the host countries. It is well known that 
the primary activity of many military attaches is the collection of 
intelligence. Because the practice is so widespread, the activities are 
normally overlooked unless they become blatant. 
In the past, the Soviet Union has expelled American diplomats to retaliate for 
the expulsion of Soviet diplomats. Expulsion is the most severe penalty applied 
to people with diplomatic immunity. 
