ADOPTION LINES FORM FOR BURROS, WILD HORSES 
Nine-year-old Laura Riedman knew exactly what she wanted at the Bureau of Land 
Management's wild horse and burro adoption Friday at Pierce College in Woodland 
Hills. And she found it. 
The blonde fourth-grader chose a 6-month-old black and brown filly because "she 
was pretty, she looked calm, she had nice eyes, she had a strong back, she had 
straight legs and she had a good strong chest. 
"I love horses," said the gum-chewing youngster from La Mesa, east of San 
Diego. "They're big and beautiful and fast and exciting." 
Riedman's mustang had been rounded up in the high desert near China Lake, near 
Ridgecrest in the Mojave Desert, which the federal BLM says is overpopulated 
with horses and burros. The animals were trucked to holding pens in Ridgecrest 
and then to adoption sites. At Pierce, the BLM offered 75 horses for $125 each 
and 20 burros for $75 apiece. 
Gene Nunn, wild horse and burro technician for the BLM's Riverside District, 
said that because of a cut in federal funding, only one adoption will be held 
in Southern California this year and that many animals will be shipped for 
adoption to the East or Midwest. There were four adoptions in Southern 
California in 1989. 
"There are more people who want them than can get them," said Becky Borquez, 
state coordinator for the American Mustang and Burro Assn. "The problem is, why 
subject them to a three-day ride? They get cuts and bruises and banged up. They 
kick each other. I'd like to see them kept here." 
The donkeys, which is another name for burros, proved more popular than the 
mustangs. By midday, animal enthusiasts had claimed 11 burros, which are about 
the size of Shetland ponies, but only 16 horses. 
The remaining animals will be available to the public from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
today and Sunday. 
A beaming Caren Woodruff of Fullerton was the first Friday to take home a 
donkey, a 2-year-old gray female. 
"She started to walk toward me in the pen," Woodruff said as her new animal 
kicked lightly against the side of the trailer. "She seemed a little friendlier 
than the others and I thought I'd have a better time teaching her." 
Gemini Herzog, a Pierce College student seeking a burro for adoption, said that 
since 1982, she has owned a pet donkey that she keeps at her home in 
Garberville in Northern California. 
"She's the greatest pet," Herzog said. "She hangs out in the yard. You can put 
a pack on her. She thinks she's a person. She'll come into the house if you let 
her. She drinks soda from a can if you hold it. If you have a cup and walk by 
with it, she'll drink out of that." 
"There is no such thing as an unadoptable burro," Nunn said. "We have people 
who drive to our holding pen in Ridgecrest from Montana to get them. 
"They are getting real popular as predator control. You put them with sheep and 
they run coyotes off. In the East, they will run off packs of dogs. And they 
are good for pets and pack animals. . . . They eat less than horses and they 
are real good weed eaters." 
Although the burros are popular, horse lovers such as Laura Riedman and her 
father, Dick, a Cal State San Diego professor, were equally pleased by the 
opportunity to take home a healthy mustang. 
Riedman selected a 4-year-old steel-gray gelding that shook the metal rails of 
his holding pen and repeatedly kicked the wooden gate behind him before being 
allowed to run through a chute into the Riedmans' trailer. 
"I liked the way he moved and positioned himself with the other horses," said 
Riedman, explaining why he selected the gelding. "Mustangs have qualities of 
durability that appeal to me." 
Observers said that with caring owners, even the wild mustangs would become 
good pets. 
"Their experience with humans hasn't been real terrific," Borquez said. "In 
their first contact, they get rounded up by helicopters and placed in big 
corrals and freeze-branded on the neck. 
"But once they build up trust, they are wonderful. I have a mustang mare who's 
4 years old and I swear if she could crawl into my lap, she would." 
