NORTHRIDGE DISCOVERS AN OFFENSE IN 9-5 CONFERENCE WIN 
The Cal State Northridge baseball team experienced an awakening Saturday in a 
9-5 win over Cal State Los Angeles at Matador Field. 
Northridge (12-10 overall), which defeated the Golden Eagles for the second 
time in as many days, finished its first round of California Collegiate 
Athletic Assn. play with a 7-5 record. 
The Matadors will play at UCLA on Wednesday in the first of 11 consecutive 
nonconference games before resuming CCAA play April 5. 
"We have been slumping lately," said Northridge Coach Bill Kernen, whose 
Matadors had dropped four conference games in a row before sweeping the series 
with Cal State L. A. (9-14, 2-3 in conference play). 
"(Saturday's) game was the first time that we had an actual offense and just 
didn't wait for someone to hit a home run," Kernen said. 
It also was the first time in six games since a 7-6 victory over Chapman on 
Feb. 27 that the Matadors had scored more than three runs. 
Saturday marked the first collegiate start for freshman left-hander John 
Bushart (1-0). The former Thousand Oaks High standout came into the game with a 
14.52 earned-run average in 4 2/3 innings. But Bushart pitched seven strong 
innings against the Golden Eagles, allowing two earned runs on three hits. 
"He pitched a tremendous game," Kernen said. "He's been waiting his turn and 
finally got his chance." 
Northridge erupted for seven runs in the fifth inning to break a 2-2 tie. 
Kyle Washington knocked in two runs on a bases-loaded single. Eric Johnson had 
an RBI double and Craig Clayton hit a run-scoring single. 
Northridge also got help from Golden Eagle reliever Todd Johnson, who threw 
back-to-back wild pitches with the bases loaded to bring home two more 
Matadors. 
Cal State L. A. scored two unearned runs in the second inning to take a 2-0 
lead before Northridge tied the score with a run in each of the third and 
fourth innings. 
The Golden Eagles added a run in the sixth and another in the eighth to cut the 
Northridge lead to 9-4, but reliever Todd Denhart retired Abdom Pinon on a 
groundout to end the rally. Steve Soliz homered in the top of the ninth and Cal 
State L. A. had runners at first and second with one out. But Steve Velasquez 
flied out to center fielder Greg Shockey, who threw out David Adams trying to 
advance to end the game. 
