SCRIPPS RESEARCH VESSEL SEIZED AS TINY AMOUNT OF POT IS FOUND 
A scientific research ship operated by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
has been seized by U. S. Customs officials in Honolulu after a search with dogs 
turned up a small amount of marijuana allegedly belonging to a low-ranking 
crewman. 
The seizure Monday of the Thomas Washington, a 209-foot vessel that is Scripps' 
second-largest research ship, was made under the federal government's 
controversial "zero tolerance" anti-drug campaign and is the second such 
seizure of a research ship in less than a year. 
Last May, Customs agents in San Diego seized the Atlantis II, the grand dame of 
the U. S. research fleet, after agents found a trace of marijuana in a 
crewman's shaving kit. The vessel, owned by the Woods Hole Oceanographic 
Institution in Massachusetts, wasn't formally returned for two months, though 
it was allowed to continue its scientific work. 
That seizure and others drew widespread public and congressional criticism and 
prompted Customs to quietly back away from some cases involving minuscule 
amounts of drugs or drug paraphernalia. The Coast Guard also modified its 
seizure policies. And just last month, the federal government further revised 
its policies, saying it would stop seizing fishing boats in cases in which only 
"personal amounts" of drugs are found. 
In the case of Monday's seizure, Customs officials conducted an "intensive 
search" of the Thomas Washington using drug-sniffing dogs. Authorities found 
4.5 grams of marijuana hidden in a berth of crew member Kenneth G. Racca Jr., 
28, a wiper who is from San Diego. 
The ship, which is owned by the Navy but has been operated by Scripps since 
1965, left San Diego a year ago on a yearlong research cruise. When it docked 
in Honolulu on Monday, it was returning from Pago Pago in American Samoa. 
Scripps spokesman Chuck Colgan said the vessel was routinely searched by the 
ship's captain before docking at the University of Hawaii's Pier 45 in Honolulu 
Harbor in preparation for Customs. 
"We don't know why the dogs were there," said Colgan. "At this amount (of 
marijuana), we're not talking about smuggling. It's for personal use, if that." 
The boat carries a crew of 15 and about 15 scientists. Both crew members and 
scientists must sign a document acknowledging that no drugs will be tolerated 
on board. 
The Thomas Washington is scheduled to depart Honolulu on Saturday for a 30-day 
research cruise around Hawaii, and is due back in San Diego about May 29, 
Colgan said. 
But Scripps officials are worried that the seizure could be costly, if the ship 
is not allowed to leave. 
"Our hope is this matter can be resolved soon . . . and that Scripps can leave 
port on schedule," said Scripps' director Edward A. Frieman in a prepared 
statement. "Expeditions are planned years in advance and require the 
coordination of people and materials from very many organizations from around 
the world. A delay in the ship's departure from Honolulu would have a 
considerable adverse impact on the effectiveness and expense of the balance of 
the crew's operations." 
Crewman to Appear in Court 
George Roberts, Customs Service district director in Honolulu, said Tuesday 
that the vessel could be returned to Scripps after an administrative 
petitioning process and payment of a fine. And another Customs official in 
Hawaii said, "We'll do all we can to expedite the release of this ship." 
Colgan, the Scripps spokesman, said the institution was not certain what it 
would have to do to get the boat released, but he said that Scripps hopes to 
avoid a fine, because no fine was levied in the Atlantis II seizure. 
Racca, the crew member, is scheduled to appear in federal court in Honolulu on 
Thursday, where he faces one charge each of importation and possession of a 
controlled substance. A court spokeswoman told the Associated Press that he 
would likely be fined and released. 
Colgan said Racca's duties as a wiper involved "spending his day wiping things 
off, like oily engines and things." 
John Miller, a spokesman for Customs in Los Angeles, said Tuesday that the 
agency has modified its zero-tolerance policy only in relation to commercial 
fishing vessels. 
The anti-drug crackdown, which began last spring, is still in force for all 
other vessels, including the one operated by Scripps, he said. 
Under zero tolerance, boats can be seized by Customs if even minute amounts of 
drugs are found on board. 
However, if small amounts of drugs are found on commercial fishing vessels, he 
said, the vessels are placed under "constructive seizure," meaning that the 
owners may continue operating the boats until their legal cases are resolved. 
Physical seizure of such boats might cause "undue hardship" on innocent owners 
who might be unaware of the actions of their crews, he said. 
Because the Scripps vessel is not a commercial fishing vessel, it was 
physically seized, Miller said. 
Since the zero-tolerance campaign began last spring, 17 boats have been seized 
by Customs in its Western region, which includes seven Western states, he said. 
All but two have been returned to their owners, he said. 
Either Scripps or the Navy has the right to appeal the seizure through legal 
channels, Miller said. 
