ANGELUS LEAGUE BASEBALL ROUNDUP; 
ROLISH PITCHES A NO-HITTER, STRIKING OUT 18, FOR SERVITE 
Chad Rolish of Servite High School pitched a no-hitter and struck out 18 in the 
Friars' 4-0 victory over Bishop Montgomery in an Angelus League game Saturday 
at Anaheim. 
The senior left-hander, relying on his breaking ball, walked three but had 
two-strike counts on each of the three batters he didn't strike out. Two 
grounded to short and the other popped out. 
Rolish (2-0) has struck out 30 in 14 innings this season. He played for 
Servite's junior varsity team last year after transferring from Orange 
Lutheran. 
Servite (7-3, 1-1 in league) scored its runs in the fifth inning. Rolish came 
in on a squeeze by Ed Crippen. Steve Sandoval's bases-loaded single drove in 
two, and the final run scored on a passed ball. 
Bishop Montgomery is 2-5-2, 0-2. 
Bishop Amat 3, Mater Dei 0 -- Right-hander Eric White allowed three hits and 
struck out six to lead host Bishop Amat (6-4, 2-1) past Mater Dei for the fifth 
consecutive year on its home field in La Puente. 
Mater Dei (8-3, 2-1) had only two runners reach third base and had its best 
scoring opportunity in the sixth, when it loaded the bases. 
Bishop Amat broke a scoreless tie in the sixth inning off relief pitcher Colin 
Galronski. Juan Hernandez hit a two-out single to right to drive in a run and 
another scored when right fielder Frank Setera misplayed Hernandez's hit. 
Bishop Amat increased its lead to 3-0 when Ted Persell lined a single down the 
left-field line, scoring Hernandez. Bishop Amat got only two hits off starter 
Jason Dietrich, but the Lancers got four singles off Galronski in the sixth. 
Rick Ellis, Mater Dei's leadoff hitter, had two of the three hits off White and 
stole a base. Mater Dei stole five bases, including two by catcher Cale Carter. 
"We don't ever seem to come here mentally prepared to play," Mater Dei Coach 
Bob Ickes said. "White didn't overpower us, but he threw strikes and we didn't 
hit the ball." TOM HAMILTON 
