OFFICIALS MOVE TO CURB RELEASE OF FREON GAS 
California could take the national lead in fighting the spread of 
ozone-depleting chemicals if proposals presented Friday by Los Angeles Mayor 
Tom Bradley and state Assemblyman Tom Hayden (D-Santa Monica) are adopted. 
At a City Hall news conference, Bradley called on the City Council to enact a 
measure requiring all service stations and auto repair shops in Los Angeles to 
use special equipment to recycle the chemical Freon when servicing automobile 
air-conditioning units. 
He was joined by Hayden, who unveiled proposed legislation, including a bill 
that would extend the repair shop requirements to auto service centers 
throughout California. Hayden's proposals, to be introduced over a two-year 
period, go on to call for an eventual ban on use of all forms of so-called CFC 
chemicals in California by 1997. 
No jurisdiction in the nation as yet has such strict controls in place. 
The control of Freon from auto air-conditioning units alone could eliminate 
nearly 20% of all the CFC chemicals used nationally, according to statistics 
presented by Bradley's office. When the Freon in a vehicle's air conditioner 
becomes contaminated with water or air, service stations routinely drain the 
gas -- simply allowing it to escape into the atmosphere -- and replace it with 
pure Freon. 
The CFC chemicals are widely used in refrigeration, air conditioning, aerosol 
sprays and the manufacture of polystyrene. 
Hole in the Ozone 
Scientists believe that CFCs are destroying the Earth's ozone layer, which 
protects plant and animal life from ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Experts 
believe that CFCs have already created a hole in the ozone layer over 
Antarctica, and leaders from around the world met in London this week to form a 
global plan for eventual elimination of the chemicals. 
"We prefer the comfort of cool air while we travel from one destination to 
another," Bradley said. "The problem is that Freon, a gas which creates this 
cool air, is the highest ozone-depleting gas." 
The mayor said he will direct the city's General Services Department to buy the 
recycling units and begin using them on the city's fleet of about 6,000 
vehicles before the ordinance takes effect. The machines, made by about a dozen 
companies, cost from about $1,500 to $4,000. 
Bradley's proposed ordinance would also ban the sale of Freon to anyone who 
cannot show proof of ownership of a recycling unit. The gas is now available in 
cans for people who want to replace the coolant in their automotive units 
themselves. 
The requirement for all service stations to use the machinery would begin on 
Jan. 1, 1990. 
Another Requirement 
Some service station owners said the requirement would be just one more in a 
series of recently enacted environmental laws that cause them to buy special 
equipment or make other changes in the way they do business. 
But some representatives of the industry are supporting the proposals. 
Steve Shelton, director of the Southern California Service Station Assn., said, 
"They've made their case . . . and I think it makes a lot of sense." 
But, Shelton cautioned, much of the Freon in use in vehicles is lost to the 
atmosphere through broken seals or pipes long before motorists get to a service 
station. 
And the added costs, as always, would have to be passed along to consumers. 
Shelton said a typical $50 air-conditioning servicing would increase by $5 to 
$10. 
