PARENTS JOIN TOGETHER FOR SUPPORT AFTER LOSING CUSTODY; 
FAMILIES: A SUPPORT GROUP FOR DIVORCED PARENTS WHO DO NOT HAVE CUSTODY OF THEIR 
CHILDREN IS QUICKLY GAINING POPULARITY. 
Marcia Smith-Field spent one year and thousands of dollars entrenched in a 
divorce that left her devastated -- and without custody of her two daughters. 
It was the end of a troubled nine-year marriage during which Field battled 
depression. Her struggle continued throughout a separation and a bitter divorce 
that resulted in a custody trial. Halfway through that fight, Field, fatigued 
and outmaneuvered, surrendered; she conceded custody of her girls, ages 6 and 
9, to her ex-husband. 
"I fought because I felt it would be important some day for my children to know 
that I did," Field said. "But after a year I was emotionally exhausted and 
financially drained." 
She did not know it at the time, but her depression was driving her to seek 
what she felt lacking, what her ex-husband seemed to have -- a network of 
support. 
"He had an extended family, a lot more support than I did," she said. And, she 
thought, "Custody is not a forever thing. The children's needs would change, I 
would get stronger. I was sure we'd be together again one day." 
The custody trial ended in December, 1988. Soon after, Field's father died of 
leukemia. The double blow left her grieving as both a daughter and a mother. 
"It was devastating to lose my father," Field said. But she felt a tragic 
comparison. "The pain of losing my children was even greater." 
It was compounded by guilt over having conceded custody. "I was suffering 
tremendously. When the children came to visit, all I did was cry." She reacted 
to those feelings by isolating herself. 
Then, last August, she got an idea. 
"I suffered in silence for eight months. Then I realized there had to be 
others," Field said. 
By September she was putting up posters in the family relations offices of 
courthouses and in YWCAs and YMCAs in the area. They read: "Parents Without 
Custody -- A support group for mothers and fathers who have lost custody of 
their children. Speak out! You need no longer suffer in silence." 
The reaction surprised her. In no time at all, there was a group meeting in her 
Stamford home. Soon an offshoot of that group got started in nearby Danbury. 
When Field took her daughters skiing in Vermont, she met a man, also a 
non-custodial parent, who was on an outing with his daughter. Now a Parents 
Without Custody group is meeting in the man's home. 
Then the Danbury News-Times printed a story about Field and sent it over the 
news wire, where it was picked up by a newspaper in Missouri. In a town called 
Carl Junction the story caught the eye of a divorced woman who called Field 
asking for guidelines to start a group there. 
Next a woman in Portland, Me., heard about it and a group is starting there 
too. 
In only a few months, Parents Without Custody has spread, mostly by word of 
mouth, from bulletin boards in the Stamford area to three other states, with 
more inquiries coming in. It looks like it will spread across the United States 
-- and be the only national support group of its kind. 
Edward Kweskin, a Stamford attorney and a specialist in family law, is not 
surprised. He is working pro bono with Field to establish Parents Without 
Custody as a nonprofit organization. 
"Unfortunately, this group sells itself," Kweskin said. "People who go through 
divorce comment on feeling angry, hurt, disenfranchised, confused. And for 
non-custodial parents, not only has a sacred union been destroyed, they've also 
lost the parental prerogatives of guidance and control, and the constancy and 
immediacy of their children's love. It leaves a tremendous void." 
Not only an emotional void, but often a practical one as well. Field, for 
example, lost her job over spending so much time in court, and then her home 
when she conceded custody. And she found that there is a ready-made perception 
that goes with the non-custodial parent. 
"When people hear you don't have the children, they see you as the guilty 
parent, the bad one," Field said. 
Talk during the group meetings centers around common problems with ex-spouses 
and getting information from schools and doctors. One parent talks about how, 
when she tries to call her children at their father's home in a town several 
miles away, all she gets is an answering machine. And when her younger child 
was sick recently and her ex-husband didn't take him to the doctor, she felt 
helpless. "I didn't know what to do. I don't know who his doctor is up there." 
Often, non-custodial parents are not getting information from their ex-spouses. 
"These are the same people who got divorced; they still have anger," Kweskin 
said. "They may not overtly interfere, but many act in a passive-aggressive 
manner." For the non-custodial parent, the result is missed report-card 
conferences, school plays, baseball games and ballet recitals. 
