OATH-TAKING CAPS 30-YEAR STRUGGLE FOR NUJOMA 
When Sam Nujoma took the oath as president of this newborn nation today, it 
marked the end of a personal battle for liberation that began almost exactly 30 
years ago when the rebel leader slipped out of the territory to launch a bush 
war against South African colonialists. 
Nujoma, a stocky man of 60 years with a thick white beard, has been called 
uneducated and ruthless by his opponents and a kindly man of the people by his 
supporters. 
A former assistant and now political opponent has said Nujoma is "a very dull 
person, basically." But Nujoma's closest comrades in the South-West Africa 
People's Organization describe him as a charismatic leader with shrewd 
political skills who has survived several challenges to his leadership while in 
exile. 
Nujoma has been welcomed since his return to Namibia six months ago as a 
conquering hero, especially in the most populous north, home of his Owambo 
people and the center of SWAPO's support. His cherubic, smiling face looks out 
from posters, flags and T-shirts all across the country. And his speeches have 
drawn tens of thousands. 
Samuel Shaffishuna Nujoma, whose formal education ended with primary school, 
got his start in politics in the late 1950s, when he was fired from his job as 
a steward on the South African railway for union activity. When the Windhoek 
municipality decided to relocate blacks near the city to what is now the 
township of Katutura, Nujoma joined a resistance movement that led to the 
police massacre of 13 demonstrators. 
Nujoma spent a week in jail for his part in the protest, was released and fled 
the country in April, 1960, appearing in New York a few months later to testify 
before the United Nations. He was the founding president of SWAPO in 1960 and 
helped push through a U.N. resolution that declared South African control over 
Namibia illegal. 
Pretoria had fought the U.N. resolution, contending that SWAPO leaders were in 
self-imposed exile. To test South Africa's claim, Nujoma and a colleague 
chartered a plane to Windhoek in 1966. He was arrested at the airport and 
deported the next day. 
When the World Court overruled the U.N. decision, Nujoma launched SWAPO's armed 
struggle. Seven years later, the World Court reversed itself, but South Africa 
refused to relinquish control. 
Nujoma's SWAPO, a liberation movement little known outside of Africa, did not 
have an enviable record in its war against the South African army. In 23 years 
of war, Nujoma's ill-equipped fighters, operating from the desolate wilderness 
of southern Angola, suffered about 20,000 casualties. 
Nujoma himself spent his years in exile traveling the world to plead for money 
for his cause. His image was boosted in 1978, when the United Nations declared 
SWAPO the "sole and authentic representative" of the Namibian people. (It was a 
declaration that the United Nations was forced to ignore last year in order to 
maintain its objectivity in the elections, in which SWAPO was one of 10 parties 
participating.) 
But Nujoma almost scuttled the entire peace process last April when he sent 
several hundred of his fighters into the country as dawn broke on the first day 
of the U.N.-supervised timetable for independence. About 300 SWAPO troops were 
slaughtered in the ensuing week while Nujoma was denying that his fighters had 
entered Namibia. The fighting ended when he ordered his troops to withdraw. 
Now Nujoma urges Namibians to lay aside their past differences and work 
together for the future of the country. 
