SNAPSHOTS: VIETNAMESE REFUGEE FINDS BALANCE BETWEEN TWO WORLDS AT CALTECH. 
It's like a trip to the middle of the country in the middle of the century. 
Andy Hardyville. On this Pasadena block, old oaks and camphor trees arch into a 
canopy of green lace over the street; front yards are fragrant with flower beds 
bordering the squares of new mint-green grass. 
The apartment is decorated in Early Student. Poster of a bathing beauty. A 
license plate tacked on the wall. The TV is on. The MTV channel -- what else? 
The occupant is a student, as a matter of fact, a sophomore at Caltech in 
Pasadena. He will be 21 in June. True to the code, he wears acid jeans. 
But when Tan Pham speaks (both first and last names have the same vowel sound 
as calm) his views are hardly mainstream American. He doesn't care if he ever 
makes a lot of money, he says. 
That "money seems to be everything these days" can get on his nerves, he says, 
and so do "people who fall for money; who will do anything for money." He says 
he has had some friends who have done that. 
His apartment is on the second floor. And from a visitor's vantage point, the 
nerves he refers to are about as apparent as a ladybug would be on the lawn 
below. Pham radiates a sunny serenity. "I can be very nasty," he insists 
merrily. "I can lose my temper." Then he feels compelled to add: "For a few 
seconds." 
Pham spent his first 13 years in Vietnam. "My family was well-educated, and 
wanted me to leave to get a better education," he says, and staying in Vietnam 
would have meant joining the army at 18. 
His parents arranged for him to escape through a leader who organized the 
venture and was paid accordingly. "My parents didn't tell me until the day I 
was supposed to leave," to make sure he wouldn't inadvertently betray the plan. 
He has no trouble recalling his reaction to the news: "I just wanted to go." 
For 11 days, the boy sat in a boat with 21 other people. Studying the 
dimensions of his modest apartment for a moment, he says the boat was about the 
width of the living room, and perhaps as long as the living room plus the 
kitchen. 
"We ran out of food a few times. But fortunately, we met some fishing boats, 
and they gave us some food." Reading of the ordeals of other boat people makes 
him realize how much worse it could have been. "When people have to kill each 
other -- I never experienced that kind of thing." 
Pham and his fellow refugees landed in Macao, across the bay from Hong Kong. 
And then the homesickness finally hit him, as a nine-month stay in a refugee 
camp began. 
A cousin in Hawaii sponsored Pham's entry into the United States, which led to 
another four months in a camp in the Philippines that was designed to prepare 
refugees for life here. "They taught us English." He looks doubtful. "Well, not 
much," he says. 
The international language of math saved him. Without that, "It would have been 
a lot more difficult. That's how I got brave enough to communicate with 
people." 
In Hawaii, an English teacher at the public school he was attending encouraged 
him to apply at a private school, where he was accepted. "My English was very 
horrible then," he says. "But I just took the test anyway, in case -- who 
knows?" Aiming at a career in physics, he came to the mainland to attend 
Caltech 1 1/2 years ago. 
Pham has four brothers and two sisters. One sister escaped Vietnam and is 
living in Holland, and his 15-year-old brother is living with him now in 
Pasadena. It's a big responsibility, he concedes. "I try to sort of tell him, 
just don't do the bad things. As long as he gets to a decent college. That's 
all I want. That's all my parents want." 
He works part time as a programmer for First Quadrant, an investment firm in 
Pasadena, gets A's and Bs at college, and keeps in touch with his parents, who 
don't intend to try and escape themselves, he says -- "just to send their 
children out." 
About half his friends are American, and about half are Vietnamese: "I think 
that's a good thing." 
How are the disparate cultures of the two sets demonstrated? "The way you eat, 
the way you act, the things you talk about, the way you treat people." 
In Asia, the young defer to the old; "Americans tend to do the opposite." Pham 
says, "I realize my parents' purpose for sending me out. I don't want to 
disappoint them." At the same time, he appreciates that "here, we have the 
right to express our opinions." 
"I wouldn't want to go back there now," he says. 
And so here he is, like a tightrope performer with a long pole. To steady 
himself, a dip into the East here, into the West there. He is balanced because 
he is centered. His father believed in him, he says. And, he says: "I believe 
in myself." 
