HOT SHOTS; 
TOP PHOTOGRAPHERS RIVAL STAR CLIENTS IN CELEBRITY STATUS 
Dancing in black spike heels and a sheer chiffon dress, Kim Basinger wants the 
music changed. 
She's purring. 
She's writhing. 
She's rubbing her back against a chalk-white backdrop like a silky cat on this 
breezy, Hollywood rooftop. 
And she's heard enough of chart-topper Bobby Brown. 
"Put on 'Bad,' the Michael Jackson tape," urges the sultry star of "9 1/2 
Weeks," "Blind Date" and the forthcoming "Batman" with Jack Nicholson and 
Michael Keaton. 
"Beautiful! Go! Wow! That's great!" photographer Herb Ritts encourages 
Basinger, firing staccato shots so fast his finger is glued to the camera's 
shutter release. 
"That's nice with the tension on your legs like that. . . . Look at me right 
here. . . . Turn to this side. It's better . . . so I see your leg." 
Here, on the rooftop of Ritts' studio, seven people are working this shoot, 
including a magazine art director, style editor, hairdresser, makeup artist and 
various assistants. But only Ritts seems to notice that Basinger is displeased 
with the music -- she's requested the Jackson tape twice -- and he calmly 
directs an assistant to make the change. 
Few details escape the eyes (or ears) of Ritts, the internationally acclaimed 
photographer who's become as big a star as many of the personalities he 
captures on film. 
Though best known for his cover portraits for such magazines as Vanity Fair, 
Rolling Stone, Interview, GQ and Vogue, Ritts is also celebrated for his work 
in slick fashion magazines from Italy to Japan, for his art prints and nudes 
exhibited in galleries worldwide and for his well-received coffee table book of 
last year, "Herb Ritts Pictures." 
He even had a billboard on Santa Monica Boulevard celebrating the book last 
year. 
In the opinion of many observers, including some of his competitors, Ritts, 37, 
is simply the hottest photographer around, one of a very slim group of 
image-makers who've achieved star status in their own right. 
Says his friend Matthew Rolston, a newer but fast-rising member of this select 
group: "This is Herb's moment." 
How do photographers make the leap from being solid magazine photographers to 
being relentlessly sought after by stars and editors alike? What makes a 
particular photographic vision desirable for setting the tone on everything 
from record album covers to movie billboards to magazine covers? 
And why are Los Angeles-based photographers Ritts and Rolston -- along with 
such well-known photographers as Annie Leibovitz, Helmut Newton and Bruce Weber 
-- suddenly finding themselves at the front of the pack, while other extremely 
gifted individuals have yet to make the cut? 
"It's a change in perception," suggests Derek Ungless, art director at Vogue 
and formerly art director of Rolling Stone. 
"Being hot, which is a particularly '80s phenomenon, seems to account for more 
than being good sometimes, but in the case of Annie and Herb and some others 
it's not the case. They work for certain types of people, certain magazines. 
They produce talked-about images. There's a point where it dawns on the stars 
themselves that if these photographers' pictures are talked about, by 
inference, they get talked about." 
Ungless also cites an obvious but sometimes overlooked factor: Star 
photographers "make people look good. They make them look extraordinary. And 
once they start to be hot, they get hotter." 
So how do you get hot? 
"I've never really figured it out. It's not the pictures. It has to be 
personality," says Temple Smith, picture editor of Esquire, referring to the 
fact that a number of celebrity portrait specialists produce exceptional 
photographs but they're not considered to be heating up the inside track. 
"Matthew (Rolston) and Herb (Ritts) are in a class of their own. Matthew's a 
fabulous photographer and so's Herb and so are other photographers but they 
don't get the access (to celebrities). When I call Mr. or Ms. Celebrity and ask 
them to shoot with somebody, they often have an opinion. Oftentimes, the 
celebrity will tell me who they want to shoot with, though we much prefer to 
shape a book according to our own interests," she adds. 
But what accounts for celebrities requesting or even demanding to work with 
Ritts, Rolston or another "name?" 
Actor Richard Gere, a friend who unwittingly helped launch Ritts' career in the 
late '70s by posing for just-for-fun shots that later appeared worldwide, says 
he can't speak for others. But Gere likes the way Ritts "gets it done quick and 
I always recognize the person in the photograph. . . ." 
Ritts' style is simple though mysterious and dramatic, often using 
natural-light shadows, stark backgrounds and the strength of a subject's 
character to carry the photo. Says Gere: "Herb doesn't impose some sort of 
exterior personality on the photograph. . . . I think in the end, the subjects 
really recognize themselves in the shots. . . . Once you've worked with Herb, 
you know you won't get burned." 
Gere, who has been staying at Ritts' Hollywood Hills home (featured last year 
in HG) until his own house is completed, acknowledges that it's commonplace for 
celebrities to request to work with certain photographers: "Of course, you 
request. You request the best. He's a lousy cook, though, and he doesn't do 
laundry." 
Esquire's Smith affirms that Ritts, Rolston and other top photographers are not 
about to produce unflattering work of their subjects, though they may strive to 
avoid traditional images of star glamour and to expose deeper, perhaps 
overlooked sides of their personas. In her experience, this is accomplished by 
establishing a strong rapport with personalities that allows them to be 
comfortable in a photo session -- a challenging task. 
"Both Herb and Matthew have developed relationships with people. They 
understand about celebrity, that a celebrity needs to be treated differently. 
They won't admit they demand to be treated differently, but they do. 
(Photographer) Greg Gorman also gets a lot of pictures because (celebrities) 
are his friends," Smith says. 
Free-lance fashion stylist Elisabetta Rogiani thinks that the reason Ritts and 
Rolston are relentlessly sought after all over the world is that, unlike many 
other photographers who work almost exclusively in celebrity portraiture, they 
also shoot fashion extensively and internationally. 
"I think celebrities finally understand they need a fashion photographer to 
make them look beautiful. Everybody wants to look like the girls on the cover 
of Vogue. They want the same kind of lighting and clothes and makeup the 
fashion people use. . . . When I work with celebrities, they don't want to look 
exactly like a model, but they want to have their look updated." 
Sometimes, work with one very well-known client can catapult an accomplished 
photographer into the picture world's upper echelons. 
Rolston, who will only reveal his age as "thirtysomething," recalls he struck 
relative success shortly after becoming a photographer at 18. 
Indeed, his first clients were such publications as Interview and Harper's 
Bazaar and Rolston eventually became well known for producing surrealistic 
fashion pictures and high-styled celebrity portraits using detail-rich sets, 
often constructed in his Melrose Avenue studio. 
But he considers meeting and repeatedly photographing Michael Jackson a few 
years ago, just after the singer concluded the "Victory Tour," to be the 
turning point that propelled him to a prominent postion on the map to the 
stars' photographers. 
As for affording celebrities special treatment, Rolston acknowledges this is 
common practice. Like most others in the business, he says, he observes such 
practices as having a member of his staff find out what type of food the 
celebrity likes and then providing it during a shoot. 
But to Rolston -- a delicate, quiet, almost cherubic man who radiates 
extraordinary sensitivity and serenity -- it is basic, sincere respect that is 
the key to establishing rapport with his clients. 
"I think liking people is No. 1 -- and accepting everybody's humanity, putting 
aside their fame while still maintaining respect for their position," he says 
at his studio, wearing wheat-colored jeans and a matching sweater over a white 
T-shirt with a few inches of pearls peeking out from around his neck. 
While Rolston's images -- at the moment they're on the covers of the February 
and March issues of Esquire, as well as on the March and April covers of 
Harper's Bazaar -- are increasingly celebrated, he has long been appreciated 
for his gentle, loving nature. 
Says Omar Albertto of Omar's Men, the chic Los Angeles-based modeling agency: 
"His personality is really amazing. Who cannot fall in love with Matthew? You 
have to love him. You can't hate him." 
Like Ritts, Rolston has reached the point where he can turn down work that 
doesn't interest him, is booked months in advance and travels constantly 
throughout the world to shoot on location. He's also studying cinematography 
two days a week because he expects magazines to move into a broadcast format in 
the next decade or so -- and he finds the current video expressions of fashion 
to be crude and visually unsophisticated. 
Lately, Rolston says, his portrait style is becoming more simplified and he's 
using fewer props and elaborate sets. Fashion stylist Raymond Lee, with the Los 
Angeles firm Cloutier, notes that Rolston has even persuaded some stars to be 
photographed without makeup. 
"He did that with Jodie Foster and Angelica Huston," Lee says. "They let him do 
it because they have such confidence in him." 
Esquire's Smith describes the look of Rolston's current pictures as "very warm 
and friendly and accessible and at the same time it's sensual and glamorous. 
It's a warmer style than Annie Leibovitz's. Her pictures say 'Hi, you don't 
know me; come here a little closer and I'll tell you.' Matthew's pictures are, 
'Come on in and sit down.' " 
It's a style, she says, that's made him most difficult to book: "I had a shoot 
recently where Matthew was more busy than the celebrity. It's a problem because 
he's in great demand." 
To hear Smith and other art directors tell it, trying to get on their schedules 
is about the only real problem in working with hot photographers; it's a given 
the pictures will turn out satisfactorily. 
"You're always sure you're going to get something usable, at least 99% of the 
time," says Charles Churchward Jr., art and design director of Vanity Fair, 
who's worked repeatedly with Ritts, Leibovitz, Rolston and other international 
photography stars. 
Only rarely is there a major flop. Like last year, Churchward recalls, when he 
and Ritts spent a week in London negotiating with Prince's representatives, 
only to have the pop star agree to a shoot and then pull out minutes before it 
was scheduled to begin. 
Though Ritts is known as something of a "control freak" among magazine editors 
for arguing forcefully about how his work is edited and displayed, Churchward 
notes that Prince proved to be "the ultimate 'control freak' -- he practically 
wanted to click the shutter." 
As for his own tendency to direct art directors, Ritts contends that it's just 
an indication of how strongly he feels about his work. 
"I'm definitely particular. There's so much effort put into these things from 
day one. . . . I know magazines too well," he explains in his characteristic 
nasal tones. "People are ready for me to get on the phone. The faxes (of photo 
layouts) fly. I care. I really care about it and they know it's coming from a 
good place." 
They also know, Ritts adds, that if he's seriously displeased about the way his 
work is presented, that he will no longer work with the magazine beyond any 
contractual agreements. 
By their own admission, both Ritts and Rolston are workaholics, working and 
traveling relentlessly. According to her assistant, Leibovitz was too 
overscheduled even to be interviewed for this article. 
As Ritts describes his situation, "I'm booked months in advance. I shoot every 
day. I'm trying to take weekends off this year. I just turned down a job for 
$40,000 three weeks ago -- a movie ad that involved travel. But I'll do some 
things for no money." 
Among those noncommissioned shots are Ritts' nudes and other erotic pictures, 
some unabashedly homosexual, such as those contained in "Herb Ritts Pictures." 
At the moment, the photographer is completing work on another book for his 
publisher, "Twin Palms," actually two volumes in a single slipcover. But he's 
not ready to reveal its theme, describing it only as "a different subject 
matter" and set for release later this year. 
An easy bet is that it will consist of Ritts' favorite sort of work, the stuff 
he shoots just for himself, which he claims to do more and more, even when he's 
working for a specific client. 
As Basinger says of their recent collaboration, within earshot of the magazine 
editors producing and ultimately paying for the rooftop shoot, "We don't do 
this for magazines. Herb and I do this for ourselves. He's real secure in what 
he does. That allows you to be free. I'll shoot anything for Herb." 
Basinger reveals, however, that Ritts will not photograph just anything for 
her. She's asked. He's said no, though she declines to elaborate on the 
specifics. 
It hasn't seemed to matter in the slightest. 
Says Basinger, who has worked with Ritts repeatedly in the last six years: "I 
shoot with other people as well and there are some fabulous photographers. But 
I've always been with Herb in some vein. We were probably brother and sister in 
our last lifetime. Shooting with Herb is like going to another part of my 
house." 
