MCFARLANE DETAILS HOW NORTH GOT INSTRUCTIONS 
Former National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane testified Tuesday that he 
"passed along" a presidential directive in 1984 to Lt. Col. Oliver L. North 
that "we've got to find a way to keep (the Contra rebels in Nicaragua) together 
body and soul." 
McFarlane, who was North's boss and then-President Ronald Reagan's aide, said 
that Reagan expressed anger at the congressional cutoff of military assistance 
for the rebel forces because he "felt deeply" about their cause and thought 
Congress was "breaking faith with the freedom fighters who had risked their 
lives." 
McFarlane related Reagan's instructions in the most specific terms to date 
under cross-examination by Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., North's attorney. Sullivan 
has been trying to show jurors at North's trial how the retired Marine officer 
was motivated to direct a secret program of financial assistance for the 
Contras after Congress prohibited it in 1984. North's defense maintains that he 
believed he had high-level authorization for his efforts. 
McFarlane said that Reagan's instructions were given to him at a meeting in the 
summer of 1984 and that he "passed them along" to Adm. John M. Poindexter, his 
deputy, and to North, who had been designated as "point man" to keep in touch 
with Contra leaders. Poindexter has been charged with conspiracy and other 
crimes in the Iran-Contra scandal and is due to stand trial separately after 
North. 
McFarlane, although he is the prosecution's chief witness against North, 
finished his questioning by prosecutor John W. Keker on a note of tension when 
Keker accused him of writing a "nonsense" note to Congress shortly before his 
1987 suicide attempt. Keker, apparently piqued because McFarlane has sought to 
excuse North's role in drafting allegedly misleading letters to Congress signed 
by McFarlane about the Contra effort, suddenly turned on the witness and 
questioned his credibility. 
McFarlane, who has pleaded guilty and been sentenced for misleading Congress, 
testified that he sought to clarify some of his false statements by sending a 
personal note to Rep. Lee H. Hamilton (D-Ind.), then chairman of the House 
Intelligence Committee, on Feb. 8, 1987 -- the day before he took a drug 
overdose at home. 
But Keker, citing apparently misleading figures about Contra aid in the note, 
said to McFarlane: "That was just complete nonsense, wasn't it?" 
"It was not!" McFarlane shot back, angrily. 
His voice rising, the normally low-key McFarlane continued: 
"Mr. Keker, if I had sat down in my state of mind the day before I tried to 
take my life -- if I had tried to parse every last dime that went to the 
Contras -- it probably would have come out different." 
Keker pointed out that McFarlane's 1987 note admitted knowledge of about a 
$5-million contribution from a foreign national "from his own wealth" for the 
Contras, although he previously testified that he had failed to tell 
congressmen in 1985 about his role in collecting part of a $32-million donation 
from the Saudi Arabian ambassador. 
McFarlane, glaring at Keker, said: "If that's your point, you're right. I'm 
dead wrong. I knew darn well it was something close to a million dollars a 
month. . . . But I was acknowledging my participation in a third-country 
donation. And I wanted that on the record." 
McFarlane has previously testified that while Reagan never told his aides to 
lie to Congress, the former President instructed them not to share certain 
information with Congress, including solicitation of Contra aid from third 
countries while the congressional prohibition was in place. 
Sullivan's cross-examination Tuesday also brought agreement from McFarlane 
that, in Sullivan's words, "you have a kind of gamesmanship in Washington 
between the executive branch and Congress -- they want to know something, and 
we try to tell them as little as possible." 
North is charged principally with making false statements to Congress and 
obstructing congressional inquiries into his support for the Contras. 
