HOSPITAL UNIT SHAKES OFF RARE INFECTION; 
HEALTH CARE: KING/DREW'S SURGICAL ICU REOPENS AFTER A MONTHLONG SHUTDOWN. TEN 
PATIENTS WERE AFFLICTED BUT CAUSE IS STILL UNKNOWN. 
Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center's surgical intensive care unit has 
reopened after a monthlong shutdown in which 10 chronically ill patients were 
infected by a rare and highly resistant bacterial infection. 
The outbreak triggered an investigation by infection-control experts and forced 
postponement of numerous elective surgeries and isolation of infected patients 
in a neighboring wing of the 430-bed county facility, according to King's 
medical director. 
Hospital officials discovered the first strains of Acinetobacter anitratus 
during a routine laboratory culture study on Jan. 5. During the next five 
weeks, a number of other tests revealed a cluster of other intensive care unit 
patients infected with the opportunistic bacterial organism, although no 
additional cases have been found since Feb. 11. 
The patients have been treated and are no longer infected, though some remain 
in isolation, hospital officials said. 
But numerous laboratory tests have failed so far to uncover the source of the 
infection, which preys primarily on ill patients with weakened immune systems 
and thrives on damaged skin. Infectious-disease experts believe that the 
organism, which exists primarily in the throat, the groin, and on hands, 
probably was transferred through human contact. The infection has been known to 
cause pneumonia, but most patients carry it without showing any symptoms, 
according to infection-control investigators. 
King hospital officials have downplayed the significance of the outbreak, 
saying the patients suffered no further health problems as a result of the 
infection. But the incident has rekindled questions about the standards at the 
medical center, which last year was cited by state and federal health 
investigators for a high incidence of hospital-borne infections and fundamental 
inadequacies in the hospital's infection-control program. 
"Nobody likes to hear that there has been an outbreak; it's like a nightmare 
for infection control," said Dr. Jessie L. Sherrod, director of infection 
control at King. "But people are human and they occasionally get lax (with 
sterilization procedures), although it remains to be seen if that was what 
caused it to spread here." 
The outbreak has so baffled infectious-disease experts that Sherrod said the 
hospital plans to do a detailed study of the case and publish it in a medical 
journal. A. anitratus has intrigued infectious-disease detectives like Sherrod 
because of its resistance to all but a few antibiotics. 
"This is not terribly surprising," Dr. Shirley Fannin, associate deputy 
director of the disease control program for the Department of Health Services, 
said of the outbreak at King. "If you put in another hospital's name and 
another type of bacteria, it wouldn't alarm anybody. All hospitals have 
outbreaks at one time or another." 
Four cases of the bacterial infection were discovered during the first week of 
January, but hospital officials said they wanted to check the extent of the 
outbreak and waited until five additional cases were found in the first week of 
February before they closed the unit. 
The last infected patient was confirmed on Feb. 11, after the ICU was closed to 
all patient admissions and discharges. 
The unit reopened March 14. 
Dr. James G. Haughton, King's medical director, said that after the outbreak 
was reported to county health officials in early February, the patients were 
immediately transferred to another surgical ward, which had been closed last 
year because the hospital could not hire enough nurses to staff it. 
Patients requiring intensive care after emergency surgery were placed in the 
hospital's post-anesthesia recovery area, Haughton said. Those patients, who 
required long-term hospital care, will remain in isolation until hospital 
officials are convinced the infection has not spread elsewhere. 
"We're hoping to find the one thing that triggered the outbreak," Sherrod said. 
"When you deal with something like this, where an organism turns up, doesn't go 
away (in a short time) and it's a type that is especially difficult to treat, 
that's when you get really scared." 
BACKGROUND 
Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center was placed on conditional 
accreditation last month after a team of medical investigators from the Joint 
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations found widespread 
problems in staffing, record-keeping, quality assurance programs and patient 
care. In addition, a turnaround by the hospital staff to bring it into 
compliance with most national health-care standards last year was enough to 
persuade federal health officials not to withhold $60 million in Medicare and 
Medicaid funds that had been threatened. 
