NO SUSPECTS IN BREA SLAYING; 
MCKENNA WAS NOT SHADY, JUST FLAMBOYANT, SON SAYS 
The son of a bodybuilder-businessman who was slain in a gangland style ambush 
Thursday said Sunday that his father was "a little flamboyant" but far from the 
portrait painted of him as a shady businessman who lived extravagantly. 
"The man I knew and the man the family knew was a man who liked to joke around 
a lot, he was really nice," Michael McKenna, 23, said in an interview on his 
father's $825,000 estate in Brea. 
Horace Joseph McKenna, 46, who had convictions for counterfeiting and parole 
violation, died in a hail of gunfire about 12:30 p.m. Thursday as he was 
sleeping in the back seat of his limousine. The ambush occurred just as 
McKenna's chauffeur, Robert Berg, was pulling up to the gate at McKenna's 
40-acre estate. Berg was unharmed. 
There are no suspects in the case. McKenna will be buried Tuesday, his son 
said. 
The shooting occurred only hours after court records were unsealed unveiling a 
Los Angeles district attorney's tax fraud investigation of Horace McKenna and a 
business partner, Michael Woods. Those records alleged that Horace McKenna and 
Woods were the hidden owners of several nude and topless bars in Los Angeles 
County. 
Horace McKenna, who served in the California Highway Patrol from 1968 to 1972, 
was convicted in 1976 of counterfeiting and convicted in 1982 of parole 
violation after he was arrested on suspicion of assaulting an off-duty police 
officer. 
Michael McKenna said he agreed to be interviewed because he wanted everyone to 
know "the true part, the way my father really was. Not the man they portrayed 
as some big Mafia leader." He said his father "was as gentle as a kitten." 
None of the court records or police reports made public said that Horace 
McKenna was ever linked to organized crime or the Mafia. 
Michael McKenna said that as far as he knew, his father "was not into anything 
that had to do with the Mafia, nothing to do with gangs . . . nothing to do 
with prostitution or with drugs." 
Michael McKenna said he lives with his father's parents in Los Angeles County. 
He said he had spent weekends and other time with his father but never lived 
with him after his parents divorced when he was a child. 
McKenna allowed a reporter and a photographer into his father's rambling house. 
It is comfortable rather than elaborate, decorated with bronze statues of 
western scenes and stuffed animals that, according to his son, McKenna on big 
game ranches. It sits at the top of a green knoll in Carbon Canyon with a 
sweeping view of Orange County clear to Disneyland, where Michael McKenna said 
fireworks can be seen at night. 
As the hazy afternoon grew dimmer, McKenna showed his guests the ranch's many 
other buildings, including a 20-foot gazebo and stables with 16 horses, 
including his father's favorite, an American saddle horse named Lord. The horse 
pulled away as McKenna stroked its nose, and McKenna explained, "My Dad rode 
him every day, so Lord knows something is not right." 
Just down the blacktop road is a small mock "ghost town" his father had built 
as an amusement for himself and his friends. The ghost town has a saloon, a 
jail, a general store and other businesses from an old western outpost. At the 
entrance to the town is a "cemetery" with "headstones" for Dead Eye Dick ("He 
ain't fastest no more") and other cowboys. 
As a joke, there is even an out-of-era headstone for Superman, who, according 
to his marker, "tried to take on Mac." The elder McKenna was known as "Mac" to 
his friends. 
The hilly road up through the property that McKenna developed from rough 
acreage is peppered with Old West signs such as "Dead Man's Curve." 
A full 3 inches taller than his 6-foot-6 father, the younger McKenna said he 
used to enjoy horsing around with his dad. 
'A 46-Year-Old Kid' 
"We'd tear out around the house, tackle each other on the lawn or something, 
wrestle," McKenna said. "He was a 46-year-old kid." 
McKenna said his father did not drink or smoke and did not take drugs, nor were 
there ever any drug activities around the ranch home that he saw. He said that 
while his father, who was twice divorced, sometimes dated women half his age, 
there was no hint of a party life style. 
"People say it the way they want to say it," McKenna said. He said his father 
"was a man who liked to have fun. He liked to entertain. He had all kinds of 
friends." But he added, "He didn't give parties in the sense of loud banging 
music with people walking around. He liked to have people up here in the 
daytime, go horseback riding, to walk around the ranch and just generally 
relax." 
Even the brand new pool was designed for volleyball -- it is 7 feet deep in the 
middle and shallower at each end. 
McKenna said he believes his father made his money breeding Arabian horses and 
from profits on the 4 Star Gym in El Segundo, which he owned. McKenna said his 
father also owned some apartment buildings. 
Of reports that his father had beaten his wife of 9 years, Sherry, from whom he 
was divorced 2 years ago, McKenna said, "Baloney. Absolute baloney." He said he 
and Sherry McKenna were not close, and that he "wondered why" his father took 
so long to divorce her. "If she was as cold to him as she was to me, I don't 
see why there wasn't a divorce the first day after they got married." 
The son said he saw no guns on the ranch except the shotgun his father used to 
shoot gophers. "I'd say out of every 10 shots, he may get one gopher, and we'd 
laugh about it," McKenna said. 
'A Little Frightened' 
Michael McKenna said he was "a little frightened, yeah," to be on the ranch 
where his father was slain. 
"I was in town for a while and I didn't get back until dark and I had to stop 
and unlock the gate," said McKenna, whose size might intimidate most intruders. 
"And I was petrified. I was very scared." 
But he said that he did not fear the murderers would return for him. 
"In my heart, (I know) it was just somebody who wanted my father," McKenna 
said. "Who, why -- I don't know." 
McKenna said that in the last several months his father had been dieting on 
low-fat yogurt, tuna fish sandwiches and water, bringing his weight down to 265 
pounds. 
He said that as he was driving to Brea after learning of his father's death, he 
thought about the ranch. 
"I knew how much he loved the horses. I knew how much he loved the ranch. This 
was his dream. Right then and there my main concern was to keep it alive, to 
keep the dream alive." 
But he said he has not figured out how he will do it. The police and federal 
officers took his father's papers even before they allowed McKenna in the 
house, so he has no idea of what his father's assets are, or even how he might 
be able to pay the ranch hands. He said he was to have started a job as a 
security officer, but decided to delay that until his father's estate is 
straightened out. 
"There are too many unexplained questions, too much paper work," McKenna said. 
He said quietly, "My father and I were really good friends. We loved each 
other. . . . He was there for me whenever I needed him." 
