HOPES RISING ON EFFECTS OF OIL SPILL AS EFFORTS BEGIN TO RESCUE WILDLIFE 
Three fishing boats loaded with a week's provisions steamed from Valdez harbor 
Thursday morning in the first organized attempt to rescue oil-smeared birds, 
sea otters and other damaged wildlife from Prince William Sound. 
As the skippers of the Dotty G., Ms. Jeanne and Silver Bullet headed toward 
Naked Island, scientists expressed cautious optimism about the unfolding 
situation despite Good Friday's massive oil spill. 
Bird death has appeared low so far, an encouraging sign both for immediate 
survival of the animal population and for the long-term effects of the spill. 
"I'd say there's a probability that the really catastrophic (effects) that we 
were afraid of, may not occur," said Bruce Wing, a biologist with the National 
Marine Fisheries Service. 
To Start Cleaning Animals 
Injured animals were to be ferried by helicopter to a recovery facility in a 
small community college dormitory in Valdez. Volunteers expected to be cleaning 
oil-covered injured animals by this morning. 
Virtually no one was certain that the rescue effort would succeed, or that 
earlier dire predictions might prove overly grim. Optimistic comments are 
invariably accompanied by warnings that every spill is different, that little 
data on this one is yet available, and that the Valdez spill is still in 
critical flux. 
"This thing ought to settle down in a week," said Dr. John Whitney, scientific 
support coordinator for Alaska's Hazardous Materials Response Branch of the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. "There's a lot of floating oil 
out there right now. It could come ashore very easily with minor wind shifts, 
or minor wind velocity changes . . . . " 
The weather was a significant factor. Throughout the day Thursday, the sun 
dropped in and out of clouds, and it was windy and in the low 20s on the water. 
But light rain and snow were forecast. 
"Right now, we're pretty lucky with the north wind. It's going with the natural 
flow of the water out Montague straits. Big slugs of oil are headed out that 
direction, and if (the wind) stays up, it reduces the impact on the islands," 
Whitney said. 
Compared with other oil spills, the Valdez disaster has produced few early 
animal victims, and these evaded capture. The big flights of migratory birds 
through flyways here are weeks away, and an assessment released Thursday by 
John Piatt of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service showed that while as many as 
200,000 marine birds are in the sound this time of year, they are widely 
scattered in flocks of 100 to 200. 
All this has kept bird death low so far, and it has become another encouraging 
sign for the long haul. 
However, Wing, a Juneau-based biologist, is concerned about fish. Again, no one 
yet knows how the herring-roe or salmon catches will fare this year, at least 
until the spill stops moving. But as Wing pointed out: "Some of the long-term 
effects could be very localized. By that I'm saying that they could occur only 
in a small bay -- and two bays down the line, it might not have any impact." 
Wing said it might take some areas 10 to 15 years for chum salmon to recover; 5 
or 6, for pink salmon. 
Al Maki, senior environmental scientist with Exxon, owner of the tanker that 
went aground and unleashed the biggest oil spill in U.S. history, repeatedly 
notes that oil is "a natural material." 
While he conceded that, "certainly, it's not a natural material in the ocean 
where we've got it now," he said, "you have to remember that oil itself is 
originally the result of marine deposition. That's where it was formed . . . . 
"That makes it at least amenable to biodegradation. I mean, the environment can 
assimilate the material." 
Maki said that Exxon intends to see that long-term studies are performed on 
Prince William Sound. 
Wing, observing the recuperative powers of nature, said that when a Mexican bay 
was swamped with oil from a beached tanker some years ago, the sea urchin 
population was destroyed. He said that quite quickly a bed of kelp, no longer 
fed on by urchins, took its place. Fifteen years later, colleagues who visited 
the site told him, the kelp was still in control. 
This is the sort of tale that makes Cindy Lowry, Alaska regional director of 
Greenpeace, particularly uneasy. 
"The problem I have," she said, "is that 10 years from now things may look the 
same, and things will still be alive, but I think we're going to see some 
resident populations like our killer whale population that aren't going to stay 
here. If there aren't any sea lions, there isn't food, they'll be gone." 
Researchers have identified just about every whale in Prince William Sound, 
according to Tom Loughlin of the National Marine Mammal Laboratory in Seattle. 
"Everybody knows who's out there," he says, "who swims with whom, the resident 
pods and transient pods. Of all the animals (in Prince William Sound) they will 
be the easiest to assess" to see if the population has declined. 
Loughlin also speculates that the whales will mostly survive, though he agreed 
that they may move to other waters. 
Loughlin also speculates that the whales will mostly survive, though he agreed 
that they may move to other waters. He is more concerned with the pregnant sea 
lions and harbor seals of the sound, worried that premature births and 
spontaneous abortions could cripple their colonies for some time. 
But in the short term, the otters are most at risk. 
"To my knowledge, this is the first spill that actually threatens otters," said 
Randall Davis, an otter specialist at Hubbs Marine Research Center in San 
Diego. 
Uses Results of Study 
Davis has set up shop at the college dormitory and plans to use the results of 
his three-year study of otter cleaning techniques, using Dawn, the dish-washing 
detergent. 
Alice Berkner, who describes herself as "just a duck scrubber," also uses Dawn 
to clean fouled waterfowl. Berkner is founder of the Berkeley-based 
International Bird Rescue Research Center and is in Alaska to assist with the 
cleanup. 
The danger to oil-soaked otters is hypothermia. Oil destroys the loft, the dead 
air formed in an otter's fur, and brings the animal's skin in contact with the 
icy seawater. An otter has a high metabolic rate, requiring a quarter of its 
body weight in food daily. Under the stress of such great cold, an otter might 
have to eat half of its body weight (a near impossibility) to survive. With 
cleaning, rinsing and proper food, many otters can be expected to recover in a 
week. 
But Thursday night, the first photos of dead animals began appearing on the 
evening news. 
