HARRODS' BUYERS LIED REPEATEDLY, BRITAIN REPORTS 
The Al Fayed brothers lied during their successful 1985 takeover of Harrods' 
owner, House of Fraser PLC, the government said today. 
"They repeatedly lied to us about their family background, their early business 
life and their wealth," according to a 752-page report by the Department of 
Trade and Industry. 
The government released the previously withheld report after the Serious Fraud 
Office and the director of public prosecutions decided that they would not 
pursue a criminal prosecution stemming from the $1-billion takeover. 
The report said documents produced by the Al Fayeds as evidence for the trade 
department's investigation, including their birth certificates, were false and 
they knew they were false. 
The Al Fayeds denied that they misled anyone. In a statement issued today they 
said they bought House of Fraser with their own cash. 
The government's decision not to prosecute was a major setback for Roland 
(Tiny) Rowland, the Lonrho PLC chairman who was a rival bidder for the famous 
Harrods department store and its parent company. 
Rowland has waged a long, expensive and very public campaign to have the 
takeover reversed, repeatedly alleging that the Al Fayeds misrepresented their 
background and wealth to win Harrods. 
The report said it is likely that the Egyptian-born brothers used their 
association with the Sultan of Brunei to raise funds toward the purchase of the 
department store chain. 
"We are of the very clear opinion that none of the activities of the Al Fayeds 
of which we have been told generated sufficient cash for the Al Fayeds to have 
been in a position to acquire House of Fraser, or any substantial part of it, 
with their own funds," trade department inspectors Hugh Aldous and Sir Henry 
Brooke said in their report. 
The Al Fayeds denied that anyone else was involved. 
"You would think . . . that if there was some mystery figure behind the scenes 
who was the real beneficial owner of House of Fraser, he or she might by now 
have shown himself or herself, or hinted that he or she was the proud owner of 
Europe's biggest department store group and proprietor of its most celebrated 
and prestigious component -- Harrods itself," the Al Fayeds said. 
The report said the misleading information was given greater credibility by 
officials because it was repeated by the brothers' reputable financial 
advisers, who took what their clients said at face value. 
