LOCAL ELECTIONS / SEAL BEACH CITY COUNCIL; 
HOUSING PLAN DIVIDES CANDIDATES IN QUIET RACE; 
EIGHT ARE VYING FOR TWO OPEN SEATS. THE CAMPAIGN HAS BEEN NOTICEABLY FREE OF 
THE CITY'S OFTEN-DIVISIVE POLITICS OF THE LAST 20 YEARS. 
It is not uncommon to hear residents here refer to their seaside community as 
an island, but when it comes to politics, few would describe the city as a 
paradise. 
Tuesday's City Council election, however, is shaping up to be different from 
many others in recent years. Eight candidates are vying for two open seats and 
are evenly split on the hottest election issue, a huge proposed housing 
development. 
Still, the campaign has been noticeably free of the often-divisive politics of 
the last 20 years -- two decades that included a recall of three council 
members and a bitter 1988 fight over a slow-growth initiative. 
"This election is a lot more quiet than some people thought it would be. People 
were all geared up for more mudslinging," said candidate Douglas Hoxeng, who 
has lived in Seal Beach for 31 years and runs a downtown tavern. "It's nice to 
have the candidates get along." 
The seats up for grabs represent two of the most diverse council districts in 
Seal Beach, a city of distinctive neighborhoods that is an island surrounded by 
the Naval Weapons Station, the San Gabriel River and the Pacific Ocean. 
In District 1, which covers downtown and Surfside, the candidates are Orange 
County planner Charles Antos, firefighter James Cook, property management 
specialist Marilyn Bruce Hastings, tavern operator Hoxeng and engineering 
contractor Joe Rullo. 
In District 3, which covers part of the Leisure World retirement community and 
the area just between Pacific Coast Highway and Gum Grove Park known locally as 
the Hill, the candidates are financial controller Galen F. Ambrose, Planning 
Commissioner Gwen Forsythe and insurance executive Dennis K. Pollman. 
The current council members from the districts -- Victor S. Grgas and Joyce 
Risner -- are prohibited from running again because of a two-term limit. 
The mild tone of this election can be explained in part by a common campaign 
theme: Keeping Seal Beach basically the way it is now. 
Quality of life -- or what a recent newspaper real estate advertisement 
described as the "charisma of Seal Beach living" -- has been the central issue 
in much of the city's political battling. 
All the candidates say they fear anything -- especially development -- that 
might make the city an undesirable place. 
"Seal Beach has been the same for the last 15 years and will essentially stay 
that way," said Grgas, noting that there has been deep-seated opposition by 
residents to major changes in the city. 
The issue that divides the candidates is what to do with a 149-acre piece of 
picturesque land in the heart of town. The Hellman Ranch property, one of the 
few remaining chunks of developable land in the city, offers sweeping views of 
downtown Long Beach and the surrounding beaches and is centrally located off 
Seal Beach Boulevard, one of just two roads that directly connect Seal Beach 
with the rest of the world. 
In October, the City Council voted, 4-1, after months of hearings and debate, 
to approve a 329-home project that sets aside 41 acres for wetlands 
restoration. 
Half the candidates are dissatisfied with that Mola Development Corp. plan. And 
an Orange County Superior Court decision delivered March 16 may require the 
incoming City Council to vote on the project, thrusting the Hellman plan on 
center stage in the election. 
Proponents of the development hail the project as far better than the original 
773-unit plan and say it represents a fair balance of environmental and 
commercial concerns. 
"This is a good compromise. It's important to be open and receptive to all 
sides," said Forsythe, who helped work out an agreement between Mola and the 
city and believes it represents the best deal the city can get. 
Other supporters of the compromise are Cook, Rullo and Pollman, all of whom 
stressed that they are for controlled slow growth but believe that some 
development is needed to provide more city revenue. 
Most supporters of the plan say the Mola project will not harm the city and 
fear what other kind of development could be built on the private land. "My 
main concern is that if it isn't Mola, what is going to go in there?" Rullo 
said. 
For critics of the project, however, the compromise does not go far enough in 
addressing environmental and traffic concerns. Ambrose, Antos, Hastings and 
Hoxeng oppose the project, saying they would like a plan that offers more 
wetlands and fewer homes. 
"Although property owners have rights, any development must be acceptable to 
the community, because the (residents) inherit any problems," Antos said. 
The staunchest development foe is Ambrose, who has made the evils of 
development the centerpiece in his campaign. 
As vice president of the Seal Beach-based Wetlands Restoration Society, he 
helped prepare the lawsuit that resulted in the Superior Court ruling that is 
forcing the city to revise its outdated General Plan and review the Mola 
development for a second time. 
"Seal Beach is in a crisis . . . as massive developments go through that will 
change our city," Ambrose said at an election forum. "Is the city of Seal Beach 
going to sell itself like a whore to the first person who comes along with a 
checkbook?" 
Mola foes say they believe that the project will cause traffic, pollution and 
even crime in the city of 26,000 people and that the diplomatic attitude taken 
by project backers will lead to overdevelopment. 
"People are concerned about traffic on Seal Beach Boulevard once this thing is 
in," Hastings said. "When they're done, I don't know if anyone is going to get 
through if there's an emergency. The traffic will be terrible." 
Grgas, who supports Rullo, described some of the statements made by anti-growth 
candidates as "hysteria" and said the city could be vulnerable legally if it 
tries to violate people's property rights. 
Because of the General Plan revisions, it is uncertain whether the vote on the 
Hellman Ranch plan will come before the current council or the newly elected 
council, which will take office May 15. Both supporters and opponents of the 
Mola development agree that the project faces an uncertain future if 
anti-growth forces win at the polls. 
Grgas and Risner were part of the 4-1 majority that supports the project. Their 
open seats could make possible a shift to a 3-2 majority against the plan. 
Growth has traditionally been a hot issue in Seal Beach. A 1988 initiative that 
would have restricted the City Council's power to vote on certain development 
issues prompted a furious and divisive campaign. The measure ultimately failed 
at the polls. 
However, the current debate over development is tame in comparison with the 
politics of the mid-1970s, when pro- and anti-growth candidates repeatedly 
clashed over the General Plan. 
Earlier that decade, three city councilmen were recalled and two city managers 
were ousted in power struggles over control of the council. 
In this year's election, other issues have been discussed in the race besides 
development, but there seems to be more agreement on them. Most candidates have 
called for better communications between the council and the citizens, and many 
support repairing old sidewalks and maintaining strong police and fire 
departments. 
"The infrastructure is a less-than-glamorous thing, but it still must be taken 
care of," Cook said. 
Hastings, Antos and Cook have focused attention on the loss of sand on several 
city beaches, calling for sand replacement and other measures. Hoxeng and 
Pollman have stressed their ties to the Seal Beach business community and say 
they would best represent all the elements of the city. 
Pollman wants the city to sponsor athletics programs for teen-agers as a 
deterrent to drugs. 
SEAL BEACH CITY COUNCIL CANDIDATES 
On Tuesday, voters in Seal Beach's District 1 and District 3 go to the polls to 
elect two new members to the City Council. 
District 1 covers the downtown and Surfside areas and has 3,052 registered 
voters. The polling places are at Fire Station 44, St. Anne's Church Hall and 
the Surfside Colony office. 
District 3 covers the Hill area and part of Leisure World and has 3,264 
registered voters. The polling places are at the Marina Community Center, 
McGaugh Elementary School's gym and Clubhouse 1 in Leisure World. 
The polls are open from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. 
DISTRICT 3 
Galen F. Ambrose 
Age: 49 
Occupation: Financial controller 
Background: Ambrose helped found and is now vice president of the Seal 
Beach-based Wetlands Restoration Society. The environmental group, which is 
opposed to the proposed Hellman Ranch development, won a court battle to have 
the city take a second vote on the project. 
Gwen Forsythe 
Age: 35 
Occupation: Financial manager for advertising agency 
Background: Forsythe is a city planning commissioner and has worked on the 
traffic safety committee and coordinated an anti-substance abuse committee with 
the Seal Beach Police Department. She has also been active in the local 
schools. 
Dennis K. Pollman 
Age: 44 
Occupation: Insurance executive 
Background: Pollman, whose business is located in Seal Beach, is active in the 
Seal Beach Chamber of Commerce, Seal Beach Business Assn. and Long Beach 
Chamber of Commerce. He is past president of the Seal Beach Coastline Kiwanis. 
DISTRICT 1 
Charles Antos 
Age: 44 
Occupation: Planner for Orange County 
Background: Antos worked as a Seal Beach planner from 1972-83 and served on 
several county committees. He ran for the District 1 seat four years ago, 
losing to Mayor Victor S. Grgas. 
James Cook 
Age: 37 
Occupation: Firefighter 
Background: Before moving to Seal Beach, Cook served on the Azusa City Council 
for five years. He also worked as a legislative liaison for the Southern 
California Watershed Fire Council in Washington and served on the board of 
directors of the Los Angeles division of the League of California Cities. 
Marilyn Bruce Hastings 
Age: 61 
Occupation: Property management specialist 
Background: Hastings served on the board of directors of Children's Memorial 
Hospital Auxiliary in Long Beach and was a founding member of the Long Beach 
chapter of GOP Juniors. She also was given an honorary lifetime membership to 
the Long Beach Parents-Teachers Assn. 
Douglas Hoxeng 
Age: 35 
Occupation: Tavern operator 
Background: Hoxeng is co-owner of a tavern in the downtown area and has been 
involved in several city groups. He is also past president of the local chapter 
of the Lions Club. 
Joe Rullo 
Age: 54 
Occupation: Engineering contractor 
Background: Rullo has served on the city Planning Commission for three years. 
He is also active with the Surfside Colony Homeowners Assn. and has served on 
the Civil Service Board. 
