THE DEATH OF HANK GATHERS; 
SPENCER SOLD USC ON WORK ETHIC OF A PHILADELPHIA KID 
David Spencer was on the telephone Monday, talking about Hank Gathers, when 
call-waiting signaled another incoming call. It was Bo Kimble. 
"That was Bo and he needs me, so we have to make this conversation relatively 
quick," said Spencer, who recruited both Gathers and Kimble for USC, where they 
played their freshman seasons. 
Spencer was courtside at Gersten Pavilion Sunday when Gathers, a senior at 
Loyola Marymount, collapsed at mid-court while playing against Portland. 
Spencer went to his friend's side and stayed with Gathers' family through the 
night as the tragedy unfolded. 
Monday, less than 24 hours after Gather's death, Spencer still talks of Gathers 
in the present tense. At times, listening to Spencer, it's as though Gathers is 
still out on a court somewhere, still playing basketball. 
But the reality of Gathers' death sounds painfully clear in Spencer's voice, as 
he struggles to speak of a man he likened to a little brother. 
"Bo's having a hard time, but he's hanging in there, he's being strong," 
Spencer said. "I think he's doing well. But he needs some support. I need some 
support. We all need each other." 
From early on, Spencer, who is from Philadelphia, said he hit it off with 
Kimble and Gathers. He first saw them play basketball at Dobbins Tech High in 
Philadelphia when they were juniors and he was an assistant coach for Stan 
Morrison at USC. 
Morrison, who coached Gathers and Kimble at USC, said Spencer knew immediately 
the pair could be the foundation of a team. 
"David said to me, 'There is one player who is extremely talented,' that would 
be Bo; 'and another who is the hardest-working player you could ever find,' " 
said Morrison, who now coaches at San Jose State. 
"But it wasn't like Hank was some slug," Spencer said. "He is an extremely 
gifted athlete, who was very quick and very fast and jumped very high. But yes, 
he's the hardest-working guy I have ever been around." 
Spencer said he also saw in Gathers a tremendous amount of pride, both on and 
off the court. 
It was that pride, Spencer said, that drove Gathers to succeed. 
"Anything that Hank undertakes, he goes at it with a desire to be the best," 
Spencer said. "You never see Hank where his hair wasn't combed and his clothes 
didn't look right. Even if he was going down to the corner, he wouldn't be 
caught looking bad." 
Spencer works for Leonard Armato, an agent with whom Gathers, Kimble and Tom 
Lewis of Pepperdine were expected to sign this year at the completion of their 
college basketball careers. 
"In all probability, it would have happened that Hank would have signed with 
Leonard, but it is against NCAA rules for him to sign prior to the completion 
of his final game," Spencer said. 
"It is a real awkward thing. On one hand, because I'm working with Leonard, he 
couldn't come right out and say (he's going to sign). But on the other hand, 
anybody with any common sense could see that all things being reasonable, who 
else would he want -- with me being there? 
"There wasn't anything clandestinely going on. We are talking about a guy who 
comes over to dinner often and jokes with my wife." 
Gathers, Kimble and Lewis' loyalty to both Morrison and Spencer was a major 
factor for their transferring to other schools when Morrison was fired by USC 
and replaced by George Raveling. Spencer also left and took a job at the Forum. 
Gathers and Kimble transferred to Loyola and Lewis to Pepperdine. 
"They felt betrayed by the university," Spencer said. 
"I only coached Hank one year at USC, but I would characterize my relationship 
with Hank maybe as an older brother, someone he would seek advice from." 
