HARRY BERNSTEIN / LABOR: LAW STACKED AGAINST STRIKERS AT EASTERN 
Texas Air Chairman Frank Lorenzo seems to be doing more to unite America's 
unions than almost any union leader has in recent history. He apparently is 
even helping labor win some rare public support. 
The hard-nosed Lorenzo has managed these feats by first breaking unions at 
Continental Airlines in 1983 and by his unrelenting effort to blame Eastern 
Airlines' troubles on his workers. They have already made $1.5 billion in wage 
concessions and, embittered, provided poor passenger service before they 
reluctantly went on strike Saturday. 
Lorenzo, whose company owns both Continental and Eastern, seems to be waking 
unions up to the fact that if they don't support each other in the pivotal 
Eastern battle, the strength of all unions will continue to diminish. 
Despite labor's impressive unity, the legal system is stacked in Lorenzo's 
favor. 
He could beat the Eastern strikers by declaring bankruptcy and dismantling the 
company, selling some parts and moving the rest elsewhere in his giant airline 
conglomerate. Or he could sell what's left of Eastern. 
Either way, though, it wouldn't be much of a victory for him financially or 
even emotionally because he would be quitting the fight he started. 
The law allows Lorenzo another alternative: continue to try to crush the unions 
by hiring enough strikebreakers to fly the planes and later sell the company at 
a higher price, giving him a more satisfying victory. 
So far, that battle plan is failing. Most flights were called off Monday, and 
5,000 workers were laid off temporarily, but Lorenzo hasn't thrown in the towel 
yet. 
And on Lorenzo's side is not only President Bush, but some strange Supreme 
Court interpretations of federal labor law. 
Stanford Prof. William B. Gould IV gets laughs out of students in his labor law 
classes when he poses an old conundrum about the right of workers to strike in 
this free society: 
How is it possible for federal law to specifically say it is illegal for 
employers to punish workers who go on strike by "firing" them and at the same 
time say a company can "permanently replace" them? 
The answer is simple, if inadequate: because 51 years ago -- and again last 
week -- the Supreme Court said so. 
The legal puzzle Gould raises in his classes might be good for some cynical 
laughs, but it isn't funny to strikers whose jobs have been taken by 
strikebreakers. 
At Eastern, Lorenzo began hiring and training strikebreakers months before the 
International Assn. of Machinists went on strike to resist demands for more 
concessions with no assurance that they would gain a future at the airline. 
The entire labor movement has joined the battle because even a Pyrrhic victory 
for Lorenzo could do more damage to unions than former President Reagan 
inflicted when he fired 11,000 striking air traffic controllers in 1981, 
serving as an influential model for employers who want to break strikes. 
Reagan's firing of the controllers was a cruel, disruptive action. But it was 
legal because the law prohibits strikes by federal workers such as the 
controllers. 
Unlike Reagan, Lorenzo cannot fire his striking workers. But he legally can 
replace them permanently. And if he succeeds in this widely watched drama, more 
and more employers can be expected to join the anti-union crusade Reagan 
encouraged in the controllers' strike. 
Bush became part of that crusade when he backed Lorenzo by denying labor's plea 
for a 60-day cooling-off period, thus allowing Lorenzo to get the strike he 
sought and slash everyone's wages at once. 
By siding with Lorenzo, Bush became the first President to refuse a request by 
federal mediators to order the cooling-off period in an airline dispute. 
Maybe the Supreme Court has figured that somehow it would make workers feel 
better if they were not fired for exercising their legal right to strike and 
instead just were replaced permanently. 
True, the court says "replaced" strikers have a better chance of getting 
another job in the same company than those who were flat-out fired -- but that 
happens only if another job opens up. 
The high court ruling 51 years ago said an employer cannot fire strikers but 
can "protect and continue his business" by keeping strikebreakers after a 
walkout is over and not making room for workers who went out on strike. 
The Supreme Court decision last week affirmed the earlier ruling and, not 
unexpectedly, made it clear that a company can also keep union members who 
cross their own union's picket line. 
Both decisions make a mockery of the 1935 labor law that was supposed to give 
workers the legal right to strike without being punished for exercising that 
right. 
Congress can unravel the legal conundrum by amending the law to make certain 
that its clear intent is carried out, providing a better balance between the 
rights of workers and employers in a labor dispute. 
Rep. Joseph E. Brennan (D-Me.) has proposed a compromise to make the ability to 
strike more meaningful and still give employers a chance to ultimately force 
strikers to put their jobs on the line if no contract agreement is reached. 
Brennan proposes that for the first 10 weeks of a strike, employers should not 
be allowed to permanently replace strikers. That's a good starting point, but 
10 weeks is not long enough. 
Workers' right to strike should be protected for one year before employers are 
allowed to offer permanent jobs to strikebreakers. At that point, almost all 
strikes either have been settled by negotiations or lost. 
Maybe, as some contend, strikes now are almost obsolete as labor's weapon of 
last resort. Last year, there were fewer strikes than in any of the previous 41 
years. 
Unions may have to use more consumer boycotts and work slowdowns and put more 
pressure on suppliers, banks and other companies that help struck companies. 
But a bit more balance between labor and management must be restored by at 
least amending the law to make certain workers such as those at Eastern have a 
reasonable amount of time to exercise their legal right to strike without 
suffering the punishment of losing their jobs. 
