COLUMN ONE; 
AN OFFICE DESIGNED FOR PEOPLE; 
TECHNOLOGISTS MAKE COMPUTER EQUIPMENT AND FURNITURE BUILDERS MAKE DESKS. THE 
TWO MEET ALL TOO INFREQUENTLY. 
When the renowned furniture designer Bill Stumpf teaches his industrial design 
course, he always begins with two slides. The first shows a state-of-the-art 
office complete with dimmed lights, sleek furniture modules and glowing 
computer screens. The second shows writer E. B. White sitting on a wooden bench 
at a wooden table in a shed in front of an open, bay-view window and typing on 
a manual typewriter. 
The students, Stumpf says, have little trouble deciding that the Cape Cod 
fishing shack is the far better working environment. 
The two images illustrate the dilemma faced by the computer industry, the 
furniture industry and, indeed, the entire business community as a result of 
the desktop terminal's inexorable takeover of the office. Somehow, a way must 
be found to meld the ever-expanding power of the computer into a working 
environment that is physically comfortable and mentally stimulating. 
Stumpf calls the missing element in office design "civility." 
Doug Patton, head of the product-design company Patton Design Enterprises in 
Costa Mesa, says that a work space should be "open, creative and fun." Jim 
Stewart, manager for advanced design at Apple Computer Corp., talks of the need 
for "collaborative, inter-active work tools." Nearly everyone involved in 
furniture and computer design pays lip service, at least, to the notion that 
the office of the future must do a better job of meeting "the real needs of the 
worker" than the office of today. 
There is little agreement, however, as to just how radically the office needs 
to be changed. Many in product design speak disdainfully of American business 
for not taking the problem seriously, and ominously predict that 
forward-thinking European and Japanese companies will soon fill the gap. 
Furniture and computer industry executives say, on the other hand, that they 
are moving as quickly as market realities will allow. 
That debate is likely to be fueled today, when a revolutionary office concept, 
sponsored by Apple Computer and developed by Patton Design, makes its debut at 
the Pacific Design Center in Los Angeles. The prototype, dubbed Workspace 2000, 
aims to produce a comfortable, personalized atmosphere for creative work by 
integrating the most sophisticated computer equipment into office furniture. 
Patton said that Workspace 2000 will do nothing less then free the worker from 
the "ball and chain" of desk, telephone and terminal. It will allow people to 
wander freely, computerized "pads" in hand, among tables that are really 
touch-sensitive, voice-activated computer screens, office partitions that 
double as video-conference consoles and desks that contain hidden copiers and 
fax machines. 
"Technology has been making people change to meet its requirements, but it 
should be the other way around," said Patton, a muscular, mustachioed 
36-year-old. "We need to break the existing product-furniture-environment 
boundaries." Just as software advances have made computers more accessible, 
Patton said, the entire office must be overhauled to make it more "user 
friendly" and allow for truly collaborative work. 
Jim Stewart, Apple's manager for advanced design research and the moving force 
behind the company's "advanced environments" program, would not say whether 
Apple was developing special products for the Workspace 2000 concept. But he 
emphasized that all parts of the system -- from the large, flat video screens 
to the wireless communications network that links everything -- are technically 
feasible today. 
"When we presented this to the product development people (at Apple), the first 
thing they said was: 'There are a lot of things here that can't be done,' " 
Stewart recalled. "But, on closer examination, everything here is doable and 
has been shown in public." 
The Workspace 2000 model has a desk, a two-man conference table and an 
adjustable surface that resembles a drafting table when horizontal and a 
blackboard when upright -- each of which has a computer screen for a surface. 
There is also a curved partition that functions as a video screen and also can 
be clear or opaque, depending on whether the worker wants privacy. 
Hand-held computer pads can be spoken into or used with an electronic pen. A 
pad can be inserted into a slot in one of the other devices, mounted on a chair 
arm or placed on a free-standing pedestal that contains a re-charger. Other 
components are miniature video-conference equipment and a "power pillar" for 
optical data storage. 
Though few people have seen Workspace 2000 in advance of its public debut -- 
Apple kept it under wraps for well over a year after its completion -- those 
who have are enthusiastic. "It's dynamite, beautiful, a very thorough analysis 
of the human being and how he is going to interact with his environment," said 
Ron Pierce, a designer with S. G. Hauser Associates in Calabasas and president 
of the local chapter of the Industrial Designers Society of America. 
"It's one of the most exciting concepts I've seen in a long time," said Lucie 
Young, an editor with Design magazine in London, which is planning a major 
feature on Workspace 2000. "The office furniture industry has recently seen 
only superficial changes. This could revolutionize the way people work." 
Katherine Bennett, a Los Angeles-based industrial designer, called Workspace 
2000 "an excellent study," and added: "This project is user-driven. Too many 
manufacturers and designers are technology-driven." 
But not everyone is so enthusiastic about integrating furniture and computers, 
or, indeed, about making any drastic change in the physical infrastructure of 
the office. Aside from efforts such as an experimental secretarial station 
commissioned by Xerox Corp. and built by Egg Design of Cypress, there have been 
few well-financed explorations of radical office concepts. 
George Wilmot, vice president for advanced research at office furniture maker 
Knoll International, said his company had concluded that "embedding computer 
equipment in any significant way in the furniture is not a good idea." 
He said that assessment was dictated by analysis of the way computers are 
really used, and by the simple reality that computer technology is changing so 
quickly that it would be impractical to incorporate it into furniture that 
might be in use for a decade or more. "The philosophy at Knoll is to find a 
means to house computer equipment," Wilmot said. 
Gus Rodriguez, manager for furniture systems at Steelcase Corp., noted that 
both the computer and the office furniture industries are relatively young. "We 
are both still going through our growing pains, and integration will really 
come only when we reach a certain level of stability," Rodriguez said. "We are 
involved in several projects in that area, but we have to take a step-by-step 
approach." 
A structural problem also inhibits work on computer-furniture integration: 
Computer companies are in the computer business and furniture companies are in 
the furniture business, and the two meet all too infrequently. 
Peter Bressler, president of the Industrial Designers Society of America, noted 
that "the furniture industry is close to fashion, and the computer industry is 
close to engineering. These are two very polarized perspectives." 
Stumpf also pointed to "a gap in the field of interest between the computer and 
the furniture industries." He said that the Ethospace office system he designed 
for Herman Miller Inc., his primary client, was supposed to have computer 
screens in the office partitions, but collaboration with the computer company 
Unisys had not worked out. 
Stewart of Apple said it would take "visionary business relationships" to bring 
something like Workspace 2000 to fruition. Although some such collaborations 
are in the works, representatives of Apple and other firms would not discuss 
them. 
But many in the design community believe there has simply been too little 
commitment, too little 
money and too little daring in the whole area of office design. Steve Diskin, a 
Los Angeles product designer and a partner in Mega-Erg, an office-environment 
think tank, said that the office furniture field is conservative and currently 
is characterized by "confusion and timidity." 
Diskin said he fears that the lack of innovation in office design will soon 
come back to haunt U.S. industry. "It's an exact parallel to what happened in 
Detroit (automobile industry)," he said. "They said 'the public isn't ready for 
these things' and then the Japanese came in and ran away with it because they 
were a little bolder." 
Bressler, who emphasized that he was speaking for himself and not his 
association, criticized the furniture industry as being "rather superficial 
when it comes to really dealing with technology." 
Indeed, while the furniture companies boast about the advances they have made 
in "cord-management" -- accommodation of electronic cables in office furniture 
systems -- many designers virtually spit the words "cord-management" as an 
example of, in Bressler's words, "designing a system for yesterday." 
Computer-furniture integration, pioneered in the 1970s by the Italian designer 
Mario Bellini in studies for the office equipment maker Olivetti, is only a 
sub-set of the office-of-the-future debate. As Patton and others are quick to 
point out, the real issue is creating an office that meets the needs of 
workers. 
The trouble is that it's not always obvious what the office worker really 
needs, as opposed to what the boss surmises he might need. Patton says that in 
the typical modern office, "objective needs, such as the ability to compose and 
manipulate data, are well met, but subjective needs -- for comfort, security, 
ease of use, person-to-person contact, privacy, portability -- are not well 
met." 
Pinning down these "subjective" needs is not easy. Although furniture and 
computer companies brim with "human factors" specialists who analyze everything 
from the ideal height of a desk to the proper lighting of a computer screen, 
ergonomics -- defined in Webster's dictionary as "the study of the problems of 
people in adjusting to their environment" -- is still in its infancy. 
"We're sorry to see that no one is investing in real ergonomic studies," said 
Charles W. Pelly, president of Designworks USA of Newbury Park, Calif. "It's a 
finger-pointing situation that goes all the way up to the architects. We can't 
get pure research money from anyone to try and look at these problems." 
In the area of basic physical comfort and safety, some progress has been made. 
The Santa Monica-based Human Factors Society has developed a standard for 
computer workstations that addresses issues such as adjustability of furniture 
and screen resolution. Biomechanics Corp. of America, a New York-based start-up 
company, has built sensing tools that can measure stresses on the human body 
with more precision than ever before. 
The best answer to the repetitive-motion and vision problems associated with 
too much work at a computer screen is to free the worker from sitting at a 
terminal all day, many designers say. And more subtle issues, such as allowing 
for the right mix of privacy and human contact -- or creating a "feel" as nice 
as the one in E. B. White's fishing shack -- are even more elusive. 
Stumpf said that "many of the techno-approaches to the office are a complete 
misrepresentation of what people really want." Defining those real needs, he 
said, is often a matter of common sense. Stewart of Apple said that a main 
purpose of the advanced-design program was "need-finding," and that he tries to 
"use design as a catalyst" to looking at the problems. 
Patton said the approach he and three colleagues took in Workspace 2000 was 
based on both instinct and analysis. "A lot of it is very emotional," he said. 
"Design combines what is very rational and logical with what feels right." 
The "rational" analysis for Workspace 2000 produced a set of design goals, 
including eliminating redundancies of function, restoring the ability to move 
about freely, creating comfortable settings for conversations and group 
interaction, preserving privacy and allowing the option of customizing each 
work area. 
On a more instinctive level, each component of the Workspace 2000 system is a 
"metaphor" for a proven device such as a blackboard, a drafting table, a 
conventional school desk or a note pad. Patton said he hoped that such familiar 
forms would counteract the impersonal character of computer technology. 
Of course, even if Workspace 2000 or some other concept were deemed the ideal 
office of the future, there is always the troubling question of how much an 
employer will pay to provide a "fun" -- or even a healthful -- office 
environment. Something like Patton's project would cost tens of thousands of 
dollars per unit if it were built today, a price far beyond the reach of most 
potential buyers. 
Corporate facilities managers such as Dan Derby at Hewlett-Packard realize, 
however, that an attractive working environment is more than just nice. It is 
an increasingly important tool in recruiting not only executives but also 
professionals such as engineers, lawyers and commercial artists. "We have to 
pay much more attention to the people's environment now -- there's no question 
that it's part of the recruiting process," Derby said. 
And Diskin of Mega-Erg said that new office designs could help address a key 
economic issue in the office today: the cost of floor space. If the desk is 
also a computer there is that much more room for everything else. 
Patton doesn't spend much time talking about the economic practicalities, 
though. He is more interested in the theory of the office revolution. 
"A lot of these ideas are embryonic," he said, "but we're trying to create an 
inspirational workplace to elevate individual and group interactions. 
"Suddenly, with this, you're not chained to your desk any more." 
The Office of Tomorrow 
The office furniture envisioned by Patton Design infuses computer functionally 
into sleek modern forms. All parts of the system are linked in a wireless 
network, and plug-in program modules allow use of a variety of software 
applications. 
Translator 
A curved screen that can change from clear glass to a solid-color privacy 
screen at the touch of a button. The screen is also used for teleconferencing 
and can simultaneously display data or additional images. 
Counselor 
A worktable for two with a surface that can display data and accept input from 
either user. 
Pad 
A portable battery-powered computer similar in size and shape to a note pad. 
Data can be entered by speaking to it, by handwriting on the pad's display 
surface or by scanning an image into it. The pad can be connected or "docked," 
with all other components in the system. 
Work Board 
A flat panel display that can be used vertically as an "electonic chalkboard" 
or horizontally as a work surface. Includes a telephone, fax, scanner and 
printer. 
Com-Chair 
A special arm designed to fit most types of workstation chairs provides another 
plug-in receptacle for the pad. The arm folds down andout of the way when not 
in use. 
