MCKINZIE GUILTY OF LOOTING S&amp;L; 
FRAUD: FAIRY TALE ENDS AS JURY CONVICTS EX-NORTH AMERICA OFFICIAL ON 
RACKETEERING AND CONSPIRACY CHARGES. COLLAPSE OF HER INSTITUTION COST TAXPAYERS 
$120 MILLION. 
Janet Faye McKinzie was convicted Thursday of looting the now-defunct North 
America Savings &amp; Loan, ending what had once been a fairy tale existence of 
Rolls-Royces, $1,000 cocktail dresses and lavish parties with entertainment 
provided by the likes of Sammy Davis Jr. 
A jury of six men and six women deliberated eight days in U.S. District Court 
before finding McKinzie guilty of 22 of 26 counts including racketeering, 
conspiracy, bank fraud, wire fraud and interstate transportation of stolen 
property. She faces up to 175 years in jail. 
McKinzie, 40, wept as the verdict was read. 
During the eight-week trial, defense attorney Richard (Racehorse) Haynes 
portrayed McKinzie as a helpless victim duped into carrying out the fraud 
because she was being pumped full of prescription drugs by the thrift's 
chairman, Duayne Christensen. 
Christensen mysteriously died in a car accident only nine hours before federal 
regulators took over the thrift in 1987. The former dentist was named an 
unindicted co-conspirator in McKinzie's case. 
Federal prosecutors had portrayed the couple as a modern-day Bonnie and Clyde, 
stealing millions of dollars from North America to enrich themselves. 
They each had a Rolls-Royce -- hers with the license plate XTACI. And McKinzie 
spent hundreds of thousands of dollars at Neiman-Marcus, much of it after 
regular store hours as a preferred customer. FBI agents found that the pair had 
spent $125,000 on a gold eagle statue, $18,500 on a letter opener and $500 on a 
gold paper clip. 
McKinzie's 37th birthday in 1986 was celebrated with a dinner for hundreds of 
guests at the Newport Beach Marriott. Sammy Davis Jr. was on hand to sing a mix 
of tunes including "Happy Birthday." 
McKinzie officially was a consultant to North America. She was also 
Christensen's business manager and confidante. Prosecutors, however, say she 
was the thrift's de facto chairman. 
The collapse of North America, one of several Orange County thrifts to fail in 
recent years, eventually cost taxpayers more than $120 million. Thursday's 
verdict was hailed by regulators. 
"The North America case was probably one of the top three investigations in the 
last five years in terms of how egregious the fraud was," said William Davis, 
chief deputy of the California Department of Savings and Loan. "Justice finally 
prevailed. I'm delighted." 
McKinzie is the first person to be convicted under the RICO statute -- the 
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act -- in connection with a 
savings and loan failure on the West Coast. 
Federal prosecutors employed the RICO statute so the government could try to 
claim the proceeds from Christensen's $10-million life insurance policy, which 
named McKinzie as sole beneficiary. 
The jury in the McKinzie case is scheduled to reconvene next month to decide if 
she must forfeit that money to the U.S. Treasury Department. The money is 
currently being held in a government-controlled escrow account. 
Because the jury still has some unfinished business, both prosecutors and 
defense attorneys were reluctant to say much Thursday. 
Assistant U.S. Attys. David J. Schindler and Paul L. Seave would only say they 
were pleased with the verdict. 
Michael M. Essmyer -- Haynes' co-counsel -- expressed disappointment. "Ms. 
McKinzie's judgment was impaired by the prescription drugs to the extent that 
under the law she should have been found not guilty," Essmyer said. 
McKinzie had pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity, a highly unusual plea in 
a white-collar-crime case. 
Haynes, one of the nation's leading defense attorneys, repeatedly told jurors 
that McKinzie was "a washed-out zombie" simply following Christensen's orders. 
Hundreds of prescriptions were introduced as evidence, indicating that McKinzie 
was taking massive doses of drugs that included anti-anxiety medications such 
as Xanax. 
During closing arguments two weeks ago, Haynes said Christensen was the Jim 
Jones of the savings and loan industry, a reference to the cult religious 
figure who led 900 of his followers in a mass suicide in Guyana. 
The defense even showed jurors pictures of McKinzie before and after her 
relationship with Christensen. The first photo shows her svelte and healthy. In 
the second, McKinzie appears emaciated and pale. 
"The smiling, charming blonde had become an 89- to 93-pound, 
prescription-drug-addicted, mentally diminished person who almost died in 
February, 1987," Essmyer told jurors. 
McKinzie didn't even drink coffee before she met Christensen, Essmyer said. 
Essmyer paraphrased Christensen as saying: "Just help me a little bit. It's my 
money, it's my savings and loan. And here, have a few pills." 
Christensen died in 1987 when his Jaguar crashed into an overpass piling on the 
Corona del Mar Freeway. He was 57. The Orange County coroner classified the 
cause of his death as undetermined, failing to rule on whether it was an 
accident or suicide. 
Jurors sided with the government, which said McKinzie was fully aware of what 
she was doing. 
Federal prosecutors focused exclusively during the trial on two schemes that 
they claimed McKinzie directed personally. 
According to the prosecution, an escrow-accounts fraud succeeded in bilking 
North America of $11 million between August, 1985, and March, 1986. The 
thrift's board of directors approved the deposit of millions of dollars in what 
they thought were escrow accounts to be used by McKinzie to purchase properties 
with the help of a real estate speculator named David L. Morgan. 
The escrow accounts were phony. 
McKinzie went so far as to order an underling to get blank stationery from the 
two banks where the deposits were supposedly held. Shortly thereafter, North 
America executives received letters that appeared to be from the banks 
reassuring them that the deposits were safe and sound. 
"To give all parties concerned a good comfort zone, prior to any of these funds 
being released, North America Savings will be immediately notified," one letter 
said. 
The letters were forgeries -- done at McKinzie's instruction -- and the $11 
million was long gone by the time they arrived in North America's mailbox. 
"The money was dispersed to the four corners of the Earth," Seave said during 
closing arguments. 
One letter -- purportedly written by the manager of one of the two banks -- 
even praised McKinzie. 
"I can assure you Jan McKinzie, her Plaza Group reputation and the business she 
provides to our bank is well respected," the letter said. 
"That was very nice of Jan McKinzie to write that about herself," Seave said 
during closing arguments. "A nice self-serving touch." 
The second scam McKinzie engineered, jurors were told, involved two residential 
projects that North America was financing. 
Using old invoices from those projects, McKinzie instructed secretaries to 
white-out key information, such as dates and amount paid, and put in new 
information including much larger amounts due. 
North America wrote $5.6 million worth of checks based on those phony invoices, 
some of which went directly to McKinzie and Christensen. The two even formed a 
shell company called Central State Construction which was used as a funnel for 
some of the ill-gotten gains, the prosecution said. 
"These schemes are not complicated," Seave told jurors. "They just required a 
lot of hard work, and Janet McKinzie was a very hard worker." 
McKinzie -- along with several other officers and directors at North America -- 
still faces a civil lawsuit brought by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corp. FSLIC attorney Eric Isken said the agency has no plans to drop its 
action. 
"We have always intended to pursue all remedies against Janet McKinzie," Isken 
said. "We intend to continue to purse that vigorously." 
The failure of North America was one of the more unusual of a series of savings 
and loan collapses in Orange County in the 1980s. 
Just last month, two Orange County businessmen were sentenced after convictions 
of fraud and conspiracy that led to the 1986 collapse of Ramona Savings &amp; 
Loan in Santa Ana. They received prison terms of 27 years between them and were 
ordered to pay $6.8 million in restitution to the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corp. 
And numerous criminal and civil investigations are under way involving 
Irvine-based Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan. The thrift, which undertook risky real 
estate investments, was seized in April by federal regulators and is expected 
to cost taxpayers more than $2 billion. 
THE SAGA OF NORTH AMERICA SAVINGS &amp; LOAN 
September, 1983: Duayne D. Christensen, a Westminster dentist, invests $6.4 
million to open North America Savings &amp; Loan in Huntington Beach. 
November, 1986: North America, now based in Santa Ana, loses $8.9 million for 
the first 11 months of 1986 and has a negative net worth of $1.5 million by the 
end of November. 
January, 1987: Christensen is killed when his car crashes into a bridge support 
on the Corona del Mar Freeway. Nine and a half hours later, North America is 
declared insolvent by state regulators. When evidence of widespread fraud is 
detected, the state turns the institution over to the Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corp., and the FBI and the state attorney general's office begin 
criminal investigations. Charles Bottomley is hired by the FSLIC to manage the 
thrift. 
February, 1987: Federal regulators sue Janet Faye McKinzie, Christensen's 
business manager and executive consultant, charging that she and Christensen 
defrauded the institution of more than $20 million and caused its collapse. 
March, 1987: Lawyers for federal regulators operating the thrift revise the 
amount missing to $40 million. 
December, 1987: After moving to new offices in Costa Mesa, North America puts 
its art and collectibles up for auction. Regulators estimate the thrift paid 
more than $250,000 for the office decorations. 
June, 1988: Federal regulators announce that they will close and liquidate 
North America. The failure is estimated to cost taxpayers $120 million. 
April, 1989: A federal grand jury in Los Angeles returns a 40-count 
racketeering indictment against McKinzie and five other former principals of 
the savings and loan, alleging that they looted the institution of more than 
$16 million. 
November, 1989-January, 1990: Three of McKinzie's associates plead guilty to 
criminal charges in connection with alleged fraud at North America. 
Jan. 9, 1990: Federal racketeering and bank fraud trial of McKinzie begins in 
Santa Ana. 
March 29, 1990: McKinzie is found guilty of 22 counts of racketeering, 
conspiracy, wire and bank fraud and interstate transportation of stolen 
property. She could be sentenced to up to 175 years in prison. 
Source: Los Angeles Times files 
