IN PLUMMER PARK 
A month ago, the old women sitting on the park benches would have been hassled 
for spare change. The children who played soccer would have had to maneuver 
around men who slept all day in muddy sleeping bags. 
But things have changed in Plummer Park. Today the women exchange news of the 
day unmolested. And now the soccer field is being used for what it was 
intended. The park is once again a haven for residents of the area with the 
recent passage of a strictly enforced "no camping" law, the eviction of a 
homeless feeding program and the closure of a nearby 24-hour hot dog stand. 
"This is simply a matter of the community taking back the park from vagrants," 
said Ed Riney of the East End Community Action group that lobbied the West 
Hollywood City Council for the changes. "It wasn't as dramatic as taking down 
the Berlin Wall, but for us it was reversing a really bad direction that our 
park was heading (in)." 
According to park director Laura Mehegan, the number of homeless people in the 
park has dropped from 2,070 in January to 280 last month. 
A sense of community has returned to the site. On a typical Saturday, neighbors 
haggle with a man selling fruit from his van, and not far away the Audubon 
Society sells bird-watching kits. 
Dozens of serious-faced men, mostly Soviet immigrants, play rummy and dominoes 
at picnic tables, and familiar television actors pound tennis balls and wave to 
fans from the courts. Children lug cellos for the Pioneer Youth Orchestra 
rehearsal at one end of the park. At the other end, men in pastel sweat suits 
warm up for their "Stretchercise for Gay Men" class. 
A few of the homeless can still be seen, one sharing a bench with the Russian 
grandmothers wearing brightly covered scarfs. 
But it is once again the neighborhood's park, and many who use it are quick to 
say how much it has improved now that most of the homeless have left. 
"We love the park, we take it back, it was not pleasant before," said Charles 
Aniell, a 77-year-old Russian who takes English classes at the park. 
Not everyone is a fan of the changes or the motives for them. Rene Seidel, an 
activist with the West Hollywood Homeless Project, said the park was a safe, 
central place to serve meals to the homeless, and the lack of the site means 
"we can't find them to help them." Most of Plummer Park's homeless have moved 
to nearby Poinsettia and Wattles Garden parks in Hollywood. "It's a basic 
meanness and hysteria from the neighborhood," said Ted Landreth of the Greater 
West Hollywood Food Coalition, which was kicked out of the park after serving 
250 meals a day for nearly two years. "They didn't want to have to look these 
people in the eyes, so they just moved them out of sight." The nonprofit food 
coalition now serves meals a few blocks away at Sycamore Avenue and Romaine 
Street in Los Angeles, but fewer people are taking part, Landreth said. 
The homeless problem is still discussed in the park as much as the historic 
events going on in the homelands of its patrons. "They don't have somewhere to 
go and don't bother me," said Esther Mezhitrsky, in the park with her 
6-year-old granddaughter. "I come here to talk to my people about our 
homeland," said the woman, who fled Kiev, a Soviet city, in 1980. "God Bless 
America we have this park." 
Today the large community of mostly elderly Soviet immigrants who frequent the 
park, nicknamed "Little Gorky Park," is more evident than ever. "Sitting down 
in a park and taking a load off their feet were part of their culture in 
Russia, that's why they're here," said Senior Center director Vivian Sauer. 
The park also attracts Israelis, Mexicans and Iranians. "This park is more of a 
United Nations than any other park in Los Angeles," said Ruth Egger, the Senior 
Center's activity director. 
The 5.3-acre, 121-year-old park -- bordered by Santa Monica Boulevard, Fuller 
Avenue, Vista Street and Fountain Avenue -- is one of the county's busiest 
parks for its size with more than 16,000 people having used it in February, 
said Mehegan. It has eight buildings, tennis and basketball courts, a 
playground and a bird sanctuary. 
To celebrate Plummer Park's rebirth, the West Hollywood City Council held its 
meeting in the middle of the park last week at a rededication ceremony of 
Fiesta Hall. The 40-year-old hall, recently renovated at a cost of $320,000, 
has featured performances by Jack Benny, Irving Berlin, Zubin Mehta and Ira 
Gershwin with guests including Elizabeth Taylor, Joan Crawford, Judy Garland 
and the Marx brothers. 
"I tell the children they are standing on hallowed ground here," said Ruth 
McLaughlin, director of the California Junior Symphony, which has held free 
performances at the park for more than 50 years. 
Historically, the park has been known as a gathering place for travelers since 
it was deeded to John and Cecelia Plummer in 1869. Large barbecue parties with 
well-known guests were held at the area known as the Pioneer Fiesta Center. 
Eugene Plummer lost the land and the county foreclosed on it but let him live 
at the park until his death in 1943. The Plummer House stood on the land from 
1878 until it burned in 1981. 
Today parties continue at the site, with Russian celebrations, Easter egg hunts 
and jazz festivals planned by the park staff of nine. Classes include cake 
decorating, armchair exercises, ballroom dancing and Soviet drama classes. 
A tiny area set off by a black iron fence is a bird sanctuary kept up by the 
Los Angeles Audubon Society, which has a bookstore in the park. Owls, 
hummingbirds, hawks and falcons can be found there, the only danger being a few 
scavenging cats. 
"Not too long ago, I had to walk over homeless people sleeping in the courtyard 
to get to the front door," said Charles Harper, Audubon bookstore manager. "The 
homeless used to throw trash from the food program over the fence into the 
sanctuary for us to clean up." 
The tennis courts, built in the 1930s, attracted every major athlete and 
celebrity of the day, according to Oscar Ringel, who has lobbied for 30 years 
for park improvements. 
Celebrities spotted on the courts have included Bill Cosby, Sidney Poitier, 
Donna Mills, George Peppard and Stacy Keach. Director Paul Mazursky plays there 
at least three times a week. It is said that people have left screenplays near 
his tennis bag hoping he would read them. 
One of the most talked-about park regulars is tennis player Richard Yarbrough, 
65, of Culver City, who lost both his legs to poor circulation. Zipping around 
the courts in his wheelchair, Yarbrough is a good match for many players at the 
park. 
He thinks the community's effort to reclaim the park was well worth it. "If you 
don't take care of what you've got, then it gets taken away from you," 
Yarbrough said. "I commend those who have taken back the park and cleaned it 
up. People are devoted to this park." 
Rod McCary, a character actor who started playing tennis at Plummer Park 20 
years ago, sees the park as a valuable part of the community where the ebb and 
flow of life can be viewed from a bench. "In this park you see a microcosm of 
what is going on in the world. 
"There's a mesh of life here," McCary said. "I've watched people at the tennis 
courts grow old and join the codgers playing cards." 
