WHEN COLD FUSION GOT HOT, IT RAPIDLY FIZZLED; 
SCIENCE: THE PROMISE OF UNLIMITED ENERGY SET OFF A FRENZY OF ACTIVITY. BUT 
PUBLICITY ALONE COULDN'T MAKE CLAIMS OF A BREAKTHROUGH TRUE. 
"Cold fusion" was born a year ago today when chemists Martin Fleischmann andB. 
Stanley Pons at the University of Utah held a press conference to announce that 
they had tamed the process of nuclear fusion. 
Their claim was novel and the apparatus simple -- a rod of palladium, a battery 
and a jar of water. The promise of unlimited energy set off a frenzy of 
activity and publicity as researchers everywhere rushed to confirm the Utah 
results. 
Scientists would have been ecstatic if cold fusion had been real. But publicity 
alone didn't make it true. Confirmation by independent researchers was the only 
way to be sure. Regrettably, the present consensus is that Pons and Fleischmann 
were simply wrong. This follows not from prejudice, but from many careful 
experiments performed and thoroughly documented by interdisciplinary teams 
using apparatus far more sophisticated than that available to the Utah 
researchers. The continuing claims of a few "believers" are plagued by 
irreproducibility, inconsistencies and the absence of peer-reviewed 
publication. Most telling, however, is that nobody else can make cold fusion 
work. 
The research community responded as it should have. Chemists, physicists and 
materials scientists dropped work in progress and focused on the fusion claims. 
Results emerged -- with surprising speed -- from universities, national 
laboratories and industry. While it is disappointing that this effort came to 
naught, validation is an integral part of the scientific process. Any 
phenomenon that doesn't fit our understanding of the physical world stimulates 
a scientist's curiosity. High-temperature superconductivity is an example where 
the process had a more favorable outcome. 
Cold fusion underscores the interdisciplinary nature of today's science. The 
concept intertwines chemistry, materials science, condensed-matter physics and 
nuclear physics. Complete knowledge of all these fields is simply too much for 
any one scientist to master. This doesn't diminish the role of individual 
initiative and creativity, but today's science requires cooperation among 
experts in the various disciplines. Indeed, scientists racing to test the Utah 
claims immediately formed teams to pool their talents and experience. If Pons 
and Fleischmann would have done so in their early experiments, cold fusion 
might have expired quietly. 
Instantaneous communication among scientists is now possible through the fax 
machines and computer networks that link laboratories around the globe. These 
tools hastened cold fusion research, but the giant game of "telephone" also 
corrupted information and spread rumors. It accounted for the speed with which 
the scientific community moved to test the idea, as well as for much of the 
confusion in the days after the Utah announcement. 
Manipulation of the popular media was instrumental in creating and sustaining 
the furor. Spectacular claims, such as the observation of nuclear reactions, 
were publicized without sufficient details to allow informed judgment by other 
scientists. Reports of heat production greatly exaggerated the tiny effects 
that researchers had actually measured. Reporters who sought independent 
assessments were hampered by scientists' natural hesitation to judge the work 
of others without knowing the details. As the facts became fully known, all of 
the highly touted claims were withdrawn or severely qualified. The usual 
procedure of peer review and full publication in a scientific journal is 
circumvented only at one's peril. 
Pressure for funding distorted the scientific process but couldn't derail it. 
The Utah Legislature committed $5 million to a National Cold Fusion Institute 
on the assurances of a panel made up largely of businessmen, lawyers and 
publicists. To its credit, the federal government sought better scientific 
advice. An expert group commissioned by the Department of Energy visited all of 
the laboratories claiming to have observed cold fusion. Its members didn't see 
a single "working" device, even in the lab of Fleischmann and Pons. Qualified 
peer review remains the best method to allocate our precious and limited 
research funding. 
Modern science is a most exciting endeavor. While progress occurs at an 
astounding rate, most advances are not widely publicized. Similarly, the errors 
that do (and must) occur are quietly corrected through the scientific process. 
True progress withstands the test of time. Although cold fusion excited our 
imagination, in the end it was just another corrected mistake. Thus, the 
lessons it teaches are more important than the experiments themselves. We 
scientists, the media and the curious public would do well to remember them 
when trumpets herald the next unverified discovery. 
