'THE THIN BLUE LINE': JUSTICE FOR ALL?; 
AN INSIDE LOOK AT WHY A DOCUMENTARY THAT HAD REAL-LIFE IMPACT DIDN'T MAKE THE 
CUT IN THE OSCAR RACE 
The New York Film Critics Circle named it the best feature documentary of 1988. 
The National Board of Review gave it the D. W. Griffith Award for the same 
reason. In four different newspaper polls of the nation's critics, it placed 
first as the best film of the year, feature or documentary. 
Last fall, the Independent Documentary Assn., an organization composed of 
people involved in the medium, gave it one of its five fraternal "IDA" awards 
for distinguished achievement. And last week, due to evidence collected in the 
making of the movie, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals overturned a verdict 
that had put the subject of the film on Death Row 12 years ago. 
If there was ever a film with a lock on an Academy Award, Erroll Morris' "The 
Thin Blue Line" appeared to be it. It had a profound topic, overwhelming 
critical acclaim and the kind of respectful media coverage that benefits the 
entire industry. Morris himself was the subject of a 15,000-word profile in New 
Yorker magazine, and there were those in Hollywood who thought he might become 
the first person to receive a best director nomination for a documentary. 
But when the Oscar nominations were announced last month, the names of Morris 
and "The Thin Blue Line" were nowhere to be found, a fact that shocked critics 
and finlm makers alike. 
"It is one of the most outrageous things in the modern history of the academy," 
said English director Michael Apted, who has made both features ("Coal Miner's 
Daughter," "Gorillas in the Mist") and documentaries ("28 Up"). "For my money, 
it was the best piece of film in any category. That they ignored it diminishes 
the academy." 
Film critic Roger Ebert, who lists Morris' 1979 "Gates of Heaven" as one of the 
10 best films ever made, called the slighting of "The Thin Blue Line" "the 
worst non-nomination" of the year and attributed its rejection to the inability 
of academy voters to appreciate innovative film making. 
"If (Morris) had done a '60 Minutes' documentary with talking heads, film clips 
and conventional narration, they would have nominated it," Ebert said. 
Perhaps they would have. In interviews with several of the 40 members of the 
academy's documentary committee, the film's style -- its blend of interviews, 
reenactments and fetishist-like close-ups of police lights, pistols and other 
murder scene objects -- was often mentioned as being off-putting. 
"I think this is a case of the emperor has no clothes," said one documentary 
film maker on the committee. "I was shocked that the film had gotten all that 
attention, and my own evaluation was so different. The critical accolades were 
stunningly different from what I observed." 
From interviews done for this story, it doesn't appear that "The Thin Blue 
Line" even came close to receiving a nomination. All but one of the members 
interviewed said they did not consider it one of the five best films they saw. 
In fact, at the committee screening of "The Thin Blue Line," enough members 
raised their hands to have the film stopped before it was completed. 
It is a common democratic procedure, committee members explained, to have a 
film turned off when enough of them request it. It is a process that one member 
described as "dumping," something that occurs frequently when there's a heavy 
workload. 
Arthur Nadel, chairman of the academy's documentary committee, said 74 films 
were submitted this year, adding up to between 100 and 150 hours of viewing, if 
each one was played to the end. 
How much of "The Thin Blue Line" did the committee see before they dumped it? 
"It was 85% of the way through," one member in attendance that night said. 
"Some of us stayed and they showed the rest of it. But it's unfair to say the 
others might have voted differently if they'd watched it all. The film was not 
liked." 
Chuck Workman, whose "Precious Images" won him an Oscar in 1986 (in the short 
films-live action category), said he considered "The Thin Blue Line" one of the 
best films of the year and that he was surprised it did not get nominated. But 
Workman said he did not think there was anything political in the rejection. 
"There is very little politics involved in that group," he said. "They have 
minds of their own and vote the way they see it. A lot of people just didn't 
like the movie." 
Nominations for documentaries, both shorts and features, involve preliminary 
and final voting. After each screening, members evaluate the film on a scale of 
4 to 10 and jot their ratings down in booklets that remain with the academy. 
After they've seen all of the submitted films, they get together for a day to 
discuss what they've seen ("We argue and lobby each other," one member said), 
then they vote again. Only the final votes, which are turned over immediately 
to Price-Waterhouse, count. (Voting for the actual Oscar is done by all academy 
members, who validate their attendance at screenings of all five nominees.) 
At this year's wrap-up nominations meeting, "The Thin Blue Line" was hardly 
discussed, members say. 
"It was discussed only in the sense that there was so much negative feeling 
about it," Workman said. "It was pretty much dismissed." 
So, how does a film steamroll critics, woo audiences ("The Thin Blue Line" 
grossed $1.5 million, which is considered good for a documentary) and get a 
warm reception on newspaper op-ed pages, only to feel an Arctic breeze emerge 
from the academy? 
Theories abound: 
 -- The film had too much publicity. It was overhyped by the distributors and 
set itself up for a fall. 
 -- Miramax Films, which holds the worldwide theatrical and videocassette 
rights to it, pushed too hard in its Academy Award campaign. In suggesting it 
in trade ads for consideration as both best picture and best documentary 
feature, it sent a signal to the committee members that the film was worthy of 
more than they could give it. 
 -- The film was too slick, it had too much production for its own good. 
 -- The academy voters are too old and too narrow in their views of 
documentaries to accept Morris' innovative style, and many of them do not have 
the expertise to judge. 
The committee members who did not vote for "The Thin Blue Line" dismiss all of 
these notions. 
"I think (the distributors) set the film up as a shoo-in and that it created an 
expectation among members that the film couldn't meet," said Mitchell Block, 
whose Direct Cinema distributes documentaries. "But there was no backlash. As a 
group, we simply thought the five nominated films were better." 
As for the critics, Block said they have no cause for outrage: "How can they 
say 'Thin Blue Line' is the best documentary of the year when they haven't even 
seen the five that were nominated? They can say 'Rain Man' is the best movie if 
they've seen all the features, but they can't say they know better than we do 
if they haven't seen what we've seen." 
Ebert concedes that point to Block, but won't concede to those members who said 
film critics get caught up in the emotion of a movie and overlook its 
structural flaws. 
"There is a strong impulse in America to want a movie to tell a story, with 
none of the stylistic elements . . . to distract you," Ebert said. "We now have 
all these movies that are totally narrative. People are resistant to movies 
like 'The Thin Blue Line' that break that narrative reverie. I think that's 
what happened (in that committee)." 
The makeup of the documentary committee is cited by some as its strength and by 
others as its weakness. 
"We have producers, directors, camera people, actors, film editors -- all kinds 
of extraordinary talents who have the dedication to commit to seeing all these 
films," said chairman Nadel. "They bring a lot of knowledge to the (nominations 
process)." 
Workman said he believes the committee would be more effective if its makeup 
were less heterogenous. 
"I think the intentions of everyone on the committee are very good," he said. 
"Their tastes are their own, and not necessarily enlightened. I just wish there 
were more film makers involved." 
The committee is composed of academy members who volunteer for the job and are 
then selected by the chairman. Nadel, who took over from Norman Corwin last 
year, will not discuss committee membership, but other members estimated that 
more than half are older than 65 and that there are only four who are under 50. 
One other theory raised to explain the fate of "The Thin Blue Line" is that it 
was a victim of timing. Because it was one of the last of the 74 films shown to 
the committee, maybe the members were too weary to give it the attention it 
needs. 
The last 10 minutes of the movie includes what amounts to a confession by the 
real killer. Yet, enough members at the committee screening apparently were 
ready to stop the film before there was a hint of the third-act revelation. 
Nadel would not comment on how or why films are stopped, but two members 
emphasized that the decision to dump is "democratic," implying that if one more 
than 50% of the viewers raise their hands, the projector is turned off. In any 
event, when the hands went up at the screening of "The Thin Blue Line," there 
was apparently no opposition. 
Morris, who is in Los Angeles attempting to parlay the success of "The Thin 
Blue Line" into a feature film assignment, refused to be drawn into the Oscar 
debate, saying he had received his award when the Texas appeals court 
overturned the conviction of Randall Adams. 
"My main concern from the beginning has been to get Randall Adams out of 
prison," Morris said. "What this film has done for me has been enormous. The 
fact that I've been involved in a case like this and have had an impact on it 
has been reward enough." 
Nevertheless, Morris acknowledged that it would have been nice to stand before 
the world and thank the people who made it possible -- "Sue Weil at PBS, who 
believed in me and the project and found a way to keep us going when no one 
else was willing; Lindsay Law at American Playhouse, who got involved and made 
it possible for me to do the re-enactments, to hire (composer) Philip Glass and 
turn the interview material into a movie. . . . " 
Morris, who has worked as a private investigator between documentaries, said he 
and Randall Adams are "ahead of the game," that he's got a new lease on his 
film career and Adams a new lease on life. But that's not enough for those 
people who think their victory should have been toasted with an Oscar. 
"His film is as good a look at that part of America as I have ever seen," said 
director Michael Apted, pointing out that the academy bestowed a batch of 
nominations (seven) on "Mississippi Burning" while ignoring a documentary that 
puts the spotlight on a more recent example of Southern injustice. "It's 
shameful that fellow members in the industry don't give it the acknowledgement 
it deserves." 
The final upshot of "The Thin Blue Line" -- the overturned conviction -- came 
after the Oscar nominations were announced. Workman wonders how his colleagues 
on the committee felt as they read the front-page news stories about that 
ruling. 
"I think those people are embarrassed now," Workman said. "Wouldn't it be nice 
if every time you see (the Randall Adams case) mentioned, it says, 'The Academy 
Award-nominated film'?" 
But another member seemed to be speaking for the majority when he said, "I'm 
thrilled that an innocent man is going to get out of jail. But that doesn't 
mean a badly made picture should get an Oscar . . . or even a nomination." 
