OWNER OF IMMIGRATION FIRMS HELD ON TAX EVASION CHARGES 
An El Toro businessman already under investigation for allegedly defrauding 
Spanish-speaking immigrants seeking work papers was arrested Thursday on 12 
felony counts of tax evasion, authorities said. 
Oscar Salinas, 51, owner of one of Southern California's largest immigrant 
legalization services, was taken into custody at his El Toro home Thursday 
morning and placed in Orange County Jail. Bail was set at $250,000 and an 
arraignment was scheduled for today. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Gerald G. Johnston said Salinas, who also uses the name Jan 
Vouziers, was charged with eight counts of failure to pay payroll taxes for his 
employees and four counts of failure to file 1987-88 state income tax returns 
for his employees. 
Salinas is the owner of one of the region's largest immigrant assistance 
companies, with offices in Orange, Los Angeles, San Diego and Ventura counties. 
Critics, including the Orange County Coalition for Immigrant Rights, have long 
complained that Salinas' companies, which operate under different names, are 
guilty of sloppy and incomplete work in handling and processing residency and 
work applications for thousands of Spanish-speaking immigrants. 
Johnston said his office has been investigating Salinas for more than 6 months 
in connection with complaints that he has lured immigrants to his businesses by 
making false promises of providing amnesty, residency or temporary work 
permits. 
"I'd estimate he has about 5,000 clients," Johnston said. "Depending on the 
program, it is very expensive. It can be up to $2,500 apiece for labor 
certification, and we think that there are about 2,000 people there." 
Johnston added that "there have been a number of complaints that people were 
lied to or not fully informed. Some people said they were not told they were 
not qualified but their money was taken anyway." 
Salinas also has been under investigation by the U.S. Labor Department, which 
sent two investigators to Orange County to assist in his arrest Thursday. 
Johnston said the case was made difficult because many of Salinas' customers 
are poorly educated, possibly in the country without proper papers and are 
afraid to speak to authorities for fear they will be deported. 
Although the tax evasion charges have nothing to do with the fraud 
investigation, Johnston said his office thought it was important to make the 
case because "we felt that there was a real concern of injury to the community 
and we needed to do something." 
Johnston said some of Salinas' firms operate under the names Hispanic Law 
Center, Attorney Management Services, H2A Growers Services and Southern 
California Immigration Center. 
He said Salinas attracted customers primarily by advertising extensively on 
Spanish-language radio. 
Robin Blackwell, coordinator of the Coalition for Immigrant Rights, said her 
office has been "receiving complaints daily about him." 
"There are a lot of gullible and innocent people who are hurt," said Blackwell, 
whose office has been assisting the district attorney's office in its 
investigation of Salinas. 
