NUTRITIONALLY SPEAKING: RESEARCHERS ASSAIL LACK OF CALCIUM IN WOMEN'S DIETS 
The scientific community, including the National Research Council (NRC) and 
U.S. Surgeon Gen. C. Everett Koop, has a bone to pick with women who regularly 
fail to meet the Recommended Dietary Allowance of 800 milligrams of calcium or 
who do so by swallowing calcium tablets in lieu of low-fat foods. There is 
concern that the importance of continuously replenishing the body's supply of 
the mineral through dietary sources has been under-evaluated and overshadowed 
by the fear of fat in the diet. 
A report released earlier this month by the NRC stressed the need for young and 
adolescent women to increase their intake of dietary calcium. The Surgeon 
General's Report on Nutrition and Health, published last year, also addressed 
this topic. 
"Calcium is an essential nutrient," the NRC report stated. "It is necessary for 
adequate growth and skeletal development. Certain segments of the population, 
especially women and adolescents, need to make careful food choices to obtain 
adequate calcium from the food supply. The committee recommends that 
consumption of low- and nonfat dairy products and dark green vegetables, which 
are rich sources of calcium, can assist in maintaining calcium intake at 
approximately the RDA levels." 
Furthermore, the report continues, "the potential benefits of calcium intake 
above the RDAs to prevent osteoporosis or hypertension are not well-documented 
and do not justify the use of calcium supplements." 
Intake Drops 
Figures taken from the USDA's nationwide food consumption survey found that in 
1985 women between the ages of 19 and 34 managed to achieve only about 80% of 
the RDA of calcium from food sources. Calcium intake for women in the 35- to 
50-year-old age range, dropped to as low as 68% of the RDA -- which is itself 
under scrutiny for being too low. 
And since 1984, when a National Institutes of Health panel concluded that 
post-menopausal women needed twice the RDA of calcium and pre-menopausal women 
needed 1 1/2 times the RDA, supplement sales have "skyrocketed," USDA reports. 
To improve consumer intake of dietary calcium, researchers have launched a 
triple attack. They are re-emphasizing the importance of building bone during 
the formative years, noting that older women consuming less than half the 
calcium needed over a prolonged period can suffer a loss of nearly 5% of spinal 
bone per year. They are stressing that the female hormone estrogen has a 
significant role in bone loss. And they are citing the negative effects of 
meeting the recommended goal through supplementation. 
Best Insurance 
Research data indicates that taking extra calcium after menopause probably 
doesn't slow bone loss and building additional bone during youth -- when the 
soft tissue inside the bones is in a continuous state of development -- is the 
best insurance against osteoporosis later in life. 
This was underscored most recently when studies of high calcium intake in older 
rats were completed. The research was directed by Dr. James C. Smith, head of 
the Vitamin and Mineral Nutrition Laboratory at Beltsville, Md., part of the 
government's Agricultural Research Service. 
"I think there's a body of evidence that the best way is to build up the bones 
before menopause," Smith said in an interview, adding, "but I haven't worked 
with women." 
His investigation was conducted at the Beltsville lab by University of Maryland 
graduate students under the direction of Joseph H. Soares, nutrition professor. 
It is scientific fact that the body's ability to absorb calcium is variable 
with age. During typical periods of growth, intestinal absorption of calcium 
increases, with infants and children absorbing up to 60% of the calcium they 
ingest. Pregnant women use about 50% and other adults only retain about 30%. 
Calcium available from supplements is often even less, depending upon the 
binders used in the product, which can hold onto the calcium and prevent the 
body from using it. The ability of an individual's stomach acid to dissolve the 
supplements also is associated with malabsorption. 
And there are other factors: bone loss accelerates naturally after age 35 and 
becomes more and more difficult to retard with age; after menopause a steady 
decline of estrogen -- an important component in bone mineralization -- is 
observed, and the process of bone development appears to slow down as an animal 
ages, making the bones solid, more brittle and thus less efficient at storing 
calcium. 
(Ninety-nine percent of the body's calcium is stored in the bones and teeth. 
But it is used for various bodily functions. These include: regulating cell and 
nerve functions, maintaining normal blood pressure, muscle contraction 
capabilities including maintaining heartbeat, clotting of blood and preserving 
the material that holds cells together.) 
"The high calcium intake did not affect bone dynamics in the aged female rats 
but increased bone formation in the young rats," said Rashmi Sinha, the 
nutritionist who conducted the study. "Just taking a lot of calcium later in 
life, without replacing the female hormones, is not going to increase bone 
formation as it does earlier in life." 
Risk of Cancer 
But estrogen replacement therapy is associated with an increased risk for 
endometrial cancer and requires ongoing medical follow-up, according to Dr. 
Bess Dawson Hughes, director of the Calcium and Bone Research Laboratory at the 
USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University. She is 
currently conducting a five-year study of 360 post-menopausal women to 
determine the benefit of taking calcium, how much is necessary to minimize bone 
loss and the potential hazards associated with calcium supplementation. 
Preliminary results indicate that with extremely low intakes of calcium -- 
below the current U.S. intake level of 600 milligrams -- there is some benefit, 
even without estrogen replacement therapy. 
"The study suggests that postmenopausal women most likely to benefit from 
increased calcium are those who consume less than 400 milligrams a day, the 
equivalent of 1 1/3 glasses of milk," she said. 
"If our research shows calcium can retard bone loss in some women regardless of 
estrogen, that's good news, because estrogen replacement therapy isn't for 
everybody." 
Osteoporosis is the gradual loss of bone mineral from the skeleton, occuring in 
millions of American women (and some men), and it "goes on for many, many 
years," she said. It starts as early as age 20 and continues at a rate of 1% a 
year in women throughout their lives. The rate in men is about .25% per year. 
This deterioration typically starts out in the spine, and manifests itself as a 
compression fracture. It is a very common disorder, according to Dawson Hughes, 
who estimated that one out of every four white women over the age of 60 will be 
afflicted with the ailment. There are a number of factors that increase risk. 
Since women have less bone to start with and tend to lose it at a greater rate 
from their spines, being a female is the primary factor, said Dawson Hughes. 
Being either Asian or Caucasian is another. Family history has a role, as does 
a lifetime of low calcium intake. Early menopause, low body weight, sedentary 
life style, bearing no children, alcohol abuse, high sodium intake, cigarette 
smoking, high caffeine intake, high protein intake and high phosphorus intake 
are others. 
One conclusion that can be drawn is that younger women, who typically are 
deficient in calcium as well as iron, should adjust their diets to include at 
least three servings of dairy products and other calcium-rich foods per day, 
instead of relying on supplements. 
According to the National Dairy Board, a serving size is: 1 cup milk, 8 ounces 
yogurt, 1 1/2 ounces natural cheese or 2 ounces processed cheese. 
Drinking nonfat or low-fat milk is the most efficient way to accomplish this. 
One (8-ounce) serving of fluid nonfat milk provides about 90 calories, less 
than a gram of fat and 300 milligrams of calcium. The same size serving of 1% 
low-fat milk offers 102 calories, 3 grams fat and 300 milligrams calcium. 
One-cup of whole milk provides the most calories and fat for its calcium 
benefit -- 150 calories, 8 grams fat and 291 grams calcium -- while 2% low fat 
has just slightly less calories and fat: 121 and 5 grams fat for its 297 grams 
calcium. 
Meeting Dairy Requirement 
If drinking milk is not an option, here are some dairy and non-dairy foods 
which in combination can help meet the daily requirement: 1 ounce of low-fat 
cheese, such as part-skim mozzarella adds 200 milligrams calcium; 1 cup low-fat 
cottage cheese offers about 140 milligrams calcium, 1 cup low-fat fruit-added 
yogurt, 345; 3 ounces canned salmon with bones, 180, and 3 ounces sardines, 300 
milligrams. 
Dark leafy vegetables, in general, are rich in calcium, but some, such as kale, 
broccoli and beet greens, are the best absorbed. Other types, such as spinach 
and turnip greens, contain a naturally occuring calcium binder, which tends to 
hold on to the calcium. 
Some processed foods, because of fortification or a calcium-salt additive used 
in the manufacturing process, are also good sources of dietary calcium. These 
include tofu (bean curd), canned tomatoes, stone-ground or self-rising flour 
and blackstrap molasses. 
In addition to increasing low-fat sources of calcium in the diet, women are 
encouraged to develop a regular routine of exercise. This helps maintain bone 
mass and stimulates new bone formation. Although Dawson Hughes admits that the 
exact role of exercise in the maintenance of bone mass remains a little 
unclear, it appears that it is "very, very important." 
She said it apparently increased bone density in a studied population 
representing a cross section of women of all ages -- particularly those who 
previously were extremely sedentary. 
In another study, women who exercised for one hour, three times a week 
increased their bone mineral content by 1% over a one-year period. Those, who 
did not decreased their bone mineral content by the same amount. 
"If you took the balance on a daily basis," she explained, "the exercisers were 
gaining 42 milligrams of calcium for their bodies. You have about 100,000 
milligrams in your body, so that doesn't sound like much. But every day, day 
in, day out, that adds up . . . . It's a very effective means of impact on your 
bones." 
To help in designing a calcium-conscious life style, consider some of the 
following recipes, which are based upon a popular Oriental cooking ingredient 
and non-dairy substitute, bean curd. 
SIMPLY SUPER SUKIYAKI 
1/2 cup soy sauce 
2 tablespoons sugar 
3/4 pound ground beef 
1 medium onion, thinly sliced 
1 pound spinach, washed and drained 
1 bunch green onions, cut into 2-inch lengths 
1/4 pound mushrooms, sliced 
1 (10.5-ounce) package firm tofu, cut into 1-inch cubes and well-drained 
Combine soy sauce, sugar and 1/2 cup water. Set aside. 
Brown beef in Dutch oven or large skillet over medium heat, stirring to break 
beef into large chunks. Add onion and cook 1 minute. Add spinach, white parts 
of green onions, mushrooms and soy sauce mixture and cook until spinach is 
limp, stirring constantly. Gently stir in tofu and green onion tops. Cook about 
5 to 7 minutes or until vegetables are tender and tofu is seasoned with sauce. 
Makes 4 to 6 servings. 
LEMON PIE 
1 (0.6-ounce) package sugar-free lemon gelatin 
2 cups boiling water 
1 1/2 cups cold water 
1 (14.2-ounce) package soft tofu 
3 tablespoons lemon juice 
2 teaspoons grated lemon zest 
1 (9-inch) graham cracker crust 
Sliced strawberries 
Dissolve gelatin in boiling water. Add cold water and chill until consistency 
of egg whites. Place in blender with tofu and lemon juice. Quickly blend until 
well mixed. Stir in lemon peel, then pour into pie crust. Chill until firm. 
Serve topped with strawberries or other fresh fruit. Makes 8 servings. 
MEXICAN CASSEROLE 
3/4 cup chopped onion 
2 tablespoons oil 
1 (28-ounce) can tomatoes 
1 (1 1/4-ounce) package taco seasoning mix 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 (4-ounce) can chopped green chiles 
1 (7 1/2-ounce) package tortilla chips 
1/4 pound Jack cheese, shredded 
1/4 pound Cheddar cheese, shredded 
1 (14.2-ounce) package regular tofu, crumbled 
Saute onion in oil until tender. Add tomatoes, taco seasoning, salt and green 
chiles. Simmer, uncovered, 10 to 15 minutes. In lightly greased 2-quart 
casserole, arrange 1/2 of tortilla chips, sauce, cheese and tofu. Repeat 
layers, reserving small amount cheese. Bake at 350 degrees 25 minutes. Sprinkle 
with reserved cheese and continue baking 10 minutes longer. Let stand 10 
minutes before cutting. Makes 6 to 8 servings. 
BLUE CHEESE DIP 
1 (14.2-ounce) package soft tofu, drained 
1 (1.1-ounce) package blue cheese salad dressing mix 
Fresh vegetables or chips 
Place tofu on paper towel and gently squeeze out excess moisture. Crumble and 
place in blender along with packaged mix. Whirl until dip is well blended. 
Serve with fresh vegetables or chips. Makes 1 1/2 cups. 
BROCCOLI-CORN CASSEROLE 
1 (14.2-ounce) package regular tofu, drained well 
1 (10-ounce) package frozen, chopped broccoli, thawed 
1 (17-ounce) can cream-style corn 
2 egg whites, lightly beaten 
1/2 cup cornmeal 
1 teaspoon salt 
1/8 teaspoon black pepper 
1/4 cup bread crumbs 
2 tablespoons butter or margarine 
Crumble tofu to consistency of cottage cheese. Carefully blend together 
broccoli, corn, egg whites, cornmeal, butter, salt and pepper. Fold in crumbled 
tofu. Pour into greased 2-quart casserole sprayed with non-stick vegetable 
coating spray. Sprinkle with bread crumbs and dot with butter. Bake at 350 
degrees 45 minutes or until set. Makes 6 to 8 servings. 
TOFU PIZZA 
1 cup prepared pizza sauce 
1 (12-inch) frozen pizza crust 
1/2 pound turkey sausage, cooked and drained 
1 (10.5-ounce) package firm tofu, drained and crumbled 
2 tablespoons black olives, sliced 
2 tablespoons sliced mushrooms 
2 tablespoons diced green peppers 
1/2 teaspoon dried oregano 
1 cup shredded part-skim mozzarella cheese 
2 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese 
Spread half of pizza sauce on crust. Sprinkle with sausage. Drain tofu on paper 
towels. Gently squeeze out as much moisture as possible, then squeeze again. 
Crumble tofu to consistency of cottage cheese. Sprinkle over sausage, then top 
with olives, mushrooms, green peppers, oregano and cheeses. Bake at 450 degrees 
15 to 20 minutes. Makes 1 pizza. 
TOFU-SALMON LOAF 
1 (15 1/2-ounce) can red salmon, flaked 
1 (10 1/2-ounce) can cream of celery soup 
1 (14.2-ounce) package firm tofu, crumbled 
2 tablespoons minced onion 
2 eggs, lightly beaten 
1 tablespoon lemon juice 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/8 teaspoon black pepper 
1/2 teaspoon dried dill weed 
1/2 cup saltine crackers, crushed 
Blend together salmon and soup in large bowl. Drain tofu on paper towel. Gently 
squeeze out moisture and crumble to consistency of cottage cheese. Add to 
salmon mixture along with onion, eggs, lemon juice, salt, pepper, dill and 
cracker crumbs. Blend together lightly. Shape into loaf and place in non-stick 
9x5-inch loaf pan. Bake at 350 degrees 1 hour. Let stand 10 minutes before 
unmolding. Makes 6 to 8 servings. 
COCONUT-BANANA SHAKE 
1 cup soft tofu, drained 
1 banana, sliced 
1/4 cup egg substitute 
1/2 cup low-fat milk 
2 tablespoons honey 
1/2 teaspoon banana extract 
1 teaspoon coconut extract 
Crushed ice 
Cinnamon-sugar 
Place tofu on paper towel and squeeze out excess moisture. Place in blender 
container along with banana, egg substitute, milk, honey and extracts. Whirl 
until blended and smooth. Serve over ice. Sprinkle with cinnamon-sugar. Makes 
about 3 cups. 
