WORLD SPORTS SCENE; 
HE DIDN'T START THE FIRE, BUT HIS WATER BUCKET SMELLS OF GASOLINE 
Maybe you've heard the radio commercial for a home security company, which uses 
a burglar as its spokesman. He tells you how to guard your home against 
criminals. 
Here's the sports version:. 
Dr. Jamie Astaphan, who masterminded Ben Johnson's steroid program for five 
years, has volunteered to supervise drug testing at the 1992 Olympic Games. He 
suggested that his Toronto mentor, Dr. Mauro di Pasquale, assist him. 
"Nobody could fool either of us," Astaphan told the Toronto Star from his home 
on the Caribbean island of St. Kitts. "I've been there. I know where it's at. I 
know where it's going." 
He no doubt can also figure out where his offer is going -- into the 
International Olympic Committee's circular file. 
Figure skater Christopher Bowman, who lost his title when he withdrew from the 
national championships because of a bad back, said this week he is 100% fit for 
next week's world championships at Halifax, Canada. 
"Maybe even better," he said. 
The receptionist at the Ice Castle International Training Center at Lake 
Arrowhead confirmed that Bowman has been working hard. 
When asked if Bowman could come to the telephone, she said, "He's on the ice." 
What are his practice hours? 
"All day," she said. 
In a recent poll, 86.1% of West Germans and 85.4% of East Germans said they 
would like to see a unified German team in the 1992 Olympics. For German track 
and field athletes, that might happen as soon as next year's world 
championships in Tokyo. 
The president of the sport's governing body, Primo Nebiolo of Italy, is 
supporting that idea at this week's meeting of international sports leaders in 
Rome. He also is promoting Berlin -- East, West or both -- as the site of the 
1995 world championships. 
Paul Caligiuri, the midfielder who scored the goal last November that put the 
United States into this summer's World Cup in Italy, said he and the team's 
coach, Bob Gansler, resolved some of their differences after the 3-1 loss to 
the Soviet Union last Saturday at Stanford. Caligiuri had suggested that he 
didn't start because of his contract dispute with the U.S. Soccer Federation, 
to which Gansler replied that Caligiuri hasn't played well enough to start. 
"Your scrapbook can't play," Gansler said. 
Now, Caligiuri, who lives in Santa Monica, said he believes he will be in the 
lineup in Italy. But he doesn't expect to be under contract. The federation 
withdrew its offer to him in January, put it back on the table a few weeks 
later and now is prepared to withdraw it again. The federation wants him to 
sign a 12-month contract with a one-year option, but he wants an escape clause 
that would allow him to join a European pro team after the World Cup. 
Add Soccer: Roy Wegerle, a forward for the Queens Park Rangers in the English 
first division, married an American in 1987, but the wedding came a month too 
late for him to gain his citizenship in time to play for the United States in 
the World Cup. Wegerle believed that the United States' No. 1 soccer fan, Henry 
Kissinger, would help him cut through the red tape. But a spokeswoman for 
Kissinger Associates told Newsday that the former secretary of state would not 
get involved. 
Italian Coach Azeglio Vicini, whose team has scored only one goal in its last 
five games, is under attack from Silvio Berlusconi, the television magnate who 
owns the country's best first division team, AC Milan. He said his team should 
represent the country in the World Cup instead of the national team, which has 
players from several first division clubs. Vicini responded that AC Milan would 
be merely another team if it didn't have two Dutch stars, Marco Van Basten and 
Frank Rijkaard. . . . 
Joao Havelange, the Brazilian president of the international soccer federation, 
wants to change the game from two 45-minute halves to four 25-minute quarters 
to accommodate television commercials. "Soccer is extremely professional and, 
as such, should seek all means for increasing revenues," he told a Brazilian 
newspaper, O Globo, this week. 
But that idea didn't go over in Europe. An editorial in the Dutch daily, De 
Telegraaf, suggested that Havelange was making an early April Fool's Day joke. 
In the International Herald Tribune, soccer columnist Rob Hughes called for 
Havelange to resign. "Growth at any price quickly burns itself out," Hughes 
wrote. "Such capitulation to U.S. television would not give international 
soccer a second century." . . . 
Austria, which is in the same four-team World Cup group with the United States, 
played Egypt to a scoreless tie in an exhibition game this week in Cairo. In 
Montpelier, France, West Germany lost to France, 2-1. 
As indoor track and field increases in popularity in Europe, it is fading in 
the United States. Fewer than 10,000 turned out for each of the two Los Angeles 
meets this winter. Fewer than 12,000 were at Madison Square Garden for last 
week's national championships. The only meet that drew well was New York's 
Millrose Games, which reported an attendance of 16,428. But now its main 
sponsor, Panasonic, has pulled out. The company reportedly spent $500,000 a 
year on the meet. . . . 
Olympic champion and world record-holder are nice titles, but Jackie 
Joyner-Kersee should go straight to sainthood. She competed in the Millrose 
Games on a Friday night in January and was committed to another meet in 
Fairfax, Va., two days later. So she canceled a Saturday night banquet 
appearance in Milwaukee. But when she discovered that the group in Milwaukee 
never got the message, she decided to go there. She missed her flight out of 
Milwaukee and didn't arrive at her hotel in Fairfax until 1:30 a.m. Sunday. . . 
. 
Soviet pole vaulter Sergei Bubka told the government he no longer needs its 
financial support. In his Ukrainian hometown of Donetsk, he is being paid very 
well to head the new Scientific and Technical Creative Center, which includes a 
sports complex and a school for pole vaulters. 
World Sports Notes 
Ben Johnson's father died of a heart attack last weekend in Falmouth, Jamaica. 
He was 65. . . . Two professional leagues, the Western Soccer League and the 
American Soccer League, have merged their business and marketing offices. But 
it will be at least a year before they begin interleague play. . . . The U.S. 
and Soviet national basketball teams have agreed to play an exhibition game in 
the United States on Aug. 4 before going to Argentina for the world 
championships. Neither team is expected to have NBA players. 
Figure skater Jessica Mills, the world junior champion in 1989, qualified for 
this year's Olympic Festival in short-track speedskating. Her sister, Phoebe 
Mills, a bronze medalist in gymnastics at the 1988 Olympics, has turned to 
diving. 
Officials from Salt Lake City's bid committee for the 1998 Winter Olympics 
didn't like suggestions that poor attendance for the national figure skating 
championships in their city hurt their candidacy. But they acknowledged that 
they need to do a better job of helping organizers promote their events. Figure 
skating is usually not a hard sell. . . . The IOC will meet in Athens today to 
discuss that city's bid for the 1996 Olympics. Terrorism will be one of the 
topics. A terrorist group recently claimed responsibility for stealing two 
bazookas from Greece's national war museum. 
