ORANGE COUNTY ALL-STAR GIRLS' BASKETBALL; 
SULLIVAN, MCDANIEL TO LEAD NORTH, SOUTH TEAMS 
Jennifer Sullivan, a two-time Sunset League most valuable player, and Aimee 
McDaniel, the Orange League's most valuable player and an All-American, head 
the list of players chosen for the Orange County All-Star girls' basketball 
game April 28 in Titan Gym. 
Sullivan, a 6-foot-3 senior who averaged 17.3 points and 14.7 rebounds for 
Ocean View, will try to lead the North to the title for the first time since 
1987. Seven of her 15 teammates on the North squad are from the Sunset League. 
Amy Jalewalia, La Quinta's 6-1 guard/forward/center, is from the Garden Grove 
League, but she will team with Sullivan to provide the North with some height. 
Jalewalia, who will attend UCLA in the fall, led the Southern Section in 
scoring with 33 points a game and set the county single-game scoring record (60 
points). 
Even with Jalewalia, the North team is sorely lacking in height at center and 
forward. The team is loaded with guards. 
The South, on the other hand, has plenty of forwards and centers with good 
height. McDaniel, who will play guard, led Brea-Olinda to its second appearance 
in the state 3-A basketball finals and is the school's all-time leading scorer 
with 1,845 points. She will attend Pepperdine in the fall. 
Ocean View's Ollie Martin and assistant Steve Rochford will coach the North. 
Tustin's Rick Falk and his assistant Lisa MacNamee will coach the South, which 
has won the past two seasons and leads the series 9-3. 
The team rosters: 
NORTH 
Tracy Wolfe (Ocean View); Amy Jalewalia (La Quinta); Jenny Newsome (Rancho 
Alamitos); Melisa Sortino (Marina); Debbie Fischer (Edison); Stacie Kosaka 
(Cypress); Karen Jensen (Katella); Christa Yorke (Marina); Julie Workman 
(Fountain Valley); Jennifer Barbaro (Fountain Valley); Francesca Rumps (Santa 
Ana Valley); Jackie Boxley (Savanna); Gracie Lopez (Santa Ana); Jennifer 
Leonard (Loara). 
SOUTH 
Sara Bone (El Toro); Karie Yoshioka (El Toro); Aimee McDaniel (Brea-Olinda); 
Allison Bickel (Brea-Olinda); Erin Schimeneck (Dana Hills); Jennifer Harney 
(Esperanza); Kim Kordik (Esperanza); Jennifer Rohrig (Mission Viejo); Stacie 
Giem (Newport Harbor); Nicole Champion (Orange); Denise Gandara (University); 
Leslie Rathbun (Woodbridge); Holly Keeton (Valencia); Jennifer Coombs (Tustin); 
Heather Schaer (Tustin). 
