COUNCIL BLOCKS BID TO OUST MANAGER IN MONTEREY PARK 
Council members blocked attempts Monday by Councilman Barry Hatch to oust City 
Manager Mark Lewis and to challenge Lewis' selection for interim police chief. 
"I give him a 100% vote of confidence," Councilwoman Betty Couch said in 
defense of Lewis, whom Hatch has blamed for the March 13 resignation of Police 
Chief Ken Hickman. 
On Monday, Hickman's replacement, interim Chief Robert Collins, 66, was briefly 
caught in the political dispute between Hatch and Lewis. 
Hatch has criticized Lewis' selection of Collins, noting that the interim chief 
has been awarded $15,000 in disability pay for a heart problem. Hatch said he 
fears that the city would be liable for additional workers' compensation 
payments if Collins, who retired as chief in 1989, were to suffer other heart 
problems while serving as interim chief. 
Collins, who waived his right to a closed session discussion about his fitness 
to serve, told the council Monday that doctors had cleared him for work. At 
Lewis' invitation, an attorney specializing in workers' compensation law also 
assured the council that putting Collins back on the payroll would not create 
additional liabilities for the city. 
When Hatch dropped the matter, Lewis smiled at Collins, and said: "Chief, 
welcome back." 
During Monday's meeting, Hatch also failed to round up council support to back 
his demand that Lewis resign. Hatch has accused the city manager of financial 
mismanagement and abuse of authority in connection with Hickman's abrupt 
departure as police chief. 
Hickman, a former Los Angeles Police Department commander hired just a year 
ago, announced his resignation after the Monterey Park Police Officers Assn. 
gave him with a no confidence vote. Wes Clair, president of the police 
association, said officers were unhappy with Hickman's policy changes that 
restricted overtime, promotions and work schedule choices. 
Hatch has blamed Lewis for undermining Hickman's authority, which he said 
prompted the chief to resign. Among other allegations, Hatch also accused Lewis 
of overspending in the Police Department. 
But Monday night, three council members defended Lewis and threw their support 
behind him. Couch read into the record sections of a letter Lewis drafted in 
response to Hatch's allegations. 
In the letter, the city manager denied Hatch's charges and noted that so far in 
the current fiscal year, the Police Department has spent less than its budget 
allocation. In February, with 67% of the fiscal year past, the police 
department had spent 63.5% of its $7 million-plus budget, the letter said. 
Mayor Pat Reichenberger and Councilwoman Judy Chu also praised Lewis and said 
he has their support. Chu said the attacks against Lewis were unjustified and 
described them as "someone's personal political vendetta." Hatch denied any 
personal or political motivation. 
Councilman Chris Houseman, who did not speak about Lewis' performance during 
the meeting, said afterward that he had no comment. Houseman said he believes 
any discussion about Lewis' work is a personnel matter and should have been 
discussed in closed session. 
Hatch last week attempted to mobilize a citizens committee to pressure council 
to oust Lewis, but on Monday, most speakers seemed to side with the city 
manager. 
In a separate move, Hatch proposed that the city authorize an independent audit 
of city finances. But Couch and Chu, joined by some residents, said the city 
already pays for an annual audit so an additional one would be redundant. 
Acknowledging that he again lacked council support, Hatch chose not to call for 
a vote. 
Hatch said he will continue to push for Lewis' resignation and criticized his 
fellow council members as "totally irresponsible for not supporting me on an 
independent audit." 
