CONVICTION SET ASIDE FOR 'THIN BLUE LINE' CHARACTER 
It was 12 years ago that the jury reached its verdict about Randall Dale Adams: 
guilty as charged in the murder of Dallas policeman Robert Wood. On Wednesday, 
Adams was given another chance to prove he didn't pull the trigger, and he owes 
it to a movie. 
A Texas appeals court in Austin Wednesday ruled that Adams' murder conviction 
be set aside, based largely on new facts brought forward in the critically 
acclaimed documentary, "The Thin Blue Line." 
The strange and perhaps tragic case of Randall Dale Adams, 40, is one that came 
to the attention of New York film maker Errol Morris by accident, grew to be an 
all-consuming project and finally, with the release of the film last August, 
became a cause celebre. 
As of late last year, more than 15,000 people had signed petitions pleading for 
Adams' release. On some days, it seemed there had been progress, while on 
others it seemed that the cause was lost. Then, finally, came the ruling from 
the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, which said that the prosecution suppressed 
evidence and knowingly allowed perjured testimony during Adams' 1977 trial. 
Adams is being transferred back to the Dallas County Jail from a Texas prison 
while the district attorney's office decides whether there is enough evidence 
to retry the case. Adams' lawyer, Randy Schaffer, said Wednesday that his 
now-famous client is trying to remain calm in the face of good news. 
"Well, after 12 years, there isn't a lot of emotion either way," said Schaffer 
about Adams' reaction to the court decision. "Until the case is over, said and 
done, it is still a pending case. Until this is behind him, he's still a 
prisoner." 
In an interview with the Associated Press Wednesday, Adams said: "I have firmly 
believed someday, someway, somehow, I would prove my case. I didn't know how, 
when or why. I knew." 
Recants Testimony 
If Adams does go on trial again, the basic question will be what happened on 
the night of Nov. 28, 1976, when patrolman Wood was killed with five shots from 
a .22-caliber pistol. What would be different at a new trial is that David 
Harris, who was with Adams that night and was the prosecution's star witness, 
had recanted his testimony when filmed by Morris. The movie strongly suggests 
that Harris, who is now on Texas' Death Row for another slaying, killed Wood. 
Errol Morris had never heard of Randall Dale Adams when he came to Texas to 
make a movie in 1985. He was interested, instead, in a man named James Grigson, 
a Texas psychiatrist nicknamed "Dr. Death" because his testimony had helped 
send Adams and 26 others to Death Row. 
In the course of his research, he came across Adams and his story. At first, 
Morris didn't believe him. But as more and more facts checked out, he began to 
be swayed, and finally convinced. Thus began a three-year project that would 
become "The Thin Blue Line." 
The opening segment of the story is clear and undisputed. Adams, a high school 
graduate from Ohio with no criminal record, had traveled to Dallas because he 
had heard there was work to be found. About two weeks after his arrival, his 
car ran out of gas and a young man driving a 1972 Mercury Comet offered to give 
him a lift. 
The driver of the car, which had been stolen the day before, was a 16-year-old 
named David Harris with an extensive criminal record. He had grown up in Vidor, 
Tex., which over the years had developed a reputation as one of the toughest 
towns in the state. 
The two spent the day together. They drank beer, smoked marijuana and pawned 
some tools. That evening, they went to a drive-in theater where a soft-core 
porn double feature was playing. It is here that the two stories diverged. 
Adams claimed that he tired of "The Swinging Cheerleaders" and his young 
companion halfway through the feature and that the two parted company before 10 
p.m. In Adams' story, he was asleep in his own apartment when Wood was killed. 
Harris said at the time that it was after midnight when the two left the 
drive-in. He claimed that Adams was driving when a patrol car stopped them 
because their lights were out. 
When Wood approached, he was gunned down by the driver of the car. Wood's 
partner, Teresa Turko, opened fire as the car sped off. She would later testify 
that the driver of the car had bushy hair like Adams'. But what jurors were not 
told was that the only description Turko could give in her original report was 
that the driver was wearing a coat with a turned-up fur collar. 
That, however, was only one of several things the jury, as well as the defense 
lawyers, were not told. They did not know that one surprise eyewitness who 
named Adams as the killer had originally been unable to pick him out of a 
lineup. 
Harris was arrested in connection with the case in Vidor a month after the 
killing. All charges against him were dropped after Adams was convicted. 
Adams was sentenced to death, but the U.S. Supreme Court ordered a stay one 
week before he was to be executed. Ultimately, Gov. Bill Clements commuted the 
sentence to life in prison. Subsequent requests for a new trial were denied. 
Morris came on the scene and began to form the theory that it had been Harris, 
not Adams, who had committed murder. 
"At the point I met Harris, I had serious suspicions about the entire case," 
said Morris in an interview Wednesday. "Harris had indicated he would never 
forget the look in the cop's eyes, which is a peculiar thing to say considering 
he claimed he was slumped down in the back of a car." 
Causes Major Stir 
When the movie came out, it caused a major stir in Dallas, which the 
distributors said was intended. In the movie and later interviews, Harris 
virtually confessed to the murder. 
"We designed our distribution plan so that it could make a difference," said 
Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax Films. "We wanted to bring this movie 
to the attention of the people that mattered. We set the goal to accomplish a 
retrial and later an exoneration of Randall. 
"Every time there was a newsworthy event, the film would reemerge and keep the 
issue alive," he said. "We were aware that by keeping the film going, we could 
put pressure on and activate people to step out." 
Last Nov. 30, based on evidence presented in the movie, a hearing was held in 
Dallas to determine if a new trial should be recommended. Schaffer, Adams' 
lawyer, asked Harris point blank if Adams had killed the policeman. 
"No, he did not," Harris said. "Randall Adams knew nothing about this offense 
and was not in the car at the time." 
With that, Judge Larry Baraka said that in his court, Adams would have been 
found innocent and sent the case to the appellate level for a final ruling. 
Last Friday, those working for Adams' release suffered a major setback when he 
was refused parole despite Baraka's strong backing. And that refusal made the 
decision Wednesday all the sweeter. 
"My response is one of great joy. The nightmare is over," said the film's 
producer, Mark Lipson. "I started to feel a sort of sick feeling when he was 
denied parole that we would enter a downward spiral and our energy would not be 
able to last. I was nervous that the storm had blown over in Texas and things 
would go back to the status quo." 
In Columbus, Ohio, Adams' mother, Mildred, was basking in the news. Her home 
had been wall-to-wall people all day. 
"I just prayed and prayed last night that God would work this out," she said. 
"And I told God, 'I know you're bigger than the state of Texas, and I just 
don't know what to do anymore.' 
"So there is justice in Texas after all." 
