DONATIONS OF LEFTOVER FOOD HIT A SNAG; 
HOTELS SAY HEALTH LAWS, INSURANCE PREVENT REDISTRIBUTION 
In a land of excess, Bryna Monsein thinks her story has particular relevance. 
Recently, the Bethesda, Md., resident decided to donate the leftovers from her 
daughter's wedding reception at downtown Washington's Mayflower Hotel to the 
Community for Creative Non-Violence, a homeless advocacy group. 
"Wonderful food," she says. "Blackened sirloin, shrimp scampi, chicken piccata, 
wonderful pasta." 
But the Mayflower, fearing it would be liable if anyone became ill, refused. 
"I was really sad," she says. "To think of all that food going into the garbage 
was just pitiful." 
Common Concerns 
But not unusual. A number of local hotels, citing health regulations, insurance 
and public relations concerns, refuse to redistribute food they haven't served. 
Still, caterers, who would presumably have the same concerns, have earned a 
reputation for being generous with their clients' extra food. 
"Somehow caterers have been more sensitized than hotels and restaurants," says 
Carol Fennelly of CCNV. 
Hotel managers say it is not a question of sensitivity. 
"Once food is dispensed, at no time could it be given away," says Paul J. 
Sacco, general manager of the Omni Shoreham Hotel. "Health laws would dictate 
that you would not be able to reissue it." 
Sacco's opinion was echoed by other hotel managers, but, according to Sidney 
Hall, chief of food protection for the District of Columbia's Department of 
Consumer and Regulatory Affairs, "There are no such regulations." Hall says 
hotels can donate food to charity "so long as the food is wholesome and has not 
been used by former patrons." 
Reasoning May Not Hold 
But Kevin McPhee, director of food and beverages at the Mayflower, insists that 
the hotel is legally liable for the food it prepares. 
"It is not a question of donating food. We donate food. But donating food that 
has already been prepared for another purpose, that is another question," he 
says. "Particularly hot food. If it has to be reheated it is exposed to 
potential bacteria. We're very careful about these things. We have that 
liability." 
But Fennelly says hotels are protected from liability for food "donated in good 
faith" by "Good Samaritan" laws in the District of Columbia and neighboring 
Maryland and Virginia. 
Still, some catering directors, like Brent Ashton at the Omni Shoreham, are 
wary of "loopholes in the law." 
Hall, the food protection chief, says the only condition he is aware of is that 
food be "transported in the proper vehicle . . . Hot food must be kept hot. 
Cold food cold." 
Fennelly characterizes the hotels' position as "baloney . . . They can do it if 
they choose to. A lot of restaurants use it as an excuse not to give food 
away." 
"I think a lot of the hotels couldn't necessarily be bothered," says the Rev. 
John Adams of So Others May Eat, an ecumenical food agency. "It's certainly not 
against the law." 
Bryna Monsein, who doesn't want others to repeat her experience, has sought 
legal recourse. Her attorney, Earl Colson, has written a letter that he hopes 
will serve as the basis for future agreements between hotels and relief 
agencies. In it, a charity acknowledges "that we have received the food in good 
condition," and promises "to refrigerate and otherwise keep the food in a 
sanitary condition suitable for consumption." 
The agency agrees to release the hotel "from any claim that may arise because 
of your having supplied this food." And also promises to "indemnify you against 
any claim made by any homeless person to whom we have provided portions of this 
food." 
Legal Until Proven Otherwise 
"It will stand up in court" as a contract, Colson says. "Whether a hotel will 
say, 'Oh, that does it,' and contribute the food, I don't know." 
Kevin McPhee of the Mayflower says he has seen similar documents before. "What 
I don't know is, if tested, would it hold?" 
In lieu of a test, Monsein recommends a client investigate a hotel's donation 
policy before booking an event. 
"My feeling is, if people knew about it, they would make these arrangements in 
the beginning," she says. "All it involves is saying, 'Will you please?' " 
