TEACHERS TRY SLOWDOWN IN HUNTINGTON BEACH DISPUTE 
Teachers at a middle school in the Huntington Beach City School District are 
refusing to participate in extracurricular activities in hope of forcing 
district negotiators back to the bargaining table and settling a long and 
bitter contract dispute, union representatives said Wednesday. 
The slowdown, begun earlier this week at Isaac L. Sowers Middle School, is a 
"grass-roots effort" started by teachers upset about the breakdown of formal 
negotiations, said Jim Harlan, executive director of the Huntington Beach 
Elementary Teachers Assn. Teachers at other schools have sent letters to 
parents explaining their dissatisfaction and may also participate in slowdowns, 
union officials said. 
"We've been working without a contract since the first day of school in 
September," said Rebbie Bates, an 8th-grade teacher at Sowers and a union 
negotiator. 
Sowers teachers "represent 20% of this school district," Bates said, "and we 
decided that we're large enough that if we take a stand, the school board will 
notice." 
Similar slowdowns have begun at another Huntington Beach school district, Ocean 
View. Those teachers are also represented by the West Orange County United 
Teachers, which encompasses several teacher groups. Harlan said teachers in the 
Fountain Valley School District, also represented by the union, may take 
similar action. 
Activities that will be affected at Sowers are an African festival for 6th 
graders, a Renaissance fair for 7th graders and a career fair for 8th graders, 
plus the schoolwide science fair. The 8th-grade promotion ceremony, a senior 
trip to Disneyland and a trip to Knott's Berry Farm for exceptional students 
will go on as scheduled, but parents will accompany the students. 
Sports teams are continuing to participate in league play, but intramural games 
have ceased. 
District Supt. Diana Peters said parents have volunteered to supervise the 
festivals and fairs, but no decision has been made on whether to go on with 
them. 
Contract talks in the Huntington Beach City District have broken down after 
nearly a year of negotiations and despite the intervention of a mediator. The 
dispute has reached the fact-finding stage, in which a three-person panel -- 
composed of representatives appointed by the union, the district and the state 
-- will meet to study each side's position. 
Harlan said the union hopes to work out a settlement before the fact-finding 
procedures, but Assistant Supt. Ron Brown, the district's chief negotiator, 
said face-to-face talks are over as far as the district is concerned. 
"I think it's necessary that we go to fact finding," Brown said. "My question 
is, how long do they want to negotiate? They're asking for something we're not 
willing to give -- that's what mediation's for, and that didn't work." 
Negotiations are stalled over salary terms and the length of the contract. The 
district has offered a two-year contract, while teachers demand a one-year 
deal. 
Bates said the teachers refuse to accept the two-year contract because the 
district is "not offering us a definite salary amount." 
Brown said the district's proposal calls for a 7% raise in the first year. In 
the second year it calls for the state-mandated cost-of-living allowance, or 
COLA, with 1% put aside to cover health benefits. 
For example, if the proposal were effective this year under the 3% COLA 
proposed in the state budget, the district would use 2% to raise salaries and 
1% to contribute to the health-care package. 
Bates said the union objects to the proposal because there is no way to 
determine the 1991 state COLA allocation. Also, teachers fear that it will be 
insufficient to cover rising health-care costs. 
But Brown said: "If the fringe benefit costs are too high, then the employees 
and the district need to sit down and talk about modifying the fringe program. 
We just can't maintain a Cadillac program." 
Harlan said the 220 union-represented teachers in the district will meet 
Wednesday. "As far as a strike being a possibility down the road," he said, "I 
would say anything is a possibility. We're looking at the possibility of 
working a whole year without a contract." 
