DANCING THE NIGHT AWAY IN TOKYO 
I'm not the kind of guy who would be out dancing and carousing till 5 o'clock 
in the morning. So why was I out on a Saturday night in late July in the middle 
of Roppongi doing just that? 
Any Tokyoite knows that Roppongi is the liveliest, trendiest, most 
international part of the city by night, where some of the finest cafes, bars, 
restaurants, jazz clubs and discotheques are. 
I'm no stranger to the city. I grew up in next-door Yokohama and have returned 
to Tokyo many times to visit my family. But I'd had my fill of temples and 
gardens and all those historic places in the big city. I was curious about 
Tokyo's many bars and nightclubs, and the disco-crazed people I'd read about in 
the magazines. 
Roppongi has more than 40 discos -- eight in one building alone -- and a 
per-block density of restaurants and bars that would astonish even a jaded New 
Yorker. 
Walking around Roppongi, what amazed me was the sense of safety I felt from the 
crowd: Even at 5 in the morning the streets were full of people, which is 
probably not the case with other night centers around Tokyo -- Ginza, Shinjuku 
or Shibuya. 
On a side street, off the main Gaien Higashi avenue, I was attracted to a group 
of about 20, a melange of foreign and Japanese men and women, milling about in 
front of a bar. 
Deja Vu is an American-style bar that was complete with tall gorgeous blondes 
and handsome Teutonic hunks -- obviously some of the American fashion models 
making mega yen in the money capital of the world. 
The bar displayed more than a hundred kinds of whiskeys. So why was everyone 
drinking bottles of Corona beer with slices of lime floating inside? Following 
the folkways of Los Angeles, perhaps. 
A sign outside emphatically stated in English, "No Military Personnel Allowed!" 
But that hadn't deterred the guy next to me at the bar, a sailor stationed at 
Yokosuka Naval Base a couple of hours' train ride away. 
He seemed utterly suave and wholesome compared to the tattooed biker in 
semi-tattered clothes talking to a voluptuous woman in short-short blue jeans. 
Meanwhile, the jukebox blared out an innocuous beat -- Bon Jovi? No matter. The 
crowd -- about 40% Japanese, the rest Westerners, mostly Americans by my 
educated guess -- was oblivious. 
Outside, the colorful neon lights were fading with dawn's soft glow, but the 
crowd at Deja Vu showed no sign of thinning out. I walked half a block up the 
street in search of my old hangout. The Hamburger Inn, a Roppongi landmark for 
almost 40 years, was still there, looking a lot spiffier. I hadn't been there 
in more than 20 years, when it had been just about the only place open all 
night. 
Compared with the people at Deja Vu, this crowd was more lethargic -- zonked 
might be a better word -- as they listened to and watched the rock group Guns 
N' Roses on a laser-disc jukebox, complete with visuals. 
"I'm just killing time waiting for the subway," a Japanese college kid told me 
sleepily. A familiar story from old times. 
Across the street a tiny pub called Mistral Blue was packed, despite the late 
hour. "This is about the safest place to play, this Roppongi," the bouncer told 
me outside, glancing at a couple of drunks who seemed to be heading toward the 
wrong end of a row of taxicabs. "I was robbed down to my undershorts in 
Shinjuku. That would never happen here," he added with conviction. 
Before I started my night tour of Roppongi I rendezvoused in Shibuya with a 
school chum and neighbor from my Yokohama days. Francais, a kissaten or place 
where one can leisurely talk for hours and listen to music for the price of a 
$3 cup of coffee, was a familiar place, having been another hangout from my 
teen years. It's conveniently across the street from the Shibuya station. 
The decor hadn't changed much over the years, unlike the other kissaten that 
have been transformed into post-modern discomfort. The district of Shibuya, 
which is a few miles east of Roppongi, isn't the hick town it used to be 20 
years ago. Now it lures away shoppers from the Ginza district and other parts 
of metropolitan Tokyo. 
Because of its inexpensive shops and restaurants, it's popular with the high 
school and college crowd. Called the "Shibu-Caji" (Shibuya casual), they wear 
blue jeans, bright T-shirts and leather jackets, trying to imitate the looks 
and mores of America. 
We hopped onto the subway to Omote-sando, a neighborhood of trendy boutiques 
and restaurants, but it was too quiet, so we inevitably ended up in Roppongi. 
The Almond coffee shop (pronounced amando by the locals), painted a garish 
pink, is a landmark at the district's busy main intersection. 
We had a dazzling choice of fine restaurants, everything from African to 
Russian, but we were in the mood for traditional Japanese cuisine and headed 
for the Goninbyakusho ("Five Farmers"), which serves country-style food in an 
attractive farmhouse setting. 
There we were greeted with an energetic "Irasshaimase!" (Welcome!), and our 
shoes deposited in an old-fashioned geta (wooden clogs) box, of the type still 
used in public baths in Japan. We feasted on sashimi, charcoal grilled fish and 
shrimp, cold bean curd and fresh-brewed sake. The seafood was delightfully 
fresh, the sake properly chilled. 
Goninbyakusho is the last thing you would expect in a building full of wildly 
decorated discotheques. Popularly known as the Disco Building, its real name is 
Square -- obviously a misnomer, with clubs such as Bingo Bango Bongo and Java 
Jive inside. The building's six other discotheques also have distinctly 
un-Japanese-sounding names: Bio, Nepenta, Venus, Giza, Buzz, the Circus. 
We tried the Circus first, on the top (10th) floor, but it was packed. It was 
prime time on Saturday night, around 9 p.m. The place was decorated with 
vintage American neon signs -- Pabst beer was one -- and with odd messages, 
such as "You are guileless in your dream" and "People who go crazy are too 
sensitive!" 
This is Roppongi's current hot spot, featuring black American DJs and their 
selection of soul music. The crowd was mostly college kids and office workers 
in their early 20s. According to a Japanese magazine survey, about 20% of the 
crowd are foreigners. 
We decided to leave the Disco Building to look for a less crowded place. In the 
same block there are Razzle Dazzle and Queue; around the corner, past Cipango 
and Area, is Lexington Queen. This is where you look for famous international 
musicians who are on tour in Japan. Kenny Rogers was there recently, a local 
magazine proclaimed. 
We headed for a familiar establishment from years back, a place called Kentos 
on the other side of the main Roppongi street, Gaien Higashi. The place has 
flourished with the retro boom of recent years; '50s and '60s rock 'n' roll is 
still very popular in Japan. Luckily, Kentos wasn't too crowded or expensive, 
and we were happy to see there were plenty of people over 30. 
But no Westerners. It was fun to watch the Japanese performers imitate everyone 
from the Beatles to Elvis to Connie Francis. Only in Roppongi. 
What happened on the dance floor at Kentos is typically Japanese. Men and women 
face the rock band, forming a line, and dance -- not with anyone in particular, 
but as a group. Although they dance with much more abandon than in the 
traditional festival dances, still there is a certain symmetry, reminiscent of 
the bon-odori, the summer dance to appease the souls of the departed, in which 
kimono-clad men and women form a circle and dance around a tower on which 
drummers and other musicians perform. 
At about 11:30 p.m. something peculiar happened: Half the clientele at Kentos 
suddenly rushed out. I asked a waiter if the place was closing and he replied, 
"Not yet. But they've got to catch the last train out." Of course. 
I remembered the times I had to run to catch that subway and connect to the 
To-yoko Line, the last train out just past midnight. Missing it meant an 
expensive taxi ride. Luckily, on this visit I was staying at my mother's house 
not far from Roppongi. 
We decided to move on. It was past midnight by then, but the streets were 
crowded with weekend revelers. We walked down Gaien Higashi avenue toward the 
Tokyo Tower, just before the intersection with Highway No. 2. On the right is a 
discotheque called Hot Corocket (meaning croquette, a popular Japanese side 
dish). When I stopped in two years ago a Brazilian band was playing some fine 
batucata. Now a Jamaican reggae band was featured. 
We'd hit the jackpot: This was a first-rate band with authentic-looking 
Rastafarians. Upon a closer look, one guitarist was a Japanese with dreadlocks. 
Hot Corocket was smaller and cozier than Kentos, the setting and the clientele 
more urbane. The crowd included several European couples as well as groups of 
men dancing among themselves, perhaps too shy to ask the group of attractive 
women nearby to join them. The island rhythm and chant of the group was 
soothing; the drummer, gazing deeply toward the flickering disco lights, played 
as if entranced. 
By 3 a.m. we were exhausted, but were determined to sample as much of 
Roppongi's night life as possible. We headed on, toward the Hard Rock Cafe, a 
couple of blocks back toward the main Roppongi intersection. It was a good 
place to rest with a cup of coffee among the guitars and other memorabilia of 
famous musicians. 
Roppongi by day is a relatively quiet part of Tokyo, attracting upscale 
shoppers to its fancy boutiques, but mostly to the amazing variety of fine 
restaurants. The American and other foreign embassies and their residences are 
nearby; Ark Hills, a modern, upscale complex of hotel, theaters and mostly 
American business offices, is just down the street. 
Many longtime foreign residents of Japan, who prefer a more "authentic" 
Japanese setting such as the shitamachi (downtown) of Asakusa and elsewhere, 
refer with scorn to Roppongi as the "gaijin (foreigner) ghetto." But to many 
Japanese it is precisely the international atmosphere that attracts them. 
Discos aren't the only draws here. Jazz, too, is very much alive and well in 
Roppongi. The Japanese branch of New York's Blue Note, Roppongi Pit Inn, Body 
and Soul and Satin Doll are popular jazz hangouts, although the quality of the 
music depends on who's playing on a given day. 
Then there are the "pool bars" such as Block Shot, Milefiglio and Arviera 
Black. The latest rage in Tokyo and Yokohama, they are essentially fancy bars 
equipped with pool tables. The Hungry Diver Waku-Waku is another popular spot, 
a cafe bar with a variety of games including darts, chess and Scrabble. 
Also abundant in Roppongi -- and all over Japan, for that matter -- are karaoke 
bars. The word derives from kara (empty) and oke (orchestra). An elaborate 
gadget containing dozens of laser discs (called the karaoke set) provides 
background music from hundreds of Japanese and American hit tunes. 
The idea is that anyone can be in the limelight for a few minutes, and impress 
(or irritate) the audience with his singing. The bars provide customers with a 
catalogue of songs. When your turn comes, you take your place on a small stage, 
microphone in hand. The proprietor punches in a few numbers on the remote 
control and -- voila! -- a TV screen provides the backdrop and printed lyrics. 
Even the music's key is adjustable at a touch of the remote control. 
After two decades of popularity, karaoke has become entrenched in Japanese 
society as something everyone has to master or cope with, not just in bars and 
nightclubs but at company parties, trips, at the boss's home. When a cliff 
crumbled and boulders hit a tour bus last summer, among the dead was a man who 
still clutched a karaoke microphone. Presumably, he died singing. 
In Roppongi I was definitely not in the mood to sing for any crowd. By 6 a.m. I 
was ready to drop. I could have taken the subway back to my mother's, but 
decided to take a cab instead. 
"Where have you been?" my mother asked when she heard me stagger in. "I'll tell 
you after I get some sleep," I said weakly. 
Compared with those in New York or Washington, discotheques in Tokyo are 
expensive, particularly in the Roppongi district. The cover charge is anywhere 
between 3,000 and 5,000 yen ($21 to $35), which includes a drink or two and, 
occasionally, food. Women usually pay about 1,000 yen (about $7) less. 
Frequently, hawkers pass out discount tickets (worth 500 to 1,000 yen) to 
passers-by on the streets outside the building. 
There is a dress check at the entrance of some establishments. Casual wear, 
including blue jeans, is acceptable at many; coats and ties are required at a 
few. Both Area and Bio turn away people who look "too casual." The entrance 
check at Razzle Dazzle is the strictest; it's said that it turns away half its 
potential customers in its search for people with "distinctive style," whatever 
that may be. 
Most Roppongi discotheques are open daily from about 6 p.m. to past midnight. A 
sampling: 
 -- Java Jive (B-1), Giza (3rd floor), Buzz (5th floor), Venus (6th floor), 
Bingo Bango Bongo (7th floor), Nepenta (8th floor), Bio (9th floor), Circus 
(10th floor). All are in the Square or Disco Building, Roppongi 3-10-3. 
 -- Hot Corocket: Daini Omasa Building, Roppongi 5-18-2. 
 -- Kentos: Fukuyama Building, Roppongi 4-10-3. 
 -- Lexington Queen: Daisan Goto Building, Roppongi 3-13-14. 
 -- Razzle Dazzle: Marina Building, Roppongi 3-10-5. 
 -- Cipango and Area: Nittaku Building, Roppongi 3-8-15. 
 -- Queue: Chiba Building, Roppongi 3-10-9. 
For more information on travel to Japan, contact the Japan National Tourist 
Organization, 624 S. Grand Ave., Suite 2640, Los Angeles 90017, (213) 623-1952. 
MORE ON JAPAN 
A look at dining in Nagasaki and at how Americans have turned one Japanese 
restaurant custom into a pop art form. Pages 21, 22 
