2 CROPS ARE BEING STUDIED FOR COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION IN CALIFORNIA 
A couple of crops with exotic-sounding names may be inching closer to 
commercial production in California. 
University of California researchers are reporting progress on guayule, a plant 
that can produce natural rubber, and kenaf, a potential source of newsprint. 
Guayule, a desert shrub, was a source of natural rubber early in this century 
before synthetic rubber became popular and again during World War II when 
rubber was scarce. Its use declined after the war, but researchers now are 
trying to see if guayule can become a profitable cash crop again. 
One way that might be possible is to adapt guayule so the plant can provide 
more than one harvest a year. 
Would Increase Productivity 
"To succeed as a commercial crop, guayule must become more productive, and the 
prohibitive cost of . . . transplanting seedlings must be reduced," three 
University of California scientists said. 
So they studied the abilities of various sources of guayule to regrow. 
"Cultivars (varieties) that can regrow after cutting at ground level are 
expected to make multiple harvest of guayule a reality," the scientists 
reported in California Agriculture, a magazine that describes the university's 
farming research. 
In studies at Shafter in the southern San Joaquin Valley, they found that one 
new variety of guayule, C250, "responded favorably to harvest at ground level: 
98.1% of the plants harvested in three consecutive years survived and grew." 
Perhaps because of this, C250 produced the highest rubber yield of the six 
varieties tested, 830 pounds per acre. 
"The finding that some selections respond favorably to harvest at ground level 
and are capable of surviving and regrowing vigorously may influence the way 
guayule is harvested in the future," said the article by Ali Estilai, associate 
research agronomist at UC Davis; Himayat H. Naqvi, associate specialist, and J. 
Giles Waines, botany professor at UC Riverside. 
Certain Conditions 
But they added that either rubber yield from guayule or the current rubber 
price of about $1.10 per kilogram must be increased before the crop can become 
commercially profitable. 
The researchers predicted that more productive cultivars will be developed 
within 5 to 10 years through breeding and high biomass-production techniques. 
"While the price of natural rubber depends on world supply and demand, as well 
as global politics, increasing the productivity of the plant remains 
biologically feasible," they concluded. 
In the same issue of California Agriculture, another UC researcher discussed an 
experiment to determine if kenaf could grow profitably in the arid Imperial 
Valley in the southeastern part of the state. 
Newspaper industry officials are studying kenaf as a potentially cheaper source 
of newsprint than trees. Paper from kenaf fiber was used to print 83,000 copies 
of the Bakersfield Californian in an experiment in July, 1987. 
Most kenaf research has been conducted in Texas, but the crop may be adaptable 
to California because previous work has produced yields of 16 tons per acre in 
the San Joaquin Valley. 
Kenaf varieties were planted at the university's Imperial Valley Agricultural 
Center near Holtville between 1983 and 1986 and irrigated with Colorado River 
water. The same varieties also were planted in a fine sand desert area in 1985 
and were irrigated with ground water that contained higher salt concentrations. 
Cut in Yield 
"The kenaf varieties grown in the desert with higher salinity irrigation water 
showed a substantial reduction in yield," said the report by Frank E. Robinson, 
a water scientist with the agricultural center. 
In fact desert yields ranged from just 11% to 20% of those at the agricultural 
center, indicating "that kenaf is at least moderately sensitive to saline 
irrigation water," Robinson says. 
But most of the kenaf grown at the agricultural station produced yields of 9 to 
9.5 tons per acre, which Robinson found encouraging and potentially profitable. 
"The upper yield range is approximately 9.5 tons dry weight of stalks per acre 
and may improve with additional work on cultivation practices and genetic 
selection," the report says. "Yields of this magnitude have encouraged the 
construction of a kenaf paper mill in southern Texas." 
