GORBACHEV READIES FAST, RADICAL ECONOMIC CURE; 
SOVIET UNION: HE SEES NEED TO SHIFT FROM CENTRAL CONTROL TO A MORE 
ENTREPRENEURIAL SYSTEM. 
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said Tuesday that he intends to take a series of 
quick, radical measures to pull the Soviet economy out of its profound crisis 
and shift it from central planning and management to a more entrepreneurial 
system based on market forces. 
Gorbachev, addressing the first session of the country's new, policy-setting 
Presidential Council, said that the program will attempt to "radicalize 
economic reforms" and will undertake "the controlled transfer to market 
relations" and thus introduce a mixed economy here. 
A package of integrated measures aimed at establishing "a normal, fully fledged 
market" will be ready within two weeks, Gorbachev said, and will include a new 
mechanism to set state prices, an end to the government's chronic budget 
deficit, banking reform, a revamped credit policy, a new system of fiscal 
controls and the break-up of the state's present industrial monopolies. 
Other steps will be taken shortly, he continued, to put into effect 
agricultural reforms, including the allocation of land to farmers for 
cultivation outside the plans of state farms or collective farms. 
In the future, state-owned enterprises will continue to predominate in the 
Soviet economy, Gorbachev said, but the ways that they are managed will change 
substantially. There will also develop new, small enterprises, many owned by 
collectives, others by entrepreneurs and their families and some the result of 
foreign investment, he said. 
Altogether, at least 20 measures are planned, according to informed Soviet 
economists, with some, such as the establishment of a bond market and setting 
new state prices for agricultural produce, to be enacted by presidential 
decree. Others would be introduced as emergency legislation, including laws on 
price reform and foreign investment. 
While all these measures have long been debated by Soviet economists and many 
have been accepted in principle by the government, Gorbachev told the council 
that he now intends to implement them, using his new powers as executive 
president when required. 
"We are at a critical point that calls for well-considered decisions," 
Gorbachev said, according to an account of his speech by the official news 
agency Tass, but he gave no details of the actual policy changes nor a 
timetable. 
Social discontent is rising quickly, Gorbachev noted, attributing this to the 
lack of economic development and arguing that the "further radicalization of 
perestroika" is the only solution. 
"Society is unquiet and unstable," he said. "Order and discipline have 
slackened. Inter-ethnic relations have become exacerbated. People experience a 
lot of difficulties and disappointments and want a quicker solution to problems 
and a calm and normal atmosphere. . . . 
"It is this failure to solve economic problems," he continued, "that is the 
cause of the social and, to a considerable extent, ethnic tension." 
The government's reforms up to now have not succeeded in transforming the 
country's economy, Gorbachev said, and in many respects have made it worse, 
largely because many of the reforms were never or only half-heartedly 
implemented. 
With state enterprises monopolizing the market and without the economic levers, 
such as taxes, fiscal controls and price policy, that are common in capitalist 
countries, the Soviet Union has had no real market governed by supply and 
demand, and little has changed, he said. 
