HORN POSES A DILEMMA FOR RED SOX 
In the early days of spring training, when Wade vs. Margo was still the only 
big story for the Boston Red Sox, Sam Horn could come and go at his leisure 
without attracting much attention. 
Yes, the man looks great, everyone agreed. Horn had used his winter to 
transform himself, dropping 17 pounds from his beefy frame. Then he broke out 
his rarely trusty first baseman's mitt, and, surprise of surprises, he was 
picking balls out of the dirt and, even more surprising, backhanding hard 
grounders down the line. 
"When he showed up here, his chances of making the team were nil, absolutely 
nil," Red Sox General Manager Lou Gorman said. "We had a lot of roster 
decisions to make for the 1989 season, but I think our decision had been made 
with Sam." 
And now? 
"Now," said Gorman, "you have to take a look at him. Everything he has done 
this spring has made us take notice of him." 
Red Sox Manager Joe Morgan took it a step further: "I just have a feeling that 
Sam Horn is going to become a real good hitter," Morgan said. "He's made a 
believer out of me to this day." Asked if he was a believer when spring 
training began, Morgan answered, "No." 
The Sam Horn Comeback was a day-long success Monday, beginning with a "B" game 
at Yawkey Field in which Horn hit a two-run homer in a 3-1 victory over the 
Kansas City Royals. In the afternoon main attraction at Chain O' Lakes Park, 
Horn slammed an Ed Olwine pitch down the right-field line and thundered into 
third with a triple. Thanks to an Ed Romero home run in the bottom of the 11th, 
the game labored through 13 innings before both the Red Sox and Royals called 
it quits with a 7-7 tie. 
Now, the Red Sox are understandably delighted to see Horn in shape and in a 
groove, but it means their roster decisions will be weighty ones. Where at one 
time the only Horn decision to make was whether to trade him or send him back 
to triple-A, the Red Sox now have three decisions -- a trade, the minor 
leagues, or the big leagues. 
Each decision has its whys and wherefores. If the Red Sox dump Horn, might they 
one day regret having given away another good young hitter a la Ben Oglivie or 
Cecil Cooper? If they decide to farm out Horn, who is out of options, will he 
be able to clear waivers? And there is this: if they keep him on the 24-man 
roster, how will they find room for him? 
One idea would be to scrap the Kevin Romine-Randy Kutcher battle for the 24th 
spot on the roster. Both are right-handed hitting outfielders who can run, and 
Kutcher plays some third. But both are being groomed as third-string catchers 
in the event Morgan needs a catcher in the late innings of a game, and the 
manager intends to stay with that idea. 
"At no time," Morgan said, "will I get into a situation where I have to put 
someone behind the plate who's never played there. To me, if we had to do it 
once all season, that would be too much." 
So Romine or Kutcher will be on the team. Morgan seems to favor Kutcher. Gorman 
seems to favor Romine, saying of Kutcher Monday, "He was just a .230 (actually 
.233) hitter at Pawtucket last year." 
Jim Rice, who hit his third home run of the spring Monday, is a lock to make 
the team. So, too, is professional substitute Danny Heep, whom Morgan likes. 
Given that another spot must be kept for a backup catcher (Rick Cerone or, 
possibly, John Marzano) and another for a back-up middle infielder (Romero or 
Luis Rivera) there is only one spot for Horn -- Carlos Quintana's spot. 
Quintana has also been a hot hitter in spring training, going 1 for 1 in the 
"B" game Monday and 2 for 3 in the main game. Morgan has been saying that he'd 
rather have Quintana on his big-league bench than playing every day in the 
minors. Of course keeping Horn and sending Quintana down removes a right-handed 
bat from the bench, but said, "We don't pinch hit that much anyway." 
Gorman won't commit himself to any Sam Horn trade possibilities. Asked if the 
Red Sox had received any offers for Horn, the general manager likes to say, 
"We've received offers on a lot of our players." 
But, hinted Morgan, "Who knows what's going to happen between now and the end 
of spring training? I might have to make a decision, but, then again, maybe the 
decision will make itself. 
"But I do know that Horn has been impressive," Morgan said. "His approach to 
pitches is what I'm looking at, and I don't see him swinging at pitches down in 
the dirt, except maybe a couple of low curves." 
