A 'HERSTORY' OF PRIVATE LIFE IN THE 1950S; 
HOMEWARD BOUND AMERICAN FAMILIES IN THE COLD WAR ERA BY ELAINE TYLER MAY (BASIC 
BOOKS: $20.95; 284 PP.; ILLUSTRATED; 0-465-03054-8) 
Why were Americans of the 1950s so deeply immersed in domesticities: having 
large families, enjoying suburban havens, being ideal mothers and fathers, and, 
not least, crystallizing gender as breadwinners and homemakers? In "Homeward 
Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era," Elaine Tyler May proposes that 
our foreign policy of "containment" of the Soviet sphere of influence had its 
domestic analogue in an ideology of domestic "containment." 
Americans "wanted secure jobs, secure homes, and secure marriages in a secure 
country . . . and so they adhered to an overarching principle that would guide 
them in their personal and political lives: containment. . . . More than merely 
a metaphor for the Cold War on the homefront, containment aptly describes the 
way in which public policy, personal behavior, and even political values were 
focused on the home." 
This "familial ideology" was a culmination, May claims, of an enduring sexism 
that "withered" incipient alternatives to women's traditional gender roles. 
Women's suffrage, the sexual openness of the 1920s, marital partnerships that 
kept families afloat in the 1930s, the abrupt rise of women in the paid 
workforce during the '40s war effort -- all such historic potentialities for a 
"radical restructuring" of the family and the workplace were lost in the 1950s. 
Skillfully piecing together a social history of sex roles and mores governing 
dating, parenting, birth control, consumerism, and divorce from the Depression 
to the late '60s, May supports her thesis with a wide range of unusual 
evidence, from Hollywood scripts and movie magazines to opinion surveys, 
economic studies, and federal employment and civil defense policies. Her larger 
aim is to dismantle the iron curtain that this culture (especially academic 
culture) has imagined between domestic and political events. 
May also draws on a unique archive of the marital experiences and attitudes of 
about 300 white, well-educated, middle-class American couples who filled out 
periodic surveys about their domestic choices, fulfillments, and regrets over 
the 20 years between the late '30s and the mid-'50s. The voices of about 60 
couples who appended spontaneous comments tell Cheever-like stories. 
The sexual politics of the '50s were particularly ugly, not least because they 
went unchallenged. In those of the McCarthy era, from "the Senate to the FBI, 
from anti-communists in Hollywood to Mickey Spillane, moral weakness was 
associated with sexual degeneracy, which allegedly led to communism. To avoid 
dire consequences, men as well as women had to contain their sexuality in 
marriage where masculine men would be in control with sexually submissive 
competent homemakers at their side. Strong families required two essential 
ingredients: sexual restraint outside marriage and traditional gender roles in 
marriage." 
Throughout, paid workforce participation is May's benchmark for judging women's 
social and moral equality. She sees it as being the most effective route to the 
wider changes she advocates -- "restructuring of the labor force along 
gender-neutral lines, ending sex segregation in the workplace and bringing 
about a realignment of domestic roles." 
But that criterion was rarely met: When middle-class women "found that 
professionalized homemaking was not enough to keep their minds alive . . . they 
faced few alternatives, other than unpaid community volunteer work or menial, 
subordinate jobs in the sex-segregated paid labor force." 
There is an anachronism here -- in this period, however unfreely chosen, the 
facts are that thousands of other middle-class homemakers were like those who 
report in these pages their considerable satisfaction with volunteer work (for 
one woman, a two-child family was her limit because she wanted to expand those 
activities). 
May overcontains the homemaker ethos in dismissing the community involvement 
ethos, which in that period as in others before, fell well within the orbit of 
"women's work." The alternatives she poses are not qualitatively equal in their 
effects on women's feelings of public efficacy and self-esteem. 
An important historical question is to what extent women's social and civic 
energies (subsidized by breadwinners who may have paid other women for child 
care and housework) were a significant source of their leadership and political 
skills since put to use politically and personally -- and which these women may 
have taught to daughters and sons. The 50,000 women who, May reports, 
participated in the 1961 "Women's Strike for Peace" cannot have been only 
bridge partners and shopping companions. 
In spotlighting the condition of "contained" homemakers, however, May makes us 
see afresh how diabolical sexism is. The marriage of one couple who had had 
premarital sex was pervaded with distrust because the husband, wedded to the 
double standard, could never recover his respect for his wife. 
Less familiar to us are the effects of breadwinner containment on men's lives. 
May offers glimmers, which are not much less chilling -- she chronicles their 
self-blame during the Depression and, by her report and by those of men, 
middle-class men's greatest dissatisfactions with their work: "too much 
pressure, tense relationships with employers or employees, efforts to achieve 
promotions or raises, boredom or ennui, and financial difficulties." 
But this is a "herstory" -- there is no index entry for "men," while that for 
"women" runs to nine lines. Men's plight is characterized by its oppressive 
consequences for women: "Family life would presumably provide men with the 
sense of power they were not likely to experience at work. At home, they could 
see tangible results of their efforts and achieve a measure of respect. It was 
important for these men to be the unchallenged heads of their households." 
Glasnost has just arrived, and whether it relaxes gender "containments" remains 
to be seen. With a new spirit of openness abroad and, we are being led to hope, 
at home, perhaps we can also hope that men in far greater numbers will make 
this stance theirs and acknowledge openly their own work-life predicaments and 
those their cultural dominance imposes on daughters, sisters, spouses, 
companions, friends and mothers. 
