NEW SALT COD IS CONVENIENT FOR COOKING 
Cod is a common and relatively inexpensive fish which, in its fresh state, is 
good mostly for preparing fish sticks (the crusty breading at least gives it 
texture). But a little-known (at least to American tables) method of preserving 
cod turns this lowly ocean denizen into an uncommonly delicious commodity. It's 
one of the important raw ingredients of Mediterranean cooking -- called bacalao 
in Spain, bacala in Italy, bacalhau in Portugal, morue in France. 
The traditional way of salting, then air-drying the cod to a stiff cardboard 
appearance may not seem appetizing to the uninitiated and its aroma is 
unmistakable, too. But the flavor is incomparable. 
In the last few years, I've seen a new salt cod, nice thick fillets of fish 
that have been salted but only partly dried. They are packed in pretty wooden 
boxes and are often sold in the refrigerator case of supermarkets. What they 
lack in soul, they gain in convenience, since there are no bones to pick, no 
skin to peel off. 
Salt cod must be soaked in water for two or three days before using. The 
resulting fish is creamy, with delicious fresh-tasting flavor -- sweet, not 
even salty. The texture of this revived cod enables it to absorb oil, and in 
France it is often pounded into a truly fabulous concoction called Brandade. 
There is some debate about what an authentic Brandade is. In Nimes, it is 
simply boiled salt cod pounded together with hot olive oil and milk. On the 
other side of the Rhone river, in Provence, they add garlic. Farther west, in 
Carcassonne, they add potatoes. 
Because many Americans are unfamiliar with salt cod and may have trouble 
finding it, I have adapted an easy Brandade recipe to use other fish. The more 
"fishy" fish taste better in this recipe than the milder ones. Use cooked 
bluefish, carp, pompano, mackerel or salmon -- it's a great way to use 
leftovers and, in fact, combines well with leftover mashed potatoes. Or use a 
smoked fish -- salmon, trout, eel, sturgeon or finnan haddie. 
It's impossible to give an exact olive oil measurement in this recipe because 
the amount you add will depend on the other ingredients that you use. Leftover 
mashed potatoes and cooked unsalted fish will require less olive oil than the 
pulp of a baked potato combined with salted or smoked fish. The important thing 
to know is that all the ingredients must be hot before mashing them together 
into Brandade. 
Use Brandade for chiles rellenos or stuffed cabbage. Or roll it into little 
balls and fry into croquettes to have with drinks before dinner. Served on its 
own it is a salty beginning to a meal that gets the juices flowing. But I 
prefer it as the main event served with crusty bread and accompanied by a 
simple green salad, making a wonderfully satisfying meal. The first time I 
tried Brandade, it reminded me of mashing mashed potatoes and meat loaf 
together when I was a child, but I liked it much better. 
BRANDADE DE MORUE 
1 1/2 pounds salt cod, smoked fish or other raw or cooked fish 
1 potato, about 1/2 pound 
2 tablespoons finely minced garlic 
1/2 to 3/4 cup olive oil 
Toast 
If using salt cod, two or three days before preparing Brandade place fish in 
bowl, cover with water and refrigerate. Change water two or three times. The 
second day, drain salt cod. If using other fish, omit this step. 
Wash potato and bake at 375 degrees 45 minutes or until potato is soft. Cut 
potato in half, scoop pulp into mixing bowl and discard (or eat) skin. If using 
cooked potato from refrigerator or freezer, place in small baking dish, cover 
and heat at 350 degrees until warmed. 
Meanwhile, place cod or uncooked fish in medium pan, cover with fresh cold 
water and bring to boil over medium heat. Remove from heat and let stand 10 
minutes. Drain fish. If using smoked fish, omit this step. Remove and discard 
any skin and bones. If using cooked fresh or smoked fish from refrigerator or 
freezer, place it in small oven-proof dish, cover and heat at 350 degrees until 
hot. 
Add cooked fish to mixing bowl and mash along with potato. A large wooden 
pestle works best. Or combine potatoes and fish in mixer fitted with paddle and 
mix until fluffy. 
Combine garlic and oil in small saucepan and cook over medium heat until oil 
begins to bubble around garlic, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Slowly pour 
garlic oil into fish and potato mixture, mixing vigorously until incorporated. 
Mixture should be fluffy and shiny. Mound mixture on serving platter and 
surround with toast. Makes 4 servings. 
BROCCOLI AND TOASTED PINE NUT SALAD 
1 pound broccoli 
1 tablespoon salt 
1/3 cup olive oil 
6 tablespoons pine nuts 
1/4 cup red wine vinegar 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon or 1 teaspoon dried 
Using small knife, cut broccoli into florets and set aside on plate. Fill 
2-quart pan with water, add salt and bring to boil over high heat. Fill large 
mixing bowl with water and ice cubes. 
Meanwhile, using knife or vegetable peeler, trim woody outer skin from broccoli 
stalks, exposing light green, tender core. Stalks should look somewhat like 
squared-off logs. Slice stalks into 1/8-inch slices, tip to stem. Stack a few 
slices and cut them lengthwise as finely as you can. You now have shapes like 
match sticks called "julienne." 
Submerge broccoli florets in rapidly boiling salted water and cook 1 1/2 
minutes. Remove with slotted spoon and plunge into ice water to stop cooking 
process and to retain bright green color. 
Repeat procedure with julienned stalks, cooking only 30 seconds. Remove from 
water and plunge into ice water. When completely chilled, remove all broccoli 
from ice bath and drain well on kitchen towels (wet broccoli will dilute 
dressing and ruin all your good work). 
Heat olive oil in small skillet over medium heat. Add pine nuts and cook, 
tossing, until a light honey color. Sprinkle nuts and oil over broccoli. 
Just before serving, add vinegar and tarragon and toss gently. Mound on plates 
and serve. Makes 4 servings. 
