EVEN AS WE TIE THE KNOT TIGHTER, NUCLEAR POWER REMAINS UNGOVERNABLE 
The prime difficulty with nuclear power today is the same as it was before the 
Three Mile Island reactor accident 10 years ago. A radiation-producing energy 
source is simply ungovernable by any ordinary human measure. 
This is true whether one thinks about fission-produced electricity or bombs. 
As events in recent years remind us, nuclear reactors are not immaculately 
conceived. Whether part of a larger radiation-producing fuel or weapons cycle, 
the 700 research and commercial reactors currently in operation throughout the 
world create a number of critical health and environmental hazards that 
simultaneously demand, and yet resist, human solution. 
Several challenges arise for a society dependent on the fissioned atom. As the 
nuclear industry expands, we have to find a way to protect more of the Earth's 
limited fresh water supplies and arable land from radioactive contamination. We 
must insulate ever-changing social and ecological systems from unwanted 
interactions with dangerous and centuries-old radioactive wastes. We have to 
find a way to offset the many physical- and mental-health problems that emerge 
in the aftermath of "unscheduled" releases of radioactive materials anywhere 
along the overlapping nuclear fuel and arms networks. We need to ask if there 
is a way to justify to an increasingly skeptical public the morality of 
randomly passing on cancer deaths and/or radiation-related birth defects to 
innocent persons over the generations. We must reduce the often disastrous 
consequences of human error within the nuclear weapons and fuel systems without 
deeding life-or-death decisions to equally fallible, and often less flexible, 
computers. We need to halt the spread of proliferation of thermonuclear and 
biochemical weapons, as well as the anti-democratic imperatives they engender, 
by severing atomic weapons from the commercial atomic-power industries. 
Even if we manage to accomplish all that, can we shield nuclear critics from 
economic and political reprisals so that their frequently well-placed warnings 
of radiation danger can be used to forestall predictable disasters? 
Quite evidently, each of these problems has been aggravated in the years since 
the radiation accidents at Three Mile Island and, more recently, Chernobyl. 
Indeed, the opening months of 1989 carry with them ominous signs of humanity's 
deepening nuclear bondage. There are many examples: 
 -- The Soviet press reports a doubling of cancer rates among adults and of 
thyroid illnesses among more than half of the children in the Chernobyl damage 
area. 
 -- American and Soviet policy-makers are rushing to bring additional reactors 
on line and to introduce supposedly "melt-down-free" models for the 1990s. They 
hope to shore up their troubled economies and reduce acid rain and greenhouse 
effect problems posed by the burning of fossil fuels. 
 -- Radiation-related leaks at Hanford, Rocky Flats, Fernald and Savannah River 
are forcing the shutdown of major parts of the U.S. nuclear arms industry at an 
estimated on-site clean-up cost of at least $80 billion over the next 60 years. 
 -- Iran, Iraq and Libya seek to stockpile chemical weapons to offset Israel's 
strength and the West's nuclear superiority in that hapless region. 
 -- Technocrats are considering the launching of more and larger 
nuclear-powered satellites into Earth's orbit for military as well as 
scientific purposes. 
 -- Respected environmental groups, like Worldwatch Institute, caution that the 
globe may be awash in plutonium by century's end as nations reprocess highly 
toxic spent reactor fuel to either extend their energy supplies and/or make 
atomic bombs. 
Tragically, we have not yet learned that the threats of nuclear war and 
radiation accident require us to control the potentially devastating 
properties. In order to guard against nuclear accident or war, we have divided 
the human community into nuclear "haves" and "have nots." This division itself 
has given rise to the very conflicts that must be avoided if serious nuclear 
breakdowns are to be prevented. 
The need to resolve this seemingly fatal paradox has been at the heart of those 
tragedies already experienced in the nuclear age. The paradox is complicated by 
the fact that radiation accidents of the kind first experienced at Three Mile 
Island remind people of their own complicity in the making and maintenance of a 
world that neither they nor their children can sustain or endure. 
These accidents tell people that in return for the Faustian promise of an 
infinite supply of energy, wealth and military security, they must saddle their 
children with a highly versatile radiation killer. 
And so, a decade after what might have been the beginning-of-the-end of the 
nuclear age, humanity slips deeper into its common nuclear nightmare, 
humiliated into accepting the rule of a lawless nuclear elite that it 
alternately worships and dreads. 
But matters could be otherwise. 
Were people honest about it, they might admit that their newly proclaimed 
search for a safer and cleaner environment will come to little unless they 
change their habit of valuing convenient consumption over conservation. 
Taking Einstein's injunction seriously -- that we need to change our mode of 
thinking to survive the Atomic Age -- probably requires us to abandon the 
nuclear game entirely and to link the quest for nuclear disarmament to the 
delivery of safe and ecologically sound energy systems. 
It would seem the only way out of the world's mounting nuclear dilemma is to 
cut the Gordian knot, as did a young Alexander, thereby announcing the passing 
of the old and the beginning of a new global economic and political order. 
