BARRY PLEADS INNOCENT TO COCAINE USE, PERJURY; 
DRUGS: HIS DEFENSE LAWYER SAYS THE MAYOR WILL NOT RESIGN OR PLEA-BARGAIN. THE 
U.S. ATTORNEY SAYS A VARIETY OF OTHER ALLEGATIONS ARE BEING INVESTIGATED. 
Mayor Marion Barry emerged Wednesday from five weeks of seclusion to plead not 
guilty to eight federal drug and perjury charges, then quickly returned to an 
exclusive South Carolina treatment center to further "heal himself" of 
alcoholism. 
Immaculate in a wine-and-white tie and matching pocket handkerchief, the 
53-year-old mayor sat silently during the five-minute proceeding, rubbing his 
hands together slowly as U.S. District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson ordered 
that his trial begin June 4. 
Barry made no public comments during his return to the city he has headed for 
nearly a dozen years. It was the first time he had set foot in Washington since 
shortly after federal agents videotaped him allegedly smoking crack cocaine 
with a former girlfriend in a downtown hotel room. 
The Jan. 18 arrest, and a later grand jury indictment charging that the mayor 
had used cocaine on another occasion and then lied about it under oath, set in 
motion a legal battle that has inflamed racial tensions in the capital. 
Defense attorney R. Kenneth Mundy declared after Wednesday's hearing that Barry 
would neither resign nor negotiate a plea bargain and said the mayor was 
confident that he would be vindicated when his case came before a jury. 
But U.S. Atty. Jay B. Stephens dismissed the defense strategy as "standard 
not-guilty pleas" and said the federal government was continuing to investigate 
"a variety of related allegations" against the mayor. 
The Justice Department last week subpoenaed the financial records of several 
close Barry associates, and sources said the probe is now focused on reports 
that the mayor steered city contracts to the associates in exchange for 
cocaine. 
The arraignment provided Barry with his first chance to respond formally to the 
Feb. 15 indictment, which contained five misdemeanor counts of cocaine 
possession and three felony counts of perjury. The charges carry a maximum 
penalty of 20 years and $1.25 million in fines. 
Under the glare of fluorescent lights and the scrutiny of a packed courtroom, 
the mayor bowed his head and squinted as he read a copy of the charges. But he 
did not appear greatly troubled by them. 
Outside, the courthouse grounds were jammed with reporters and vocal supporters 
and opponents of the mayor. About 20 members of the crime-fighting group 
Guardian Angels carried signs urging Barry to resign. 
Barry held up two fingers in a victory sign as he entered the courtroom and 
later grinned broadly as he exchanged a word with Mundy. 
The mayor looked on impassively as his lawyer entered pleas of not guilty "on 
each and every count." 
The court appearance followed the postponement of a Feb. 21 hearing that was 
put off at the mayor's request on grounds that a return to Washington at that 
time would have interrupted his four-week rehabilitation program at a Florida 
alcohol and drug treatment facility. 
Barry, who has denied using drugs and has said he is being treated for 
alcoholism, has since moved to the Fenwick Hall Clinic near Charleston, S.C. 
The judge ordered Wednesday that Barry be released on his own recognizance, and 
he lifted a previous requirement that the mayor submit periodic urine samples 
for drug tests. 
Stephens said he accepted the judge's decision on the end of the mandatory drug 
testing as "appropriate" in light of the time that had passed since the mayor's 
arrest. 
Associates of Barry said the mayor returned to South Carolina after the 
arraignment to resume treatment, but his official spokesmen refused to comment 
on his movements. 
Mundy said Barry would remain in touch with city officials during his time in 
the South Carolina treatment center, but he asked reporters not to disturb him 
because "the mayor is seeking to heal himself." 
"As he continues to mend himself physically and spiritually, he will adhere to 
the program that has been set aside for this treatment," Mundy said. 
The bulk of the charges against Barry stem from a December, 1988, incident in 
which he is alleged to have smoked crack cocaine in a Ramada Inn hotel room 
with Charles Lewis, a convicted drug dealer. 
Lewis, whom the mayor has described as a friend, has said under oath that he 
provided crack to Barry and smoked the drug with the mayor more than once. The 
perjury charges against Barry stem from his sworn denials, in grand jury 
testimony, that he used drugs with Lewis. 
The indictment of the mayor followed a costly yearlong Justice Department 
investigation of his conduct, prompting Barry to charge that he had been 
unfairly targeted by Republican administrations and had become the target of a 
"political lynching." 
His supporters noted that the mayor was arrested only after being lured to a 
Justice Department trap in the Vista Hotel, where undercover agents videotaped 
a reunion between Barry and a former girlfriend, Rasheeda Moore. 
Barry has not yet announced whether he will seek reelection this year to an 
unprecedented fourth term, and his associates said Wednesday that they expected 
him to put any such decision on hold for at least another month. 
A recent Washington Post poll reported that seven out of 10 Democrats in the 
city do not want Barry to seek a fourth term, and half say he should resign 
immediately. 
But the poll showed that about one in four Democratic voters in the district 
remained hard-core Barry supporters. 
