TRAVELING IN STYLE; 
LUXURY LINES; 
MAPPING THE ROUTES TO SYBARITIC SHOPS THAT SPARE NO EXPENSE IN QUENCHING THE 
WORLD-CLASS SHOPPER'S THIRST FOR TREASURES 
Glimmering gold, shimmering silk, dazzling diamonds, fabulous furs and other 
luxuries have inspired travelers since the time of Marco Polo. Today's 
world-class shoppers know that top purveyors of first-class fineries, the likes 
of Hermes, Patek Philippe and Fendi, sell magnificent one-of-a-kind and /or 
exclusive items and offer their latest styles in their opulent flagship shops. 
Patrons of the world's haute salons have the satisfaction of being surrounded 
by glamour and luxury beyond compare. Pay a king's ransom for fineries and 
expect to be treated like royalty. That's part of the luxury of buying luxury 
goods. Such shoppers view the world as a treasure hunt. The map outlines 
merchandise rather than nations, and stars locate splendid emporiums rather 
than capital cities. Personal preferences determine individual itineraries of 
acquisition, but luxury-shopping sprees require a spirit of adventure and 
substantial globe-trotting. On any world-class shopper's map a cluster of 
starred shops centers on Paris, especially on Rue du Faubourg Saint Honore. As 
playwright Jean Giraudoux said, "Faubourg Saint Honore is 1,500 meters of 
sidewalks, 200 boutiques, with not one single lapse in good taste." A list of 
this street's designer boutiques is a Who's Who of high-ticket fashion: Lanvin, 
Lapidus, Jitrois, Cardin, Saint Laurent, Chloe, Lagerfeld, Feraud, Perris, 
Rykiel, Carven, Scherrer. 
Faubourg Saint Honore fashion moguls dress boutique windows to kill, but the 
street's most splendid and opulent showcases belong to Hermes (No. 24), 
purveyor of the world's most prestigious leather goods and of haute snob style. 
Hermes offers Kelly and Constance bags, glorious silk scarfs that frame famous 
faces or are framed to fill walls of palatial homes, gloves to grace any 
outfit, a herd of saddles and equestrian equipage, organizers costing enough to 
make all dates precious events, street and home attire almost too posh to put 
on mere mortals' backs, plus attache cases, belts, wallets, dog leashes and cat 
collars, super-sized steamer trunks (costing five figures and up) or diminutive 
chewing gum cases (merely $125 and up). There are sumptuous silk ties, robes 
and pajamas, cashmere shawls, jewelry, scents and mink-lined raincoats. Hermes 
has elevated humble umbrellas to the level of objets d'art, with prices that 
might feed a family of eight. 
Not open to the general public, Hermes' top-floor museum has fitted leather 
chests, saddles, and other accessories that belonged to the rich, famous and 
influential of yesteryear. Use your influence to get a tour of this treasury 
for a priceless treat that's free. 
Faubourg Saint Honore's deluxe shoe sellers include Jourdan, Steiger, Kelian 
and Fratelli Rossetti, but most luxurious of all is John Lobb-Hermes, a 
magnificent leather-scented salon on Hermes' second floor. This custom 
shoemaker, previously affiliated with the London Lobb, supports the feet of men 
whose stand on issues influences world events, along with presidents of 
republics, chairmen of conglomerates, monarchs, magnates and movie stars. 
Custom-shoe prices at John Lobb-Hermes start at $2,000 and soar with added 
tassels or trim. Nevertheless, the shoes are in such demand that it takes about 
a year to fill a first order, and longstanding clients are limited to one pair 
per month. Nothing beats the quality or comfort. Each element is sewn, rather 
than glued, into place. Classic and conservative styles are customized with 
color and material ranging from calf to ostrich, shark, kangaroo and other 
exotica. 
Women's riding boots and walking shoes are made at John Lobb-Hermes, but a full 
range of women's custom-made styles is found at Michel, 12 Avenue Montaigne. 
Michel's shop is simple; the luxury is in perfect shoes and accommodating 
service, not the surroundings. Each season, Michel features 80 handsomely 
conservative shoe styles, including women's sturdy but feminine pumps and men's 
oxfords, with the finest leathers in a rich palette of colors, priced at $1,200 
and up. Michel will copy your favorite old shoes, and Michel files your last 
for future purchases. 
Ritzy Avenue Montaigne and environs are where Ungaro, Mori, Dior, Laroche, 
Ricci, Chanel, Givenchy, Balenciaga, Balmain and other designers of note have 
haute couture salons, with tickets on clothes beginning at about $5,000 and 
soaring from there. Have your concierge telephone to make an appointment for 
you at these salons; otherwise you won't get the full show. 
The last word in ultra-refined, conservative, made-to-order suits for men (and 
women) is Charvet (2 Place Vendome). This splendid haberdashery has outfitted 
distinguished businessmen since 1838. Sales personnel are sophisticated and 
personable -- a rare but appealing combination. The ground floor's colorful 
carrousels display thousands of magnificent silk ties arranged by hue, with a 
dizzying variety of stripes and dots. The women's silk squares and 
cashmere-silk shawls designed by Raoul Dufy and other famous artists are 
fabulous, and Charvet's colognes sealed in Champagne bottles are delightful. 
The second, third and fourth floors have exquisite ready-to-wear suits, shirts 
and lounge wear. The fifth floor is the bastion of the made-to-measure 
customer. Here, amid dozens of bolts of cotton in solid colors or striped, and 
rolls of exquisite cashmeres and woolens in conservative colors, you are fitted 
for perfect shirts and suits. After your first order, if measurements don't 
change drastically, Charvet will be your personal mail-order tailor for life. 
Patterns are filed and put to use whenever you need a new supply of shirts or 
suits. 
Jewelry shops around Place Vendome rival Versailles in opulence. The glitter of 
gemstones in fabulous tiaras, rings, bracelets, necklaces and objets d'art is 
overwhelming. Cartier has its fabulous "les musts" collection, Van Cleef &amp; 
Arpels offers bejeweled golden chains and Alderbert displays gem-encrusted 
timepieces. 
The Paris showcase of Italian jeweler Gianmaria Buccellati (No. 4), a lavishly 
appointed boutique with brocade-covered walls and gilded mirrors, is decorated 
with a menagerie of solid-silver peacocks, pheasants, birds of paradise, cupids 
and other fabulous creatures covered with colorful gems, astonishingly ornate, 
but much too finely detailed to be considered gaudy. Some of these silver 
objects are purely decorative, others hold candles or canapes, or contain punch 
or tea. Silver flatware is similarly ornate, as is gold and silver jewelry set 
with spectacular gems. 
Mauboussin (No. 20) has been making unique jewelry since 1827. Three artists 
currently design exquisite pieces combining flawless diamonds with rare, black 
mother-of-pearl in elegant gold settings. Brilliant tear-shaped diamond 
"droplets" are encased in gold and suspended from gold chains. Ornately 
sculpted, gem-encrusted clocks belong on grand marble mantels such as the ones 
on which they are displayed. 
Boucheron (No. 26), founded in 1856, offers magnificent hand-fashioned gold 
chains; top-quality gemstones in ornate rings, brooches and pendants, and 
unusual pieces made of leopard wood (rare hardwood with fascinating spot-like 
patterning). Boucheron's real specialty is rock crystal work, including huge, 
smooth, translucent, perfectly shaped bowls accented with inlaid gold and agate 
or lapis designs and finely detailed sculptures of birds or other animals, 
presented in lovely leather boxes. Production is limited to one edition of 
three or four pieces annually. 
Chaumet (No. 12), the venerable Parisian joaillier, founded in 1775 and now 
operated by Jean Baptiste (10th generation), has made jewelry and crowns for 
many of Europe's royal families (maquettes are displayed in the museum, call 
for an appointment). The grand salon is for important clients who study jewels 
under the watchful eyes of an 1812 portrait of Marie Louise. Other customers 
are received in adjacent boutiques, one for gold with small gems, the other for 
extraordinary stones, especially pearls and emeralds. Settings are unusual, 
ornate, unique. Chaumet recently acquired Brequet, which produces 1,200 
timepieces per year. Along with atelier and patent came an outstanding 
collection of jewel-encrusted antique clocks and watches, now on display. 
But for the best collection of luxury timepieces, head for Geneva. Exclusive 
and probably beyond the budgets of most mortals are investment-quality watches 
by Piaget (40 Rue du Rhone). Production is limited to 15,000 watches a year; 
models with onyx faces and diamond-studded bands cost $287,000 and up; 
18-karat-gold models begin at $9,500. 
Vacheron-Constantine, at 1 Rue des Moulins, has made exclusive timepieces since 
1755. Limited-edition contemporary models feature the world's thinnest 
automatic movement, ranging from an understated numberless face with leather 
band ($3,000) to dazzling diamond-faced watches with diamond bands (from 
$130,000). 
Patek Philippe (22 Quai du General-Guisan) makes exquisite classics as well as 
"complicated" watches. The most complicated watch, first made to order in 1928, 
features strike gongs to sound the hour, an elapsed-time totalizer, perpetual 
calendar with moon-phase display, split-second chronograph, alarm, sunrise and 
sunset indication, celestial chart for the Northern Hemisphere, equation of 
time, sidereal time and more. All in one watch! Calibre '89, a complicated 
watch debuting this year to mark Patek Philippe's 150th anniversary, has 1,728 
parts, 24 hands, and adjusts itself to leap years. The price is expected to 
exceed $3 million at an upcoming auction. 
If you're still working on Rolex, Rado or Baume et Mercier time, go to Bucherer 
(26 Quai du General-Guisan), an elegant wood-paneled shop with sweeping 
stairways and gleaming glass cases filled with fabulous watches and glittering 
jewels. 
Milan and Rome compete as the most-starred cities on the shopper's map of 
Italy. Milan's pricey Via Montenapoleone district boasts the flagship boutiques 
of Armani, Versace, Krizia, Missoni, Gigli, Ferre, Soprani and other trendy 
alta moda moguls. Rome has Valentino, Biagiotti and other classics, and the 
fabulous Fendi empire of boutiques on Via Borgognona, where the prestigious 
initial F logo reigns supreme. Fendi stocks leather goods and clothes, shoes 
are sensational, but the firm began and still excels with excellent 
ready-to-wear and made-to-measure furs. Fendi's high-fashion fantasy furs 
(shown at Via Borgognona 39) mix major- and minor-league pelts, such as mink 
with mole or sable with squirrel. The effect is dramatic and so are the prices. 
Some luxury shoppers object to wearing fur, but fur fanciers' treasure maps 
highlight Helsinki's fabulous furriers who offer luxurious classic coats in 
finest quality mink, sable, blue and silver fox, muskrat and other pelts, but 
also emphasize innovative design, unusual detailing and playful use of color in 
ready-to-wear or special-order wraps. Tarya Niskanen (Unioninkatu 30) makes 
marvelous mink trench coats with belts and epaulets, stunning ankle-length mink 
coats with detachable patchwork mink shawls fringed with mink tails, and 
exciting mink coats and jackets with brightly colored geometric patterning. 
Peachy-pink full-length fox coat-and-hat ensembles are attention-getters, and 
the mink, fox and muskrat hats and muffs, and ankle-length shearling coats are 
superb. 
The Grunstein Boutique (Unioninkatu 27) features fantastic reversible fur and 
leather coats with detachable sleeves and vests, for a layered look and 
versatile wear. Peach, coral, green, blue, gray and lilac patchwork mink, 
raccoon, lamb suede and leather are used to create bold patterns that classify 
these coats as wearable art. 
Tua Rahikainen (Kasarmikatu 48) uses sheared muskrat or mink for remarkably 
supple, lightweight and warm coats styled with broad shoulders in bottle green, 
burgundy and other unusual colors. Some models are accented with geometric 
patches of fur in contrasting colors and all are lined with sumptuous silk. 
For fabulous silk garments, head for Bangkok. Thai silk's special luminous 
sheen is unsurpassed. The Thai Silk Co., otherwise known as Jim Thompson's, is 
a spacious, gracious emporium in a splendid mansion at 9 Surawong Road. On the 
ground floor, bolts of silk resemble a rainbow of about 200 exotic colors in 
single-ply for clothing, four-ply for draperies and six-ply for upholstery or 
covering walls. There are shimmering ties, pillow covers, place mats, napkins, 
tablecloths, picture frames, handbags, wallets and silk-covered boxes. A 
sweeping teak staircase leads to the fashion floor, with day and evening 
attire: quilted and kimono jackets, blouses, shirts with mother-of-pearl 
buttons, elegant gowns, robes, dresses, pant suits, and "pretzel belts" of 
twisted-silk rope. But best of all, have favorite garments or new designs 
made-to-measure. For the perfect fit, fabulous fabric and excellent 
workmanship, the $500 to $700 ticket for a dress qualifies this as a very 
reasonably priced luxury. 
Bangkok's legendary lapidaries sell gemstones by the handful, but rarely offer 
the public exceptional stones or settings. The Orient's most famous jewelry 
designer is in Hong Kong (famous for bargains, but a mecca for luxury shoppers, 
too). Kai-Yin Lo (4-6 On Lan Street or Mezzanine, Peninsula Hotel, Kowloon) 
makes exclusive and exotic-looking jewel-encrusted collars for British royalty, 
Natalia Makarova, Hanae Mori and other famous necks. Kai-Yin uses extraordinary 
semiprecious stones, and her collars are priced at $60,000 and up. She also 
makes opulent hand-beaded or sequined capes, belts and handbags. 
First-class, star-sized, show-off hunks of rubies, sapphires, emeralds, 
diamonds and semiprecious stones, set in lavish 18-karat Swiss gold brooches, 
rings, bracelets and necklaces, are available at Trio Pearl Co. (Mezzanine, 
Peninsula Hotel, Kowloon). Trio also has magnificent jade beads for about 
$400,000 or more per strand, as well as high-quality pearls. 
The gentle glow of nacre is particularly luminous at Mikimoto (4-5-5 Ginza, 
Chuo-ku) in Tokyo. The great Japanese pearl purveyor sells around the world, 
but keeps a reserve of exceptional pearls and pearl jewelry at this elegant 
Tokyo salon. State-of-the-art single pearls, perfectly rounded, perfectly 
smooth and measuring 8 millimeters and larger, 16-inch strings of 
perfectly-matched 8-millimeter or larger pearls with exquisite gem-encrusted 
clasps, and brooches or pendants with extraordinary pearls in delicate floral 
settings, or clustered with diamonds and other gemstones, are spectacular. 
Gleaming Ma Be pearls come in drop-dead sizes, unusual shapes and magnificent 
settings. Mikimoto's accommodating staff demonstrates how pearls are seeded and 
processed. 
Tokyo's other luxury goods range from one-of-a-kind traditional lacquerware 
creations to the latest innovations in high-tech electronics. For lacquerware, 
exclusive and expensive Heiando (3-10-11 Nihombashi, Chuo-ku) has collectible 
pieces from all regions of Japan, with antiques and rare works of art on the 
second floor, and bushy (Axis Building, 5-17-1 Roppongi, Minato-ku) sells 
lacquerware furniture and accessories made with old-fashioned methods but 
ultra-contemporary designs, including great red lacquer lounge chairs and 
stunning black lacquer chests of drawers. 
For futuristic high-resolution televisions, compact discs, computers, stereo 
and video equipment, games and gadgets, portables, miniatures, super-sized 
screens and other luxury electronics not yet available in the United States, 
visit Sony, Hitachi, Toshiba, Technics, Mitsubishi and other top manufacturer 
showcases on the Ginza. These high-tech havens are high-ticket gamerooms that 
keep you entertained for hours. Or head for the Akihabara district where dozens 
of multistory electronics shops have special sections for export goods and 
guarantee purchases with plugs, electric current and variable settings 
compatible with or adaptable to systems back home. 
