WARNER SHAREHOLDERS FILE SUIT TO BLOCK MERGER WITH TIME 
A group of Warner Communications Inc. stockholders charged in a lawsuit filed 
Wednesday in a Delaware court that a proposed merger with Time Inc. is an 
illegal scheme to block any outside takeover of Warner. 
Meanwhile, Warner and Time shares skidded as takeover talk dimmed. 
West German publisher Bertelsmann AG said it was not interested in seeking 
either Time or Warner, and industry analysts saw no other serious threats. In 
New York Stock Exchange trading, Time fell $1.875 to $114.875 and Warner 
declined $1.125 to $47.75 after rising in previous sessions on talk of outside 
offers emerging. 
The Warner shareholder suit, filed in Delaware's chancery court, seeks to block 
the companies from proceeding with a so-called lockup provision in which Time 
will exchange 12.5% of its stock for 12% of Warner's shares. 
The provision was part of the agreement under which Time and Warner plan to 
swap shares and merge into what would be the world's largest media and 
entertainment company, with a market value of $18 billion. 
Court records also showed that two more shareholder suits have been filed 
challenging the merger, including one naming Time and Warner and another naming 
just Warner. No other details were available immediately. The suits could later 
be consolidated. 
Time and Warner agreed to vote each other's shares in support of the merger or 
in case of a proxy fight for control of Warner. This, together with Warner 
director share holdings, would effectively block any outside takeover of 
Warner, the shareholders said. 
The suit charged that by blocking an outside takeover, Warner is preventing its 
stockholders from receiving a fair price for their shares. It noted that Time 
and Warner have each been a rumored takeover target in recent years and that it 
"is generally believed that (their) merger would make them a difficult takeover 
target." 
"The merger and lockup transactions are nothing more than a plan and scheme by 
the (Warner) director defendants to entrench themselves," argued the 
shareholders, Bernice Berger, Harold Sachs, Joseph Kovacs and Kathleen Pessin. 
The shareholders said in a 12-page court document that Time and Warner are 
"engaged in a conspiracy and are substantially and knowingly aiding and 
abetting each other in carrying out this unlawful scheme." 
Analysts had been predicting lawsuits because some shareholders were 
disappointed that a more lucrative offer did not emerge for either of the 
companies, whose underlying asset values are estimated at as much as twice 
their current stock market value. 
In a related development, the House Judiciary Committee announced that its 
subcommittee on economic and commercial law will hold a hearing on the proposed 
merger on Tuesday. 
