THEY WON'T BE FORGOTTEN AT GONZAGA; 
COLLEGE BASKETBALL: BROTHERS BRYCE AND JIM MCPHEE MADE THEIR MARKS IN 
CONSECUTIVE CAREERS SPANNING 10 YEARS. 
In a West Coast Conference dominated by fifth-year seniors -- Hank Gathers, Bo 
Kimble and Tom Lewis among them -- the best little-known basketball player for 
the last decade has been named McPhee. 
But after Gonzaga plays at 2 p.m today against Loyola Marymount in the opening 
round of the West Coast Conference tournament at Gersten Pavilion, the name 
McPhee probably won't appear in a Bulldog box score again, after having been 
there since the 1980-81 season. 
That doesn't mean that 6-foot-5 guard Jim McPhee has played the longest career 
in NCAA history; merely that he and older brother Bryce McPhee have had 
consecutive five-year careers. 
At the tournament coaches' luncheon Friday, WCC Commissioner Michael Gilleran 
jokingly asked Gonzaga Coach Dan Fitzgerald, "Any more McPhees coming? We hear 
rumors about cousins or an uncle." 
Gonzaga has already signed Bryce McPhee's infant son to a gag letter of intent. 
Jim McPhee, averaging 23.3 points and within 17 of 2,000 for his career, is 
playing on a sore knee but undoubtedly will lead the Bulldog offense in what, 
barring a major upset, will be his last collegiate game. He scored 42 points in 
each of the two games game against Loyola this season. 
"His knee is not very good, but he's gotta play and he'll find a way," 
Fitzgerald said. 
Loyola Coach Paul Westhead said: "We're going to try to keep him in the low 
40s." 
On Friday, McPhee was named to the all-conference team for the third time and 
was named a first-team Academic All-American -- a distinction Bryce also 
earned. McPhee, who already has one degree, is taking graduate courses in 
communication and has a 3.3 grade-point average. He and his brother have 
combined for five all-conference selections. 
Fitzgerald says the McPhees fit the "Gonzaga guy" image along with another 
former Bulldog, John Stockton. 
"They're out of the same mold," Fitzgerald said. "If Jimmy's what a Gonzaga guy 
is, I'm proud of that. I appreciate that he's our all-time scorer, but I 
appreciate him even more for things other than basketball. We've given him a 
lot, but he's given an awful lot back to us." 
The McPhees' Gonzaga connection started when Fitzgerald recruited Bryce at 
Bellarmine Prep in Tacoma. Jay Hillock, now an assistant coach at Loyola who 
helped recruit both McPhees while at Gonzaga, said Bryce's signing was almost 
an afterthought. 
A good all-around athlete and leaper at 6-3, he played center in high school 
and was not heavily recruited. 
"Lenny Wilkens (then coach of the Seattle SuperSonics) called me over the 
summer and said McPhee was the best player in his camp. He was beating college 
guys," Hillock said. "So we gave him a scholarship. If we hadn't, he was going 
to walk on at Santa Clara. (Now) they're kind of an institution up there." 
Bryce McPhee, who improved rapidly as a swing man, was often the recipient of 
assists from Stockton, another little-known Washington native who was in his 
recruiting class. But where Stockton went on to NBA stardom with the Utah Jazz, 
McPhee suffered a devastating knee injury that cost him the 1983-84 season. 
He finished his career with 1,060 points but thoughts of a pro career were 
gone. He is now back at his alma mater in Tacoma, coaching the junior varsity 
and working on a master's degree in physical therapy. When Stockton went to the 
NBA, he called Bryce McPhee the best athlete he had played with or against. 
But Gonzaga barely missed a beat, the younger McPhee replacing his brother the 
next season, despite some misgivings about being compared to Bryce. They are 
different types of players as well as individuals, but Fitzgerald said there is 
a common thread of competitiveness. 
"Bryce was a tremendous athlete, one of the best we've ever had," Fitzgerald 
said. 
"Jim is a great shooter, more limited in some ways. He's probably achieved more 
for his ability than any kid I've been around. Bryce could play above the rim. 
Jim's a competitor." 
Hillock said, "I think Jimmy was more ready to play immediately, but he didn't 
have the massive improvement Bryce did. 
"Jimmy's more limited as an athlete, but he's probably the best pure shooter in 
our conference." 
Fitzgerald said the Bulldogs' last-place finish in the WCC (3-11, 8-19 overall) 
showed how tough the younger McPhee is. 
"He's been a great competitor, maybe even more this year," Fitzgerald said. 
"He is as good a kid and as good a competitor as he appears. He's a tough guy 
that gets it done." 
After winning all-conference honors as a sophomore, McPhee suffered a torn knee 
ligament before his junior season. He was granted an injury hardship by the 
NCAA for that season. 
He returned for 1988-89 and averaged 20 points on 59% shooting. He began this 
season shooting 54% from the field and 88% from the foul line, numbers he has 
maintained as a senior despite being the focus of most defenses. 
How would the McPhees fare against one another? 
"That would be a great fight," Fitzgerald said. 
"Somebody would have to die to win that fight." 
WCC Notes 
Postseason honors were named, with Loyola Marymount dominating as it did the 
league. Bo Kimble was named player of the year and Lion Coach Paul Westhead was 
coach of the year. Also, Loyola's Hank Gathers and Jeff Fryer were named to the 
All-WCC team. Other members included: Jeffty Connelly, Santa Clara; Craig 
Davis, Dexter Howard and Geoff Lear, Pepperdine; Joel DeBortoli, San Francisco; 
John Jerome, San Diego; Josh Lowery, Portland; and Jim McPhee, Gonzaga . . . 
Matt Houle of Portland was named freshman of the year. 
