ALLAN MALAMUD: NOTES ON A SCORECARD 
Clipper owner Donald Sterling adores the style -- and won-loss record -- of 
Coach Billy Tubbs of top-ranked Oklahoma. . . . 
It appears likely that Sterling will dismiss Don Casey at the end of the season 
and offer Tubbs a lucrative, multi-year contract to replace him. . . . 
The Clippers' jinx notwithstanding, the job actually would be a plum. Perhaps 
no other team in the NBA has more outstanding young talent. And, if the draft 
were held today, the Clippers would own two lottery picks. . . . 
Tubbs, who took the Sooners to the NCAA championship game two years ago, has 
done his best coaching job this season with an inexperienced team and always 
has favored the run 'n gun NBA style of play. . . . 
The question remains whether the town would be big enough for both Tubbs and 
sound-alike Jack Nicholson, the famous Laker fan who also owns Clipper 
front-row season tickets. . . . 
Think the difference in political clout had something to do with Notre Dame 
making the NCAA tournament field and Cal State Long Beach not?. . . . 
The snub doesn't figure to do much for Long Beach's chances of keeping Joe 
Harrington, its outstanding coach who has been interviewed by the University of 
Miami. . . . 
Final Four forecast: Oklahoma vs. Connecticut, Virginia vs. Arizona. . . . 
Nevada sports books cannot post odds on teams winning the tournament until 
Nevada Las Vegas is eliminated. Bets on events involving Nevada schools are 
illegal and a bet on another team in the tournament is construed as a bet 
against UNLV. . . . 
No UCLA or USC game was telecast here the first three days of the Pac-10 
tournament and the Bruins' championship game against Arizona was shown only on 
a delayed basis. No wonder so many local high school basketball stars, who want 
to be seen on TV, leave town. . . . 
UCLA's Jim Harrick and Alabama-Birmingham's Gene Bartow will meet in the first 
round of the NCAA tournament Friday in Atlanta. But all four other coaches who 
have followed John Wooden at UCLA -- Gary Cunningham, Larry Brown, Larry Farmer 
and Walt Hazzard -- now are out of college basketball. . . . 
Greg Foster, who lettered at UCLA in 1987 and then transferred to UTEP, was 
voted most valuable player of the WAC tournament. The Bruins could have used 
him at center this season. . . . 
John Thompson showed again after Georgetown's loss to Connecticut in the Big 
East Conference semifinals that he is one of the few coaches in big-time 
college basketball who will give full credit to the winning team after a tough 
loss. He did the same thing after the Hoyas' loss to Villanova in the 1985 NCAA 
final. . . . 
In his NBA career, Magic Johnson never has gone through a season without 
missing a game. However, he's missed only one in 1989-90 and, as the Atlanta 
Hawks will attest, looks the picture of health. . . . 
Before thinking about Vlade Divac's chances of becoming NBA rookie of the year, 
remember that David Robinson is a rookie although he was drafted three years 
ago by the San Antonio Spurs. . . . 
With Robinson just beginning his career, why would even Larry Brown possibly 
consider leaving the Spurs?. . . . 
Navy was 26-6 in Robinson's senior year and is 23-61 since. .. . 
John Salley should concentrate more on his basketball and less on his comedy 
routine. . . . Portland may not win the Pacific Division, but deserves some 
kind of crown for going 11-1 against the Atlantic Division. . . . 
The Los Angeles Kings, famed for their giveaways this season, donated $136,000 
to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation after the recent Tip-A-King benefit. . . . 
Rogie Vachon's son Nicholas, who is too smart to play goal, has been awarded a 
hockey scholarship to Boston University. . . . 
Eastern bettors still refuse to give California-based thoroughbreds their due. 
Sunny Blossom, the Santa Anita track record holder at six furlongs, won a 
stakes at Aqueduct by 5 1/2 lengths Sunday and paid $9. . . . 
According to the latest weigh-ins, Raider Coach Art Shell has lost 18 pounds in 
the charity AFC vs. NFC Battle of the Bulge. He's down to 320, but San Diego 
Coach Dan Henning, down to 201, leads with a 21-pound loss. . . . 
I give 80% of the blame for the baseball lockout to the owners and 20% to the 
players. . . . 
No defeat by Pam Shriver should be called an upset. . . . 
News item: Jennifer Capriati, 13, loses to Gabriela Sabatini in finals of 
tennis tournament. Reaction: Must be burnout. 
