SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA BASKETBALL REGIONALS; 
DIVISION III BOYS; 
TRABUCO HILLS TEAMS UP, TOPS LEMOORE; 
MUSTANGS' 86-79 VICTORY PUTS THEM IN THE FINAL AGAINST MORNINGSIDE 
Playing with an extra dose of intensity, teamwork and smarts, Trabuco Hills 
High School found its groove and defeated Lemoore, 86-79, in a Southern 
California Regional Division III semifinal game Thursday night at El Toro High 
School. 
The victory sends Trabuco Hills (24-6) into the Southern California Regional 
final against Morningside, a 53-46 winner over Corona del Mar. 
Trabuco Hills, which defeated San Diego Clairemont, 87-60, in Tuesday's first 
round, found an even higher level of play against Lemoore. 
"It was an exciting game and fun too," Trabuco Hills Coach Rainer Wulf said. "I 
think we gave the crowd something exciting to watch tonight." 
Rick Swanwick, who Tuesday overcame a frightful first-half shooting slump 
before scoring a career-high 32 points, had another good game, scoring 22 
points and grabbing 15 rebounds before being taken out midway through the 
fourth quarter. 
But Trabuco Hills' biggest source of entertainment might have been its overall 
teamwork. The Mustangs, guided by guards Randy Kriech (14 points), Tim Manning 
(12 points) and reserve Louis Arenado (five steals, eight points), continually 
frustrated Lemoore with pinpoint passing and tricky dribbling. 
Lemoore's main weapon, 5-foot-9 guard Tommy Jones, scored a game-high 28 points 
including four three-pointers and had five steals. But even he had high praise 
for the Mustangs. 
"They are hot, definitely hot," he said. 
Trabuco Hills opened up the game with a Swanwick bank shot in the key and a 
three-pointer by Poulos to take a 5-0 lead. The Tigers, pressed by Trabuco 
Hills' man-to-man defense, missed their first six shots. 
From the start, it was apparent Lemoore was going to have trouble with Trabuco 
Hills' well-balanced team. 
When Lemoore tried to double-team Swanwick, Swanwick passed to the perimeter 
where any of several Mustangs were ready to shoot. Kriech scored 10 points, 
including two back-to-back three-pointers to give Trabuco Hills a 28-16 
first-quarter lead. 
The balance -- from Swanwick's inside game to the sharp perimeter shooting of 
Kriech and Manning -- hounded Lemoore as it has many Mustang opponents this 
season. 
"It's so hard to defend this team," Lemoore Coach Jim Gordon said. "The big guy 
bangs inside, and they got those outside shooters." 
All of whom shot especially well -- 10 of 15 as a team -- in the first quarter. 
Lemoore was held to 7-of-21 shooting in the same period. 
Although Lemoore managed to find its running game in the second quarter, and 
outscored Trabuco Hills, 23-17, to cut its deficit to six (45-39), the Tigers 
couldn't handle Trabuco Hills' firepower late in the third quarter. 
After two layups by Clarence Scott and a eight-foot jumper in the key by Jones, 
Lemoore had cut the lead to 47-45 just 3 minutes into the third quarter. 
Lemoore looked even more impressive as it held the Mustangs scoreless for 2 
minutes. 
But, with 2:39 left in the period, the Mustangs had had enough. Keyed by 
Poulos, who hit two three-pointers, and reserve John Goodman (eight points from 
within the key), the Mustangs broke open a 15-2 run to take a 63-47 lead into 
the fourth quarter. 
