OUTDOORS; 
THERE'S SO MUCH TO TAKE IN; 
WHALES: IN WATERS 600 MILES SOUTH OF SAN DIEGO, KAYAKERS MARVEL AT THE SIGHT OF 
THE GIANT MAMMALS, WHO ARE INCREDIBLY TOLERANT OF THE INTRUSION. 
A short ride by skiff to . . . another world? 
Where seemingly endless dunes of sand ripple under the attack of near-constant 
winds. Where early morning animal tracks are everywhere, but lead nowhere since 
they are quickly erased by blowing sand. 
It's a world where life of a magnificent sort fills the channel. Whales, huge 
and graceful, come here by the hundreds. 
It's Magdalena Island, 600 miles south of San Diego on the Pacific side of the 
Baja California peninsula. 
Few visitors ever set foot on this island, 40 miles long and looking more like 
a moonscape than a landscape. Those who do, however, don't soon forget its 
strange and unique beauty, its isolation. 
It's a piece of land untouched by progress, remnants of age-old shipwrecks 
dotting its shores. 
Large frigate birds loom high in the sky, their long black wings and forked 
tails invoking thoughts of some prehistoric past. Long-eared coyotes roam and 
sniff about the tents of those who do come. They yip and yell eerily into the 
night. They make off with shoes, bottles or anything else left untethered 
overnight. By dawn, they are nowhere to be seen over the sandy expanse. 
Oversized pelicans dive-bomb the channel for fish, or rest in huge flocks under 
a sun that beats relentlessly upon the sandy shore. 
And in the channel, exhalations of whales echo in the night. The huge mammals 
slumber in the daytime sun, looking like monstrous floating rocks as they drift 
with the current. And so easygoing, they are downright approachable. 
At night, when the moon is full, it highlights surrealistic patterns painted by 
the wind across the powdery dunes. The dunes reflect the moonlight. Twilight 
seems endless. 
Tim Means got married here, he and his bride remaining on the island for a 
week. They now have a daughter. Her name is Magdalena. 
And now, Means is president of the San Diego- and La Paz-based Baja 
Expeditions, which offers guided trips here. He lives in La Paz, so coming here 
now is all in a day's work. 
But what would bring John Thaxton all the way from the concrete confines of New 
York? 
He and his wife Pat came for the kayaking and whale-watching, to escape the 
civilized world and to count species of birds in this part of the world. 
"We do that everywhere we go," Pat says. 
The common loon and spotted sandpiper can be seen here, as can the royal tern 
and swallow-tailed kite. Godwits, gulls and grebes are abundant. Sanderlings 
and larks abound. Then there are the loggerhead shrike, the white ibis, the 
majestic osprey . . . the list goes on. 
How about that persistent peregrine falcon, chasing down the acrobatic tern 
over the middle of the channel in a dogfight just above water that lasted 
nearly a minute? 
And how could Thaxton have expected to end up carrying back to camp a nearly 
starved, sick young sea lion that had crawled high atop a blistering dune to 
die? He helped to nurse it back into a playful pup by hand-feeding it raw fish. 
Lee Rodencal and Tom Borrowman left one desert for another. But they wouldn't 
have been touching any whales in Palm Springs. 
And here, people can touch whales. Sometimes, even when they don't mean to. The 
panga boat in which Cathleen Griffin of Portland, Me., was riding accidentally 
bumped one. 
"I'm all right, are you all right . . . is everybody all right?" she asked 
after the encounter. 
Apparently so. 
Said Dave Beckwith of Boulder, Colo.: "We hit the whale. He dove, and then came 
up alongside the boat and circled around, as if to check to see if we were all 
right. He came up along the boat and stayed there and we touched it. It was 
incredible." 
Karen Peterson, also from the mountains of Boulder, said she couldn't have 
found a better place to forget about the computer business back home. 
She kayaked across the channel, gliding quietly past several 40-ton whales, 
then into the miles of tidal estuaries that mark the peninsula's shore, 
disappearing amid the thick-growing mangroves. 
A great blue heron, standing tall in the mud-flats created by the ebbing tide, 
watched her slide past. 
Loni Levy and Deborah Vogl followed basically the same route as the whales in 
coming here from their law offices in Alaska. 
At least they didn't have to worry about getting tangled up in gill nets off 
the Southern California coast. 
It is the migratory pattern of the California gray whale that is basically 
responsible for this gathering of stateside travelers, brought here as part of 
a package put together by Chuck and Judy Nichols of Nichols Expeditions of 
Moab, Utah, which works in conjunction with Baja Expeditions. 
The narrow channel between Magdalena Island and the peninsula is just one of 
several areas along the Baja coast that is frequented by gray whales, which 
travel the 6,000 miles from Alaska each year to give birth to and nurse their 
calves in Baja's warm-water lagoons. 
They play and cavort for three months, the females fattening their young with 
milk until they are fit to survive the trip north, and the icy Bering Sea. 
The channel between Magdalena Island and the peninsula is ideal for travel by 
kayak, and for close encounters with the whales, because it is narrow -- about 
a mile wide at its widest -- and generally calm. 
The whales can be seen jumping, their vast bulk causing splashes visible for 
miles. They also poke their bodies up out of the water, as if standing on their 
tails. They look around, then slip quietly back under. 
Kayakers are advised to make noise when approaching a whale, to alert the giant 
mammal of their presence. The whales generally keep their distance. 
"Probably the most striking thing down here is that these animals are so 
incredibly tolerant of our intrusion," said Means' partner Kent Madin, a former 
guide and now vice president of Baja Expeditions. "If ever they wanted to do 
anybody any harm, they could. They have plenty of opportunity. And yet they 
consistently avoid any confrontation with humans." 
Perhaps there is reason. 
The most popular lagoon, 200 miles north of here, is the famous Scammon's, 
named after Capt. Charles Scammon, who discovered the entrance to the lagoon in 
the 1850s and, going after the valuable whale oil, turned it into a 
slaughterhouse. 
The whales were also hunted at San Ignacio Lagoon, about 100 miles south of 
Scammon's by land, and even in these narrow waterways that wind through 
Magdalena Bay. 
Between 1846 and 1874, whalers, using harpoons tipped with gunpowder charges, 
slaughtered about 10,000 whales in this 150-mile long bay alone. 
The gray whale was said to have dwindled to just a few hundred in the late 
1930s, before conservation efforts took hold. They have since come back in a 
big way, now numbering about 20,000. 
An estimated 180 to 200 enter this channel each year at the Boca de la Soledad, 
its mouth, and most remain for about three months, providing ample opportunity 
for observation. Trips are booked through Baja Expeditions, the only company 
with legitimate permits to do so, according to Madin. 
"It's pretty much a nursery," Madin says of the channel during the winter 
months. "That's the main guess, that they come to a given lagoon and stay in 
that lagoon." 
Said Judy Nichols, whose company got its start down here after she had trained 
with Madin: 'It's the only place I know of where you can kayak in an area where 
you're so close to the California gray whale. You can kayak off the coast of 
Santa Barbara and San Diego (during the whales' migration) but you're not 
really that close to the whales. But here, where you have a calm channel like 
this . . ." 
Here, it is almost impossible to look out on the water and not see any whales. 
Every detail is planned for a trip billed by the Nicholses as "a time of 
discovery and tranquility surrounded by the unique environment of Magdalena 
Bay." 
It's camping in style, with meals of chicken and fish and steak prepared by the 
Mexican guides. Cakes are made from scratch and baked over hot coals in the 
sand. Baggage is transported by panga, freeing the campers to kayak from 
campsite to campsite. 
It's a world so isolated that all of the animals seem less apprehensive than 
similar species elsewhere. Pelicans seem reluctant to fly away when people 
approach. 
Dolphins appear even less afraid of mankind. 
Madin recalled that on another trip, one camper customarily took a two-mile run 
at dawn along the waterline. 
"After he had started out running, a dolphin came along and swam next to him 
and paced him for the whole run," Madin said. "This dolphin was five or six 
feet away the whole way. When the runner got to the end of his run he turned 
around and came back, and the dolphin turned around and followed him. And it 
happened two mornings in a row." 
Dolphins, apparently curious, occasionally show within five or six feet of camp 
during the night. Campers can hear them breathe, and see their reflecting eyes 
focused on shore. They remain for several minutes, then move on. 
And the sea lion that John Thaxton carried back to camp? It crawled right into 
Deborah Vogl's lap, over the outstretched bodies of the other campers. 
As for the whales, just gaze out over the water, or hop aboard one of the 
pangas and you can learn firsthand of their peaceful nature. 
Guides Angel Viscaino and Juan Jesus Lucero motor out to the middle of the 
channel, and into the path of a mother whale and her calf. 
The whales continue on their course, apparently unafraid. They swim up 
alongside the boat's rail, the mother intent on keeping herself and the baby at 
what she feels is a safe distance -- a few feet. She spouts a cloud of mist 
that floats into the passengers' faces. 
They marvel, at this encounter, at the size of the mother whale and the 
proximity at which it is being viewed. They comment that the whales' skin is 
not pretty, but rather pocked by barnacles and marine growth. They remark on 
the care with which the whale treats its calf. 
Eventually, the mother loses any fear it might have had and begins to roll 
lazily about, well within the reach of the passengers, its calf by its side. 
Viscaino, at the boat's stern, reaches down and touches the baby, then grins 
from ear to ear, raising his hand victoriously. 
He touches it a second time and lets out a hearty laugh. Several of the 
passengers then reach over the rail and begin to pet the baby whale. It rolls 
over, perhaps appreciative of the affection, its eye staring at the smiling 
passengers. This goes on for nearly two hours before the setting sun transforms 
the horizon into a display of burning red. 
Cost of this seven-day trip is $799, not including air fare, but including two 
nights -- the first and last -- in a La Paz hotel. 
A chartered bus travels north from La Paz for four hours on Highway 1, 
affording a panoramic view of the Baja desert. Falcons and hawks fly over the 
cardon cactus and cirio trees that stand tall and thick under the blazing sun. 
Small rancheros come and go until the traffic lights of Ciudad Constitucion, 
Baja California Sur's second-most populated city, bring the bus to a stop. 
After lunch in the parking lot of a modern supermarket, it's back on the road. 
A left turn off the main highway and the farms of the Magdalena Plain, 
otherwise known as the Santo Domingo Valley, come into view. 
This arid region has been developed as an agricultural center recently, thanks 
to the tapping of water that had been trapped for centuries deep beneath the 
earth's surface. Cotton, wheat, alfalfa and vegetables are grown here and 
shipped to the Mexican mainland. 
The end of the road is the water's edge. The townspeople gather as the bus is 
unloaded. They watch as the passengers step off and sink deep into the soggy 
beach. 
As the campers board the pangas, and disappear across the channel, they leave 
behind the world they have always known, entering one they will never forget. 
