BLUSTER ON DRUGS, BUT THAT'S NO SOLUTION 
A nurse I've known for 22 years is a drug dealer. Her main customer is an 
elderly widow next door. Once a week the nurse crosses the walkway to visit the 
widow. She finds a vein and injects the drug. 
It's a B-12 shot. The widow feels relief. She's fine for a week. Then another 
shot. 
To categorize the nurse as a drug dealer is jarring perhaps. But accurate. That 
she deals in a legal drug separates her in obvious ways from those who sell, 
buy or use illegal drugs. The results, in somewhat less than obvious ways, are 
similar. Consumption of drugs -- legal or illegal -- is reducible to two 
reasons: relief of pain or the giving of pleasure. Aspirin reduces one kind of 
pain, crack another. A shot of beer provides one kind of buzz, a snort of 
heroin another. 
In President Bush's new drug war, which includes William Bennett as "commanding 
general," most of the talk is on cleaning up the battle-zone wreckage. Bennett 
wants more jail cells for convicted drug pushers. George Bush wants the death 
penalty for certain drug crimes. Rep. Walter E.Fauntroy, the District of 
Columbia Democrat who represents the nation's new murder capital in Congress, 
is offering a bill to hire and train more police officers. Others are calling 
for the National Guard to patrol the streets of Washington. The city, says 
Bennett, is to be a "test case" of curative measures. 
More cops, more jails, more death-row executions. Those are reactions, not 
solutions. They are weak interventions, not strong preventions. Epidemiology -- 
the control of epidemics -- demands that causes be dealt with, not only 
effects. Yet in the current drug epidemic, a disproportionate amount of talk -- 
bluster, really -- is being heaped on the results of illegal drug dealing. 
Washington One -- the city of issues where Presidents, drug czars and 
congresses come and go -- is telling Washington Two -- the black neighborhoods 
of homicides and drug wars -- that it is about to move in with a show of force. 
Why are few officials willing to raise questions about the pain that pushes 
high-school dropouts in Washington's black neighborhoods to seek relief in 
drugs? Why no questions about enhancing the normal pleasures of life -- quality 
schools, fair-paying jobs, access to recreation -- so that the abnormal 
pleasures of addictive drugs will be less appealing. 
The pain and the absence of pleasurable living being felt now in Washington Two 
-- and in Detroit Two or New York Two or in any of the nation's inner-city 
second cities -- are peaks of problems. The ascent to a crisis began in a 
gradual series of political decisions of governments that had the effect of 
inflicting pain on citizens. 
Pain is shown when the need for emergency food assistance rises an average of 
18% in 24 cities as it did in 1987. Pain is caused when the government decides 
to tolerate an unemployment rate for black teen-agers of 40%. 
How is the pain of poverty relieved? Drugs, for many. Current poverty is the 
result of policy decisions made five, 10 and 20 years ago. The Reagan years, 
which saw an increase in both the number of poor and the number of 
millionaires, furthered the conditions of misery that have now pushed 
Washington One into frenzies of action. 
If crack, cocaine and the other drugs are pain killers, which they are, why not 
deal aggressively with the causes of the pain? Where is the low-income-housing 
czar? Or the black teen-ager unemployment czar? Or the homelessness czar? 
Poor people keep asking for housing, jobs and education. The requests are 
denied. When enough of the poor turn on each other as drug pushers or 
murderers, and it happens within miles of the Capitol or White House, an alarm 
of dismay sounds. 
There is little talk in Washington of righting old wrongs or removing known 
pains. A thirst is here for perpetuating them. 
