POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
ICE CUBE KEEPS COOL, CHILLS CLASH 
Rap music, already widely linked in the public mind to gang violence, came 
within a heartbeat of another black mark Thursday night when a fight broke out 
near the stage during N.W.A.'s concert at the Celebrity Theatre in Anaheim. 
It was an especially delicate moment because N.W.A. is the hot new Los 
Angeles-area group whose sometimes X-rated tales about gang violence are 
already drawing criticisms from those who feel the records glorify gang 
behavior. 
As part of the regular precaution for rap shows at the 2,500-seat theater, 
security guards held hand metal detection devices against everyone who entered 
the building and made women open their purses. 
Inside, the atmosphere was calm as the three opening acts served up rap with 
varying degrees of effectiveness. 
But the intensity level increased dramatically when N.W.A. walked on stage 
shortly after 9:30 and soon went into "Gangsta, Gangsta" and "---- tha Police," 
two of the most provocative numbers on the quintet's "Straight Outta Compton" 
album. 
Midway through the equally graphic "Dopeman," the fight broke out and a chill 
of tension swept the hall. Ice Cube, one of the principal N.W.A. writers and 
rappers, saw the flurry of activity and was faced with a challenge. Would he 
maintain the group's "neutrality" stance or simply ignore what was going on to 
appear cool? 
In a brave and revealing moment, Ice Cube, 19, stopped the song and used the 
microphone to try to combat the potential flare-up. Speaking in the same angry 
tone as the song, he shouted: "This ain't (the movie) 'Colors'. . . . You 
didn't come to see a fight, you came to see a concert.' " 
With the help of security guards, order was quickly restored, although about 40 
males later spilled outside, causing nearby Anaheim police to dispatch a dozen 
squad cars. The youths then raced away; no arrests were made. 
Inside the theater the concert continued uneventfully. Ice-T, who helped 
popularize the L.A. gangster rap image, was the evening's headliner, but N.W.A. 
was the more galvanizing force. For all its crudeness, the group -- which also 
includes Eazy-E, MC Ren, Dr. Dre and D. J. Yella -- exhibits a sense of 
artistic spirit and vision. 
