CITIES CALLED KEY TO NEW O.C. GROWTH PLAN 
The Orange County Board of Supervisors unanimously adopted a growth-management 
plan Tuesday, but county officials said its effectiveness depends on cities 
imposing similar mandates to ensure that development does not outpace needed 
improvements in roads and other public facilities. 
And some officials raised the specter of holding back revenues from a proposed 
sales tax increase for transportation to any city that would not cooperate to 
control growth. 
"It is vital that cities in the county follow suit to strengthen our work on 
the county level and make this document (the county's plan) really work," said 
Supervisor Harriett M. Wieder, who last year appointed the 11-member citizens' 
panel that drafted the county's growth-management strategy. 
"It doesn't take a brilliant person to figure out that countywide solutions 
need countywide participation," former Supervisor Bruce Nestande, who chaired 
the citizens' committee, told the board Tuesday. "We don't have that right 
now." 
Jams to Affect Other Areas 
He said all cities must adopt such a plan or traffic that jams one community 
will back up into an adjacent area. 
The growth-management plan, adopted on a 4-0 vote, divides the county's 
unincorporated areas into five zones that will be closely monitored to ensure 
that new development does not outpace needed improvements in roads, libraries, 
flood control, and police and fire protection. Developers will be required to 
pay for needed public facilities before their commercial and residential 
projects are completed. 
The plan comes in the wake of last June's $2-million election battle over 
Measure A, the slow-growth ballot initiative rejected by voters, 56% to 44%. 
But the plan does not apply to the county's 28 cities. 
The only vehicle on the political horizon for persuading cities to cooperate 
with the county's growth-management strategy is the threat to deny 
county-controlled traffic improvement funds to the cities, county and building 
industry officials said. 
A proposal by a committee of the League of Cities' Orange County chapter calls 
for withholding revenue from a planned countywide sales tax increase from any 
city that failed to adopt specific growth-management policies, including strict 
traffic-flow standards at intersections. 
The committee is led by Santa Ana Mayor Daniel H. Young and Huntington Beach 
City Councilman John Erskine, who also is executive director of the Orange 
County Building Industry Assn., a politically influential group of builders and 
developers who generally favor adoption of a local sales tax to fund new 
highways. 
Nestande said the best way to get the cities to follow the county's lead is to 
tie revenues from the proposed half-cent sales tax to approval of 
growth-management plans. 
Such a move, Nestande said, would be a "test for those who really want good 
growth management in this county and really want to do away with the 
inconveniences and congestion they deplore. If they want it, they'll support 
this half-cent measure." 
Nestande was referring in part to slow-growth advocates who in June, 1984, led 
the successful effort to defeat a 1-cent countywide sales tax increase intended 
to help fund transportation projects, and partly to cities that have talked 
about growth management but have done little about it. 
As an example, Nestande cited Irvine, which has several badly congested 
intersections that could back traffic up into adjacent unincorporated areas if 
Irvine fails to adopt growth-management strategy consistent with the county's 
effort. 
Nestande has advocated placing a sales tax before voters as often as necessary 
until it passes. 
The Orange County Transportation Commission has developed a 20-year, 
$11.6-billion spending plan based on a state law that requires such a plan 
before submitting a sales tax measure to the voters. 
The spending plan focuses on completion of the massive Santa Ana 
Freeway-widening project, new car-pool lanes on existing freeways, and the 
initiation of new commuter rail services between Riverside and Irvine and 
between Los Angeles and several stops in Orange County. 
Contra Costa Plan 
The spending plan and sales tax effort are being modeled after a similar 
package approved by Contra Costa County voters last November. 
But county supervisors have not yet approved plans for a sales tax election, 
fearing a repeat of June, 1984, when county voters rejected the 1-cent sales 
tax proposal by a 2-1 margin. 
The growth-management requirements proposed for cities as part of the sales tax 
effort will not come before the League of Cities' general membership until 
April 20, and League Executive Director Bob Dunek said that some cities, such 
as Fullerton, have indicated objections. He said he has asked the cities to 
explain whatever reservations they have before the April meeting. 
"I suspect that some cities are concerned about how this will affect 
redevelopment areas, in which they're trying to attract new development," Dunek 
said. 
Both Young and Erskine were unavailable for comment Tuesday. 
Stanley T. Oftelie, executive director of the Orange County Transportation 
Commission, has indicated he will support the growth-management language 
proposed by the league's subcommittee. 
Oftelie contends that the county's approach in dealing with cities is generally 
less punitive than has been the case elsewhere. 
Los Angeles County, for example, recently adopted rules that deny 
road-improvement funds to cities that fail to synchronize traffic signals. 
"In Orange County, we give the cities some money to synchronize the signals, 
then we see if they do other things we have asked of them as well. We think our 
way is better," he said. 
But Oftelie acknowledged recently that the current policy has not prevented 
hundreds of instances in which the cities have failed to comply with the 
county's Master Plan for Arterial Highways, a document that is supposed to 
guide all road work. 
"Enforcement of the Master Plan has been in shambles for years," said Tom 
Matthews, an aide to Board of Supervisors Chairman Thomas F. Riley, who has 
persuaded some developers to pay for road work intended to fill gaps in major 
arterials in his district. 
And so part of the current debate among county officials concerns who should 
enforce the Master Plan -- Oftelie and his agency, the county Environmental 
Mangement Agency, which currently handles the task, or some new agency yet to 
be created. 
