WORLD TRAVEL WATCH: AIDS TESTING IS REQUIRED IN MORE COUNTRIES 
World Travel Watch is a monthly report designed to help you make informed 
judgments about travel throughout the world. Because conditions can change 
overnight, always make your own inquiries before you leave home. In the United 
States, contact the nearest passport agency office; abroad, check in with the 
nearest American Embassy. 
 Asia 
 -- Japan: A law permitting immigration authorities to prohibit foreigners 
carrying the AIDS virus from entering the country went into effect Feb. 17. 
The law allows officials to require AIDS tests for any traveler who fits an 
AIDS profile, loosely defined as those demonstrating homosexual or drug-related 
behavior. How authorities will determine who fits this profile remains vague. 
Instructions from Japan's Foreign Office state that this will be determined 
"from all information available at that time." Travelers suspected of carrying 
the virus will be tested, and if found to be infected, a decision will be made 
regarding entry. 
According to a Japanese consular official reading from the Foreign Office 
instructions, the testing physician will assess whether the person is likely to 
spread the disease in Japan, taking into account the person's "social behavior 
patterns in the past, giving due consideration to his business career, age, 
purpose of entry and strength of infectivity." 
There is no clear signal yet about how actively this new law is being enforced. 
 -- Nepal: Foreigners living here may now stay for a maximum of three months 
and then must spend one month outside the country before reentering with a new 
visa. 
In exceptional circumstances a four-month stay can be arranged, but the visa 
holder will not be allowed to return for either six months or a year, depending 
on the stamp issued by immigration officials on departure. 
Travelers using Katmandu as a base for trips to Tibet or India must be sure to 
request a multiple entry visa. 
 -- North Korea: Closed to U.S. citizens for the last 40 years, North Korea has 
opened its borders to Americans and is actively seeking tours. 
This development reflects an easing of tensions between North and South Korea 
and the North's awareness of the value of opening up its economy. 
 -- Tibet: All travel agencies in Tibet were recently placed under the control 
of a central Chinese government agency, which could mean that foreign tour 
operators will no longer be able to choose their local outfitters. 
Africa 
 -- Chad: Chad and Libya exchanged diplomats last October and agreed to settle 
their differences peacefully, but Chad's disputed northern region is still 
militarized and portions of it are heavily mined. 
Fighting between insurgents and government forces occurred recently in eastern 
border areas with Sudan. Travel to both of these areas is restricted. Check 
with the U.S. Embassy in N'Djamena for current conditions. 
 -- Somalia: Avoid areas along the Ethiopian border and the northern regions of 
Bari, Sanag and Togdheer because of unsettled security conditions. Register 
with the U.S. Embassy in Mogadishu on arrival. 
Persian Gulf 
 -- Oman: The Sultan of Oman has decreed that visitors shall not disturb sea 
turtles nesting on the beaches because Oman's coastline is the endangered 
species' most important Indian Ocean breeding ground. 
Mediterranean 
 -- Greece: Security has been tightened in Piraeus, Athens' port city, in an 
effort to prevent a repeat of last year's terrorist incident aboard a luxury 
cruise ship. Check-in time may be increased an hour by new procedures, so 
report to the pier as much as six hours before departure. 
Eastern Europe 
 -- Czechoslovakia: Visas are now available at four border checkpoints, three 
on the Austrian border and one on West Germany's. 
Visas cost about $30 and are good for 30 days, and can be obtained at Dolni 
Dvoriste, Hate, Petrzalka and Rozvadov. 
South America 
 -- Argentina: Buenos Aires is experiencing a power shortage that has been 
going on for months, producing nightly brownouts and shutdowns throughout the 
city. Few hotels have auxiliary generators and most have their power shut off 
for as much as six hours a day. Take a flashlight and extra batteries. 
Caribbean/Central America 
 -- Trinidad: The risk of yellow fever exists outside urban areas. A 
vaccination is not required for entry or onward travel at this time, but is 
advised. Yellow fever inoculations last 10 years. 
Southeast Asia 
 -- Burma: Another Burmese domestic aircraft crashed recently, the fourth since 
mid-1987, this time evidently the result of engine failure. Travel by land when 
possible, especially during the rainy season from May through September, when 
flying is riskier. 
Political conditions have stabilized and the country is again open for tourism, 
but individual travel is not permitted. All travelers to Burma must make 
arrangements through Tourist Burma, the state tourist agency. 
Health Note 
 -- AIDS testing: Thirty-nine countries in addition to the United States have 
some kind of AIDS testing requirements for arriving foreigners, including 
students, those requesting work permits and tourists planning to stay longer 
than a specified time, usually not less than a month and often as long as three 
to six months. (In the case of Iraq, all foreigners must report to a doctor for 
an AIDS test within five days of arrival, and certification of an AIDS test in 
the United States is not valid.) If you plan a lengthy stay in a country, check 
with its consular or embassy officials for testing requirements before you go. 
