NO INTENT TO DECEIVE, SAY APPLE GROWERS 
Growers who supplied Alar-treated apples to a Southern California grocery chain 
said Thursday they did not knowingly deceive the supermarket into believing the 
fruit was free of the chemical. 
On Wednesday, Hughes Market decided to test its apples for Alar after a 
laboratory examination for The Times found traces of the potentially hazardous 
chemical in some Hughes apples. The store could not determine the growers who 
supplied the apples tested by The Times, so Hughes tested apples from its 
warehouse. 
Alar, the trade name for daminozide, was detected in three of seven samples 
tested by Hughes, and the store announced it would return those apples to the 
growers and continue testing on a regular basis. 
Relied on Certification 
Previously, supermarket executives said, they had relied on letters from 
growers certifying that no Alar was used on their apples. 
But Tom Hanses, a partner in a company Hughes identified as supplying some of 
the suspect apples, said Thursday he was "not aware" that his company had sent 
Hughes a letter certifying that Alar had not been used. The Hughes test found 
Alar residues of 1.2 parts per million on Hanses' apples. The allowable level 
set by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is 20 p.p.m. 
"We have not issued a letter to them, to my knowledge, that all of our apples 
are Alar-free," said Hanses, a partner in Washington Fruit &amp; Produce Co. of 
Washington state. "We wouldn't be able to do that because not all of our apples 
are Alar-free, although they are under the EPA tolerance standard. There is 
absolutely nothing wrong with those apples." 
On Thursday, Roger Schroeder, director of produce for Hughes Market, said that 
"to the best of my recollection" the store had received a letter from the 
Washington company certifying that Alar had not been used. However, he said, he 
could not immediately find it. 
Hanses, whose company ships under the "Independent" label, said some of his 
apples were treated with Alar this year, but that others were not. 
"We will not be using Alar in the future unless the attitude changes of the 
press -- although we should use it," Hanses said. "It is the best thing for 
apples. It will give the consumer a much better apple at no risk to his 
health." 
Alar is used to improve the appearance and extend the shelf life of apples. 
Without it, some growers contend, many apples will lose their crispness before 
reaching consumers. The EPA believes there will be 4.5 additional cancer cases 
for every 100,000 people who consume apples with average Alar residue over 
their lifetime. The agency is expected to ban the chemical next year. 
Hughes said its tests also showed that some apples sold under the "Marley" 
label had residues of 3.6 p.p.m. Bill Gammie, president of Jack Frost and 
Marley Orchards in Washington state, said his company wrote a letter to Hughes 
saying: "It is our sincerest intent to comply with your request to make every 
effort to ship you food that has not been treated with the chemical daminozide 
during the past growing season." 
An Experiment 
Gammie said he used Alar on five of his 3,500 acres in 1988 as an experiment to 
determine the chemical's benefit. The apples that were treated with the 
chemical were sent to market in September, Gammie said, and none of his apples 
have since been treated or will be in the future. 
He could offer no explanation for Hughes' finding, except that it was possibly 
an error. Schroeder of Hughes said the store did not run second tests to 
confirm the positive findings. "It might behoove us to run second tests on this 
thing," he said. Schroeder also said that it is "feasible" but not probable 
that the treated apples shipped in September could have been in storage until 
now. 
The third batch of apples found by Hughes to have traces of Alar came from 
Evans Fruit Co. in Washington and are sold under the label "Top Red." The 
company owns orchards and also packs and ships for other growers. Some of the 
"Top Red" apples had a reading of 2.5 p.p.m. 
"We have about 35 or 40 growers," said Jeannette Evans, who owns the business 
with her husband. "They tell us they do not have Alar on them. . . . We don't 
know what we are going to do at this point." 
Lucky Stores Inc., meanwhile, announced Thursday it will soon begin testing its 
apples for Alar on a random basis to verify claims by growers that no Alar is 
used. Two samples of Lucky apples tested by The Times also were found to 
contain Alar residues. 
