PAY ISSUE EXODUS?; 
WHY A JUDGE MAY LEAVE THE BENCH 
Something snapped inside Judge Jim R. Carrigan after Congress rejected a 50% 
pay raise for the judiciary and other top federal officeholders. 
During nearly 10 years on the federal bench, Carrigan, 59, a former trial 
lawyer who earned more than $300,000 annually at the peak of his career in 
private practice, had learned to accept the financial sacrifices of government 
service. 
He put six children through college and graduate school by gradually selling 
off almost all the investments he had made before his appointment to the bench 
in 1979. Learning to do without many of the luxuries he once enjoyed, he even 
traded in his Porsche for a Subaru. 
Enjoys Prestige 
Carrigan made these sacrifices gladly because he enjoyed the prestige and the 
intellectual challenge that comes from being a federal judge and because -- in 
the words of one of his former law partners -- he was "imbued with the desire 
for public service." 
But after the long-expected pay raise was rejected by Congress as part of its 
decision to deny itself a 50% raise on Feb. 7, Carrigan came to the conclusion 
that the intangible rewards of sitting on the federal bench were no longer 
enough to compensate for the prospect of going at least another four years 
without an increase in his $89,500-a-year salary. 
"I've decided I should leave the bench," Carrigan confided in an interview in 
his chambers in which he detailed his personal finances. "I owe it to my family 
to leave . . . . If our pay had gone to $135,000, I would have stayed." 
Many Ponder Resigning 
Carrigan, while more outspoken than most judges, is by no means the only person 
on the federal bench who is thought to be on the verge of resigning as a result 
of being denied a pay raise. In fact, the American Bar Assn. estimates that 
one-fourth of all the nation's more than 1,000 federal judges may be stepping 
down earlier than originally planned, causing an unprecedented mass exodus that 
could forever alter the character of the federal judiciary. 
"Failure to reverse the trend of resignations could cause the federal judiciary 
to be viewed as merely a stepping stone to higher paying jobs," warned U.S. 
District Judge Robert H. Hall, president of the Federal Judges Assn. 
No less a figure than Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, breaking his 
customary silence on issues of public policy, warned last Wednesday that the 
salary gap between judges and lawyers "poses the most serious threat to the 
future of the judiciary and its continued operations that I have observed 
during my lifetime." 
Until recently, a federal judgeship was viewed as a lifetime occupation -- a 
juicy political plum that promised social status, independence and financial 
security all the way to the grave. 
Some financial watchdogs argue that the advantages of the federal bench remain 
so substantial that today's salary level is ample. David L. Keating, vice 
president of the National Taxpayers Union, which fought the congressional pay 
raise, says that judges should be willing to sacrifice to help trim the 
deficit. 
More than that, Keating is not convinced that many judges are dissatisfied with 
their salaries. "Obviously, it's a job that many of the judges like doing, or 
more of them would be quitting," Keating said. "They are not leaving in 
droves." 
But as Carrigan's case suggests, an exodus may be beginning. At a time when 
most leading law firms offer first-year hires considerably more than $89,500, a 
federal judicial appointment is beginning to lose some of its luster. 
Damage to Standards Feared 
And if judges start resigning in large numbers before their retirement, 
creating a so-called "revolving door" on the federal bench, legal experts fear 
it would jeopardize the historical independence and high ethical standards of 
the judiciary. 
Even before the pay raise was rejected, there were strong indications that the 
deteriorating salary levels -- combined with an enormous increase in the 
workload of the courts -- already were undermining the lifetime commitment of 
judicial appointees. 
Carrigan, like many of his colleagues, already was feeling disillusioned by 
what for him has become a 60- to 70-hour-a-week job with a big and complex 
workload, considerable stress and mind-numbing isolation from other people, 
including old friends who are lawyers. 
"Nobody says thank you and all you get are complaints and death threats," he 
said. "If you don't have a sense of humor, you're dead." 
As a result, the disappointment caused by Congress' surprise rejection of the 
50% pay raise has only succeeded in exacerbating a pervasive feeling of unrest 
that already was growing among judges serving on the federal bench. 
A number of federal judges interviewed by The Times, almost all of whom 
declined to be identified, admitted that their families were eager for the 50% 
raise and already had made plans for spending it when it was suddenly killed by 
Congress. Their initial shock quickly turned to anger, mostly directed at 
Congress. 
"Nobody gives a damn," complained Carrigan, one of the few judges who was 
willing to be quoted by name. "Congress has been jerking us around for years." 
For Carrigan, as for many other judges, the lost pay raise was as much a blow 
to his ego as it was to his pocketbook. 
"There's an insult aspect to this," he said. "It's a lack of appreciation. You 
are denigrated by being told that you are not worth more than a beginning 
lawyer." 
U.S. District Judge Frank M. Coffin, who heads the Judicial Conference's 
committee on the judiciary, said that Carrigan's reaction to the defeated pay 
raise is typical of many judges. "They just feel demeaned, a tremendous sense 
of rejection," he said. 
Carrigan knows firsthand about the growing disparity between his salary and the 
pay earned by competent lawyers in private practice. He has watched a 
succession of young law clerks leave after putting in a year of service in the 
federal courthouse in Denver to earn as much as $103,000 in their first year. 
Moreover, he himself recently turned down a job offer of more than $250,000 as 
house counsel for a major corporation. 
According to statistics gathered by the Federal Judges Assn., experienced 
partners in law firms across the country now earn an average of $158,000 a year 
and the median rises to $250,000 for partners in larger firms. The average 
annual salary for partners with eight years' experience in Denver is $140,000. 
Even most college law professors and some state-level judges now earn 
considerably more than federal judges. 
Carrigan argues that Congress has violated "the spirit of the Constitution" by 
allowing judicial salaries to be seriously eroded by inflation over the last 
two decades. The Constitution prohibits the legislative branch from cutting the 
pay of judges. 
In recommending the 50% pay raise that was killed by Congress, both President 
Bush and former President Ronald Reagan noted that inflation has outstripped 
raises for judges and other top federal officeholders by 223% in 20 years. They 
placed the blame on Congress' failure to enact regular cost-of-living 
increases. 
The ABA's survey of judges shows that Carrigan is fairly representative of 
those federal jurists who have expressed the desire to shorten their tenure on 
the bench because of low pay and overwork. Like Carrigan, the bulk of them are 
in their late 50s or early 60s and have served between 5 and 12 years as 
judges. While these are believed to be the most productive judges in the 
system, they also have the best opportunities in the private sector. 
Bemoans His Choice 
Carrigan, a gentle, good-humored man with a keen mind and a reputation for 
fairness in the courtroom, said he never would have sought a judgeship if he 
had known that he was not going to receive annual cost-of-living raises. "I 
would never become a judge today -- absolutely not," he said. 
While inflation has eroded his pay, he said, Congress over the last 10 years 
has heaped on additional deductions that have further reduced the take-home 
salaries of judges. 
For example, Carrigan noted, he and the others must now contribute to Social 
Security, even though federal judges are not eligible to receive benefits when 
they retire. In addition, judges, like others with relatively high incomes, no 
longer can make tax-free contributions to individual retirement accounts -- a 
change he takes personally, attributing it to "pure vindictiveness" on the part 
of Congress. 
Carrigan, who opened his personal financial records to The Times in an effort 
to dramatize the financial plight of federal judges, noted that while his 
government salary exceeded $87,000 in 1987, he took home less than $45,000 
after deductions. The deductions that year were $20,077.36 in federal taxes, 
$3,603.20 for state taxes, $3,131.70 for Social Security, $4,544.04 for health 
insurance, $5,869.92 for term life insurance and $4,475.04 for an annuity that 
would provide his wife with 25% of his salary after his death. 
Opts for Cheaper Insurance 
In 1988, when his gross pay rose to $89,500, Carrigan canceled his life 
insurance and opted for a cheaper health insurance plan. 
He also has been economizing by canceling memberships in such organizations as 
the Rotary, the American Law Institute, the American Bar Assn. Fellows and 
other such groups he had joined for social as well as intellectual stimulation. 
Just last month, in fact, he dropped out of a prestigious discussion group 
known as the Colorado Executive Forum, that cost him $800 every six months -- a 
luxury he decided he could no longer afford. 
In private practice, he noted, such fees are paid by law firms. 
Carrigan said he was forced to limit his paycheck deductions because most of 
his investments -- some stocks and about $150,000 in municipal bonds -- already 
have been liquidated to pay college tuition for his six children, the youngest 
of whom is a junior at the University of Notre Dame. He also sold off a 
half-interest in the family's Rocky Mountain retreat to raise money for tuition 
and he recently refinanced his home in nearby Boulder -- only months before the 
original mortgage would have been paid off -- to make renovations that his wife 
wanted. 
In fact, the only substantial personal fund that Carrigan has not drained 
during his years on the federal bench is his profit-sharing accrued while he 
was in private practice before he was appointed to the bench. "If I spend 
that," he remarked, "I'll have nothing left." 
Although Carrigan acknowledges that his salary would be the envy of many 
Americans -- even after all the deductions -- he believes that without a big 
pay increase the only lawyers who agree to serve as judges in the future will 
be those who are independently wealthy. 
"While it's a very great honor to serve on this court, it's an honor that the 
founding fathers didn't think you ought to have to purchase," Carrigan said. 
"In a sense, every competent lawyer who serves is paying to be a federal 
judge." 
Kenneth N. Kripke, a Denver attorney and one of Carrigan's former law partners, 
predicts that his old friend will be able to command whatever salary he wants 
if he decides to leave the bench and return to private practice. 
"Jim is a very, very talented person -- nothing short of a genius," Kripke 
said. "There would be many, many law firms that would want him -- probably at 
his own price." 
Teaching vs. Law Firm 
As for Carrigan, he appears to be torn between two possible alternatives -- 
teaching at a law school or opening a law firm with his son and son-in-law. 
Although he enjoys the stimulation of teaching, he adds: "I'd love to leave 
behind a law firm to my children." 
He said that he has been contacted by one law school and two national law firms 
interested in hiring him after he resigns. 
In addition, he has even toyed with the idea of seeking the Democratic 
nomination to replace Sen. William L. Armstrong (R-Colo.), who recently 
announced plans to step down at the end of his current term next year. 
While money plays a big role in Carrigan's decision-making, he indicated that 
after a decade on the bench he is also longing for more rewarding work than his 
current job provides and the kind of close contact with people that he got as a 
trial lawyer. 
"This is a standoffish job," he observed. "I miss the people contact, the sense 
that you are helping people at a time of crisis. People knock lawyers, but when 
they get into trouble, they don't call bureaucrats. It's deeply satisfying." 
The isolation required of judges was particularly troubling for Carrigan not 
long ago when one of his former law partners suffered a heart attack. Carrigan 
could not go to visit his old friend in the hospital because he was also 
sitting in judgment of a case involving the ailing man. Ever since, he said, 
"I've felt guilty." 
Moreover, Carrigan is so overwhelmed by his current workload -- a heavy docket 
of routine trials such as drug cases combined with a number of highly complex 
legal matters, including a $5-billion hazardous waste cleanup case that is 
scheduled to go to trial soon -- that he fears he is no longer doing the kind 
of legal work of which he can be proud. 
"There's a lot of frustration in having so much to do that you can't do it with 
excellence," he said. "It's impossible to do more than a fair job. It's hard 
for me to be the one person in the courtroom who knows the least about a case. 
I don't think this job was intended to be done in haste." 
Carrigan's wife, Beverly, also thinks that he would be happier if he resigned 
from the bench. "I think my husband is a very good judge," she said, "but the 
way he is talking about the job, there isn't much satisfaction anymore . . . . 
I hate to have him work so hard at age 60. 
Small Things Mean a Lot 
Beverly Carrigan said she feels some bitterness -- even a little petty, 
sometimes -- when she and her husband go out with old friends who enjoy the big 
incomes of lawyers in private practice. The feeling overwhelms her most when 
one of her friends shows up in a new fur coat or when -- as usually happens -- 
their friends offer to pick up the check at a restaurant. 
Although Mrs. Carrigan occasionally has considered going back to social work, 
which she did before she was married, she noted that it is a low-paying 
occupation that would do little to supplement their income. Furthermore, she 
said: "I'm a bride of the '50s and I like the traditional things -- taking care 
of the house, the kids." 
As Carrigan contemplates leaving the bench, nevertheless, he is torn by doubts 
-- a fear that his resignation would add to the workload of his colleagues on 
the court as well as a sense that as a judge he is doing some good for his 
country. 
"I don't like the idea of leaving," he said. "It's not all money. It's a sense 
of public service too. You have a sense of justice. You hate to just walk away 
after you've committed so much of your life to the justice system." 
