SPARKING HIGHLAND PARK'S RENAISSANCE 
Diane Alexander loved the newspaper review she read about a Russian 
delicatessen in West Hollywood, so she wrote a letter inviting its owner to 
move his operation to Highland Park. 
"He wanted to expand, and he was very interested in Highland Park," said 
Alexander. 
But the owner decided he was not willing to sell his store to make the move. 
Undaunted, she went looking for another business to invite. And another. 
Alexander is part of a small but dedicated group of three Highland Park 
professionals that wants to revitalize the community from the inside out, 
hoping to bring in new businesses and spark a renaissance in the local arts 
community. 
A former member of the Highland Park Chamber of Commerce, Alexander wants to 
upgrade the city's commercial areas. Her colleague, Hendrik Stooker, is senior 
curator of the Occidental College art department, and wants to keep the 
community's artistic heritage alive. Completing the trio is Matt Marchand, a 
marketing director who has become the editor of the group's newsletter. 
Five months ago, they established the Arroyo Arts Collective to attract local 
artists and involve them in the process of changing the city. Their aims are 
very broad. On a practical level, the group wants to upgrade the shopping 
district and restore the city's older homes. It also hopes to attract more 
working artists to the city to make the city into a prominent arts colony. 
But they're finding that it is difficult to be a grass-roots catalyst for urban 
redesign. 
"We're taking what we have that is positive and trying to expand for a better 
community, not waiting for it to happen to us, but making it happen for 
ourselves," Alexander said. "It is building a community from within, building 
on our strengths." 
Alexander's first target has been Figueroa Street, the city's main business 
corridor. Old homes and churches, side by side with discount shops and family 
eateries, line the four-lane street between York Boulevard and Avenue 50. But 
the discount stores are the prime focus for Alexander. 
"There is just a profusion of $3 dress shops up and down the avenue," she said. 
"We were tired of listening to people complain, 'We have to go to Pasadena to 
buy anything.' We just got together to see what we could do." 
Alexander decided the best way to go about changing Figueroa Street would be to 
try to attract a different mix of businesses from other cities. 
"We are keeping track of storefronts as they become available, and contacting 
businesses that seem appropriate to Highland Park," she said. So far, none has 
come as a direct response to her invitations, but Alexander said she is still 
trying. 
"I would love to see this become a restaurant row of international cuisine," 
she said. "Once we have that as a base, then other businesses can come in and 
survive." 
"Coffeehouses," said Alexander. "That is one of the first things we need." She 
would also like to attract a more sophisticated motion picture theater to 
replace a local one which she said features "slasher" films. 
Highland Park is a sprawling suburb, nestled between South Pasadena and Eagle 
Rock, about five miles from the Los Angeles Civic Center. A guild of artisans 
flourished there at the turn of the century and vestiges of that community can 
still be seen in the stained-glass makers of the Judson Studios. Today the 
neighborhoods are a collection of Victorian homes, modest Craftsman houses and 
a few apartment buildings. 
"The nice thing about Highland Park is that it is like an urban village, just 
five minutes from downtown," said Alexander. "You walk down the street and you 
bump into friends." 
Unfortunately, many people outside the area have a "totally wrong image" of 
Highland Park as a dangerous place, according to Stooker, who worked with 
Alexander to establish the collective. Stooker said the criminal element in 
Highland Park is minor, "but it gets a lot of publicity." He said he finds the 
image undeserved. 
Stooker earned a degree in arts education from an art academy in the 
Netherlands and has done graduate work in art history at UCLA. Prior to his 
arrival at Occidental he worked at an art gallery in Beverly Hills and nursed a 
struggling gallery in Highland Park. 
He became aware of Alexander's efforts to attract new businesses to the area 
and decided they might attract working artists too. 
"There are hundreds of professionals in the arts living and working in this 
area," said Stooker. As more artists move into Highland Park it will reflect 
positively on the community, he said. 
For Stooker, an important part of the collective's work is making residents 
aware of vintage homes in the area. "It's a historic neighborhood," he said. 
Another goal of the Arroyo Arts Collective is to find people who are interested 
in the arts and who will invest in the Highland Park community. The members 
want to attract potential home buyers, tell them about the local history, then 
persuade them to refurbish their homes. 
"Our main effort is communication; searching out and finding people," said 
Marchand. In just five months the mailing list for their newsletter has grown 
to more than 300 names, he said. "We just want to prove that there is a vital 
arts environment in the Highland Park area." 
Marchand handles project development for Photo Ventures, a publishing company. 
For the last two years he has worked with photographer William Reagh to produce 
a calendar documenting urban redevelopment in the Bunker Hill section of Los 
Angeles. Reagh's before and after photographs span five decades of 
architectural construction downtown. 
Marchand said Highland Park needs creative people who can renovate existing 
structures and design new ones. 
"The community is really ripe for it now," he said. "Highland Park really needs 
the talents of innovative architects to save it." 
With the group's newsletter, Marchand is able to spotlight local examples of 
creative housing design. The January issue carried a story about the Aldama 
Duplexes. These multilevel hillside homes, with lofts and tall clerestory 
windows, were designed by architect Allyn E. Morris in 1961. 
Because the collective is so young, it is hard to determine whether it has had 
much success in meeting its goals. It is clear that lower housing costs have 
induced some people to buy homes in the area. Whether many of the new arrivals 
are artists, and whether the group's activities helped attract them, is 
uncertain. 
Crime in the central city was a big reason for Stephen Kafer's move to Highland 
Park, where he bought a house in 1985. He said thieves had broken into both his 
car and his studio in the Little Tokyo district of Los Angeles. Kafer is a 
sculptor who works in steel, glass and concrete. He has added a second story to 
his house, and now works out of his home studio. 
"I was paying less to buy a house than it cost me to rent a studio," Kafer 
said. "I was getting real tired of all the concrete. It seemed much more 
reasonable to have a house with a yard. There is a nice rural feeling to the 
area." 
Kafer offers some evidence that the collective is having an effect along 
Figueroa Street. Some new restaurants have opened and some commercial buildings 
are being renovated, he said. But a local real estate broker sees a different 
reason for the changes. 
"I don't feel it has anything to do with artists," said Martha Marshall. "What 
is really coming in is the Asian influence. Any business you walk into on 
Figueroa now, you will find, is Asian owned and operated. They're the ones with 
the cash. I don't see at all that it is artists." 
Alexander agrees that "there are huge numbers of Asians coming in from many 
countries." She said Highland Park is evolving into an international community 
with a broad mix of ethnic cultures. 
Likewise, Marshall acknowledges the presence of artists, but said most of those 
she knows have been in the area since she moved there 25 years ago. 
Marshall said the average home price in Highland Park is $214,000. "Most 
artists can't afford that," she said. 
The core members of the collective remain optimistic about their work, even in 
the face of some frustration. Three people "can only do so much," Stooker 
explained. Thus far the three of them have paid for most of the group's 
activities and the newsletter out of their own pockets, he said. 
One plan in the works would bring performances of the Los Angeles Bach Festival 
to Highland Park in October. And a landscape design contest proposed a 
mini-park on a triangular vacant lot near Figueroa. But neither plan has been 
finalized. 
The collective has been very effective fostering a group spirit among local 
artists. It has sponsored a series of social gatherings and organizational 
meetings. Alexander said a December brunch brought together about 60 people. 
Although change has been slow in coming, Alexander's efforts to reshape the 
Figueroa Street business corridor have not gone unnoticed. Heather Hoggan, who 
is president of the Highland Park Heritage Trust, said Alexander is making a 
difference. 
"Figueroa has always been a tough nut to crack," said Hoggan. "I think change 
will come from what Diane Alexander is doing." 
