NBA ROUNDUP; 
START ME UP: MCHALE FUELS CELTICS, 101-98 
Larry Bird is getting most of the credit for the resurgence of the Boston 
Celtics. He should, but another reason is Kevin McHale. 
Most of this season the veteran forward has been coming off the bench trying to 
provide instant points. It wasn't until Coach Jimmy Rodgers put McHale back in 
the starting lineup that the Celtics made their move. 
McHale scored 27 points Friday night at Boston and the Celtics, after almost 
wasting a 31-point lead, defeated Atlanta, 101-98. 
Since McHale returned to the starting lineup, the Celtics have won six out of 
seven to move into second place in the Atlantic Division, 1 1/2 games behind 
the Philadelphia 76ers. 
The Celtics took a 71-40 lead with a little more than four minutes left in the 
third quarter before Kenny Smith, who had all his 19 points in the second half, 
brought the Hawks back. 
Twice in the last minute the Hawks cut the Celtic lead to three points. But 
with 24 seconds to play, they allowed the Celtics to run out the clock. 
McHale was concerned about the Celtics letting the Hawks back into the game. 
"We can't play like we did in the second half and expect to win a lot of 
games," he said. 
In the Celtics' last seven games, McHale has averaged 27 points and taken much 
of the pressure off Bird. 
While the Celtics are making a fight for another division title, the Hawks 
(31-36) are in danger of failing to make the playoffs. After their third 
consecutive loss, they are in eighth place in the East -- the last playoff 
spot, but only a half-game game ahead of the Cleveland Cavaliers. 
Charlotte 106, New York 93 -- They will probably stagger to a playoff spot, but 
the Knicks' collapse seems nearly complete. 
The Knicks couldn't even make a game of it on the road against the team with 
the worst record in the NBA and lost their fifth in a row. 
Dell Curry made 10 of his 14 field goal attempts, including three in a row in 
the closing minutes and the Hornets led almost the entire game. 
The Hornets (13-53) led by 16 points in the middle of the third quarter and, 
despite 32 points and 14 rebounds by Patrick Ewing, the Knicks never again were 
closer than eight points. 
The Knicks led the Atlantic Division almost from the start of the season and 
were still on top last Sunday. The loss to the Hornets dropped them into third 
place. 
The slump began before Charles Oakley, their leading rebounder, was lost for 
the season and the Knicks show no signs of pulling out of it. 
Philadelphia 115, Sacramento 99 -- The 76ers are playing well, but the way the 
Celtics are going, even Charles Barkley isn't claiming the division title. 
On a night at Philadelphia in which Barkley and Hersey Hawkins were both six 
for 18 from the field, the 76ers still had a rather easy time winning their 
third in a row. 
Sacramento's Wayman Tisdale had 27 points and 11 rebounds, but the Kings, after 
a good first quarter, fell to 5-28 on the road. 
Hawkins finished with 21 points, seven during a 17-2 run that broke the game 
open early in the fourth quarter. 
Chicago 102, Cleveland 95 -- Despite his painful thumb, Michael Jordan started 
firing again at Chicago. 
In recent games Jordan had been reluctant to shoot, but he took 32 shots, 
making 18, in 40 minutes to lead the Bulls to their 15th victory in their last 
17 games. 
Jordan scored 14 points during the first quarter to get the Bulls going early. 
The Cavaliers could have moved into eighth place in the East with a victory. 
Utah 106, Golden State 91 -- The Warriors need to be at full strength to have a 
chance on the road against a good team. 
With their best player, Chris Mullin, still out because of a lung infection, 
they were no match for the Jazz at Salt Lake City. 
Karl Malone had 27 points and the Jazz, leading all the way, improved their 
record at home to 32-4. 
Although he missed all eight of his shots from the field, the Jazz's John 
Stockton had 15 assists. 
Phoenix 120, Minnesota 99 -- The Johnsons, Eddie and Kevin, teamed up to hand 
the Timberwolves their 22nd consecutive loss on the road. 
Eddie Johnson, who has been in a shooting slump, was 14 for 22 from the field 
and had 37 points. Kevin Johnson had the sixth triple-double of his career -- 
13 points, 10 rebounds and 18 assists. 
Dallas 106, Miami 103 -- Derek Harper clicked from long range at Miami and the 
Mavericks held on for their third victory in a row. 
Harper sank a club-record seven three-pointers in 11 attempts and finished with 
34 points. 
Indiana 125, New Jersey 109 -- Rik Smits had 30 points and 14 rebounds in the 
game at Indianapolis as Pacers (34-34) handed the Nets their 22nd consecutive 
road loss and ninth consecutive defeat overall. DAN HAFNER 
