MEATPACKER, OSHA SETTLE ON MOTION INJURIES; 
WORKPLACE: MORRELL &amp; CO. ACCORD ON TREATING REPETITIVE-STRESS AILMENTS MAY 
SERVE AS A MODEL FOR THE INDUSTRY. 
John Morrell &amp; Co., one of the nation's largest meatpacking companies, has 
reached a settlement with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
that is expected to serve as an industry model for treating repetitive-motion 
injuries, sources said Tuesday. 
Under the agreement, which is scheduled to be announced today, Morrell will pay 
a fine of $990,000 and will make a $250,000 grant to the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health. A year ago the company was fined $4.3 million 
for safety conditions at its South Dakota plant. 
The Labor Department has targeted the nation's red meat industry in an effort 
to deal with the often crippling repetitive-motion injuries, which range from 
bursitis to carpal tunnel syndrome. 
The agreement with Morrell covers the operations of its slaughtering and 
processing operations at Sioux Falls and is similar to an agreement signed in 
late 1988 with IBP Inc., the nation's largest meatpacker. The Morrell agreement 
calls for the appointment of 15 "ergonomic monitors" to be picked by the United 
Food and Commercial Workers union, which represents company employees, and a 
study of all jobs in the plant by an outside expert in ergonomics. 
Ergonomics is the science of making the workplace conform to the physical needs 
of the worker. 
But sources said the medical treatment program agreed to by Morrell goes far 
beyond the agreement with IBP and requires the company to hire a noted 
neurologist from Johns Hopkins University to oversee the medical operations of 
the plant. Sources said the agreement would give the medical consultant wide 
discretion to change the Morrell program as she saw fit. 
Injured workers at the Morrell plant, which slaughters and "disassembles" more 
than 1,000 cows and pigs a day, will be allowed to seek treatment from their 
own doctors. In the past, injured workers were required to seek treatment from 
company doctors at a Sioux Falls clinic that has a contract with the company. 
Employees who did not use the company doctor risked losing workers' 
compensation. 
Under the new agreement, workers can not only seek treatment from their own 
doctors, but can automatically go to a doctor after just two visits to the 
plant nurse. In the IBP agreement, workers have to wait a specific amount of 
time before they can see their doctors. 
