BAKER CHALLENGES SOVIET LATIN POLICY; 
WARNS MOSCOW NOT TO EXPORT ARMS, IDEOLOGY TO CENTRAL, SOUTH AMERICA 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III, in a challenge to Soviet President 
Mikhail S. Gorbachev who visits Havana next week, said Thursday that the 
democracies of the Western Hemisphere are determined to prevent Moscow and its 
allies from using Latin America as "a dumping ground for their arms or their 
failed ideologies." 
Seizing on Gorbachev's "new thinking" campaign, Baker called on Moscow to apply 
new ideas to Central America by reducing its $500-million-a-year program of 
military aid to the Sandinista government in Nicaragua. 
Meanwhile, White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater said President Bush has 
made clear that Soviet restraint in Central America would "have a (favorable) 
impact in terms of our overall relationship." Fitzwater said that the U.S. view 
has been communicated to Gorbachev, who arrives in Havana on Sunday at the 
start of a three-day visit, but he declined to say how the message was sent. 
Baker's remarks came in a speech to a seminar on Western Hemisphere affairs at 
former President Jimmy Carter's Presidential Center in Atlanta. The text was 
made public by the State Department in Washington. 
Tough Rhetoric 
His words represented some of the toughest rhetoric that the Bush 
Administration has directed at the Soviet Union after weeks of conciliatory 
statements. They underlined the tacit veto that the Soviet Union holds over the 
Administration's new bipartisan Central America policy. 
The White House and the Democratic-controlled Congress agreed last week on an 
approach to provide non-military support to maintain the Contras long enough to 
find out if the Nicaraguan government will conduct free elections, as it has 
promised to do. A continued flow of Soviet economic and military aid would 
likely stiffen Managua's response to the U.S. plan. 
Addressing an audience that included many Latin American leaders, Baker said: 
"Together we must send a clear message to others outside this hemisphere: This 
is not a dumping ground for their arms or their failed ideologies. We are 
looking for signs of new thinking. The Soviet Union now has an opportunity to 
demonstrate it in Central America. This is what the (regional peace) agreement 
requires and what the democratic community demands." 
Baker also urged the other democracies in the hemisphere to support U.S. 
efforts to pressure Nicaragua to keep its pledge to move toward genuine 
democracy. He said that such support is necessary if Central American nations 
want the United States to end its support for the Contras. 
"If you ask the United States to forgo unilateral initiatives and work instead 
in good faith with the democratic nations of Latin America in a new cooperative 
diplomacy to support democracy, then we ask you to join with us in good faith 
to turn the promise of that diplomacy into reality throughout this hemisphere," 
Baker said. 
"All those who advocate diplomacy and political solutions to the region's 
conflicts have a responsibility to prove that this is the best and surest route 
to achieve our common goals," he added. "We invite Latin America's democratic 
leaders to join us in this challenge." 
The presidents of El Salvador, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua 
agreed earlier this year on a regional peace plan calling for free elections in 
Nicaragua by next February. The agreement also calls for the five nations to 
develop a specific plan for demobilizing the Contras who are now camped at 
bases in Honduras. 
In his speech, Baker also pledged a continuing U.S. effort to help ease "the 
weight of Latin America's foreign debt." But he emphasized that the Latin 
nations must also "move forward to take the necessary, but difficult steps to 
restructure and reform your economies." 
He noted that Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady recently unveiled a U.S. 
proposal for debt relief, but he said that plan will not work without economic 
reforms in the debtor nations. 
"We must negotiate, case by case, the details of that policy to ensure 
continued economic reform, a real reduction in existing debt burdens and new 
capital flows in the future," he said. 
State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said that Baker discussed the 
debt problem with Venezuelan President Carlos Andres Perez on the return flight 
from Atlanta to Washington. Perez, who attended the Atlanta symposium, is 
scheduled to confer with Bush on Saturday at the White House. 
The President plans to discuss the Central American peace process next week 
with Alfredo Cristiani, El Salvador's incoming president and Costa Rican 
President Oscar Arias Sanchez. 
Meanwhile, the State Department sought to refute speculation that Washington 
plans to modify its tough policy toward Cuba in the wake of the withdrawal of 
Cuban troops from Angola. 
In a memo to all U.S. embassies last week, Baker said that the 28-year-old U.S. 
trade embargo against Cuba will remain in place. 
"Cuba is involved in a public diplomacy effort to reinforce the impression that 
improved bilateral relations are in the cards," Baker said. "Better ties -- 
especially with the absence of a comprehensive trade embargo -- would benefit 
greatly the failed Cuban economy and enhance Cuba's image and prestige. 
"The U.S. government is prepared to resolve problems with Cuba whenever U.S. 
interests can be served," he said. "But, Cuban statements to the contrary, Cuba 
has not demonstrated a serious interest in improving relations with the United 
States." 
Times staff writer Don Shannon contributed to this report. 
