NEWSMAKERS: KITTY DUKAKIS' HOMECOMING: WARMED-OVER LASAGNA 
A smiling Kitty Dukakis, wife of Massachusetts Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, 
returned to her Brookline, Mass., home after a monthlong stay at a Rhode Island 
clinic for treatment of alcohol abuse. "Doesn't she look terrific," the 
governor said as he and his wife emerged from a car driven by her father, Harry 
Ellis Dickson. Asked what was the best part of returning home, Mrs. Dukakis 
said: "Being with my husband." Without missing a beat, her husband added: 
"Being with my wife." Mrs. Dukakis, 52, had been in Edgehill Newport, an 
intensive residential facility, since Feb. 5. The governor and his wife planned 
a quiet day at home, with Dukakis capping off the homecoming by reheating a 
lasagna dinner prepared by a friend. In a statement, Dukakis expressed 
gratitude for the public support for his wife. While in treatment, Mrs. Dukakis 
received about 5,000 letters, including good wishes from First Lady Barbara 
Bush, Nancy Reagan and Betty Ford. Mrs. Dukakis had revealed during her 
husband's campaign that she had earlier conquered a 26-year addiction to diet 
pills. 
 -- On the other side of the world, the wife of another political figure was in 
the news when the official Soviet news agency gave rare coverage to Raisa 
Gorbachev. "If people currently are more confident of a peaceful future, we 
know that much of the credit goes to women actively working on all continents 
for friendship, cooperation and profound mutual understanding of nations," Tass 
reported the Kremlin First Lady as saying at a reception she gave in honor of 
International Women's Day, a Soviet holiday that will be celebrated today. 
Although Mrs. Gorbachev is shown frequently on Soviet state-run television and 
has been interviewed by Western reporters, her views are rarely reported in 
Soviet media. Not to be outdone by his wife, Mikhail S. Gorbachev also made 
headlines. The Communist Party youth daily Komsomolets Tadzhikistan said he has 
donated $82,000 from the U.S. sales of his book "Perestroika" to the 
Tadzhikistan earthquake fund. The paper from the central Asian republic 
reported that the money will go for rebuilding homes and public buildings in 
three villages devastated in a Jan. 23 earthquake and subsequent mudslide. 
About 280 people were killed. SHIRLEY MARLOW 
