TWO NICARAGUA FACTIONS IN L.A. PLEDGE TO UNITE 
Nicaraguans living in Los Angeles pledged to put their political differences 
aside and "become one people again" during two separate rallies Saturday -- one 
celebrating the recent victory at the polls of President-elect Violeta Barrios 
de Chamorro and another mourning the defeat of Nicaraguan President Daniel 
Ortega. 
"We want unity and peace, not war," said a tearful Kenia Chamorro while leaving 
St. Vincent's Catholic Church in Los Angeles, where about 250 people gathered 
to celebrate a noon Mass in honor of the recent election victory in Nicaragua 
of the National Opposition Union (UNO). 
The need for peace was also expressed at a pro-Sandinista rally at USC's 
Davidson Conference Center Saturday night where about 300 participants cheered 
and applauded when several speakers mentioned the possible end of the 10 years 
of civil war in Nicaragua. 
"Sure we are disappointed with the Sandinistas' defeat, but what's more 
important is to put an end to the blood bath," said Ramon Diaz, a native of 
Nicaragua who is also a member of the Nicaraguan Cultural Center, a 
pro-Sandinista Organization in Los Angeles. "We want to become one people again 
to help Nicaragua blossom and grow to be strong." 
But Lydia Brazon of the Nicaraguan Elections Information Project, the 
organization that sponsored the pro-Sandinista rally, said the wounds between 
supporters of the right and the left wing would take much time to heal. 
"The intensity of the hatred is appalling," said Brazon, whose parents are 
Nicaraguan. "Entire families are divided. People need time to forget their 
political differences and come together." 
Most speakers at the pro-Sandinista rally steered away from criticism of the 
victorious UNO party, but they did criticize U.S. actions in Nicaragua. 
Speakers accused the United States of buying votes for the UNO party by 
promising to stop sending aid to the Contras and to lift trade sanctions if 
Chamorro won. 
An address from Nicaragua by Ortega was supposed to have been transmitted by 
satellite to the rallies in Los Angeles and 55 other U.S. cities. But technical 
problems prevented that from happening. Organizers said they suspect that the 
anti-Sandinista U.S. government somehow blocked the transmission. 
Earlier in the day, participants in the pro-Chamorro Mass and rally had nothing 
but praise for U.S. actions. 
"God bless Violeta Chamorro. God bless Oliver North. God bless President 
Reagan," the demonstrators repeatedly shouted at a rally in MacArthur Park. 
The same cheers could be heard as Chamorro supporters made their way from the 
church to the park three miles away in a caravan of cars adorned with 
Nicaraguan flags. 
Some onlookers made thumbs-down motions at the procession of about 50 cars, and 
a driver in a pickup truck shouted in a thick accent, "Vivan Los Sandinistas." 
At a rally in MacArthur park, the crowd shouted, whistled and rejoiced as 
speakers addressed them in Spanish. 
"No more pain. No more war. No more separation my fellow Nicaraguans," 
organizer Cesar A. Aviles declared. Aviles, director of the Nicaraguan 
Patriotic Coalition in Los Angeles, added it was important that Nicaraguans put 
politics aside and unite. 
"There are no words to describe the happiness we feel as a people," Adam 
Torres, one of the participants, said. "Nicaragua is free. We have been 
liberated. Much of it, thanks to the Americans." 
Torres, who immigrated to the United States in 1979, said many exiled 
Nicaraguans plan to return to their homeland if there is a smooth transition of 
power from Ortega's administration to Chamorro's. 
"We are all brothers," he said. "We can't let hatred get between us. There will 
soon be peace in our country, I hope that will also bring peace to our hearts." 
