O.C. CENTER MOVES AHEAD WITH PLANS FOR 2 THEATERS 
With the Orange County Performing Arts Center operating near capacity 2 years 
ahead of projections, the Center board Thursday moved ahead with plans to add 
at least two new theaters at an estimated cost of up to $92 million. 
The proposal includes a concert hall of 2,300 to 2,500 seats -- designed in 
part to head off any competition for popular Broadway road shows -- and a drama 
theater of 650 to 800 seats, possibly to be shared with neighboring South Coast 
Repertory Company. 
Together with SCR's two existing stages, the resulting complex of five stages 
and nearly 8,000 seats would rank in size between the Lincoln Center-Juilliard 
complex in New York City -- the nation's largest -- and the Kennedy Center in 
Washington. 
Like the $70-million Center, the additional theaters would be privately funded 
if possible, officials said. 
"Both a concert hall and a small hall are justifiable in the next decade, 
subject, of course, to the one caveat that we can afford to proceed and the 
determination of a prudent timetable," said Center Chairman Henry T. Segerstrom 
in a statement relayed by Center President Thomas R. Kendrick. 
The board's decision to proceed with plans to expand the Center was partially 
based on a $50,000, 8-month marketing study. After voting to accept and approve 
the study, members authorized management to do feasibility studies on site 
selection, design, parking and funding for the two theaters plus a possible 
third, mid-size facility of 1,200 to 1,500 seats. 
The most pressing need is to proceed with the concert hall to preempt 
construction of another major theater in the area for such popular attractions 
as national companies of Broadway shows, Kendrick said. 
"There is only so much touring product," he said. 
The concert hall, used by the Pacific Symphony and for single-performance 
musical events, would free Segerstrom Hall for popular shows. The hall, he 
said, would be "essentially a shoe box," designed solely for music and dance 
events without elaborate sets. 
Site Search Gets Priority 
In a news conference after the board meeting, Kendrick said the board's first 
priority would be to find a site for the concert hall. It has ruled out any 
remote site for new facilities. 
The board earlier had announced its intention to build a second theater for 
such programs as chamber music recitals and dramatic performances. One location 
considered for this smaller theater is land adjoining the Center now used for 
staff parking. That site, the study found, is too small to accommodate either 
the concert hall or a mid-size theater. 
Kendrick said the small theater, estimated to cost $10 million to $12 million, 
would not necessarily be built on the current parking area. It is possible that 
both the small theater and the concert hall could be built on a new site, he 
said. 
Undeveloped land within walking distance of the Center is scarce and at a 
premium. Some of this land is owned by the firm of C.J. Segerstrom &amp; Sons. 
The Segerstrom family donated the land for the Center. 
The new theater study, prepared by Harrison Price Co. of Torrance and released 
Thursday, found that the Center's 3,000-seat Segerstrom Hall was in use -- not 
necessarily for performances -- on 364 days from September, 1987, to August, 
1988. During that season 686,500 tickets, or 77% of capacity, were sold, a 
figure well over the national average, according to the study. 
"There can be no expansion of program without the addition of a new 
professional facility," the study concluded. "The best way to relieve pressure 
on Segerstrom (Hall) is to construct a concert hall" at a cost estimated 
between $60 million and $80 million, the study says, adding that "a lesser 
quality concert hall . . . could be built for as low as $40 million to $45 
million." 
The study coupled these figures with county population projections of 2.7 
million by the year 2000 as another factor in recommending long-term expansion 
of the Center. 
"To maintain the same ratio of population attending performing arts events as 
is currently being achieved, the county must increase both the level of 
programming and the number of theater seats," the study said. 
The maximum estimated cost for constructing all three new theaters was $119 
million. 
The third theater would rely on the new, San Diego-based Pacific Lyric Theater, 
according to the study, along with Opera Pacific and the Fullerton Civic Light 
Opera. Because the Pacific Lyric Theater is, in the words of the study, "a new 
and untested group," it recommends that "further consideration of this theater 
be deferred." 
According to Los Angeles arts consultant David Lutz, the Center should have no 
difficulty raising money for the new theaters, "if this were a phased project 
over a 10-year period." Center officials "certainly seem to have figured out 
what appeals to potential donors," said Lutz, who has worked for Orange County 
arts organizations. 
Lutz also does not see any problems of competition from other new and expanding 
theaters elsewhere in the county. 
"Audiences in Orange County do not seem to travel from one part of the county 
to another, with the exception of (going to) the Center," he said. 
For the study, Harrison Price commissioned Hebert Research Inc., to conduct two 
random telephone surveys on programming preferences in the area: one of 600 
Orange County residents and another of 200 Center subscribers. 
The two surveys found that "overall satisfaction with the Center is quite 
high," with respondents in the random survey giving the Center an 8.6 rating on 
a scale of 10, and subscribers rating it at 9. 
Those in the general category prefer, in order, Broadway musicals, plays and 
opera at the Center. Center subscribers said they preferred opera to plays. 
In two subsequent "focus groups," composed of volunteers from the Center's 
subscribers, "members expressed a desire for a more intimate venue to house 
smaller-scale presentations than those now staged at the Center" and for more 
children's programming. 
The study also took note of at least one recent development on the theater 
scene elsewhere in the county. 
While observing that "there are no large new theaters planned in Orange County 
for major productions," the study acknowledged the 750-seat, $17.9-million 
Irvine Theatre now under construction on the UC Irvine campus. 
Orange County Performing Arts Center 
Three Proposed Facilities 
1. A concert hall of 2,300 to 2,500 seats, costing $60 million to $80 million. 
"A lesser quality concert hall. . .could be built for as low as $40 million to 
$45 million." Designed solely for music and dance events without elaborate 
sets. Such a facility most likely would be used by the Pacific Symphony and dor 
single-performance musical events. 
2. A drama theater of 650 to 800 might share with neighboring South Coast 
Repertory Co. One of the locations considered for this smaller theater is land 
adjoining the Center that is now used for staff parking. 
3. A third, mid-size theater facility with 1,200 to 1,500 seats, which would 
rely on the new, San Diego-based Pacific Lyric Theater, along with Opera 
Pacific and the Fullerton Civic Light Opera. 
