ERMA BOMBECK: WELCOME TO THE WORLD OF WEAPONRY 
One of the funniest parts of a James Bond film is when the home office outfits 
him with enough gimmicky weapons to stock an arsenal. Briefcases harboring 
knives, cuff links holding cyanide pills, fountain pens with gas and cars that 
release oil slicks are all part of Bond's survival. It boggles the imagination. 
You just know they are going to get him out of any situation. It's the movies. 
Welcome to the real world of "Jamie" Bond -- the woman of the '80s, a time when 
trends are becoming too shocking to parody and too real to be funny. Imagine 
her getting these instructions: 
"Here is your little bitty Ladysmith gun, new from Smith &amp; Wesson. It comes 
with a pastel grip in glossy blue or frosted sterling. From Texas is a designer 
handbag with a special compartment for your gun so it won't roll around in the 
bottom with breath mints and loose powder. 
"For cocktail parties, there is an evening bag to accommodate a 5-inch-long 
barrel with optional gold straps and a touch of snakeskin. 
"Try this on for size. Out of New York, it's your bulletproof sable coat that 
is so lightweight you'll never realize it has a Kevlar lining. Hang onto it. We 
wouldn't want it to fall into the wrong hands. Also, the price tag is in the 
high five digits. 
"Of course, there's your key ring with the little light and an innocent-looking 
button that will Mace the face of anyone who threatens you. If you have any 
questions, you can call the toll-free hotline for more information on your 
protection needs." 
Is Jamie off on an adventure to an exotic foreign country where evil people are 
constructing a bomb to destroy the United States? Actually, she's off to the 
mall to have her hair done. 
All of these items are real and are designed to give women an advantage over 
the criminals in this country. Before I become what has been characterized as a 
"Rambette," I want to know how far I have to go. Will I wear earrings with 
small cameras to photograph my attackers? Fake fingernails that release 
short-range missiles? Push a shopping cart that converts to a tank? Wear a bra 
that contains a parachute? How about a perfume atomizer that paralyzes its 
victims? Detonators disguised as water pills? Or a belt buckle that houses an 
automatic? 
If I thought for one moment that the world would be a safer place if we all 
mobilized and armed, I'd volunteer as a poster child for a cannon on every 
lawn. But I worry. I worry that after a while I won't be able to tell the 
difference between the enemy and me. 
