JUDGE CLEARS CAMBODIANS WHO KILLED DOG FOR FOOD 
A Long Beach judge Tuesday dismissed all charges against two Cambodian refugees 
accused of misdemeanor cruelty to animals for killing a German shepherd puppy 
for food. 
"Under (the) facts, I don't believe it can be said that these defendants 
inflicted unreasonable pain on the animal," Long Beach Municipal Judge Bradford 
L. Andrews said in responding to a defense motion that the case be dismissed 
for lack of evidence. "To hold otherwise would subject every slaughterhouse 
employee or farmer to prosecution." 
Earlier in the case, Andrews had ruled that killing an animal for food is not 
illegal unless it is done in a cruel way. 
The two refugees -- Sokheng Chea, 32, and Seng Ou, 33 -- had admitted hitting 
the 4-month-old puppy over the head with a blunt instrument, slashing its 
throat and skinning it on the floor of Ou's Long Beach apartment. But in doing 
so, they said, they had been following their cultural customs with no idea that 
the action would be considered offensive to Americans. 
Considered Delicacies 
While local Cambodian leaders say the practice of eating dogs was rare in their 
country before the 1970s, other Asian leaders report that the animals are 
considered delicacies in such countries as Vietnam, Korea and the Philippines. 
The Long Beach case had been closely watched by animal rights activists who 
said it was the first time to their knowledge that Southeast Asian refugees had 
been prosecuted for attempting to eat a dog. 
"I'm very disappointed in the outcome," said Wendy Aragon, president of the Pet 
Assistance Foundation, based in Van Nuys. "I think that what these defendants 
did offends the sensibilities of the community. There is a need for legislation 
to outlaw the slaughter of dogs and cats; they are companion animals, not food 
animals." 
Because of the ruling by the judge early in the trial that killing a dog for 
food is not in itself a violation of the law, prosecutor Sarah Lazarus had to 
prove, in the judge's words, that the dog was "maimed, wounded, tortured, 
mutilated or tormented" in a manner beyond that required to prepare it as food. 
To prove her case, the prosecutor produced a neighbor who had witnessed part of 
the incident and two veterinarians, including one who had examined the carcass. 
Their testimony, in Judge Andrews' opinion, did not establish unequivocally 
that the animal was treated inhumanely and therefore did not constitute a case 
strong enough to submit to the jury. In dismissing the matter, however, he 
warned that the ruling should not be taken as a license to kill pets. 
"I am sympathetic to the feelings of those who champion the cause of animal 
rights," Andrews said, "but the remedy lies in convincing the Legislature to 
enact laws that would make the actions of these defendants unlawful." 
Both defendants expressed relief at the outcome. 
"I am happy," Ou said through an interpreter, "but I can assure you that there 
will be no second time." 
