MOTHER HAD LONG TALKED OF SUICIDE; 
TRAGEDY: RESEDA WOMAN WHO KILLED HER THREE CHILDREN AND HERSELF HAD CLOAKED HER 
REMARKS IN RELIGIOUS REFERENCES. APPARENTLY NO ONE TOOK HER SERIOUSLY. 
Roxanne Jones, the Reseda woman who shot her three children to death as they 
slept and then turned the gun on herself, talked of killing herself and taking 
her children with her for as long as two months before carrying out the threat, 
police and acquaintances said Thursday. 
None of those who heard her discuss suicide took her seriously enough to 
contact authorities or to steer her toward counseling. Some hints that she was 
suicidal went unrecognized, apparently misinterpreted as part of her fervent 
new religious beliefs. 
Two weeks before the murder-suicide, Jones' 7-year-old son Jeremiah told his 
first-grade teacher that his mother was taking him to "a good place, where God 
is, and there are no worries." But the teacher took that to mean a religious 
retreat. 
The bodies of Jones, 32, daughters Brandy Fernandez, 15, and Leticia Fernandez, 
13, and Jeremiah were found Wednesday afternoon in the family's small house on 
Tampa Avenue in Reseda. Los Angeles police said Jones had shot the children 
while they slept Tuesday morning, then turned the .22-caliber rifle on herself. 
The family dog was shot to death in the house as well. 
Jones, who separated four months ago from her husband, Jeff Jones, 31, left 
behind a five-page suicide note in which she asked for God's forgiveness and 
outlined the family and financial problems that burdened her, police said. They 
said that Jones had previously told several friends and relatives that she was 
contemplating suicide. 
"She would mention possibly killing herself and she said if she ever did she 
would take the children with her," Detective Rick Swanston said. "It wasn't 
taken seriously." 
Jeff Jones said in an interview Thursday that he had not picked up any hint 
from his wife that she was suicidal, nor did he ever hear his son talk 
obliquely or directly about it. "If he would have, I would have known right 
away," Jones said. "I cannot explain this at all." 
He said his wife was consumed by a desire to be "someplace better" and turned 
to religion for solace and guidance. "She was into nature and wanted to go to 
God, where the trees and grass were nice," Jones said. "I hope she's there." 
Jones said he and his wife of nine years 
met in the San Fernando Valley. "(She) had proposed to me and I accepted 
because I loved her." 
Though separated, Jones visited the family often. He said their problems were 
"nothing major" and that the couple had attempted to reconcile. He last saw 
Roxanne on Monday morning. 
"She seemed OK," he said. She told him she was leaving the state for "a couple 
months" and wanted Jones to "hug her and hold her. She said goodby and that was 
the last I saw her." 
Jones said his wife was religious but "didn't quite interpret the Bible the way 
it should have been. She comprehends things her way and no way else. Whatever 
she thinks is right is right." 
Last week Roxanne Jones went to the Convenant Faith Center in Northridge, a 
church that practices faith-healing and which she had attended a decade 
earlier, before her marriage. She sought counseling from the pastor, but he was 
not unduly alarmed at her situation, according to a church secretary who asked 
to remain anonymous. 
Two weeks before the deaths, Jones apparently told her son that the family 
would soon be going to the "House of David," which Jeremiah then described to 
his first-grade teacher, Madeleine Bellomo, at Blythe Street Elementary School. 
He said it was a "peaceful place," and suggested that "maybe you should go 
there, too," Bellomo recalled. 
Bellomo said she interpreted his comments as meaning the family was going to 
"physically leave the scene" and move somewhere else. The child, who was often 
late to school and rarely completed his homework, did not seem concerned or 
troubled about the impending move, so she did not feel the need to report his 
comments to authorities. 
Last week, the boy mentioned that he had started attending church and Bible 
study sessions. 
Jeremiah's last day of school was Monday. He was late, and Jones had given him 
a note that "was rambling and reflected a sense of struggling and turmoil," 
Bellomo said. 
School officials said they were aware of Jones' struggle to provide financially 
for her children. 
"She was quite open" about her money troubles, Principal Maureen Banks said. 
"She was having problems making ends meet." 
When Bellomo spoke recently with her, Jones said she was trying to "keep them 
from losing the house, and to keep the children off the street." Banks said 
that two weeks ago the mother asked for a job as a playground supervisor, but 
the position had already been filled. 
Jeff Jones, a house painter, said he gave money to his family as often as he 
could. And the Los Angeles County district attorney's office said that her 
first husband, Joaquin Fernandez of San Fernando, had made child-support 
payments totaling $600 already this year -- more than called for under their 
1979 divorce agreement. 
As an unemployed single mother, Jones received welfare payments from the 
county, but those records are confidential, a spokeswoman said. 
Several friends and neighbors said Jones had turned increasingly to religion 
since her separation and the onset of financial problems. Though police said 
she spoke specifically about suicide to some acquaintances, other friends only 
now recognize the hints of desperation in her religious expressions. 
"She got pretty heavy into God," said Crystal Erickson, a 15-year-old friend of 
the family who found the bodies. "She would start reading Scripture to everyone 
when we were . . . around." 
Doreena Pacheco, another family friend, said Jones often said that if "she died 
and went to heaven, she would take the children with her. . . . She wanted to 
go to heaven so bad, and she wanted the kids to be with her." 
Jones often talked of going to a "better place," friends said. 
"I didn't think she meant this," said Pacheco. "I thought she was moving." 
Unfortunately, police said, it is not unusual for suicidal hints to go 
unrecognized or outright threats not be taken seriously. 
"Among the lay public a threat of suicide is not often taken seriously because 
they don't want to believe it," said Martin Reiser, chief psychologist for the 
Los Angeles Police Department. "They want to believe it is just a feeling of 
the moment, something that will pass with time." 
But one friend told detectives she had severed ties with Jones because she felt 
Jones might harm someone. 
Times staff writers Amy Louise Kazmin, Steve Padilla, Patricia Klein Lerner, 
Gabe Fuentes and Robyn Loewenthal contributed to this story. 
