WHO'S IN CHARGE OF THE INTERIOR? 
Even his political opponents believe Secretary of the Interior Manuel Lujan Jr. 
of New Mexico is a truly nice and well-meaning person. But more than a few of 
his friends, as well as critics, are convinced that Lujan is in over his head 
as chief of an agency that is instrumental to President Bush's desire to become 
known as the environmental President. 
This view was reinforced Thursday by news accounts of a session between the 
former congressman from New Mexico and a small group of reporters invited by 
Lujan to his office to discuss Interior issues. Particularly embarrassing was 
Lujan's failure to understand some of the very basic facts about how his 
department administers the nation's public estate. For instance, Lujan 
incorrectly insisted that the government receives royalty payments on minerals 
gotten from mining claims that had been sold by the government to claim 
holders. 
When told of the error, The Times' Douglas Jehl reported, Lujan expressed 
amazement and asked: "We don't get any royalties? We don't get any money?" Then 
he added, "I didn't know what I was talking about. " 
An official new to a sprawling department with a $10-billion budget -- Lujan 
was selected for the post in late December and confirmed in February -- might 
be excused for not knowing such seemingly obscure details. But Lujan dealt 
constantly with these very same issues for 20 years as a congressman from New 
Mexico, an important mining state, and as a longtime member of the House 
Interior Committee. The sale of patented claims for as little as $2.50 an acre, 
stemming from the Mining Claims Act of 1872, has been a matter of considerable 
controversy for years. 
Later in the same discussion, Lujan seemed confused about how the department 
leases land for coal mining. This is only a symptom of the problems at 
Interior, however, which is described by some insiders as an agency adrift and 
riddled with depression and dissension. 
When Lujan accepted the nomination, it was with the understanding that all the 
key officials under former Secretary Donald P. Hodel would be replaced. The 
clean-sweep concept presumably was Bush's way of ridding himself of the 
anti-environment image of Interior under Ronald Reagan's secretaries, including 
James G. Watt and Hodel, a Watt confidant. 
But so far, most of the top jobs requiring Senate confirmation have not been 
filled. Career Interior officials say that a few Hodel holdovers, although they 
have been given notice, remain entrenched in key positions and continue to 
exercise authority while they wait for their official departure dates, which 
often are weeks away. News reports have noted that false stories spread by some 
in this clique led to Lujan's firing of the department's respected 
congressional liaison staffer, who had been recommended for a top Interior 
appointment. Word is that Lujan later apologized to the victim, but took no 
other action. 
After Thursday's meeting with reporters, a Lujan aide said that at least people 
would know they have a human secretary of the Interior. But that never was a 
question. Lujan was well-liked during his long service in Congress. What the 
people want, and need, is a secretary who will take charge of the Interior 
Department and rescue it from the harshly exploitative and political mind-set 
of the last eight years. Lujan must demonstrate this ability soon. 
