NEIGHBORHOOD LOUNGE IS BASKING IN LIMELIGHT OF THEATRE'S SUCCESS 
Some purveyors of night life on the Central Coast may resent the Ventura 
Theatre's success, but not Ellis Otwell, the 56-year-old owner of the San Souci 
Cocktail Lounge. 
The dark, tiny, working-class bar with a capacity of 30 people, across Chestnut 
Street from the theater, has become something of a hangout for concert-goers, 
especially among the fishnet-stockings-and-leather-jacket set. 
The theater's reopening nearly two years ago "really upped our business," 
Otwell said. He estimated that sales have increased by 30%. 
"They come in before a concert, after a concert and go back and forth for a 
break," said Marjory Wardien, the bar's manager. She owns another Ventura 
lounge, the Town and Country. 
The influx has changed the complexion of the lounge. Regulars, who have come to 
the bar for years and tend toward cowboy hats and stretch pants, have made room 
for fans of rock bands such as Fishbone and the Red Hot Chili Peppers. 
Otwell, a former supplier of tools to the oil industry, believes his success is 
due to his prices, which run $2 for a mixed drink -- albeit, one of the well 
variety. 
Gregory Ignacio, a 35-year-old Oxnard engineer who dropped into the bar before 
John Prine's recent concert, said location is the key. 
"It just seems like a logical place to catch a buzz before going over to the 
show," said Ignacio, in a big-shouldered, black overcoat and spiky haircut. 
Other concert-goers spoke lovingly of the bar's decor, which Otwell describes 
as "Old English" and swears hasn't changed in the 30 years since the San Souci 
-- that's French for "without a care" -- opened. 
Dominated by a large U-shaped Formica bar equipped with a bell for those 
occasions when a regular buys the house a round, it's sort of a sea of red, 
with red Naugahyde booths illuminated by red light bulbs. 
A clock with a picture of John Wayne decoupaged to its face hangs on the wall. 
A jukebox and dart board share the other room with a couple of photographs of 
Elvis Presley. 
Despite a big black box hanging from the ceiling that sucks cigarette smoke, 
the bar smells of soggy bar towels and heaping ashtrays. The only natural light 
that leaks into the windowless, two-room establishment comes from the front 
door. 
"It's great," says one local reviewer. "It's like this out-of-the-way cowboy 
dive." 
But where some see a set for a Guess Jeans advertisement, others have found a 
home. 
Ron Reynolds, a retired sewing machine salesman, said he's been coming into the 
bar on a daily basis since Otwell bought it 14 years ago. Before that, he 
frequented the Pump Room, the Main Street bar that Otwell sold to buy the San 
Souci. 
"Sometimes I just come in for a cup of coffee, but I'm always here," he said. 
"This is a comfortable place. I know just about everybody here." 
And presiding over it all is Otwell, who keeps the bar open 365 days a year and 
closes for a scant four hours daily, between 2 and 6 a.m. He serves 
Thanksgiving and Christmas dinner there, and once a month dons an apron for a 
free barbecue in a small courtyard in front of the lounge. 
These are the touches of an old bar hand. Over the years, Otwell has owned a 
restaurant and three bars, including Ventura Avenue's Derek Room, which he sold 
six months ago. The former oil man didn't hit pay dirt, however, until the 
Ventura Theater reopened across from the San Souci. 
"Every day," he said, "people ask to buy it." 
