EAST-WEST CONVENTIONAL ARMS TALKS START 
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact on Thursday opened 
talks aimed at reducing conventional weapons in Europe and building trust among 
the Continent's nations. 
Arms reduction proposals presented by each military bloc at the negotiations 
underlined the differences between the sides, particularly over air and naval 
forces and tactical nuclear weapons. 
But the top Soviet negotiator, Oleg A. Grinevsky, said the problems are not 
insurmountable, and he held out hope of an initial agreement by the early 
1990s. 
Chief U.S. negotiator Steven J. Ledogar said the negotiations are off to a good 
start but that NATO does not want to set a time frame for possible agreements. 
"We are not really that far apart," he said. 
2 Sets of Meetings 
Two sets of talks are being held in Vienna's majestic Hofburg palace -- one 
between the 16 NATO and seven Warsaw Pact nations on conventional armed forces 
in Europe, the other on building trust among the 35 nations that signed the 
1975 Helsinki accords. 
In Washington, President Bush heralded the start of the talks, saying: "Today 
marks the beginning of a process of great importance for the people of Europe, 
the United States and Canada and for all who share the hope of a safer and more 
secure Europe." 
He said the negotiations on conventional forces "offer a new opportunity to 
redress the imbalance in military forces which strongly favors the Warsaw 
Pact." 
On the talks on improving East-West relations, he said: "Our aim is to lift the 
veil of secrecy from certain military activities and forces and thus contribute 
to a more stable Europe. 
"Although these two negotiations have different participants and aim at 
different kinds of accords, they share a common purpose. That purpose is to 
make Europe safer, to reduce the risk of war and strengthen stability on the 
Continent that has seen more bloodshed in this century than any other part of 
the world," Bush said. 
Outlining the Warsaw Pact's stance on conventional arms, Grinevsky proposed 
deep cuts by 1994 in troop numbers, tanks, artillery and other land weapons and 
combat aircraft. 
He gave no numbers but said both blocs should eliminate any imbalances and then 
trim to 10% to 15% below their present lowest levels. 
In a second phase, from 1994-97, both sides should trim troop numbers by 25%, 
or about 500,000 military personnel, he said. In a third phase, by the year 
2000, the alliances should move to strictly defensive forces. 
By contrast, NATO wants specific overall ceilings. Under its proposal, each 
side should be limited to 20,000 tanks, 16,500 artillery pieces and 23,000 
armored personnel carriers. 
NATO says the proposal would eliminate the danger of a surprise attack and a 
2-to-1 Warsaw Pact edge in those weapons. 
As outlined in a paper given to reporters, the Warsaw Pact proposal at the 
closed-door negotiations made no specific mention of tactical nuclear weapons. 
