IRA SHOTS KILL 3, INCLUDING 2 ELDERLY MEN 
Two gunmen jumped out of a stolen car and opened fire with automatic weapons at 
a village garage near here Tuesday afternoon, killing the garage owner and two 
elderly men standing with him, the police reported. 
The British Broadcasting Corp. reported that the garage owner's wife and 
teen-age children are believed to have witnessed the attack -- and that the 
gunmen cheered as they drove off. 
The Irish Republican Army, in a statement to the local news media, took 
responsibility for the killings. The statement said the garage was a stronghold 
of the illegal Ulster Volunteer Force, an armed Protestant group. But police 
said the shooting was "indiscriminate." 
Tit-for-Tat Violence 
The incident occurred in Coagh, about 50 miles west of here, and was the latest 
in what Northern Ireland security authorities describe as a worrisome spate of 
tit-for-tat sectarian violence in which 16 people have been killed this year. 
Coagh is a predominantly Protestant village identified with the majority of the 
people in Northern Ireland who want to remain a part of the United Kingdom. 
The Ulster Volunteer Force claimed responsibility last month for killing John 
Joe Davey, a town councilor from the same general area who represented the 
nationalist Sinn Fein party. Sinn Fein, which wants the British out of Northern 
Ireland, is the legal political arm of the outlawed IRA. 
Tuesday's shooting was considered noteworthy because of an IRA pledge to 
"refine" its activities after a year in which its operatives killed 23 
civilians in bungled attacks. 
Sinn Fein leader Jerry Adams told a party conference in Dublin five weeks ago 
that there had been "an exceptional and regrettable level of civilian 
casualties arising from IRA operations" in 1988. 
The IRA is believed to be responsible for killing 33 soldiers and 6 policemen 
in the province last year. Illegal Protestant groups are blamed for 22 
killings. 
The police said that at least three men drove up to Leslie Dallos' garage in 
Coagh shortly after 4 p.m. Tuesday in a red Vauxhall auto that had been stolen 
shortly before. Two of the men jumped out and sprayed the garage with gunfire. 
Dallos was killed instantly, as was 72-year-old Ernie Rankin, a pensioner, 
according to the police. A second pensioner, Austin Nelson, 61, died of wounds 
on the way to a hospital. 
Nelson, a former truck driver, had taken up violin-making in retirement and was 
featured on a local television newscast Monday evening. He said he hoped that 
through his hobby he could make a lasting contribution to the world. 
Garage owner Dallos was described as a drag-racing enthusiast in his early 40s. 
His wife was reportedly visiting the garage at the time of the shooting. His 
teen-age children were among a group of youngsters who witnessed the killings 
as they were getting off a school bus nearby. 
Arms, Ammo Discovered 
In a related development, authorities in northern England reported Tuesday that 
they had found a cache of arms and ammunition and a large quantity of 
high-explosive Semtex buried in a wooded area near the seaside town of 
Scarborough. 
Officials pointed out that in 10 days Scarborough is to be the site of a 
conference of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Party and that 
Thatcher is expected to attend. 
In 1984, IRA assassins bombed the hotel where Thatcher and members of her 
Cabinet were staying in Brighton during a Conservative Party convention. Five 
people were killed in the explosion, but the prime minister was not injured. 
There have been a number of other IRA bombings in recent months aimed at 
military targets in England. The police have uncovered other caches of 
explosives, which the IRA is believed to have acquired through Libya. 
