MOTHER LODE COUNTY'S CEMETERIES YIELD TREASURE TROVE OF AREA LORE 
Four generations of Hart Ralph Tambs' family are buried in the Sonora 
Historical Cemetery. That is where he found the grave of his great-uncle Fred 
O. Ralph, who died in 1873, a relative he had not realized was buried there. He 
also found the grave marker of a first cousin who died when he was 25 days old. 
But when he looked a week later, the marker had been stolen. Tambs, 67, 
discovered that such incidents are commonplace and result in many people being 
unable to locate their ancestors' graves. 
"There were markers for everyone at one time," he said. "Those missing were 
stolen or destroyed by vandals." 
Tambs decided to do a plot map of the Sonora cemetery. He also has mapped six 
other cemeteries in the area and has plans to do 23 more. It is his gift to the 
people in this Mother Lode community in the Sierra Nevada foothills. 
Unscrambling a Puzzle 
And on a personal level, it is a puzzle he never tires of trying to unscramble. 
"Look at this faded headstone," Tambs said as he began reading it to a visitor. 
" 'Erected by S. G. to the memory of Nelly, Jan. 14, 1861.' I'm going to do 
some research and find out who S. G. and Nelly were. I'll bet there's a good 
story there." 
Tambs is just completing his survey of the Sonora Historical Cemetery. 
Townspeople call it "the old cemetery on the hill." 
All the cemetery maps and records had been lost, so Tambs had to copy the 
inscriptions from all 1,060 markers. Poring through county records, he found 
information about 619 other people buried there whose graves are now unmarked. 
From all this information, he pieced together a plot map. 
"Unfortunately, all the cemetery plot maps in the county have disappeared over 
the years," Tambs said. "People go to the cemeteries and look for graves of 
loved ones or ancestors who died years ago and can't find them. This will 
help." 
Retirement Project 
Altogether, Tambs is doing plot maps for 30 known cemeteries in Tuolumne 
County. It is a voluntary effort, his retirement project. (He retired in 1975 
from his job as an engineer for Pacific Telephone Co.) 
One thing he has not figured out is what motivates graveyard vandals. 
"It's difficult to understand why anyone would desecrate a grave, but it 
happens all the time. An average of six grave markers a week have been 
vandalized or stolen while I have been doing the survey in this cemetery," he 
said. Some steal headstones and put them in their back yards. Can you imagine 
that?" 
He encountered a heavy concrete marker that had been knocked off its concrete 
base and broken in two. "It took more than one person to knock that one over," 
he said. 
Damaged Headstone 
The inscription on the damaged headstone read: 
"Magie Mersereau. Died March 30, 1884. Aged 24 years &amp; 26 days. Goodby 
Babies dear. As I can no longer be here. To Heaven have Gone. Will meet you 
there." 
Heart-Shaped Stone 
Nearby was a tombstone, flat on the ground, in the shape of a heart with the 
inscription: "Susan Hester Curnow. Died March 21, 1910." Tambs pointed out the 
oldest tombstone in the graveyard, that of Louise Lepaper, who was born in 
Paris in 1824 and died in Jamestown in 1856. 
To get information from old, weathered wooden markers, Tambs waits until the 
sun is just right, with the light coming in at a 45-degree angle. To help him 
read the faded inscriptions he uses powder, chalk and magnifying glasses. 
One tombstone was for William K. Rushing (1835-1880), a rancher. A nearby 
mountain is named in his honor. At the headstone for Happy Hen Chow Ng 
(1856-1948) Tambs remarked: "He was the last resident of Sonora's Chinatown. I 
knew him when I was a boy. 
'Much to Be Learned' 
"There's so much to be learned in the cemetery. The history of the whole area 
is here." 
Tambs has prepared plot maps of the old cemeteries in Columbia, the 
19th-Century Gold Rush town now a state historic park. Sharon Grout, a ranger 
at the park the last 11 years who oversees the cemeteries, lamented the 
vandalism, especially by Satanists. 
"Devil worshipers scrawl anti-religious pentagrams on the tombstones. They 
knock over grave markers and destroy them. We have caught groups in the 
cemetery at night when there is no reason for anyone to be there," Grout said. 
