U.S. ACCUSES SOVIET DIPLOMAT OF SPYING, ORDERS HIM TO LEAVE; 
ENVOY GOT DATA ON PROTECTION OF CLASSIFIED PAPERS 
The United States today accused a Soviet diplomat of spying and ordered him out 
of the country, the State Department said. 
Spokesman Charles E. Redman said Yuri Nikolayevich Pakhtusov, a member of the 
Soviet military mission, "has been declared persona non grata for engaging in 
activities incompatible with his diplomatic status," a diplomatic term for 
spying. 
Redman said Pakhtusov "received classified documents from an American employee 
of a firm with classified government contracts" but declined to identify either 
the American or the company. 
The documents "dealt with how the U.S. government protects classified and other 
sensitive information contained in its computer systems," he added. 
The FBI said Pakhtusov was arrested Wednesday before he had a chance to examine 
the classified documents. It was not disclosed how long he is being given to 
leave the United States. 
FBI Informed 
State Department spokesman Dennis Harter said Pakhtusov approached the American 
last August and asked about the possibility of acquiring the secret documents. 
The American reported the contact to the FBI, which began monitoring contacts 
between the two. 
FBI spokesman Nik Walsh said the case had no connection with the arrest last 
week of several West German computer "hackers" accused of selling codes to 
Soviet intelligence agents that would permit entry into Defense Department 
computer networks. 
Although the FBI routinely conducts surveillance of Soviet diplomats stationed 
in this country, it is rare when the United States makes public any accusations 
of spying. 
The Soviet Embassy was not immediately available for comment. 
The last time a Soviet official was expelled from the United States for alleged 
spying was on June 20, 1986. 
The FBI at the time said that Vladimir Izmaylou, an air attache at the Soviet 
Embassy in Washington, had been caught trying to steal top military secrets 
from a U.S. military officer posing as a traitor. 
Improved Relations 
The latest incident occurs during a period of dramatically improved U.S.-Soviet 
relations in arms control, human rights and regional cooperation, and it was 
uncertain how much this case might sour the atmosphere. 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III just met Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard 
A. Shevardnadze in Vienna this week for their first formal meeting since Baker 
came to office. 
