POP MUSIC REVIEW; 
JOHN PRINE, A MARK TWAIN GUITAR MAN, EARNS HERO HOOPLA; 
PERFORMANCE: AT THE COACH HOUSE, THE SINGER-SONGWRITER USES PARALLEL ACHE AND 
ABSURDITY TO DELIGHT HIS FANATICAL FOLLOWING. 
Given the consistent insight, heart and individual vision of John Prine's work 
since his debut nearly 20 years ago, it's a grievous oversight that America 
hasn't named him its poet laureate, or at least President. 
Instead, as "respected artist" has increasingly become a code word for 
"virtually unheard-of artist," the singer-songwriter has had no airplay to 
speak of and for the last seven years has had his records released only on his 
own cottage-industry Oh-Boy Records. 
Yet, as his career has sojourned along at the speed of shoes, Prine has built a 
rightly fanatical following, evident in the hero's welcome that greeted him 
when he took the stage Thursday for the first of two nights at the Coach House. 
Much like the wonderfully representative 1988 "John Prine Live" album -- 
recorded chiefly at the Coach House -- his 31-song set drew from all points of 
his career and, as such, explored many of the avenues and byways of American 
life. 
The most easily communicated of Prine's qualities is his humor. Examples 
Thursday included his "Let's Talk Dirty in Hawaiian"; an ode to organ donors 
("Please don't bury me in the cold, cold ground/I'd rather have them cut me up 
and pass me all around"), and a wealth of anecdotes, including a recent 
experience in Berlin. He bought a chunk of the Berlin Wall from a street 
vendor, he said, mostly because it looked like his home state of Illinois. 
Paying with too-large a bill, he was given a rock-size piece of wall as change. 
"They must have thought we were Fred and Wilma Flintstone," Prine deadpanned. 
He had gone with friends to Berlin in January "to see what fresh-baked freedom 
smells like right out of the oven." He came back with a new song, which 
included the lines: 
I want your East German kisses on my West German face 
 We'll hang old Gorby's picture up above the fireplace. . . . 
 If you show me your lederhosen, I'll take you to a shopping mall 
 Because tonight we're going dancing on the wall. 
 While covering the more crass and commercial aspects of the border's opening, 
his loose-gravel voice added a sense of wistfulness and one-to-one romance to 
the song. And its celebratory tone perhaps caught the moment better than all 
the laborious tomes written about the wall coming down. 
Prine mixed the fantastic with the commonplace in "The Bottomless Lake." To the 
question of just what goes on in a car sinking in a bottomless lake, Prine 
posited a family eating chicken legs and smoking all available cigarettes, 
while: 
Papa played the music on the radio 
 Mama rocked the baby to sleep 
 He said he would have taken the other road 
 But he didn't think the lake was this deep. 
 It isn't merely a clever wordsmith behind Prine's wry smile. Rather, like a 
Mark Twain with a guitar, his lyrics could often be at once funny, bittersweet 
and true. 
With such imagery as "heat lightning burnt the sky like alcohol" or the 
childhood memory of Green River, "where the air smelled like snakes," Prine 
needed no more than the space of a song to create a palpable world. The latter 
line is from his "Paradise," a powerfully evocative song that uses the true 
story of a childhood haunt being strip-mined as a metaphor for lost innocence. 
These often mean-spirited times are encapsulated in one line from his "People 
Puttin' People Down": "People without love sometimes build a fence around the 
garden up above." One of the most heartbreaking songs of the last 20 years must 
be his "Sam Stone," with a child's-eye view of a broken Vietnam veteran: 
"There's a hole in daddy's arm where the money goes." 
Even though Prine delivered it right after the uproarious "Let's Talk Dirty in 
Hawaiian," his "Hello in There" ached with the isolation of aging. It was that 
parallel ache and absurdity running through Prine's show, perhaps, that gave 
the performance such a palpable sense of life. 
