DOCTORS CONTEND HONECKER AND TOP AIDES ARE TOO ILL FOR TRIAL; 
EAST GERMANY: THE FORMER HARD-LINE RULER IS CHARGED WITH CORRUPTION. HE HAS 
CANCER. 
Ousted Communist leader Erich Honecker and his former key aides are too feeble 
to answer corruption charges and will likely never go to trial, prosecutors 
said Wednesday. 
A team of "prominent, independent" doctors, including a psychiatrist, examined 
the cancer-stricken Honecker and his deputies, said Dieter Platt, spokesman for 
the state prosecutor. 
"The final decision is up to the court," Platt told The Times in a telephone 
interview, "but at this point, it (prosecution) doesn't look likely." 
Only two of the 10 former Politburo and parliamentary members under criminal 
charges are in jail, Platt said. The rest, including former Prime Minister 
Willi Stoph, are considered too sickly or senile. 
Honecker, 77, is recuperating in a village outside Berlin from surgery to 
remove a tumor. Doctors have advised that he be moved from the cramped garret 
room where a village pastor gave has given sanctuary, but angry citizens 
hounded him away from a more spacious government villa. 
"Feelings here are very complicated," Platt said. "For many reasons, not the 
least of which is German character, the people long for accountability." 
Hundreds of citizens have called or written the prosecutor, Platt said. 
On the streets of East Berlin, people expressed anger at the possibility of no 
trials. 
"I'm not satisfied," said auto mechanic Andreas Kloebbe, 30. "It's not right. 
How come they're all suddenly at death's door? They weren't too old or too sick 
to commit the crimes." 
Werner Michael, 68, a Leipzig resident, agreed. 
"They had so many luxuries and lived so well, while all the time the majority 
of people were struggling for a decent life," he said. "Yes, there should be 
trials -- fair trials, though you could say we were all guilty. We're all 
part-victim and part-participants." 
Such sentiments are common here these days. East Germans find themselves 
curiously frozen in history, unable to fully account for their Stalinist past 
or fully plan their democratic future. 
First steps toward forming a new government have proved shaky since the 
country's first free elections March 18. Rumors of secret-police collaboration 
have dogged newly elected Parliament members and stalled coalition talks, which 
are now scheduled to begin in earnest today between the Christian Democrats and 
the runner-up Social Democrats. 
Grass-roots citizen groups have called for mass demonstrations today to demand 
that all 400 deputies in the new Volkskammer, or Parliament, be checked for any 
ties to the dismantled Stasi security police. The state prosecutor's office has 
said that such an investigation must be left to the Volkskammer itself, since 
deputies enjoy immunity. 
Officials say the Stasis once numbered 85,000, with 109,000 informants. Files 
were kept on about 6 million of the country's 16 million citizens, whose 
everyday lives were often scrutinized for even the slightest hint of disloyalty 
to the hard-line regime. 
The former Stasi chief, Erich Mielke, is among the ex-Politburo members 
reportedly unfit for trial. The 82-year-old general, described as "a senile old 
man" by deputy prosecutor Lothar Reuter in the West German daily newspaper 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung, is accused of wrongfully imprisoning people and theft. 
The latter charge stems from the routine Stasi interception of mail, Platt 
said. 
Treason charges were dropped earlier this week against Honecker and his aides, 
but they are still charged with misuse of power and corruption. The others 
include former Economics Minister Guenter Mittag, who remains imprisoned but is 
said to suffer from severe diabetes; former Parliament President Horst 
Sindermann, 74, who has heart disease, and former Central Committee secretary 
and Politburo member Hermann Axen, 74. 
The prosecutor's office declined to provide further details about their health 
problems, citing doctor-patient confidentiality. 
No court dates have been set, but the official news agency ADN said a final 
decision about their fitness to stand trial is likely next month. 
