TRAPPING THE LIGHT FANTASTIC; 
RESEARCHERS' LASER USES BORROW PAGES FROM SCIENCE FICTION 
Nineteen years ago, Arthur Ashkin performed a remarkable feat at Bell 
Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J. The physicist levitated a tiny glass sphere with 
a beam of laser light. 
The microscopic orb, no wider than a human hair, hovered motionless in space, 
helplessly ensnared by some magical force that seemingly defied both gravity 
and common sense. 
Even though the focused light from Ashkin's laser was almost a billion times 
more concentrated than sunlight and could slice through a sheet of metal, the 
beam passed harmlessly through the transparent glass bead, or microsphere. 
Ashkin's measurements revealed that the laser light was refracting, or bending, 
through the microsphere and subjecting it to a subtle combination of 
surprisingly strong forces. A microsphere placed in the laser beam is drawn to 
the focal point -- the narrowest part of the beam. Electromagnetic forces 
perpendicular to the direction of the beam also keep the microsphere centered. 
The result was startling. Like some force beam in a science fiction movie, the 
laser light trapped the microsphere within its focus. When the beam's focus 
moved, the microsphere helplessly followed. 
Today, years of development have transformed Ashkin's laser light trap into a 
new, powerful research tool with mind-boggling applications. 
Laser beams are being used to capture living microorganisms. And traps made 
from nothing but laser light can bring speeding atoms to a halt and imprison 
them for minutes at a time, allowing scientists to study them with a clarity 
never before possible. 
Some of the applications under investigation range from automated sorting of 
biological cells to the production of antimatter rocket fuel for interstellar 
space flight -- all made possible by the purity and intensity of laser light. 
It was Ashkin's research group at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories who discovered 
that laser light traps also worked on microscopic organisms. 
Reporting on their work in the journal Science, Ashkin and his colleague J. M. 
Dziedzic wrote: "We have used the laser light trap as 'optical tweezers' for 
moving live single and multiple bacteria while being viewed under a 
high-resolution optical microscope." 
The invention of "optical tweezers" could revolutionize microbiology by 
providing hands-off control on a microscopic scale. 
Tudor N. Buican, a researcher at the Life Sciences Division of Los Alamos 
National Laboratory in New Mexico, is perfecting optical tweezers into a 
computerized instrument he calls a "microscopic robot." Using a computer to 
control the positioning of laser beams, Buican can automatically sort and 
manipulate cells inside an airtight chamber while observing the whole process 
on a video monitor. 
For Buican, optical cell manipulators have distinct advantages over existing 
mechanical cell manipulators because they are non-invasive, more precise and 
can operate through the windows of a sealed container. These capabilities are 
vital in the study of infectious diseases such as AIDS, in which contamination 
is a serious concern. 
Optical tweezers could also be used to probe the inner workings of living cells 
in unique detail. David Clapham of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., has 
proposed inserting chemically treated microspheres inside of cells and moving 
them around with optical tweezers in order to map the biochemistry of the cell. 
"The microsphere can be coated with a compound that senses calcium, for 
example," Clapham explained. "The fluorescence of the bead would change to 
reflect local calcium concentrations." Clapham believes the same technique 
could be used to chart other ion concentrations within the cell, which is 
important for understanding cell function. 
At the Beckman Laser Institute at UC Irvine, Michael Berns is already using 
laser light traps to study the biomechanics of cells. His investigations have 
recently uncovered surprisingly high spring tensions on the chromosomes within 
a cell. 
"What we do," Berns explained, "is grab the chromosomes with the optical trap, 
and that causes the cell to exert a very strong force to pull them out of the 
optical trap. When they get out of the trap, there's so much force pulling on 
them that they then recoil at an enormously high rate of speed." Berns hopes 
laser light traps will help unravel some of the mystery surrounding the 
physical mechanisms of cell division. 
Perhaps the most fascinating aspect of laser light traps is their ability to 
cool the atoms of a gas to record low temperatures. 
To cool a gas, the average speed of its atoms must be reduced, and when the 
atoms are at rest, the temperature has reached absolute zero. 
Although absolute zero (0 Kelvin) is technically unattainable, William 
Phillips, Paul Lett and others at the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology in Gaithersburg, Md., came within 43 millionths of a degree of it 
last summer by using the forces of laser light to slow and capture atoms of 
sodium. 
The scientists first slow down the atoms by bombarding them with photons of 
laser light traveling in the opposite direction, a process that Paul Lett 
likens to throwing Ping-Pong balls at onrushing bowling balls. Once the atoms 
have been slowed to a virtual stop, they are snagged in an "optical molasses" 
created by six opposing laser beams pointing east-west, north-south and 
up-down. For a few minutes this collection of atoms becomes the coldest spot on 
earth. 
Optical molasses amounts to a lot more than just an esoteric refrigerator, 
however. Physicists are interested in using the technique to test their 
theories of the atom by exploring the interaction between slow-moving atoms. 
Spectroscopists can also measure the light emission and absorption of 
ultra-cold atoms with unprecedented precision. 
Optical molasses could improve the accuracy of atomic clocks by 10,000 times. 
And there are even schemes to use laser light traps for the manufacture and 
storage of solid antimatter. 
Antimatter, as any Trekie will explain, is the "flip side" of ordinary matter, 
and when the two opposites unite, they obliterate each other with an intense 
burst of pure energy. 
Laser light traps might one day make it possible to contain antimatter and 
harness its enormous potential energy. If so, the stars would literally be 
within our grasp. 
