HOME IMPROVEMENT; 
ON THE HOUSE; 
FAN CAN RID BATHROOM OF TOO MUCH HUMIDITY 
QUESTION: A licensed contractor is fixing my bathroom, which had a leak between 
the tile and the bathtub. I asked him if I needed a bathroom fan to get rid of 
the humidity that goes into the bedroom after showers. He stated I didn't need 
one because I have a window in the bathroom. I would like your opinion about 
this. Also, if you recommend installing a fan even with the existence of a 
window, what brand do you recommend? Is there a noiseless one? 
ANSWER: Your contractor is correct. Section 1205 of the Uniform Building Code 
(1979) states that where bathrooms have natural ventilation by means of 
openable exterior openings (such as windows or skylights) with a minimum of 1 
1/2 square feet, a mechanical ventilation system or bath fan is not required. 
So much for building code minimums. Now we must address specifically what your 
needs dictate. Granted, if you have an operable window, you aren't required to 
have a bath fan but you may in fact need one. There is a definite difference 
here. 
Your description of an abundance of steam accumulating in the bedroom is a sure 
sign that a fan is needed. We strongly recommend that you consider installing 
one. 
There is no such thing as a noiseless exhaust fan. Some, however, are less 
noisy than others. Fans are rated by the cubic feet per minute (CFM) of air 
that they move and are also rated by the level of noise they emit. Remember, 
the building code does require that a bath fan provide a minimum of five air 
changes an hour. Some simple math will tell you just what size fan you will 
need.Draining Water Heater Enhances Efficiency 
Q: Is there something I can do to improve the efficiency of my water heater? It 
seems like the higher my utility bill goes, the longer it takes for me to get 
hot water. 
A: There are several things that you may do to improve the performance and 
longevity of a water heater. The fact that your utility bill is high and that 
you are having trouble maintaining hot water are no doubt related. 
First, it's a good idea to drain the water heater at least once annually, and 
twice annually in areas where the water is abundant with mineral deposits. This 
will prevent the accumulation of sediment at the bottom of the tank, which 
greatly inhibits the effectiveness of the gas burners below. 
An electric water heater will also benefit from this because once drained, you 
can remove the heating elements and clean any debris that has accumulated on 
them. It is not unusual for these elements to eventually corrode and become 
nonfunctional. 
Draining the water heater is a relatively simple task that generaly doesn't 
even require any tools. Start by turning off the gas or electricity to the 
appliance, and close the cold water valve at the top of the tank. 
Connect a garden hose to the drain valve located at the bottom of the tank and 
open the valve a couple of turns. You will also want to open at least one 
hot-water faucet somewhere in the house. This will let air into the tank and 
help it to drain. Once the tank is empty, turn the cold water valve at the top 
of the tank back on, and close the drain valve (after water from the drain 
appears clear). 
The faucet that was opened when draining should remain open, allowing air to 
escape until water comes rushing out of it. Disconnect the hose and restore 
power to the unit.Sources for Locating Qualified Contractors 
Q: I contacted 12 painting contractors (referrals, advertisements, Yellow 
Pages) and scheduled appointments. Seven came and looked at the exterior of the 
building. All seven said they would be "calling in a few days and would put 
together a bid for the job." 
Only three responded with a written estimate. I don't feel totally comfortable 
with the three estimates I did receive. However, I don't want to pick 10 more 
contractors out of the Yellow Pages, wasting my time with contractors who don't 
show up, do show up but don't submit an estimate and those that don't call 
back. 
Frankly, I'm disappointed. What am I doing wrong? My list of contractors with 
no response is longer than the list of those who did. 
A: You aren't doing anything wrong. As a matter of fact we want to congratulate 
you for all of the valuable time that you are investing in the selection of a 
contractor. It is apparent that you recognize the value of contracting with a 
professional to improve your home. 
Your "buyer beware" attitude may tend to be exhausting now, but you will reap 
the fruits of your labor when the painting starts. 
The methods that you have used to locate contractors are good ones (such as 
referrals, advertisements and the Yellow Pages). However, your list is not 
complete. Many counties have a Builders Exchange that maintains a membership 
roster by trade. They may even make a few recommendations if you ask. 
Another good way to find a good contractor is through a national trade 
organization with a branch in the area. Generally, these organizations maintain 
stringent criteria for membership and require their members to adhere to a code 
of ethics and high business standards. 
In addition to these precautions, you should also contact the Contractors State 
License Board and the Better Business Bureau to ensure that the contractors you 
are considering are in good standing with these respective agencies. 
Finally, once you have found someone you are comfortable with, make sure that 
he has all of the proper insurance required to perform the work, and that his 
contract is fair and includes everything that you have discussed. Remember, if 
it's not in writing, chances are that you won't get it. 
The Careys are syndicated columnists and general contractors in the San 
Francisco Bay area. Address questions to the Carey brothers at 510 Garcia Ave. 
No. E, Pittsburg, Calif. 94545. 
