SECURITY TIGHTENED BEFORE STRIKE BEGAN 
Federal authorities announced Friday they had made "extensive" preparations to 
ensure that air safety standards are upheld and to prevent violence or sabotage 
at airports in connection with the Eastern Airlines strike. 
Immediately after President Bush announced that he would not intervene to head 
off the strike that started as scheduled at 9 p.m. PST, the Federal Aviation 
Administration said it had set up a central command post in Miami, where 
Eastern is headquartered, to monitor the airline's operations and all its 
maintenance facilities. 
The agency said it would screen mechanics hired to replace striking Eastern 
workers to make sure they met government standards. 
Federal surveillance and aircraft inspections also were stepped up at all of 
Eastern's 11 hub cities and foreign operations and all 2,100 FAA aircraft 
inspectors were placed on alert to be dispatched to any Eastern facility "as 
needed," the agency said in a statement. 
The FAA will "make sure that every plane Eastern puts into the air during this 
strike is airworthy and safe," said Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner. 
"If the FAA finds a plane that does not conform with standards, it will be shut 
down," he said. 
He added: "We will not tolerate any threats of sabotage . . . on the ground or 
in the air." 
FAA Associate Administrator Anthony J. Broderick said the agency has ordered 
tighter security at airports serving Eastern, its sister airline Continental 
and other airlines whose mechanics are represented by the International Assn. 
of Machinists, the union striking Eastern. 
Airport security officers were put on special alert, and instructed to notify 
local police immediately if there is any violence on picket lines or threat of 
vandalism or sabotage to equipment, he said. 
It was not immediately clear how serious the prospect of sabotage was. Skinner 
said there had not yet been any firm threats, but added that "it is clear . . . 
from the activity last week that the animosity between the union and the 
company is very intense." 
Federal officials were also concerned about the possibility of confrontations 
on picket lines that might be set up by sympathetic unions to disrupt 
operations at other airlines. 
Meanwhile, Amtrak announced it would add 12 high-speed Metroliner trains in 
runs between New York and Boston and New York and Washington on Monday to help 
offset any loss in airline service. 
But Amtrak spokesmen also said rail service could be cut substantially -- in 
areas outside the East as well as along the seaboard -- if Amtrak personnel 
decide to honor the machinists' picket lines. The agency said it is assigning 
supervisory personnel with training to operate some trains. 
The U.S. Postal Service said it has prepared "contingency plans" for keeping 
mail delivery going by diverting the mail to other airlines and using chartered 
planes if Eastern is forced to ground substantial numbers of its aircraft. 
Ralph Stewart, a spokesman for the Postal Service, said agency planners believe 
the strike "should not have a severe impact" on mail delivery even if Eastern 
finds it must shut down. 
White House Press spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said that in view of the 
possibility of transportation disruptions, the Transportation Department "will 
monitor the situation and . . . take whatever steps are needed to protect the 
safety of the traveling public." 
He said Bush was urging responsible labor officials "not to try to influence 
resolution of this dispute by disrupting the nation's transportation system 
through secondary boycotts" against other airlines. 
