UNOCAL CONFIRMS DISCUSSIONS WITH VIETNAM 
A major American oil company confirmed Thursday that it had conducted 
exploratory business talks with Vietnam, even though the U.S. government has a 
trade embargo against the Southeast Asian nation. 
"A representative of Unocal Corp. did visit Vietnam in an exploratory meeting 
several weeks ago," said Art Bentley, a spokesman for the Los Angeles-based 
company. 
"There are no plans to proceed any further. That's about all I want to say 
about it," he said. 
He noted that the U.S. government has maintained an embargo on trading with the 
former enemy since the end of the Vietnam war in 1975. 
On Wednesday, a senior Vietnamese economic official said two U.S. oil companies 
had begun investigating the possibility of investing in oil exploration in 
Vietnam with approval of the U.S. State Department. 
The two companies were identified as Unocal and Sun Co., headquartered in 
Radnor, Pa., by Nguyen Xuan Oanh, a member of the Vietnamese National Assembly 
and an economic adviser to the government. 
Venture With Soviets 
Sun denied sending any representative to Vietnam for talks. 
Vietnam, in a joint venture with the Soviet Union, currently produces about 
15,000 barrels of oil a day from the Bach Ho (White Tiger) field off the coast 
of southern Vietnam, a field that was discovered by American oil companies in 
the waning days of the Vietnam War. 
The Southeast Asian nation has signed exploration contracts with British 
Petroleum, the French company Total, Royal Dutch-Shell of the Netherlands and 
Petrofina of Belgium in the past year. 
In Washington, a State Department official, who spoke on the condition that he 
not be identified, said Wednesday that many U.S. companies call and are told 
the U.S. embargo against Vietnam still stands. 
"We tell them it's all right to go and talk business. But it's against the law 
to do business," the official said. 
Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia is the main roadblock to U.S. normalization 
of relations and lifting of the embargo, he said. 
