MIKE DOWNEY: ALL IN ALL, A GOOD SEASON FOR UCLA AND ITS NEW COACH 
Curses. Heeled again. 
Well, what are we to make of UCLA's 88-81 loss Sunday to North Carolina, which 
ended the Bruins' dreams of -- as the saying goes -- Recapturing the Golden 
Era? Did Jim Harrick's baby bears do themselves proud against Dean Smith's Tar 
Heels, or did they -- as another saying goes -- Blow a Golden Opportunity? 
Depends on how you look at these things. 
Yes, UCLA played well. The Bruins hustled and muscled and had the favored Heels 
right where they wanted them -- down by as many as 10 points. They gave it the 
old college tournament try. 
No, UCLA did not play well. The Bruins caught Carolina on a bad day, a day 
without J.R. Reid, and still couldn't come any closer than seven points. 
So, what do you say, Bruin boosters? Were you proud of your boys? Or ready to 
toss a brick through the television screen? 
Our opinion is: 
(Pause for dramatic effect.) 
Let's be kind. Let's be gentle. Let's be grateful to the dead. 
The Bruins worked their socks off. They gave what they had. They sent a couple 
of freshmen and a couple of juniors out there to challenge a Tar Heel team 
that, even without that old curfew-breaker J.R. Reid, was stocked with talent 
from Dean Smith's elbow to the last seat on the bench. 
What Sunday's game did show was just how far UCLA still has to come. Taking 
Reid away from Carolina is tantamount to taking Hank Gathers away from Loyola 
Marymount. Look at how Illinois fell apart for a few weeks without Kendall 
Gill, and he was just a playmaking guard. Reid is big and powerful. He's the La 
Brea of Tar Heels. 
All UCLA could do was try. The spirit, however, was weaker than the flesh. 
Compared to other top college clubs, the Bruins' front line looks skinny and 
soft. Trevor Wilson, Kevin Walker and Don MacLean worked long and hard to hold 
off North Carolina, but toward the end, the Heels seemed to muscle the ball 
underneath the basket at will. 
The play that really put UCLA away is one Harrick might watch a few hundred 
times on the game films, once he has the stomach for it. It is a play that 
might have prevented the Bruins' first-year coach from pulling off the big 
upset and advancing to the Sweet 16. 
Less than a minute remained when Carolina went into a four-corner offense, 
trying desperately to preserve a three-point lead. For no reason in particular, 
Jeff Lebo took it upon himself to dart toward the basket, driving for a lay-up. 
Darrick Martin, the UCLA freshman guard, cut into Lebo's path and planted 
himself. He appeared to be in perfect position to take a charge by Lebo, which 
would have turned the ball over to the Bruins with 44 seconds to play. 
At the last instant, though, senior forward Charles Rochelin came flying from 
nowhere to go for the block. Rochelin fouled Lebo instead. The North Carolina 
guard made one of two free throws, putting four points' distance between his 
team and the Bruins, who now had to score twice. 
Turned out they never scored again. 
Well, many a tear has to fall, but it's all in the game. You can't blame 
Rochelin for doing his best. Had he blocked Lebo's shot, they would have 
carried him on their shoulders all the way back to Los Angeles. 
How was UCLA's first season under Harrick? Not bad. There was no conference 
championship, but Arizona and Stanford ranked among the nation's top teams. 
There were few scintillating upsets, but at least there was that funny phantom 
goaltending victory over Louisville. There also was a defeat at Arizona that 
was as lopsided as any UCLA team has ever endured, but the Bruins gave the 
nation's No. 1 team fits at a later date. 
High marks, overall. 
The only key player Harrick will lose for next season is Richardson, who 
improved steadily throughout his career, but still attempted to do too much -- 
Senior Syndrome, we call it -- with the game on the line against North 
Carolina. Toodle-ooh, Pooh, and thanks for the memories. 
The entire starting front line returns, and MacLean should be a stud if he 
either lifts more barbells or eats more often at McDonald's this summer. The 
kid needs some meat on his bones. 
As for Martin, the freshman guard who at first was reluctant to play for UCLA, 
he should become better than Richardson in the long run -- and maybe closer to 
sooner than later. Keep an eye on Harrick's Darrick. 
Meantime, North Carolina and North Carolina State move on, along with two other 
Atlantic Coast Conference teams and four from the Big Ten. It's clear to see 
where college ball's balance of power lies. 
As long as UCLA can't win the championship, somebody has to. Who will that 
somebody be? 
Arizona or Oklahoma, that's who. 
Tell the ACC and Big Ten to bring as many teams as they like. Ain't gonna 
matter. 
