A-BOMB TRIGGERS FOR IRAQ SEIZED IN LONDON; 
NUCLEAR WEAPONS: A U.S.-BRITISH STING OPERATION INTERCEPTS 40 DEVICES BEING 
SMUGGLED FROM CALIFORNIA. 
U.S. and British agents in London seized 40 Iraq-bound nuclear bomb triggers 
that had been smuggled out of Southern California, officials said Wednesday. 
Six people, including two Iraqi nationals, were arrested. 
The raid on a cargo hangar at Heathrow Airport climaxed an extraordinary 
international sting operation that began in San Diego 18 months ago, 
authorities said. 
"It was a sting all the way," said one State Department source. 
"We've stopped some very serious business from going forward," said U.S. 
Customs Commissioner Carol Hallett. 
Neither Hallett nor other American or British officials would discuss the 
operation in any detail. It was not clear if the triggers were sought by the 
Iraqi government or if that nation has developed nuclear weapons capability. 
Nor did officials explain what had prompted the investigation. 
At the White House, President Bush said in a statement that the arrests 
underscored his "deep concern about the issue of nuclear proliferation in the 
Middle East." 
The President added: "We again call upon nuclear suppliers to exercise special 
restraint in providing materials related to the development of nuclear, 
chemical and biological weapons and intermediate-range missiles in the volatile 
area. 
"Furthermore, we urge all states in the area to adhere to the non-proliferation 
treaty. Iraq is a signatory of that treaty. Iraqi officials are well aware of 
our views on nuclear proliferation, which we have made clear on several 
occasions." 
A sealed indictment in the case has been returned in federal court in San Diego 
and may be unsealed today, sources said. 
According to an NBC News report, CSI Technologies Inc. of San Marcos, near San 
Diego, alerted officials to an attempt by two Iraqis to buy the sophisticated 
electronic devices used to trigger nuclear weapons. CSI executives could not be 
reached Wednesday for comment. 
A second U.S. firm, EG&amp;G of Wellesley, Mass., said late Wednesday that it, 
too, had been cooperating with authorities. 
EG&amp;G's president, Donald M. Kerr, said in a statement that the firm had 
provided customs agents with more than 40 inoperable trigger devices, known as 
krytrons, apparently for use as decoys in the sting. 
EG&amp;G, which has a sales office in San Diego, is the only domestic 
manufacturer of the devices, which are strictly controlled by the U.S. 
government. Such devices generally are acquired at advanced stages in the 
production of nuclear weapons, nuclear experts said. 
EG&amp;G is a major contractor for the Department of Energy, which is 
responsible for producing nuclear weapons for the nation's arsenal. EG&amp;G 
also runs the department's Nevada Test Site and its facilities at Rocky Flats 
in Colorado, the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory in Idaho Falls and the 
Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Fla. 
Sources said that a crate containing the EG&amp;G trigger devices was shipped 
to London earlier this month aboard a TWA plane out of Los Angeles 
International Airport. At Heathrow, the crate was stored at a TWA cargo depot 
for several days. Authorities moved in as the container was about to be loaded 
onto an Iraqi Airways flight bound for Baghdad, sources said. 
In a statement, Britain's Customs and Excise Department named three of those 
arrested as Ali Daghir, 49, a company director with dual Iraqi and British 
nationality; Lebanese engineer Toufic Fouad Amyuni, 37; and export executive 
Jeanine Celestine Speckman, 41, a Frenchwoman married to a Briton. The other 
three people arrested were not identified either by British or U.S. officials. 
NBC News identified Daghir as the main suspect and said he allegedly posed in 
London as an importer of frozen french fries from the United States. 
The Associated Press reported from London that British authorities said they 
had also arrested Iraqi national Omar Latif, who was immediately served with a 
deportation order, and a Cypriot with a British passport who was released after 
questioning. The Home Office said Latif was being deported because of 
"attempted breaches of legislation governing the export of strategic goods from 
the United Kingdom." The Iraqi ambassador was summoned to the Foreign Office 
and informed of the expulsion order. 
It was unclear if Daghir or Latif had any ties to the Iraqi government. 
"We are deferring (on the release of any details) to the British government at 
their request, due to the extreme sensitivity to Iraq," said U.S. Customs 
spokesman Dennis Shimkoski. 
He was referring to the execution in Baghdad two weeks ago of Farzad Bazoft, a 
British-based journalist convicted of espionage. 
The President's concerns were echoed by experts in nuclear proliferation. 
"This just points out the shortcomings in the international system, which isn't 
going to catch them every time," said Deborah Holland, issues director for the 
Nuclear Control Institute, a Washington-based organization that studies 
terrorism and nuclear proliferation. 
Gary Milhollin, director of the Washington-based Wisconsin Project on Nuclear 
Arms Control, said the incident has significant implications. 
"The first thing it means is that a country which has joined the 
non-proliferation treaty (Iraq) has violated it by trying to make the bomb," 
Milhollin said. "The device they were trying to import secretly obviously was 
intended to make a nuclear weapon. So they have been caught red-handed in 
violation of this treaty." 
Times staff writers Douglas Frantz, David Lauter and Robin Wright in Washington 
and Alan Abrahamson in San Diego contributed to this story. 
IRAQI SMUGGLING PLOT ABORTED 
USA: 
Nuclear weapon triggers go from California to New York to Britain. 
Heathrow Airport: 
Triggers found in cargo shed. Several suspects arrested. 
Baghdad: 
In 1981 Israel destroyed nuclear power station which it alleged would produce 
nuclear weapons. 
