SACRAMENTO FILE: ASSEMBLY 
Bill Introductions: 
Firearms: AJR 24 by Assemblyman Mike Roos (D-Los Angeles) would request 
Congress to enact a national law to ban the future use, manufacture, sale, 
importation and possession of semiautomatic rifles, shotguns and pistols that 
are not legitimate hunting and sporting weapons. 
Firearms: AJR 25 by Assemblywoman Jackie Speier (D-South San Francisco) would 
ask Congress to require all states to share information about criminal records 
or serious mental health problems of people who attempt to purchase a firearm 
in any state. 
Los Angeles County: ACA 26 by Assemblyman Tom Bane (D-Tarzana) would require 
Los Angeles County to have an elected chief executive officer instead of one 
appointed by the Board of Supervisors. 
Rent: AB 1082 by Assemblyman John Burton (D-San Francisco) would establish a 
state program to provide rent subsidies to low-income households. 
Military Bases: AB 990 by Assemblyman Sam Farr (D-Carmel) would create a state 
task force to address local needs arising from military base closures and to 
assist in solving resulting worker retraining and economic conversion problems. 
Internment: ACR 37 by Assemblywoman Jackie Speier (D-South San Francisco) would 
request that approved school textbooks reflect Japanese-American internment 
during World War II as a violation of human rights rather than an act of 
military necessity. 
Bonds: ACA 25 by Assemblyman Bill Bradley (R-San Marcos) would reduce from 
two-thirds to 60% the voter approval rate required for local bond issues that 
increase taxes under Proposition 13. 
VDTs: AB 955 by Assemblyman Tom Hayden (D-Santa Monica) would require computer 
video display terminals used in the workplace to meet certain design and 
ergonomic standards designed to ensure safe and healthful working conditions. 
Senate 
Floor Action: 
Kidnapers: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 36-0 vote a bill (SB 117) by 
Sen. Bill Lockyer (D-Hayward) to authorize the governor to offer a reward of up 
to $10,000 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of certain 
kidnapers. The reward could be increased to $50,000 if the victim of the 
kidnaping was under 18 years of age. 
Bill Introductions: 
Alcohol: SB 760 by Sen. William Campbell (R-Hacienda Heights) would set a 
minimum penalty for those convicted of selling alcohol to a minor of 48 hours 
in a county jail and a fine of $250. 
Senior Citizens: SB 752 by Sen. Dan McCorquodale (D-San Jose) would allow 
people 65 and older to purchase for $5 a year passes good for unlimited daytime 
use of most state parks. 
Stolen Cars: SB 709 by Sen. Larry Stirling (R-San Diego) would require 
automobile insurance companies to pay $500 rewards to people who find stolen 
cars and report them to law enforcement agencies. 
Gang Violence: SB 665 by Sen. Ed Davis (R-Valencia) would require the state 
Department of Education to develop a model gang violence prevention curriculum. 
Sex Offenders: SB 674 by Sen. Newton R. Russell (R-Glendale) would provide for 
rewards of up to $500 for information leading to the conviction, probation or 
parole revocation of convicted sex offenders who fail to comply with the law 
requiring them to notify local law enforcement officials of a change in 
residence. 
Judges: SB 719 by Sen. Marian Bergeson (R-Newport Beach) would increase the 
number of Orange County Superior Court judges from 59 to 69 and the number of 
South Orange County Municipal Court judges from four to seven. 
Pearl Harbor Day: SB 697 by Sen. Don Rogers (R-Bakersfield) would require the 
governor to annually proclaim Dec. 7 as Pearl Harbor Day. 
