TIBET DISSIDENTS ARE ROUNDED UP; 
MARTIAL-LAW CRACKDOWN FOLLOWS PRO-INDEPENDENCE RIOTS 
Suspected pro-independence protesters, some screaming in terror, were rounded 
up by police and soldiers in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa on Wednesday as the 
city began its first day under martial law. 
The heavy crackdown, which came after three days of clashes in which police 
shot and killed at least 11 and perhaps 50 or more, appeared to have brought 
relative calm to the city. 
All foreigners, with the exception of a handful of people holding teaching or 
business jobs in Lhasa, have been ordered to leave the city by today. Many 
Tibetans fear that once those potential witnesses have been removed, a fierce 
crackdown will take place against those who participated in this week's clashes 
and any who dare to protest in the streets again. 
Fear engulfed many of those involved in the protests. Security forces raided 
homes in the city's Tibetan quarter, arresting suspects and taking them away in 
trucks, according to foreign tourists in Lhasa interviewed by telephone from 
Beijing. 
An American tourist described seeing a terrified young Tibetan woman dragged by 
soldiers from the stone-walled courtyard of a residential compound. 
"She was screaming and crying and was pulled by many troops into the back of an 
open truck and driven off," he said. "The truck kept coming back and forth. 
Each time they'd arrest someone. They seemed to be doing it pretty 
systematically." 
Police had photographed many demonstrators and rioters during the clashes and 
are now in a position to seek out those individuals. 
Tibetans "are afraid that . . . whatever people they (police) can identify are 
going to get arrested and maybe executed," another American traveler said. 
"Tibetans think a lot of people are going to get killed, and that's why the 
foreigners (who might inform the outside world) are being forced to leave." 
'Restraint' Seen as Weakness 
Doje Cering, a pro-Chinese ethnic Tibetan who heads the Tibet Autonomous Region 
government, was quoted on China's national radio Wednesday as saying that 
"separatists" advocating Tibetan independence had taken the government's 
"restrained" stance toward previous demonstrations as a sign of weakness. 
Three previous pro-independence demonstrations in the past 18 months have been 
suppressed after police opened fire on protesters. Various reports have placed 
the death toll in these incidents anywhere from 15 to 41. After each incident, 
dozens or hundreds of Tibetans were imprisoned, with most released again after 
several weeks or months. Some have been sentenced to long prison terms, and 
Western human rights organizations have reported allegations of torture of 
prisoners by electric cattle prods and other means. 
Authorities now say these protests were handled too leniently. 
"Now is the time for a radical solution," Doje said, according to the radio 
report. "If we don't adopt that now, it will seriously influence our social 
stability." 
The current troubles in Lhasa began Sunday when about a dozen Buddhist monks 
and nuns staged a pro-independence demonstration, which soon escalated into a 
rock-and-bottle-throwing clash with police. Police shootings and widespread 
rioting followed. Official reports say that the rioting came first, while 
foreign tourists say that police gunfire ignited the subsequent violence. 
The official New China News Agency has reported that 11 Tibetans and one 
policeman have died in the violence. Most tourists have placed the number 
killed this week at 20 to 50. Some Tibetans in Lhasa have told tourists that 
about 100 people died. 
China, which has firmly controlled Tibet since 1951, views advocacy of Tibetan 
independence as treason. The region was part of the Chinese empire during the 
Qing Dynasty but had de facto independence after 1911. 
Friday is the 30th anniversary of the beginning of an abortive anti-Chinese 
uprising that resulted in the Dalai Lama, traditionally the temporal and 
spiritual ruler of Tibet, fleeing to exile in India. Until martial law was 
declared, there were widespread expectations among Chinese authorities and 
Tibetans that Friday might be a day of especially severe conflict. March 17, 
the anniversary of the day the Dalai Lama fled Lhasa, has been viewed as 
another potential trouble date. 
It is unclear whether any Tibetans will dare to stage demonstrations now that 
thousands of Chinese People's Liberation Army soldiers are deployed in the 
city. 
The Dalai Lama's administration-in-exile in India issued a statement Wednesday 
condemning the declaration of martial law but reiterating a call for 
negotiations on Tibet's future. 
"Despite the current tragic events, we are still ready to hold talks with the 
Chinese so that a peaceful solution can be found," Tashi Wongdi, the Dalai 
Lama's chief representative in New Delhi, declared. "We are willing to meet the 
Chinese any day in Geneva." 
China offered last year to hold talks with the Dalai Lama if he first dropped 
demands for Tibetan independence. The Dalai Lama accepted the offer but wants 
the agenda to discuss "a self-governing democratic entity" in Tibet that would 
leave only defense and foreign affairs in Beijing's hands. China views this 
proposal as a disguised form of independence. Although contacts between the two 
sides continue, there has been no visible progress toward opening formal talks. 
The exiled leader's statement expressed fear that with martial law in place, 
China may "resort to more repressive methods." 
"The imposition of martial law reveals that the Chinese have lost control of 
the situation in Tibet," it added. "If, as the Chinese claim, only a handful of 
people are involved, we don't see any reason why they have to resort to such an 
extreme step." 
A report from Lhasa on Wednesday by the New China News Agency used almost 
idyllic terms to describe the quick results of martial law. The agency said 
shopkeepers and Buddhist worshipers praised the return of order to the city. 
A middle-aged Tibetan woman who came out to pray at the Jokhang Temple in 
central Lhasa was quoted as declaring: "Since martial law was declared, I have 
a strong sense of safety. I needn't worry any more that flying stones might 
hurt or kill me when I come here simply to pray." 
Meanwhile, the only two Western correspondents known to be in Lhasa were 
detained at their hotel. 
Reuters reported from Beijing that one of its correspondents, Guy Dinmore, and 
Jasper Becker of the Guardian newspaper, both British citizens who have been in 
Lhasa the last few days, had been interrogated by police. They were then 
returned to their hotel, informed that they were "under investigation" and 
ordered not to go outside, the British agency reported. 
The New China News Agency reported early today that Dinmore and Becker were 
ordered to leave Tibet for breaking a regulation requiring Beijing-based 
correspondents to receive permission for reporting trips outside the national 
capital. The agency said that Dinmore was fined and Becker was given an oral 
warning. 
