SENATE PANEL, DEFYING VETO THREAT, BACKS HIKE IN MINIMUM WAGE TO $4.65 BY 1991 
Defying President Bush's veto threat, the Senate Labor Committee voted 11 to 5 
Wednesday for a bill that would raise the $3.35 hourly minimum wage to $4.65 in 
three steps by 1991 without any subminimum rate. 
The committee's swift approval, with similar action expected in the House, 
could set the stage this month or early in April for the first legislative 
showdown between the new President and Congress. 
Bush has proposed a three-stage increase in the minimum wage to $4.25 an hour, 
with an eventual top rate of 90 cents an hour less for new workers in their 
first six months of employment, and he has said he will veto any more generous 
bill. 
'His Last Offer' 
At the White House, Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater reaffirmed Wednesday that 
the President would not yield. "He's giving them our best and last figure up 
front, and his proposal for an increase to $4.25 an hour is fair and firm and 
his last offer," he said. 
But Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said that the minimum wage has been 
unchanged since 1981 and he believes there is enough congressional support for 
an increase to override a presidential veto. 
"It's on a fast track now," said Kennedy, chairman of the Senate panel and 
chief advocate of the legislation. "The earlier the better, so far as I am 
concerned." 
The Senate may vote as early as next week, he said. The House Education and 
Labor Committee is expected to approve a similar bill next week and seek 
passage by the entire House before the Easter recess starts on March 23. 
The federal minimum wage, first enacted a half century ago at the rate of 25 
cents an hour, has been a major battleground for liberals and conservatives in 
almost every decade since. Although former President Ronald Reagan successfully 
opposed any increase in his two terms, Bush announced during his campaign that 
he would favor an increase in the minimum rate but only if it was accompanied 
by a "training wage" for new workers. 
Rejects Bush Plan 
Before approving Kennedy's bill, the Senate Labor Committee rejected Bush's 
plan in a 10-6 vote, mainly along party lines. Two Republicans, Dave 
Durenberger of Minnesota and James M. Jeffords of Vermont, then joined nine 
Democrats in sending the $4.65 legislation to the Senate floor. 
Opponents, led by Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah), argued that a higher minimum 
wage would destroy 650,000 jobs and contribute to inflation. Their arguments 
were echoed by a business coalition formed to fight any increase in the $3.35 
hourly rate. 
Coalition director Bob Martin of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce said the 
committee-approved bill was "misguided and would have very serious economic 
consequences. We're saying it will set off a Kennedy round of inflation." 
But, after the committee vote, Kennedy said the case was "compelling" for an 
increase to $4.65 an hour to restore the 1981 buying power of workers on the 
economic ladder's bottom rung. 
As for the President's proposal to pay new workers a lower rate for six months, 
Kennedy said the Labor Department estimated that minimum-wage workers could be 
trained in one month. He said he would listen to proposals for a compromise on 
the amount and duration of a lower wage rate. 
Called 'Substandard Wage' 
Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum (D-Ohio) said Bush's proposal to pay those workers 
80% of the minimum wage rate prevailing for most workers was "just a 
substandard wage for fast-food operators and others like that." 
But Hatch termed it a "classic compromise" between those in the Administration 
who oppose any increase and those who want to raise the federal minimum rate on 
equity grounds. The lower rate, Hatch said, would reduce the loss of jobs that 
otherwise might accompany a $4.25 wage. 
Dashed by Filibuster 
Kennedy's efforts to get Senate approval of a $4.55 hourly minimum wage last 
year were dashed by a GOP-led filibuster at the session's close, despite Bush's 
general support for an unspecified increase. The House never took up similar 
legislation in Congress' last session, partly because Democratic leaders 
decided that they lacked the votes to pass it. 
But Kennedy said that proponents were in a stronger position this year, adding: 
"This case is so compelling -- it's a minimum standard of decency. This 
President (Bush) even recommended a 50% increase in pay for members of 
Congress." 
