NO MAJOR CHANGES; 
PANEL VOTES TO RESUME STUDY ON RAIL ROUTE 
The Los Angeles County Transportation Commission, brushing aside objections 
from angry homeowners, voted overwhelmingly Wednesday to resume a study of San 
Fernando Valley rail route options and declared its intent to pick a route by 
next March. 
The commission's 9-0 vote ended nearly two months of delay during which 
homeowners fighting rail routes that traverse their neighborhoods sought to 
have the routes deleted from the study. 
The commission, which is building a countywide network of rail lines, also 
voted to grant a request from Valley rail backers to delay any action on two 
competing rail projects until March, 1990, so the Valley study can be 
completed. 
Proponents had worried that the Valley might lose its place in line for a rail 
project. 
Boisterous Testimony 
After four hours of public testimony, much of it boisterous, from a crowd of 
about 300, commissioners voted to proceed with the state-mandated study with no 
major changes to the route options that they approved in September. 
Routes under consideration in the $2.1-million study are the Ventura Freeway's 
southern shoulder from the planned Universal City Metro Rail subway station to 
Warner Center, and a Southern Pacific railroad right of way that parallels 
Chandler and Victory boulevards from Metro Rail's planned northern terminus on 
Lankershim Boulevard in North Hollywood to Warner Center. 
Both routes are being studied either as Metro Rail extensions or as light-rail 
lines requiring passengers bound for downtown to change trains at the Universal 
City or North Hollywood Metro Rail stations. 
In addition, the freeway route is being studied as a fully elevated line and as 
an elevated line in commercial areas with a subway in residential areas. 
Also to be studied are residential portions of the Chandler-Victory route 
either as a full subway or with track in a shallow trench surrounded by 4-foot 
earthen berms or in a deep trench with a metal grid on top. 
Bus Transfer 
In a change from its September vote, the commission decided Wednesday to study 
the possibility of building a rail line no farther west than the Sepulveda 
Basin at this time. Under that plan, a bus transfer station would be built at 
the basin to feed in passengers from points north and west. 
At the behest of County Supervisor Mike Antonovich, who represents most of the 
Valley and is a commission member, commissioners also directed that the report 
consider whether it would be better to use monorail or magnetic-levitation 
technology instead of conventional rail transit. 
And the commission, acting on the motion of Mayor Tom Bradley, also a 
commissioner, agreed to forgo consideration of federal aid for a Metro Rail 
extension across the Valley. 
Bradley argued that the federal study process is so complex that it "could 
unnecessarily delay the decision on Valley rail transit for at least five 
years." 
The commission's decision not to seek federal funding, which staff members said 
would be difficult to secure in any case, left unanswered the question of how 
the commission would pay for most of the route options being studied. 
The commission, which is building the Long Beach-Los Angeles and Century 
Freeway light-rail lines, has about $800 million available to build one more 
rail line before the turn of the century. 
Cost estimates for proposed Valley options range from $900 million for a 
shallow-trenched line along the Chandler-Victory route to $3 billion for the 
freeway option that would be subway in residential areas and elevated in 
commercial areas, the commission staff said. 
However, halting construction in the Sepulveda Basin reduces the estimates to 
$500 million for an all-elevated freeway line, $1.7 billion for a part-subway, 
part-elevated freeway line and $1.5 billion for a part-subway, part-elevated 
line along Chandler-Victory. 
Most rail proponents at the downtown hearing represented the business 
community. They argued that congestion is strangling the Valley and that polls 
show wide support for an east-west line. 
Homeowner opponents said they would favor any line that did not intrude into 
their neighborhoods. They said trains running as often as every three minutes 
would bring intolerable noise and congestion to their streets. 
They said an all-subway line would be acceptable. 
"We don't want to see it. We don't want to hear it. We don't want to feel it," 
said Julie Fine, a West Valley crusader against rail. 
But David Fleming, president of the Valley Industry and Commerce Assn., warned 
of the high cost of the subway, saying, "Don't kill this by making it 
financially impossible." 
Opposition leaders said state Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) is expected to 
reintroduce legislation that would all but force the commission to build a 
cross-Valley line and to place it as a subway in residential areas. 
Robbins, interviewed by telephone from Sacramento Wednesday, said that he has 
had trouble getting all parties to agree on details and that it is "conceivable 
but not likely" that he will abandon the legislative effort. 
Commission staff members said they expect a draft version of the study, which 
will specify the costs and ridership estimates for each option, to be available 
by October. 
Rival routes, for which studies are nearly complete, are a Pasadena-to-downtown 
line and a northern extension of the Century Freeway line past Los Angeles 
International Airport to Marina del Rey. 
