JAZZ REVIEW; 
'GREAT ARRANGERS': A SPELLBINDING MATINEE 
The great outdoor jazz concert season has begun, and it could hardly have 
started more stylishly than with the triple-threat attraction offered Sunday 
afternoon by KLON at the John Anson Ford Theatre. 
"Jazz West Coast: The Great Arrangers" was the apt title. Three big bands were 
led by Shorty Rogers, Gerald Wilson and Bill Holman, whose writing, coupled 
with a full measure of spirited solos, determined the success of this 
often-spellbinding matinee. 
Rogers was the most traditional, using several charts he wrote for sessions in 
the 1940s or '50s. Some were derivative but pleasant in a Basie vein; others, 
possibly more recent, reflected an innovative orchestral approach. 
The brass section included two valve trombonists: Mike Fahn was at his voluble 
best in "I'm Gonna Go Fishin' " and Bob Enevoldsen was well-framed in the 
richly textured "Contours." 
"Lanny Morgan," a mini-suite for saxophone, came alive via shifts of tempo, 
meter and mood, with Morgan's alto in rare form. The Coopers, Bob on tenor and 
Buster on trombone, also brought substance to the set, which ended with a 
glittering sublimation of Bud Powell's "Un Poco Loco." 
Gerald Wilson moved from his standard blues opener to a series of originals, of 
which the Mexican-flavored "Carlos" was most typical of his unique scoring. 
"Pisces" found pianist Milcho Leviev in frantic form as he plowed excitingly 
through its shifting rhythms. 
Wilson brought on a long-ago sideman, trumpeter Carmell Jones (now residing in 
Kansas City) as a guest soloist, reviving such early band pieces as "Blues for 
Yna Yna" and "Viva Tirado." Jones has lost none of his lyrical identity. Ron 
Barrows on trumpet, Louis Bonilla on trombone and Scott Mayo on alto helped 
establish the Wilson imprimatur. 
Bill Holman's set displayed his arranging skill along with a sense of humor 
that informs such charts as his "Moon of Mannakoora" parody; the Monk tune "I 
Mean You," given over mainly to three soprano saxes; and the witty "Just 
Friends," in which a dozen horns play several choruses entirely in unison, in 
the style of an ad lib solo. 
Bob Cooper broke it up with his masterful tenor sax on "Rhythm-A-Ning." The 
Mingus composition "Goodby Pork Pie Hat" was plaintively scored, using 
everything from piccolo and bass clarinet to muted brass. 
The next concert in KLON's series will be "A Celebration of Stan Kenton," with 
an alumni band, April 2 at the Ford Theatre. 
