RULING ON ILLINOIS S&amp;L COULD DISRUPT BAILOUT PLAN; 
REGULATION: THE DECISION, WHICH CHALLENGES ACTIONS BY THE OFFICE OF THRIFT 
SUPERVISION, INVITES SIMILAR SUITS. 
A federal judge ruled Wednesday that federal regulators lack constitutional 
authority to seize an ailing Illinois savings and loan, throwing into disarray 
the nation's already troubled thrift bailout program. 
U.S. District Judge Royce C. Lamberth in Washington agreed with Olympic Federal 
Savings &amp; Loan of Berwyn, Ill., that the 7-month-old U.S. Office of Thrift 
Supervision lacks authority to seize the thrift because its previous director, 
M. Danny Wall, and its current one, Salvatore R. Martoche, were improperly 
named to their posts. 
Legal experts said the ruling only temporarily bars the government from seizing 
the suburban Chicago institution and is not expected to unravel the seizure of 
any of the more than 350 S&amp;Ls operating under government supervision. They 
added that it also does not take away the government's basic right to seize 
insolvent institutions. 
But it does add confusion, delays and ultimately higher costs to the nation's 
bailout fiasco because other already seized thrifts or those expecting to be 
seized may sue on similar grounds. 
Already by late Wednesday, at least one such suit had been filed. San 
Diego-based Imperial Corp. of America, former parent of Imperial Savings Assn., 
said it filed a lawsuit in federal court in San Diego seeking a restraining 
order and preliminary injunction to overturn the Feb. 23 seizure of Imperial 
Savings as unconstitutional. Imperial Corp. of America, which filed for 
bankruptcy protection on Feb. 28 following the seizure of its thrift unit, 
cited Lamberth's ruling as grounds for its claim. 
Such legal challenges, if successful in delaying or overturning seizures, could 
add to estimates that the bailout will cost taxpayers $285 billion over 30 
years -- roughly $1,100 for every man, woman and child in the nation. Any more 
delays could cost millions, even billions, of dollars if regulators find their 
hands tied by the decision. 
"What the court is saying is that nobody at the agency is in a position to be a 
decision maker. That's hard to understand," said Eugene M. Katz, acting chief 
counsel for the agency. 
Katz said government lawyers will ask an appeals court judge today to stay 
Lamberth's order and will request an immediate hearing to appeal the case. 
Lamberth declined late Wednesday an OTS request to suspend his order. 
Olympic's basic argument was that Wall lacked legal authority as head of the 
Office of Thrift Supervision because he was never confirmed by the Senate. Wall 
had been chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and continued as the 
chief regulator for S&amp;Ls when the bank board was replaced by the OTS as 
part of last year's S&amp;L rescue legislation. 
Lamberth said Wall "required re-nomination and re-confirmation before he could 
constitutionally take office as OTS director." He added that because Wall "was 
never re-nominated or re-confirmed, he never constitutionally took office." 
Wall left the job earlier this month amid criticism that he mishandled the case 
involving the scandal-plagued Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan in Irvine. Wall was 
replaced by acting OTS director Salvatore R. Martoche, and President Bush has 
since nominated a permanent successor, Washington lawyer T. Timothy Ryan, who 
must be confirmed by the Senate. 
Lamberth ruled that Martoche's temporary appointment by President Bush under 
legislation to fill federal job vacancies is also improper because Martoche is 
replacing someone who wasn't properly confirmed. If this procedure were 
permitted, "the President could unconstitutionally 'appoint' an 'officer,' have 
him resign and then use the vacancies act to fill the post for up to 120 days," 
Lamberth said. 
Lamberth tempered his ruling by noting that he was not "closing the door on the 
OTS" and also not invalidating actions taken by Wall or Martoche. "Olympic has 
not asked this court to issue a sweeping injunction prohibiting the director 
(of OTS) from taking any action against any S&amp;L," Lamberth said. 
But he acknowledged the ruling could have a major affect on the agency, which 
he said was secondary to the Constitutional issue. 
"Although this may lead to a great deal of litigation and place OTS operations 
in some confusion, the clear violation of (Olympic's) constitutional rights and 
the public's interest in protecting the Constitution outweigh these harms to 
the public interest," Lamberth wrote. 
Olympic was solvent under the old thrift rules but insolvent under new laws 
that went into effect last year. Those laws wiped out an intangible asset 
called goodwill. Thrifts such as Olympic could claim on their books that 
goodwill was capital, which is the financial cushion a thrift must maintain 
against losses. 
In an interview, Olympic Chief Executive John J. Lanigan said the thrift sued 
because "word on the street" was that it was to be seized any day after 
regulators in February turned down the thrift's business plan to restore its 
capital. 
He said Olympic had an investor lined up willing to put money into the thrift 
and the investor would have walked away from the deal if regulators seized 
Olympic. At that point, he said, Olympic decided to challenge the OTS using the 
novel argument that Wall's appointment was invalid. 
"The law had quite a few Constitutional flaws. We happened to detect a few and 
the judge happened to agree with us," Lanigan said. 
In a telephone interview from his home in Virginia, Wall called Lamberth's 
ruling bizarre and said it hurts efforts to clean up the thrift problem. 
"Anything that delays costs more money," Wall said. "The irony is that it is 
the taxpayer that is funding this litigation because it is an insolvent 
institution." 
But most lawyers predicted that the OTS would probably prevail in challenging 
Lamberth's ruling. 
"There is so much to be lost and nothing to be gained by that kind of position. 
It's hard to see a court that will take such a technical position even though 
this judge did," said Norman H. Raiden, a Coast Savings executive vice 
president in Los Angeles who formerly was the top lawyer at the Bank Board. 
Some also predicted that the ruling could prompt a speedy confirmation of Ryan, 
who could then affirm the actions of Wall and Martoche. Lamberth's ruling, 
after all, specified that Martoche or any other OTS official cannot appoint a 
conservator for Olympic until a new director is "constitutionally appointed." 
Paul H. Irving, a thrift lawyer at the Manatt, Phelps, Rothenberg &amp; 
Phillips law firm in Los Angeles, said regulators still maintain the power to 
put thrifts under restrictions that are so tight that it would almost be as if 
they were seized. 
"The difference is you have a guy with a private hat on handcuffed to his chair 
instead of a guy with a government hat on handcuffed to his chair," Irving 
said. 
James Bates reported from Los Angeles. Robert A. Rosenblatt reported from 
Washington. 
