COMMENTARY; 
IF THE RAIDERS CAN DO IT (SIGH), HOW ABOUT THE LONG-LOST COLTS? 
 -- The Raiders are moving back to Oakland. (Sigh) 
You try it. 
The Raiders are moving back to Oakland. . . . 
(Sigh) 
It's darn near impossible to say the words without conjuring up another move 
and images of trucks rolling in reverse, back in time, back in space, back from 
Indy, back to us. If the Raiders can move back to Oakland, couldn't the Colts? 
. . . 
No. They couldn't. They're not. They won't (unless you see Bob Irsay 
negotiating with Irwindale; then, maybe). Go ahead: Sigh. 
But at least truth and justice reside somewhere in the world, if not in our 
particular part of it. Like sweet Loretta Martin, the Raiders get back, get 
back, get back to where they once belonged. You see, people will occasionally 
do the right thing. All you have to do is give them a $600-million nudge, which 
is what Al Davis was given to bring the Raiders back to their rightful home. 
OK, it wasn't romance. You want romance in the sports world, you get a date and 
rent a baseball movie. And don't look for any trend developing here. The 
Donald's not going back to Ivana. The Dodgers aren't returning to Brooklyn. Rob 
Lowe's not going back to Atlanta. 
This is just business. Whatever anyone says, you can go home again, if the 
price is right, and $600 million over 15 years is so right, it's what we used 
to call righteous. 
Most of the money is in ticket guarantees, just so the team doesn't have any 
incentive to do any sales work of its own, and the rest comes in improvements 
to the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum, including the building of luxury boxes 
that rich people can lease and then write off on their taxes. There are some 
city councilmen in Oakland who have expressed concern over the size of the 
guarantee for a city that has too many homeless people in the street and not 
enough teachers in the classroom. But at least it's got football. 
Sure, 37,000 seats in the revamped stadium will cost at least $30. And a lot of 
ticket-holders are going to have to commit in advance to pay a premium ranging 
from $2,000 to $16,000. And, for Oakland just to break even, the Raiders will 
have to average 57,000 fans over the next 15 years. It's a great deal. 
Why didn't Los Angeles see the obvious advantages of such a bonanza? Funny you 
should ask. It seems the folks in L.A. were so sick of Davis and his 
will-he-or-won't-he stance on a home for the Raiders that, according to a 
recent poll, 83% of the people said they didn't care if the Raiders left or 
buried themselves in an Irwindale gravel pit. And politicians, whatever else 
their flaws, all know how to count. 
The L.A. position contrasts nicely with the Oakland population, who, when the 
Raiders left, voted ashes and sackcloth as the official town uniform. The 
people in Oakland will welcome Davis back as the prodigal son. They'll forgive, 
if not forget. The team is theirs again; that's what counts. 
There has been much made of the fact that the Raiders, dressed in silver and 
black, the Hell's Angels of pro football, belong in blue-collar Oakland and not 
rhinestone-collar Los Angeles. All the cliches are being rolled out. We hear 
about the post-Perrier depression in L.A. and how the only time anyone drinks 
any kind of water in Oakland is as a chaser. Actually, Oakland has a sizable 
yuppie population, and Los Angeles, home to the Crips and Bloods, is the 
drive-by shooting capital of the world. If the Raiders like to think of 
themselves as outlaws, Los Angeles is as good a place as any to live. 
Besides, in the Raiders' good years in L.A., they averaged over 70,000 fans. 
They averaged 50,000 last season amid all the rumors of flight and in the 
just-win-babies' fourth consecutive season out of the playoffs. Maybe the 
streets aren't paved with football fans, but you can make a living here. 
But, enough of their problems. This is basically a happy ending, anyway. The 
question we should be asking: What does this mean to Baltimore? More good news. 
This move obviously takes Oakland out of the running as an expansion site and 
also effectively removes Sacramento, which is in the same end of California as 
San Francisco and Oakland, thereby losing out to geography. There's as good a 
chance the National Football League will put an expansion team in the L.A. 
Coliseum as there is in the Rome Colosseum, which is only slightly older and 
also doesn't have luxury boxes. That leaves the usual suspects -- Memphis, 
Tenn.; St. Louis; Jacksonville, Fla.; Charlotte, N.C.; San Antonio and 
Irwindale. 
If the NFL expands by two teams, Baltimore seems to have a great chance. If it 
expands by four -- and there are indications that might happen -- Baltimore is 
a lock. Of course, there's the nasty matter of when, and if the NFL, under its 
new commissioner, is sincere about sticking to the concept of no expansion 
before a labor agreement, then we may be teamless for the duration. 
Which leaves us -- what? -- sighing? 
Or maybe we could float $600 million Bob Irsay's way. That would pay for the 
move back, with enough left over to pay the bar tab. 
