FAMILY LIFE: WOMEN WHO REGRET THEIR ABORTIONS 
As she regained consciousness, Carmen heard the reassuring words of the 
recovery room nurse: "It's all taken care of. Everything's going to be fine." 
At first, she found those words comforting. Then she remembered where she was, 
and why. The 32-year-old mother of two was in a local hospital, and she had 
just had an abortion. 
Across the hall were mothers with their new babies. Lying there in her hospital 
bed, drifting in and out of sleep, Carmen wished -- too late -- that she could 
be one of them instead. 
That was in December, 1976. Today Carmen, now 46, still grieves over what she 
calls "the most horrible experience of my life." In the intervening years, she 
has been hospitalized three times for severe depression, a condition she 
believes was triggered by the abortion. 
"For some people that might have a predisposition to depression, I really 
believe something like this can bring it on," she says. "And depression does 
run in my family." 
Much of the debate over abortion centers on whether a woman should have the 
right to decide whether to terminate a pregnancy. Although Carmen did have that 
right under the U.S. Supreme Court's 1973 Roe vs. Wade ruling, she says the 
decision to abort was not hers. And that is the greatest source of her pain, 
she says. 
"I was forced into it," she says. "My husband didn't want the baby. My parents 
didn't want it either. Their pressure made me do it. 
"I grew up in a family where I was the good little girl who always did what 
Mother and Dad wanted me to do. I didn't have any control over it." 
Based on her experience, Carmen now believes that abortion should be illegal in 
most cases "because it can cause unpredictable future mental anguish." 
Many of the women who wrote to Family Life about their abortions said the 
decision was difficult and painful. All but Carmen, however, insisted that for 
them, abortion was the right thing to do. 
Carmen was joined by two other women who are opposed to abortion, neither of 
whom has had the experience herself. Otherwise, our response overwhelmingly 
favored women having the right to choose whether to terminate pregnancy. 
Last week, we heard the majority. Now it's the dissenters' turn. 
Carmen was happily married, financially secure, with two young daughters back 
in 1976. After noticing that her blood pressure had climbed above normal, her 
doctor had taken her off the pill. A few months later, she found that she was 
pregnant again. 
"I was very happy about it," she says, but her husband wasn't. "When I told 
him, his reaction was, 'Oh, no!' He felt he just couldn't handle it." 
As they did with most decisions, the couple talked the question over with 
Carmen's parents. "They felt we were too old to have another child," she says. 
"I wasn't able to argue. There was just so much pressure." 
They even told the girls, ages 4 and 10, that their mother was expecting a 
baby. 
"I guess we were trying to see what their reaction would be," Carmen says. 
"They were pretty excited about it, I think. I'm not sure; I have trouble 
remembering some things." 
Before she agreed to go through with the abortion, Carmen recalls, "I cried for 
8 days straight, without stopping except to sleep." 
But finally, in her 11th week, she went along with the family's wishes. 
Still, Carmen says: "I just felt there was life there. No matter how small it 
is, there was." 
After Carmen came home from the hospital, she and her husband told their 
daughters that there would not be a new baby after all. "We just said there 
wouldn't be room for another baby, and they'd like it better if they could have 
their own rooms," Carmen says. 
"They were little, and they didn't really understand, so they agreed with that. 
My older daughter is very angry with me about it now, however." 
Carmen says she told her husband afterward that she regretted the abortion, 
"but every time I brought it up, he just said, 'We did the best thing.' " 
After a while, she stopped mentioning it. 
About a year after the abortion, Carmen stopped eating and began losing weight, 
dropping from 140 pounds to 109. Her doctor hospitalized her for tests and 
later prescribed an antidepressant. 
Two other hospitalizations followed, under supervision of a psychiatrist. 
Carmen says she still sees the psychiatrist once a week and a psychologist two 
times a week, as well as other doctors for other physical problems. And she is 
on lithium, a drug used to regulate depression. 
"I've gotten past a lot of it now," she says. "A lot of time has gone by, and 
time heals." 
Carmen says she never discussed her feelings about the abortion with her 
parents, both of whom have died: "I couldn't talk to them about it. I was 
always afraid of them." 
Nor does she talk about it with her husband, although she says he "finally 
guessed that the abortion was what brought on my problems." They separated from 
1983 to 1987 but have since reconciled. 
The subject does come up during psychotherapy, Carmen says, and that helps: 
"I'm able to release a lot of the anger I have that way. I also talk to myself, 
but not loud enough for him to hear." 
Carmen calls abortion "murder" and says she believes it should be outlawed, 
except in cases of rape, incest or when the mother's life is threatened. "For 
teen-agers, I'm 50-50 on that," she says. 
"There are so many people out there who want to adopt children. I think if a 
girl is 17 or older, she could be a parent or give it up for adoption. Younger 
than that, it's probably OK (to have an abortion). Or if the mother and father 
already have five children, they ought to eliminate the sixth. There has to be 
a limit to everything. 
"But a case like mine, where a woman is married and has the means to take care 
of the child, that's just ridiculous." 
Wendy, who lives in Costa Mesa, is 40 and about to give birth to her fifth 
child. 
"Even though I am in the 'risky' age bracket for bearing children, I would 
never in this world think about having an abortion," she says. "I didn't even 
have an amniocentesis, because even if it was found that there was something 
wrong with the baby, I would never abort it. I believe that life begins at 
conception, and the medical-science community has sufficient information to 
support this belief. 
"I believe the women's liberation movement has done much harm to women in 
general in convincing them that their bodies are more important than their 
babies' bodies. In the last 20 years, we have promoted sex education in the 
form of birth control, and now abortion has become a popular form of birth 
control. 
"Unfortunately, this thinking has led to increased sexual promiscuity and the 
thinking that, 'Well, if I get pregnant, I'll just get an abortion.' 
"I think it's time we ended the 'me' generation and started reaching out to 
those in need. If everyone did a little to help, there would be no reason to 
kill unwanted babies, just because they're inconvenient." 
And Jeanne, who lives in Irvine, sent a postcard to say that "I cannot see that 
abortion will solve any of the problems of an 'unwanted' pregnancy. It will 
only intensify further problems in this life." 
Next week, we'll hear from a woman who made the heartbreaking decision to abort 
for medical reasons. 
