LOW TURNOUT FOR PHASE 2 OF AMNESTY WORRIES INS 
Federal officials warned Thursday that many applicants for amnesty may have a 
false sense of security about their long-term status in the United States. 
In San Diego and elsewhere in California, authorities said, only about 13% of 
eligible amnesty seekers have submitted paper work for the program's so-called 
Phase II, which allows aliens who entered the United States illegally to remain 
permanently as legal immigrants. Most applicants have only been granted 
temporary legal status in the United States. 
Amnesty seekers who do not apply for the second phase within 12 months revert 
to illegal status and are subject to deportation. 
Widespread Concern 
Most applicants still have at least eight months to apply, but there is 
widespread concern about the small number of applications, a shortfall that 
appears to be related to misunderstandings about the process and a false sense 
of long-term security. 
"It's our feeling that there's a lot of confusion in the amnesty world," said 
Harold Ezell, Western regional commissioner for the U. S. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, who addressed the issue during news conferences in San 
Diego and Los Angeles. 
Word of the low turnout comes at a time when educators in San Diego and 
elsewhere have already expressed concern about their ability to provide needed 
English-language and U. S. government instruction to large numbers of amnesty 
applicants, most of whom are required to demonstrate basic knowledge of the 
language and U. S. civics. 
Nationwide, about 1.8 million people applied under the general amnesty program, 
which was limited to foreigners who had been living illegally in the United 
States since 1982. Included are about 42,000 applicants in San Diego and 
Imperial counties. 
"We didn't bring these folks this far just to lose them now," said James 
Turnage, INS district director in San Diego. 
In response to the problem, INS officials announced a series of steps. Among 
other things, authorities said they plan to launch an "aggressive" public 
information campaign in newspapers and on radio and television, and will also 
establish information booths at amnesty offices, which, under an extended 
schedule, will now be open Thursdays from 7 to 9 p.m. and on Saturdays from 11 
a.m. to 3 p.m. 
INS Criticized 
Some critics suggest that the INS itself has done an inadequate job of 
informing recipients about the importance of the second phase. Charges of poor 
community notice and outreach have dogged the service throughout the program, 
although officials have dismissed such allegations. 
"I think there could be a a lot more outreach and publicity," said Roberto 
Martinez, a community activist in San Diego who works with the American Friends 
Service Committee, the social action arm of the Quaker Church. "I have a 
feeling that people don't recognize the seriousness of following up on the 
second phase." 
In another step, the INS said it will allow recognized social service agencies 
to administer a 15-question civics test -- taken via video screens -- that is 
designed to comply with the English-language and U. S. government requirement. 
Those who pass the multiple-choice test -- which includes basic questions such 
as identifying major U. S. political parties and the U. S. capital -- are 
deemed to have met the standard. (Exempt from the requirement are those 15 or 
younger, 65 or older, U. S. high school graduates and those who received at 
least 40 hours of English and government instruction during a full academic 
year at a state-recognized school.) 
Those whose English skills are so rudimentary that the test is beyond their 
skills may meet the language/civics requirement by completing at least 40 hours 
of an INS-certified course, but some educators have expressed concern about the 
ability of school districts to provide the needed instruction. 
In San Diego, as in other areas, fears have emerged that federal funds designed 
to offset the costs of providing the classes to tens of thousands of amnesty 
applicants may not be available in time. Such delays could prevent school 
districts from hiring the needed instructors, causing some students to be 
turned away. San Diego educators say they have been able to meet the demand 
thus far, but they are uncertain about beyond this month. 
"We have to determine what we can offer based on the funding," said Ed Spies, 
principal of Montgomery Adult School in southern San Diego County, one of a 
number of facilities offering language and civics classes to amnesty seekers. 
