CRUISE VIEWS: TRAVELERS CAN CHOOSE FROM GLAMOROUS SHIPS 
The cruise passenger in the coming months should be in the catbird seat, able 
to choose the perfect cruise from a fleet of glamorous ships. 
Last year brought us not only a glut of new and remodeled vessels, but also a 
mind-boggling series of mergers and consolidations that left even the most 
blase industry-watchers gaping. 
Also, just over the horizon, three Japanese-owned cruise companies are 
preparing to sail into the North American market in the next 18 months -- 
Oceanic, Mitsui and Crystal Cruises. 
Concern About Quality 
First to feel the squeeze, however, will probably be the small lines that have 
older mid-size ships that handle 500 to 800 passengers. 
Most cruise companies seem to be concentrating on the "biggest, brightest or 
most expensive ships" ever. However, most passengers don't care much one way or 
the other about the newest design trends; the major concern we hear is about 
the declining quality of service. 
Aloha Pacific's U.S.-flag Monterey, still in operation although under a recent 
Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing for financial reorganization, made a first-class 
try when it began seven-day sailings around Hawaii in October. It was hampered, 
however, by having to train attractive young Americans who looked like movie 
starlets and who were not that enthusiastic about making beds and cleaning 
toilets. 
So we should all cheer the splendid new Seabourn Pride, a 10,000-ton vessel 
that made its debut in late December with a perfect staff of Europeans and 
flawless food and service, something rare in a banner year of new ships. 
Fares average about $600 a day per person, double, including tips; a sister 
ship, Seabourn Spirit, is due next November with the same follow-the-sun 
itinerary. 
The brand-new Royal Viking Sun provides plenty of room to roam with the highest 
passenger space ratio of any of the new crop of ships. It's the first new 
vessel for that prestigious company in 15 years. 
Crowning a Princess 
The first big new ship due in 1989 is Princess' 1,600-passenger Star Princess, 
scheduled to sail March 24 from Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., for a series of 10-day 
Caribbean cruises before heading north to Alaska. Crown Cruise Line's Crown del 
Mar, a 486-passenger vessel due last November, made its inaugural two-night 
sailing from Palm Beach at the end of January. 
Carnival's Fantasy, set to make its inaugural cruise Dec. 11 from Miami to the 
Bahamas on three- and four-day sailings, is the most striking endorsement yet 
for the future of the mini-cruise; this 2,600-passenger vessel is supposed to 
be the most expensive cruise ship ever built. 
Next January, Carnival will move the 1,022-passenger Tropicale from its 
longtime Los Angeles base to San Juan, Puerto Rico, replacing it with the newer 
1,500-passenger Jubilee, which will assume the same seven-day Mexican Riviera 
itinerary on April 8, 1990. 
Club Med Cruises' five-masted, 416-passenger computerized sailing ship, Club 
Med I, originally expected to arrive in time for Christmas, will make its first 
sailing in mid-January 1990, with fares around $1,250 to $2,500 for a seven-day 
cruise. 
Ocean Quest's Ocean Spirit, the former Sunward I, a 320-passenger dive-cruise 
vessel sailing from New Orleans to Belize, Cozumel and Cancun, was scheduled to 
set out on its first cruise March 4. 
Yacht-Size Luxury 
The yacht-size Oceanic Grace from Oceanic Cruises and the 600-passenger Fuji 
Maru from Mitsui are both due in April, while Crystal Cruises' super-deluxe 
49,000-ton luxury Crystal Harmony is due in July, 1990, as is a second Mitsui 
vessel. 
Oceanic Grace says its San Francisco-based representative, Guynell Kryzak at 
SMI Group (toll-free (800) 545-5778), begins cruises April 22 with seven-day 
sailings in Japan, China, Taiwan and Korea from $3,395 per person, double 
occupancy. 
We'll also see more small luxury vessels in '89. 
Norwegian-based Fearnley &amp; Eger, owner of Starship Explorer and North Star, 
both operated until recently by Exploration, are bringing out a series of eight 
116-passenger ships from an Italian shipyard between the fall of 1989 and the 
summer of 1991. 
And two 80-passenger Dutch-owned vessels, Rembrandt and Van Gogh, are both due 
in December from Goliath Transport. 
Windsor Cruises will introduce two new 70-passenger, 270-foot British-registry 
yachts, Lady Diana and Lady Sarah, this summer that are expected to be the most 
expensive yet at a minimum of $1,000 a day per person, double occupancy. 
he Lady Diana will be first on line, due July 1 for a series of Mediterranean 
sailings before a Caribbean winter season. 
Another super-luxurious option: West Coast passengers for a 1989 QE2 
transatlantic crossing between New York City and Southampton can add an MGM 
Grand Air Los Angeles-New York City flight for $695 extra. 
Rates for the five-day crossings are $1,330 to $8,010 per person, double 
occupancy, which includes return to the East Coast via British Airways or, for 
an additional $995 per person, British Airways Concorde. 
For passengers who read the right-hand side of the menu first, there's also 
good news: Cunard's lower fares on the Cunard Princess, already seen this fall 
and winter on Mexican Riviera sailings, and the Cunard Countess, starting next 
September in the Caribbean, are both pegged at $495 per person, double 
occupancy, for some seven-day sailings. 
Careful cruise shoppers should keep an eye on three areas -- Alaska, Bermuda 
and the Mediterranean -- for potential spring and summer discounting. 
Scheduled traffic to Alaska this summer is down somewhat, only 16 or so ships 
compared to last season's 23. 
Savings on Bookings 
The intense competition between Princess, with a record five ships in Alaska, 
and Holland America with four, also should produce some early booking and 
advance-payment savings for careful cruise shoppers. 
Bermuda, which prunes its visiting ships as carefully as its well-kept gardens, 
has always limited the number of ships that call in a season. For the first 
time in three decades the familiar yellow-and-blue stacks of now-defunct Home 
Lines will be missing, but Royal Caribbean's Nordic Prince will be back along 
with Chandris' Amerikanis and Galileo. 
New faces there this season will be Cunard's Sagafjord and the Cunard Princess, 
along with the Royal Viking Star, making a first-ever full season of New York 
City-Bermuda seven-day round-trip cruises. 
The Chandris vessels and Cunard Princess will vie for lowest prices -- from 
$799 and $845, respectively, per person, double occupancy during low season. 
The Galileo will sail to Bermuda from Port Canaveral April 8 and 15, then move 
gradually north on subsequent sailings scheduled from Charleston, Wilmington, 
N.C., Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York City and Boston. The Cunard Princess 
will intersperse some three- and four-day cruises with its seven-day series. 
Newest Hot Spots 
Hottest destination for the spring and summer is Europe and the Mediterranean, 
with 36 ships set to sail part or all of the summer there. While the French 
Riviera remains a favored itinerary, the newest hot spots are Turkey's 
Turquoise Coast (all three Sun Line vessels will sail there this spring) and 
the Adriatic coast of Yugoslavia, where Windstar's Wind Spirit will cruise in 
midsummer. 
Next winter the Cunard Princess will reposition to Malaga, Spain, for seven- 
and 14-day cruises to the Canary Islands, Madeira and Morocco; prices for the 
two-week itineraries are priced from $2,295, including air fare from New York. 
The little country of Belize, lying south of Mexico's Yucatan Peminsula on the 
Caribbean, is a new destination for both Ocean Quest and American Canadian 
Caribbean, whose 80-passenger New Shoreham II sold out its first winter season 
of 12-day cruises round trip out of Belize City along the coasts of Belize and 
Guatemala, further proof that new destinations attract passengers. 
In the Orient, the always-imaginative Ocean Pearl offers a new China Dynasty 
program scheduled April through October that will add a cruise along part of 
the Yangtze River and calls in Xiamen and Nanjing to Beijing, Dalian, Qingdao 
and Shanghai. 
