TORN BY WAR; 
EMISSARIES: AN EIGHT-MEMBER TROUPE, CHILDREN OF WAR, VISITS GLENDALE ON ITS 
TOUR TO ACQUAINT U.S. STUDENTS WITH THE CONFLICTS THAT TROUBLE MUCH OF THE 
WORLD. 
Justina Endjala, a shy 17-year-old from Namibia, had just finished telling of 
life in her West African homeland -- of police brutality, racial segregation, a 
century-old battle for independence. Rachel Richman, a white Glendale High 
School senior, was shaking her head. 
"I basically know nothing about those countries," said Richman, 17. "It makes 
me mad that I don't know and that I'm not doing anything about it. But how are 
we supposed to relate to them if we're thinking, 'Am I going to get a car for 
my 16th birthday?' " 
For Endjala and seven other youths who are part of a project called Children of 
War, now touring Los Angeles schools to educate and motivate their American 
peers, the question was typical. 
It spoke, in a way, of the divided world faced by many of the students in their 
audiences last Friday at Glendale and Hoover high schools, where an increasing 
number of students from war-torn countries are trying to mix into American 
teen-age life. 
The Glendale schools were two stops on a three-week tour by members of Children 
of War, a project sponsored by the Religious Task Force, an interfaith, New 
York-based group. 
The task force, according to its literature, recruits and pays for teen-agers 
from troubled areas, including the United States, to share their experiences 
with American youth and promote grass-roots action and education about "social 
injustice." 
Glendale's eight visitors made up one of two groups touring Los Angeles, 
speaking for free to student, church and community groups. Some had emigrated 
to the United States, some were simply visiting as part of the tour. One was a 
teen-age American mother from Boston. 
After arriving at Hoover, where several hundred students filled an auditorium, 
they spoke in English about their lives. 
Sanaa Al Okbi, 19, a Palestinian with Israeli citizenship who attends a Jewish 
university in Jerusalem, talked softly into the microphone, her voice choked by 
tears. "I feel very strongly inside that I'm Palestinian. But I can't say that 
in my country. It's very dangerous. But I have no choice. I study in school 
Jewish religion, Jewish language, Jewish history. I know their history better 
than I know my own. 
"The land without people is our land," said Al Okbi, wearing a traditional 
Palestinian frock, a kofia. "I want peace for my people. I want freedom. I want 
to say I'm Palestinian without fear." 
Asi Degani, a T-shirt- and sneaker-clad 18-year-old from Israel, put his hands 
in his jeans pockets and spoke calmly. "In six months I'll have to go into the 
Israeli Army, and I'll have to stand in front of kids 7, 8 or 9 who will throw 
stones or Molotov cocktails at me and I'll have to shoot them. 
"The question," he said, as Al Okbi wept in her chair behind him, "is not 
whether I'll shoot back but whether I should be there in the first place. The 
answer, of course, is no." 
Saroeum Phoung, 17, a refugee from Cambodia now living in Boston, talked of his 
harrowing escape from the Khmer Rouge regime. "It's hard for a kid like me to 
be born into this world where all I see, all I hear is people killing each 
other and a world screaming for help. 
"My family spent five years living in a refugee camp in Thailand before we made 
it to the United States," he said. "When I got here, I thought it meant peace 
and freedom. But it didn't. Everyone says 'go back, we don't want you here.' 
This world has shown no mercy to me. Only pressure and pain. Now, I just want 
peace." 
Like several hundred other students, Lisa Dohren, 18, a tall, blonde Hoover 
senior, sat captivated by the words. "I think it's really good that they, like, 
talked about it," she said. "You hear it on the news and you see it on TV but 
you never talk to people firsthand. It makes it real." 
Reality is closer than some think. More than 65% of the district's 24,000 
students are Asian, Latino, Filipino, Mid-Eastern or Pacific Islander, 
according to district figures. Many of those only recently emigrated from their 
homelands, said Alice Petrossian, director of intercultural education for 
Glendale schools. 
"We have children from Vietnam who are boat people," Petrossian said. "We have 
children who were in the earthquake in Soviet Armenia. You could go to any 
school site and find children who are willing to share their stories." 
One of Dohren's schoolmates, James Phan, listened to Phoung's speech and nodded 
in painful agreement. Phan, 17, came to Glendale in 1988 from a Cambodian 
refugee camp. His father had been killed by the Khmer Rouge; his mother, he 
said, died last month in the camp. 
But Phan, a junior, said he does not share his experiences with his classmates 
at Hoover. And they usually don't ask. 
"It's supposed to be a melting pot, but it's like oil and water," Jessica 
DiLullo, 17, a Hoover senior, said while standing near Phan. 
After their speeches, the Children of War stepped down from the stage and 
mingled with Hoover students, who approached them incredulously. The visitors, 
who during their tour may make six to seven presentations each day, welcomed 
the interest. 
"At Venice High, one student asked me if I had to ride a camel to school," 
Degani laughed, with a trace of weariness. "It's not discouraging that they 
don't know. It's discouraging when they don't care after they know." 
At Glendale High School, where the Children of War gave three presentations in 
a classroom, their stories made Chelsey Overstreet, former student body 
president, cry. 
"We were complaining last period about a lot of little things -- friendships, 
weights, stuff like that," said Overstreet, 17. "Then when you see kids our own 
age going through those things. . . . And we worry that there aren't any 
parties." 
Overstreet and two cheerleaders, Marisa Battaglia and Christie Denzel, stood 
together and mulled their own, related problem: the divisions between them and 
their immigrant classmates. 
"There's none of the violence, but there's a lot of prejudice," said Battaglia. 
"It's crossing the line that's hard. What do you do?" 
Sherry Sami, 17, an Iranian immigrant now living in San Francisco, sat with the 
other Children of War in the school's cafeteria and saw Overstreet cry. 
Earlier, she told Glendale students how the Iran-Iraq war had taken the lives 
of her relatives and the mind of her brother. Now she smiled and answered 
Battaglia's question. 
"Some of them cry and apologize, but it's not their fault," Sami said. "I say 
that when we cry for each other, we can feel the pain in our hearts. And then 
we can start finding peace." 
