NEWSMAKERS 
Latest Fall: Former hotel queen Leona Helmsley said her 81-year-old husband 
Harry Helmsley is "all right" after falling down a flight of stairs Monday and 
hitting his head in his New York apartment, columnist Cindy Adams wrote in 
Tuesday's New York Post. "I was waiting for Harry to join me for lunch," 
Helmsley was quoted as saying. "Instead, an ambulance became my lunch." 
Convicted of tax evasion and other charges, Leona Helmsley is free pending an 
appeal. Harry Helmsley was ruled incompetent to stand trial on income tax 
evasion charges. 
South for the Winter: Globe-trotting novelist James A. Michener is hunting for 
a winter retirement home in Florida, his editor says. Michener recently visited 
a group of retired professionals in St. Petersburg, editor James Kings said 
Monday. "He said they were very interesting people down there, and he was more 
interested in that than he was in the sun," Kings said. 
Bleacher Bum: Pete Rose is facing his first season out of baseball since 1963 
with a sense of humor. "I'm ready for it. The only difference is I think I'll 
have to pay to go to the games now. So I'll pay for my tickets, sit behind home 
plate and the first guy that strikes out I'm going to boo," the former 
Cincinnati Reds manager said Tuesday in Indianapolis. But, he said, some things 
are not funny: "To see guys turn on me because of hearsay. . . . Guys that I 
thought were my so-called friends." Baseball's career-hit leader was banned 
from the sport Aug. 24 for illegal gambling. 
Pump It Up: The White House limousine pulled up to Dave's Sunoco service 
station in Washington, D.C., Tuesday and out popped George Bush in a photo 
opportunity for his clean-air program. Bush helped inaugurate the new methanol 
fuel pump at Dave's. Methanol fuel is cleaner-burning than regular gasolines, 
but environmentalists charge that Bush's legislative compromises weakened the 
clean-air package. While Bush spoke, demonstrators nearby carried placards 
reading "Clean Air Hypocrisy." 
