FIRST CONVICTION IN DREXEL PROBE: AIDE AT BEVERLY HILLS OFFICE IS GUILTY OF 
PERJURY 
The federal investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert claimed its first guilty 
verdict Wednesday when a jury convicted a 26-year-old trading assistant from 
the firm's Beverly Hills office of perjury and obstruction of justice. 
A jury deliberated for only four hours before concluding that Lisa Jones of 
Sherman Oaks had lied repeatedly in January, 1988, during testimony to a grand 
jury investigating Drexel, the head of its "junk bond" department, Michael 
Milken, and a small securities firm, Princeton/Newport Partners. She was 
convicted on five counts of perjury and two of obstruction of justice. But the 
jury acquitted her on one obstruction count. 
Jones, who had cried during her testimony and had again been in tears during 
the brief deliberations, was comforted after the verdict by two women friends 
who had accompanied her from Los Angeles. She was then led silently from the 
courtroom by her lawyer. 
Jones faces a maximum sentence of 35 years in prison and a fine of up to $1.7 
million. Under new federal sentencing guidelines, she will almost certainly 
have to spend time in prison, although prosecutors said they hadn't yet 
calculated the minimum possible sentence. But if she had been convicted on only 
one count she would have been required to serve from 10 to 16 months in prison. 
The conviction raises the possibility that Jones could receive a longer 
sentence than was imposed on either Dennis B. Levine or Ivan F. Boesky, the two 
Wall Street figures whose guilty pleas and cooperation with the government led 
to the Drexel investigation and a chain of other Wall Street cases. Levine was 
sentenced to two years in prison and Boesky to three years. 
Rejected Plea Bargain 
U.S. District Judge Leonard Sand set sentencing for May 22. He allowed Jones to 
remain free on bail. 
Brian O'Neill, Jones' defense attorney, throughout the trial had portrayed her 
as a "scapegoat" and "victim" in the government's quest to prosecute higher-ups 
at Drexel and Princeton/Newport. He said after the verdict that she "got stuck 
paying the price for whatever occurred." He called the outcome "tragic" and 
said Jones was "a little person run down by a truck." O'Neill said he plans to 
appeal. 
But Bruce Baird, head of the securities fraud unit in the U.S. Attorney's 
Office in Manhattan, said: "We think justice was done." He added: "We think 
that whenever people lie to the grand jury, we're not doing our job if we don't 
prosecute them." 
Mark Hansen, the prosecutor who tried the case, rejected criticism by Jones' 
supporters that the government had been unduly harsh in bringing the charges 
and vigorously prosecuting her. He said that during the grand jury proceedings 
she had repeatedly rejected chances offered to her by prosecutors to change her 
testimony and tell the truth. 
"She is nobody other than a foolish young woman who made a dumb choice despite 
numerous opportunities to make the right choice," he said. 
Jones had been called to New York in January, 1988, to testify before a grand 
jury looking into charges that Princeton/Newport Partners had illegally 
"parked" bonds with Drexel in a complicated scheme meant to help 
Princeton/Newport evade taxes. Under the scheme, the trades between 
Princeton/Newport and Drexel allegedly were rigged so that Princeton/Newport 
would get the securities back at a fixed price. 
Presented as Scared, Confused 
Jones denied to the grand jury that that she was aware of any illegal parking. 
But during the trial, prosecutors presented tape recordings of telephone 
conversations between Drexel and Princeton/Newport, including one tape in which 
Jones was heard discussing the trades with William Hale, a Princeton/Newport 
trader. Hale testified against Jones during the trial. 
He presented Jones as a scared and confused minor employee at Drexel who had 
been intimidated by government investigators and wasn't aware that she was 
involved in any illegal activity. 
Testimony in the trial disclosed that Jones had run away from her New Jersey 
home at the age of 13 and obtained a job as a bank teller in Los Angeles by 
lying about her age. She eventually was offered a job at Drexel and worked her 
way up to being a trading assistant in the junk bond department, working in the 
same trading room as Milken. In 1988, she earned $117,000 in salary plus a 
$45,000 bonus, helping Drexel traders execute their transactions. 
At the time of her grand jury testimony, Jones had been represented by the law 
firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel, which was Drexel's main outside law firm. 
Five Princeton/Newport partners have since been named in a separate indictment 
that includes racketeering and securities fraud charges. They deny any 
wrongdoing and are awaiting trial. 
Drexel Backs Jones 
More recently, Drexel has agreed to plead guilty to six criminal counts, 
including one involving Princeton/Newport. But the firm hasn't formally entered 
its plea yet pending settlement of separate civil charges brought by the 
Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Milken, who as head of Drexel's junk bond department in Beverly Hills was 
behind much of the firm's success and also much of its legal problems, has been 
notified by prosecutors that he too is likely to be indicted soon. But he 
denies breaking any laws. 
While the deliberations were under way, Richard Sandler, a longtime friend of 
Milken's who is one of his main attorneys, stopped in the courtroom to offer 
sympathy and encouragement to Jones. He said he was present because "she is a 
person that I care about." Drexel, too, has been supportive of Jones throughout 
the case, continuing to pay her salary even though she is on leave and picking 
up much of her travel and legal expenses. 
In a statement after the verdict, Steven Anreder, a Drexel spokesman, said: 
"Lisa Jones was fondly regarded as a warm and highly industrious individual" by 
the people she worked with. He said: "The verdict today, therefore, is a very 
sad event which causes us a great deal of sorrow." 
Anreder said that Jones was still officially on leave and that he didn't know 
if her employment status would change as a result of the verdict. 
