AILING KILLER WHALE'S DAYS NUMBERED IN LOSING BATTLE AGAINST RARE DISEASES 
Knootka, the ailing 8,500-pound killer whale, has not responded to last-ditch 
efforts to treat a rare fungal infection that has been further complicated by a 
bacterial infection, Sea World officials said Monday. 
Officials believe Knootka, one of three adult killer whales at Sea World, will 
probably not survive her bout with the illness, which was first diagnosed in 
November. 
The chances of Knootka surviving are worsened by her relatively old age, which 
is mid- to late-20s, said Dr. Jim McBain, Sea World veterinarian. Killer 
whales' life expectancy is 25 to 35 years. It is not known how much longer the 
whale has to live, McBain said. 
"We are all dying, but she is dying faster than most of us. If she died 
tonight, I would not be surprised -- she is a very sick animal," McBain said. 
But Knootka remains a good patient, demonstrating no signs of pain or 
discomfort. She has a large appetite for herring, mackerel, smelt and squid, 
which she can eat whenever she wants. Knootka also has become "good friends" 
with the newly arrived killer whale Kasatka, a 4,000-pound female. Kasatka 
spent two years with Knootka before being moved to Texas for a breeding 
program. 
"She is showing a desire to live," McBain said. 
In December, Knootka became the first whale to receive itraconazole, an 
experimental drug approved for human use in Europe. It was hoped that the 
medication would battle what doctors said was a rare fungal infection. After 
five weeks of treatment, Knootka's appetite returned and a lesion in her mouth 
disappeared. 
In recent days, however, it became clear that a bacterial infection had also 
stricken Knootka. Bacterial infections are not unusual among older whales, and 
Knootka' immune system, already weakened by the fungal infection, fell prey. 
Her medical condition is similar to that of an elderly patient, weakened by one 
illness who then succumbs to pneumonia, McBain said. 
"Bacteria is common in the body already. When whales are young and healthy, 
those bacteria don't cause problems," McBain said. 
Knootka, who has been at Sea World since 1986, hails from the waters 
surrounding British Columbia. Before her San Diego debut, she was at Marine 
Land aquatic park in Niagara Falls. 
McBain is continuing to give the whale itraconazole, as well as antibiotics, 
vitamins and minerals. Her condition is monitored around the clock. After her 
death, an autopsy will be conducted to determine the effectiveness of the 
various medications, McBain said. 
"She will die eventually, but we are hoping it will be later and not sooner," 
he said. 
