IRAQIS PROTEST BRITISH REACTION TO 'SPY' HANGING 
Tens of thousands of Iraqi protesters marched in the capital and other cities 
Saturday to express anger at the British measures taken to censure Iraq for 
hanging a London-based journalist accused of spying. 
Also Saturday, President Saddam Hussein flew to Saudi Arabia for consultations 
with King Fahd. The official Saudi Press Agency said Fahd invited Hussein after 
the international uproar over the execution of Farzad Bazoft. The 31-year-old 
Iranian-born journalist worked for the Observer, a British newspaper. 
No details of their talks were released. 
Demonstrators swept through the streets of all major Iraqi cities chanting 
support for Hussein's decision, state-run Baghdad Radio said. Bazoft was hanged 
Thursday, four days after a closed-door revolutionary security court sentenced 
him to death. He denied the charges of spying for Israel and Britain. 
After the execution, Britain withdrew its ambassador, expelled six Iraqi 
military students and canceled all ministerial visits. But it resisted demands 
to break off relations and impose economic sanctions. 
Officials of the ruling Arab Baath Socialist Party estimated that 100,000 
people turned out in Baghdad. No violence was reported. 
Demonstrators sent a cable to Hussein urging him to take a tougher position 
against Britain. 
"Chop off the heads of all spies and silence their dirty tongues," said the 
cable, broadcast on the state-run radio. 
Radio reports also said the protesters handed a letter of protest to the 
British Embassy press officer expressing outrage over London's denunciation of 
the execution. 
The embassy was ringed by police officers and plainclothes security agents. No 
embassy personnel were seen in the compound. 
Iraqi newspapers focused on Bazoft's criminal record in Britain. He served a 
year in prison in 1981-82 for robbing a savings and loan office of $764 while 
he was a student living in central England. 
Bazoft was arrested in September along with British nurse Daphne Parish while 
he was investigating reports of a major explosion at a secret Iraqi military 
research complex south of Baghdad. 
Parish was sentenced to 15 years in prison. 
