NUTRITIONALLY SPEAKING: OAT BRAN PRODUCTS PROVE POPULAR 
A woman at a local bakery recently sauntered up to the counter to ask the clerk 
if the outlet's brand of oat bran muffins could reduce her cholesterol. 
"I'm afraid I really don't know," the clerk responded. "Our bakery items are 
already prepared when we get them. We just bake the dough." 
The customer seemed a bit confused, since the young woman behind the 
magnificent display of baked goods had failed to answer her question. 
Nonetheless, the customer headed for the bin of oat bran muffins. 
To her dismay, the bin was empty -- another example of consumer demand for a 
product with a perceived health effect. And bakeries aren't the only retailers 
finding it hard to keep oat bran muffins on the shelf. 
After being bombarded by weekend shoppers, a Los Angeles membership warehouse 
chain, where consumers can buy foods and other items at reduced prices, had 
trouble offering Monday morning shoppers any of their usually large supply of 
oat bran muffins, even though the rest of the warehouse items had been 
completely restocked after the busy two-day spree. 
It appears that Angelenos are very eager to buy food items that contain oat 
bran. 
Manufacturers have been quick to respond to that consumer demand. They tout oat 
bran as an ingredient in everything from gourmet cold breakfast cereals to 
granola-type snack bars. Gourmet cookie makers are even adding bran cookies to 
their product lines. 
Increased Consumer Interest 
Health experts claim -- and opinion polls indicate -- a growing interest by 
consumers in reducing their blood cholesterol to acceptable levels. But often 
the amount of oat bran in commercial products -- when compared to that given to 
participants in the study that recognized the cholesterol-lowering effects of 
the fiber -- produces insignificant health benefits. 
It is important to keep in mind that the study group consumed two ounces of oat 
bran each day, which represents about two-thirds of a cup of the insoluble 
fiber. And they followed a low-fat diet that derived only 30% of its calories 
from fat. 
This can easily be translated into a one-ounce serving of hot oat bran cereal, 
oatmeal or cold oat cereal in the morning, oat bran or oatmeal bread with 
sandwiches for lunch, oat bran muffins as an afternoon snack and an oatmeal 
cookie for dessert. Spoon a tablespoon or two of oat bran into savory dishes or 
into crust mixtures for oven-baked chicken. Substituting oats for up to 
one-third of the flour called for in some recipes is another option. 
Maintaining a low-fat diet regimen is also vital. Use nonfat milk, lean meat 
and egg whites instead of whole eggs in recipes. Remove the skin from chicken 
before cooking and coat the chicken with an oat bran crumb mixture and bake 
instead of frying. 
OAT BRAN LOAF 
2 cups water 
1 cup plus 2 tablespoons oat bran 
2 packages dry yeast 
1/4 cup honey 
1/4 cup oil 
1 1/2 teaspoons salt 
4 1/2 to 5 cups flour 
Cinnamon Date Filling, optional 
1 egg white 
Bring 1 1/2 cups water to boil. Remove from heat and stir in 1 cup oat bran. 
Blend well. Set aside to cool. 
Place 1/2 cup warm water (105 to 115 degrees) in large bowl. Sprinkle in yeast 
and stir until dissolved. Stir in oat bran mixture, honey, oil, salt and 2 cups 
flour. Beat until smooth. Stir in enough additional flour to make soft dough. 
Knead lightly on floured surface until smooth and elastic, about 8 to 10 
minutes. Place in greased bowl, turning to grease top. Let rise in warm, place 
until doubled, about 35 minutes. 
Punch dough down. Divide into 2 equal parts. Roll each piece to 16x7 inches. 
Sprinkle each piece with half of Cinnamon Date Filling. Roll up from short ends 
to make loaves. Place seam sides down in 2 greased 8 1/2x4 1/2-inch loaf pans. 
Cover and let rise in warm place until doubled, about 35 minutes. 
Brush with egg white, sprinkle with remaining oat bran and bake at 375 degrees 
35 minutes or until done. Remove from pans and cool on wire racks. Makes 2 
loaves. 
Cinnamon Date Filling 
1 (8-ounce) package chopped dates 
1 cup oat bran 
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon 
1 egg white 
Combine dates, oat bran and cinnamon in small bowl. Stir in egg white and blend 
well. 
PEACHY OAT MUFFINS 
1 (16-ounce) can peach halves, in juice 
2 egg whites, beaten 
1/4 cup oil 
1 teaspoon vanilla 
1/2 teaspoon grated orange zest 
1/4 teaspoon almond extract 
1 cup flour 
1 cup oats 
3/4 cup brown sugar, packed 
2 teaspoons baking powder 
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 cup raisins 
Drain peaches, reserving juice for other use. Chop 2 peach halves and set 
aside. Puree remaining peach halves to measure 1 cup. Combine peach puree, egg 
whites, oil, vanilla, orange zest and almond extract. Set aside. 
Combine flour, oats, brown sugar, baking powder and cinnamon in large mixing 
bowl. Mix well. Pour liquid ingredients into dry ingredients and mix just until 
moistened. Fold in chopped peaches and raisins. Spoon into paper-lined muffin 
cups and bake on top oven rack at 400 degrees 20 minutes or until wood pick 
inserted in center comes out clean. Makes 12 servings. 
ALMOND OAT COOKIES 
3/4 cup sugar 
1/3 cup margarine, softened 
1/3 cup corn syrup 
2 egg whites, lightly beaten 
1 teaspoon almond extract 
2 1/4 cups oats 
1 cup flour 
1/2 teaspoon baking soda 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
3 tablespoons sliced almonds 
Beat together sugar, margarine and corn syrup until light and fluffy. Add egg 
whites and almond extract. Beat until blended. Gradually add combined oats, 
flour, soda and salt. Mix well. Stir in nuts and drop by scant 1/4-cup measure 
onto ungreased baking sheet. Gently press into 3-inch circles. Bake at 350 
degrees 14 to 16 minutes or until light golden brown. Cool 1 minute on baking 
sheet. Remove to foil, then store tightly covered. Makes 1 dozen cookies. 
THREE-GRAIN FILLED ONION RINGS 
2 (8- to 10-ounce) sweet Spanish onions 
1/3 cup flour 
3 tablespoons cornmeal 
3 tablespoons oat bran 
2 teaspoons sugar 
1 teaspoon baking powder 
1 teaspoon baking soda 
1/2 cup buttermilk 
2 egg whites 
2 tablespoons oil 
Peel onions and cut crosswise into 1/2-inch slices. 
Remove centers of onion slices to leave 1/4-inch thick rings. Reserve centers 
and end pieces for other use. 
Mix together flour, cornmeal, oat bran, sugar, baking powder and soda, 
buttermilk, egg whites and oil. Place onion rings on lightly oiled griddle, 
heated to medium heat or 350 degrees. Fill each ring with batter. Cook until 
bottom sides begin to brown. Turn and cook until other sides are done. Serve 
hot. Makes 4 to 6 servings. 
ONION-PARMESAN OAT BRAN MUFFINS 
1 cup finely chopped onions 
1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon oil 
2 egg whites 
3/4 cup nonfat milk 
1 1/4 cups flour 
3/4 cup oat bran 
1 tablespoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/4 cup grated Parmesan cheese 
Saute onions in 1 tablespoon oil over medium heat until tender, about 5 
minutes. Transfer to small bowl. Add remaining oil, egg whites and milk and 
beat to blend. Combine flour, oat bran, baking powder, salt and cheese in large 
bowl. Stir in liquid ingredients, mixing just until moistened. Spoon into 12 
non-stick or paper-lined muffin cups. Bake at 375 degrees 18 to 20 minutes or 
until lightly browned. Serve warm. Makes 12 muffins. 
ITALIAN OAT-ONION BREAD 
1 (8 to 10-ounce) sweet Spanish onion 
3 tablespoons olive oil 
1 envelope dry yeast 
1 cup warm water (105 to 115 degrees) 
1 teaspoon salt 
2 1/2 to 2 3/4 cups flour 
3/4 cup oat bran 
Peel and thinly slice onion to measure 1 1/2 cups. Saute in 2 tablespoons oil 
until tender, about 5 minutes. Set aside. 
Dissolve yeast in warm water. Stir in remaining 1 tablespoon oil, salt, flour 
and oat bran. Knead on lightly floured surface until smooth and elastic, 8 to 
10 minutes. Place in greased bowl. Cover and let rise in warm place 45 to 50 
minutes or until doubled. 
Turn out onto greased baking sheet or pizza pan. Pat out to 14-inch circle. 
Spoon onions evenly over top. Bake at 400 degrees 15 to 18 minutes or until 
browned. Serve warm, cut into wedges. Makes 8 to 10 servings. 
