ON CALIFORNIA: THIS COULD BE ABORTION PILL'S BATTLEGROUND 
Initially, the scene looks like any other political boogie in a dull election 
year: Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp, running for governor, stands up and says 
he wants the drug RU 486 tested in California. OK, John. RU 486 is the abortion 
pill and this move just might drain some of the female vote away from 
front-runner Dianne Feinstein. 
As a maneuver, it has a weary quality. The manufacturer of RU 486, the French 
drug company Roussel Uclaf, hasn't even applied for a license to test its 
product and shows no signs of wanting to do so. On the face of it, RU 486 seems 
to be an issue so vaporous that its only utility lies in the realm of the 
purely political. 
But there is an axiom in politics known as the law of unintended consequences. 
If you've been driving the freeways in the last day and happened to spin the 
radio dial to the talk shows, you might have noticed this law in action. All 
you heard on the radio was RU 486. Except the call-in people weren't talking 
about Dianne or John or who won the boogie. They were talking about the drug. 
There's a reason for this. RU 486 is one of those rare drugs, like the birth 
control pill, that represents a great leap from the past and has the power to 
change the human condition. It would make surgical procedures obsolete for most 
abortions. It would mean the decision to terminate a pregnancy would be carried 
out at home, not a hospital or a clinic, and therefore would be cloaked in a 
privacy heretofore unavailable. 
Those virtues also make the drug intensely political in the grandest sense. Put 
simply, RU 486 could cripple the movement to stop abortions. If clinics and 
hospitals no longer serve as the centers of abortions, who does the movement 
attack? Where do the true believers go to lay down their bodies? 
There is an easy answer to that question: they attack the drug company that 
sells RU 486. In fear of that response, Roussel Uclaf has declined any attempt 
to market the drug in this country. From a business standpoint, the risk of a 
company-wide boycott has outweighed the profit potential of a single drug. 
Of course, these calculations are tricky and subject to revision. What if 
Roussel Uclaf, or another company, could limit its risk by marketing RU 486 in 
one state only, rather than taking on the whole country? And what if that state 
is California, with a relatively low Catholic population and a liberal attitude 
toward new products that promise a better life? 
That's exactly the situation we have here. When Van de Kamp brought up RU 486, 
he was suggesting that we take advantage of California's unique position in 
drug testing. California alone operates a program where the state can approve 
drugs without the prior consent of the federal government. The single proviso 
is that such drugs be manufactured and sold within the state's borders. 
Aside from politics, the advantages of a test here are obvious. RU 486 carries 
the promise of lower risk during abortion because it does not involve an 
invasive procedure. It acts by blocking absorption of the hormone progesterone 
and may also be effective in use against breast cancer and endometriosis, one 
of the leading causes of infertility in women. 
Of course, before any of this comes about some drug company must be willing to 
take the risk. A year ago, or even six months ago, that prospect was regarded 
as non-existent. 
It still remains faint, but times are changing fast. In one of the great 
political ironies, the rollback of Roe vs. Wade by the U.S. Supreme Court last 
year marked the revival of pro-choice sentiment. All three of our major 
gubernatorial candidates support the notion that a woman has the right to make 
the abortion decision for herself. And the very fact that Van de Kamp believes 
he can get some mileage out of an aggressive pro-choice stand is a measure of 
where he thinks the momentum lies. 
At some point, and maybe it's not so distant, that shift could become 
pronounced enough that one or another drug company will decide the profit 
potential is worth the risk. And then we might see a quiet application for 
testing. 
What then? It's probably safe to predict that California would become the nexus 
of a new phase in the abortion war. A struggle that involves technology and 
morality all at once, a Brave-New-World kind of struggle. 
After all, isn't that why God made California? So bring it on. This is a matter 
of destiny. 
