LEAKS IN THE CLEAN-AIR BILL 
If it were an air-pollution-control device, you could say that the U.S. 
Senate's clean air bill sprang several leaks while it was being worked on at 
the White House. 
Still, the bill would launch the toughest attack the nation has ever made on 
acid rain, tighten up tailpipe emissions for cars in states outside of 
California and increase control of toxic air emissions. But in the compromise 
effort to make it acceptable to the Bush Administration, too often the 
deadlines come later and the emission standards are lower than in the Senate's 
version. 
For example, there is one truly curious provision that would let the 
Environmental Protection Agency set a ceiling of $5,000 per ton on the cost of 
emission controls a polluter could be required to install. For the three 
largest polluters in the Los Angeles Basin, whose incomes run to the billions 
of dollars a year, the provision would put a limit of something over $18 
million on what they could be required to pay to cut emissions. 
California's Senators, Democrat Alan Cranston and Republican Pete Wilson, say 
that they will try to plug as many of these leaks as possible. Wilson is 
bothered by, among other things, the way tailpipe emission limits in urban 
areas were increased from the original level. That is important because about 
one of every five cars on California roads was bought outside the state and 
thus is equipped with looser pollution controls than California cars. 
And toxics controls are too loose, a Wilson aide said. The bill is also silent 
on whether California could set tougher emission standards for its cars, power 
plants and other sources of pollution, a right the state has insisted on -- and 
used -- since the first federal air-pollution law was enacted back in 1970. 
Despite polls showing a steady rise in public support for clean air, the 
battles over health standards and costs still make fashioning pollution law a 
real legislative jungle. It's mean work but, for Californians, the rewards are 
high. 
