SCRIPPS SHIP COULD BE FREED BY WEEKEND; LIABILITY NOT AN ISSUE 
A Scripps Institution of Oceanography research ship, seized this week by the U. 
S. Customs Service in Honolulu after 4.5 grams of marijuana was allegedly found 
on board, may be on its way by Saturday, authorities said. 
Customs authorities and Scripps administrators continued discussions over the 
release of the ship, which is owned by the Navy but operated by Scripps, 
including an initial demand by Customs that the research institution admit 
"full guilt in this matter," according to Tom Collins, associate director for 
administration at Scripps. 
But by Wednesday afternoon, Collins said it appeared that the boat would be 
released in time for a scheduled research trip. 
Never a Question of Guilt 
Customs officials said there was never a question of guilt on Scripps' part and 
the institution will not be held liable. 
Asked whether the ship would be released by Saturday, Customs spokesman Art 
Morgan said: "I can't speculate on that. . . . The U.S. Customs Service is 
doing whatever it can to expedite the process." 
The research vessel Thomas Washington was seized in Honolulu on Monday after 
federal agents using drug-sniffing dogs said they found a small amount of 
marijuana hidden in the berth of Kenneth G. Racca Jr., 28, of San Diego, who 
works as a wiper on the ship. The seizure was conducted under the government's 
controversial "zero tolerance" anti-drug campaign. 
Collins said the ship was in "constructive seizure," a process in which the 
Customs Service allows the seized property to remain in use and in the custody 
of the owner or operator. 
"They have softened their position somewhat," Collins said. "The status is now 
that they're talking about this constructive-seizure arrangement, which really 
means we'll be able to take our ship and do our cruise. We have been assured 
that we are not admitting guilt to anything." 
But Morgan, who is assistant district director for the Customs Service in 
Honolulu, would not confirm that the ship was in the constructive-seizure 
process. 
Study of Greenhouse Effect 
The boat is scheduled to leave Honolulu on Saturday with a team of scientists 
for a 30-day trip to study carbon dioxide and the greenhouse effect in the 
mid-Pacific. 
Collins said that so far, the delay has cost Scripps, which is part of UC San 
Diego, about $20,000 in legal counsel expenses and staff overtime. If the ship 
is delayed beyond Saturday, costs of keeping the crew and the scientific team 
waiting could increase to $15,000 a day, he said. 
Meanwhile, the boat is in an "administrative petition process" that will give 
the ship's crew an opportunity to tell their side of the story in writing, 
without having to go through court proceedings, Morgan said. 
Racca is scheduled to be arraigned today in connection with one charge each of 
importation and possession of a controlled substance. A court spokeswoman has 
told the Associated Press that Racca will probably be fined and released. 
Collins would not discuss whether Scripps would take any action against Racca. 
"He will be dealt with fairly within university policy," he said. 
Separate Processes 
Morgan said the seizure of the ship and the charges facing Racca were two 
separate processes. 
"Mr. Racca is involved in a court case, and a ship's seizure is in an 
administrative process. One does not necessarily hold up the other. They're 
independent of each other." 
Rep. Jim Bates (D-San Diego) said he was disappointed in the action taken by 
Customs and criticized the zero-tolerance policy as cosmetic. 
"It's image over substance. . . . It doesn't work," he said. 
A spokesman for Sen. Pete Wilson (R-Calif.) said that, though the search was 
necessary, "There needs to be some flexibility on what punishment should be 
inflicted on the boat owner when he's done everything possible" to ensure that 
there are no drugs on board. 
"By law, the (Customs Service) has to at least react," said Wilson aide Bill 
Livingstone. "Our concern is that the procedure ought to be reasonable. . . . 
Is a fine even necessary at this point? The skipper appears to be trying to 
comply with the law." 
Collins said Scripps paid a company that used dogs to check the ship for drugs 
when it was in San Francisco last June. In addition, all crew members signed a 
statement acknowledging the institution's anti-drug policy and promising to 
abide by it. 
'We Were Shocked' 
"We feel we've gone to extraordinary lengths to ensure that this kind of thing 
wouldn't happen," Collins said. "When we found out, we were shocked." 
The Thomas Washington, Collins said, had just returned from Pago Pago in 
American Samoa. 
The government last year relaxed its zero-tolerance policy for commercial 
fishing vessels so as not to place "undue hardship" on innocent owners who 
might be unaware of the actions of their crew. 
