FEISTY NEW SPIRIT; 
GIBRALTAR: BRITAIN'S ROCK IS ON A ROLL 
The remains of Capt. Thomas Norman, Royal Marines, who was fatally wounded in 
the epic battle off Trafalgar in 1805, lie in a tiny cemetery at the foot of 
Main Street. Nearby, the Barbary Ape Take Away advertises fast food: breaded 
haddock and Spanish omelets. The apes themselves still gambol, under government 
subsidy, on the limestone cliffs thrusting, defiantly British, out of the blue 
Mediterranean Sea. 
Gibraltar's fortress image lingers, but the Rock is shifting. 
Bankbooks in Fashion 
Bankbooks are more fashionable now than gun ports on an outpost long prized as 
an impregnable sentry at the western entrance to the Mediterranean. Residents, 
recognizing that forts are as passe as dreadnoughts, predict a profitable role 
for themselves as an offshore adjunct to the new Europe. 
"We're transforming ourselves from a fortress to a city," J. H. Bautista, an 
adviser to the Gibraltar government's ambitious attempt to transform the Rock 
into a major financial center, said recently. 
Amid economic ferment, a feisty hometown spirit is growing in Europe's last 
colony. After three centuries, the people who live here are demanding a piece 
of their Rock. 
If there is no room for nationalism on 2 1/4 square miles of precipitate 
limestone, then call it village-ism. What it means is that the 22,000 polyglot 
people want a controlling say in their future. 
This late-blooming assertion of local fervor may ultimately aggravate the 
British, who have controlled Gibraltar since 1704, as much as it irritates the 
Spanish, who for nearly as long have demanded the Rock's return. 
"What's wrong with our being prosperous?" said Joe Garcia, editor of a weekly 
newspaper here. "How can 22,000 souls be so threatening to two such big 
countries? This is our homeland. There is no other. We've never been Spanish, 
and although we identify with the British, I don't think we've ever trusted 
their governments." 
New Socialist Government 
Change on the Rock is being accelerated by a labor-based Socialist majority 
elected a year ago in the first philosophical change of local government since 
World War II. 
"The Gibraltar people are a free European community entitled to exercise 
freedom of choice," said Gibraltar's new chief minister, 48-year-old Joe 
Bossano, a union man. 
Bossano and his allies argue that there must be room for Gibraltar in the 
frontier-free Europe promised in 1992, just as there is for other "Euroquirks" 
like Monaco, Andorra, San Marino and Liechtenstein. 
Down the road, Bossano and many of his constituents envision some sort of free 
association with Britain, or with a united Europe, that would make Gibraltar 
master of its own rock. 
"The right to our land is at the bottom of our position," said acting Chief 
Minister Joe Pilcher, filling in for Bossano, who was traveling. "We agree that 
we are a very small country, but we have as much right of existence as anybody 
else. Gibraltar wants to become self-sufficent. Only that would assure our 
independence." 
The British government says it will respect the wishes of the people of 
Gibraltar in any political rejiggering. 
"We have an absolute commitment that Gibraltar will not pass to anybody else's 
sovereignty against its wishes," Deputy Gov. William Quantrill, a British 
diplomat, said. "We are not going to sell out Gibraltar for the sake of our 
relations with Spain." 
Garrison Cutback 
But a recently announced cutback in the size of the British garrison has made 
some people nervous and will certainly have an economic impact on a colony 
where military spending has always been an economic mainstay. 
"We accept the cutback without liking it," said Michael Feetham, minister of 
trade and industry in the new government. "At the same time, while we are 
deeply bonded with Great Britain and have full faith in our long-term 
relationship, we must plan to use our own resources without help from Britain. 
We're on our own. That's a challenge we accept." 
In all, about 31,000 people live on the Rock. There are 5,000 British military 
and 26,000 civilians, of whom 22,000 can claim a relative living on the Rock in 
1925. That makes them officially Gibraltarian. 
So it is that Britain's rock is patrolled by dressed-for-Piccadilly bobbies 
who, like their brethren Gibraltarenos, are equally at home in both English and 
Spanish, often in the same sentence. This is a Gibraltar tradition. Another is 
a dish called calentita, a chickpea pie brought to the Rock by fishermen from 
Genoa. 
Along with the Genoese in the years after Britain wrested Gibraltar from Spain 
came Maltese, Portuguese, Spaniards and Sephardic Jews from Morocco, a group 
whose 600 descendants here wield great economic influence today. Recent 
immigrants include about 2,000 Moroccan workers. The mix is leavened by former 
British servicemen who never went home. 
"The Rock has molded a people who are different," said Peter Montegriffo, a 
young lawyer who is a leader of the opposition to Bossano. "Gibraltar is a 
unique Mediterranean community. Spanish? My God, I'm not Spanish! (He said this 
in Spanish.) But I'm not British either. (In English.) When we go to school in 
England we realize how different we are ethnically and culturally. They drink 
beer, play rugby, have all that bad weather. . . ." 
Scandinavians and Arabs 
On a recent day at Gibraltar's Cathedral of St. Mary the Crowned, the marriage 
banns of Brian Consigliero and Helen Martinez were posted. The Rock is 
overwhelmingly Roman Catholic, but while Bishop Bernard Patrick Devlin said 
noonday Mass, the Main Street throng in front of his church included 
Scandinavian tourists in shorts, shopping Spaniards, off-duty British 
servicemen (a sprinkling of them black), Arab women muffled from toes to nose 
and a gray-suited Jewish businessman in a yarmulke. 
"Until the border was closed, we were just a bunch of people who lived on a 
rock," said Devlin, who came from County Cork four decades ago to preach. 
To press Spanish claims, dictator Francisco Franco closed the land border in 
1969, forcing Gibraltarians to look inward. The frontier was not fully reopened 
until 1985 and is still subject to the caprice of Spanish immigration and 
customs inspectors. 
"None of us will ever forget it," recalled Clive Cooms, the 46-year-old clerk 
of Gibraltar's Parliament. "Nothing moved. Franco stopped even the oxygen for 
the hospitals and the Communion wine. As a result, my kids -- the whole younger 
generation -- want nothing to do with Spain. The Spanish say we're more British 
than the British, and, well, if we do paint the town red, white and blue now 
and again, it's because we know it annoys them. If Mongolia plays Spain in 
soccer, the Rock roots for Mongolia." 
Visiting Spanish tourists encounter no visible tension, but scratch a 
Gibraltarian and you'll find a Rock patriot with no love for Spain. 
"Franco gave identity to this place," said Sam Benzaquen, a Main Street 
merchant whose Sephardic family came to Gibraltar from Morocco in about 1750. 
"He fused us into one people. We're pro-British but not English. We're 
anti-Spanish. The British now seek a modus vivendi with Spain. Will they try to 
divorce us?" 
The last time Britain asked Gibraltarians if they wanted to align with Spain, 
in 1967, the answer was no by a vote of 12,138 to 44. 
Tensions with Spain have eased in the democratic years since Franco's death, 
and particularly since Spain joined the European Community in 1986. Under Prime 
Minister Felipe Gonzalez, Spain maintains its case for the recovery of 
territory ceded to Britain in perpetuity under a 1713 treaty, but not at a 
level that would sour relations between Spain and its British partners in a new 
Europe. 
Under its 1969 constitution, Gibraltar is internally self-governing; Britain 
retains responsibility for foreign affairs and defense. The Rock remains an 
important base for British forces, but the economy, once tied to military 
spending, is now linked more closely to private enterprise. 
Tourism, Financial Services 
Tourism and offshore financial services, both growing, are bigger moneymakers 
than the old Royal Navy shipyard, which is now administered by the Gibraltar 
government. 
With no taxes levied on non-residents, the number of banks in Gibraltar has 
grown from five to 23 since 1985, according to financial adviser Bautista. One 
of the banks opened 10,000 new accounts in the first six months of last year, 
when the Rock's economy grew by 6%. About 9,000 offshore companies are 
registered here, four times as many as when the land border with Spain was 
reopened in 1985. 
Tourism has increased to 3.5 million visitors a year, most of them day-trippers 
from Spain. 
Gibraltar has become an important banking and shopping annex for several 
hundred thousand British and Northern European snowbirds who have settled along 
the Costa del Sol between Gibraltar and Malaga. Supermarkets that stock British 
goods are popular; so are cheap electronics and so, for reasons Gibraltarians 
cannot fathom, are umbrellas. 
At present, Spain and Britain are both frustrated by Gibraltarian 
intransigence. The 15-member Gibraltar House of Assembly is balking, 15 to 0, 
at an attempt by Britain and Spain to ease their historic enmity over the Rock 
by allowing joint commercial use of the Gibraltar airport. 
A bilateral agreement would allow travelers bound for Spain to have a separate 
exit and clear Spanish immigration and customs without reference to Gibraltar 
authorities. Gibraltar's approval is required, though, and in the assembly the 
concept is regarded unanimously as an unacceptable surrender of Gibraltarian 
sovereignty. 
Few Direct Flights 
Until there is an airport agreement, one of Gibraltar's peculiarities will 
continue to be that you can't get there from here. The only direct flights are 
from Britain or Tangier, Morocco. Otherwise, a visitor must fly to Malaga and 
then drive three hours along what little the developers have left of the Costa 
del Sol. En route, the Spanish disgust with England's Rock is manifest: There 
is not a single road sign mentioning Gibraltar. 
Gibraltarians are betting that the prospect of a unified, frontier-free Europe 
will make historic antagonisms seem out of step and old fashioned. Even if they 
are wrong, the Gibraltarenos say, they are by now as wed to their Rock as to 
the Barbary apes, who have survived 15 sieges and two world wars. 
Britain, legend says, will remain on the Rock as long as the apes are here. 
During World War II, Winston Churchill took that lore seriously enough to send 
a secret mission into the Atlas Mountains of North Africa for reinforcements 
when the ape population dwindled. 
By tradition, the apes figured on the muster list of the British army garrison. 
Now, in a sign of the changing times, the apes, all 67 of them, are on the 
rolls of the locally raised Gibraltar Regiment. 
There are even fresh breezes blowing at Ape's Den, according to Cpl. Ernest 
Asques, who commands there. Michael, longtime boss of the ape pack that 
tourists see, seems to be on his way out. An interloper named David, a newcomer 
from the wild pack of apes that roam the north end of the Rock, appears to be 
ready to take over, Asques says. 
GIBRALTAR: 'THE ROCK' 
The 2 1/4-square-mile island has been controlled by Britain since 1704. 
About 31,000 people live on the Rock: 5,000 British military personnel and 
26,000 civilians. 
