THE COUSTEAU WATCH: ANTARCTIC TREATY THREATENS CONTINENT 
There exists a vast, eternally white continent where life clings to the borders 
of death. There the icy air is light to the lungs and offers magical 
transparency to the sight. The hours of bewitching quietness and of total sun 
are swept away by raging blizzards that spare intruders only by chance. 
This immense austral land is buried under mountains of snow, piled up and 
frozen over the course of tens of millions of years. Fossils, the vestiges of 
important chapters in our planet's history, sleep under their immaculate 
shroud. All around circles a silent carrousel of giant icebergs that have been 
torn from the shores, and dwarf lichens sprinkle the coast ice with hesitant 
spots of color. A fringe of salty ice protrudes, then disappears with seasons, 
while on land soft ice melts only to better solidify. 
The sea sometimes reddens with clouds of tiny shrimp -- krill -- on which 
penguins, whales and, indirectly, seals stuff themselves in order to survive. 
The seals move about under the pack ice while singing eerie melodies; a fish -- 
the icefish -- injects proteins as antifreeze into its colorless blood; the 
orcas, endowed with majestic fins, blend their breath with the morning mist. 
Antarctica, continent at the bottom of the world, has shown us its fragile 
state, which is due to the extreme simplicity of its ecosystems. But the 
forbidding rigor of its environment did not discourage some territorial claims 
that the 1959 Antarctic treaty has thus far managed to include. The document, 
signed by 12 nations and now honored by 26 others, ensures the demilitarization 
of Antarctica and lays great stress on its use for scientific research. 
Already whales have been hunted, and more recent tentative agreements 
(particularly that of April 7, 1982) have begun opening the way to industrial 
fishing for krill. Such hypocritical infringements on the spirit that 
enthusiastically gave birth to the Antarctic treaty -- namely the willingness 
to preserve the last wilderness zone on our planet -- caused us to sound a 
first cry of alarm in 1984. 
Alas, this time, masks have fallen. Representatives of 33 countries, assembled 
in Wellington, New Zealand, have, after six years of difficult negotiations, 
signed an agreement that opens the entire Antarctic continent to a so-called 
controlled exploitation of its mining resources: coal, uranium, gold and oil. 
The document even specifies that prospecting by means of seismic explosion of a 
"reasonable magnitude" is permitted. The cold? The ice? It will be difficult? 
It will be costly? What does it matter!? Since it is possible, exult the 
technocrats, it will be done! What? Dust from coal and smoke from oil torches 
are going to alter the protective whiteness of the surface, the albedo of the 
entire continent? The ice may melt; the sea may rise several dozen feet and 
engulf most of our cities? Come, come now! More ecologists' tales! 
Hardly. We need only take the example of the Bahia Paraiso, the Argentine 
supply ship that ran aground in January off Palmer Station, a crucial U.S. 
scientific base. The diesel-fuel cargo leaked slowly, over a matter of days, 
but 20 years of scientific research was compromised before clean-up vessels 
could even reach the spill. 
Oil-coated seabirds and smothered plankton -- microscopic sea creatures being 
studied in experiments to gauge how increased ultraviolet sunlight will effect 
the ocean surface. Accidental pollution had finally stained the laboratory of 
Antarctica. It was a "minor" oil spill, authorities said, but the local 
consequences to the fragile ecosystem will take years, if ever, to recoup. 
If an innocent ship with an innocent purpose can cause potential catastrophe, 
what of mining operations? Are we naive enough to believe that miners will put 
on white coats and brush their feet before they unleash their industrial 
maelstrom? 
Citizens of the entire world, be on the alert! The Wellington Agreement is 
nothing more than a holdup on a planetary scale. It involves the smashing open 
of the safe that contains the most fantastic treasure: the last water reserve 
that cannot be controlled if it is set free. The hostages: seals, birds, 
penguins, whales. Threatened is the whole of humankind whose conscience in 
managing the future of our planet risks being sacrificed to the cult of a 
meaningless golden calf. 
The scrap of paper signed in Wellington will be applied when 16 of the 20 
voting members of the 1959 treaty ratify it. We must at all costs oppose this 
ratification in the name of future generations. 
In December, 1972, I disembarked from Calypso onto Antarctica for the first 
time. A serene sun shone upon the dusting of snow which had fallen during the 
night. With my heart beating excitedly, I took my first steps. The crackling of 
my boots in the soft powder made me look back. My footprints, soiled with a bit 
of grease, contrasted with the blinding whiteness of everything that surrounded 
me. Naively, I blushed with shame for not having cleaned the soles of my shoes. 
