KYLANDER FLOWERS AT CSUN AFTER HIGH SCHOOL BURNOUT 
Jude Kylander can safely lay claim to the title of fastest woman swimmer at the 
NCAA Division II championship meet. 
She already has anchored three victorious relay teams and won an individual 
title in the 50-yard freestyle sprint. 
And her favorite race, the 100-yard freestyle, is scheduled for today. 
But as fast as she is in the water, she was even more of a blur on foot one 
October day in 1987. 
You think FloJo can fly? Too bad there wasn't a stopwatch on Kylander, a born 
and bred Pennsylvanian, the first time the light fixtures in her off-campus 
apartment started break-dancing to the tune of a California quake. 
Fortunately, Kylander's older brother Fred was on a visit and was there to 
place the event in its proper perspective. 
"I got to meet the neighbors," he said. 
They both did. Jude said that it was quite a while before they dared go back 
inside. 
"We were looking for an open field to go run in," she said. "Anything away from 
buildings." 
Kylander said that she was more frightened than her brother but "only because I 
could tell he was scared. Normally, nothing bothers him, so I figured if he was 
scared I should be even more." 
The following day, Northridge Coach Pete Accardy recalls, Kylander was still 
quaking even though the ground had long since stopped. 
"It made me think about coming back home, let me tell ya," Kylander said. 
Home for the Kylanders is Warren, Pa., an oil and timber town of about 15,000 
less than 20 miles from the New York border. The area is not considered much of 
a swimming hotbed, which is why Jude, the youngest of four children, was sent 
packing as a high school junior in search of better training. 
Mercersburg Academy, a private boarding school in the mountainous southeastern 
part of the state, seemed to have the prescribed combination of aquatics and 
academics. 
It was the right choice for many -- Olympic backstroke specialist Betsey 
Mitchell went there, as did several other successful Division I swimmers. But 
it wasn't right for Kylander, who fizzled when faced with the demands of 
mega-mileage workouts. 
"I got worse each year," Kylander said. "By the time I graduated, I wasn't even 
a contender to look at." 
So, while her high school teammates sorted scholarship offers from the likes of 
Tennessee and Texas, Kylander took to the road in search of a team. 
First stop: Orlando, Fla., site of the 1985 Division II nationals. 
"I knew when I graduated that if I was going to continue swimming I had to be 
realistic," Kylander said. "I didn't want to just go try to hang on at some 
Division I school." 
Fred Kylander, who had been a swimmer on strong Clarion State (Pa.) College 
teams, suggested Northridge. 
"They were always an all-around class act," said Fred, who last swam for 
Clarion in 1982, a year in which CSUN won both the men's and women's national 
team championships. 
Clarion, Fred said, was not much of an option. In his two seasons of swimming 
there he suffered through the same type of burnout his sister had experienced 
in high school. 
"I improved, but not in the leaps and bounds like kids who had been slower 
before they went to Northridge," Fred said. "When I swam against them I 
couldn't understand what kind of magic Accardy had. But I thought that is what 
Jude should have." 
No tricks involved, Accardy says. A shot of confidence was all that was needed. 
"She came from a good swimming school, but I don't think they worked with her 
head very much," Accardy said. "A lot of swimming coaches put so much stress on 
these kids from such a young age that they all go through plateaus. 
"We've picked up a lot of burned-out people and been able to work with them. 
All it is really is developing them emotionally rather than swim-wise." 
Although they are 3,000 miles apart, Kylander keeps close contact with her 
family. 
Fred Kylander said that the family considers his sister's experience living in 
Southern California as valuable as the education she is receiving. 
"We come from a very small and conservative community," Fred said. "You only 
get so much from the books, then maybe 75% is out of life itself. There is no 
better place than Southern California to learn those lessons." 
There is no debating that Kylander's swimming has flourished. She has been 
among the elite of Division II sprinters for three years. 
In addition to her three individual championships, Kylander has been on 12 
title-winning relay teams. 
She has been a part of four record-setting relay teams. Northridge is the 
record-holder in the 200- and 800-yard freestyles and the 200- and 400-yard 
medleys. The 400-yard freestyle relay, which will be held today, is the only 
relay record that has eluded CSUN and Kylander. 
"They have a shot at it," Accardy said. 
The event will be the meet's last race. 
"It would be a nice way for her to go out," Accardy said. 
