RESISTANCE TO DRUG FOUND IN TESTS OF SOME AIDS PATIENTS 
Scientists have detected resistance to the commonly used anti-AIDS drug AZT in 
blood samples drawn from a small number of AIDS patients who have received the 
medication for more than six months, it was announced Tuesday. 
The laboratory findings of resistant strains of the AIDS virus -- which 
researchers said were not unexpected -- are likely to have no immediate effect 
on the use of AZT in AIDS patients. AZT was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration in 1987 for many patients with either AIDS or advanced 
AIDS-related conditions. 
But the new research, from the UC San Diego Medical Center and Wellcome 
Research Laboratories in Britain, is likely to stimulate efforts to design AIDS 
treatments that combine AZT with other medicines. 
Previous research has suggested that AZT can prolong the lives of AIDS patients 
for an average of one to two years. AZT blocks the replication of HIV, the 
virus that causes AIDS, but does not rid the body of the infection. As a 
result, the immunodeficiency caused by HIV continues to progress. 
AZT can also cause serious side effects, such as anemia, requiring 
discontinuation of the drug. 
The new findings may also cause some physicians and patients to rethink the use 
of AZT in the early stages of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus. 
Although the benefit of AZT in the early stages of HIV infection has not been 
established, the antiviral drug is widely prescribed in this situation. 
"I feel very strongly that no change in the management of individual (AIDS) 
patients should be based on these data," Dr. Douglas Richman, a professor of 
pathology at UC San Diego, said. He expressed concern that misinterpretation of 
the findings would create inappropriate "fear or hysteria." 
Richman, one of three authors of the new study, said that resistance happens 
"with all drugs and all bugs and all tumor cells." He said it was "not 
surprising" in the case of HIV. A germ is considered resistant when it develops 
the ability to grow in the presence of even high concentrations of a drug. 
"So far, the resistance has not been proven to have clinical significance," Dr. 
Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases in Bethesda, Md., told Associated Press. 
"People who are on AZT and are currently benefiting from AZT should not panic 
and consider this a major setback," Fauci said. "Just because one can isolate a 
resistant strain from a patient doesn't mean AZT is not effective in combatting 
most of the viral replication in the patient." 
The early announcement of the findings, which are to be published in the 
journal Science on March 31, was made at press conferences in London and San 
Diego on Tuesday and in letters mailed by AZT's manufacturer, Burroughs 
Wellcome Co. of Research Triangle Park, N.C., to AIDS physicians and infectious 
disease specialists around the country. 
Regulators' Demand 
Kathy Bartlett, a spokeswoman for Burroughs Wellcome, said the results were 
being released by the company so that physicians could put them "in the proper 
context if questions came up from their patients." But, according to Richman, 
"British regulatory agencies," which oversee Wellcome PLC, the parent company 
for Burroughs Wellcome, had "demanded" the release. 
Bartlett, Richman and Jeffrey L. Teramani, a spokesman for Science, all 
declined to make available a copy of the scientific paper. Many physicians 
consider it impossible to put findings into the proper context without 
reviewing the actual research report. 
The new study involved 11 patients who had received AZT for more than six 
months, according to Monday's "Dear Doctor" letter from Dr. S.W. Singleton, 
vice president of medical affairs for Burroughs Wellcome. 
When samples of the patients' blood were tested in the laboratory, many were of 
"reduced sensitivity," including blood from five patients that had "very marked 
reductions in sensitivity," the letter said. "Longer durations of treatment 
were associated with progressively less sensitive virus." 
More Studies Made 
Richman said, "Some of the isolates were a hundredfold more resistant (than 
prior to AZT treatment)." He termed the findings a "pretty straightforward and 
consistent observation." 
Richman said studies are in progress to determine the mechanism of HIV 
resistance to AZT and to determine if asymptomatic HIV-infected individuals 
developed AZT resistance in a comparable fashion. 
Singleton's letter cautioned that "no correlations were evident" between the 
development of resistance to AZT in the laboratory and changes in the patients' 
condition. 
The letter said that, "Clinical decisions based on correlations between in 
vitro (test tube) sensitivities of virus and plasma concentrations of drug may 
be inappropriate and the clinical implications of these findings are therefore 
not clear." 
Burroughs Wellcome officials said that more than 20,000 people throughout the 
world are estimated to be taking AZT, which is also known as azidothymidine or 
zidovudine. 
