ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: REPORT EXPRESSES FEARS FOR TOLLWAY 
The 15-mile San Joaquin Hills tollway to run from Newport Beach to San Juan 
Capistrano and scheduled for construction next year, could run into trouble 
without state funds or if construction costs rise too rapidly, a consultant 
reported Thursday. 
"The project is still financially viable -- though only marginally," Fieldman, 
Rolapp &amp; Associates of Irvine states in a report to the Orange County 
Transportation Corridor Agencies. "State funding, though minimal, is an 
integral part of the financing plan which, even with that support, is only 
marginally feasible." 
Banks poised to help finance the project have insisted that the state come up 
with $48.5 million previously committed in principle by the California 
Transportation Commission. But that money is now in jeopardy. 
The state is out of money for new highway construction, and a recent Los 
Angeles Times Poll found that 49% of voters surveyed statewide oppose a ballot 
measure that would increase the state gasoline tax and raise state spending 
limits to finance a major transportation improvement program. About 36% of the 
respondents favor the measure; 15% said they were undecided. 
"Unless Prop. 111 passes, we'll have to rethink everything we're doing around 
here," said William C. Woollett Jr., executive director of the corridor 
agencies, which plan to build three tollways in eastern and southern areas of 
the county. 
The agencies' staff, however, said the Fieldman, Rolapp report is somewhat 
misleading. The report, agency officials said, used on toll-revenue assumptions 
based on 2-year-old traffic studies while taking into account a recent update 
of cost estimates from $585 million to $601 million. 
"It's not really marginal," corridor agencies spokeswoman Donna Stubbs said. 
Walter Kreutzen, the agencies' financial chief, said that banks' refusal to 
issue letters of credit would not doom the project. Kreutzen said other 
financial arrangements such as bond anticipation notes can be made. 
"We have to work out alternatives," he said. "It's not a make-or-break 
situation." 
Former Orange County Supervisor Bruce Nestande, vice chairman of the California 
Transportation Commission, said he considers the Fieldman, Rolapp report an 
update rather than the final word. 
Nestande said it would be unfortunate if state funding now became the critical 
factor for the project. 
The San Joaquin Hills tollway will be an extension of the Corona del Mar 
Freeway, running from Newport Beach through Laguna Hills to the San Diego 
Freeway in San Juan Capistrano. JEFFREY A. PERLMAN 
