DRUGS INTOXICANTS EVERYWHERE; 
IT'S A DRIVE AS NATURAL AS FOOD OR SEX; 
IN A SENSE, THE WAR AGAINST MIND-ALTERING SUBSTANCES IS A WAR AGAINST 
OURSELVES, A DENIAL OF OUR VERY BIOLOGY. 
There is a silent spring of intoxicants that flows through our lives and 
bodies. Whether we wake up with a cup of coffee or a line of cocaine; whether 
we take a break with a cigarette or a beer; whether we relax after work with a 
cocktail or a joint of marijuana; whether we go to sleep with something we 
bought at the pharmacy or on the street -- we use drugs to change the way we 
feel. Nobody wants this to be unhealthy or dangerous. Nobody wants people 
living out their lives inside crack houses, dying from cancer caused by tobacco 
or lying dead on the highways as a result of drunk drivers. 
At the drug summit in Cartagena last month, President Bush announced a "new" 
emphasis on reducing consumption, although his speech echoed the words of 
former President Richard Nixon when he declared his war on drugs in 1971. Sure, 
we can discourage the use of a drug such as cocaine. Already, the image of 
cocaine has been transformed from a glamorous drug for the rich and famous to 
one found in dirty crack pipes on inner-city streets. This new image has turned 
off many users but the lower price of "crack" has attracted many more. 
So we blockade their streets and bulldoze their crack houses. When we uncover 
huge warehouses full of cocaine, we find out who sent it. Then we go after 
them, encouraging extradition, kidnaping if we must, even invading a country to 
capture just one of the kingpins. The federal budget escalates as we provide 
military support for coca eradication in the jungles of South America and 
coerce foreign governments reluctant to help. At home, we use urine tests to 
uproot users from their jobs and write tough laws to treat dealers like so many 
coca shrubs. 
If the domestic cultivation of coca now beginning in several states -- Florida, 
Hawaii, Arizona, California -- is curtailed, and the development of 
synthetic-coke labs can be avoided, these efforts might reduce cocaine use. 
Let's say they do. 
What if cocaine simply disappeared from the face of the Earth? The war on drugs 
would still be lost. Why? Because the drive to use drugs is unstoppable and the 
supplies are unlimited. 
History shows that we have always used drugs. In every age, in every part of 
this planet, people have pursued intoxication by consuming drugs derived from 
plants, alcohol and other mind-altering substances. Surprisingly, we're not the 
only ones to do this. Almost every species of animal has engaged in the natural 
pursuit of intoxicants. This behavior has so much force and persistence that it 
functions like a drive, just like our drives of hunger, thirst and sex. This 
"fourth drive" is a natural part of our biology, creating the irrepressible 
demand for drugs. In a sense, the war on drugs is a war against ourselves, a 
denial of our very nature. 
Of course, this "fourth drive" sometimes runs amok and overshadows the other 
drives, as is the case when animals and people pursue an intoxicant to the 
exclusion of everything else in their lives. This tells us that we are doing 
the right thing when we try to curtail cocaine use. But there is simply no end 
to the supply of dangerous drugs. Already, there is a methamphetamine ("ice") 
epidemic looming on the horizon, ready to recruit ex-cocaine users to its 
ranks. Designer chemistry, exotic plants, even over-the-counter medicines 
provide endless sources of new highs. And so the war on drugs will continue, as 
it has throughout history. 
Some people want to stop the war, putting an end to its enormous societal 
costs, by legalizing drugs such as cocaine or heroin. The voices calling for 
legalization are not only well-intentioned, they are also louder and more 
respectable than ever. But calling a drug legal doesn't change its basic 
pharmacology or safety any more than saying "no" changes our basic drive to 
pursue intoxication. 
Making some dangerous drugs illegal while keeping others legal is not the 
solution. Outlawing drugs to solve drug problems is much like outlawing sex to 
win the war against AIDS. We recognize that people will continue to have sex 
for non-reproductive reasons, whatever the laws or mores. Thus, we try to make 
sexual practices as safe as possible in order to minimize the spread of the 
AIDS viruses. Similarly, we continually try to make our drinking water, foods 
and pharmaceutical medicines safer. 
To solve the drug problem, we must recognize that intoxicants are medicines, 
treatments for the human condition. Then we must make them as safe and 
risk-free and -- yes -- as healthy as possible. 
Dream with me for a moment. What would be wrong if we had perfectly safe drugs? 
I mean drugs that delivered the same effects as our most popular ones but never 
caused dependency, disease, dysfunction or death. Imagine an alcohol-type drug 
that never caused addiction, liver disease, hangovers, reckless driving or 
workplace problems. Would you care for a cigarette that is as enjoyable as 
marijuana but as harmless as clean air? 
This is not science fiction. There are such intoxicants available now. If drug 
czar William J. Bennett can switch from smoking tobacco to chewing nicotine 
gum, why can't crack users chew a cocaine gum that has already been tested on 
animals and found to be relatively safe? 
Even safer drugs may be just around the corner. They could be made available 
early in the next century. What would it cost to develop them? Probably less 
than this year's budget for the war on drugs. But it will first take a national 
commitment equal to putting a man on the moon. 
We must begin by recognizing that there is a legitimate place in our society 
for intoxication. Then we can join in building new, perfectly safe intoxicants 
for a world that will be ready to discard the old ones as the corroding pieces 
of junk they really are. 
