U.S. CATHOLICS EXPECT MORE THAN 'PAY, PRAY,' POPE TOLD 
Vatican cardinals on Friday assailed threats to family life and morality in the 
United States, and an American bishop told the Pope that American Roman 
Catholics expect more from their religion than "paying and praying." 
Theological maneuverings behind them, three dozen American bishops and Vatican 
prelates got down to basics with Pope John Paul II, exploring the concerns of 
American Catholics over issues such as marriage, divorce, sex, pornography, 
abortion, feminism and the role of women in the church. 
The Americans dueled with a cardinal from the Curia, the church's highest 
administrative body, over the granting of annulments to divorced Catholics. 
For the third straight day, the Pope was an avid listener, straining to catch 
the quickly spoken English of the Americans, and at times asking them to speak 
more slowly. On Thursday, a spokesman said, the pontiff had become so engrossed 
in the deliberations that he was half an hour late for dinner. 
Friday's discussions underlined again the basic cultural differences between 
American prelates trying to preach Catholicism in a way acceptable to their 
society and a Vatican Curia firmly sustaining traditional church principles. 
After back-room jockeying that had continued all week, the Americans won 
agreement to make available to the press the full texts of American and curial 
presentations from the eight discussion sessions completed through Friday. 
Papal spokesman Joaquin Navarro said the participants on both sides had agreed 
unanimously to make the texts public. 
The bishops will concelebrate Mass with the Pope this morning at the tomb of 
St. Peter. Then there will be two final discussion sessions and a papal address 
to climax the extraordinary conference called to ease strains between the 
53-million-member American church and Rome. 
In a strongly worded address Friday, unusual in the specificity of its language 
and examples, Cardinal Edouard Gagnon, the Vatican's ranking official concerned 
with families, criticized American Catholics who surrender to the loose morals 
of the society around them. 
Gagnon denounced "the degrading of moral values vehicled by cinema and TV 
shows, which pretend to depict normal American life." He cited the TV series 
"Dallas" as an example. 
Reciting social evils often denounced by the Vatican, the 71-year-old 
French-Canadian cleric stressed their prevalence in American society today. He 
decried what he called an American contraceptive mentality and called for 
greater education for chastity. He called too for the promotion of women within 
the church but warned that "ideological feminism has a deleterious influence on 
the family." 
'Promiscuity Encouraged' 
"A new challenge is offered to the church by the efforts of Planned Parenthood 
to set up school-based clinics for abortion referral and contraception," Gagnon 
complained. "Planned parenthood programs and sex education in no way resolve 
the problem of teen-age pregnancies, but rather increase it by encouraging 
promiscuity." 
The American speaker in the session on the family, San Francisco Archbishop 
John Quinn, acknowledged the many challenges to marriage and the family in the 
United States, including "the growing efforts to legalize 'marriages' between 
persons of the same sex. 
"Nevertheless," he said, "the church is making serious and effective efforts to 
confront these challenges and fulfill its mission of evangelization." 
Inveighing against the "prevalent divorce mentality" in the United States, 
Gagnon said church tribunals with authority to annul marriages had become 
overworked there. 
"Women religious can be very helpful in dealing with marriage cases, but we 
have to be careful that their tender hearts do not play tricks on them," he 
said. 
'Dating Services' 
Some church ministries to divorced Catholics who are not free to remarry, he 
said, have "degenerated into dating services." 
Italian Cardinal Achille Silvestrini criticized the American church for 
granting too many annulments. 
"One may deduce," he said, "that various tribunals in the United States have 
introduced their own method, not fully in conformity with the Code of Canon Law 
in instructing marriage cases." 
In 1985, Silvestrini said, of 45,632 annulments granted by tribunals around the 
world, 36,180 were in the United States. 
In response, Vatican briefers told reporters, Archbishop Roger M. Mahony noted 
that in Los Angeles last year, judges found no grounds to hear the overwhelming 
majority of about 13,000 annulment applications, and only about 1,000 were 
granted in the Archdiocese of Los Angeles. 
Archbishop Edward O'Meara of Indianapolis and Cardinal Edmund Szoka of Detroit 
also defended the probity of American tribunals, the briefers said, and Szoka 
invited the Vatican to send a delegation to examine them in action. 
From the outset, the Americans have stressed the singularity of their culture 
and the difficulties of preaching spirituality in a fast-moving, materialistic 
society. Archbishop Patrick Flores of San Antonio returned to the democratic 
theme Friday in a discussion on the role of the laity as agents of 
evangelization. 
The life of American Catholics as active participants in a democracy, Flores 
said, "is quite different from our hierarchical mode of life, which for a long 
time expected Catholics to limit their involvement to paying and praying only." 
Flores noted that American Catholics live side by side with other Christians, 
and added: "They see their non-Catholic brothers and sisters participating as 
preachers almost from the moment they are baptized. They also see them active 
in so many other ways." 
The very roots of American Catholicism complicate its attempts to grow while 
coping with societal changes, the Texas archbishop told the Pope and his 
cardinals. 
"The Catholic experience in the U.S.," he said, "was one of an immigrant church 
needing to protect itself against a society that was predominantly Anglo and 
Protestant. Because we have been more self-preserving than outward looking, we 
have struggled with the reaching out needed to be evangelizers." 
While acknowledging difficulties facing the American church, Vatican cardinals 
urged caution in the search for ways to confront them. In a session on liturgy 
and the sacraments, Curia Cardinal Eduardo Martinez Somalo lamented that 
Americans seemed to be losing their "sense of sin." 
He voiced reservations about experimental Masses, overzealous attempts to 
depersonalize liturgical texts, and also "the direct service of women at the 
altar." An American attempt to win approval for altar girls is being studied by 
a Vatican commission. 
Martinez Somalo also complained about the "over-utilization" of general 
absolution instead of individual confession. Archbishop Daniel V. Kucera of 
Dubuque replied, "General absolution has been used quite sparingly in the U.S. 
despite vocal but inaccurate claims to the contrary." 
Closing sessions today before the papal address will examine ecumenism and 
evangelization, and the use of the mass media for evangelization of 
non-churchgoers who have become known, in the jargon of American bishops, as 
"the unchurched." 
