PARTYING STUDENTS INVADE HOUSE, LEAVE A MESS 
A group of students apparently angry about being evicted retaliated by throwing 
a very expensive house party near San Diego State University. 
The party last week and ensuing vandalism left the house, in the 5000 block of 
Alumni Place, in a shambles that will take up to $25,000 to repair, said 
Detective Norm Hardman of the San Diego Police. The students passed a flyer 
around campus that advertised an "eviction party" on March 10, and encouraged 
participants to come and "barf" on the walls. "Who carez (sic)," the flyer 
read, "it's not my house." 
The students forced their way through a door into the house, where they 
allegedly proceeded to vandalize the premises. Floor tiles were cracked and 
broken, windows were smashed, holes were punched in walls. One wall, Hardman 
said, "looked like they were playing head-butting contests." There were holes 
in the ceiling and graffiti were written with marker pens on wallpaper, walls 
and cupboards. Mirrors were smashed, cupboard doors were ripped off and drapes 
and carpets were stained with dirt. 
About 55 students were arrested on suspicion of misdemeanor violations of 
trespassing and disturbing the peace, Hardman said. Arrested on suspicion of 
burglary and felony vandalism were Donald Melvin Clarke, 23, Joe Clark Murdoch, 
21, and Adalberto Munoz, 21. 
A few students were cited for operating a business without a license, Hardman 
said. He said he expects one more arrest to be made but said it is still being 
investigated. All of the students were released on bail or on their own 
recognizance, Hardman said. 
None of the students arrested was listed on the lease, and police did not know 
if any of the students had ever been tenants of the house, Hardman said. Police 
also did not know how many of the students arrested were from SDSU. 
Vestiges of the party also included swastikas scrawled on a wall, said Hardman, 
but he downplayed their significance. 
Swastikas on Wall 
"There were indications that there were swastikas on the wall, but through the 
course of the investigation, I determined this is not a racially motivated or a 
race crime. It was just stupidity on the part of intoxicated students. The 
swastikas were not directed at any victims," Hardman said. 
Hardman disputed reports that party-goers were also stamped with swastikas 
after paying the $2 admission. "Nobody had their hand stamped," he said. "They 
were marked with a marker pen to indicate they had paid. There were not 
swastikas. Band members, for instance, were marked with "B" to distinguish 
them." 
The owner of the house, Angela Balsamo, had some forewarning that a party was 
planned, Hardman said. "Someone turned in a flyer to SDSU authorities before 
the party. SDSU detectives contacted the owner. The owner checked the property 
at 6:30 p.m., but the house was secure." 
Feared Retaliation 
Police began to receive complaints between 9 and 9:30 that night about noise 
from the party. When police arrived, they called Balsamo, who later told police 
that she feared retaliation from the students, Hardman said. 
Hardman said he will submit the case to the district attorney's office by 
Tuesday for consideration, adding that he hopes the culprits won't get off with 
just a slap on the wrist. "We're talking felony charges here. . . . These 
people's house was trashed. How would you feel if your house was trashed?" 
