CRIPPLED TRAUMA SYSTEM 
Closure of the first teaching hospital trauma center firmly seals the coffin's 
lid on an essential health-care service for San Gabriel Valley residents. The 
decision to close the trauma center at the Huntington Memorial Hospital shows a 
total lack of appreciation and consideration for important patient-care issues. 
In these days of cost controls and corporate medicine financial concerns, who 
is left to worry about patient care? If physicians and hospitals do not take up 
this cause, the whole system will collapse. Never should concern for payments 
be put above patient care. 
Huntington Hospital has been an excellent teaching hospital for many years. It 
chose to be an institution for medical education, rather than just another 
community hospital. As a teaching hospital, it is expected to instill reliable 
and trustworthy value systems to its young physicians, yet by choosing to 
remove itself from the trauma center network, it reinforces the idea that 
dollars should take precedence over delivery of care. This kind of conduct if 
allowed to persist threatens the public safety. 
Trauma centers are essential health services which lower death rates without 
question. Allowing the entire San Gabriel Valley to not have a trauma center 
jeopardizes the health of everyone living there. 
A teaching hospital with such high responsibility should have reached a more 
reasonable and fair solution. Downscaling or accepting less trauma runs would 
help lower its financial exposure, while at the same time satisfying its 
societal obligation as a health-care institution. This disastrous and fatal 
blow must be met with an equally strong counterblow. First, county and state 
officials need to obtain a restraining order preventing the closure of this 
essential public service. Failure to achieve this is a real danger to the 
health of every resident in San Gabriel Valley. 
Secondly, if the hospital persists in its trauma closure, then its status as a 
teaching institution should be removed. We cannot allow institutions of medical 
education to hold hostage the public's well-being. 
We are all potential patients of trauma centers. Continued closure of these 
health services only further increase needless deaths due to accidental 
injuries. 
ROBERT A. BELTRAN, M.D. 
Temple City 
