STUDENTS ADVANCE IN FIRST CITIZEN BEE 
Students throughout the Southland distinguished themselves in the first round 
of California's first Citizen Bee. 
On March 4, 234 students from 86 high schools in Southern California fielded 
questions about American government, history, geography, economics and current 
events in regional playoffs of the Citizen Bee. Participants had previously won 
contests at their schools. The nationwide civics competition is organized by 
the Close Up Foundation of Washington, D.C. 
National Competition 
First-place winners in the 11 regional competitions will proceed to a statewide 
contest, which will be held April 22 in Los Angeles. The three top state 
winners will compete with other state winners in the national competition in 
June in Washington. 
Top regional winners each took home a prize of $500. The state winner will win 
$1,000, plus a $2,500 scholarship. The three top finishers in the state will 
also receive all-expense-paid trips to Washington for the finals. The national 
winner will receive a $7,000 college scholarship. 
The national Citizen Bee was established in 1985 by the Close Up Foundation, a 
nonprofit organization that promotes civic education. In California, the 
contest is sponsored by the Los Angeles Times. 
Demography Question 
Local winners and the winning questions they answered included: 
Region C, including Westside and San Fernando Valley schools. The question: 
"What term do demographers use to describe the degree to which a particular 
population continues to reside in one place over a period of time?" Answer: 
Population persistence. First: Miguel Olano, ninth grade, Walter Reed Junior 
High, North Hollywood, Paul W. Mertens, teacher. Second: Peter Aronson, 12th 
grade, Beverly Hills High, Stewart Horowitz, teacher. Third: Arun Srinivasan, 
12th grade, Hollywood High, Paul Johnson, teacher. 
Region D, including Pasadena, Glendale, San Gabriel Valley and Los Angeles 
schools. Question: "Give the full name of the person who was vice president to 
Gerald Ford." Answer: Nelson A. Rockefeller. First: Jonathan Giron, 12th grade, 
Eagle Rock High, Brent Beaty, teacher. Second: Tony Chan, 11th grade, San 
Gabriel High, Los Angeles, Ben Molnar, teacher. Third: Dennis Derecho, 12th 
grade, Franklin High, Los Angeles, Sharon Bergh, teacher. 
Region E, including Westside and South Bay schools. The question: "The prime 
minister of Great Britain attended a memorial service for the victims of Pan Am 
Flight 103. What is her last name?" Answer: (Margaret) Thatcher. First: Pedro 
Cardenas, 12th grade, Garfield High, Los Angeles, John Bennett, teacher. 
Second: Philip Strubbe, 12th grade, South Bay Lutheran High, Inglewood, Mark 
Tornow, teacher. Third: Bryan Goldberg, 12th grade, Los Angeles Center for 
Enriched Studies, Marion Wong, teacher. 
Region F, including San Gabriel Valley and Southeast schools. Question: "The 
movie 'Mississippi Burning' is a fictional account of the murder of three men 
who were concerned about what issue in the 1960s?" Answer: Race relations/civil 
rights (equality among races or voting rights or segregation). First: Robert 
Ashley, 12th grade, Glendora High, Judith Waggoner, teacher. Second: David Lee, 
11th grade, Diamond Bar High, Jack Moore, teacher. Third: Robert West, 10th 
grade, Monrovia High, Marjorie Thomas, teacher. 
