ISRAELI REGIME FALLS ON VOTE OF NO CONFIDENCE 
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's government fell Thursday night on a tense 
parliamentary vote of no confidence as the rightist Likud Party leader doggedly 
refused to accept an American formula to start Israel's first peace talks with 
the Palestinians. 
The vote was 60 against Shamir's government, 55 in favor of it and five key 
abstentions. 
Shamir's defeat marked the first time in Israel's 41 years of independence a 
government had lost a no-confidence vote in the Knesset, Israel's Parliament. 
Under Israel law, Shamir will continue as head of a transitional government 
while President Chaim Herzog begins what promises to be a long process of 
establishing a new regime. 
The crisis began in late February when the Labor Party, then the Likud's 
coalition partner, demanded that Shamir accept a plan for peace talks put 
forward by U.S. Secretary of State James A. Baker III. 
Shamir refused Labor's demand, and the crisis came to a head on Tuesday when 
Shamir fired Peres. The 10 other Labor ministers promptly resigned from the 
Cabinet, and Labor submitted the motion of no confidence in the rump government 
left to Shamir. 
On Thursday night, after nearly seven hours of debate on the motion, the 
outcome clearly pivoted on the votes of the six-man Shas party, an 
ultra-Orthodox group that circulated a compromise proposal requiring Shamir to 
accept the Baker proposal. The prime minister demanded a two-hour recess and 
went to the home of Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, spiritual guide of the Shas deputies. 
Soon after, he was joined there by Peres and Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin, 
the top Labor Party leaders. 
Asked point-blank to approve the Baker plan and let Labor back into government 
in return for withdrawal of the no-confidence motion, Shamir refused, asking 
instead for more time for consultations. Peres and his party, flatly opposed to 
further delays, pressed for the critical vote. 
As Shamir returned to his seat in the Knesset, the voice vote began; the prime 
minister smiled grimly as five of the six Shas seats remained empty, signaling 
automatic abstentions. A 60-60 tie would have meant victory for Shamir. 
"We will continue in our fight," Shamir told reporters immediately after the 
defeat. "Life goes on even after no-confidence votes." 
The fall of his government ended a day in which Peres and other Labor stalwarts 
again and again lashed the prime minister verbally for stalling. Peres, opening 
his remarks, declared: "We can have unity for the sake of peace, not unity for 
paralysis or evasions, not unity for murdering the peace process." 
In his own speech, Shamir gravely advised, "We are not afraid of peace or the 
peace process. We fear irresponsible concessions. 
Throughout the crisis, Shamir has attacked Baker's proposal that a Palestinian 
panel for preliminary talks in Cairo include a few deportees from the occupied 
territories as well as Palestinians residing in East Jerusalem. The former, he 
argued, would be tainted by influence from the Palestine Liberation 
Organization and the latter would raise questions about Israeli sovereignty 
over the eastern sector of Jerusalem, annexed after the 1967 Arab-Israeli War. 
Thursday's debate began about 11 a.m. when Peres introduced the Labor motion of 
no confidence, almost precisely two days after he had been sacked by Shamir. 
Shamir, the deputy prime minister and finance minister in the now-shattered 
coalition, rose from the front bench of the Labor deputies, an unaccustomed 
location for a man who has sat for many years at the table reserved for 
government ministers. At his request, he was introduced by Speaker Dov 
Shilansky simply as Knesset member Shimon Peres. 
Rarely looking at his notes, Peres launched into a strident, sometimes angry 
attack on Shamir. 
"We've come to express no confidence in a man," he declared, looking at the 
impassive prime minister who sat scribbling on a tablet at the government 
table. 
Several times, shouts from the Likud benches interrupted Peres, who paused 
impatiently as Shilansky gaveled for quiet in the modernistic stone-walled 
Knesset chamber. The hall was packed for the showdown between the two party 
leaders whose political futures were on the line. 
Bearded deputies from the religious parties shuttled between the Labor and 
Likud benches, apparently discussing the last-minute compromise proposals 
designed to salvage the unity government. 
"I propose voting no confidence in the man who ended two processes, peace and 
national unity," Peres declaimed. 
"Who will believe you ever again in this country?" he continued, accusing 
Shamir of breaking up the coalition and failing to deliver on promises to the 
religious parties, who held the swing votes on the no-confidence motion. "You 
have broken every promise. 
"Shamir has one problem, fear," Peres declared "Fear to make peace with Egypt, 
fear to make peace with Jordan, fear to reach a dialogue with the 
Palestinians." 
And, he asserted in a foreign policy revelation, Syria has notified Jerusalem 
that it wants to discuss negotiating demilitarization in the Golan Heights, the 
territory dividing Israel from its bitterest Arab enemy. 
In the test of strength that came after weeks of a mounting crisis in the 
brittle coalition, the 66-year-old longtime leader of the left-center Labor 
Party was unrelenting in his 40-minute personal attack on Shamir, six years his 
senior. 
The prime minister, who took the podium after leftist party leaders aligned 
with Labor had their say, read from a prepared text, rarely raising his eyes or 
his gravelly voice until late in his speech. Heckling from the Labor deputies 
halted him again and again until, exasperated, he growled over the tumult: "If 
you keep screaming, I'm staying here until tomorrow." 
Shamir traced the course of the peace plan based on Palestinian elections that 
he introduced 10 months ago, insisting that it had been damaged by lack of 
cooperation from Labor and what he characterized as inopportune comments by 
American officials. 
Over the past months and weeks, he has accused Labor of being soft on PLO 
influence on the proposed peace talks, demanding guarantees that Palestinian 
representatives be free from direct or indirect contacts with the PLO. 
He accused his former coalition partners of "constant back-stabbing" -- and 
Peres personally of trying to dominate the peace process. 
"Peres never accepted the fact that he was not prime minister," Shamir charged, 
referring to the partnership that collapsed Tuesday. Peres headed an earlier 
Likud-Labor coalition from 1984 to 1986, trading stints at the top with Shamir. 
"We must determine our fate," Shamir demanded. "What we do here will affect the 
fate of the Jewish people throughout the world. The enemies are still at the 
gate. They are far from achieving their goals. The land is still being built 
and the way is still long to the settlement of all parts of her." 
According to Israeli political analysts, the compromise put forward by Shas was 
the deciding factor. Deputy Prime Minister David Levy, a Likud member, pointed 
out that his party had already rejected the Baker plan in Cabinet consultations 
before the coalition collapsed. 
Rabbi Yosef, the Shas leader, had emerged in recent months as a convert to a 
peaceful solution of Israel's long conflict with the Palestinians. He had 
argued that protection of human life took precedence over the disputed West 
Bank and Gaza Strip. 
Yosef has a strong following among Israelis of North African and Near Eastern 
descent, an important voting bloc for Likud. 
Under Israeli law, President Herzog will consult with party leaders and decide 
who has the best chance to form a new government. The inside track would seem 
to go to Peres -- Likud suffered another blow Thursday when five of its members 
formed a separate faction, reducing the official Likud count in Parliament from 
40 to 35, four less than Labor. 
Herzog's choice would have up to six weeks to build a working majority. If the 
first choice fails, the president can try someone else. If no one can paste 
together a coalition, new elections would be called. 
