DESIGNERS COME UP SHORT IN BERMUDAS AND SKIRTS FOR 1990 
If Gianni Versace was bold enough last season to hike his hemlines 10 inches 
above the knee, he's downright aggressive now, with skirts so tiny they hardly 
cover the wearer's hips. 
In his fall '90 collection, shown on Sunday, the flamboyant designer and 
favorite son of the show-biz crowd presented a variety of abbreviated items, 
from derriere-hugging jersey dresses and skirts to elaborately embroidered silk 
cocktail mini-gowns. 
For a long evening, Versace showed a floor-length dress, but it was slit 
straight up the leg with a plunging back line that met the slit at the waist. 
There, the dress was held together with a single snap. What happens if the snap 
pops is anybody's guess. 
There were more than a few raised eyebrows from the crowd on this first day of 
the four-day ready-to-wear collections, and afterward the consensus seemed to 
be that Versace's short skirts were just too short. 
The jeweled embroidery on some of his evening wear helped divert attention from 
the many bare spots in any given outfit. A tiny, A-line slip-dress became a 
sumptuous cocktail gown when covered with myriad shimmering crystals and pearls 
that formed a heart on the the bodice. 
Bustiers made entirely of encrusted jewels gave substance to the micro-mini 
below, while simple silk stretch pants turned into sophisticated evening wear 
when decorated with paisley tops covered with sequins. 
The newest looking jacket by Versace is loose and full with wide sleeves and 
generous shawl collar, in bright shades of blue, green, yellow and red -- a 
favorite color of the designer this season. 
On Sunday as well, Giorgio Armani showed his Emporio Armani collection, aimed 
at the younger set. It was filled with fun ideas for the chilly winter months. 
Heavy knit sweaters were shown over jackets, boots reached the thigh to protect 
legs bared by miniskirts and Bermuda shorts, and jumpsuits were worn with a 
scarf tied around the waist for extra coziness. 
These first two shows have been followed by others that reconfirm Italian 
designers' commitment to skirts a good 3 inches above the knee, and Bermuda as 
well as short shorts, for winter 1990. 
The shorts are loose-fitting and sporty, usually made of corduroy or light wool 
jersey, worn with dark or printed stockings and comfortable walking shoes. Like 
most of the "moda Milanese" seen this season, the look is pert rather than 
sexy. 
Gone are the tailored city suits and elegant coats of past seasons, replaced by 
sweat suits, sport jackets, parkas, down and duffel coats and loads of knitwear 
from cozy cardigans, pullovers and sweater dresses to the brand-new all-knit 
jumpsuit. 
Colors range from the browns and reds of autumn leaves to the icy beige, green 
and blue pastel shades of a winter landscape. 
Three of the collections shown on Monday -- Krizia, Missoni and Byblos -- are 
longtime experts in the field of chic sportswear. 
Krizia, by Mariuccia Mandelli, featured a soft and casual look with natural 
shoulder lines, brief hemlines and loose-fitted waistlines. Jackets tended to 
be oversized with huge shawl collars, rounded hemline and drawstring waist. 
Krizia also offered cozy bathrobe coats with silk cord monk belts. 
For weekend wear, Krizia showed a series of quilted items from long down coats 
and duffel coats to pert quilted miniskirts. 
Most seasons Krizia makes use of a jungle-animal motif to adorn pullovers and 
sweaters. But for next winter the designer steals cherubs from a Renaissance 
painting and prints them on her soft cashmere pullovers and short sweater 
dresses. White horses and imperial eagles also adorn many of her outfits. 
To dress up her sporty look, Krizia's Mandelli embroidered gold onto lapels, 
hemlines and cuffs. 
Since last winter, the Italian designers have promoted the anti-fur movement by 
replacing their once-sumptuous furs with exquisite look-alikes in teddy-bear 
plush. Thus the Krizia customer can flaunt her tiger, leopard or brightly dyed 
beaver outerwear, knowing its all just fluff. 
Missoni has been the leading label for Italian knitwear ever since the company 
presented reversible knit and quilted jackets, several decades ago. But the 
latest collection, entirely dedicated to the Soviet Union, is one of the best 
in seasons. 
Beautiful reversible coats and parkas are knitted in patterns of Russian folk 
art: the "onion" spires of Red Square, the quaint houses of a Russian village, 
the geometric designs of a carpet. The same patterns appear on knitted 
jumpsuits and sweat pants, as well as silk evening outfits. 
Later in the day on Monday, Keith Varty and Alan Cleaver for Byblos presented 
their version of the sporty winter woman. 
True to their British blood, the designers dressed her in favorite items from 
their native countryside: riding jackets with velvet collars, riding breeches, 
and blouses complete with ascot tie. Lace embroidery added a feminine touch to 
the look. 
For languid hours by the fire of a ski lodge, Byblos offered heavy knit 
pullovers in ivory-white with large rose patterns, and cable-knit Irish 
sweaters. 
Speaking of skiing, the Byblos ski parkas with string-tie and fur-trimmed hood 
in icy beige or blue are sure to be a hot item on the slopes from Aspen to St. 
Moritz. 
