JAMES FLANIGAN: TIME WARNER MIXES VISION AND POWER 
What's really behind the proposed merger of Warner Communications and Time 
Inc.? Both vision and muscle -- a grand vision of global entertainment and a 
calculated grab for market power. 
The vision looks ahead to the time when movies will be beamed directly from 
film studios to high-definition television screens in homes and theaters 
worldwide. 
It is a vision that has captivated Hollywood for a long time. In 1962, Darryl 
F. Zanuck, the founder of 20th Century Fox, was asked if television would 
replace movies. No, said Zanuck, movies would not only survive alongside 
television, they would thrive. The time would come, he said, "when I will make 
a movie on Friday, distribute it on Saturday and recoup my investment over the 
weekend." 
He was talking about instant worldwide distribution of entertainment -- which 
is the real promise of high-definition television, the clear-picture, 
big-screen TV that Japan is developing. It's the vision driving Sony Corp., 
which is angling to buy a movie studio as it looks to globally distribute 
entertainment and information. It's the vision driving entrepreneur Rupert 
Murdoch, who has put together the Fox movie studio, the Fox television network 
and a satellite TV service in Europe called Sky Channel. 
And it's the vision behind the combination of Warner, the descendant of the 
Warner Bros. studio that made Edward G. Robinson and Bugs Bunny famous, and 
Time, the magazine empire that owns Home Box Office and American Television 
&amp; Communications, the second largest U.S. cable system. 
TV Networks Should Worry 
But exciting as the vision is, it is also years away from being realized. And 
meanwhile, the Time-Warner combination -- if the merger is completed as planned 
-- will hold awesome power in today's media markets. 
"If I were the television networks, I'd worry," said analyst John Tinker of 
Morgan Stanley, as officials of CBS and NBC demanded that the government grant 
their companies the right to own cable systems and to own and syndicate 
programs. The networks fear the market power that Time Warner could exert as 
owner of a movie studio, a major exhibitor of movies (HBO) and cable systems 
with 5.5 million subscribers. The company would be a seller and a buyer of 
programming on a massive scale and could theoretically set differential prices 
to favor itself and hurt competitors. 
Network fears are understandable. Market power is something to be reckoned 
with, as Time Inc. demonstrated last year in the magazine field -- where it 
publishes Time, Life, Fortune, People, Money, Sports Illustrated and others. 
For years, the accepted wisdom in the advertising world was that independent 
magazines had nothing to fear from a multi-publication company like Time. 
Individual magazines have specific readerships and attract advertising on that 
basis, went the thinking. One didn't need to be a big company. 
Then Time showed the field what market power is all about. To discomfort 
competitors, Time offered advertisers who increased their ads in any Time 
publication a free ad in another of its magazines. The strategy boosted lagging 
ad page totals in Fortune and Sports Illustrated, and forced competitors to 
give advertisers a similar deal. It became an expensive year of giving away ad 
pages for Time's competitor, Newsweek, and Fortune's competitors, Forbes and 
Business Week. Time has since ended the practice, having shown the mailed fist 
and made its point. 
Could Time Warner bring the same kind of muscle to cable? Possibly, but it 
hasn't yet, even though Warner Communications has owned a studio and a cable 
system for years, just as Time has owned HBO and cable systems. That's one 
reason the Justice Department probably won't intervene on antitrust grounds. 
Another reason is that increasing globalization may be making domestic 
antitrust rules beside the point. Traditionally, antitrust in the film industry 
has meant movie producers can't own theaters, a restriction that has eroded. 
The question for the future will be whether it makes sense to bar a U.S. 
company from owning a studio and a cable system if programs are distributed 
globally and restrictions don't apply to non-U.S. companies. 
In any case, such interesting questions are for the future. The thing to keep 
in mind about Time Warner is that people and institutions move less quickly 
than technology. Darryl Zanuck, who died in 1979, outlined his vision of 
instant global movies in 1962. But 27 years later the vision hasn't become 
reality. Time Warner, even presuming a competing offer doesn't derail the 
merger before it starts, could fall over its shoelaces in actually trying to 
operate as one company. 
Still, you don't have to see a vision realized to appreciate how smart it is, 
and how much it offers a glimpse of business in the global future. 
