THE STRUGGLE TO OUT-FOX TV'S BIG 3 CONTINUES; 
FOURTH NETWORK'S THIRD NIGHT OF PROGRAMMING MAY BE THE KEY TO ITS FUTURE 
It is 10 o'clock in the morning in Los Angeles, and, as they say in war-room 
lingo, confidence is high. Fox Inc. chairman and CEO Barry Diller, who sets the 
sartorial tone for his troops in an all-business white shirt and peach power 
tie, looks down the long table at the 20 employees he'd hired to make a go of a 
fourth television network, the Fox Broadcasting Co., for Rupert Murdoch's News 
Corp. -- most of them men, most of them hovering near 30, most of them, by 
Diller's own admission, in over their corporate heads. 
They are too new at what they are doing, and too full of the pioneer spirit, to 
entertain notions of failure. If a show's ratings increase a single point over 
the previous week, it is cause for rejoicing. If a new promotional spot for the 
popular "21 Jump Street," an hourlong drama about undercover police officers at 
a large public high school, impresses the executives, they enthusiastically 
back Diller's quick decision to buy an additional $250,000 in air time on MTV 
for the ad, even though financial analysts and business writers had been 
speculating on the financial health of the company for months. 
This weekly staff meeting -- which is equal parts business meeting and public 
forum -- is unusual for a television network, where departments typically 
function in bureaucratically discrete units. But Diller recognizes the 
therapeutic value of calling his people together and letting them discuss the 
network's performance. As much as anything, the session is designed to revive 
any flagging spirits and restore the momentum needed to climb uphill for 
another week. 
Diller, who appreciates the inspirational effects of a little naive optimism, 
does his best to make sure his staff does not dwell on the darker side. "They 
get nervous," he says, "to the point where you spend a great deal of time 
setting the environment, setting the agenda. You create your own mirrors so 
that you can keep the process stable -- even fictionally." It is important that 
everyone believes there are no real problems ahead. Just puzzles to be solved. 
So the 46-year-old elder statesman barks orders, interrupts, consults his watch 
and, as the meeting expands beyond the 90 that Diller thinks it deserves, 
begins to yawn loudly. He cannot allow self-confidence to turn into lazy 
self-congratulation: Between May and September, FOX will face its biggest 
challenge and its most ambitious agenda so far. 
The network's third night of programming -- which will be announced in May and 
debut on Monday, Sept. 11 -- is the key to the future. A third night has been 
announced and postponed several times before, the false starts always blamed on 
the need to shore up a weak Saturday night line-up before taking on a new 
night. But too many delays begin to look like failure, so FOX is banking on a 
much expanded programming department -- dozens of shows are currently in the 
works -- to supply series that will survive against such hefty competition as 
"Monday Night Football." 
As for the still-faltering Saturday night shows, the network hopes to have a 
solution in "Cops," a half-hour "reality show" about police in Florida that was 
scheduled to appear on the Saturday schedule for the first time March 11. In a 
five-night trial run in Los Angeles, "Cops" boosted KTTV to over 20% of the 
viewing audience, a first for an independent station. Fox expects that the show 
will lift the rest of the Saturday ratings in the same way that "21 Jump 
Street," the network's first Sunday night hit, gave a lift to the Sunday 
schedule. 
On Friday, April 21, Fox debuts "Revolution," an hourlong music and feature 
show aimed at the MTV audience. And to get viewers into the Monday-night habit, 
on May 8 the network will begin a monthly movie night of FOX features that will 
move to Tuesday in the fall. It is all part of an effort to get beyond two 
nights of flirting with the appealing 18- to 34-year-old market, the 
demographic group advertisers most want to reach. FOX wants to be these 
viewers' steady date. 
But FOX's brief history has been an odd one: Its successes have been mostly a 
matter of good luck, its failures often the ironic product of hard work from 
the West Coast staff. The very structure of the company keeps changing as new 
job titles and responsibilities are invented to fill a perceived need. And the 
network has been hobbled from the outset by the decision to start programming 
on two adjacent nights, a move considered necessary to establish a strong 
identity with viewers. 
While Sunday night was the most appealing night of the week, Saturday -- when 
that 18-to-34 target audience tends to be away from the television set -- has 
proven to be an overwhelmingly difficult obstacle. Unless Diller can figure out 
how to exploit serendipity -- how to take what he's learned from the successes 
he's stumbled upon and manufacture new kinds of hit shows -- and enforce 
stability among his troops, he could be in trouble again as soon as he launches 
the third night. 
He cannot allow smugness to creep into the meeting. When talk about upcoming 
segments of "The Reporters" drags on too long, he breaks it off with the curt 
comment, "the stories have been dreadful." He complains about "The Garry 
Shandling Show" and "Duet," which do well on Sunday nights, but not well enough 
to suit him. And, always impatient for the next good idea, he interrupts 
staffers who talk too much. Diller believes in fostering a spirit of 
professional camaraderie, but he does not believe in complacency. It is much 
too soon for that. 
If Barry Diller has his eye on everybody at Fox Broadcasting, Rupert Murdoch, 
in turn, has his eye on Barry Diller. For there is much more at stake here than 
a mere television network. "We're building a loosely integrated global 
communications company," Murdoch says of his News Corp., which owns newspapers, 
magazines and book publishers worldwide, "and it would be nonsense without a 
very firm foot in television." 
The Fox Broadcasting Co. (which calls itself FOX to help viewers used to CBS, 
NBC and ABC think of it as a network) is Murdoch's very expensive experiment in 
video entrepreneurship -- a brazen, extravagantly financed effort to compete 
with the three traditional networks. Armed with nothing but resolve and money, 
Murdoch launched FOX in May, 1986. He purchased all the necessary components of 
a national opportunity: Stations ($1.6 billion), a production company to 
provide original programs and a facility to make them ($575 million). The 
stations, and any affiliates FOX could round up, were to be the potential 
profit center for Murdoch; if the network succeeded, the stations' advertising 
revenues would rise simultaneously with a dramatic reduction in programming 
costs. 
At first, the money flowed in one direction -- out. FOX put "The Late Show With 
Joan Rivers" on the air in October, 1986, and launched two nights of 
programming in 1987, only to lose $99 million in fiscal 1988, almost double its 
initial $50 million estimate. The network expects to lose at least $20 million 
in the current fiscal year. 
Prospects looked so glum in June, 1988, that Richard Sarazen, chief financial 
officer at the News Corp., was reported to have said that FOX would be closed 
down in six months unless there was marked improvement. While Murdoch and 
Diller insisted that the remarks had been misinterpreted, skeptics cited the 
dollar losses and programming failures and continued to forecast doom. 
But since the debut of the 1988 fall season, Murdoch and Diller have ratings 
that, for the first time, hold a glimmer of promise. In their best time period, 
7 to 9 p.m. on Sundays, they have begun to beat some of the network competition 
-- "21 Jump Street" has maintained its popularity, while "Married . . . With 
Children" and "America's Most Wanted" have dramatically improved ratings. That 
performance, combined with the concentrated demographics, has already enabled 
the network to raise advertising rates. Total advertising revenues for the 
1987-88 fiscal year, which ended June 30, 1988, were about $100 million. 
Revenues for the first four months of this year were $130 million. 
None of this makes FOX an apparent direct threat to the networks, not when NBC, 
the number one network, has annual ad revenues of $3.8 billion. FOX simply has 
too few shows on too few stations -- in 10% of the country, there is no FOX 
affiliate -- to compete on an equal basis. But the response to the current 
line-up does suggest that the company has a future as a boutique broadcaster -- 
a narrow-casting network that goes after a smaller, concentrated target 
audience and bases its scaled-down operation on low overhead and inexpensive 
inventory. 
If recent changes in the FOX West Coast operation -- all aimed at cutting 
losses and achieving what Diller calls a consistent "personality" -- are 
successful, Murdoch could end up not with a fourth traditional network but with 
the first of a new kind of network, one designed to make the most out of a 
smaller piece of the viewing pie. 
To put together a nontraditional network, Diller decided to put together an 
unorthodox staff. Since his days as chairman and CEO of Paramount Pictures, 
Diller has believed in hiring the not-quite-ripe -- he takes credit for 
launching Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of the Walt Disney Studios, on his 
meteoric career by promoting him to head of production at Paramount before he 
was quite ready -- so he purposely hired young executives to fill "jobs that 
they are not yet qualified for. This company has an enormous number of very 
talented people who do not have a great deal of experience," he says. "What you 
get out of that is freshness, you get energy. The price you pay is that you 
sometimes don't have the maturity that is necessary, and the basic experience." 
But Diller's primary concern was with getting product on the air, fast, so he 
opted for enthusiasm over know-how, hiring Jamie Kellner, a film executive who 
had never worked in network television, to be Fox Broadcasting president. Garth 
Ancier, who appraised his previous seven years at NBC as "a solid track record, 
nothing amazing," joined as senior vice president of programming, and Kevin 
Wendle became an executive after only a year and a half at NBC and 10 years in 
local television. 
Both Ancier and Wendle had been trained by NBC Entertainment President Brandon 
Tartikoff, who espoused a programming philosophy based on buying the services 
of already-proven producers. It was a pricey way to start doing business, but 
it looked to Diller to be fairly low-risk, since a proven producer would be 
likelier to deliver a successful show than would a less experienced, less 
expensive one. Ancier and Wendle mixed their mentor's approach with their new 
boss' predilection for betting on people's potential, and, according to Ancier, 
went after "second- or third-level people" who may have worked on -- but had 
not created -- a hit series. 
The FOX executives let the Hollywood creative community know that they were 
looking for what Diller called "alternative programming" -- shows that might 
seem too controversial to the networks, but would attract younger viewers bored 
with the standard fare. To get producers to work with a speculative venture 
such as FOX, they offered incentives: more creative control, and a financially 
remunerative combination of competitive fees and definite on-air commitments. 
Because the standard program development process includes network involvement 
and does not necessarily lead to a prime-time series, the promise of freedom 
and a time slot was seductive. 
"One reason we were attracted in the first place," says Mitch Semel, vice 
president and executive in charge of production at UBU Productions, the company 
that produces the half-hour comedy "Duet" for FOX, "is that we got an immediate 
on-air commitment for 13 episodes. We didn't have to go through development and 
making a pilot; we knew from the get-go we had 13." The inherent risk was that 
the network would have to meet contractual obligations even on canceled shows. 
But the pay-off in terms of independent station interest and advertiser 
response was worth the gamble. Original programming from well-known producers 
was the one thing that could elevate a marginal independent into a more 
lucrative, competitive position. 
Kellner offered them shows from UBU Productions, Stephen Cannell ("The A-Team," 
"The Rockford Files"), James L. Brooks ("Terms of Endearment") and Ed. 
Weinberger ("Taxi," "The Mary Tyler Moore Show"). What he wanted in return was 
eight minutes of advertising spots per hour for FOX, leaving only three for 
local sales. But the potential increase in ad revenues was so great that the 
independents still stood to make more money. 
"If you are a little UHF station in the 116th largest market in the United 
States, and suddenly you are a FOX affiliate, the perception of you, 
particularly in the buying and selling of advertising, has totally changed 
overnight," says Steve Bell, senior vice president and general manager of KTLA, 
the Tribune Broadcasting-owned independent station that competes with the 
FOX-owned KTTV in Los Angeles. "You're no longer considered a schlocky UHF 
independent, because advertising agencies do tend to favor affiliates over true 
independents." 
One year after the announcement of the network's formation, in April, 1987, FOX 
launched a Sunday night prime-time schedule. Three months later, FOX began 
programming on Saturday night and by the fall had four situation comedies in 
place to compete directly with NBC's strong Saturday night comedy line-up. "We 
wanted to go very fast," says Diller of what he, and his staff, now consider to 
have been a somewhat hasty debut. 
"We took the best five shows and premiered Sunday night," says Wendle. "We took 
the next best four and premiered Saturday." There was no contingency plan in 
case of disaster. 
Which is exactly what they got. The Sunday night schedule, anchored by the 
relatively successful "21 Jump Street," did not meet the projected national 
ratings figure. The Saturday night shows dipped as low as 2 in the national 
ratings and refused to budge despite a revolving door lineup. In the meantime, 
FOX's experiment in late-night programming, "The Late Show With Joan Rivers" -- 
meant as a direct challenge to NBC's Johnny Carson, a contest between Carson 
and his most popular substitute host -- had developed into "The Late Show" with 
a series of different hosts, and then into another format entirely, none of 
which worked. 
In October, 1988, FOX's late-night programming disappeared. "We auditioned on 
the air to find an idea, and we failed," says Diller, who says he is relieved 
to be out of the late-night business. "I said to my colleagues, 'We don't have 
a valid idea, and until we get a valid idea, we should say, 'We're going home 
from this area, and we'll be back when we have something to say.' " Rivers did 
have a 3-year, $10-million contract, however, which the network had to pay off. 
The Fox Broadcasting Co. made two basic errors of calculation in its short 
spring, 1987, season and the full 1987-88 season: For all the talk of 
alternative programming, the network served up Saturday night programs almost 
identical to the competition, and it underestimated the difficulty in luring 
viewers to their local affiliate. 
'You look back and say, 'My God, how could we have been so stupid?,' " says 
Wendle. "But at the time it was easy to rationalize. You say, 'The networks 
have all these viewers, so clearly the viewers on Saturday night want comedy.' 
" And dissatisfied viewers seemed unwilling to give FOX a second chance, so its 
replacement shows did just as badly. 
The network's more popular Sunday night programs also failed to live up to 
ratings projections, but for a different reason -- station anonymity, despite 
$20 million spent on advertising, promotion and publicity. Many viewers simply 
were not familiar with the small FOX affiliate in their area. "In our darkest 
hour so far we said to ourselves, 'They don't know where our stations are,' " 
says Diller. "We put on an idea we think is a good idea, they don't find it. . 
. . We couldn't get growth no matter what we did." 
The network paid for its mistakes, literally, for almost 18 months. The ratings 
average for FOX during the first full season was not 6, as promised to 
advertisers -- it was 3.6, a shortfall of more than 2 million viewers. 
According to Pat Mastandrea, senior vice president for national sales, FOX had 
to provide "make-goods" -- free advertising -- to compensate advertisers for 
the smaller audience. "We had between 30 and 35% make-goods in our first 
years," says Mastandrea. "We made good on every deal that we made, to the 
penny. It was very frustrating to give 35% of our inventory away." It took 
until the end of September, 1988, to meet that obligation. 
There were make-goods on the local level as well -- a contributing factor, 
according to Drexel Burnham Lambert media analyst Jeffrey Russell, in a 
$10-million drop in operating profits for the seven owned stations for fiscal 
1988. The affiliates, some of whom dropped "The Late Show" before it was 
canceled, realized that the benefits of their network link might take longer to 
materialize than they had hoped. 
"What an independent station has to do is evaluate whether they're better off 
running FOX programming, even if ratings are a bit lower, than they were 
running a movie," says Larry Gerbrandt, senior analyst of cable and 
broadcasting programming for Paul Kagan &amp; Associates, a Carmel, 
Calif.-based media consulting firm. "It varies market to market." As to whether 
FOX affiliates are better off, Gerbrandt says, "It's a qualified yes." 
The network also had to absorb what Wendle calls "abandonment costs," payments 
made to honor contracts on canceled series. Two of the Saturday night comedy 
casualties, "Karen's Song" and "Down and Out in Beverly Hills," were 
"multimillion-dollar mistakes." Wendle estimates that a single hour of failed 
programming cost the network $10 million in programming costs, including 
extended payments on contracts, and another $20 million in advertising 
make-goods. 
Although FOX executives are quick to deny that the extent of their financial 
troubles really surprised them, the impact of the losses was felt even by their 
relatively successful producers, who suddenly found themselves victims of 
second-guessing. Semel, who had happily anticipated that the first order for 13 
segments of "Duet" would be followed by orders of equal size, found himself 
instead having to defend the show as definitions shifted as to what FOX should 
be. 
"We hoped that each time we'd get similar orders -- for 13, or for 26," he 
says, "but each time it has been like pulling teeth. Each time we're up for 
renewal they've been in the midst of periodic uncertainties about what they 
want to do. Last year they weren't going to pick us up; they were at a point 
where they really wanted to go all the way in being an alternative program 
service, and the fact that 'Duet' could have appeared on one of the three 
networks worked against us. We were the most traditional. Luckily, they backed 
off from that position." 
Ironically, "21 Jump Street" creator Patrick Hasburgh found that the 
uncertainty worked in his favor. For all the talk of alternative programming, 
the new network had been, in the beginning, more cautious than Hasburgh had 
anticipated. "They wanted to be a little more commercial. I think they wanted 
'Happy Days Goes to High School,' " he says, referring to a highly successful 
NBC situation comedy. "The pressure for the show to be successful was so 
enormous that I think we almost lost sight of what was good." 
Hasburgh nearly walked off the show in its first season when executives refused 
to approve a controversial episode about racial tensions -- but when "21 Jump 
Street" proved to be the company's first success, he was allowed to produce the 
segment. 
Since then, Hasburgh has left Stephen Cannell Productions to form his own 
company. Although he is no longer involved in making "21 Jump Street," he does 
plan to produce TV-movies and series for FOX. Hasburgh dismisses the network's 
disappointing economic showing, and its attendant identity crises, as 
predictable problems for a young network. The only real mistake he thinks FOX 
made was to assume that high-priced talent would be insurance against failure, 
and to commit to putting shows on the air before there was enough "back-up 
inventory" to replace a ratings casualty. 
"The FOX executives made the same mistake George Steinbrenner made," says 
Hasburgh. "He said, 'I'll win the pennant if I buy the best baseball players 
available.' Which he did. And he finished third." 
Salvation, as it turned out, came from an unexpected direction -- from a 
concept for a show that FOX had originally rejected, a show that offered a 
distinct departure from network fare at a bargain price. "America's Most 
Wanted" was developed by FOX-owned station WTTG in Washington, and its 
impressive ratings made it more appealing to a network beset by conventional 
entertainment program failures. Perhaps this was the alternative FOX needed; at 
about $150,000 in production costs for a half-hour segment, as opposed to 
$300,000 for a sitcom, it certainly had financial appeal. The network gave 
"America's Most Wanted" a Sunday night slot last April, and in its second week 
the show achieved the highest rating ever achieved by a regularly scheduled FOX 
program. Over the summer, FOX introduced three more "reality programs": "A 
Current Affair," which had been running on WNYW in New York since June, 1986, 
"The Reporters" and "Beyond Tomorrow." 
Then FOX got lucky. The five-month Writers Guild strike caused a postponement 
of the fall season; the three networks had to program an extended line-up of 
reruns. That opened up the viewing audience to "sampling," says Mastandrea, and 
FOX picked up some of the shoppers. Although FOX was also airing reruns, most 
viewers had missed the programming the first time around, so the shows looked 
fresh. 
The new viewers were primarily in their teens and 20s, people whose viewing 
habits were not yet "frozen over," according to Diller. The demographics of the 
FOX audience skewed to the lower end of the 18- to 35-year-old range -- which 
meant that an advertiser with a youth-oriented product, like their biggest 
advertiser, Coca-Cola, could reach that isolated audience for less than it 
would cost to make a network buy. The FOX ad sales staff got such an 
enthusiastic response over the summer that they purposely oversold, selling 80% 
of their ad inventory up front instead of the 70% they had planned to offer. 
It was a calculated risk, according to Kellner, because FOX was selling time 
that the network would need for make-goods, if programs again failed to perform 
at the ratings estimate. "Thank God the ratings are going up," he says. 
"Otherwise we would have had to add shows, run a movie once a quarter, or 
something like that, to be able to make up the weight we needed." 
If some critics have complained about the quality of the alternative now being 
offered -- dubbing these shows "tabloid journalism" and viewing them as part of 
a trend toward sensationalistic programming -- members of the financial 
community look at the ratings, and the dramatic drop in costs, and pronounce 
the programming a success. 
"They've carved out an interesting alternative for the younger demographic 
audience," says Drexel Burnham Lambert's Russell. "You or I may not like it, 
but somebody out there likes it. And the advertising dollars ultimately follow 
the eyeballs." 
Murdoch shrugs off the criticism. "People who read newspapers," says the man 
who owns more than four dozen of them, "tend not to be the people who watch 
television." 
Failed programming was FOX's most visible problem, but the new network was 
wobbly internally as well. Hiring "young, relatively inexperienced people" 
worked better in theory than it did in practice. Diller's programming 
department simply wasn't as coordinated as it needed to be. And his executives 
couldn't exert the control needed -- they were either too busy scrambling to 
fill suddenly vacant programming slots or caught up in management musical 
chairs, which saw Kevin Wendle in five different jobs in his first eighteen 
months at FOX. 
The first defection was Garth Ancier, who resigned as president of Fox 
Entertainment, effective March 1 of this year. Diller says that Ancier told him 
six months ago he was tired of the job but agreed to stay on because "we were 
at our most vulnerable point and couldn't take any shock to our system," 
although one producer who has worked with the network says that Ancier had 
become a "lame-duck executive" once Wendle was put in charge of day-to-day 
programming. Whatever the impetus, his replacement, Peter Chernin, ex-Lorimar 
Film Entertainment president, appealed to Diller because he was "a real 
manager." 
"Peter is a mature, truly organized executive who, I think, will bring 
stability to the company," says Diller. "It is easy to say that that's a 
reflection on the past. But it's really evolutionary." 
The other significant addition to the FOX team is new Vice President of 
Development Joe Davola, an MTV alum whose allure, according to Diller, is that 
he comprehends "the essence of getting things going on nothing. His program 
budget high was maybe $6,000. He gives us a whole new group of people to talk 
to." He also embodies the clear purpose of FOX: to go after the youth market on 
a budgetary shoestring. 
FOX staffers still like to think of themselves as what Wendle calls "guerrilla 
programmers" -- quicker and more open to new ideas than their bureaucratically 
gridlocked brethren at the big three networks. But Diller admits that the pace 
has slowed since the early days, when "we were so behind that I don't think in 
a lot of respects we knew what we were doing." Cautiously, he borrows good 
ideas from the networks -- there are now more programs in development, and more 
steps in the process. A show no longer jumps from idea to on-air: Now, FOX 
might ask for a sample script, or even a pilot. 
"We shouldn't get bureaucratic," he says, "but there's no reason not to act 
professionally. We should pick from what the networks do, sensibly." 
The network also abandoned what Murdoch calls the "track record" school of 
programming. "We tended to go along with it because we were engaging what 
seemed to be the experts," he says of his, and Diller's, initial support of the 
idea. But his interest was in the "more experimental" programs such as "The 
Tracy Ullman Show" -- and when some of the most dependable companies in 
Hollywood couldn't serve up hits, Murdoch conveyed his dissatisfaction. 
"We always want to buy the best and brightest," Murdoch says. "That's not the 
same as buying the person with the track record, because that could be some old 
fogy. It very often is." 
Since FOX's most recent successes came from outside the Los Angeles production 
center, there is no way to predict how the new attitudes at FOX will affect the 
third night of programming, the first major effort from Diller's staff since 
the string of Saturday night failures. One previously announced project from 
Aaron Spelling Productions, an updated version of his successful series 
"Charlie's Angels," was in development for so long that its name was changed 
from "Angels '88" to "Angels '89." It is no longer planned as a series -- when 
and if it airs at all (and right now there is no production scheduled), it will 
be a series of two-hour movie specials. And "City Court," a spin-off from "21 
Jump Street" featuring young lawyers instead of young cops, has been on hold 
since its creator, Hasburgh, left the project. Diller says he intends to stick 
with "fiction programming" for the third night, despite the high-profile 
success he's had with reality shows. The one sure thing is that there will be 
more shows to choose from: FOX now has between 40 and 50 programs in various 
stages of development, an expensive but necessary insurance policy against 
disappointing debuts. 
The search for stable ground continues, but Rupert Murdoch is not worried. His 
$20-million loss estimate for fiscal 1989 is down from an original figure of 
$35 million, and that, he believes, constitutes progress. Not that his support 
was ever a doubt: He says he would have backed FOX even if losses had again 
exceeded the estimates, as they did in the first year. As long as the ratings 
improve, he is happy. "I would not mind losing money again and again if we were 
making solid progress," he says. "If we were still losing $50 million and our 
ratings were performing the way they are today, I would still be right in 
there. Absolutely. We are going forward very well." 
His attitude -- his personal definition of success and failure -- may be the 
key to the survival of FOX. Murdoch says he is prepared for several more years 
of losses, since any monies made will be invested back into program 
development. He says he expects it will take six or seven years before the 
network can offer a nightly prime-time schedule. 
As long as Murdoch is prepared to foot the bill, the experiment continues. 
Sheer financial stamina may buy the Fox Broadcasting Co. the time to find its 
niche in the video marketplace. Money, after all, talks. "I think an ability to 
write the check -- and a willingness to write the check -- gives the network a 
great credibility," Murdoch says. 
Alternative Programming: Joys, Woes 
FOX's "alternative programming" 
 -- shows perhaps too controversial for the big networks but attractive to 
younger viewers -- has produced "Duet," upper left; "21 Jump Street," right, 
and "Married . . . With Children," whose star, Katey Sagal, is at left. 
'Married . . . With Children" has been both the most popular and most 
controversial of the FOX shows. For the last two weeks it has bested the three 
major networks in the Los Angeles ratings for the 8:30 p.m. Sunday slot. And 
its portrayals of family and sexual matters have led to a letter-writing 
campaign by a Michigan mother and to considerable media coverage of that 
protest. 
FOX owner Rupert Murdoch, left, shrugs off both the criticism of his network's 
alternative programming and print critics' charges that FOX indulges in 
"tabloid journalism." "People who read newspapers," says the man who owns more 
than four dozen of them, "tend not to be the people who watch television." 
