BRAIN ABNORMALITIES FOUND IN SCHIZOPHRENICS; 
MEDICINE: SCIENTISTS STUDYING TWINS HAVE COME UP WITH RESULTS THAT SUGGEST 
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS MAY BE AS IMPORTANT AS GENETICS IN DEVELOPING THE 
DISEASE. 
Government scientists studying identical twins have found physical 
abnormalities in specific areas of the brains of victims of schizophrenia, a 
discovery that should eventually lead to the development of new therapy for the 
estimated 50% of victims of this disabling mental illness who cannot now be 
adequately treated with drugs. 
Studying pairs of twins in which only one had the mental disorder, researchers 
from the National Institute of Mental Health report today in the New England 
Journal of Medicine that the afflicted twin in virtually all cases had a 
slightly smaller brain in certain key areas, suggesting a non-genetic 
abnormality in growth of the brain during development. 
Researchers have long known that genetics play a key role in the development of 
schizophrenia, and assumed that environmental factors, such as exposure to a 
virus during fetal development, played a lesser role. The new results suggest 
that such factors may be as important as genetics. 
"This is a landmark study," said Dr. Lewis L. Judd, NIMH director, "because 
previous efforts to link brain abnormalities to schizophrenia have been clouded 
by the difficulty of interpreting normal variations in individual brain 
structures. Only by comparing the brains of twins who . . . would be expected 
to have identical brain structures could NIMH researchers show that the twins 
with schizophrenia consistently had brain abnormalities not present in their 
healthy identical twins." 
Because the abnormally small brain segments were found in virtually all twins 
studied, researchers assume that the finding will hold true for most 
schizophrenics. If so, that would constitute one of the few unifying features 
of this enigmatic disease. 
Schizophrenia afflicts, or will afflict, about 1% of the population, an 
estimated 2.5 million Americans. It is characterized by inappropriate emotions, 
hallucinations and disordered thought processes that cause difficulties in 
communication, interpersonal relationships, and distinguishing between the real 
and the imagined. It is commonly confused with split or multiple personalities, 
but that is an entirely different class of disorder. 
"While schizophrenia is by no means the most common mental illness," according 
to an NIMH report, "it is probably the most costly and devastating in terms of 
human suffering." NIMH has estimated the annual cost of schizophrenia to the 
U.S. economy as $21 billion, while the National Academy of Sciences has said 
that it costs society as much as $48 billion a year. 
Many researchers have reported finding evidence of structural abnormalities in 
the brains of schizophrenics, such as a smaller hippocampus, which is involved 
in thinking and perception, but interpretation of these studies has been 
difficult because of the large variability in brain size from individual to 
individual. A given "abnormality" might thus be found in only a third to a half 
of patients studied, leaving open many questions about its role in the disease. 
The new findings by neurologist Daniel R. Weinberger and his colleagues at 
NIMH's St. Elizabeths Hospital in Washington should answer those questions. 
These findings, along with a previous study by psychiatrist Michael Reveley of 
London Hospital in the United Kingdom, provide "nearly definitive evidence" of 
the existence of structural abnormalities in the disease. 
Reveley and his colleagues reported in 1982 on computed tomography (CT) 
scanning of 12 sets of identical twins. CT uses X-rays to image cross-sections 
of the brain. In 11 of the 12 pairs, they found that the affected twin had 
larger ventricles, fluid-filled cavities in the brain. By inference, if the 
ventricles were larger than normal, the brain tissue must have been smaller 
than normal. 
But the CT scans did not have high enough resolution to show which parts of the 
brain were smaller. 
Weinberger and his colleagues used a newer technique called magnetic resonance 
imaging, which provides a much more detailed picture of the brain. "It's like 
holding a brain in your hand," he said in a telephone interview. 
They studied 15 pairs of twins, eight male and seven female, with an age range 
of 25 to 44 years. They found that, compared to the normal twins, the left 
hippocampus was significantly smaller in 14 of the schizophrenic twins and the 
right hippocampus was smaller in 13. The schizophrenic twins' temporal lobes 
were also smaller. 
In 12 of the twin pairs, the differences were so large that the afflicted twin 
could be readily identified just by looking at the images. 
Now, Weinberger said, "researchers can focus in on a specific area as 
consistently abnormal and find out what has happened, what has specifically 
affected it. . . . Before, if an area was found to be only occasionally 
abnormal, it wasn't worth all that much attention." 
Ideally, he said, researchers will be able to find specific biochemical 
abnormalities in those regions and develop new drugs to force the biochemistry 
back to normal. 
