ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: TUSTIN; 
CANDIDATES DISAGREE ON POWER STRUCTURE 
Eight candidates seeking City Council seats in the April 10 election broke into 
two camps at a Wednesday forum in which the city's power structure became a 
central issue. 
One side said the city manager and city attorney have too much power. That 
group included incumbent John Kelly, 28, operator of a tuxedo shop; and 
challengers Berklee A. Maughan, 52, a retired financial executive, and Carole 
Bryant, 41, an accountant and business owner. They say the council, rather than 
the staff, should run the city. 
The other group contended that the city staff is competent and the power 
structure is appropriate. That camp included challengers Leslie A. Pontious, 
44, co-owner of a travel agency; Jim Potts, 36, a business owner and Irvine 
police sergeant; Dennis E. Pedersen, 42, a facilities construction manager; 
Charles E. (Chuck) Puckett, 47, district sales manager, and John Norman Butler, 
34, a real-estate broker. They say a strong council provides a system of checks 
and balances. 
Another power issue that split the candidates was the method of mayoral 
selection. Pontious, Pedersen, Puckett, Butler and Potts want to maintain the 
current method of selection, in which the council chooses the mayor. They say a 
member should earn the respect of his peers before serving as mayor. 
Maughan and Kelly, who has never served as mayor, favor rotating the post while 
Bryant said voters should decide who becomes mayor. 
The candidates also split on whether to limit council members to two terms. 
Kelly, Maughan and Bryant said they favor limiting council terms to ensure 
turnover. Potts said he supports limiting terms if voters have the opportunity 
to keep a "shining star" in office longer than eight years. Pontious, Pedersen, 
Puckett and Butler said they oppose limiting terms because voters already have 
the power to turn council members out of office. 
The forum, sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce, was broadcast live by 
Continental Cablevision. The program will be shown again at 8 p.m. Friday, 2 
p.m. March 31, and at an undetermined time on April 7. SHANNON SANDS 
