ETHNIC SOMALIS CHAFE UNDER OFFICIAL SCRUTINY IN KENYA; 
EAST AFRICA: A FLOOD OF REFUGEES AND ARMED MARAUDERS FROM ACROSS THE BORDER 
PROMPTS NAIROBI TO CHECK FOR CITIZENSHIP. 
It was not very long ago that members of this country's sizable ethnic Somali 
community believed that years of discrimination and harassment by the black 
African majority had come to an end. 
"Things were better than (at) any time in memory," said one prominent Somali 
here. 
No more. Angered by a flood of refugees and a surge of armed attacks by 
marauders from across its long border with Somalia, the Kenyan government has 
lately subjected its ethnic Somalis to an unprecedented "screening" exercise in 
which they are required to prove their Kenyan citizenship. 
The exercise has created a political uproar here. Kenyan Somalis say they are 
victims of petty harassment that is as bad as it has ever been. 
The issue has split the Somali community. The screening has been supervised by 
prominent Kenyan Somali politicians and bureaucrats, leading some to suggest 
that they are intent on deporting members of opposition tribes or clans to 
promote their own. 
Also, the exercise comes at a time of unprecedented misery for Somalis in 
general. A heightening civil war in Somalia has sent thousands of people across 
the borders of that stricken country into Kenya and Djibouti. Human rights 
groups have charged both countries with mistreating the refugees. 
One group, Africa Watch, charged that in September, the Kenyan authorities 
returned 60 Somali refugees to their own country at gunpoint. The report 
contends that 18 of the refugees were executed by Somali soldiers and 42 
imprisoned. 
Originally expected to last three weeks, or until the end of December, the 
screening process was extended until April. Under the rules, all ethnic Somalis 
over 18 are required to bring their national identity cards, passports and 
birth certificates for verification by panels of Somali elders at any of 51 
"screening centers." Those who pass muster are issued a pink identification 
card that must be produced on demand. 
Kenyan authorities say 71 people "suspected to be citizens of Somalia" have 
been arrested, and sources in the government and the Somali community here say 
as many as 500 allegedly illegal aliens have been deported to Somalia. 
Among those deported were leading Nairobi businessmen, a former official of the 
ruling party, the Kenya African National Union, even a former member of 
Parliament. Some held official citizenship or residence documents that were 
summarily declared to be forgeries. 
None of these deportations were preceded by due process, as provided for in the 
Kenyan constitution. 
"In our country, a person is innocent until proven guilty," says Mohammed 
Ibrahim, a Kenyan Somali lawyer. "Nobody has been prosecuted or charged in a 
court of law. So on the facts we have, the Kenya government has deported 500 of 
its own citizens." 
Others who have registered protests include the Kenya section of the 
International Commission of Jurists and the Law Society of Kenya. Among ethnic 
Somalis who initially refused to submit to the screening was Ahmed Khalif, a 
former member of Parliament and head of the Supreme Council of Kenya Muslims. 
In response, the council stripped him of his post. 
Kenya has long seen itself as a multi-ethnic, multiracial community, but the 
authorities seem to have always made an exception for ethnic Somalis. Thousands 
of these people are second- and third-generation Kenyans with Kenyan 
citizenship and passports. 
People of Somali background, whose dark olive skin and Caucasian features 
distinguish them physically from African Kenyans, say they are often singled 
out by police on the street. 
"If you are Somali-looking, the police will stop you and ask to see your 
documents," says one prominent businessman who resides legally in Kenya as a 
political refugee. "It happens as often as you come across a policeman -- at 
least one or two times a week." 
The distaste of Kenyan authorities for ethnic Somalis goes back to the eve of 
independence in 1963. In 1961, the British attached part of the former Italian 
Somaliland to its Kenya colony; it became part of Kenya upon independence in 
1963. 
The Somalis began a war of secession, which lasted until 1967, when the 
government of Somalia withdrew its support. But the state of emergency imposed 
during the unrest has never been lifted. 
The so-called North-Eastern province has been troublesome ever since. In recent 
years the waxing and waning of civil war in neighboring Somalia has 
periodically sent tens of thousands of refugees into the region, along with 
hundreds of marauders known as shiftas, or bandits. 
As the shiftas graduated from bows and arrows in the '60s and '70s to automatic 
weapons and motorized carriers, security in the region deteriorated. 
Eventually, the shiftas moved into elephant poaching, a crime that the Kenyans 
at one point traced directly to agents of Somali President Mohamed Siad Barre. 
The poaching and a surge in armed attacks on tourists in Kenyan game parks, 
allegedly by Somali bandits, provoked the government to order the screening. So 
many alien Somalis had crossed the border to escape the civil war, the 
government said, that Kenya's Somali population was overrun. The difficulty of 
telling a Kenyan Somali from an alien, it argued, made the screening necessary. 
