VA TO PAY SOME AGENT ORANGE CANCER CLAIMS 
In a significant shift in federal policy, Vietnam veterans suffering from a 
rare form of cancer that they claim was caused by exposure to the defoliant 
Agent Orange will receive full disability benefits, Veterans Affairs officials 
announced Thursday. 
Researchers at the Centers for Disease Control found in a study released 
Thursday that Vietnam veterans are 50% more likely than non-veterans to 
contract non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, even though they specifically denied a link 
between Agent Orange exposure and incidence of the cancer. 
Acting immediately after receipt of the CDC study, Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs Edward J. Derwinski ordered full benefits paid to some 1,800 veterans 
who currently suffer from the disease and to the expected 450 new cases 
expected each year for the next several decades. 
Derwinski's decision marks the first time that the federal government has 
acknowledged a link between service in Vietnam and incidence of any form of 
cancer. 
Veterans groups applauded the decision, but said that tens of thousands of 
Vietnam veterans still await government help in coping with several cancers and 
other health problems they believe were caused by Agent Orange exposure. 
The CDC study and the shift in VA policy will not end the long, bitter dispute 
over Agent Orange and cancer, veterans' advocates and government officials 
said. 
While the CDC study found a clear link between service in Vietnam and 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, CDC Director Dr. William L. Roper stated: "The study 
did not find any evidence that the increased risk might be due to Agent Orange 
exposure." 
In an unexpected and unexplained finding, Roper noted that sailors who served 
on ships far off the Vietnam coast suffered the highest incidence of 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, also known as NHL. Soldiers and airmen who served in 
III Corps, the area of the heaviest spraying of the chemical herbicide, were at 
lower risk of contracting the disease, the CDC found. 
Derwinski said the link between service in Vietnam and the cancer was 
compelling enough to demand action, but the VA chief offered no opinion as to 
whether Agent Orange played a part in generating the disease. 
"The debate may well go on forever," Derwinski said in a press conference. 
"There may never be enough scientific and technical evidence to put to rest 
forever all the charges and countercharges relating to Agent Orange." 
He called Thursday's action "a practical and humanitarian decision." He 
stressed it was "not a scientific decision, and it should not be seen as one. 
It was a policy determination. . . . Remember, this is a kinder, gentler 
Administration." 
Nearly 36,000 Vietnam veterans have applied for VA benefits on claims that they 
contracted cancer or other maladies as a result of exposure to Agent Orange, a 
defoliant containing dioxin, a highly toxic agent that was widely sprayed in 
Vietnam from 1961 to 1972. 
All of the Agent Orange cancer claims have until now been denied, although 
21,000 of the Agent Orange claimants are receiving medical care from the VA, 
agency officials said. 
Mary R. Trout, national president of the Vietnam Veterans of America and one of 
the most vocal critics of federal policy on Agent Orange, called Derwinski's 
decision "very positive." 
But she quickly added: "We still have some concerns. If it takes a 50% increase 
(in the incidence of a cancer) to win benefits, then it's going to take a very 
long time for other veterans" to be compensated for Vietnam-related health 
problems. 
Miles S. Epling, national commander of the American Legion, praised Derwinski 
for "taking one small step toward resolution of this problem we've been 
fighting for over 10 years." He said he hoped Derwinski would now speed 
consideration of claims based on 10 other maladies that veterans say are 
related to Agent Orange. 
But Epling blasted the CDC study as "irrelevant." 
"It has nothing to do with Agent Orange, and it says so. It's a piece of 
garbage as far as we're concerned," he said. 
The CDC study looked at cases of six types of cancer among Vietnam veterans and 
other men between the ages of 35 and 59. The study found that the Vietnam 
veterans were at no greater risk than the non-veterans of contracting five of 
the cancers: soft-tissue and other sarcomas, Hodgkin's disease, nasal cancer, 
nasopharyngeal cancer and cancer originating in the liver. 
The VA will continue to deny benefits to Vietnam veterans with these cancers 
who claim they are service-connected, but Derwinski left open the possibility 
that future research could support payment of such claims. 
For non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph nodes and lymphatic tissues 
that is similar to leukemia, Vietnam veterans were 50% more likely to come down 
with the disease than those in the same age group who did not serve in 
Southeast Asia. 
NHL has a latency period of 15 to 25 years and if left untreated is virtually 
always fatal. Chemotherapy has prolonged the life of a number of NHL patients 
but has not reversed the degenerative disease. 
Derwinski said that for VA purposes, any Vietnam veteran with NHL will be 
considered 100% disabled and will be paid full benefits -- today worth about 
$1,527 a month -- for the rest of his life. Widows and children of NHL victims 
will also be entitled to maximum compensation, $500-$1,000 a month depending on 
the veteran's rank at retirement. 
Thousands of Vietnam veterans who claim Agent Orange-related health problems 
are eligible for compensation from a $180-million fund established by seven 
chemical companies that produced the defoliant. The firms agreed to provide the 
money as the result of a class-action lawsuit by veterans. 
So far, 17,000 servicemen have been declared eligible for compensation from the 
fund and have received a total of $84 million, according to attorneys handling 
the fund. 
