RELATIVES SAY MENENDEZ 2 ARE INNOCENT 
An uncle of Lyle and Erik Menendez said Saturday that he and other relatives 
believe that the two brothers have been wrongly accused of brutally murdering 
their wealthy parents in their Beverly Hills mansion last August. 
"We don't think in the least circumstance that they are guilty of what they 
have been accused," said Carlos Baralt, a New Jersey businessman who also is 
the executor of the Menendez family's $14-million estate. "We are behind the 
boys 100%." 
He said he had heard there was circumstantial evidence pointing toward Lyle and 
Erik as suspects, but said he is confident that there is evidence pointing in 
other directions as well. "I really, really believe that the whole situation 
with the kids is something (police) have fallen into for lack of a better 
lead," he said. "I feel they acted, perhaps, precipitously. 
"The police don't know these kids like I do," Baralt said. 
Lyle, 22, was arrested Thursday and is scheduled to be arraigned on Monday. His 
younger brother, Erik, 19, had been playing in a professional tennis tournament 
in Israel, but was reported heading back to the United States to surrender. 
Beverly Hills police said Saturday that they had no information on when or 
where a surrender might occur. Lyle Menendez's attorney, Gerald Chaleff, said 
that Erik wanted to accomplish the surrender with "a little dignity." 
Jose Menendez, 45, chief executive of Live Entertainment Inc. of Van Nuys, a 
video and music distributor, and his wife Kitty, 44, were slain in a barrage of 
shotgun blasts at close range as they watched television in the first-floor 
library of their Elm Drive home last Aug. 20. Their sons said they found the 
bodies when they returned from a night out. 
Police said they had considered the brothers suspects for some time but only 
recently did they find "the glue" that brought the case together, an apparent 
reference to the seizure of tape-recorded conversations between the brothers 
and a psychologist that occurred after the murders. 
Lyle and Erik are the sole heirs of their parents' estate, valued at $14 
million. 
Baralt said he heard from Erik late Thursday night. According to the uncle, 
Erik had telephoned a roommate in California, learned of his brother's arrest 
earlier in the day, and then called Baralt, the uncle said. 
"I told him the best thing he could do was to turn himself in," Baralt said 
Saturday. 
He said Erik immediately agreed. He said he was not sure how the surrender 
would take place, but that it was being worked out through "a third party." 
