POLICE SEIZE 3 SUSPECTS IN FORGERY RING 
In one of its biggest seizures involving counterfeit identification, Los 
Angeles police have arrested three suspects in what they described as a 
statewide forgery ring that may have stolen more than $2 million from Los 
Angeles-area banks. 
Police had made earlier arrests in the case, but Wednesday was the first time 
they were able to locate so many of the bogus documents allegedly used in the 
scam and the equipment used to produce them, officials said. At four Los 
Angeles County homes -- in Lennox, Hawthorne, the Wilshire district and 
southwestern Los Angeles -- authorities found thousands of stolen and 
counterfeit identification cards, police said. 
"It's a very, very sophisticated, effective forgery ring," Los Angeles Police 
Detective Pat Riley said. "They were able, with ease, to withdraw lots of money 
and the only time the bank (account) holder would know was at the end of the 
month when he looked at his bank statement. We figure they stole millions of 
dollars." 
As part of the scheme, the suspects allegedly mass-produced fake driver's 
licenses, credit cards, Social Security cards and other picture identification, 
then used the bogus materials to withdraw millions of dollars from other 
people's accounts at banks throughout the state, Riley said. 
Police are not certain how members of the ring got enough information about 
existing bank accounts to pull off the scam, but they suspect that they had 
access to bank signature cards and carbons from credit card receipts. Police 
have not said how many banks are involved or whether any bank employees 
participated in the ring. 
"Last year, the city of Los Angeles reported over $20 million lost (in bank 
forgeries). This group here was responsible for a good percentage of it -- 
possibly 10% or more," Riley said. 
Because of the large number of forgeries, police in August began an intensive 
investigation into the problem. That has led to 13 arrests -- including the 
three early Wednesday when Lonnie Jackson, 42, Cornelius (Connie) Albert, 44, 
and Adrianne Crea, 43, were taken into custody. 
Among the items found Wednesday was a stack of fake IDs, showing photos of 40 
people who allegedly worked with the suspects in forging bank forms, Riley 
said. 
At one home, police found thousands of dollars worth of counterfeiting 
equipment, including camera equipment, sheets of paper that were used to 
practice signatures, stacks of used and unused bank checks and a list of banks 
"to hit," Riley said. 
Police have linked this counterfeit operation to forgery rings in the Bay Area 
and Orange County and believe that the suspects have out-of-state contacts in 
Minnesota, Nevada and Arizona, Detective David Hudson said. 
