CHILD'S 'BEST INTERESTS' GUIDE JUDGES' DECISIONS; 
LAW: DETERMINING WHO GETS CUSTODY IS A FREQUENTLY COMPLICATED PROCEDURE, AND 
ONE THAT HAS EVOLVED GREATLY IN THE PAST 40 YEARS. 
Children often find themselves in the middle of a tug of war when their parents 
get divorced. 
The scene is played out thousands of times a year in courtrooms across the 
country: A man and a woman realize that their crumbling marriage cannot be 
saved, so one or each of them files for divorce. If they have children, custody 
becomes an issue. And when both parents want custody, the result is often an 
emotional battle in which their kids are caught in the cross-fire. 
"Everyone thinks he or she is acting in the best interests of the child," said 
Dr. Stephen P. Herman, a child and adolescent psychiatrist with a practice in 
Connecticut and New York. "But unfortunately, that's not always the case." 
Acting in a child's best interests is a legal requirement in child-custody 
cases. Moreover, it is being used as a guide to address emerging trends such as 
surrogate parents, unmarried parents, homosexual couples, frozen embryos and 
grandparents' rights. 
Determining a child's best interests is a delicate and frequently complicated 
procedure in which lawyers, psychiatrists, psychologists and social workers all 
make recommendations that are considered by a judge before he or she makes a 
decision. 
The recommendations of these experts are made after extensive interviews or 
counseling sessions with the parents and, usually separately, their children. 
Mental health experts are frequently called upon to testify for one side or the 
other, but sometimes the court will appoint its own expert to ensure impartial 
testimony. After weighing all the factors in a custody case, the judge will 
make a decision based on the Best Interests Standard, which has become the 
guide by which custody cases are decided. 
The Best Interests Standard, which Herman called "the guiding presumption of 
the courts today," has been in use for about 40 years and differs significantly 
from previous standards, in which the sex of the parent was the determining 
factor in almost all such cases. 
"For most of civilization, children were considered the 'property' of the 
father," Herman said. "This was laid down by Roman law and continued through 
the Renaissance until the last part of the 19th Century." 
By that time, children were no longer considered property; instead, they were 
viewed as "little people" who would be better cared for by their mothers. 
"Mothers were then seen as the so-called 'better-fit' parents," Herman said. 
That led to the adoption of the Tender Years Doctrine, a legal standard that 
almost always gave custody of young children to their mothers. After the 
children turned 7, however, they were often returned to their fathers. 
"This really could have been very disruptive," Herman said. 
For this and other reasons, notably the constitutional guarantee of equal 
protection under the law, the Best Interests Standard was established just 
after World War II and has since become what Herman called "the major trend 
that forms judicial opinion" in such cases. 
Although judges are guided by this standard, Herman added, "there is, in fact, 
a strong feeling among judges that mothers are better parents, especially of 
younger kids." 
This, he said, is borne out by the fact that in most cases, the mother gets 
custody of the children. Although there is no one organization or agency that 
compiles nationwide custody statistics, according to Herman and other 
professionals interviewed for this story, they all said that mothers get 
custody in the vast majority of uncontested cases, perhaps as much as 90% of 
them. 
Judge Stanley Novack, who has heard child-custody cases at Superior Court in 
Stamford, Conn., for the past 15 years, disagrees with Herman, saying that 
while mothers often get custody of their children, it is not because judges 
think they are better parents. 
"It does work out in many cases that the mother gets the child," Novack said. 
"But that is based on relationship. One of the factors to consider is, who is 
the psychological parent? To which parent is the child bonded? In many cases 
the child is bonded to his or her mother because he or she is with the mother 
most of the day. In that case the woman may get custody, but not simply because 
she is the mother." 
Novack also points out that since the institution of the Best Interests 
Standard, a greater number of fathers are winning custody. And he agrees with 
Herman that while mothers are still more likely to get custody, fathers win "a 
large percentage" of contested cases. 
"Women win a large number of custody cases that are uncontested," Herman said. 
"But when fathers decide to fight it, they win a good deal of the time. I'd say 
about 50%." 
Perhaps the most difficult decision a judge has to make in a custody case is 
whether to give one parent sole custody or to award joint custody. Novack says 
that there are two kinds of joint custody. 
"Joint legal custody is when both parents share the decision-making about their 
child or children," he said. "Joint physical custody is when both parents share 
blocks of time with their children." 
Joint legal custody is common in situations where the children of a divorced 
couple live primarily with one parent, even though the other parent may have 
visitation rights or has been allowed to take the children for weekends, 
vacations or holidays. 
