HIGH COURT OKS DRUG TESTS OF JOB APPLICANTS; 
LAW: JUSTICES REJECT A CHALLENGE TO A COURT OF APPEAL RULING ON THE 
CONSTITUTIONALITY OF A MANDATORY URINALYSIS. 
The state Supreme Court, acting for the first time on the controversy of 
drug-testing in the workplace, on Thursday allowed a private employer to 
require that job applicants take drug and alcohol tests. 
The justices, in a brief order issued without dissent, rejected a challenge to 
a precedent-setting ruling last November by a state Court of Appeal that found 
that mandatory urinalysis to detect drug use among job-seekers represented only 
a limited intrusion on the right to privacy -- and did not violate the state 
Constitution. 
The appellate court upheld a pre-employment drug and alcohol screening program 
administered by Matthew Bender Co., a legal publishing firm owned by the Times 
Mirror Co., which also publishes the Los Angeles Times. 
Lawyers for three job applicants who challenged the tests called the 
across-the-board screening program "patently unreasonable," noting that neither 
public safety nor law-enforcement positions were involved. 
The Supreme Court's denial of review means that for now, the appellate ruling 
will be binding on trial courts throughout the state. 
In other actions Thursday, the high court: 
* In a sharp setback to the insurance industry, refused to hear a challenge by 
auto insurers to Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie's denial of a 112% 
increase in assigned-risk insurance rates. An association of insurers that 
issues policies to more than 1 million motorists without regular coverage 
contended they were losing more than $2 million a day in assigned-risk 
policies. 
But the court also declined requests by Gillespie and the sponsors of 
Proposition 103 to assume immediate jurisdiction over more than a dozen 
lawsuits now in lower courts involving the 1988 insurance reform initiative. 
Attorneys for Gillespie and Voter Revolt argued that high court intervention 
could speed resolution of legal questions about the measure by at least a year. 
* Let stand a novel ruling by a state Court of Appeal that upheld the criminal 
conviction of a Hemet man for secretly videotaping his sexual encounters with 
three women in 1986. The appellate court found that sexual intercourse was a 
form of private "communication" and that covert taping without the other 
party's knowledge was a violation of state privacy laws. 
The laws at issue apparently were aimed to prevent surreptitious telephone 
recording -- but the appeal court held they could apply to nonverbal acts as 
well. The defendant in the case, Michael Francis Gibbons, was fined $4,500 and 
sentenced to 14 months in jail. 
The drug-testing case was one of three such disputes that have emerged recently 
in state appeal courts. 
Last month, an appellate panel in San Francisco, upholding a $485,000 damage 
award to an employee who was fired after refusing a random test, held that 
workers in nonsafety-related jobs could not be forced to undergo urinalysis to 
determine drug use. An appeal court in Los Angeles ruled that a worker's 
refusal to submit to even a less intrusive eye test to detect drug use could 
not serve as grounds for dismissal. 
Rex S. Heinke of Los Angeles, an attorney for Matthew Bender, welcomed 
Thursday's action by the high court as a "clear signal" that private employers 
may test applicants, so long as steps are taken to minimize the intrusion on 
privacy. Heinke noted that the justices may have an opportunity to set further 
guidelines for testing if and when the two other drug-testing cases -- 
involving the broader question of tests for employees -- reach the high court. 
A lawyer for the job applicants, Stephen L. Mayer of San Francisco, voiced 
disappointment with the action, saying any distinction between the privacy 
rights of applicants and employees was "extremely unfortunate." Mayer added, 
however, that some applicant testing -- if not performed with proper safeguards 
-- could still be found unconstitutional. "I see today's action as a cautionary 
light, rather than a green light, to employers," he said. 
The court's action Thursday was a test of Californians' constitutional right to 
privacy, which was added to the state Constitution by the voters in 1972. 
Over the years, the courts have applied the amendment to curb violations of 
privacy by public officials -- such as undercover college classroom 
surveillances by police. But it remained unsettled whether privacy protections 
were applicable to employment practices by private companies. 
In the Bender case, the drug tests were initiated in 1985 as part of a program 
for all Times Mirror companies. At the Matthew Bender office in Oakland, three 
job applicants -- Kathleen Wilkinson, Rina Hirai and Francesca Bannerman -- 
refused to take the tests, as part of a medical examination, and were denied 
jobs. They brought suit, arguing that the tests violated their constitutional 
right to privacy. 
Last November, a state Court of Appeal in San Francisco said that the right to 
privacy does apply to private companies, but that urine testing of applicants 
presents only a limited intrusion on privacy rights. 
The court noted that job applicants could easily anticipate being asked to take 
a pre-employment physical examination -- and that urinalysis was ordinarily a 
part of such exams. The company gave advance notice that a job was conditioned 
on consent to drug testing and steps were taken to minimize the intrusion on 
privacy -- for example, applicants are not observed while furnishing samples, 
the panel pointed out. 
