CEMENT COMPANY UNABLE TO FIND RADIOACTIVE GAUGE; 
INVESTIGATION: STATE AND FEDERAL OFFICIALS HUNTING FOR THE SENSOR NEAR GORMAN 
SAY IT DOESN'T POSE A HEALTH HAZARD. 
A radioactive gauge is missing from a cement manufacturing plant near Gorman 
that is already under fire from environmentalists because it burns hazardous 
waste, and a two-week search has failed to find any trace of the gauge, company 
and state officials said Thursday. 
The National Cement Co. plant in Lebec is being investigated by state health 
officials, who said they expect to cite the company for mishandling the device. 
State and federal officials said the amount of radioactive material contained 
in the device is so small that it does not pose a public health hazard. 
The radioactive material was sealed inside a container that would prevent 
harmful exposure. And even if the material were somehow released, the level of 
radiation would not be strong enough to harm anyone nearby, said Greg Cook, a 
spokesman for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 
The missing gauge is just the latest in a series of problems for the cement 
plant, the only one in California permitted to burn hazardous wastes as fuel. 
Earlier this month, state health officials fined its operators $350,000 for 
burning too much waste in 1988 and 1989. 
In the latest incident, plant workers and a state health inspector dug up areas 
of the nearby Lebec Landfill in Kern County on Monday thinking the gauge might 
have been accidentally thrown out, said Donald Bunn, an official with the state 
Department of Health Services. 
Bunn, who is in charge of compliance for the state's radiologic health office, 
said the company will be cited for this incident and could face sanctions on 
its operating license or other legal action. 
The company reported the device missing on March 9. Plant Manager Byron 
McMichael said it had been removed from one building sometime earlier and was 
taken to a shop on the plant site to await reinstallation elsewhere. "We went 
to install it and we couldn't find it," McMichael said. 
Bunn said he believed the company was not authorized to remove the device and 
should not have left it in a shop. The company and a state health inspector 
searched the plant without success. Although the search has been suspended, the 
company is still questioning its employees about what might have become of the 
device, McMichael said. 
The device is described as a lead pipe about a foot long, containing 20 
millicuries of the radioactive material cesium-137. It was one of 19 sensors 
used at the plant that contains varying amounts of radioactive material. Such 
sensors are fairly common in industrial manufacturing uses, state officials 
said. 
Even if the shielding were removed, a person would have to be closely exposed 
to the material for more than 83 hours to exceed the NRC's established annual 
exposure threshold for an individual, the NRC's Cook estimated. 
However, state and federal officials also said their policy is to keep 
radioactive material out of the environment. 
Thus, a Gardena business that unknowingly melted what state officials believe 
may have been a similar device had to be temporarily closed and decontaminated 
last spring, Bunn said. 
The news that the plant had radioactive materials on site came as a surprise to 
local environmentalists. They said the loss of the gauge illustrates the 
unreliability of the plant's operations. 
"It just goes to show they can't be trusted with what they're doing," said 
Helen Thornburg, who is a leader of a local environmental group that has 
repeatedly protested that the burning of hazardous wastes endangers the health 
of area residents. 
