FAIR TO SEEK PERMIT FOR SITE OPPOSED BY NEARBY CITIES 
Renaissance Pleasure Faire officials said Wednesday that they will apply for a 
permit to use a 130-acre site in Ventura County despite opposition from nearby 
cities. 
Fair spokesman Eric Stoltz reiterated the spring festival's commitment to 
securing the proposed site after learning that the Thousand Oaks City Council 
had decided Tuesday night to send the county a letter opposing the event -- 
which has drawn more than 300,000 people during a six-week run. 
Later Wednesday, the Moorpark City Council voted to draft a letter opposing the 
fair and to send it to the county. But if the county approves use of the site 
over the city's objections, Moorpark council members said they will ask that an 
environmental impact report be required. 
In its letter, the Thousand Oaks City Council said it supported preserving as 
open space and for agricultural uses the Tierra Rejada Valley, an 
unincorporated area of eastern Ventura County where the proposed site is 
located. 
The letter said the council opposes "any intensive land use for any commercial 
purpose" in the Tierra Rejada Valley, including the fair. It dated its 
opposition to development of the valley to 1982, when it joined Simi Valley and 
the county in designating the area as a greenbelt. Moorpark joined the 
agreement in 1984. 
Stoltz said the fair is not a commercial event because it benefits the Living 
History Centre, a nonprofit organization. 
But Thousand Oaks City Councilman Alex Fiore said the fair is a commercial 
event because about 175 vendors rent booths and sell goods. 
Opposition to the fair has surfaced since fair officials announced in January 
that they had rented the proposed site, which is about a quarter of a mile west 
of the Moorpark Freeway. It is bordered by Tierra Rejada Road on the north, 
Moorpark Road on the south and east, and by hills on the west. 
For 25 years, the fair had been held near Agoura Hills, but that site has been 
sold to a developer. 
Fair officials said they intend to apply by the end of next week for a permit 
to use the Tierra Rejada site for eight consecutive weekends, beginning May 6. 
County planner Paul Porter said that once an application is filed, the county 
will add the letter from Thousand Oaks to its staff report on the project. In 
addition, Thousand Oaks, Moorpark, Simi Valley and Camarillo will have a chance 
to comment on the application. 
