WE MUST BEGIN NOW 
NOTE: In a recent letter to The Times, Gov. George Deukmejian complained that 
this newspaper frequently proposes new programs without saying where it would 
get the money to pay for them. In this third and final editorial response, The 
Times proposes specific additions to the governor's 1989-90 budget and the tax 
increases needed to pay for them. 
 For all the problems confronting California, the state's most urgent needs can 
be met without a burdensome increase in taxes. The cuts and omissions in Gov. 
Deukmejian's $46-billion budget for 1989-90 could be restored with about $1.3 
billion more in general fund revenue. 
This money will not make up for the spending shortfalls of past years, but it 
would lift California from the budget hole that has made planning for the 
state's future impossible. Californians still would be taxed less than 
residents in most other major industrial states and far less than they were 
before the state began providing $115 billion in cumulative reductions 
beginning in 1978. 
California also must develop a coordinated strategy for managing growth and 
must plan the public works required to make such a strategy realistic. 
The immediate problem, however, is the 1989-90 budget. Here is our plan: 
TRANSPORTATION 
The 1989-90 budget contains a shortfall of nearly $700 million in state highway 
construction and maintenance, growing to $4.5 billion over the next five years. 
California should raise its gasoline tax -- dedicated entirely to highways and 
other transportation uses -- from the present 9 cents a gallon to 19 cents, 
yielding an additional $15 billion to $20 billion over the next decade. The new 
tax would cost the average motorist an estimated $63 a year, but poorly 
maintained roads and time lost in traffic jams are said to cost $122 for every 
California driver annually. 
EDUCATION 
For kindergarten through 12th grade, an additional $160 million for class-size 
reductions and $37 million for teachers' continuing education and staff 
development. For higher education, $24 million for operating funds at the 
California State University, $19 million in student aid, $140 million for 
community college reforms and $32 million to reverse a 10% fee increase at the 
University of California and CSU. Total $412 million. 
MEDICAL AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
Restore proposed elimination of $272 million in cost-of-living increases in 
Medi-Cal; county health services; supplemental income for the aged, blind, 
elderly and disabled and welfare recipients. 
Also, $132 million for mental health; $65 million for the new workfare program; 
$36 million for the Office of Family Planning; $6 million for in-home services 
for the elderly; $81 million for Medi-Cal case load and other factors, and $259 
million for health services for the poor and county hospitals. 
REVENUE 
Support legislation by Sen. Alfred Alquist (D-San Jose) to restore, on taxable 
incomes of $100,000 and more, the top state personal income tax bracket of 11%, 
reduced to 9.3% by the 1987 state tax reform act. This raises about $600 
million a year. 
Replenish the state's depleted reserve fund over several years rather than all 
at once as proposed by Deukmejian for a one-time savings of about $500 million. 
Adopt legislation to further conform state tax law to federal tax statutes, 
about $300 million. 
Other reasonable methods of raising additional revenue, if needed, would be to 
eliminate some exemptions from the state sales and use tax, a potential $2 
billion; partially restore the inheritance tax with a threshold that would not 
affect children taking over family homes, farms and small businesses; scale 
back the full indexing of personal income taxes to a percentage of inflation; 
tax services such as fees charged by lawyers; create a split roll in the 
property tax so that businesses would pay at a higher level than homeowners, 
and raise the tax on alcoholic beverages. 
None of this money could be spent as long as the Gann spending limit, which 
restricts government growth to a formula based on inflation and population 
increases, remains in state law (although there can be a one-year emergency 
overrun). The Gann limits should be abolished. If that is not possible now, the 
formula by which the ceilings are calculated should be changed to reflect the 
faster real growth of key cost factors such as school and prison populations 
and the cost of health care. 
Proposition 13, which faces potentially crippling court challenges, must be 
revised in a manner that retains a reasonable limit on property tax increases 
-- especially for those on fixed incomes -- but eliminates some of the 
inequities created by the poorly drafted 1978 initiative. The tax on a newly 
purchased home can be as much as 10 times the levy on a similar house next door 
that has not changed ownership for some time. Also, since businesses change 
ownership less frequently, homeowners have assumed a far greater proportion of 
the total property tax -- and businesses less -- than in 1978. 
Proposition 13 also should be stripped of provisions requiring a two-thirds 
vote of the Legislature to raise state taxes and a referendum by the people to 
increase local revenues. 
The reasons for the anti-tax crusade triggered by Proposition 13 were 
understandable at the time. But the unintended consequences could not be 
foreseen: the granting of billions in tax relief to Californians and the 
shrinking of the tax base to the point that it no longer will finance the 
state's most urgent needs. This problem will not fix itself. Much political 
leadership and courage is required to get California back on the road to a 
productive future. The journey must begin now. 
