TRAINS COLLIDE IN BRITAIN; 5 DIE, 80 HURT; 
CARS TUMBLE DOWN EMBANKMENT IN 2ND CRASH IN 3 MONTHS 
In the second major rail accident here in less than three months, five people 
died and about 80 others were injured Saturday afternoon when two trains 
collided on the southern outskirts of the city. 
Officials said that only because the latest crash occurred on a weekend, when 
the trains were not full, the tragedy was not as deadly as the rush-hour 
collision that killed 35 commuters near London's busiest rail junction last 
Dec. 12. 
Doctors said that 20 of those hurt Saturday were in serious condition, mostly 
with multiple head, chest, and spinal injures, and that as many as 10 were 
listed as critical. 
Saturday's accident, which occurred within 10 miles of the December crash, 
apparently occurred when a slower-moving northbound train switched tracks in 
front of a faster train coming up behind it near the suburban Purley station. 
The impact as the trains collided tore a gaping hole in one carriage and sent 
half a dozen others tumbling down a steep embankment. One came to rest in the 
back yards of a row of homes, stopping only a few feet short of the houses 
themselves. Residents were evacuated for fear that other derailed carriages on 
the side of the embankment could break loose and roll farther. 
Rescuers Used Ropes 
Local people helped pull the injured from crushed carriages, while firefighters 
had to use heavy cutting equipment to free more than a dozen others from the 
tangled wreckage. Rescue workers could only negotiate the steep embankment with 
the help of ropes. 
There was much confusion during the evening over how many people had died. At 
one point, British Broadcasting Corp. television reported 12 fatalities. But 
Scotland Yard later said that five were confirmed dead. 
"My daughter and I were deep in conversation when we heard this huge impact," a 
survivor identified as John Lawrence told reporters at Mayday Hospital in East 
Surrey. "Following that, it was mainly a case of flying debris and bodies 
flying through the carriage as well." 
Lawrence's head and jacket were caked with dried blood from cuts caused by 
flying glass. 
The exact cause of the accident was not immediately clear, although Bernard 
Munn, a local resident, told Britain's Press Assn. news service that he saw 
British Rail engineers working on signaling equipment near the site on Friday, 
apparently as part of routine monthly maintenance. 
Faulty Signaling Work 
British Rail has acknowledged that December's crash near the Clapham Junction 
was caused by faulty signaling work there on the weekend prior to the accident. 
A public inquiry into the Clapham crash, which was this country's worst rail 
disaster in 20 years, is still under way. 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was said by a spokesman to be "very 
distressed" by the latest accident and receiving minute-by-minute reports. Her 
junior Transport Minister, Michael Portillo, went immediately to the crash 
scene. 
A Buckingham Palace spokesman described Queen Elizabeth II as "shocked" and 
also being kept informed. 
The opposition Labor Party's shadow transportation secretary, John Prescott, 
said there had been a 20% increase in rail accidents in recent years and a 30% 
increase in casualties. "I'm extremely alarmed that safety is not getting the 
priority it needs in our railway system," he said, and he called for a full 
government statement to the House of Commons to explain Saturday's accident. 
Britain's worst rail crash occurred during World War I on May 22, 1915, when a 
troop train collided with a passenger train, killing 227. 
TRAIN TRAGEDY 
Five people were killed and 80 injured when a slow-moving northbound train 
apparently switched tracks in front of a faster train near the suburban Purley 
station in London. 
Los Angeles Times 
