JUDGE RULES U.S. ENVOY CAN TESTIFY 
A federal judge ruled Monday that the U. S. ambassador to Mexico may testify as 
a witness in a complex drug case, and defense attorneys said they plan to call 
him to the stand Thursday. 
U. S. District Judge William B. Enright, who last month quashed a subpoena for 
the appearance of Ambassador Charles J. Pilliod, reversed his ruling Monday 
after reviewing State Department documents submitted by the defense. 
Defense attorneys have asserted that Pilliod will cast doubt on prosecution 
claims that three of the seven men on trial were high-ranking Mexican 
government or military officials when they were arrested in an undercover sting 
operation last year. 
Federal prosecutors have fought to keep Pilliod off the witness stand, arguing 
that he has no first-hand knowledge of the investigation and little to offer as 
evidence. 
However, Cynthia G. Aaron, an attorney for Jorge Carranza, who prosecutors say 
is a retired Mexican army colonel, argued Monday that a two-page Teletype 
message sent by Pilliod in January, 1988, to then-Atty. Gen. Edwin Meese III 
indicates that all three Mexicans were less important than federal prosecutors 
claim. The message details Pilliod's discussions with Mexican government 
officials about the backgrounds of the defendants. 
The Teletype informed State Department officials that Carranza was discharged 
from the Mexican army as a major, not a colonel; that another defendant, Pablo 
Giron Ortiz, was not a high-ranking member of the Mexican Federal Judicial 
Police; and that a third defendant, Hector Manual Brumel Alvarez, had not 
served as a Mexican government official with ties to the country's ruling 
Institutional Revolutionary Party. 
Stephen Nelson, the assistant U. S. attorney prosecuting the case, said Monday 
that Pilliod's statements last year were made shortly after the arrests and 
that his information was "third-hand" at best. "Before he's even briefed on the 
case he makes these gratuitous comments," Nelson said. "It was pretty rank 
hearsay. He would not have been informed or briefed on it. . . . He was kept 
out of the loop." 
Four Bolivian citizens also are charged in the case, which resulted from an 
undercover investigation by U. S. agents attempting to expose corruption among 
top Mexican officials. The investigation ended a year ago in the parking lot of 
a La Jolla supermarket, where Carranza was arrested while wearing the uniform 
of a Mexican army colonel. 
Aaron said Monday that it is her understanding that Pilliod "voluntarily" did a 
background check on the Mexicans by contacting Mexican authorities after 
reading press accounts that Carranza had been arrested wearing a Mexican 
military uniform. 
"He did this checking on his own because he became suspicious that Carranza was 
in uniform," she said. "That seemed bizarre to him. So he called and learned 
that Carranza was not on the military list." 
Aaron said she intends to question Pilliod "about his relationships with 
various branches of the Mexican government . . . and how he first learned about 
the indictment in this case." 
Pilliod's testimony also should demonstrate how easy it would have been for U. 
S. agents to determine that the defendants were not the powerful Mexican 
officials the agents had hoped to bring down, she said. 
"It shows the shoddiness of their investigation," she said. "The agents wanted 
to believe it so bad they weren't willing to verify anything. And they still 
want to believe it." 
Nelson on Monday denied that the investigation was shoddy and said that, if 
Pilliod testifies, the prosecution will be forced to present rebuttal witnesses 
who will show the "absolute stonewalling of the Mexican government" on the 
case. "To this day, we have not received one bit of official information from 
the Mexican government," Nelson said. 
Aaron said she at first hoped to have Pilliod, who is in Mexico City, in the 
courtroom today, but, after discussing the situation with State Department 
officials, she now hopes to have Pilliod on the witness stand on Thursday. 
