SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL REGIONALS; 
BOYS' DIVISION IV; 
CHRISTIAN PLAYS IT SMART, BUT IS DONE IN BY WRONG GUY 
Orange Lutheran Coach Jerry Simmons proved Tuesday that information is indeed 
one of today's most valuable commodities. 
After skimming through the local newspaper that covers Christian High School, 
Simmons made a couple of adjustments that paid off in a 72-64 victory over 
Christian in the Division IV boys' quarterfinals of the Southern Regionals at 
Granite Hills High School. 
"According to the local paper," Simmons said, "they were going to stop (Daryl) 
Cole. So we just opened up someone else. 
That someone else turned out to be junior forward Kent Dowding, a nine 
points-per-game scorer. Dowding far eclipsed his average, continually getting 
open on the baseline to score 27. 
"They left him open, and he can hit," Simmons said. "So he did hit." 
Dowding's explosion was one key to the victory. Another, perhaps more 
important, one was the fact that Christian's David Jeremiah, who holds two San 
Diego Section three-point records, was held to two points in the first half. 
"Some nights you just don't shoot well," Christian Coach Randy Wright said of 
Jeremiah. 
But Jeremiah was not the only Patriot having trouble scoring in the first two 
quarters. The Patriots missed their first four free throws and also missed the 
front ends of three one-and-one situations. 
"Missing those front-ends might not seem like much early in the ball game, but 
they add up," Wright said. "When it gets down to a four-point game later on, 
they look real big." 
While the Patriots were missing free throws and turning the ball over 13 times 
in the first half, the Lancers were building a 13-point halftime lead. 
But in the second half, Christian stormed back to make a game of it, pulling to 
within four four times late in the game. In fact, the Patriots were knocking at 
the door with just 33 seconds left when center Darrell White sunk a four-footer 
to make it 66-62. 
"I was extremely proud of them the way they came back in the second half," 
Wright said. "They gave it all they had; they don't have anything left." 
White and Jeremiah, who found a groove in the second half to score 17 points, 
led Christian with 19 each. 
