WESTSIDE HOUSING PRICES SOAR; NO END SEEN 
Each year, the traffic on the Westside get more congested. New commercial 
construction blots out residential views. Developers and environmentalists 
battle for every remaining piece of open space. Parking becomes increasingly 
scarce. Homeowner groups raise their voices in protest. 
And real estate prices in the Westside continue to soar to new heights. 
Forget the complaints about the crumbling quality of life on the Westside. 
Hordes of affluent home buyers are lining up, sometimes with millions in cash, 
to grab a chunk of land as close as they can to the Pacific Ocean. 
Outpacing the U.S. 
The prices are staggering. Middle- and upper-income families are being frozen 
out of the modest Westside neighborhoods. Former blue-collar communities are 
becoming havens for starch-collared corporate executives. And in a city as 
celebrity-conscious as Los Angeles, real estate agents are becoming stars, 
sought after by the rich and famous. 
Economists predict that real estate prices in the section of Los Angeles County 
bordered on the north by the Santa Monica Mountains, on the south by Los 
Angeles International Airport and on the east by Western Avenue will continue 
to outpace all but a few communities in the United States during the next few 
years. 
The average sales price of single-family homes jumped more than $100,000 in at 
least 10 Westside areas over the last year, according to sales reported through 
multiple listing services. The average sales price in several other communities 
jumped more than $200,000. 
In the sharpest increase reported, the average sales price of a single-family 
home in Playa del Rey rose 63% in 1988, leaping to a new high of $603,000. And 
that's in an area troubled by airport noise. The listing prices were even 
higher. 
And the homes for sale on the Westside were on the market only half as long as 
they were a year ago. 
Although the real estate boom engulfed numerous areas of the Southland, 
particularly such places as Pasadena, Glendale and the West San Fernando 
Valley, the surge pumped up the already-steep prices in numerous Westside 
communities. 
The average sales price of single-family homes in Beverly Hills and Bel-Air 
already top the $1 million mark. Next year, Brentwood probably will join that 
list. Malibu and Pacific Palisades are only a few years away. 
Why the house-buying frenzy? What is driving up the asking and selling prices 
of Westside bungalows to mansion levels? 
Industry experts say it's a simple imbalance between supply and demand. 
Available Westside land is almost used up, and with a booming regional economy 
luring people from throughout the country to Los Angeles, more and more people 
are lining up to try to buy the best properties. 
"I think the only thing that would make the escalation stop would be if the 
financial services community doesn't make as much money available to home 
buyers," said Michael Salkin, an economist and senior vice president at First 
Interstate Bank. "But I don't think the trend will reverse until the state of 
California no longer attracts households for economic reasons." 
Little New Housing 
Although population growth on the Westside has lagged behind the rest of Los 
Angeles County -- rising only 8% since 1980, compared with 12% countywide -- 
the fixed housing supply has dramatically lifted sale prices. 
"It's the same phenomenon that occurs in San Francisco, where even if the 
population rises only slightly, there is still very little new housing being 
built," said Salkin. 
"Prices won't stop increasing until the population drops or the economic 
strength shifts to other parts of the country. 
"The fundamental fact is that you've got a lot more people chasing houses than 
there are houses available." 
In the last 12 months, while the demand for housing surged throughout Southern 
California, the Westside was targeted by a huge influx of home buyers. Industry 
analysts say that the already limited inventory of housing previously has been 
sold in only three months. In the last few years, it would have taken eight to 
12 months to exhaust the supply of single-family homes. 
"The price pressures on the Westside are reflective of much of coastal 
California," said Joel Singer, chief economist for the California Assn. of 
Realtors. "You will continue to have rising prices on the Westside because of 
the scarcity of land. As the job market on the Westside continues to grow, it 
will promote a further demand for housing, but it's not going to generate new 
housing." 
The result will be a continuing trend of what real estate agents call multiple 
bid offers, where groups of prospective buyers try to outspend each other for 
newly listed properties. Singer and other economists say they haven't seen 
anything like it since a similar housing boom in the late '70s. 
Few New Homes 
Ben Bartolotto, director of the Construction Industry Research Board, said the 
small supply of new homes on the Westside will continue to drive existing home 
prices up. 
"Of all the construction in Los Angeles County, the Westside accounts for less 
than 10%," he said. "The only things that are being built are either condos or 
very large and prestigious single-family homes. 
"When you combine that with the already high land prices, you're talking about 
a lot of money." 
Real estate market watchdogs point to foreign investment in Westside properties 
as another reason house prices are jumping off the charts. 
"The increase of foreign capital is the wild card," Singer said. "Clearly it 
increases the demand and pushes the prices even higher. But there's no way to 
quantify it." 
However, industry experts say that although they expect Westside real estate 
prices to continue to rise, they will rise at a much slower rate than they did 
in 1988, when home prices rose an average of 23%. 
"Last year was crazy," said Jon Douglas, president of the real estate company 
which bears his name. "I've never seen anything like it." 
Some industry analysts are concerned that the rising price of homes throughout 
the Westside may begin to change the character of the community. They say that 
the elements that make the area so desirable -- good weather, lots of cultural 
offerings, new jobs and overall panache -- are shifting the base of the 
community from just very expensive to nearly exclusive. 
"What the numbers mask is that you've got a different population in the 
Westside now, more affluent," said Salkin. "In a situation like that, the 
cultural, the ethnic and the employment characteristics will change, but it 
doesn't happen overnight." 
The overall effect of the decrease in moderate housing could be a reassessment 
-- and ultimate rejection -- of Westside properties by prospective home buyers, 
according to some real estate experts. But even they predict it will be years 
before there is any significant drop in the price of housing. 
Drop in Value? 
"The future housing situation depends on a lot of different scenarios such as 
the increasing traffic problem and the effect that has on new (commercial) 
building in the area," said Kathleen M. Connell, chair of the Center for 
Finance and Real Estate at UCLA's Graduate School of Management. "If there 
continues to be a lack of affordable rental housing and people can no longer 
afford to work on the Westside, then I do think you will see a revaluation of 
what has been a substantial premium of living on the Westside. 
"I don't anticipate a great drop in value, but whether it increases as rapidly 
as in the past is doubtful," she said. 
However, Douglas said the factors that make Westside housing so expensive are 
not likely to change. He said that in the last decade, the price of detached 
single-family homes there has risen an average of 16% each year. 
"Because of the rent-control atmosphere that exists in places like Santa 
Monica, you're not going to see much new development," Douglas said. "So the 
existing base price of residences in the area will continue to go up. 
"Over the last 20 years, with the exception of a couple of recessions, Westside 
real estate values have never gone down. I think that will continue to happen 
as long as people can continue to afford those properties on the Westside." 
Highly Affordable 
If that's the case, Westside properties will sell at at escalating rates for a 
long time. First Interstate's Salkin said, however, that by world standards, 
the Westside is highly affordable. 
"When you compare it to places like Tokyo and Hong Kong, it's not expensive," 
he said. "America is still fairly underpriced compared to the rest of the 
industrial countries. We're a bargain basement society when it comes to 
houses." 
Statewide, the median sales price of a home rose from $150,000 in January, 
1988, to $177,000 in December, 1988, and $185,000 in January, 1989, according 
the the California Assn. of Realtors. 
Last year, 850,000 California homes were sold, 250,000 of them new. 
"If you look at whether housing is overpriced in California, all you have to 
see is that nearly 1 million people bought homes at these prices," Salkin said. 
"So are housing payments exaggerated here? It's tough . . . to say yes." 
