THE SAVVY TRAVELER: SECURITY INCREASED AT AIRPORTS 
Not long ago two Northwest Airlines gate agents walked up a jet-way at the 
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton airport in Pennsylvania. They were preparing to 
close out a late-night DC-9 flight to Detroit. 
Suddenly two men jumped out from around the corner, forced them onto the plane 
and announced that they were hijacking the flight. 
Five-and-a-half hours later the ordeal was over. But it had all been staged by 
FBI agents as an exercise in terrorism and negotiation, part of a series of 
mock hijackings that the FBI has been conducting at airlines around the nation. 
But that's just the start. In the wake of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over 
Scotland, airlines, airports and governments are moving quickly to implement 
new security measures and new detection and scanning devices. 
Plastic-Bomb Detectors 
Immediately after the Pan Am incident in December, the Federal Aviation 
Administration accelerated its order for six machines that can detect plastic 
explosives. 
In Greece the government has stepped up its counterterrorist initiative. A 
special Greek Coast Guard unit has been assigned to protect cruise ships in the 
port of Piraeus, near Athens, and throughout the Greek islands. At the Athens 
airport all luggage is hand-searched, then sealed before check-in. 
In Rome, airport officials no longer allow friends or relatives of passengers 
into the airport building. Airport officials in Paris are training a new army 
of explosive-sniffing dogs. 
In the Middle East armed guards now fly on all Royal Jordanian flights. And in 
Cairo, after passengers check in their baggage the bags are lined up outside 
the plane on the tarmac. Then, before passengers are allowed to board the 
plane, they have to identify each of their bags before they are loaded onto the 
aircraft. 
In France the civil aviation agency has announced funding for two advanced 
weapon-detection systems for checked baggage and cargo containers. 
New ID Cards 
In addition, the agency is issuing new identification cards with special 
magnetic information strips to all workers at French airports, at a cost of $17 
million. 
The new French scanner systems are designed to measure emissions from a source 
installed on the other side of a moving baggage track. A scanning of a large 
baggage container would take less than four minutes. 
In the United States, American Airlines has ordered 19 X-ray scanning devices 
that are capable of detecting plastic explosives for use at all airports where 
American's international flights originate or terminate. 
These scanning units are able to distinguish between inorganic and organic 
materials and will display the items on color monitors. The systems should be 
in place and operational by April. 
But some argue that the new technology designed to combat terrorists won't go 
far enough. 
"The real problem with airline security breaches as it now stands has little to 
do with new machines or equipment," an airline security consultant said. "It's 
the human factor -- the quality of the people we hire to operate the machines 
and the training we give them." 
To be sure, most recorded breaches in security during surprise FAA inspections 
have occurred because personnel manning the equipment have missed weapons, 
bombs and other devices intentionally packed in bags by security officials. 
The FAA is seeking detectors that require little human judgment to find 
explosives. 
Circumventing People 
One system, Thermal Neutron Activation, acts almost independent of human 
judgment and doesn't require a security employee to interpret what is flashed 
on a screen. Instead, it bombards luggage with low-energy neutrons in a 
detection chamber. If explosives are detected, the baggage is automatically 
diverted. 
Another system was tested recently on passengers at Boston's Logan 
International Airport. This machine moves warm air around passengers as they 
enter a chamber. After that passenger leaves, an immediate chemical analysis is 
performed on the air sample, looking for the telltale chemical signatures of 
dynamite, plastic and TNT. 
Other machines are being designed to stop terrorism before the airplane gate. 
It is estimated that 90% of aviation terrorism involves the use of false 
passports. The new machines are working with high-technology identity 
documents. 
But we may have to wait as long as three years for these machines to be 
installed at high-risk airports. 
The U.S. systems ordered by the FAA may not be in place until the end of this 
year. 
And the French weapon detection systems won't be in place until a year from 
now, and won't be fully operational until later next year. In addition, the 
systems are only useful in detecting weapons or guns, not explosives. 
"All of this will undoubtedly help in reducing the potential for disaster," 
says one airline security chief. "But we're still dealing with countries and 
terrorist organizations that will try to beat the system no matter what we do." 
For example, some U.S. airline security experts say that Libya has developed 
ways to disguise plastic explosives, molding the material into the shapes of 
hair dryers, calculators and other items typically found in passenger bags. 
"Given the sheer volume of bags checked in by passengers," one head of airline 
security said, "the odds of these devices getting past us is still good." 
Unfortunately, the technology gap between airline security officials and the 
terrorists they try to stop is still wide. 
Still, effective security steps are being taken by some airlines. Some of these 
new airport and airline security measures have already been implemented but 
most are not readily apparent to passengers. With few exceptions, most of these 
steps do not force long passenger delays at airports. 
For example, in the wake of the furor over Salman Rushdie's novel "The Satanic 
Verses," British Airways has taken steps to protect its planes, passengers and 
personnel. 
British Airways Flight 20, between Hong Kong and London, makes a refueling stop 
en route in Bombay. Until recently, passengers who had boarded in Hong Kong 
were allowed to remain on board during the late-night stopover. 
Now they are required to leave the aircraft. Authorities then board during 
refueling and thoroughly search the passenger cabin. 
Then, when passengers reboard, a head count is made and matched against the 
number of bags each passenger has checked through to London. 
On one recent flight, after new and transit passengers had boarded Flight 20 
for the leg to London, the plane was delayed about an hour. The head count of 
passengers did not match the number of tickets collected. 
Finally it was discovered that ground agents had forgotten to take one 
passenger's ticket when he boarded. The numbers matched and the plane was sent 
on its almost 11-hour all-night journey to Heathrow. 
The pilot explained the problem, the resulting snafu and its ultimate 
resolution to the passengers. Not one passenger complained. 
