CONSUMER VIEWS: CONSUMERS; 
CROSSING SWORDS WITH INSURANCE FIRMS 
Question: I enrolled with my family in the Blue Cross Prudent Buyer health plan 
a few years ago. About two years ago I gave birth to a premature baby who needs 
physical therapy to learn how to walk. The treatment is two or three times a 
week, and 80% was paid by Blue Cross. The cost is $125 for a 50-minute session, 
provided I use approved facilities, which are at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. 
As of Aug. 1, 1988, however, Blue Cross Prudent Buyer has limited all physical 
therapy they will pay for up to 12 sessions per year at $25 per session, again 
at Cedars-Sinai -- which means that I must pay the rest of the charge myself. 
As my son needs therapy two or three times a week, this is a great hardship on 
me. 
Blue Cross claims that they are legally correct because there is a sentence in 
the contract that allows them to change any, or all, rules, providing they give 
30-day notification to the consumer. This is fine if a new subscriber is given 
the opportunity to decide if he wants an insurance company without physical 
therapy benefits. But what about a subscriber, like me, who could not change 
policies because the child would be determined to have a "pre-existing 
condition"? 
Is it fair? Is it legal? Can the insurance companies put a sentence in their 
contract that exempts them from honoring the contract if they choose to? Could 
they decide tomorrow that dialysis or chemotherapy is no longer covered, even 
though the patient depends on it, and contracted for it? 
What can I do regarding this issue? -- Z.A. 
Answer: It's a tough one, all right, and the questions of "is it fair?" and "is 
it legal?" get caught in the realities of today's escalating medical costs. 
Yes, of course, it is legal for a health insurance company to change its rules 
covering benefits as long as both the subscribers and the California Department 
of Insurance are notified of those changes on a quarterly basis. Downward 
scaling of benefits, according to Charles Coleman, the public relations 
spokesman for Blue Cross of California, isn't done lightly, frivolously or 
selectively. 
It can't be done at all, in fact, unless the change in the benefits is applied 
to all subscribers -- not just those immediately impacted by the changes. 
In the case of physical therapy, Coleman adds, Blue Cross got hit by the 
double-whammy of "very high utilization and sharply escalating costs." As a 
result, the company "felt it necessary to either put restrictions on physical 
therapy or increase the premiums through the roof for everyone." 
A good part of the problem with physical therapy, according to Judy Penman, the 
underwriting services bureau supervisor for the California Department of 
Insurance in San Francisco, is that -- because of the large number of 
chiropractic patients using it -- "there has been a lot of overusage, and the 
insurance companies have come to regard this more as maintenance rather than as 
therapy and have sharply cut back the number of treatments covered. 
"Blue Cross," she continues, "changed their guidelines on physical therapy some 
time ago to restrict it to short-term therapy after an injury or surgery and, 
even then, found that the utilization far exceeded premiums and that if they 
were to increase the premiums to cover unlimited therapy it would be 
exorbitant. They've got several different plans -- one limits the subscriber to 
12 visits a year, another limits him to 25." 
The Department of Insurance's Penman wonders, however, if your son's use of 
physical therapy as a corrective treatment was taken into account under Blue 
Cross' own guidelines, or whether someone, arbitrarily, simply decided that it 
was being used for maintenance. In her discussions with Blue Cross 
representatives about your case, however, she did discover a few cases that 
were considered by Blue Cross to be exceptional -- one involved a child with 
multiple sclerosis -- and a compromise physical therapy regimen, and premium 
structure, was worked out. 
In the meantime, Penman assured us that she is writing to you for more 
information -- you neglected to give me your policy number for instance, or 
your phone number, or she would have contacted you by now. She promises to 
investigate your case thoroughly. 
Both Penman and Blue Cross' Coleman suggest that you write to Blue Cross 
yourself, requesting a "Medical Review Board hearing." This in-house review 
will look into it and make sure that Blue Cross' own guidelines were followed, 
that you weren't the victim of someone's arbitrary action, and will see if you 
qualify for any sort of compromise arrangement. 
"If she gets turned down there," Penman adds, "there's one last option open to 
her. She can request a 'Medical Society Review' from Blue Cross. This will 
bring in outside doctors to investigate the whole thing." 
We still can't hold out a big, beaming ray of sunshine for you. Blue Cross -- 
and it's a position in which the state's Judy Penman agrees -- is leery of 
making exceptions in matters like this. But you still have a couple of doors to 
open first. 
Ask for the Medical Review Board hearing by writing to Rebecca Kapustay, vice 
president, operations, Individual and Small Group Division, Blue Cross of 
California, P.O. Box 70000, Van Nuys, Calif. 91470. 
Good luck, but don't build your hopes up too much, yet. 
Q: I was interested in your recent column about the elderly gentleman who was 
pressured into taking additional life insurance that he neither needed nor 
wanted. It certainly is a complex field, and I'm wondering if there are any 
guidelines for someone who suspects that he does need more insurance. -- B.J. 
A: There's some pretty good literature on the subject you might study. One is 
an 11-page booklet that is available without charge right here in the state. 
Write to the California Department of Insurance, 600 S. Commonwealth Ave., Los 
Angeles, Calif. 90005, and request a copy of "The Buyer's Guide to Life 
Insurance." The department also has a toll-free hot line number for consumers 
with insurance questions: (800) 233-9045. 
A more comprehensive look at the life insurance industry is also available from 
Consumer Reports Books, "Life Insurance: How to Buy the Right Policy From the 
Right Company at the Right Price" (290 pp, $12, Consumer Reports Books, 110 E. 
42nd St., New York, N.Y. 10017). 
 Campbell cannot answer mail personally but will respond in this column to 
consumer questions of general interest. Write to Consumer VIEWS, You section, 
The Times, Times Mirror Square, Los Angeles 90053. 
