WALL STREET / JOHN CRUDELE: TRASH ISSUES LIKELY TO BE AT TOP OF HEAP FOR 
INVESTORS 
A few years ago when the ITT Corp. was planning to close a plant in Georgia 
that made creosote-soaked railroad ties and telephone poles, its accountants 
recommended that the company face financial reality. 
The plant had damaged the land on which it stood and the mess would have to be 
cleaned up. To its credit, ITT didn't stall. It took a $30-million charge 
against earnings so that the money would be available to get the job done. 
Just about every expert agrees that the 1990s will become known as the decade 
when environmental issues truly came into their own. And trash, you might say, 
will be at the top of the heap for investors. 
Debating the theoretical merits of cleaning up the environment (as happened in 
the '80s), and actually going ahead and scrubbing the sky and earth, of course, 
are two very different things. And one factor that could turn the theoretical 
into the actual, the experts contend, are pencil pushers like ITT's 
accountants. 
"It's going to be the accountants who could be the catalysts that get 
industries to recognize their true liability," says Kenneth Ch'uan-kai Leung, 
environmental analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co. 
While companies and legislators in the 1980s first debated the need for 
cleaning up the environment, then moved on to debating ways to accomplish the 
task, Leung figures that the time is about right for the companies to replace 
talk with action. 
This premise is causing a lot of investors to wage some mighty big bets on 
environmental stocks. And in 1989, those investments paid off. Smith Barney's 
index of stocks involved in the solid waste business rose 59% last year, while 
its index of hazardous waste stocks jumped more than 42%. The overall stock 
market rose about 27% in 1989. 
Does this mean that pollution control stocks have already discounted -- as they 
say on Wall Street -- the strides that the industry is likely to make in the 
1990s? 
"Expectations could get ahead of reality," says Marc H. Sulam, the environment 
control analyst with Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co. He thinks that this may have 
happened already in the case of hazardous waste stocks. He believes that shares 
of solid waste companies might be a better bet right now than hazardous waste 
stocks. Among the stocks he likes are Waste Management, Laidlaw Industries and 
Browning-Ferris. 
There isn't anything mysterious about why analysts are attracted to the shares 
of solid waste companies such as these. There is a well-publicized scarcity of 
landfill in parts of the country. And experts don't think that major cities 
such as New York are going to be able to come up with alternative ways to get 
rid of their everyday garbage any time in the near future. 
"There's a crisis of capacity, mostly on the East Coast of the United States." 
says Aldo Mazzaferro, an analyst with C. J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc., 
about the landfill situation. 
Companies that own land on which garbage can be dumped might reasonably be 
expected to make a pile of money from their ability to pile trash. But 
landfills aren't the only things getting investors in garbage excited. During 
the next decade, both the Departments of Energy and Defense are expected to 
launch stepped-up campaigns to clean up the mess they've made around the 
country. 
And when the government starts spending, the experts believe that everyone 
could get rich. 
Next Earnings Period Bears Close Watching 
It's nearly time to worry once again about that old stock market nemesis -- 
corporate earnings. And for the third straight quarter, there could be a lot to 
worry about. 
The stock market reacted badly to weakening profits in the last two quarters. 
Stock prices fell sharply in October, when many companies were reporting their 
third-quarter earnings. Then the market turned in another bad performance in 
January and February, when corporations were reporting that their after-tax 
profits fell an estimated 1.4% during the fourth quarter. 
Profits for the first quarter, which ends March 31 for most companies, probably 
won't start rolling in until around mid-April. But that doesn't mean that Wall 
Street will wait until the last minute to start trembling. 
This month Monsanto Co. decided to give the world a peak at its first-quarter 
numbers. The St. Louis-based chemical company said its profit will be on track 
with what it had expected internally but probably would be below Wall Street's 
expectations. Wall Street would have none of that. It promptly pulled the value 
of Monsanto's stock down a hefty 5%. 
The profits that corporations report could be especially important this time 
around because government statistics on the economy have not given investors a 
clear indication of business conditions. Some stats have been pointing to a 
very slow economy; others to a moderately improving business outlook. 
Yet while economic statistics are always open to a variety of interpretations, 
the earnings that corporations report are, more often, taken at their face 
value. 
Companies could report a modest 2.5% improvement in their first-quarter 
profits, according to Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. 
Still, Wall Street analysts have generally been trimming their earnings 
estimates for the rest of 1990. 
Why Houghton Mifflin Stock Is Climbing 
Almost a year ago, Robert M. Bass, the Texas investor and sometime corporate 
raider, bought a large stake in Houghton Mifflin Co. The stock soared (more 
than $10 in one day alone) as Wall Street smelled a takeover attempt in the 
making. 
But neither Bass nor anyone else tried to acquire the Boston-based textbook 
publisher in 1989, and the speculation (as well as Houghton's stock) soon 
withered. 
Wall Street doesn't give up on its dreams easily and, now, more than one year 
later, Houghton Mifflin's is hot again. The publisher's stock was up more than 
$5 a share over the last two weeks even though trading volume was painfully 
low. 
Is the "Second Annual Houghton Mifflin Raid" under way? 
Speculators think that it might be. But a Wall Street source close to Houghton 
Mifflin says the speculators are all wrong -- they're making book, if you will, 
on the wrong outcome. 
First, here's the speculators' side. 
Bass was in the media period of his investment career last year when he 
purchased over 5% of Houghton Mifflin's stock. At about the same time the Texan 
had purchased shares of a number of other communications companies and was also 
rumored to have taken a large position in Tribune Co., owner of the New York 
Daily News and Chicago Tribune newspaper, and Time Inc., the magazine 
publisher. 
Bass has long since forgotten about Houghton Mifflin and most of the other 
publishers. After peaking at $49.50 a share, Houghton Mifflin's stock -- until 
recently -- was mired in the $20s. 
Wall Street isn't sentimental, but it figures that the one-year anniversary of 
Bass' disclosure could be significant for Houghton Mifflin. 
The speculators argue that when Bass disclosed late last January that he owned 
the Houghton Mifflin stock, it probably sent the company to its longtime 
investment adviser, Rothschild Inc., for advice and alternatives. That, the 
speculators say, was a logical thing to do when someone of Bass' stature is 
making threats. 
What an investment banker will typically do is go to several potential buyers 
of the company and ask, "If we need someone to come to our rescue, will you be 
available?" If so, they'll have to sign a confidentiality agreement and swear 
not to harass the company for a specific period of time. 
Often, these confidentiality agreements last for a year. That's why the 
anniversary could be significant. 
If this theory is correct, that would mean that any cease-fire that Houghton 
Mifflin might have signed with potential buyers would soon be coming to an end. 
And the publisher could, therefore, be very vulnerable. 
Speculators figure that other publishing companies -- such as Paramount 
Communications, McGraw-Hill, Bertelsmann and Hachette -- might like to own 
Houghton Mifflin, especially if the price isn't much higher than what the stock 
is now trading at. 
What really has the speculators excited is the fact that much of the buying of 
Houghton Mifflin's stock these past few weeks seems to be coming from just two 
investment firms -- First Boston Corp. and Bear, Stearns &amp; Co. And 
concentrated buying like that could mean that a corporate raider is on the 
prowl. 
The Wall Street source who is close to Houghton Mifflin thinks that the 
speculators who have concocted this scenario might do well as Hollywood 
scriptwriters but not in the stock market. 
"The company is not for sale," he says, adding that Houghton Mifflin did not 
search for a "white knight" because of Bass. So, there would have been no 
standstill agreements that are now expiring. 
"Nobody perceived (Bass) as a threat, and he wasn't a threat. He took his 
profits and went his merry way. It was never seen as unfriendly," said the 
source, who asked to remain anonymous. 
The "first SOB" who tries to threaten Houghton Mifflin, the source added, will 
be "eviscerated." For those who don't have a dictionary handy, that's what you 
do to the insides of a fish before cooking. 
Why has the stock been climbing? This source thinks that Houghton Mifflin is 
becoming attractive to some money managers. 
J. Kendrick Noble, publishing analyst for Paine Webber Inc., recently started 
recommending Houghton Mifflin again after a long layoff. He thinks that the 
stock is now attractively priced, and that the publishing business in general 
is turning itself around. "Most analysts are more cautious on the industry than 
I am," admits Noble. 
Noble is not basing his new assessment of Houghton Mifflin on the possibility 
of a takeover. But speculators -- who have had their rumor mill come to a 
grinding halt in recent months -- clearly are. 
There's no way of knowing whether Hilton Hotels was ever serious about the 
threat to become a private company after acquisition offers didn't come in as 
high as it liked. Hilton took itself off the market two weeks ago, and Hilton's 
stock promptly collapsed in price. But curiously heavy trading in Hilton's 
shares kept speculators hopes alive. A source close to Hilton says it was the 
company buying all that stock. . . . 
