IN COLORADO, RECKLESS SKIING IS PURSUED AS A FELONY 
Concluding that reckless skiing is tantamount to reckless driving, a Colorado 
prosecutor is pressing felony charges against two out-of-control skiers who 
collided with children in separate accidents that left an 11-year-old Iowa girl 
dead and an 8-year-old San Diego boy seriously injured. 
The charges are believed to be among the first of their kind, but "I suspect 
they won't be the last," said Dist. Atty. Gregory Long, who filed them this 
week in Grand County. 
"I don't see any difference between this and being hit by a car on a sidewalk 
or in a school parking lot," Long said. "You don't get magical exemption from 
responsibility because you're on a set of skis." 
Believes in Licensing 
Concerns about reckless skiing were echoed at resorts around the nation 
Wednesday, and one expert doing a study for Mammoth Mountain said his research 
has convinced him that skiers should be licensed. 
Charged in Colorado Tuesday were Howard Hidle, 31, of North Richland Hills, 
Tex., and Terrence Coghlan, 38, of Steamboat Springs, Colo. Both could face 
stiff prison terms if convicted. Neither could be reached for comment 
Wednesday. 
Hidle is accused of manslaughter in the Feb. 17 death of Kari Meylor, a Sioux 
City, Iowa, girl who died of head injuries after being struck at the base of a 
practice hill at the Winter Park resort. 
Coghlan is charged with second-degree assault, child abuse and reckless 
endangerment in an incident a week later at Steamboat Springs, where Russell 
Wittman was seriously injured while vacationing with his family. 
Long said both defendants skied past signs and barriers. "The witnesses felt 
their conduct was beyond mere negligence or mistakes," Long said. Hidle and 
Coghlan both escaped serious injury, he added. 
Calls for Stiffer Laws 
Steve Wittman, a San Diego attorney, has been pushing for tougher laws on the 
slopes since the Feb. 24 accident that left his son with a shattered leg. 
Reckless skiers are not held accountable in part because it is not mandatory to 
report accidents on the slopes, Wittman believes. He has written Colorado 
legislators and ski industry officials to urge such legislation. 
"Ski resorts naturally want everyone to think it's a glowing, beautiful day on 
the slopes," Wittman said. "The hope is that everyone will lick their wounds, 
go away from the ski resort and not get involved in any litigation." 
He said Coghlan "appeared out of nowhere" and flew 40 feet through the air 
before hitting Russell Wittman at a speed later estimated at 50 m.p.h. 
Coghlan sent a friend back up the slope to retrieve his ski, which Steve 
Wittman was clutching. When he confronted the frantic father, Coghlan "was 
smiling" and "denied ever seeing Russell," Wittman recalled, adding that 
Coghlan never apologized. Russell may eventually need surgery to repair his 
leg. 
Applauds Charges 
At Winter Park, resort spokeswoman Paula Sheridan applauded the criminal 
charges in the Meylor death. 
"We have to get word out that reckless skiing just will not be tolerated, and 
this is ultimately what can happen," she said. 
Several ski resorts said that they have extensive skier education programs and 
patrols to combat recklessness and that the slopes are actually safer than 
ever. 
The National Ski Areas Assn., a Springfield, Mass., trade organization 
representing the nation's 600 ski resorts, reported a 300% decline in the 
number of injuries over the last 38 years. 
Spokeswoman Lynn Murphy said there are currently about 2 1/2 injuries per 1,000 
skiers, and one fatality per 2 million. About 54 million lift tickets are sold 
around the country each year, she said. 
"We would support the concept of prosecuting reckless skiers where proper laws 
apply," Murphy said. 
Concern over reckless skiers prompted Mammoth Mountain to commission a study 
profiling the offenders. 
Frank Tikalsky, a psychology professor and insurance industry consultant from 
Dillon, Mont., and his wife, former Olympic skier Linda Meyers, have 
interviewed more than 500 people and reviewed more than 2,500 accident reports 
from Mammoth so far and expect to submit their report next month. 
Focus Is on Men 
They found that most reckless skiers are men between 18 and 26 who have been 
skiing about three years and have accidents while skiing in groups. 
Tikalsky, a skier himself, favors tough measures to combat the problem. 
"I think you should have to have a license to ski," he said, adding that 
mandatory ski schools would also help. Criminal charges would also be a 
deterrent, he said. 
"I don't think you have to do it too many times for the community to get the 
message." 
But resorts "are stuck between a rock and a hard place," said Jim Mitchell, who 
manages Crystal Mountain Resort, about 75 miles east of Seattle. 
"Basically, we have a sport here for people who are looking for something 
different, fast, exciting, the wind in your hair . . . and, as we all know, 
mountains have inherent dangers," he said. 
"But at the same time we're inviting them, we're slapping rules and regulations 
on a large element of the population that's affecting a small element of the 
population, and taking some of the fun out of it," he said. 
Crystal Mountain tries to reward caution by giving away daily passes to 15- to 
25-year-olds "who we feel are exhibiting the right kinds of behavior," he said. 
At Killington, Vt., the largest ski resort in the East, spokeswoman Laura 
Wittern agreed that criminal "charges might make people stop and think twice." 
Researcher Lisa Romaine also contributed to this story. 
