ASSEMBLY PANEL OKS SUBWAY PROPOSAL 
The Assembly Transportation Committee on Monday approved by an 11-1 margin 
legislation to require that an extension of Metro Rail through residential 
areas of North Hollywood and Van Nuys be built underground. 
In 1989, a similar proposal was vetoed by Gov. George Deukmejian, who said it 
inserted the state into a matter that should be in the jurisdiction of local 
authorities. 
But Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) -- the author of both transit proposals -- 
expressed optimism that his latest measure will become law because it has drawn 
support from a variety of local groups -- from the Los Angeles County 
Transportation Commission to business and community associations. 
Citizen groups have protested proposals to place the line above ground because 
it would slice up neighborhoods and increase noise in the area. 
Under Robbins' proposal, 3.6 miles of the Metro Rail extension in the Valley 
would be underground along a Southern Pacific railroad right of way, partly 
following Chandler Boulevard, between the Hollywood Freeway and Hazeltine 
Avenue. 
The measure also exempts the acquisition of the Chandler Boulevard railroad 
right of way from provisions of state law requiring preparation of an 
environmental impact report. Because of that, the measure now must be heard by 
the Assembly Natural Resources Committee, which reviews legislation affecting 
the environment. 
Robbins maintained that when the commission actually builds the Metro Rail 
line, it still would be required to study environmental impacts of the line. 
Supporters of the bill argued that it is necessary to spell out the routing in 
state law to ensure that the Los Angeles Transportation Commission follows the 
route. 
Kurt Hunter, president of the North Hollywood Residents Assn., cited "a climate 
of distrust" between his community and the commission over plans to build the 
line. 
But Assemblyman William Lancaster (R-Covina), the only committee member to 
oppose the measure, complained that Robbins was singling out the San Fernando 
Valley for special treatment. 
Lancaster, who represents a portion of the San Gabriel Valley, which is 
competing with the San Fernando Valley for transit funds, objected to detailing 
the Valley subway route in state law because "if there's a need for change, 
they'll have to come back to the Legislature" for a new law. As a result, 
Lancaster said, he would urge the governor to veto the measure. 
Lancaster, his voice rising, also expressed concern that transit funding in Los 
Angeles County was already "too oriented to one section of the county." 
But Robbins dismissed any suggestion that the measure would give a special 
break to the San Fernando Valley. "We have been paying taxes consistently and 
there has yet to be a penny" spent in construction of Metro Rail in the San 
Fernando Valley, Robbins said. 
