WASTE HAULER FINED $1 MILLION IN PRICE-FIXING CASE 
When Mike Delaney and Tom Papageorge got a letter from a small Los Angeles 
commercial-waste hauler in October, 1985, complaining of harassment from 
competitors, the two Los Angeles County prosecutors were not surprised. 
Several years earlier, Papageorge had looked into similar allegations of 
price-fixing and conspiracy against trade in the cutthroat multimillion-dollar 
industry. But he didn't get very far because of the industry's unusually 
clannish nature, reinforced by many familial ties. 
"It's a difficult industry to break into," the deputy district attorney 
recalled. 
But this time, Papageorge and Delaney got a big break. Their investigator 
turned up an insider who spilled the beans. 
That touched off a wide-ranging investigation that culminated Monday with a 
record $1-million fine to be paid by Waste Management of California Inc., the 
local branch of the nation's largest solid-waste disposal firm. 
The case is the largest criminal antitrust case in California history. 
In addition to Waste Management's no-contest plea, two of its officials and 
several other defendants also entered no-contest pleas in Los Angeles Municipal 
Court on Monday. 
Waste Management and several other large haulers were accused of plotting to 
eliminate competition and charging inflated prices. In addition, the firms were 
accused of "blitzing" competitors who refused to go along by offering their 
customers lower, often "predatory," below-cost rates. These arrangements led to 
higher prices that "affect all of us," Papageorge said. 
The case began more than three years ago when the district attorney's office 
received a letter from Carry All Disposal, a Pico Rivera firm that picks up 
trash from commercial outlets in South Gate and Cudahy. 
Carry All said its trucks were being followed by agents of GSX Corp., a chief 
competitor. Once GSX learned of Carry All's customers, GSX then "blitzed" Carry 
All's customers, offering better prices in an attempt to eliminate its 
competitor. 
At one point, a Carry All driver stopped his truck and confronted the man who 
was tailing him, who said, " 'I'm just trying to learn the business,' " 
according to Delaney. 
But it wasn't long before Carry All began receiving cancellations from 
customers. 
The break in the case came when this particular GSX blitz against Carry All was 
well-documented by internal documents that turned up during a search of GSX 
premises, Delaney said. 
After reviewing Carry All's letter, the prosecutors assigned investigator 
Dewain E. Barrett to look into the allegations. Within weeks, Barrett found an 
employee at Carry All who had once been the sales manager at GSX. The new Carry 
All employee began detailing GSX's predatory tactics. 
Using this information and, after obtaining a search warrant, Delaney and 
Papageorge found eight to 10 boxes of detailed GSX internal memos and expense 
vouchers. 
"We got much more at GSX than we had anticipated," Delaney recalled. 
The former GSX sales manager then sat down with the two county prosecutors and 
explained the documents, many of which contained only cryptic or partial notes. 
Papageorge and Delaney were especially surprised to find numerous notes, made 
by diligent GSX telephone receptionists, spelling out the firm's illegal 
contacts with competitors. Among the messages recorded by receptionists were 
some from GSX competitors demanding, "Why are you talking to my clients?" 
according to Delaney. 
"It's rare to find the smoking gun," Papageorge said. "The challenge of these 
cases usually is having to prove a conspiracy when agreements are mostly 
verbal." 
What the documents clearly showed was that GSX, and many of its competitors, 
often got together surreptitiously to eliminate competition and control prices. 
According to the prosecutors, the conspiracy included agreements not to take 
away one another's customers. The firms often resorted to below-cost sales 
pitches, or blitzes, to take away customers from haulers who did not go along 
with the arrangement to divide up customers. 
Other evidence of collusion, Delaney and Papageorge said, were GSX "hit lists," 
in which the firm had targeted competitors for blitzes. 
According to the prosecutors, when a commercial customer sought to change 
haulers, the current and the prospective hauler often would get together and 
have the latter offer a "highball" price to the customer. Then the two firms 
would divide the profits, often with payoffs from one hauler to the other as 
high as $10,000, according to Delaney. 
In the meantime, customers who did not change haulers were "stung" regularly 
with annual price increases of 15% to 20%, the deputy district attorney said. 
There was open competition only when new accounts were available, such as when 
a mini-mall opened, Delaney said. 
"The standing rule was non-competition," he said. 
As a result of the wealth of GSX documents confiscated by Delaney and 
Papageorge, the firm in April, 1986, came forth seeking a deal, offering to 
help "clean up" the industry. 
"It was a big break for us," Delaney said. 
GSX made available to the two prosecutors numerous company officials who 
"essentially bared their souls," pleading that they had inherited these 
practices, Delaney said. 
Grand Jury Testimony 
The GSX officials also testified at a county grand jury investigation in early 
1987, in which they freely named names. 
That led to the June, 1987, charges filed against the defendants, who pleaded 
no-contest. 
Until the GSX break came, Delaney said, "we didn't even know" about Waste 
Management and the other firms. "You just never know where a conspiracy will 
lead," he said. 
The prosecutors alleged that the defendants, along with other, smaller, 
uncharged firms, operated what amounted to a secret cartel, dividing up 
commercial accounts "so they could charge any price . . . without fear of 
competition." 
Their customers included restaurants, gas stations, theaters and other 
businesses throughout the county. 
GSX eventually was fined $236,500 for its part in the conspiracy. In a 
separate, ongoing federal antitrust investigation in nearly a dozen other 
cities, GSX earlier this year also paid a $500,000 fine. 
In addition to Waste Management, Western Waste Industries Inc., and 
Angelus-Hudson Inc. and five of their employees also have pleaded no-contest to 
similar charges. 
Wiley A. Scott Jr., 33, Waste Management's operations manager in Sun Valley, 
faces up to 60 days in jail. And Clifford R. Chamblee, 65, the firm's former 
general manager in Gardena, faces up to 250 hours of community service. 
John Marderosian, 56, an official of System Disposal Service Inc., which was 
bought by GSX, also faces up to 60 days in jail. 
Other Fines 
Angelus-Hudson has agreed to pay a $75,000 fine. And Western Waste has agreed 
to pay $900,000 in the antitrust case, plus another $100,000 for an unrelated 
toxic waste violation in which it allegedly hid hazardous wastes in household 
trash, dumping them illegally in three county landfills. 
At the same time, Western Waste's sales manager, Ishkan (Ara) Gordian, 44, 
agreed to a 45-day jail sentence for his no-contest plea in the antitrust 
prosecution -- the first such penalty to be imposed under the felony provisions 
of the Cartwright Act, the state's basic antitrust law, according to Dist. 
Atty. Ira Reiner. 
Still facing criminal charges in the illegal dumping case is Western Waste's 
vice president and manager, Hacob (Jack) Shirvanian. His trial is set for April 
24 in Los Angeles Superior Court. 
