KREMLIN DENOUNCES U.S. EXPULSION OF DIPLOMAT 
The Soviet Union on Friday accused the FBI of "gross provocation" in detaining 
and expelling a Washington-based Soviet diplomat, and alleged that FBI agents 
forced him from his apartment house without shoes or coat, prevented him from 
calling his embassy for several hours and offered him financial aid if he 
defected. 
Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov refused to rule out the 
possibility that American diplomats might be ordered to leave Moscow in 
retaliation. 
"The U.S. side assumes all the responsibility for what happens in the future," 
he warned. 
But official Soviet reaction to the expulsion of Lt. Col. Yuri N. Pakhtusov was 
notably muted on two counts. For one thing, Gerasimov was careful to blame the 
FBI, not the Bush Administration, for what he called "a hostile act." 
"I would classify this as an instance of gross provocation staged by those 
people in the United States who are reluctant to accept improvements in 
Soviet-American relations," Gerasimov said. "Of course, the full responsibility 
will rest on U.S. special services for what happened." 
Secondly, the Soviet spokesman repeatedly declined to deny that Pakhtusov had 
sought to obtain secret information. Asked three times whether Pakhtusov had 
engaged in espionage, Gerasimov repeated details of the arrest and said that 
Pakhtusov, reportedly a military intelligence officer, "did not carry out any 
actions incompatible with his diplomatic status." 
The FBI said that Pakhtusov, 35, took up his post as a military attache in 
Washington last June and two months later contacted an American civilian 
employee of a computer company in an effort to try to acquire documents showing 
how the U.S. government protects secrets in its computer system. The employee 
reported the contact to the FBI and Pakhtusov was placed under surveillance for 
six months, the FBI said. Neither the employee nor the company was named. 
Received Document 
Pakhtusov was arrested Wednesday after he received classified documents from 
the American employee, according to U.S. officials, who said that no classified 
information had reached the Soviet Union. 
U.S. Ambassador to Moscow Jack F. Matlock Jr. dismissed as nonsense any 
allegation that the FBI had behaved in a hostile manner. 
A senior U.S. diplomat here observed: "The expulsion was a perfectly legitimate 
act, showing simply that we take our internal security seriously. It shouldn't 
have any repercussions on Soviet-American relations." 
But the official Soviet news agency Tass said the allegation that Pakhtusov was 
a spy was a "sin against truth," and added: 
"What is behind this affair? It is only left for us to presume that not 
everybody in the United States is pleased with the long-awaited thaw in 
relations between the two superpowers. Not everyone, apparently, is pleased 
that ever-growing numbers of Americans are lately showing sympathy with what is 
happening in the Soviet Union, displaying unconcealed interest in the ongoing 
processes in our country." 
Pakhtusov was identified by U.S. sources as a member of the GRU, the 
intelligence branch of the Red Army. Soviet officials refused to confirm or 
deny this. 
Tass and Gerasimov offered differing accounts of Pakhtusov's arrest. Tass said 
Pakhtusov was arrested Wednesday night when he left his apartment to carry out 
the garbage. The news agency said he wore only light trousers, an undershirt 
and slippers. 
"Pakhtusov was dragged to a car and handcuffed," Tass said. "He was not allowed 
to go back and get dressed, or to see his wife, who remained home with his two 
children not knowing what had happened to her husband, who had gone out for 
only a few seconds." 
Gerasimov said Pakhtusov was visiting an American friend who lives in his 
apartment house when "FBI agents forced their way into the flat. . . . 
Pakhtusov was subjected to physical force. He was put into handcuffs. He was 
even denied the basic right to immediately get in contact with the Soviet 
Embassy and to report this incident. 
Barefoot in the Cold 
"Pakhtusov was not allowed to put on his overcoat and shoes, despite the cold 
weather. He was brought to the FBI, where for a long time he was denied the 
opportunity to contact Soviet representatives. The staff of the FBI attempted 
to persuade Pakhtusov to defect and promised financial assistance in exchange." 
Gerasimov said the expulsion of the diplomat was "incompatible with the new, 
constructive atmosphere which has been emerging in Soviet-U.S. relations." 
Secretary of State James A. Baker III met this week in Vienna with Soviet 
Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze. It was their first formal meeting 
since Baker came to office, and the two plan more talks in Moscow in May. 
In Washington, State Department spokesman Charles Redman declined to respond in 
detail to the Soviet allegations about the FBI. 
"The reason for our action was very simple," Redman said. "He (Pakhtusov) was 
caught red-handed with the goods, and no amount of verbiage can change that." 
Redman said the Soviets "have protested the expulsion but have advised us that 
Pakhtusov will be leaving as requested. There is no reason to believe it should 
affect our relationship. The Soviets know, as they always have, that we will 
protect our national security whenever it's threatened." 
The last time a Soviet diplomat was expelled from the United States was in 
December, 1987, when Mikhail Katkov, a middle-level official at the Soviet U.N. 
Mission in New York City, was sent home as an alleged spy. 
Times staff writer Jim Mann, in Washington, contributed to this article. 
U.S.-SOVIET EXPULSIONS 
June 14, 1985 -- Soviets expel Paul M. Stombaugh, second secretary at the U.S. 
Embassy in Moscow, accusing him of being involved in a "widespread espionage 
operation." 
March 14, 1986 -- Soviets expel Michael Sellers, political officer at the U.S. 
Embassy, on spying charges. 
May 14, 1986 -- Soviets expel American diplomat Erik N. Sites, an embassy 
attache, for "unlawful espionage actions" after he was discovered with a Soviet 
citizen identified as a recruit of an American intelligence service. 
Oct. 1, 1986 -- The United States expels 25 Soviet diplomats, accusing them of 
spying. 
Oct. 19, 1986 -- Soviets expel five U.S. diplomats, accusing them of engaging 
in "actions which are incompatible with their official status." 
Oct. 21, 1986 -- The U.S. orders 55 Soviet diplomats in Washington and San 
Francisco to leave the country and bars the Kremlin from filling another 19 
vacancies in those cities. 
Oct. 22, 1986 -- In retaliation, the Soviets expel five more American diplomats 
and withdraw 260 Soviet employees from U.S. missions in Moscow and Leningrad. 
Dec. 18, 1987 -- U.S. expels Soviet diplomat Mikhail Katkov, accusing him of 
trying to acquire military data. 
