MCCALLUM MAY JOIN CHARGERS IN FALL; 
HE EXPECTS TRANSFER HERE, HOPES TO MAKE FOOTBALL PART-TIME JOB 
Napoleon McCallum, the former Navy All-American and Raider running back, said 
Wednesday he expects to be transferred to a local Naval recruiting office here 
in May. And if the Navy doesn't change its regulations allowing personnel to 
work an outside job part time, he said he expects to play for the Chargers in 
the fall. 
The Chargers obtained McCallum last October in a move that completed the terms 
of the controversial July trade that sent offensive lineman Jim Lachey to the 
Raiders for offensive lineman John Clay. The deal was controversial because 
Clay reported to the Chargers overweight and then missed most of the season 
with a neck injury. 
McCallum, who recently completed the sea portion of his Naval obligation, 
requested orders last November that would place him in the San Diego recruiting 
office. He must now attend a recruiting officers school in Orlando, Fla., that 
begins April 17 and ends May 10. If he then passes an exam, he would become 
eligible for assignment to San Diego. 
"There's nothing definite right now, but I'm going to be working (for the Navy) 
in San Diego," McCallum said. "There's no doubt about it." 
He is so confident of that assignment that he recently entered an escrow 
agreement to purchase a house in north San Diego. 
McCallum's biggest concern is that the Navy could change its rules about 
allowing personnel to be employed in an outside part-time job. 
"I should be allowed to play," McCallum said when contacted by phone aboard the 
guided missile cruiser California, currently in port in Alameda. "But, if they 
(the Navy) want to make it so I can't play, they can. My situation is real 
political. It all depends on who's in office and what their feelings are." 
Naval officials were unavailable for comment Wednesday. 
The Chargers are cautiously optimistic about having McCallum on the field next 
fall. Owner Alex Spanos stopped short of saying he expected McCallum in uniform 
next season. But, when asked if McCallum's attempt to purchase a house meant 
the Chargers could expect McCallum this year, Spanos said, "I'm pretty sure it 
does." 
Steve Ortmayer, the Chargers' director of football operations, emphasized the 
Chargers were "in no way" involved in McCallum's attempts to obtain the 
transfer to San Diego. "Other than that," he said. "I have no comment." 
McCallum said he talked briefly with Ortmayer Wednesday. 
When the McCallum part of the trade was announced last October, the Chargers 
came under further criticism because McCallum's Naval obligations extended 
through December, 1989. What the Chargers didn't reveal was that McCallum's sea 
obligation would end early this year. According to McCallum, the Navy cannot 
assign him to duty at sea between now and the end of his obligation without his 
permission. 
McCallum, 28, graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in December, 1985 and was a 
fourth-round draft choice of the Raiders the following spring. He was assigned 
to the amphibious assault ship Peleliu, which was docked in Long Beach during 
the subsequent NFL season. 
Splitting time between the Navy and the Raiders, McCallum, 6-feet-2 and 215 
pounds, gained 536 yards on 142 carries and scored one touchdown. He returned 
eight kickoffs for a 22.9-yard average and seven punts for a 6.3 yard average. 
He also caught 13 passes. He started five games and rushed for a season-high 84 
yards against Houston. 
But the Navy subsequently reassigned him from the Peleliu to the California, 
berthed in Alameda. Geography prevented him from fulfilling his Naval duties 
and being a Raider. He did not play in 1987 or 1988. 
"That's a tough question," McCallum said when asked if he was in physical 
condition to play football. "I don't have anyone to judge against to know if 
I'm in football shape." 
his replacement. 
The addition of McCallum to the Chargers would give them a big, fast back to 
complement Gary Anderson, who gained 1,119 yards last season, third best in the 
AFC. It also would mean they could eliminate one of their many areas of need 
before next month's NFL draft. 
