TIBET RIOTERS, POLICE CLASH; 11 DIE, 100 HURT 
Eleven people were killed and more than 100 others were injured in the Tibetan 
capital of Lhasa on Sunday in a clash between pro-independence protesters and 
police, according to an official Chinese news report. 
The incident began around noon when 13 Buddhist monks and nuns staged a protest 
march around central Lhasa's Jokhang Temple, carrying banners and shouting, 
"Independence for Tibet!" the official New China News Agency reported early 
today. 
The protest escalated into widespread rioting that left one policeman and 10 
protesters dead after police opened fire, the news agency reported. It said 
that some of the protesters had firearms and shot at police. 
Fired Warning Shots 
Western tourists in Lhasa who spoke by telephone with reporters in Beijing said 
that police used tear gas and fired warning shots to try to control the 
protesters but eventually shot directly into crowds of rioters. 
Fleeing protesters carrying the banned "mountains and snow lion" flag of 
Tibetan independence were shown in a front-page picture today in the official 
People's Daily. 
Shortly after the demonstration began, "several hundred people joined the 
paraders, and they started throwing stones at a police station," the news 
agency said. "By 3 p.m., more than 600 rioters marched onto East Beijing Road, 
smashing windows, robbing more than 20 restaurants, hotels and shops and 
setting fire to commodities and furniture." 
The protesters attacked offices of the city's Chengguan District and the 
Communist Party, smashed traffic lights and damaged more than 20 police 
vehicles, the report said. 
A Canadian tourist, Roch Berphiaume, told the Associated Press that he saw 
Tibetans ransacking Chinese-owned stores and restaurants. 
"There was a lot of firing," Berphiaume said. Security forces were "running 
with machine guns and rifles," and at one point a stray bullet came through his 
third-floor hotel window, he said. 
Forty Officers Hurt 
Forty police officers were injured, with 11 of them requiring hospitalization, 
the agency reported. Although the agency said some of the rioters had fired at 
police, Berphiaume and several other Western witnesses who spoke with reporters 
in Beijing said they did not see any protesters with weapons. 
In the chaos of the police shooting and rioting, 10 civilians were killed and 
more than 60 were injured, including both rioters and onlookers, the news 
agency report said. Medical workers who rushed to the scene were also attacked, 
it said. 
China has firmly controlled the region since 1951 and now looks upon the 
advocacy of independence there as treason. 
Pro-independence sentiment among Tibetans remains widespread, however. Sunday's 
protest was the fourth in a series of major demonstrations that have ended with 
police gunfire and fatalities since the first such incident on Oct. 1, 1987. On 
that occasion, from six to 14 people were killed, according to the best 
available information. 
8 Killed a Year Ago 
Sunday's protest came exactly one year after a similar incident there left at 
least eight people dead. In another protest on Dec. 10, police shot and killed 
a monk who was carrying the outlawed flag of Tibetan independence, according to 
witnesses who later spoke with reporters. 
This month also marks the 30th anniversary of an abortive anti-Chinese uprising 
that resulted in the flight to India of the Dalai Lama, Tibet's traditional 
religious and political leader. Authorities in Lhasa had expressed the fear 
that the anniversary would bring further outbursts of anti-Chinese sentiment. 
Rumors circulated in Lhasa during January that a small quantity of weapons had 
been stolen from Chinese security forces and that authorities feared they might 
be used in pro-independence protests. It was not immediately clear whether this 
in fact is what happened Sunday, or whether such rumors may have been 
intentionally spread by Lhasa authorities to help justify the possible use of 
force to put down demonstrations. 
Police Shooting of Monk 
Western witnesses said that the flag-carrying monk killed on Dec. 10 was shot 
by police before any rioting began. 
All the pro-independence demonstrations over the past 18 months have been 
spearheaded by Buddhist monks but have received support from ordinary Tibetans. 
The New China News Agency report on Sunday's incident did not say whether there 
was any police action against the original 13 demonstrators that might have 
provoked the subsequent rioting. 
The report said that before Sunday's incident, local authorities had attempted 
to dissuade potential protesters "from making trouble" and to "educate them so 
as to maintain social order." 
