THEATER; 
'ANNIE GET YOUR GUN' CAST CREATES HAPPY SOUND 
The Yorba Linda Civic Light Opera's production of "Annie Get Your Gun" has some 
good things going for it -- principally the wonderful songs of Irving Berlin. 
Eminently hummable and spiced with genteel wit, they undoubtedly go home in the 
hearts and on the lips of every listener. And the Yorba Linda cast, along with 
musical director Joel Pressman, create a solid, happy sound throughout. 
John LaLonde, as Frank Butler, does musical justice with his rich, expressive 
voice to such tunes as "The Girl That I Marry" and "They Say It's Wonderful." 
And Linda Lebel, as Annie Oakley, pounds out her numbers with gusto. "You Can't 
Get a Man With a Gun" is a great song, and she sings it so's you listen. 
It's a shame that the orchestration is recorded, though. For one thing, many of 
the numbers felt rushed and breathless as a result, and beyond that, good music 
deserves live accompaniment. This show in particular, being so much about show 
business (as in, "There's No Business Like . . ."), suffers from canned music. 
Even a small ensemble would enhance the traveling-show atmosphere around which 
this story revolves. 
The story is still a good one. Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show pulls into town 
with a challenge to all comers to outshoot glamorous star rifleman Frank 
Butler. Who should best him but a dusty, illiterate little backwoods 
firecracker named Annie Oakley? Opposites attract, and Annie does all she can 
to become the soft, pink girl of Frank's dreams. But how can the slick ladies' 
man and the no-nonsense, home-grown Annie find happiness together when he wants 
to be the world's greatest sharpshooter, and she is? 
 LaLonde and Lebel look the parts: He really is drop-jaw handsome, and she's a 
solid, honest piece of womanhood. There's even a hope of genuine sparks between 
them when they sing "Anything You Can Do," an anthem to the battle of the 
sexes. 
Director Gary Gordon seems to want laughs. He would have achieved many more if 
he had focused on Annie and Frank's relationship, with all its passion and 
surprises, rather than playing everything as a setup and a punch line. 
Within that tone, however, Jim Driskill as Chief Sitting Bull is a particular 
hit with the audience, and Billy Beadle as show-biz huckster Charlie Davenport 
is picture perfect. Rob Hulings, who also choreographed, brings welcome panache 
to his cameo as a manly Indian brave. But it's the little Oakleys who really 
charm. Jared Pfeifer, Allison Harned, Emily Benson, and Marlena Rice are 
delightful. The rest of the cast could take a note from them: Play a little 
more, perform a little less. 
 The Yorba Linda Civic Light Opera's production of "Annie Get Your Gun" 
continues through Sunday at the Yorba Linda Forum, 4175 Fairmont Blvd., Yorba 
Linda. Curtain: Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; Sunday at 2 p.m. Tickets: $8 to 
$10. Information: (714) 779-8591. 
