THE BEN JOHNSON STEROID INQUIRY; 
FRANCIS WENT TO GREAT LENGTHS TO HELP HIS ATHLETES 
Although he had graduated from Stanford University five years before with a 
major in political science and a minor in history, Charlie Francis was a bored 
insurance underwriter in his native Toronto when he got the call in 1976 to 
help coach a suburban track and field club. 
Francis didn't have to think twice before accepting. A former sprinter who had 
competed for Canada at the 1972 Summer Olympics at Munich, he soon developed a 
reputation as a devoted mentor, who often dipped into his own pockets to pay 
his athletes' expenses, and an outstanding coach, who developed some of the 
world's best sprinters even though they worked out in a place they called the 
Pig Palace. 
He also became known in international circles as "Charlie the Chemist" because 
of his expertise in performance-enhancing drugs, particularly anabolic 
steroids. 
Francis, 40, displayed his depth of knowledge in that field Wednesday, 
testifying before the Canadian government's inquiry into international sport 
that he was instrumental in the drug use of 11 of his athletes, including Ben 
Johnson, world record-holder in the 100 meters. 
After winning the gold medal and setting a world record at the 1988 Summer 
Olympics in Seoul, Johnson was disqualified when he tested positive for an 
anabolic steroid. Since then, Francis has been suspended with pay from coaching 
by Sport Canada. 
In four hours of testimony Wednesday, exhaustive but never dull, Francis also 
implicated athletes from eight countries, primarily the United States. Even 
though rumors have been rampant for years about drug use in the sport, it was 
the first time that anyone with such a grasp of the issue has been so explicit 
in public. Not only were his comments on the record, he made them while under 
oath. 
Track and field may never entirely recover. 
But on Tuesday, his first day of testimony, a portrait was presented of a man 
who has so much passion for the sport that he quit his insurance job in 1978 to 
become a full-time, albeit unpaid, coach for the Scarborough Optimists Track 
and Field Club. Even though it was the Toronto area's most successful 
organization for youth sports, the athletes had no place to train except for 
the Swine Pavilion -- "the Pig Palace" -- on the grounds of Canada's National 
Exhibition, near the home stadium of the Toronto Blue Jays. 
To support himself, Francis sold his Aston-Martin and, at 30, moved back in 
with his parents. 
Most of that type information was supplied by the inquiry's co-counsel, Robert 
P. Armstrong, who said that he had to prod Francis for it. Reporters kidded 
Armstrong afterward that he was creating another St. Francis. 
Armstrong said that Francis often footed at least half the bill for the club's 
annual tours. Because most of the young athletes were poor, the majority having 
immigrated from the West Indies, Francis also sometimes had to make sure they 
were properly fed. 
"The boyfriend of one of our girls told me that she was eating Fruit Loops for 
dinner," Francis said after he was asked by Armstrong to tell the story. 
"Obviously, that had to stop. I went out and bought them some groceries." 
He recalled another occasion when Johnson and his older brother, Eddie, had 
only $6 between them for a three-day trip. Upon discovering that when they 
asked for one order of french fries to share at the first meal, he gave them 
money. 
A few years later, after he began receiving a $25,000 annual salary as a 
national coach from Sport Canada and Sport Ontario, Francis said he still 
refused to take a percentage of his athletes' earnings, although several of 
them were beginning to emerge as world-class runners. 
"It seemed kind of pathetic to take a fee and then give it back to them the 
next time they needed a meal," he said. 
It was only after he acquired an agent for Johnson and other athletes in 1985 
that Francis said he accepted a cut, a one-time payment of $20,000. 
During Wednesday's testimony, the lengths that Francis would go to help his 
athletes gain recognition as world-class became further apparent. He introduced 
many of them to performance-enhancing drugs. 
He said that he first learned of anabolic steroids from other athletes at 
Stanford from 1967-71. Francis, whose hand-timed 10.1 in the 100 meters in 1970 
was tied for fifth-fastest in the world, said that he competed drug-free 
through 1972, when he represented Canada in the Summer Olympics. He was 
eliminated in the quarterfinals of the 100 meters because of a leg injury, but 
he said his eyes were opened. 
"Rumors in Munich were that the level of use among top-level (track and field 
athletes) was 80%," Francis said. 
In 1973, when he won his second national championship in the 100, he said that 
he was assisted by the most popular anabolic steroid of the day, Dianabol. 
"During that period, I was working, and it was very difficult for me to 
maintain a proper training program," he said. "To get myself back to a world 
level, I became actively interested in steroids and where I could obtain them 
for myself." 
A doctor prescribed the Dianabol, which Francis said he used for three weeks. 
"I lost weight, and I gained muscle mass," he said. "I felt generally improved. 
I felt more confident. The emotional effect was apparent. Physically, I felt 
much better leading into that championship." 
He said that he felt no adverse side effects from the steroid use. 
Despite his confidence in the drugs, particularly after some of his athletes, 
especially Johnson, began to show extraordinary results with no discernible 
side effects, Francis said that he still believed he needed additional 
firsthand knowledge. 
He said that when the physician used by most of the athletes, Dr. Jamie 
Astaphan, prescribed a new steroid for them in 1986, Francis also asked for a 
prescription. 
"I wanted to know the effect of it," he said. "I was getting back into shape. 
My weightlifting improved quite rapidly. I went from a bench press of 200 
pounds to 320 within five weeks." 
Because of the suspension, his future in coaching is in doubt. 
But his immediate future is determined. He could be asked to testify through 
the middle of next week. 
