KENYA HOLDS 2 IN SLAYING OF BRITISH TOURIST 
Authorities here have taken two game rangers into custody in connection with 
the 1988 murder of a British tourist in one of Kenya's most popular game parks, 
police said Thursday. 
The detentions result from an investigation by two Scotland Yard detectives who 
were sent to Kenya at the request of President Daniel Arap Moi after the Kenyan 
police probe of the crime developed into an international embarrassment for 
this tourist-dependent country. 
There are two teams of Scotland Yard investigators currently at work in Kenya. 
The second team, also here at the government's request, is investigating the 
murder last month of Kenyan Foreign Minister Robert J. Ouko, whose charred body 
was found not far from his home in western Kenya three days after his family 
reported him missing. 
The detention of the two unidentified rangers (authorities here declined to say 
the men were "arrested," but made it clear they could be charged within 72 
hours) marks the first major break in the investigation of the killing of Julie 
Ward, 28. 
Ward disappeared while driving alone in the Masai Mara Game Reserve in early 
September, 1988. After her father, a wealthy British hotelier, arrived in Kenya 
to conduct a search, the burned and slashed remains of her leg and jawbone were 
found in a remote corner of the park, which is southwest of Nairobi on the 
Tanzanian border. 
Kenyan police at first contended that she had unwisely wandered away from her 
jeep and was killed by wild animals. Later they suggested she had committed 
suicide. But evidence unearthed by Ward's family showed she was probably 
murdered, and the woman's father charged that the likeliest suspects were park 
officials. 
He also charged that Kenyan officials were trying to cover up the murder to 
protect the country's tourist trade, which last year attracted 700,000 game 
viewers to Kenya. Tourism brought about $360 million into the country in 1988 
and is Kenya's largest earner of foreign exchange. 
At a month-long inquest held here a year after Julie Ward's death, Kenyan 
police officials acknowledged that they had never questioned or investigated 
the movements of any of the park rangers on duty at the time of her 
disappearance. The inquest ended with a ruling that Ward had indeed been 
murdered. President Moi's request for Scotland Yard's assistance followed. 
