PRINCIPAL POINTS TO STRIDES AT GOMPERS 
Gompers Secondary School Principal Marie Thornton on Wednesday asked parents 
and students not to let a student demonstration in support of a teacher last 
Friday overshadow what she said are continuing academic gains at the 
long-troubled Southeast San Diego school. 
During an afternoon press conference, Thornton also said her action in 
transferring business education teacher Rhoenna Armster involuntarily to 
Lincoln High School was not in retribution for Armster's outspoken opposition 
to changes in curriculum at the math-science-computer magnet school. 
Thornton and top San Diego Unified School District administrators say that 
state law, and the threat of legal action by Armster, prohibit discussion of 
specific reasons for the transfer. Armster has also declined comment on 
specifics, although she has said that Thornton acted out of retribution. School 
Supt. Tom Payzant said Tuesday night that he and school board members back the 
transfer. 
The demonstration by students provoked a police response of more than 30 units, 
including trained dogs, a police helicopter and riot-equipped police, which 
Payzant and trustees believe may have fanned the planned demonstration into a 
larger news story than it otherwise would have been. 
Thornton, who remained in her office dealing with telephone calls and other 
matters during the demonstration, declined comment on the police action, saying 
that she would await results of separate district and Police Department 
investigations into why so many officers were dispatched to the campus. 
But the school's African-American male pupil advocate, teacher Douglas 
Williams, said he believes the "media circus" on Friday would not have occurred 
if police had not responded in such force. 
Thornton has been criticized by some parents and administrators for not being 
publicly visible during the demonstration. But Thornton rejected those charges, 
saying that she "could not be everywhere" and that a sufficient number of 
administrators handled the demonstration. 
Thornton said she has been an effective leader at Gompers, pointing to 
improvements in the school's physical appearance and student achievement under 
a year-old program to extend the high-powered curriculum to all of the 
overwhelmingly nonwhite neighborhood students who attend the seventh- through 
12th-grade school. 
