AKIRA KUROSAWA EARNS OSCAR FOR LIFE'S WORK; 
FILM: THE LEGENDARY DIRECTOR OF 'RAN' AND 'RASHOMON' WILL RECEIVE AN HONORARY 
OSCAR TONIGHT FOR LIFETIME ACHIEVEMENT. 
The man widely regarded as the world's greatest living film director was in a 
jovial mood as he sat in his Beverly Hills hotel suite Friday morning. Akira 
Kurosawa, who tonight receives an honorary Oscar for his lifetime achievement, 
didn't seem to mind that he had a full day of work ahead on what happened to be 
his 80th birthday. 
"I was here in 1986 on my birthday when 'Ran' was nominated, and that was no 
big deal," said a smiling Kurosawa through his interpreter, film historian 
Audie Bock and translator of Kurosawa's 1981 "Something Like an Autobiography." 
"I sure don't feel like I'm 80. Nothing special is planned, we'll just go out 
to dinner. 
"To be honest, I feel like behaving like a total fool, but I can't do it 
because my producers are here," exclaimed Kurosawa, indicating his son Hisao 
and his nephew Mike Y. Inoue, who retorted, "You've been doing that all along." 
What Kurosawa has in fact been doing for half a century is to tell stories on 
the screen superlatively well, creating images that stick permanently in the 
memory -- the swift tracking shots through the forest in "Rashomon"; the shot 
in "Ikiru" of Takashi Shimura, as a petty bureaucrat sitting in a swing under a 
softly falling snow, dying but content in his belief that he has succeeded in 
giving his life meaning; the comical swagger of Toshiro Mifune's itching, 
scratching samurai in "Yojimbo" and "Sanjiro," or the shocked expression of 
Mifune's Macbeth in "Throne of Blood" as he realizes that he has been fatally 
impaled by a flurry of arrows. The list of unforgettable moments goes on and 
on. 
There will be no resting on laurels for Kurosawa -- tall, vigorous and dapper 
as ever. Right now he's busy helping promote his latest picture, "Akira 
Kurosawa's Dreams," an eight-episode film based on actual dreams he experienced 
throughout his lifetime, which Warners is releasing worldwide. Currently being 
subtitled, it's slated to launch the Cannes Festival in May. The screenplay for 
his next picture is already written, he says, but is not ready to be discussed. 
Although his impact upon other directors is undeniable, Kurosawa professes not 
to see it himself. (No, the squabbling of RTD2 and C-3PO in "Star Wars" didn't 
remind him of his quarreling peasants in "The Hidden Fortress," even though 
George Lucas told him that they were a direct inspiration). He would rather 
savor the memories of meetings with men such as King Vidor, Frank Capra and 
John Ford -- men whose work he has admired all his life. 
His admiration of other directors is by no means restricted to the old masters. 
"For example, I think Coppola's 'Godfather, Part II,' is a very good picture," 
he said. "It has the feeling of being a really professional job of filmmaking. 
The thing that surprises me most about it is that sequels are almost invariably 
of lesser quality -- and that is definitely not the case here. 
"I just wish I could see all that Francis left out of 'Apocalypse Now.' I heard 
from the Japanese distributor, Nippon Herald, that the various longer cuts were 
really spectacular." 
Sitting in his hotel room armchair, Kurosawa wondered aloud whether he really 
deserves his Oscar. "I have the feeling that I'm getting it partly because I've 
turned 80 and that it is an expression of warm feeling toward me." 
The truth, of course, is that it is long overdue. 
