SALE OF LIQUOR IS BARRED NEAR DANA SCHOOLS 
In an effort to curb students' access to alcohol, the Dana Point City Council 
has passed an ordinance blocking a liquor license for a convenience store being 
built near Dana Hills High School. 
The ordinance approved unanimously Tuesday night prohibits the sale of 
alcoholic beverages within 500 feet of parks, schools and churches, and within 
100 feet of residences. 
The law, which took effect Wednesday, bars a Circle K convenience store from 
obtaining a license to sell beer and wine from the state Department of 
Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
'Won't Have to React Again' 
"Now we have an ordinance that will affect any new business that would come in, 
so we won't have to react to it again," Dana Point City Councilman Mike Eggers 
said. 
However, a representative for the store said he believes that the ordinance 
comes too late to affect their status. If the ordinance does cover Circle K, he 
said, an appeal may be considered. 
The council contended that the store would pose many problems if allowed to 
sell alcohol. The store, scheduled to open June 1, is in the Village shopping 
area at Street of the Golden Lantern and Acapulco Drive, near the high school. 
"Kids face enough problems in school, so they don't need any additional 
enticement from a store that sells alcohol nearby," Eggers said. 
Initial Agreement 
City and school officials and nearby residents initially made an agreement with 
the franchise's first owners that the Circle K store would sell no alcohol. 
However, the store's new owner -- unaware of the initial agreement -- requested 
an application from the ABC. 
A notice of the application, posted March 1, angered school board members and 
residents from the Marinita Townhomes and the Dana Woods Community Assn., all 
of whom wrote letters to the city and the ABC protesting the application. 
"Historically, (we have) fought any liquor sale occurring across the street 
from the high school," said Dana Hills High's vice principal, William Smith. 
Smith said the store could become a "hangout" for students as well as 
"non-students who might harass our students. And we can't control that." 
Representatives from the two community associations addressed the council 
Tuesday night and presented petitions against the store's license. 
No one spoke in favor of the store; representatives from Circle K were not 
present, City Manager William O. Talley said. 
Circle K Says Too Late 
Douglas Nye, real estate manager of the western region for Circle K Convenience 
Stores Inc., said that he was unaware of the council's decision but that he 
does not believe it will affect the store. 
"We applied for the ABC license and made arrangements for the liquor section 
before the city's zoning action," he said, "so I don't understand how this will 
change anything." 
Nye said the company would have to look into the matter further, and, if 
necessary, would appeal the zoning ordinance. 
"I'm not sure that an appeal will even be necessary," he said, "but we need to 
get all the information first. . . . We put a lot of money into the store." 
