COMMENTARY; 
CANCELLATION OF SEASON WAS AN INTERNAL FAILURE 
When the Regional Arts Foundation of Long Beach announced earlier this year 
that it was canceling the three-play series it had planned for the 862-seat 
Center Theatre at the Long Beach Convention and Entertainment Center -- 
effectively wiping out the Long Beach Repertory Theatre before it started -- it 
placed responsibility on outside forces. 
Foundation General Manager Steven McCarthy blamed the cancellation on poor 
response to a direct mail subscription campaign (1,200 yeas out of 128,000 
solicitations) and cited the foundation's failure to match a $100,000 challenge 
grant offered by members of its own board -- a failure that foundation Chairman 
Harry Newman attributed to "too many worthy charitable and cultural causes 
chasing too few dollars." 
Problem or symptom? 
At the time of the cancellation, the first show -- Mayo Simon's "Elaine's 
Daughter" -- was about to go into rehearsal. According to director Shashin 
Desai, casting was verbally and/or contractually in place. Set designs were 
complete. Everything was in place -- except the money. 
The budget for that first production was $110,000, or roughly the same amount 
that was spent in the pre-opening marketing and fund-raising campaign, 
according to McCarthy's figures. Considerable for a campaign that consisted of 
one brochure and two mailings. 
While on the surface the canceling of a season for lack of dollars seems 
fiscally sound, this one was more like the retreat of an agency that, over the 
years, has shown little ability to fulfill its stated, twofold mission: to 
increase the potential audience for the arts in the Long Beach region and to 
establish a permanent theatrical activity in the Center Theatre. 
Except for the Long Beach Opera, very little of a theatrical nature has taken 
place in the center in the past decade. 
It is not as though it was proposing to go out on a limb. Desai runs a 
successful, award-winning small professional theater, the International City 
Theatre, on the campus of Long Beach City College. He has done so since 1985. 
Following "Elaine's Daughter," he had planned a revival of Paul Osborne's 1939 
comedy, "Mornings at Seven," and Kevin Heelan's "Distant Fires," a 1988 hit at 
ICT. 
It was nothing dangerous or outrageous, but nothing dishonorable either. What 
it showed was an artistic director proceeding with caution in relatively 
uncharted waters offering "audience-friendly" shows. And rightly so. Previous 
theatrical ventures in the Center Theatre had not prospered, after all. Herb 
Rogers' 1978 season barely broke even and Norman Twain's in 1979 lost money. 
But if the mandate was to fill an empty theater, it was wise to engage a 
company with a decent track record in Long Beach. So why the 11th-hour failure 
of nerve? 
Susan Rafferty, a former acting executive director for the foundation who came 
aboard for six months in 1987 to do a feasibility study, had been the first to 
propose Desai. The board, she said, had bought her suggestions. "I can't 
believe they came this far and gave it all up," she said. "No way should they 
have expected to break even in the first season. They never knew how 
well-positioned they were for this opening. My sense, because I live in an 
adjacent community and get every solicitation from Long Beach, is that they 
really didn't market it." 
Or at least not enough. Even Paul Berg, executive vice president of the 
foundation board, who voted for the cancellation, acknowledged that the 
marketing campaign could have been more aggressive. 
Berg, who also said he was personally disappointed in the outcome, believed in 
retrospect that the cancellation might have been "overcautious." "It has always 
been my contention," he said, "that you have to tell people exactly what you 
want money for before you can raise it." 
Putting on that first play would have told people what the foundation wanted 
money for. It would have shown spirit and confidence. And a deeply needed 
commitment. If more community support were not forthcoming, there would have 
been time to warn the public that the rest of the season might not make it. But 
the door would have been opened and left ajar. 
The people of Long Beach do have to let their wishes be known. There cannot be 
an equity theater in that city if there is no will among its citizens to have 
one. 
Newman and McCarthy contend that Long Beach is not ready. Desai and others, 
including Berg ("We're starving for it here") and Councilman Evan Anderson 
Braude, in whose district the Convention and Entertainment Center sits, contend 
it is. 
"They sent out literature, but didn't follow it up with phone calls," Braude 
said. "You have to work people." 
Who's right? And will there be a way to find out? 
