CONTRACTOR GROUP SEEKS LATE PENTAGON PAYMENTS 
A number of aerospace contractors, saying the Pentagon is delinquent in paying 
its bills, have organized a group within the California Society of Certified 
Public Accountants, which is scheduled to meet today. 
The payment problems involve a Defense Department business office in El Segundo 
called the Defense Contract Administration Service. The office is in the middle 
of an administrative crisis that has prompted growing protests by the industry. 
The CPA group includes representatives of several major contractors, banks and 
accounting firms, who are all attempting to speed up payments. About $10 
billion annually is paid out of the office in El Segundo. 
A second contractor group organized within the Aerospace Industries Assn. met 
with officials in Washington earlier this month to lodge protests about the 
DCAS office in Los Angeles. 
Moving Office to Ohio 
The contractors have alleged that the Pentagon is delinquent on millions of 
dollars in contract payments, which has driven some small shops into virtual 
insolvency and forced major firms to increase their bank borrowing. They claim 
that paper work is often lost or rejected by DCAS for trivial errors, forcing 
additional payment delays. 
But DCAS officials have sharply disputed the allegations every time they 
surface. Officials of the agency say delinquent invoices have been reduced by 
80% and that the long-term problem will be solved by moving the entire payment 
office to Columbus, Ohio. 
However, it is the plan to move the payment office to Columbus that has 
prompted growing industry concern. The new office will be known as the Defense 
Finance Center. 
By locating the office so far from Los Angles, the nation's largest 
defense-contracting center, the industry is concerned that payment problems 
will be even more difficult to clear up. 
The meeting of CPAs is scheduled this morning at the Los Angeles Stouffer 
Concourse Hotel, near Los Angeles International Airport. 
Michael Wilson, acting administrator of the new Defense Finance Center, is 
expected to make an appearance before the group to explain how it will help the 
industry get paid more promptly. 
May Hire Accountant 
So far, however, many contractors are skeptical that a centralized government 
bureaucracy responsible for paying about $50 billion annually will be better 
than a local payment office. 
At an Aerospace Industries Assn. meeting earlier this month, officials at the 
Defense Logistics Agency, the parent organization of DCAS, said they would 
consider hiring a Big Eight accounting firm to help solve the DCAS problem. 
In addition, the association is expected to create another working group to 
explore solutions to the DCAS problems. 
