HUNTER, COOK ADVANCE TO SEMIFINAL ROUND OF STATE WRESTLING FINALS 
Any good wrestler has to have goals, and Westlake High's Bill Hunter is a good 
wrestler. 
Hunter, a junior, came into this weekend's state wrestling championships at 
University of the Pacific seeking to make a name for himself. 
How's this one?: semifinalist. 
Hunter defeated Al Martell of Mount Carmel on Friday in the quarterfinals of 
the 175-pound weight class. Even Hunter was surprised after felling Martell, 
who came into the state meet ranked No. 1 at 175 pounds. 
"I had some high hopes coming into this thing," Hunter said. "But I really 
wasn't shooting for this high." 
The day did not begin quite as auspiciously for Hunter, who narrowly defeated 
Overfelt's Richard Garcia, 4-3, in the first round. Hunter then buried 
Monache's Ryan Land, 11-0, in the second round to set up his quarterfinal match 
with Martell. 
Hunter led throughout the quarterfinal match, opening the scoring on a takedown 
in the first period. 
"For some reason, I think he quit after that first takedown," Hunter said. "I 
could feel it. I think he was even more surprised than me at what was 
happening. He's probably never heard of me." 
And probably won't soon forget. 
The only other Valley-area wrestler to advance to the semifinals was Rob Cook 
of Rio Mesa in the 132-pound division. Cook opened with a 12-point victory in 
the first round, followed with a pin the second and scored a 6-1 victory over 
North Bakersfield's Joe Cemo in the quarterfinals. 
Two came close to advancing. 
Chris Kilbane of Newbury Park was undone in the final 10 seconds of his 
quarterfinal match against Eric Miklusicak in the 154-pound weight class. 
Kilbane, who won his first two matches by a combined score of 26-6, trailed 
virtually the entire match. He was behind, 7-3, late in the second period and, 
9-6, midway through the third. 
Kilbane rallied to take a brief 10-9 lead on a reversal with less than 20 
seconds remaining. But Miklusicak quickly countered with a reversal of his own 
and won the match, 11-10. 
"I thought we had it," Newbury Park Coach Marty Maciel said. "At worst I 
thought it would go to overtime." 
Another heartbreaking loss was incurred by Channel Islands' M. T. Merickel, who 
was leading Vallejo's Dominic Boutan, 5-4, late in their 126-pound second-round 
match when he was turned and pinned. 
