KAIFU WILL TRY TO CONVINCE BUSH THAT TRADE PROGRESS IS BEING MADE; 
SUMMIT: JAPAN'S LEADER CITES GAINS ON CUTTING THE SURPLUS AND OPENING MARKETS. 
BUT HE OFFERS NO HINT OF CONCESSIONS. 
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu said Wednesday he will try to convince President 
Bush at their Palm Springs summit that Japan is making progress both in opening 
its markets and in cutting its trade surplus with the United States. 
In a nationally televised news conference after naming a new Cabinet, Kaifu 
offered no hint of new concessions, despite warnings from Washington that a 
breakthrough in solving economic disputes is needed before relations "get out 
of hand." 
A senior Japanese diplomat, speaking not for attribution, said privately that 
what Kaifu wants and needs most in talks at Palm Springs on Friday and Saturday 
is reaffirmation from Bush that he considers Japan an important ally and a 
"global partner" of the United States. 
Putting economic frictions into a framework of that larger -- and more 
important -- relationship will be Kaifu's main goal, he said. 
Kaifu himself complained to reporters that "only negative, dark aspects of 
U.S.-Japan relations are being focused upon. But Japan and the United States 
have a partnership. We should emphasize our points of commonality and quietly 
solve our points of difference." 
Asked if he thinks relations are deteriorating, he replied: "I do not even 
think of a worsening of U.S.-Japan relations. We are trying to improve 
relations by carrying out talks on economic issues. . . . It is precisely 
because we consider U.S.-Japan relations important that we want to make efforts 
to prevent a worsening." 
He acknowledged, however, that solving frictions has become "urgent" and 
stressed that Japan regards its ties with Washington as the axis of its entire 
global diplomacy. 
The Japanese diplomat said Kaifu needs Bush's help to counteract hostility that 
is spreading against Japan in the United States. American criticism has spread 
from the longstanding bilateral trade imbalance to Japanese investment, to 
Japanese financial power, to Japanese culture and even to a questioning of 
whether Japan is a true democracy. 
Congress members advocating managed trade have latched on to so-called 
revisionist scholars' arguments that Japan, as a "unique" country, cannot be 
treated by standard rules, the diplomat complained. 
Kaifu said he must discuss with Bush "what role Japan can play and how it can 
coordinate its policy with the United States" now that the world is moving away 
from an East-West confrontation based upon military power. During the campaign 
for the Feb. 18 election for the lower house of Parliament, the prime minister 
said that Japan wants to join the United States in establishing "a new world 
order." 
Another diplomat, briefing reporters who will accompany Kaifu, complained that 
when Americans think of Japan, "the thing that comes into their minds 
immediately is economic problems." 
"But we have entered a world in which there are problems that the United States 
can no longer solve by itself. Neither can Japan alone solve them. But when the 
two nations get together, they can be solved," he said, citing as examples aid 
to Mexico, Poland, Hungary and a multilateral assistance program for the 
Philippines that the United States and Japan launched last July. 
Bush persuaded Kaifu to meet him during a middle-of-the-night telephone call 
last Friday. The call came hours after U.S. officials expressed frustration 
with what they called their Japanese counterparts' lack of "political guidance" 
from Kaifu in pursuing talks to remove structural impediments to trade. But the 
prime minister told reporters that Bush raised none of the specific points that 
caused the frustration. 
Those points included a request that Japan raise its public works spending to 
10% of the gross national product within three to five years, abolish a law 
that protects mom-and-pop stores and revise its Anti-Monopoly Law to outlaw 
collusive business practices. 
If the President does take up these points, Kaifu said, he would reply by 
proposing "further discussions on the experts level." 
He said Japan began increasing its public works spending three years ago -- 
"even before the Structural Impediments Initiative began." His country, he 
added, recognizes that its infrastructure -- parks, housing, sewerage and the 
like -- lags behind other advanced nations. 
He insisted that Bush himself, both earlier this year and in the 
middle-of-the-night call, said he wanted to "discuss global problems, without 
setting an agenda." Bush assured him, Kaifu added, that he didn't intend "to 
try to make deals." 
" 'Let's have a frank discussion, without setting an agenda,' " Kaifu quoted 
the President as saying. 
The diplomat who briefed reporters said the two leaders are expected to "give 
the Structural Impediments Initiative a stimulus and a direction" -- but 
nothing else. 
Kaifu predicted that "frank discussions" he intends to have with Bush will 
"deepen understanding" of the measures Japan has been taking and the success 
that it has achieved. 
As examples, he cited a continued surge in domestic demand that has eliminated 
reliance upon exports for growth, and a reduction of Japan's trade surplus with 
the United States to $49 billion last year from a peak of nearly $60 billion in 
1987. 
American exports to Japan increased 14.6% last year and 58.3% of the shipments 
were manufactured goods, whereas Japanese exports to the United States 
increased by only 4%, said Taizo Watanabe, the Foreign Ministry's spokesman. 
Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama said in an interview with the Japan 
Times that Japan must take "bold steps" in the Structural Impediments 
Initiative talks to prevent further deterioration of U.S.-Japan relations. But 
he added that "there are some things that Japan can do and other things that 
Japan cannot do." 
"Japan needs to say clearly to the United States what it cannot do," he said. 
He added that the timing is not right to make specific commitments now. 
The Japanese diplomat warned that Kaifu will be going to Palm Springs "without 
any preparation" and will be unable to make commitments on specific trade 
issues. 
"You can't expect a miracle with only four working days for preparations," 
another diplomat added. 
In addition to the abruptness of Bush's invitation, political turmoil in Japan 
since Kaifu's Liberal Democratic Party suffered an unprecedented defeat in an 
upper house election last July effectively shelved discussion of all domestic 
and foreign issues as the party prepared for the Feb. 18 vote. 
When Kaifu met Bush last September, he promised the President that he would 
implement policies based upon the interests of Japanese consumers. 
But the Asahi newspaper, in an editorial after the latest round of trade talks, 
condemned Japan for attempting "to get through the SII with the minimum 
possible reforms in order to protect vested interests at home." It warned that 
"Japan is in danger of allowing itself to be ostracized" by the rest of the 
world. 
