YOUR TAXES; 
TAX REFORM; 
GIMME SHELTERS?; 
IF YOU CAN FIND ONE, BE HAPPY -- THERE AREN'T TOO MANY LEFT. 
Tax shelters these days have gone the way of the California condor and 39-cent 
hamburgers. They are nearly extinct. 
It wasn't always that way. In the late 1970s and early '80s, "gimme shelter" 
was the cry of rich and not-so-rich taxpayers alike. No wonder: Investing in 
anything from windmills to avocado groves to cattle semen could let you take 
immediate tax deductions of as much as five times what you put in. And you 
could use the deductions to shelter any kind of income, including your salary, 
stock dividends or savings account interest. 
But Congress formally ended the party with the Tax Reform Act of 1986. With 
only a few exceptions, traditional tax shelters such as real estate limited 
partnerships have lost their appeal as shelters. Losses from these investments 
are now classified as "passive" and can only be used to shield "passive" income 
from similar shelters. 
Tax reform made shelters less attractive in another way: By lowering individual 
tax rates, the new tax laws made deductions worth less. With the top individual 
tax rate now at 33% -- less than half the 70% top rate in 1980 -- each $1 in 
deductions saves you no more than 33 cents in taxes, compared to as much as 70 
cents nine years ago. 
As a result, most investments that previously qualified as tax shelters now are 
oriented toward generating income. You must now evaluate them on their 
economics -- their tax benefits alone won't make them profitable. 
"There just aren't many shelters left that you can use to shelter ordinary 
income," says Fuhrman Nettles, vice president at Robert A. Stanger &amp; Co., a 
Shrewsbury, N.J., company that tracks limited partnerships. 
There is, however, a partial break still left if you bought your shelter before 
Oct. 22, 1986. In that case, you can still use 20% of losses to shelter 
ordinary income. But that will drop to 10% next year and then vanish completely 
in 1991. 
And some shelters survived tax reform. They can still be used to reduce 
ordinary income, regardless of when they were bought. 
Here is a brief rundown on those surviving shelters: 
* Rental real estate. If you rent out a home, condominium, apartment or other 
residential building -- and your income is not too high -- you can enjoy one of 
the best tax breaks left intact under tax reform. 
You can deduct losses from these properties of up to $25,000 each year against 
any kind of income. However, to qualify you must meet a few tests. 
First, your adjusted gross income must be below $150,000. If it's below 
$100,000, you can take up to the full $25,000. If it's between $100,000 and 
$150,000, the $25,000 ceiling will be reduced by 50 cents for each $1 your 
income exceeds $100,000. If your adjusted gross income exceeds $150,000, losses 
must be treated as passive, deductible only against passive income. 
Also, you must own at least 10% of the property. And you must make management 
decisions such as approving tenants, although a professional management company 
can maintain the property and collect rent. 
These tax breaks can make the difference between profit and loss, because 
rental income alone may not be sufficient to cover your mortgage payments and 
other costs. And with rental properties, you can earn profits through rent 
increases and price appreciation -- something many California investors are 
currently enjoying. 
But brokers' commissions and maintenance costs could eat away at profits. 
Another common risk: The possibility that your tenants may damage your property 
and be hard to evict. 
* Real estate limited partnerships. Real estate limited partnerships -- 
investing in office buildings, shopping centers, apartments or other commercial 
property -- are by far the most popular form of limited partnerships. But 
unless they invest in low-income housing or historic rehabilitations, they 
generally are no longer suitable as tax shelters. 
In a limited partnership, you and other "limited partners" invest money into a 
fund to be managed by so-called general partners. You get a share of any 
profits, and your losses are limited to the amount you invest. A major 
advantage is that you can get in with initial investment of as little as 
$5,000. 
But with some exceptions noted below, losses are considered passive. And 
partnerships can lose money due to poor investments or price declines. 
Commercial real estate prices were often artificially inflated a few years ago 
when tax benefits were still generous, notes Dick Poladian, tax partner at the 
accounting firm of Arthur Andersen &amp; Co. 
* Low-income housing and historic rehabilitations. These limited partnerships 
are the most generous form of tax shelters. That is because they offer tax 
credits, which reduce taxes dollar for dollar. 
Both types of partnerships offer tax credits that will let you write off up to 
$25,000 a year from your taxable income. So if you are in the 33% tax bracket, 
the maximum credit you can claim is $8,250 (that is the tax you save if you 
reduce your taxable income by $25,000, equal to 33% of $25,000). 
However, to qualify for the full credit, your adjusted gross income must be 
less than $200,000. If your adjusted gross income is between $200,000 and 
$250,000, the credit phases out by 50 cents for each $1 your income exceeds 
$200,000. 
For the low-income housing credit, the amount of the credit depends on the type 
of housing involved in the project and when you place the building or buildings 
in service. Check with the IRS to find out the exact credit, but a typical 
program might offer a credit of 9% of your investment each year for about 10 
years. 
For historic rehabs, you generally can take more of the credit up front. The 
credit is limited to 10% of the amount you spend to fix up a building built 
before 1936 or 20% of the amount you spend rehabilitating a designated 
certified historic structure. To find out what buildings carry that 
designation, check with your local historical society or the Interior 
Department. 
But beware: These partnerships could still lose money. So shop carefully. 
And Congress may scale down the historic rehab credit to garner new tax 
revenues, says Sidney Kess, tax partner at the accounting firm of Peat Marwick 
Main &amp; Co. Existing partnerships may be grandfathered, however. 
* Oil and gas limited partnerships. Like real estate limited partnerships, oil 
and gas partnerships no longer work as pure tax shelters. They are subject to 
the same passive loss rules as other limited partnerships. 
There is, however, one exception. "Working interest" partnerships still allow 
you to shelter all kinds of income. But in exchange, you must subject yourself 
to greater legal and financial responsibility. For example, you may have to put 
up more money than you originally invested if it is needed to finance drilling 
costs. Or you may be liable if problems develop, such as an explosion or 
greater-than-anticipated debts. 
While you can insure yourself against such risks, Peat Marwick's Kess says, 
these deals are risky in another way: They can still lose money. And as with 
real estate limited partnerships, you may have to hold your interest for 
several years; it may be hard to sell in the meantime. 
* Retirement plans. Investments -- whether savings accounts, stocks, bonds or 
mutual funds -- can accumulate earnings tax free if placed into individual 
retirement accounts, Keogh plans or 401(k) company savings plans. And the money 
you invest may itself be deductible, provided you meet certain tests. 
* Annuities and life insurance. Annuities operate like IRAs in that income can 
build up on a tax-deferred basis. 
Certain life insurance plans also can provide various tax benefits. For 
example, the savings, or "cash-value" portion, of a policy can grow tax free, 
unless withdrawn. 
However, a tax bill passed last year made some of these benefits harder to come 
by. For policies issued after June 20, 1988, you must pay premiums over at 
least seven years to qualify for certain tax breaks. Previously, you could pay 
a single, one-time premium and qualify. 
* Series EE savings bonds. Starting in 1990, they will be exempt from federal 
tax under certain conditions, if proceeds are used for college education. 
* Municipal bonds. Their interest income is exempt from federal tax and may be 
exempt from state tax too, if you live in the same state as the agency issuing 
the bond. 
* Treasury bills, notes and bonds. They are taxable on the federal level but 
are exempt from state and local taxes. 
