FREEZE URGED ON ROCKET FUEL SHIPMENT 
House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin (D-Wis.) on Wednesday urged 
both President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III to freeze the 
shipment of a scarce rocket fuel component allegedly sought by Iran. He called 
it "a matter of grave national concern" and "extreme urgency." 
In joint letters, Aspin and another member of the military panel, Rep. James H. 
Bilbray (D-Nev.), expressed alarm that a federal judge in Houston may soon 
release 286,000 pounds of ammonium perchlorate to a Tampa shipper. 
The chemical, used as an oxidizer in fuel for rockets and missiles, was seized 
last year by the U.S. Customs Service when it was being transferred from an 
American ship to an Iranian freighter in the Dutch port of Rotterdam. 
'Sizable Shipment' 
"Top Air Force officials have expressed reservations that securing adequate 
supplies of (the chemical) would assist the (Ayatollah Ruhollah) Khomeini 
regime in refueling its Soviet rockets and its own short-range 
surface-to-surface missiles," the letters said. "In the past, the Khomeini 
regime has used similar missiles to target cities" in its war with Iraq. 
The letters said that the "sizable shipment" is "desperately needed for 
domestic use" because one of the two U.S. producers of the chemical, Pacific 
Engineering &amp; Production Co. of Henderson, Nev., was destroyed in an 
explosion last May. 
The sole remaining producer, Kerr-McGee Corp., has offered to buy the impounded 
shipment, Aspin and Bilbray said. U.S. military and space programs require an 
estimated 60 million pounds of ammonium perchlorate each year, they added. 
Seized by Customs 
Girindus Corp. of Tampa bought 286,000 pounds of the chemical from Pacific 
Engineering &amp; Production in January, 1988, and shipped it from Houston to 
Europe. The bill of lading showed that it was bound for a buyer in Basel, 
Switzerland. About a month later, however, Dutch authorities and the Customs 
Service seized the shipment as it was being loaded on an Iranian freighter. 
Girindus sued to get it back. Two weeks ago, U.S. District Judge Sim Lake ruled 
that the shipment had been illegally seized. He said that the government had 
offered no evidence of any diversion to Iran. 
But the judge set another hearing for Monday after the Customs Service filed 
papers demanding that the shipment be forfeited to the government on grounds 
that the listed destination was false. 
Customs Commissioner William von Raab has been unsuccessful in trying to get 
the State Department to withdraw an export license that was issued for the 
shipment last year. He also has encountered resistance from the Justice 
Department in his efforts to block the shipment on national security grounds. 
Officials at State and Justice have declined to explain their stands. 
Robert K. Givens, a Houston attorney representing Girindus, has denied that the 
firm was selling the chemical to Iran. He suggested that the intended buyer was 
connected to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Europe but would not 
give any details. 
