JOHNSON PUT ON STEROIDS IN '81, COACH TESTIFIES 
Ben Johnson's track coach testified here Wednesday that he put the Canadian 
sprinter on a steroid program in 1981 because the performance-enhancing drugs 
were "worth a meter" in Johnson's event and because keeping up with the 
competition made it necessary to use the drugs. 
The revelation came during the second day of Charlie Francis' wide-ranging 
testimony before a Canadian inquiry into drugs and sports. 
Spurred to Investigate 
The Canadian government was spurred to create this investigative commission 
after Johnson lost his gold medal and world record in the 100-meter dash at the 
1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul because he tested positive for an anabolic 
steroid. 
Francis in his testimony also implicated at least a half-dozen prominent 
current and former Olympic athletes in steroid use, including Florence Griffith 
Joyner. 
Francis said he first approached Johnson about steroids in the summer of 1981, 
but said he "was not sure of the advantages." That fall, Francis said, Johnson 
"decided he would go on." 
"If he wanted to compete, it's pretty clear that steroids are worth a meter at 
the highest level of sports," said Francis, who has been Johnson's coach since 
1977. 
"I think he understood that his competitors were on them." 
Johnson has maintained that he never knowingly used drugs to enhance his 
performance. Francis' only previous statement since the Olympics was that the 
sprinter's urine test may have been sabotaged. 
Francis said that after he introduced Johnson to steroids in 1981, the drugs 
were later administered by Johnson's personal physician, Jamie Astaphan. 
Astaphan, who has promised to travel from his home in the Caribbean to testify 
in Toronto, has denied that he gave the drug to Johnson. 
In hour after hour of detailed testimony on the use of anabolic steroids and 
growth hormones, Francis said that at an early stage, top female sprinter 
Angella Taylor Issajenko injected Johnson and fellow sprinter Tony Sharpe with 
the steroids, while the two men injected Issajenko with a growth hormone. 
He said he first worked on steroid programs with Issajenko in 1979 and with 
Johnson and fellow runners Desai Williams and Sharpe in 1981. 
He implicated 11 Canadians, all his athletes. They have been advised not to 
talk to the media. 
Francis said he initially looked at the progress of women's competition before 
discussing the program with Issajenko in 1979. 
Using a graph in the packed hearing room, he pointed to the increase in the 
women's 100-meter records over the past decade and described it as "a 
monumental blip" from what could be expected. 
He cited the 10.49-second 100-meter record set last year by Florence Griffith 
Joyner. He did not mention her name, referring to her as "this lady in 
question, and said, "This girl would beat the great Jesse Owens by four feet." 
Though Francis stopped short of saying Griffith Joyner's world-record 
performance was the result of using steroids, he mentioned it in the context of 
performance-enhancing drugs. 
Griffith Joyner, who retired from track last Saturday, was unavailable for 
comment, but her agent, Gordon Baskin, strongly denied that the runner had used 
a banned substance. 
"The truth is the truth and the truth will prevail -- Florence has never and 
will never use steroids," Baskin told the Associated Press from his office in 
Los Angeles. 
"She has gone through so many tests with the USOC (U.S. Olympic Committee) the 
TAC (The Athletic Congress) and the many governing bodies." 
Baskin said after Johnson tested positive in Seoul, there were rumors about 
other leading athletes, including Griffith Joyner. 
"The IOC thought it was so unfair that they made a specific announcement that 
Florence has never tested positive," he said. 
Related stories in Sports. 
