JUDGE UPHOLDS SEIZURE OF ROCKET FUEL DESTINED FOR IRAN 
In a major victory for the U.S. Customs Service, a federal judge ruled Tuesday 
that the agency acted properly in seizing 286,000 pounds of a rocket fuel 
ingredient that was secretly being sent to Iran. 
At the same time, U.S. District Judge Sim Lake was highly critical of the way 
the Customs Service and the State Department handled their investigation of the 
case. He cited in particular the fact that more than a year elapsed between the 
seizure of the chemical aboard an Iranian freighter in the Dutch port of 
Rotterdam and the case's arrival in his court. 
The judge, who made his ruling after a two-day hearing, also stopped short of 
blaming the export company, Girindus Corp. of Tampa, Fla., for any attempt to 
hide the cargo's true destination. He ruled only that the shipping documents 
stating that the chemical was bound for Europe were false and that proof of 
intent to violate the law is not required in forfeiture proceedings. 
Girindus had asked Lake to order Customs to return the impounded cargo, but the 
agency, citing the inaccurate shipping papers, asked the court to declare it 
forfeit. 
"We are delighted with the results of the case today," said Customs spokeswoman 
Donna de la Torre. "We take our export enforcement program seriously." 
But David Laurain, the marketing manager for Girindus, said he was 
"flabbergasted" at Lake's decision, especially since the judge had ruled in an 
earlier preliminary hearing that Customs agents had illegally seized the 
chemical. 
"There was no false documentation," he said. "It was strictly a clerical 
error." 
The case of the rocket fuel ingredient, ammonium perchlorate, has created a 
furor in Washington, where House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin 
(D-Wis.) went so far as to call it "a matter of grave national concern." 
At one point the controversy even caused the suspension of a $92-million loan 
from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to the Nevada company 
that manufactured the rocket fuel, Pacific Engineering &amp; Production Co. The 
loan was needed to rebuild a plant that was destroyed in an explosion last May, 
thereby creating a national shortage of the chemical. NASA reinstated the loan 
Tuesday. 
During the hearing, it also came to light that two other cargoes of chemicals 
being shipped by Girindus had been impounded -- one in Belgium and the other in 
Houston. 
Laurain testified that he never knew of the 40,000-pound Belgian seizure, which 
occurred in 1987, until the confiscation of the Netherlands shipment in 1988. 
In both cases, the buyer was the same -- D. A. Dampf, a West German chemical 
company. 
Customs agents confiscated 240,000 pounds of the chemical in Houston soon after 
the impoundment in the Netherlands. That load was eventually shipped back to 
the manufacturer. 
On the stand, and after the judge's ruling, Laurain maintained his ignorance of 
the Belgian seizure, saying that Dampf had never informed him of what happened. 
Customs officials said they believed the Belgian shipment also had been on its 
way to Iran. 
In a related development, C. Keith Rooker, an official with Pacific 
Engineering, said he had tried to call Dampf after learning from Girindus about 
the Belgian seizure for the first time last Saturday. He said he was told that 
the Dampf office was closed and that the company's records had been seized by 
the West German government. Rooker said he was shocked to learn of the two 
apparent attempts to ship the fuel to Iran. 
"If someone asked me to sell pencils to Iran -- much less AP (ammonium 
perchlorate), I wouldn't do it," he said. 
In the hearing, Customs officials contended that the seizure of the chemical 
was legitimate because Girindus had used two inaccurate shipping documents, one 
stating that the cargo was bound for Switzerland while another listed West 
Germany as the eventual destination. 
An official with the freight forwarder that Girindus used to send the fuel to 
the Netherlands testified that he believed a clerical error in his office had 
caused the discrepancy. But the judge ruled that the ultimate consignee was 
neither of those two destinations, but Iran -- and that Customs was therefore 
within its rights to seize the cargo. 
He also ruled that on the date of seizure, the cargo did not belong to 
Girindus, but to Dampf. The judge said that if no one else claims ownership in 
10 days, the rocket fuel component becomes the property of the Customs Service. 
Kennedy reported from Houston and Houston reported from Washington. 
