CHILDREN LEARN LESSONS BY STAYING AWAY FROM SCHOOL; 
EDUCATION: UP TO A MILLION AMERICAN FAMILIES MAINTAIN HOME-SCHOOLS WHERE THEIR 
CHILDREN ARE TAUGHT. THEIR MOTIVE IS USUALLY RELIGIOUS. 
In the living room of the modest two-story farmhouse of Peter and Ruth Nobel, 
five children are gathered around a piano and singing hymns. 
The music signals the start of the school day for Charity, Luke, Hope, Samuel 
and Hannah Nobel. It also symbolizes the type of education their parents want 
for them. 
"We try to live a God-centered life," Ruth Nobel said. "It seems like the 
public schools elevate man and his reasoning above all things, where we 
consider God's word to be the final authority." 
The Nobels, members of an independent Reformed church, consider public schools 
to be un-Christian places that do a mediocre job of educating. They also find a 
nearby Christian school unacceptable because of doctrinal differences. 
They are among up to a million American families teaching their children at 
home, said Chris Klicka, senior counsel for the Home School Legal Defense Assn. 
in Paeoian Springs, Va. The association offers legal assistance to 
home-schoolers for a $100 annual fee. 
Many cite religious reasons for keeping their children out of public schools, 
and some end up in court, said Klicka, whose group is involved in more than 30 
cases nationwide protesting state restrictions on home-schoolers. 
"We're gaining ground," he said. "Thirty-one states have passed bills 
permitting schooling at home, and 29 have done so since 1982." 
Michigan and Iowa remain the most restrictive states, with laws requiring 
certified teachers, Klicka said. Home-schoolers also object to laws in other 
states that require such things as teacher competence tests or college degrees. 
Michigan's law is being challenged in a case pending before the Michigan 
Supreme Court and has been altered by previous court decisions. 
Jean Shane, education consultant for the Michigan Department of Education, said 
recent court decisions require the state to give teaching permits to people 
with bachelor's degrees, even if they lack teaching certificates. 
Parents who ask for a permit must report the names of the children being taught 
and the curriculum being used, Shane said. 
About 700 filed reports this year, but Klicka said many never report for fear 
of being taken to court. 
Ruth Nobel, a college graduate who won a court ruling allowing her to teach at 
home, began teaching her children more than 11 years ago with 22-year-old 
Abigail and now with 3-year-old Hannah. 
The Nobel children begin their day with chores on the family's 77-acre dairy 
farm about 25 miles south of Grand Rapids. Then they gather in the living room 
at 9 a.m. for hymns while Charity, 17, accompanies them on the piano. 
The children grab their books and scatter to their separate study areas on the 
floors of their bedrooms, at the dining-room table or in the kitchen. 
"Unless I have a problem, I don't even go downstairs. I just work by myself. In 
a way, that's better," said Charity, who does her schoolwork sitting 
cross-legged on the floor of her tidy bedroom. 
Economics, history, biology, government, algebra, English literature, typing 
and Bible fill about five hours of her day. The younger children spend about 
three hours a day on their studies. 
Downstairs, Ruth Nobel spends a few minutes with each child. 
Hope, at the dining-room table, recites for her mother a portion of "The 
Midnight Ride of Paul Revere," which the 11-year-old sixth-grader has 
memorized. Then she takes a science test. 
Luke, 14, has read a story at a small desk at the end of his bed and Ruth Nobel 
quizzes him about it. 
Then the older children work independently while Ruth Nobel helps Samuel, a 
7-year-old first-grader, read a story about Jesus walking on water. 
"I think that they get the basics," said Ruth Nobel, who has found herself 
brushing up on algebra and chemistry to stay ahead of her students. 
Some of the children's books and work sheets come from the Christian Liberty 
Academy in Arlington Heights, Ill., a private school that also operates a 
correspondence school for parents who teach their children at home. 
The children follow a school year similar to a traditional school. They get 
report cards four times a year and take standardized achievement tests used by 
many traditional schools. 
On a recent round of tests, their scores were at or above grade level in all 
areas. 
"They aren't being compared with other children their age," said Ruth Nobel, 
who has taught as many as seven children at once. "They move at their pace and 
aren't really that much aware that they are behind or ahead of others." 
One daughter is attending Calvin College in Grand Rapids and another graduated 
as a nurse. Ruth Nobel says they were as well-prepared as their classmates. 
"There were a few things they had to catch up on, such as science laboratory 
work, but it was by no means impossible," she said. 
The children's studies are supplemented by trips to the library, occasional 
field trips with other home-schooling families, softball games and volleyball 
matches. 
