SAN MARCOS FIRM DETAILS ITS ROLE IN INTRIGUE 
CSI Technologies of San Marcos had been selling its highly specialized voltage 
capacitors to the Iraqi government for years, mainly for use in radar and radio 
transmitters, until president Jerold Kowalsky sensed something fishy in late 
summer of 1988. 
That's when the Iraqis placed a new order that requested capacitors built along 
specifications that suspiciously fit only one product: a nuclear bomb 
detonator, probably for a missile. 
Kowalsky had every reason to know. CSI had been selling nuclear warhead 
detonators to the U.S defense industry since the company was formed in 1969. 
He also knew that the export of those devices is illegal. 
Kowalsky immediately notified U.S. Customs and the Central Intelligence Agency 
that a potentially illegal purchase of nuclear technology had been attempted. 
His calls set in motion an elaborate 18-month sting that ended Wednesday with 
the arrest of six alleged members of an Iraqi-sponsored smuggling ring as they 
purportedly tried to ship detonators to Iraq from a London airport. 
An ex-submarine officer and U.S. Naval Academy graduate, Kowalsky, 57, was 
persuaded by U.S. investigators "to play along with" the Iraqis and to assume a 
central part in the sting. 
Kowalsky was thoroughly coached in his cloak-and-dagger role by U.S. Customs 
agents. And, although he downplayed the intrigue involved in the sting, he said 
the experience was comparable to the time several decades ago when, as a Navy 
lieutenant, his submarine closely skirted the coast of the Soviet Union on a 
reconnaissance mission. 
Over the sting's 18 months, Kowalsky met with the Iraqis in London in February 
1989 and again last September. The second time, he was accompanied by Customs 
undercover agent Daniel Supnick who, wired for sound, posed as a CSI executive 
named Daniel Saunders. 
Kowalsky acknowledged to feeling like a character in a James Bond spy novel but 
said the meetings generally were businesslike. He never felt physically 
threatened because the London sites where they met were filled with British 
undercover intelligence agents. 
"It didn't really bother me because the bulk (of his role in the sting) was 
what I did in everyday work, so I wasn't out of character," Kowalsky said. 
He said his motive for participating in the sting was less his fascination with 
intrigue than his strong opposition to nuclear proliferation, saying he would 
never permit his company to ship a nuclear weapon component to a foreign 
government or customer. 
"I don't read spy novels. . . . I've never been an actor," Kowalsky said. "With 
the Cold War winding down, I regard nuclear proliferation as a major threat to 
world peace, and that foreign countries building nuclear bombs is a major 
hazard." 
CSI makes a range of high-powered capacitors, devices that store and 
concentrate large amounts of electrical power. Only about 25% of CSI's business 
is selling weapon detonators to defense contractors. Its capacitors are also 
used in commercial products such as heart defibrillators and lasers. 
An indictment unsealed Thursday in federal court in San Diego describes, in 
lengthy detail, how CSI came to fill order number 1K/20/3, a contract for 85 
military electrical capacitors, 40 of which were for nuclear warheads. The 
entire deal ended up being for $10,490, the indictment said. 
According to the indictment, the negotiations and shipment of the capacitors 
involved a flurry of telexes, faxes and phone calls between Baghdad, London and 
San Marcos. 
At a press conference Thursday in San Diego, Assistant U. S. Atty. Maria T. 
Arroyo-Tabin, who supervised the case, said all San Diego activity connected to 
the case occurred at CSI's San Marcos offices. There were no clandestine 
meetings between Supnick and any of the five indicted individual 
co-conspirators in San Diego, she said. 
Though bargaining began in September 1988, it wasn't until last Sept. 11 that 
the deal's specifications and price were agreed upon, after a meeting of 
officials from CSI, an Iraqi agency and the British go-between at the Cavendish 
Hotel in London, according to the indictment. 
Among those at that meeting were two agents of Al-Qaqaa State Establishment, 
described in the indictment as a division of the Iraqi Ministry of Industry and 
Military Industrialization. 
Asked why they needed nuclear warhead capacitors, the two agents initially said 
they were for "laser applications," the indictment said. Later, the two men 
said they were for "aerospace" use. 
Ali Ashour Daghir, an Iraqi, the managing director of the British middleman, 
Euromac (London) Ltd., also was at that meeting. According to the indictment, 
he told Supnick that his company sought no commission on the deal, not even "a 
single dollar for us." 
"I am an English company, but I am Iraqi. . . . If I profit my country, it is 
for me a profit," Daghir said. 
At the meeting, Supnick told Daghir that an American export license would be 
needed but probably would not be available for a shipment to Iraq. Jeanine 
Speckman, a French citizen living in England who was Euromac's export 
executive, suggested mislabeling the shipping carton so that it "wouldn't 
create any problems," according to the indictment. 
The next day, Speckman suggested to Supnick that the capacitors be mislabeled 
on the packing carton as "computer room air-conditioning units," according to 
the indictment. 
The contract was confirmed on Sept. 14. A week later, Euromac transferred 
$2,625, a down-payment, from an unnamed bank in England to CSI's account at a 
Bank of America branch in Escondido, the indictment said. 
Another $2,625 was wire-transferred last Dec. 19, the indictment said. On Jan. 
11, 1990, the balance, $5,240, followed. 
During last November and December, while CSI built the capacitors, a second 
order -- for high-speed switches called krytrons that are essential to the 
detonation of a nuclear bomb -- was discussed. That order never went through, 
Kenneth W. Ingleby, the special agent in charge of Customs' San Diego office, 
said Thursday. 
During that period, there were a number of discussions about visits to Iraq by 
CSI personnel and tests of the capacitors, the indictment said. Because of 
logistic, neither the visits nor the tests were ever carried out, it said. 
Also during the same time frame, Daghir vacillated on the issue of where to 
ship the capacitors, the indictment said. 
Last November, he wanted them delivered to a "contact," never named, in the 
United States, the indictment said. In December, he acknowledged that exporting 
the capacitors from the U.S. to Iraq would be illegal but said that, because 
the order was "so small" it would not arouse concern, according to the court 
document. 
On Jan. 10 of this year, Daghir said that Al-Qaqaa contacts were not available 
in the U.S. and that, if the capacitors were to be shipped to England, they 
would have to be mislabeled as "air conditioning equipment," the indictment 
said. 
Daghir also said in a phone call that day to Supnick that the capacitors would 
be left in England for Al-Qaqaa agents, who would then decide "what is the best 
way" to move them to Iraq, the indictment said. 
On March 19, the capacitors were shipped out of San Diego, according to the 
indictment. They were labeled "electrical components for air conditioning 
equipment," it said. 
U.S. Customs generally regards high-powered voltage capacitors as a sensitive 
area of technology and often prohibits their export because of their potential 
use in a variety of weapons and communications systems, said president Monson 
Hayes of Maxwell Laboratories, a San Diego company that also makes capacitors. 
Hayes said that about 10% of Maxwell's export deals involving high-powered 
capacitors end up being disallowed by Customs. "We usually are surprised 
because we request only (deals) that we believe (involve the sale) of old 
state-of-the-art products that are readily available from other suppliers in 
Europe," he said. 
Founded in 1969 by ex-Maxwell Laboratories employees, CSI has generated its 
share of headlines. In 1983, CSI employee Leslie Landersman, a 22-year-old 
newlywed, was abducted by a bank robber from the company's plant -- then 
located in Escondido -- and killed in a shoot-out by an Escondido policeman. 
In 1985, CSI was fined $30,000 after pleading guilty to illegal importation and 
selling of capacitors containing PCBs, or polychlorinated biphenyls, a toxic 
substance linked with cancer and birth defects. 
The company has 35 employees at its 25,000-square-foot plant on Rancheros 
Boulevard in San Marcos. 
