OTTERS SERVE STUDY IN SURVIVAL 
When Alaskan sea otter No. 600 arrived at Sea World in San Diego nearly one 
year ago, he was an oily mess. Rescue workers in Alaska had attempted to bathe 
him, but the otter's thick fur remained matted with a gooey coating of crude 
oil -- the spilled cargo of the grounded tanker Exxon Valdez. 
More life-threatening than No. 600's soiled pelt, however, were his own efforts 
to clean it. To maintain buoyancy and warmth, otters continually lick and groom 
their coats, and No. 600, like many otters caught in the worst spill in 
history, had ingested potentially fatal amounts of oil. 
Luckily for him, the March 24 disaster had prompted Sea World to develop an 
emergency antidote: powdered charcoal that absorbed the toxins and saved 
otters' lives. Today, as No. 600 and five other Valdez survivors tumble and 
frolic in a Sea World exhibit pool, the charcoal discovery stands out as one of 
the few positive results of the devastating spill. 
"As unpleasant an experience as the Valdez spill was, it proved to be a 
valuable learning tool," said Jim Antrim, Sea World's senior curator of marine 
mammals. "The treatments we developed in response to this spill could be 
instrumental, for example, in saving the threatened California sea otter, were 
a spill to occur in their habitat." 
According to Antrim, only 3,000 California sea otters remain -- a fragile 
population that could be wiped out by a large spill. In contrast, there are 
about 180,000 Alaskan sea otters, of which at least 1,000 died in the Valdez 
spill. 
Another 300 Alaskan sea otters were rescued from the shores off Bligh Reef in 
Prince William Sound, rehabilitated and returned to the wild, Antrim said. 
But the nine otters at Sea World are unlikely to return to the wild. No. 600 
and No. 599, whose names correspond to identification numbers that rescue 
workers assigned in Alaska, exhibit no obvious lingering symptoms, but are 
being monitored for long-term effects of oil ingestion. Babe, a 52-pound 
female, is nearly blind. Katie and three other pups were quite young when 
captured and have not learned survival skills. Brownie has a bone disease of 
the rear flippers, and Old Blue has an arthritic spine. 
Instead of repopulating Alaska's waters, then, these otters are helping teach 
park visitors the importance of protecting habitats. Since Sea World put the 
Valdez otters on display last summer, the exhibit has developed quite a 
following -- even a group that Antrim calls the "otter spotters," who visit 
regularly. 
The otters don't disappoint their fans. Whether chewing on shrimp, crab and 
clams or doing "whirlies," rapid underwater somersaults, the otters appear to 
delight in their 50-foot, 70,000-gallon outdoor pool. Even at rest, floating 
lazily on their backs as if atop invisible rafts, they are completely at home 
in the water. 
"Talk about the ultimate water bed," Antrim said, pointing at an otter who 
seemed to be napping afloat. "They have evolved so they can do literally 
everything in the water: eat, sleep, mate, give birth, nurse." 
Evolution had not prepared the otters for the 11 million gallons of crude oil 
that gummed up their home one year ago Saturday. 
"It was a like a curtain coming down on them," said Ron Britton, a biologist 
with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service who worked on the animal rescue effort 
in Alaska for five months. "Even if they tried swimming under it, they couldn't 
swim that far. So they'd surface, draped with this sticky goo, with oil in 
their eyes, in their mouths. There were probably some that just plain 
suffocated." 
Others died of exposure when the oil rendered their fur useless. Unlike other 
marine mammals, sea otters rely on their dense fur -- not an insulating layer 
of blubber -- for waterproofing and warmth. Oil-coated otters faced almost 
certain death from hypothermia or drowning. 
In 1985, at the behest of the U.S. Department of the Interior, the Sea World 
Research Institute had studied techniques for removing oil from otters' fur. In 
experiments on 12 otters taken from the wild, scientists applied crude oils to 
fur and then tried to remove it. Over months, they discovered that repeated 
applications of dish-washing detergent and water would remove the residue. 
So, when five Valdez survivors arrived in San Diego on April 4, 1989, Sea World 
technicians knew how to clean their coats. They were unsure, however, how to 
remedy the internal damage suffered by otters that had swallowed oil, and, one 
by one, four of the five otters died of irreparable liver damage. 
Don Kent, executive director of the park's Research Institute, said that, once 
ingested, the oil began a vicious cycle in the otters' bodies. From the 
stomach, it went to the intestine, where it was absorbed into the blood. Once 
the blood was contaminated, the liver attempted to cleanse it by secreting 
bile, which ended up in the intestine and was absorbed into the blood again. 
The discovery of the activated charcoal mixture broke that cycle. By binding 
with the toxic hydrocarbons in the otters' intestinal tracts, the mixture 
allowed the animals to expel the poisons from their systems and begin to heal. 
Nine of the 13 otters that were flown to Sea World have survived. 
What long-term effects, if any, the crude oil will have on the otters is the 
subject of a continuing study, sponsored by Exxon Shipping Co. and conducted by 
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife service in cooperation with the marine park. Of 
particular interest is the reproductive ability of the surviving otters. 
"A partial success will be if these otters produce young," Antrim said, as he 
watched No. 600 and one of the female otters engage in a frantic underwater 
embrace. "A total success would be if their young could reproduce also. We want 
to know -- were they genetically damaged?" 
"It's a lousy thing to have to learn," Kent said of the animal rescue 
techniques his staff helped develop. "We were cleaning up somebody else's mess 
instead of doing science. . . . But what it really taught us is there's no way 
to totally clean up the mess afterwards. You have to prevent it from happening 
in the first place." 
