ELECTION LEAVES LATINOS WITH CHALLENGES IN 1989 
Normally, a presidential election year like 1988 is followed by a respite from 
politics. Activists of all political parties are tired from the arduous 
campaign just completed, and they need some time to rest and recuperate. 
But Latino political activists don't have that luxury in 1989. For a variety of 
reasons, Latinos from Southern California to Washington are going to be busy 
all year keeping tabs on political developments. 
On the national level there is a great deal of interest in how President Bush 
will respond to expectations among Latinos. 
A former Texas resident with many business connections in Mexico, Bush made a 
strong appeal for Latino voter support in the campaign. His most visible 
campaigners were his son, Jeb, and his Mexican-born wife, Columba. But Bush 
also had help from several Latinos in campaign staff positions. 
The President is off to a good start, having named two Latinos to his Cabinet. 
He reappointed Ronald Reagan's last secretary of education, Lauro F. Cavazos of 
Texas, and he selected former U.S. Rep. Manuel Lujan of New Mexico to be his 
secretary of interior. But while both men are sure to be sources of pride to 
most Latinos, they could face rough going in their highly visible jobs. 
Cavazos must persuade the President to spend more federal money on education, 
despite a large budget deficit left by Reagan. 
The political tensions that Cavazos' appeals for more money have generated are 
already in the open. Some Republican conservatives say Cavazos, a Democrat, is 
too liberal. 
Lujan could have difficulty trying to strike a balance between the 
environmentalists who want to protect the federal lands and forests controlled 
by the Interior Department, and the businessmen, loggers and ranchers (many 
from the West) who want access to those valuable properties. 
Here in California, Latinos in both major parties are going to be involved in 
the early maneuvering among candidates who plan to run for governor in 1990. 
The campaign is beginning so early because Gov. George Deukmejian has already 
announced that he will not seek reelection, and a wide-open governor's race is 
likely to attract many candidates. 
Locally, Latino activists will be busy, not in a political campaign, but in the 
courts. They will be monitoring the progress of a lawsuit that will affect the 
five seats on the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. 
Filed against the county by the U.S. Justice Department and the Mexican 
American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, among others, it aims to force the 
county to create a new supervisor district -- one in which a Latino might be 
elected. 
Los Angeles Latinos have become increasingly restive with the fact that while 
one of every three people in the county is Latino, all five supervisors are 
white men. They want a Latino voice on the powerful board, and look to 
Supervisor Gaddi Vasquez in neighboring Orange County as a model. 
But county officials have vowed to fight the lawsuit to the bitter end, so it 
could be some time before a Latino sits on the county board. Should the county 
give in on the lawsuit and create a new district, some of the prominent Latinos 
being talked about as possible candidates include Los Angeles City Council 
members Richard Alatorre and Gloria Molina, state Sen. Art Torres (D-Los 
Angeles) and Rep. Esteban E. Torres (D-La Puente). 
While it may not be as dramatic as all the political maneuvering, perhaps the 
most important political effort that will start up in 1989 is the effort by 
MALDEF and other Latino advocacy groups to help the U.S. Census Bureau get a 
more accurate count of Latinos when the national census is taken in 1990. 
Many Latinos, especially those who are recent immigrants, tend to shy away from 
census takers and other government officials, but cooperation with the 1990 
census is going to be vitally important for the Latino community. 
An accurate count of the population will make it easier for Latinos to push for 
more political representation. The larger our population, the more it is likely 
that new Latino-majority legislative districts can be drawn at all levels of 
government. Such districts could elect many new Latino political leaders in the 
1990s, especially if the many Latino immigrants who applied for amnesty under 
the 1986 Immigration Reform Act become citizens and start exercising the right 
to vote. 
In fact, the 1990 census issue illustrates the one overriding reason why Latino 
activists can't afford to take a break from politics in 1989: For all the 
progress Latinos have made in recent years, we are still behind where we should 
be, given our fast-growing population. We will begin to catch up when we are 
accurately counted -- and then put our numbers to work by fully participating 
in the civic life of this nation. 
