FRAUD FIGURE CONFESSES PAYING BRIBE TO PAISLEY; 
GUILTY PLEA IMPLICATING FORMER ASSISTANT NAVY SECRETARY SEEN AS BREAKTHROUGH IN 
DEFENSE PROBE 
In a major breakthrough in the Pentagon fraud case, a former vice president of 
the Unisys Corp. pleaded guilty Thursday to bribing then-high-ranking Navy 
official Melvyn R. Paisley to win multimillion-dollar Defense Department 
contracts. 
The executive, Charles F. Gardner, admitted that he had directed an associate 
in 1986 to use company funds to buy Paisley's Sun Valley, Ida., condominium at 
an inflated price in return for preferential treatment on Navy and Marine Corps 
business. 
A guilty plea entered by the Gardner associate, James G. Neal, a Unisys 
consultant, implicated a previously unnamed sixth Pentagon official in 
wrongdoing. The official is retired Navy engineer Garland Tomlin Jr. When 
serving in the Pentagon, according to Neal's plea, Tomlin received $400,000 in 
bribes directed by Gardner. 
The new pleas provide prosecutors with their strongest evidence to date 
implicating Paisley in the massive fraud case. Paisley, a former assistant 
secretary of the Navy who later became a successful defense industry 
consultant, is the highest-ranking target of the 2 1/2-year investigation. His 
lawyer strongly denied any wrongdoing by Paisley. 
Gardner's plea agreement, which included a pledge to cooperate with the 
government, gives prosecutors a potential star witness to testify against other 
defendants when cases produced by the extensive investigation come to trial. 
"These are significant developments," said U.S. Attorney Henry E. Hudson, who 
has been directing the investigation from his office in Alexandria, Va. "The 
cooperation we get . . . from individuals will advance the case substantially." 
However, the government's willingness to strike a plea bargain with Gardner 
shocked some people close to the inquiry. "I can't believe it," one defense 
lawyer said. "This sounds like a desperation move." 
As a government target, Gardner, a highly placed corporate officer associated 
with many of the figures under investigation, was believed to rank in priority 
only behind Paisley and influential consultant William M. Galvin. 
However, Thursday's pleas also implicate Galvin in alleged bribery, saying that 
he advised Gardner to offer Paisley the inflated condominium price. 
Under the agreement entered in federal court in Alexandria, Gardner pleaded 
guilty to one count of bribery of a public official, one count of conspiracy to 
commit bribery and one count of tax fraud. He faces a maximum penalty of 18 
years and a $750,000 fine. 
Sentencing was postponed until July, apparently to allow him to assist the 
government in the investigation. 
Lawyers for Galvin and the Unisys Corp., as well as Paisley, denied that their 
clients were guilty of wrongdoing. 
Denial by Paisley 
"Mr. Paisley unequivocably rejects the contention that he was bribed by Charles 
Gardner or anyone else while at the Navy," his lawyer, E. Lawrence Barcella 
Jr., said. 
"Mr. Paisley had no knowledge that the sale of his condominium was anything 
other than a completely legitimate, arms-length transaction" at fair market 
price. 
William Nussbaum, an attorney for Galvin, said, "Any allegation that Mr. Galvin 
bribed a government official or participated in a conspiracy to bribe a 
government official is absolutely false." 
A spokesman for Unisys said that the company had been unaware of Gardner's 
criminal activities. The spokesman noted that those activities had begun when 
Gardner worked for Sperry Corp., which was acquired by Burroughs Corp. to form 
Unisys in November, 1986. 
Gardner was forced by the company early last year to retire as a vice president 
and general manager of its Fire Control and Surveillance Division in Great 
Neck, N. Y. 
'Disguised' Payoffs 
The payoffs were "disguised by a small group of former Sperry employees and 
consultants . . . " spokesman Peter Hynes said. "Gardner's crimes were rooted 
in premerger practices that the new company helped find and eradicate." 
All of Gardner's Sperry superiors have left Unisys since the merger, and 38 
former Sperry employees have been dismissed or otherwise disciplined, Hynes 
said. 
In addition to his admission that he had bribed Paisley, Gardner admitted 
Thursday that he used company money to establish a slush fund for campaign 
contributions to Rep. Roy Dyson (D-Md.), former Rep. Bill Chappell Jr. (D-Fla.) 
and others with influence over the defense procurement process. 
His admission, in which he said he had directed Unisys subordinates and defense 
consultants hired by the firm to make the contributions, confirmed an account 
contained in a guilty plea entered in January by former Unisys executive Robert 
D. Barrett and former consultant Joseph E. Hill. 
Abbe Lowell, a lawyer who represents both Dyson and Chappell, reiterated that 
the congressmen did not know the money was tainted. The two, and other 
congressmen reported to have received illegal campaign funds, have pledged to 
return them. 
Faces Up to 15 Years 
Neal, 63, who said he paid Paisley $149,000 for a condominium that was worth 
only $100,000, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit bribery, one 
count of conspiracy to defraud the government and one count of tax evasion. He 
faces a maximum penalty of 15 years and a $750,000 fine. 
Also pleading guilty was Galvin's stepson, Kenneth F. Brooke, 40, who had 
worked for Galvin as an accountant. Brooke promised to testify against his 
stepfather and pleaded guilty to a single count of tax evasion. He faces a 
maximum penalty of five years and a $250,000 fine. 
The pleas indicated that Gardner, while presiding over Unisys' Great Neck 
division, supervised a network of associates that paid off Pentagon officials 
and contributed illegally to congressional campaigns in an effort to obtain 
further Defense Department business for Unisys. 
The net effect, Gardner admitted in the court documents, was that many of 
Pentagon contracts at his division "were obtained or maintained through the use 
of bribes and illegal campaign contributions." 
According to an account that both Gardner and Neal swore to be true Thursday, 
the two bribed Paisley in August, 1986, with the condo purchase and sold the 
unit the next year for only $100,000. From 1981 to 1987, Paisley oversaw 
contracts awards for the Navy as assistant secretary. 
In return, they said they sought Paisley's help in steering to Unisys 
multibillion-dollar contracts as the Navy's second source for production of the 
Aegis shipboard defense system and a multimillion-dollar contract to produce 
the Marine Air Traffic Control and Landing System. 
Both contracts ultimately were awarded to Unisys. The Times reported last 
summer that Paisley in June, 1986, abruptly revised the bidding rules for the 
Aegis contract in a way that favored Unisys. 
Thursday's admissions disclosed that Gardner and Neal took elaborate 
precautions to disguise the source of the payment to Paisley, which they said 
they made at the recommendation of Galvin, whose close ties to Paisley were 
well-known in the defense community. 
Under instructions from Gardner, the documents show, Neal deposited more than 
$150,000 in Unisys money into an account on Britain's Isle of Man, which has 
secretive banking laws. 
He then transferred those funds to his own Bahamian-based company, Surrey 
Investments, and finally passed that money through a third firm, Pathway 
Investments, to buy the Idaho condominium. 
Neal said he had bribed the other Pentagon official, former Naval Electronics 
Systems engineer Tomlin, after Tomlin told Gardner that he would use his 
influence to help Gardner's company obtain an unspecified multimillion-dollar 
Navy contract in return for a $500,000 payment. 
Neal said that, at Gardner's direction, he had transferred 18 separate payments 
totaling $400,000 to Longwood International, a Bahamian company owned by 
Tomlin. It could not be learned to whom the contract ultimately was awarded. 
Resigned From Navy 
A Navy spokesman said that Tomlin, a top-ranking civil servant, resigned from 
the Navy in October, 1985. Neither Tomlin nor his attorney could be reached for 
comment. 
Gardner also profited enormously from the transfer of the Unisys funds. 
According to the pleas, a total of $1.7 million paid to Neal under his 
consulting contracts with Unisys ultimately was transferred to AVC Associates, 
a company Gardner had established without the knowledge of his superiors. 
The Unisys spokesman said the company planned to take legal action against 
Gardner to recover the funds. 
