CALIFORNIA: FISCAL GRIDLOCK 
NOTE: In a recent letter to The Times, Gov. George Deukmejian complained that 
this newspaper frequently proposes new state programs without saying where it 
would get the money to pay for them. On Wednesday, this column outlined the 
state's budget problems in general. Today, The Times explains how the state 
came to find itself in such fiscal straits and what to do about them. Tomorrow, 
The Times will propose specific additions to the governor's 1989-90 budget and 
the tax increases that would pay for those additions. 
The quality of life in California is crumbling in ways that every citizen can 
see -- traffic gridlock on deteriorating highways, inadequate growth 
management, an education system at capacity and potential chronic water 
shortages, to name a few. Turning that trend around will take money and firm 
direction from Sacramento. 
"Our problem is not a lack of revenues," Governor Deukmejian wrote in a letter 
to The Times, published Wednesday, in which he challenged the argument that 
California cannot effectively deal with future growth without additional tax 
income. Low taxes have encouraged economic growth and this, in turn, produces 
more state tax revenue, he said. 
But California's fiscal structure is not providing the revenue the state needs, 
either to sustain many vital services at existing levels or to build the public 
works system the state must have to accommodate and manage California's growth. 
Increasingly, the California business community is concerned that the failure 
of the state to maintain and expand its transportation system, schools and 
other public works will jeopardize the state's economic vitality. 
Part of the problem is that California's system of taxation has been restricted 
over the past 11 years, primarily by initiative petition measures written into 
law by the voters. Deukmejian has offered tentative support for reform of the 
Gann spending limits, but opposes any general tax increase. He would accede to 
higher gasoline taxes only if approved by the voters. 
More transportation revenue is California's most urgent priority. Five years 
ago, the Governor's Task Force on Infrastructure Review projected a 10-year 
public works deficit of more than $50 billion, including $15 billion for 
highways. Five years later, California is spending less ontransportation than 
any other state as a proportion of personal income. The state gasoline tax,the 
principal source of highway construction funds, remains unchanged at 9 cents 
per gallon. The highway project gap has grown to $20 billion. 
The gas tax is the most obvious example of how California's revenue system is 
failing to keep up with need. But it is only a part of a dramatically changed 
structure that has granted Californians $115 billion in direct tax benefits 
since 1978, according to the California Taxpayers' Assn., a business-supported 
group. The tax revolt triggered by the Proposition 13 property tax rollback of 
1978 has produced radical change throughout the tax system. Proposition 13 was 
followed by voter initiatives that set strict spending limits on state and 
local government (Proposition 4, theGann initiative of 1979), eliminated the 
state inheritance tax and permanently indexed the personal income tax for 
inflation. 
Under Proposition 13, the Legislature can increase taxes only by a two-thirds 
vote, something that is almost impossible to achieve. Local tax increases can 
be raised only by a vote of the people. State budgeting was further constrained 
by last fall's Proposition 98 that sets aside 40% of the state budget for 
public education. 
State officials increasingly are turning to bond financing because bond funds 
are not counted against the Gann spending limits and need only a majority vote 
to pass. In 1988, $5.5 billion in bond funds were approved, raising the state 
debt to $13 billion. 
So far, the debt level is not near a danger point, and California's high credit 
rating remains intact. The major problem is that the state has no process for 
planning and budgeting capital construction needs. Bond issues get on the 
ballot on the basis of political appeal, not in relation to long-term 
priorities. The Legislature passed a bill last year to begin such a planning 
process, but it was vetoed by the governor. 
Proposition 13 produced other distortions, such as the creation of a new layer 
of special tax districts to raise revenue that used to come out of general 
government funds. Counties have been squeezed from both sides -- a loss of 
property tax revenue and an increase in responsibilitydelegated to them by the 
Legislature but not accompanied by enough money to finance the programs. 
Money alone will not make everything right. California needs to come together 
as it did in the 1950s and 1960s to assess its problems and to mobilize the 
energy, political leadership and finances required to overcome them. But the 
"creative solutions" that have evolved in the post-Proposition 13 era -- 
devices such as developer fees to finance public facilities as a way of getting 
around the law -- will not solve California's problems, either. These are 
indirect taxes thatfall inequitably on different groups of taxpayers. 
At a minimum, the Gann limits should be based on a more realistic formula of 
inflation and population gain than at present so they accurately reflect the 
growing demands on government. And one way to eliminate some of the inequities 
created by Proposition 13 is to create a split assessment roll so that 
businesses can be taxed at a somewhat higher rate than homeowners. Since 1978, 
homes have carried an increasingly larger share of the property tax burden. 
The first need is for a gasoline tax increase that will permit the development 
of an integrated transportation plan for the 21st Century. Second, the state 
must have some additional general revenue to maintain programs such as health 
care and education. Then, California leaders must begin untangling the fiscal 
pretzel that is paralyzing government. To deal with its problems, California 
must return to a rational form of budgeting on the basis of priorities rather 
than the arbitrary dictates of poorly conceived initiative measures. 
The new tax money would not go for frills, nor would it jeopardize the state's 
economic vitality. It is the very necessary investment that California must 
have if the state is to build a bright future. 
