NEWS ANALYSIS; 
DREAM OF UNITY RISES AGAIN IN ARAB WORLD; 
REGIONAL POLITICS: EGYPT AND SYRIA HAVE PATCHED UP THEIR RIFT. BUT OTHER 
CONFLICTS REMAIN. 
The Arab world, struggling for a new foothold after a decade of war, intramural 
squabbling and economic crisis, has launched a drive for political 
reconciliation that has awakened hopes for unity in the Middle East for the 
first time since the Camp David accords. 
Some of the most troublesome regional conflicts still elude a solution. But 
Egypt's rapprochement with Syria in December and other recent moves toward 
reconciliation signal a new attempt by the Arab world to close ranks and revive 
-- in a calculated, pragmatic way -- a modern vision of the old dream of Arab 
unity, diplomats and political analysts say. 
Recent moves to patch up old squabbles among Arab nations also reflect what 
many analysts say is an end to the Cold War in the Middle East, now less of a 
potential flash point for conflict between the superpowers and more an area of 
complex economic and political dilemmas needing solutions on a regional scale. 
Arab regimes, analysts say, are focusing less these days on philosophical 
debates and more on the challenges of an economically united Western Europe and 
a new, restless Arab middle class that could be the greatest threat to some of 
the region's dictatorial leaderships. 
"The historical images and scenarios are changing. The Middle East of today is 
a Middle East that is undergoing domestic and inner change, and it is a Middle 
East in a different world," said Tahseen Basheer, an Egyptian political analyst 
and former spokesman for the late President Anwar Sadat. 
"In the '80s, everyone was trying to change the established order by force, and 
all of them failed. . . . It came to naught, and the Egyptian way of doing it, 
in small, patient measures, has paid off," he said. "So now in the '90s, with a 
lot of new challenges deep from within, they realize that instead of competing 
with each other, they need to coalesce their regimes, to help each other and 
not to undermine each other." 
The most dramatic of the recent moves was the restoration in December of 
diplomatic relations between Egypt -- a virtual outlaw in the Arab world a 
decade ago when it made peace with Israel -- and Syria, the most intractable 
critic of any resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict short of the elimination 
of Israel. 
Though most Arab countries warmed up to Cairo last year, readmitting Egypt to 
the Arab League and restoring full relations, Syria had remained aloof. But a 
variety of regional and international developments combined to force Damascus 
into reconciliation, according to diplomats and political sources here. 
Many of the same forces have prompted other moves toward Arab harmony in recent 
months. The results: at least partial reconciliation between renegade Libya and 
two of its closest neighbors, Egypt and Jordan; talk of reunifying Yemen with 
Marxist South Yemen, and even some reports that radical Palestinian factions 
nurtured by Syria might seek reconciliation with Yasser Arafat's mainstream 
Palestine Liberation Organization. 
Perhaps most important in the region's changing scene has been the Soviet 
Union's virtual withdrawal from the Middle East as an arena for international 
conflict, most analysts agree. 
Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, conflicts in places like the 
Israeli-occupied territories and Lebanon assumed alarming international 
proportions because of the historic U.S. support for Israel and the Soviets' 
support for regimes like Syria and Libya that have sought the elimination of 
Israel. 
In the last two years, however, the Soviet Union has made it clear to Syria and 
other Arab countries that it no longer sponsors strategic parity with Israel. 
Moscow says it will provide defensive weapons to countries like Syria but not 
arms for an offensive against Israel -- effectively backing away from a 
regional arms race with the United States. 
At the same time, Moscow has warmed its relations with Israel and Egypt. And, 
while not actively participating in the U.S.-brokered peace process with the 
Palestinians, Moscow has encouraged the PLO to adopt a more moderate diplomatic 
stance, including tacit recognition of Israel and renunciation of terrorism, 
that would allow the process to move forward. 
"The world of polarization in the Middle East vis-a-vis the superpowers is 
coming down," said one Arab diplomat. 
Syria, faced with reduced Soviet support and increased isolation from other 
Arab states because of its support for Iran in its war against Iraq, had little 
choice but to reconcile with Egypt, which is rapidly regaining its position at 
the diplomatic forefront of the Arab world, analysts said. 
Economics have also spurred the new move toward Arab unity, particularly in 
countries like Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco and Libya, where there are worries 
that the 1992 economic unification of Western Europe will threaten some of 
their most important export markets. 
The North Africa tier recently launched an official multi-state union to 
provide a united economic front. Similar regional groupings have emerged among 
the oil-rich Persian Gulf states and in the central region, where Egypt, Iraq, 
Jordan and Yemen have formed the Arab Cooperation Council. 
"Regional groupings are the wave of the future," one Western diplomat said. 
