WORLD WATCH: UNREST STILL A PROBLEM IN THE VALE OF KASHMIR 
World Travel Watch is a monthly report designed to help you make informed 
judgments about travel throughout the world. Because conditions can change 
overnight, always make your own inquiries before you leave home. In the United 
States, contact the nearest Passport Agency office; abroad, check in with the 
nearest American Embassy. 
Asia 
 -- India: Unrest continues in the troubled region of Kashmir, and has 
increased tensions between India and neighboring Pakistan. Defer all 
non-essential travel to Srinigar, the Kashmir Valley and surrounding areas. 
Exercise caution. 
The only official border crossing to Pakistan for foreigners is at Attara, 
Punjab/Wahah, Pakistan. A Pakistani visa is required, and travelers may cross 
by train or road any day of the week between 9:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. 
 -- The Maldives: Far from the cares of the world, isolated in the Indian 
Ocean, The Maldives is a chain of atolls extending 500 miles north to south 
about 400 miles south of India. The largest of the republic's 1,200 islands is 
only five square miles, and few rise more than six feet above sea level. 
In recent years scientists from around the world have gone there to study the 
effects of rising sea levels caused by the so-called "greenhouse effect." A 
rise of three feet is considered quite possible in the next century, and such a 
rise would submerge many of these islands and wreak havoc on the rest. 
In November, 1988, a band of Tamil mercenaries from Sri Lanka staged a coup in 
the capital city of Male, hoping to turn the islands into a staging area for 
their insurgent war against the Sri Lankan government. 
Their plan quickly went awry, but as a measure against future coup attempts, 
foreigners are required to be off the streets of Male by 10 p.m. 
The Maldives are best known for their pristine beaches, clear tropical waters 
and spectacular reef life. The legal system is derived from traditional Islamic 
law, and the importation of alcohol, pork products and pornography is 
prohibited. Prohibition of alcohol does not extend to the resorts, however, and 
each one has a bar. 
Sailors must report to government officials in Male before landing on any of 
the outer islands, and such restrictions are usually enforced by island chiefs. 
All islands except Male are subject to malaria, and appropriate precautions 
should be taken. 
 -- Nepal: Recent violent demonstrations by protesters demanding multi-party 
democracy indicate a growing dissatisfaction with the ruling monarchy in this 
kingdom where political parties have been banned for 29 years. 
Although the violence took place in Bhaktapur, eight miles from the capital 
city of Katmandu and a popular side-trip for visitors to the Katmandu Valley, 
travel here is unlikely to be affected because the democracy movement hasn't 
developed a broad base of support. 
 -- Pakistan: Political violence in Karachi flared recently during a strike 
called by an opposition party representing Mohajir migrants from India, 
resulting in an indefinite curfew in many parts of the city. The situation can 
change rapidly; follow local press reports for current information. 
Africa 
 -- Chad: Travel is restricted in the northern regions along the Libyan border 
and the eastern regions bordering Sudan. The north remains a militarized zone, 
although Chad and Libya have agreed to negotiate their differences, and the 
east has been the site of recent clashes between government forces and armed 
guerrillas. Check with the U.S. Embassy in N'Djamena for current information. 
 -- Zambia: A cholera epidemic in the capital city of Lusaka poses a 
significant health risk. Social gatherings have been banned and schools have 
been closed. If traveling here, be sure to avoid drinking tap water and eat 
only fully cooked food. 
Mediterranean 
 -- Cyprus: Hotel rooms will be hard to find in Nicosia from March 28 to April 
8 due to a meeting of the International Postal Union. Be sure to comfirm 
accommodations before arrival. 
Although progress has been made in talks between the Greek-Cypriot government 
of the Republic of Cyprus and the Turkish-Cypriot government of the Turkish 
Republic of Northern Cyprus about resolving the division of the island, the 
only legal points of entry remain Larnaca and Paphos international airports and 
the seaports of Limassol, Larnaca and Paphos. 
These ports are all in the southern part of the island, controlled by the 
internationally recognized government of the Republic of Cyprus. Travelers who 
arrive at Turkish-Cypriot ports will not be allowed to cross into the 
Greek-Cypriot controlled areas, even for transit purposes. 
Travel from the south to the Turkish-Cypriot controlled areas in the north is 
often possible, but shouldn't be assumed to be unrestricted. 
Europe/Soviet Union 
 -- Italy: Hotel accommodations will be difficult to obtain in many Italian 
cities this summer due to the World Cup soccer championship being held in 
Italy. 
Accommodations will be tight in Rome from late May through early July, and 
throughout the month of June in Bari, Bologna, Cagliari, Florence, Genoa, 
Milan, Naples, Palermo, Turin, Udine and Verona. Be sure to comfirm 
accommodations before arrival. 
 -- Sweden: Beginning July 1, one of the world's strictest drinking and driving 
laws will get stricter, when the permissible alcohol level for drivers will 
drop to 0.2% from 0.5%. A single glass of wine or beer will put drivers over 
the limit; avoid alcohol completely if you are planning to drive in Sweden. 
 -- Soviet Union: Travel to many regions of the Soviet Union remains risky due 
to ethnic and political unrest. Check with the State Department or local 
authorities for current information if you are planning trips to Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Moldavia, Tadzhikistan or Uzbekistan. 
 -- Yugoslavia: Ethnic unrest continues in troubled Kosovo province, where the 
Yugoslav army recently was sent for the first time to quell disturbances. Defer 
unnecessary travel. 
South America 
 -- Colombia: Americans and American interests have been targeted by a 
guerrilla group, and the threat has been backed by the recent kidnapings of 
three Americans. The government is increasing security for American facilities 
and officials. Exercise caution. 
 -- Peru: An American was killed recently amid the Inca ruins of Sacsayhuaman, 
which overlook the city of Cuzco. This is a grim reminder to exercise caution 
in the city and surrounding areas, and to avoid visiting archeological sites 
alone. 
Oceania 
 -- Papua New Guinea: Avoid travel to Bougainville Island, where a state of 
emergency exists due to armed insurgency. Violent crime continues to be a 
problem in rural and urban areas, and traveling alone is not advised. Be 
especially cautious in Lae and Port Moresby at night. Avoid Mt. Hagen and the 
Daiver River area in the Western Highlands. 
 -- Western Samoa: A cyclone struck in early February, causing severe damage to 
housing, transportation and food crops. A national emergency is in effect, and 
inter-island transportation and communication has been disrupted. Defer 
non-essential travel. 
Southeast Asia 
 -- Philippines: Despite reports of possible coup attempts, most urban centers 
and tourist destinations are considered safe for travelers. These include 
Manila, Baguio, the Batangas area, Puerto Galera, Dipolog, Bohol, Boracay, 
Camiguin, Marinduque, Palawan and most areas of Cebu. 
Travel should be avoided to Samar, Marawi City in Lanao del Sur, Sulu, Basilan, 
Kalinga Apayao and the Cagayan Valley in Cagayan and Isabela provinces. 
Exercise caution when traveling to parts of Luzon, especially Ifugao and 
Mountain provinces, including Banaue and Sagada. Use common sense precautions 
against street crime, especially in entertainment districts. 
 -- Singapore: In its drive for modernization Singapore destroyed much of its 
heritage as historic parts of the city were razed in the name of development. 
Aware of the value of tourism (its third-largest industry), the republic is in 
the middle of a five-year restoration effort to rebuild many of those areas. 
The first major project, restoration of the 125-year-old Empress Place, a 
neo-classical building by the Singapore River where Raffles supposedly landed, 
was completed last April. The place will be used as a museum housing revolving 
exhibits, the first of which showcases artifacts from China's last dynasty and 
runs through April. 
The master plan to restore old Singapore lists for rebuilding temples, mosques 
and traditional shophouses in districts such as Chinatown and Little India, as 
well as several colonial structures. 
Tiger Balm Garden, a bizarre collection of exhibits depicting Chinese 
mythology, was closed for restoration in July, 1988, and is scheduled to reopen 
in April as a high-tech amusement park. 
The historic Raffles Hotel is also closed for restoration, and is due to be 
reopened at the end of 1991. Bugis Street, the notorious red-light district 
that was razed to make way for Singapore's subway, will be re-created, as much 
as such a place can be, near its original site by 1991. 
A strict code of behavior is imposed in Singapore. Laws prohibiting spitting, 
littering, smoking in certain areas, even failing to flush public toilets are 
enforced, some with expensive fines. There is little crime, with most visitor 
complaints concerning taxis or misrepresentation of goods. 
The Singapore Tourist Promotion Board works with the Consumer Assn. of 
Singapore to address such complaints, and tries to resolve them within 24 
hours. 
 -- Vietnam: Independent travel is possible if the traveler first enters on a 
tour and then requests a visa extension. Extensions are valid for 14 days. 
Eastern Europe 
 -- Bulgaria: Travel conditions in Bulgaria should improve in the months ahead, 
but the pace will be slower than in countries such as Poland and 
Czechoslovakia. Antipathy toward the Bulgarian Turks may produce ethnic 
upheavals as hard-liners resurrect long-dormant differences. 
 -- East Germany: Change is occurring rapidly. Travel may not be as smooth, 
even in parts of West Germany, as Americans are accustomed to. Expect 
occasional delays. 
 -- Romania: Elation over the toppling of Ceaucescu has given way to new 
difficulties as this long-suffering country tries to build a democracy. The new 
struggle is between the old elite that would like to regain the reins of power, 
and those who want to establish a real democracy. 
Travel should open more in coming months, but the possibility of more 
demonstrations, and even violence, still exists. Contact the U.S. Embassy in 
Bucharest for current information. 
For more information on safety concerns in countries you may be visiting, 
contact the Citizens Emergency Center, U.S. Department of State, Washington, 
D.C. 20520, (202) 647-5225. 
