ORANGE COUNTY PERSPECTIVE; 
HOW BIG A GAMBLE IS THIS TRAIN? 
A privately operated high-speed train between Anaheim and Las Vegas might 
quicken the pulses of high-rollers. But if it's done right, such a train could 
also raise hopes for getting some commuters off freeways. 
Images of the fleeting French and German countrysides are still fresh in the 
minds of a delegation of officials and business executives from the county who 
have just returned from examining France's Train a Grande Vitesse and West 
Germany's magnetically levitated train. The California-Nevada Super Speed Train 
Commission hopes to select one of them, by October, as the model for the 
$4-billion train that would run along the proposed route. 
Exciting? Yes. But will the public be asked to kick in? As it stands, public 
funding pays only for administrative costs related to a bistate commission's 
work toward setting up the project. And the law would have to be changed in 
both states to get public money for this project. But what happens if either 
bidder decides it needs public help acquiring land for rights of way? The 
history of private railroads is filled with examples of the taxpayers bailing 
out entrepreneurs who could not make it. 
So the Legislature should think long and hard before committing funds to any 
such project, especially with all the rest that needs to be done to improve 
transportation in Orange County. That's especially so because there are no 
answers yet to the second big question: the number of stops between Las Vegas 
and Anaheim, and where they would be located. That's crucial if there is to be 
any hope of using the train for commuters. It's possible, and sensible, for the 
bidders to propose something that would provide express runs to Las Vegas, but 
also double tracks near some stations to allow commuter trains to stop. 
Of course, it's possible that the train will be an entirely private 
undertaking. But that won't be clear until the bids, due in July, are in. But 
if either the German or French proposals are to have any broad significance for 
Orange County, they must offer a system to serve a larger ridership than those 
headed to and from the gambling tables of Nevada. 
