U.S. TALKS PUT HIM IN A GOOD MOOD, ARAFAT SAYS 
Yasser Arafat said Thursday that the second formal meeting between U.S. and PLO 
representatives was encouraging and reflects the desire of both sides to make 
the dialogue a success. 
"We believe the content of the meeting was positive and bore the stamp of 
seriousness. . . . This is an indication of the interest which we and the U.S. 
Administration are giving to this dialogue," he told a news conference here. 
To a reporter who asked the smiling chairman of the Palestine Liberation 
Organization whether Wednesday's meeting was responsible for his good mood, 
Arafat replied, "Yes, exactly." 
He described the meeting between U.S. Ambassador Robert H. Pelletreau Jr. and 
Yasser Abed-Rabho of the PLO executive committee as "positive and serious" but 
gave few details of the discussion. 
Pelletreau and Abed-Rabho met for 4 1/2 hours at the Tunisian government's 
guest house. Afterward, Pelletreau declined to talk about the meeting and 
referred all inquiries to the State Department. 
Arafat, who received a detailed briefing into the early hours of Thursday, 
played down the differences between the two parties. 
"I believe the two sides have the firm will to pursue this dialogue and bring 
it to a fruitful conclusion," he said. 
Did the Americans ask him to stop the 15-month-old uprising in the 
Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip that has taken the lives of about 400 
Palestinians? 
"No one presented such a request, and no one can ask a people to stop resisting 
an occupation," he said. 
There was no indication whether a third meeting was scheduled, but the PLO 
chief's mood suggested that the dialogue will continue. 
"The fact that the agenda was loaded with a lot of subjects to be discussed 
shows clearly the importance given to it both by the U.S. Administration and 
the PLO," he said. "Its importance is even greater if you take into 
consideration all the Israeli efforts to stop it." 
Asked about Palestinian measures to reduce tension in the Middle East, Arafat 
said the query should be addressed to the Israelis because "it is they who are 
causing tension, with the Israeli army and the armed settler groups using force 
against the Palestinians." 
Arafat was asked about the unexplained delay in organizing an exile Palestinian 
government and said the Palestine National Council wants to include 
representatives of Palestinians living inside Palestine, which includes Israel. 
"We need to know how the Israelis will react to those who are appointed," he 
said. "Will they deport them, or put them in jail, or put them to death?" 
