MARKETING: TARGETING MOVIE ADS WITHOUT STICKING YOUR (LEFT) FOOT IN YOUR MOUTH 
One good way to persuade people to go see a particular movie is to tout how 
many Academy Awards it has won. With the Oscars ceremony set for Monday 
evening, filmmakers are doing everything they can -- from placing ads in the 
Hollywood trades to arranging special screenings -- to persuade Academy judges 
that their flick is No. 1. 
But long before Oscar nominees become Oscar winners, filmmakers have to find 
other marketing hooks for their movies. That's why the nation's estimated 43 
million Americans with physical disabilities are being marketed to as never 
before to see one particular motion picture: "My Left Foot." The film -- 
nominated for five Oscars -- dramatizes the story of the late Irish writer and 
painter Christy Brown, who had cerebral palsy. 
Even if the film doesn't win the Academy Award for best picture -- and some 
critics think that it should -- perhaps it at least deserves recognition for 
its innovative marketing techniques. 
An ongoing marketing campaign for "My Left Foot" featuring direct mail, 
follow-up phone calls and even lobbying in Washington will likely be put into 
high gear after the Academy Awards. The unusual campaign not only speaks 
directly to people with disabilities but was also crafted with the help of 
carefully sought advice from the community. 
"I hope this will be a model not only for distributors of motion pictures, but 
for all advertisers," said Paul K. Longmore, a Los Angeles historian and 
author, who is disabled. He was asked by Miramax Films to write a special 
review of the film from the perspective of a person with disabilities. His 
review -- for which he was not paid -- was mailed directly to more than 5,000 
key organizations, publications and individuals. 
"Miramax has their agenda. They want people to pay to see the movie," said 
Longmore. "But I want people to buy tickets for a different reason. I'm trying 
to promote civil rights for the disabled. People with disabilities should see 
Christy Brown as a role model." 
It is one thing for McDonald's or Levis to show disabled people in commercials. 
But it is something else to target the disabled just as some advertisers target 
blacks or Latinos. "Disabled people do have money," said Norma Vescovo, 
executive director of the Independent Living Center of Southern California. 
"It's nice to see someone finally recognize that." 
But Miramax isn't selling wheelchairs or special equipment. It is selling a 
movie that many people with disabilities say realistically portrays a disabled 
person. And this is done with an actor -- Daniel Day Lewis -- who is not 
disabled. That can make it an even tougher sell. 
"Every film has at least one special interest group, and we recognize the 
disabled community is a key element here," said Russell Schwartz, executive 
vice president of marketing at Miramax. "Our job is to get as many people as 
possible to see the film." 
But until the marketing campaign begins its big push in a few weeks, Miramax is 
trying to keep a relatively low profile about it. It is believed, however, that 
the campaign could include a major advertising effort in publications for the 
disabled and increased availability of specially made versions of the film for 
the blind and hearing-impaired. 
"Many marketers are concerned they'll be viewed as exploitative if they target 
the disabled," said Stan L. Friedman, who owns Santa Monica-based Friedman 
Communications and helped plan the campaign. "But the disabled community wants 
to be talked to. They want to be acknowledged as existing. People with 
disabilities do make money and they do go to movies." 
The question is: Can a relatively low-budget but carefully targeted marketing 
campaign persuade disabled people that this is the movie to see? 
Miramax hopes so. Besides mailing the specially written film reviews to 
organizations for the disabled, Miramax enclosed a one-page form that asked for 
opinions not only about the movie but also about the marketing behind it. These 
mailings were followed up by phone calls to each group or publication. 
"In the ideal world, it would be better if we weren't a group that had to be 
marketed to," said Tom Ritter, who is disabled and who produces TV 
documentaries on the disabled. "But we're not in an ideal world. We need to be 
viewed as a special interest group," said the brother of actor John Ritter. 
Miramax also hired Tari Susan Hartman, regarded as a leading expert in 
marketing to people with disabilities. Hartman, who owns Los Angeles-based Ein 
Sof Communications, was formerly executive director of Media Access Office, a 
group that works to ensure accurate portrayals of people with disabilities in 
films and on television. 
"The disabled don't want this done for them, they want it done with them," said 
Hartman, who recently returned from Washington, where she lobbied in support of 
the Americans with disabilities bill that seeks to end discrimination against 
people with disabilities. 
"We're creating a bridge between the corporate world and the disability world," 
said Hartman. "It turns out, both sides may be saying the same thing." 
Locklear Pops Out in New Magazine Ad 
The new-look Heather Locklear began popping up all over this week. Literally. 
A complex, pop-up print ad featuring Locklear for Bally's Health &amp; Tennis 
Corp. of America appears in the March 19 issue of People magazine. The pop-up 
portion of the ad is preceded by a full-page ad that poses this question: What 
can you do in 30 minutes that makes you feel good all over? 
When readers turn the page, the answer pops out in the form of Locklear. 
Actually, there are 11 separate pop-ups of Locklear exercising on high-tech 
equipment at the club, which operates under the name Holiday Spa Health Club in 
Southern California. The print campaign was created by the ad agency J. Walter 
Thompson/Los Angeles. 
Will the ad grab as much attention as one the company formerly ran that asked 
readers to rub a coin across a photo of Cher's belly button to find out about a 
new promotion? Don't bet on it. Locklear's belly button is completely concealed 
in this ad. 
Riney Talking to E&amp;J Gallo -- Again 
Will Hal Riney &amp; Associates soon be making ads for E&amp;J Gallo again? 
In December of 1987 Riney made big news when he resigned the $70-million Gallo 
wine business in a huff. At the time, Riney refused to say why he quit the 
notoriously difficult client. But now, Riney's agency, which created ads for 
Bartles &amp; Jaymes wine cooler as well as Gallo wine, is once again talking 
with Ernest Gallo about the business. 
"Just because we resigned the business doesn't mean I hate Gallo," said Riney. 
"Ernest and I have remained friends since our separation. If we can be of some 
help to them, why not?" 
New Competition Aimed at Ad Students 
Advertising contests often reward those who need attention least: the 
successful. But students and advertising newcomers are finally getting some 
well-deserved attention. 
A new ad competition, sponsored by the Los Angeles Creative Club, will reward 
college students. The 10-year-old group of ad professionals is seeking 
student-created entries that have not been published or broadcast. There will 
be no cash prizes, but winners will receive certificates of merit. Complete 
rules are available from the organization. 
Although judges have not been selected, they will be chosen from among the top 
creative directors in Los Angeles. And with creative eyes like that judging the 
contest, said Dick Merritt, vice president of the Creative Club, "Some winners 
could be offered jobs." 
Meanwhile, all of this year's Belding Awards entries have been turned over to 
Bruce Schroffel, president of the ad agency Schroffel &amp; Associates. And 
he's making the award-winning commercials, print ads and collateral available 
to schools that might want them. For years, the entries have been tossed out 
after the contest. "But I complained so much about that policy," said 
Schroffel, "they decided to give them to me." 
