THE LOS ANGELES CONNECTION; 
ALIEN SMUGGLER'S DAY: DOZEN 'COUSINS' ABOARD 
In the parlance of alien smugglers at Los Angeles International Airport, 
everybody has "cousins." With a knowing smile, a man who all too readily 
identified himself as Jose Luis Hernandez admitted that he had just boarded 
three "cousins" on Eastern Airlines Flight 80 bound for New York, via Atlanta. 
"Yes, they are illegal, but they're my cousins," said "Hernandez," a winning 
young man dressed in designer blue jeans and a white jacket. 
Later, when asked about the six additional passengers he had just presented 
with tickets at Gate 65 to board the red-eye flight, Hernandez was not daunted. 
"Oh, they're my cousins, too," he said, all but winking. 
This was Tuesday night, just 24 hours after Immigration and Naturalization 
Service agents apprehended 69 suspected illegal immigrants boarding Flight 80 
en route to New York and the promise of jobs. Earlier that same day, 79 others 
had been taken off the same flight when it stopped in Atlanta for refueling. 
INS officials described Eastern's flight, which departs daily from LAX at 10:50 
p.m., as an unwitting conduit in a massive transcontinental smuggling operation 
that apparently moved several thousand illegals out of Los Angeles in the last 
month alone. Some of the aliens arrested said they paid as much as $4,000 for a 
package deal -- transportation from home, housing, the Eastern plane ticket and 
a job in New York. 
The series of airport arrests, including the detention Wednesday of 27 
suspected illegal immigrants in North Carolina aboard a Piedmont Airlines 
flight, has focused new attention on Los Angeles' role as a hub for the 
nation's force of illegal workers. 
While the fact that Los Angeles is an attractive port of entry for aliens is 
widely documented, the use of flights from Los Angeles International to 
dispatch the workers to destinations throughout the continental United States 
is less well known, and on this topic Hernandez is an expert. 
There were no agents working the gate Tuesday night, he was free to ply his 
trade and, in a limited fashion, discuss it. In all, Hernandez boarded about 12 
of his "cousins." 
The young man was uncommonly forthcoming when asked directly if he was a 
smuggler of aliens. 
"Yes, I'm a smuggler," he said. 
Hernandez, a Salvadoran who said he lives in Orange County, said it is his job 
to meet illegals who have crossed the U.S. border at Tijuana. He meets them 
near Santa Ana. From there, he escorts them to LAX and makes sure they board 
Eastern Flight 80. 
Was he not afraid, given the recent INS attention to the flight? 
"What are they going to do to me?" he replied. "Send me home? I could be back 
in no time." 
Hernandez said that using a commercial aircraft is a lucrative way to smuggle 
aliens. 
"It is easy to do," he said. 
Pressed on how the tickets, which INS officials say are purchased in bulk, were 
obtained, Hernandez smiled and said: "I don't know anything about that." 
Other questions -- such as "How much did your 'cousins' pay you?" or "Who are 
your bosses?" -- were answered in much the same way. 
His "cousins" Tuesday arrived in twos and threes, all of them young men. Most 
carried no baggage and wore drab clothes. Some held grocery bags filled with 
belongings. 
Airline Workers Pass Them 
Hernandez escorted each set of his "cousins," all of them Spanish speakers, 
inside Terminal 6 to Gate 65. The airline workers checked their tickets and 
boarding passes, and then left them alone. They sat together in rows, waiting 
to board the plane. Hernandez hovered around the scene, keeping his charges in 
sight. 
When Flight 80 was announced, six who were sitting together joined the line of 
passengers waiting to board. Approached by a reporter, who assured them that he 
was not an INS agent, the six said in Spanish that they were illegal immigrants 
headed for New York. 
"I don't have a job there yet, but I hope to," said one alien, who said he was 
from the Mexican state of Zacatecas. 
"We're not looking for trouble," one of the others interjected. "We just want 
to feed our families." 
And with that, they boarded the flight without incident, and apparently managed 
to complete their journey to New York. 
Twenty-seven others on another flight were not so lucky Wednesday. They were 
detained in Charlotte, N.C., by federal agents who boarded a Piedmont jetliner 
and asked for documentation of U.S. citizenship or legal residency. 
Tipped by Irate Passenger 
Supervisory INS Agent David Carmichael in Charlotte said agents had been tipped 
by an irate passenger who said there were New York-bound illegals on the 
flight. Recent publicity about the airport apprehensions prompted the 
unidentified passenger to notify authorities when the plane landed, Carmichael 
said. 
According to federal officials, the 27 had flown on another airline from Los 
Angeles to Phoenix and then transferred to the Piedmont flight, which was to 
have taken them to New York. 
One of the suspected aliens, Mario Gonzales, said he had borrowed $3,000 and 
paid it to a man who arranged ground transportation to Los Angeles and then air 
transportation to New York. He said the man promised him a job at a 
construction site in New York, where he would be paid $30 to $40 a day, far 
below union scale. 
INS officials in Atlanta, meanwhile, said Wednesday that smugglers may start 
dumping the blocks of airline tickets purchased in advance of the recent 
arrests. 
"They've already purchased their tickets before they even know who is going to 
buy the ticket or who is going to pay for the smuggling process," said Neil 
Jacobs, assistant INS district director for investigators in Atlanta. "Probably 
even more as a result of Monday's and Tuesday's operations, you are going to 
see more and more smugglers attempting to unload these tickets, and get as much 
money as they can before we really start scrutinizing everybody." 
INS officials in Los Angeles offered no new details Wednesday on their part of 
the investigation. Officials said the situation would be discussed today when 
Harold Ezell, INS western regional commissioner, meets with Los Angeles 
District Director Ernest Gustafson. The two have been out of town, officials 
said. 
Times staff researcher Edith Stanley in Atlanta contributed to this story. 
