IRVINE FIRM SEEKS NYSE INQUIRY ON 'RUMOR CAMPAIGN' 
On Friday, just one day after the unexpected resignation of its president, 
National Education Corp. asked the New York Stock Exchange to investigate what 
it says is a rumor campaign aimed at damaging the company's financial 
reputation. 
Investment analysts said the rumors helped send the value of National Education 
stock down 20% on Thursday and early Friday before the Irvine-based vocational 
education and training services firm received a vote of confidence from a group 
of institutional investors. 
H. David Bright, National Education's chairman, said in a prepared statement 
Friday that company officials had received numerous requests from financial 
analysts for "verification of a variety of rumors." He said the rumors 
denigrated the firm's performance and prospects. 
No Comments 
New York Stock Exchange spokeswoman Martha Cid declined to comment on the 
situation and would not even say whether it is usual for companies to request 
investigations of apparent smear campaigns. She said the exchange does conduct 
investigations when there is an unusual volume of trading or an unusual 
volatility in a stock. 
National Education officials declined to comment on their request. 
The rumors, which analysts said began Monday after the release of a negative 
investment report, gathered steam with the resignation Thursday of President 
Jerome W. Cwiertnia, who said he was stepping down to pursue other career 
opportunities. 
National Education stock began the week badly when an investment report 
questioning an unusually large buildup in the firm's accounts receivable was 
released. Receivables totaled $96.9 million on Sept. 30, up from $51 million at 
the end of 1987 and $28.6 million at the end of 1986. 
"The accounts receivable gave me uncertainties, and I downgraded the stock," 
said Bert L. Boksen, an analyst at Raymond, James &amp; Associates, a regional 
brokerage in St. Petersburg, Fla. Boksen downgraded the stock from a "buy" to a 
"hold" recommendation Monday, then issued a "sell" recommendation Friday 
because of investor uncertainty about the effect of Cwiertnia's departure. 
Other analysts said the large receivable figure is not cause for concern and 
that an increase is understandable considering that National Education has made 
two major acquisitions in the past 2 years. 
"These receivables are with either Fortune 100 or Fortune 500 companies. Jerry 
Cwiertnia told me he has no doubt they're going to receive them. Jerry 
Cwiertnia is as honest as a person can be," said David Butterworth, an analyst 
at Wedbush Securities in Los Angeles. 
'No Connection' 
One analyst said the unexpected resignation caused some investors to connect 
the concern over receivables with Cwiertnia's resignation. 
"I see some uninformed people saying, 'Oh, here's this receivables question and 
3 days later the president is stepping down.' I've followed the company for 
years, and I know there is no connection," Butterworth said. 
Institutional investors tried to give the stock a boost Friday with buy orders. 
And the investment firm of Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. arranged a conference call 
between 50 investment managers and National Education officials in a bid to 
bolster confidence in the company. 
"Among informed investors, nothing was amiss," said Ram Capoor, a Morgan 
Stanley analyst. 
Investor uncertainty over the company's short-term cash flow caused Shearson 
Lehman Hutton analyst Jeff Kessler to slightly downgrade his firm's rating for 
National Education, but Kessler said he nevertheless believes the uncertainty 
is unfounded. 
Timing Is Questioned 
One industry analyst, who asked not to be identified, said the timing of 
Cwiertnia's announcement added to the uncertainty. "They could have waited 
until the market closed," he said. Cwiertnia then "could spend the afternoon 
telling people his reasons for leaving and the stock wouldn't be trading." 
National Education said it informed the stock exchange of the resignation 
before the announcement was made, and a company spokesman said that officials 
believed that they were required to announce the resignation while the market 
was open. 
National Education stock closed Friday at $20.25, up 25 cents for the day. It 
was one of the most active on the exchange, with 1.7 million shares traded. The 
stock was trading as low as $18 Thursday. It began the week at $25.375. 
