STAGE REVIEW; 
SECOND CITY STORMS WEST 
Ring out the old, ring in the new. Chicago's Second City has blown into town 
and taken over the Mayfair in Santa Monica -- and the joint is jumping. 
It will break some hearts to see the former Victorian red and gold of the old 
Mayfair Music Hall lobby conformed into yet another of those sleek, neutered, 
high-tech spaces with the exposed ducts and pipes that seem to be the requisite 
for hip. It's all cabaret seating inside. Gone is the grand old semicircular 
rococo lobby bar, replaced by . . . just a bar. 
But gone, too, is the erratic programming. If the content on stage was 
unpredictable at the Mayfair and New Mayfair (as it was called when it was less 
new), the streamlining outside heralds the streamlining inside. 
The 30-year-old improv comedy troupe from the Windy City has opened a local 
franchise. It's been a steady hatchery for top comedy talent, spawning such 
names as Mike Nichols, Elaine May, the Belushi brothers and John Candy among 
dozens -- literally -- of familiar alums. Nor did Second City wait for the 
reviews to be in to sign a 10-year lease. The company is here to stay and we're 
the beneficiaries. 
"For a Good Time Call . . . 451-0621" is a shrewd, smart, savvy series of quick 
takes dealing with everything from malpractice insurance and hyperkinetic 
Space-Age kids to revisionist school teachers, secret male fantasies and a 
slow-motion Western spoof. You name it, they've got it. And if they don't have 
it, don't worry. They'll create it. On the spot. 
There is nothing new about improv and scripted comedy of this type, but these 
young comedians have pedigrees. They're direct descendants of the inventors of 
the genre. Like the work of the San Francisco Committee, the old Credibility 
Gap or the current Los Angeles Groundlings (and an endless effluvium of young 
imitators), comedy as a series of fast blackouts is very much in vogue. Not all 
who are called, though, are necessarily choice. What Second City delivers in 
Santa Monica is prime stuff. 
What makes the difference? Outrage, a keen sensibility and sharp eye for what's 
funny. Director Jeff Michalski didn't invent the sketches without the terrific 
ensemble of seven who perform them -- Dana Anderson, Chris Barnes, Robin Duke, 
John Hemphill, Bonnie Hunt, Don Lake and Jane Morris -- but he can be credited 
for the selection of scenes that comprise the show and for its superswift pace, 
sandwiching snappy living cartoons between blackouts and longer segments. 
The troupe picks up on political satire, one of the most lamented lapses in 
comedy today. There's a solo Washington, D.C., rap song and a group song about 
the deficit ("We're gonna stick it to the children / Dump it on the kids / 
Leave it to our heirs / To clean up our affairs / Chips off the H &amp; R Block 
. . . "), but better still, they deliver a sizzling indictment of homelessness 
in the form of a fantasy revue, performed against a giant American flag as 
backdrop. The point is not lost. 
The greatest clue to the group's sense of social responsibility is the top of 
the second half. It takes nerve, in the middle of an evening of comedy, to do a 
series of short sketches, commentaries almost, related to the tragedy of AIDS. 
These are beautifully done, one scene overlapping into another, with a 
deepening solemnity. 
Yet there were bimbos in Wednesday's audience who laughed all the way through, 
as though programmed in their expectations and having no minds of their own, 
they had to continue to laugh. And no, it was not nervous laughter. 
What the members of Second City do requires class as well as skill. This was 
brilliantly illustrated in a glowing sketch with three people at a bar telling 
stories, demonstrating the subtle difference a good (or bad) storyteller can 
make to similar sets of events. 
The members of Second City can tell stories and then some. 
About that 10-year lease -- is there an option to extend? 
 At 214 Santa Monica Blvd. in Santa Monica, Tuesdays and Thursdays, 8:30 p.m.; 
Fridays and Saturdays, 8 and 10:30 p.m.; Sundays, 7:30 p.m. Indefinitely. 
Tickets: $12.95-$13.95. (213) 451-0621). P.S. Deli food and drink can be 
ordered before the show and during the intermission. 
