SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA JOB MARKET; 
REPORTS FORM THE FIELD; 
JOB FAIR: WHEN DREAMS COLLIDE WITH REALITY 
Los Angeles Police Sgt. Joseph Peyton was looking for a few good rookies. So on 
a San Mateo recruiting drive, he tried to lure new officers with the rewards of 
police work: the chance to perform a vital public service, the excitement of 
apprehending criminals. 
But Peyton was outgunned by a rival who drew bigger crowds. "The (Drug 
Enforcement Administration) had this gimmick -- a robot-like Ninja warrior 
moving up and down," he recalled laughingly. "All we had were four officers." 
Welcome to the job fair, the awkward ritual where prospective employers and 
employees get acquainted, usually on college campuses. Both sides say the 
encounter is revealing, if not a downright collision of expectations. 
Recruiters say many students want more money at the entry level than employers 
are willing to pay. And students say they sometimes find the demands of 
would-be employers to be a little, well, unrealistic. 
On a recent blustery day at USC, about 3,000 students visited representatives 
of 135 fields, including high technology, entertainment, financial services, 
retailing and law enforcement. 
Charles M. Hedgepeth, 23, a USC senior majoring in public administration, 
discovered that the hard realities of the working world were somewhat different 
from what he'd hoped. 
"Nordstrom is entry-level only," complained Hedgepeth, who spent $700 for his 
job interview wardrobe. "And May Co.? They want a 3.0 grade average. . . . It's 
ridiculous." 
What sort of money should college graduates expect for their first professional 
job? Depending on the field, holders of bachelor's degrees generally start out 
at $20,000 up to the low $30,000s, according to national surveys by the College 
Placement Council, an association of employers and colleges. 
Petroleum and chemical engineers, for instance, start out at an average of 
$33,000, whereas health care workers typically start at $20,000 to $25,000. 
(Salaries in high-cost regions, such as Southern California, may be higher.) 
Highest starting pay outside technical fields goes to students entering the 
investment banking field, with offers typically in the mid-$20,000s or higher, 
the placement council reports. 
Not surprising, "financial services have continued to be a pretty big draw (for 
students) as well as communications, tech-oriented companies and, of course, 
the more glamorous ones, entertainment," said Stephen Cheney-Rice, assistant 
director of USC's Career Development Center. 
Asked for popular career choices among UCLA undergraduates, Joyce Haraughty, a 
career development employee there, cited advertising, accounting, management, 
real estate and government. 
While some fields are perennially popular, other aspects of the career search 
are changing. Consider preparation: Increasingly at local universities, 
preparing for the job hunt is serious business. At UCLA, counselors are 
available to help students prepare their resumes and fine-tune their job 
interview techniques, Haraughty said. 
Such practice can help, counselors say. During a typical two-hour mock 
interview at USC's career development center, counselors pretend they are 
employers; the episode is videotaped to help improve the student's performance. 
One tape revealed that a "young lady's leg would accelerate -- jumping up and 
down out of nervousness -- whenever she had to answer a question," Cheney-Rice 
recalled. " . . . a mile a minute that leg was going. That's the kind of thing 
that can be found by video playback." 
All the preparing, it seems, can create student-experts in workplace issues -- 
even among students who have little firsthand knowledge of the working world. 
"They want to know about retirement, pension benefits, opportunities," said 
LAPD's Peyton. "They are going to grill you, and you'd better be prepared." 
Jerry Houser, who directs the USC career center, agrees: "Students say, 'I'm 
going to check out a company and if they don't come through with their 
promises, I'm going to get out of here.' That's a big switch from the early 
'70s." 
Tim Briggs, a recruiter for the Broadway department store chain, noted another 
aspect of the tough attitude among students he has met lately: They state 
exactly what they want the company to do for them. 
"No long-term commitment," he said. "Students tell us that they are looking to 
get a job, get experience and move on to other companies. Students are more up 
front about their wants, to work and move on." 
Listen to Gunner Chapman, 23, a public administration major and one of the 
thousands of USC students at the career fair: "Ideally I'd like to start with 
big companies for training and experience and then go off on my own or a 
smaller company. Larger companies tend to stifle growth. Atmosphere is very 
important. I don't want it too rigid, like engineers, or too loose like 
sales-oriented jobs. 
Are such expectations excessive? Not at all, declared Sally Peinado, 21, a USC 
communications major. 
Peinado said she wants to know about a firm's training programs, its 
recruitment policies and, "How do they assess my wants as well as theirs. . . . 
You have every right asking the company what they can offer you. I'm not 
afraid. I want to know what they have to offer me." 
STARTING SALARIES 
Average salary offers to bachelor's degree candidates in January, 1990 
FINANCE 
Public accounting: $26,293 
Commercial Banking: $18,983 
Insurance Underwriting: $21,843 
Investment Banking 
(Corporate Finance): $25,040 
COMMUNICATIONS 
Design/Graphic Arts: $17,630 
Public Relations: $19,995 
Writing/Editing: $19,275 
MARKETING 
Advertising: $16,750 
Product Management: $23,869 
ENGINEERING 
Manufacturing: $31,622 
Software Design: $30,734 
HEALTH CARE 
Administration: $19,575 
Nursing: $24,114 
Occupational Therapy: $25,346 
SOCIAL SERVICES 
Counseling: $15,053 
COMPUTER SCIENCE 
Programming: $26,730 
Systems Analysis: $28,505 
OTHER 
Architecture: $18,130 
Consulting: $26,161 
Paralegal: $19,000 
Research (Technical): $24,024 
Teaching: $18,627 
Source: College Placement Council 
