WITNESS HINTS OF NORTH LINK TO REAGAN 
Lt. Col. Oliver L. North told a retired Air Force officer who helped him 
resupply Nicaragua's rebels that "someday the President will shake your hand," 
the officer told a federal court jury Monday. 
Retired Col. Robert C. Dutton said that North made the remark to him in 
September, 1986, after Dutton had solved tactical problems that prevented the 
Contras from receiving airdrops of weapons and medical supplies purchased with 
private donations. 
Dutton became the sixth prosecution witness at North's trial to link the former 
National Security Council aide with the resupply mission, despite North's 
repeated denials of his activities to members of Congress at that time. 
The most serious of 12 felony charges against North are that he gave false 
statements to Congress in 1985 and 1986 in response to questions about his 
assistance to the Contras and that he obstructed congressional inquiries. 
During this two-year period, Congress had voted repeatedly to prohibit U.S. 
military aid to rebel forces fighting the leftist Sandinista government of 
Nicaragua. 
North's defense is that his superiors in the Ronald Reagan Administration 
approved his activities but instructed him to conceal them from others, 
including Congress. 
On cross-examination of Dutton, Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., North's attorney, 
elicited testimony that Dutton and two others who had helped North in the 
Contra resupply mission -- retired Air Force officers Richard V. Secord and 
Richard B. Gadd -- all had taken part in a high-risk covert mission authorized 
by former President Jimmy Carter nine years ago. 
That was the unsuccessful secret mission to Tehran to rescue 52 American 
hostages in the spring of 1980. The mission had to be aborted when Iranians 
discovered it in its final hours. The hostages were released in January, 1981, 
after 444 days in captivity. 
Oath of Secrecy 
Dutton said that because of an oath of secrecy, he was unable to describe his 
exact role, but that his military specialty had been "penetrating hostile 
territory." 
Gadd, like Dutton, previously had testified that he helped North assist the 
Contras as a tactical expert. Secord is a co-defendant of North's who will be 
tried separately later this year. 
Dutton said that North, in referring to a possible future handshake from 
Reagan, said that he intended to show his "top boss" some photos that Dutton 
had made of successful airdrops to the Contras. 
"Whom do you think he was referring to?" Sullivan asked. 
"The President," Dutton replied. 
Dutton said that the incident occurred soon after Congress had voted to begin 
funding the Contras again with a $100-million appropriation. 
Sullivan, meanwhile, told U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell that the judge 
was unfairly limiting Sullivan's attempts to show jurors that Dutton and Secord 
also had worked with North to trade weapons to Iran to obtain the release of 
other American hostages in Lebanon in 1986. 
Sullivan was able to elicit a brief reference to the 1986 operation from 
Dutton. But Gesell said that detailed testimony about Iranian arms sales no 
longer is relevant to the trial, because the alleged diversion of arms-sale 
profits to the Contras by North was one of two central charges that the 
government dismissed in January. 
The charges were dropped after Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh determined that 
evidence needed by North to defend himself would require disclosure of 
top-secret government information. 
With jurors absent from the courtroom during a noon recess, Sullivan protested 
that "we've got to go back to basics. The indictment (against North) makes 
specific reference to the Iran initiative," he said. "The government's opening 
statement discusses the Iran initiative." 
But Gesell told Sullivan that he was giving him wide enough latitude on 
cross-examination and "I think you're being oversensitive. I'm just trying to 
move this along so we can end this trial while I'm still alive," said the 
78-year-old jurist. 
