'STAR WARS' SATELLITE PUT IN ORBIT AND QUICKLY SPOTS A TEST TARGET 
A Delta Star missile-hunting satellite thundered into orbit Friday and quickly 
spotted a target as it began a key months-long test to develop a split-second 
"Star Wars" defense against nuclear rockets. 
The payload's sensors passed their first trial within two hours after launching 
when they successfully tracked the thrusting second stage of the Delta booster 
rocket after separation and during its fiery destruction in the atmosphere over 
the Indian Ocean. 
"We watched that burn with the sensors; we not only got the second stage 
burning but we also got the re-entry and breakup," said Air Force Col. Michael 
Rendine, program manager for the Strategic Defense Initiative Office. 
Perfecting Technology 
Over the next several months, the $140-million satellite is to aim its sensors 
at a series of ground-based missile and space launches to help perfect the 
technology for detecting and destroying enemy boosters within minutes after 
they leave their launching pads. 
Researchers will seek to gather rocket exhaust data against the background of 
the North Pole region, an area through which attacking Soviet missiles would 
travel. 
Air Force officials said that the Delta Star experiment is part of research 
being done for the Strategic Defense Initiative, also known as "Star Wars," to 
develop a space-based missile defense system. 
The three-ton satellite carries a laser radar, seven video imaging cameras and 
an infrared imager. A Laser Illumination Detection System is designed to spot 
ground-based laser firings, a capability that would permit future satellites to 
take evasive action. 
Using a 48-jet thruster aiming system, Delta Star has the capability to 
maneuver into position to spot the blazing plume of missiles and rockets to be 
launched over the next several months from the space center; Wallops Island, 
Va.; White Sands, N. M.; Poker Flats, Alaska; Barking Sands, Hawaii, and, 
possibly, from Soviet launching sites. 
Identifying Exhaust Signature 
In addition to quickly sighting a rocket plume, Delta Star sensors are expected 
to gather information to help distinguish the exhaust signature from such 
backgrounds as land, ocean, horizon, space, atmospheric effects and the bright 
aurora borealis in the North Pole region. 
The polar background information is critical because Soviet missiles would 
travel through that region in any attack on the United States. 
The launching was the third in a series. In a 1986 test, two satellites tracked 
each other and one destroyed the other by crashing into it. 
