STAGE REVIEW; 
COMEDY TAKES AIM AT THE TEMPERAMENTAL ACTOR 
"Jitters" is a comedy, all right, but it also feels like a playwright's 
good-humored revenge on temperamental actors. 
Playwright David French apparently has first-hand knowledge of actors' foibles, 
and he puts them on parade in "Jitters." French isn't too mean about it, but he 
is insistent. Just about everybody in this near-farce is an actor (or former 
actor), and just about everybody is a little foolish. 
They're also self-absorbed, preeningly proud, amazingly insecure -- and often 
funny, especially under Craig Fleming's wide-open direction in the Laguna 
Playhouse production that runs through April 9 at the Moulton Theatre in Laguna 
Beach. 
"Jitters" is not a great comedy -- the last act seems to go on and on -- but 
it's not bad. Fleming works at giving the audience a good time. 
The plot revolves around rehearsals for a drama at a Canadian playhouse in need 
of a hit. The theater, known for its artistry but skimpy box office, brings 
together some of the country's best actors, including the grand Jessica Logan 
(Katherine Rodecker). 
Logan has even ventured to Broadway, which irks the respected but irascible 
Patrick Flanagan (George Woods), who has to assume second billing when she 
joins the party. But there's more than just marquee-status friction at hand. At 
least Logan left the provincial safety of Canada to see whether she had the 
stuff. Flanagan's too chicken, and that irks him. 
Of course, they battle almost nonstop. Into this tempest-in-a-theater is tossed 
a band of stage folk including a neurotic character actor (Jeffrey Markle), a 
young first-timer (Rich Jackson), a martinet of a stage manager (Tony Crowell), 
an intense playwright (Dan Finn) and a fatherly director (Bob Kokol). 
Fleming gets good performances from his cast, especially Woods in the pivotal 
role. This guy is all bluff and blather, and Woods makes him as windy as can 
be. Woods also gets us to see his nastiness without separating us from the 
character -- not a minor accomplishment. 
Rodecker's Logan is both strong and emotional, and Markle, as the character 
actor, Phil, plays it pretty big but is funny nonetheless. Rich Jackson brings 
an appropriately antic restlessness to the young actor; Kokol is a vision of 
exasperation, and Finn is broodingly distracted. 
Steve Maddy's set, of a set and the backstage dressing room, is more 
serviceable than special. Both D. Scott Linder's lighting and Marthella 
Randall's costumes fit the show. 
'JITTERS' 
A Laguna Playhouse production of David French's comedy. Directed by Craig 
Fleming. With George Woods, Katherine Rodecker, Jeffrey Markle, Bob Kokol, Dan 
Finn, Rich Jackson, Tony Crowell, Wendy Abas and Joan Lorenzen. Sets by Steve 
Maddy. Lighting by D. Scott Linder. Costumes by Marthella Randall. Sound by 
Jeffrey Markle. Plays through April 9. Show times: 8 p.m. Tuesday through 
Saturday; 2:30 p.m. on Sunday, April 2 and 9. Tickets: $11 to $13. At the 
Moulton Theatre, 606 Laguna Canyon Road, Laguna Beach. Information: (714) 
494-8021. 
