MOM AND DAD HUXTABLE DO VEGAS; 
A SHOWROOM ACT BY BILL COSBY AND PHYLICIA RASHAD IS PART OF THE GAMING RESORT'S 
WOOING OF FAMILIES 
If it's skin Vegas audiences want, they won't get it from Mom and Dad Huxtable. 
"There'll be no G-strings in my show," drawled Phylicia Rashad, ending the 
pronouncement with her patented "Cosby Show" giggle. She shook her finger, 
playfully scolding, more in the mock-serious manner of Mrs. Clair Huxtable than 
as the singer/dancer/actress/wife of NBC sportscaster Ahmad Rashad. 
"And if there are G-strings, they'll be under the garments so no one will see," 
she said, unsuccessfully trying to check the giggle. "No G-strings!" 
The First Mom of TV sitcoms hunkered down in one corner of the broken-down 
black Naugahyde couch that sits in front of the stage inside the S.I.R. sound 
studios on Manhattan's upper west side. As she rehearsed for her recent Las 
Vegas club debut, billed alongside her TV husband, Bill Cosby, Rashad unzipped 
a black and white ski jacket to reveal a skin-tight pink leotard underneath. 
She smiled. Her teeth are perfect, testimony, perhaps, to the fact that both 
her father and the first of her three real-life husbands were dentists. 
"I mean, Las Vegas is a community I'm told, where people live who have nothing 
to do with show business," she continued, peeling off another layer of 
cold-weather clothing as she spoke. 
On the opposite side of the studio, a host of veteran musicians who have played 
backup to the likes of Luther Vandross, Judy Collins and Ashford and Simpson, 
warmed up for yet another run-through in the string of rehearsals that began 
six months ago. 
"They've got a university there," the 41-year-old actress said. "They've got 
churches there. They've got schools there. They've got people living life 
there!" 
Indeed, Las Vegas is not what it once was. Nevada's largest city is at least as 
well-known these days for UNLV Coach Jerry Tarkanian's winning basketball team 
as it is for hoodlums, gambling, golf and the sunny weather. 
During February in New York, Popsicle-like winds make G-strings sound more like 
an instrument of torture than lust. Clear and sunny Las Vegas represents 
another world in more ways than one. The famous Strip, where casino hotels play 
host to more than 18 million visitors a year, seems as contrary to the family 
image she and Cosby have fostered as Mr. and Mrs. Cliff Huxtable as do 
showgirls in a snowstorm. 
And yet, Mom and Dad Huxtable have, indeed, brought their brand of good, clean 
family fun to Las Vegas. 
Rashad is headlining alongside her TV husband through March 11 at the Hilton. 
In her final rehearsals two weeks ago in New York, she alternated between 
anxious and confident that her song-and-dance routines would be a hit, even 
though she's been planning the show since July. But she has her bets covered. 
Any chance that showroom crowds might yawn through her renditions of "As Time 
Goes By" or Stevie Wonder's "Overjoyed" is diminished by the advice she gets 
from the father figure she "married" on the Cosby show. 
"Bill and I were supposed to debut in November, but the musician's strike was 
still on," Rashad said. "In January, there was some talk about some performers 
crossing the picket line and I talked to Bill about that and he said: 'No, I 
don't want you going in like that. You just wait.' " 
Cosby is shrewd enough to know that crossing picket lines is a potential public 
relations disaster, especially for the Huxtables. The 52-year-old entertainer, 
who reportedly hand-picked Rashad from among dozens who auditioned for the role 
of Mrs. Huxtable when the sitcom was cast seven years ago, is no stranger to 
the Strip. Commanding more than $300,000 a week, he holds the title of No. 1 
draw among the dozens of Las Vegas attractions that play the city's showrooms 
and lounges each year, according to the Las Vegas News Bureau. 
With typical excess, Las Vegas bills itself as "the Entertainment Capital of 
the World," even though cynics gave it the more accurate, if less flattering 
title of "a Disneyland for adults." 
But whatever its epithet, the one-time Mormon settlement at the southern end of 
Nevada is arguably the last place Huxtable fans might expect to find the tube's 
most popular prime-time parents. 
Yet as Rashad and others point out, audiences have changed and Las Vegas has 
changed with them. Lounge pianists who insist on whining their version of 
"Feelings," bare-breasted showgirls with Kewpie doll smiles and foul comedy a 
la Redd Foxx may be Strip perennials, but their appeal to balding baby boomers 
is limited. With the mellowing of the '60s generation, a new brand of 
entertainer is beginning to surface in Las Vegas. Sinatra still packs them in, 
though he has slipped to the No. 2 spot in terms of salary and audience behind 
Cosby. Julio Iglesias (No. 3), Wayne Newton and Englebert Humperdinck can 
always be depended upon to make grandmothers swoon. 
But the Pointer Sisters and the , Beach Boys do all right when they come to 
town too. As more yuppies approach middle age, they contribute a larger share 
to the $4 billion lost at the casinos each year. They also demand younger 
entertainers for themselves and more family entertainment for their children. 
What could have more wholesome yuppie family appeal than, say, the Moscow 
Circus that had a weeklong run here last month? Or Sid and Marty Krofft's 
Puppets? Or Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton appearing on the same bill for the 
first time in years? 
So what's so strange about Cliff and Clair Huxtable in Vegas? 
"The typical Las Vegas show is still the big production that features 
bare-breasted showgirls," said Las Vegas News Bureau media director Stephen 
Allen. "Like 'Jubilee' at Bally's. It's got 125 performers. Big production 
numbers." 
Allen is a former Philadelphia newspaperman who came to Las Vegas for a weekend 
12 years ago and wound up staying. Until Hollywood entrepreneur Kirk Kerkorian 
sold the MGM Grand Hotel to Bally's in the mid-'80s, Allen was the hotel's 
public relations director. Since then, he has run the non-stop press release 
division of the city's convention and visitors bureau and, from that vantage 
point, he's seen a subtle but clear shift in the way in which the casinos 
entertain their guests. 
"The stereotypical visitor here used to be the guy who came here with his 
'niece' or his girlfriend to gamble for the weekend," Allen said. "Now these 
are still gambling casinos. They're not Disneyland yet." 
But the writing is on the wall. 
Witness the very face of the Strip, where the Golden Nugget's Steve Wynn just 
opened a $500-million, 3,600-room hotel next to Caesars Palace last year. The 
32-story marvel, called the Mirage, has a waterfall cascade system and a fiery 
two-story high volcano in its front courtyard that erupts regularly throughout 
the evening. It was such a traffic stopper along Las Vegas Boulevard that 
Mirage management put up a permanent sign advising motorists not to be so 
distracted that they caused an auto accident. 
This June, another mammoth hostelry opens about a mile west, near the end of 
the strip adjacent to the Hacienda Hotel. Excalibur, a 4,000-room hotel built 
in the style of a medieval castle, is the second Strip casino built by the 
operators of the hugely successful Circus Circus hotel and will feature a kind 
of permanent Renaissance Pleasure Faire atmosphere, complete with daily 
jousting tournaments. 
"I don't know if you know anything about occupancy rates, but Circus Circus has 
a phenomenal annual percentage of 98%," Allen said. "That's because they cater 
to family business." 
Circus Circus room rates remain low ($40-$60 range). In addition, a huge 
recreational vehicle lot behind the casino invites families to hook up and stay 
awhile. Trapeze acts perform around the clock and, in a "Midway" mezzanine 
between the gamblers and the high-wire acts, children can play video and arcade 
games while they eat cotton candy and popcorn. 
With Excalibur, Circus Circus owners again plan to cater to families, but they 
are no longer going to have a monopoly on the kiddie market. 
"MGM just bought the Marina Hotel and the 147-acre Tropicana golf course next 
to it," Allen said. "By the end of 1992, they plan to build a 145-acre 
movieland-type theme park and the biggest hotel in the world: 5,000 rooms. For 
the first time, Las Vegas is going to be a vacation destination, like Orlando, 
Fla. I mean, why would you go to Orlando if Epcot Center wasn't there?" 
At least two other "theme" hotel casinos are on the drawing boards: 
* A $22-million Irish pub called O'Shea's, to be constructed next to the 
Flamingo Hilton at the midway point on the Strip. 
* A 3,000-room hotel adjacent to the Dunes, to be called Carnivaal. That 
$300-million effort is being underwritten by the Radisson Corp. 
And virtually every existing Strip hotel along the five-mile stretch of neon 
roadway is planning a major expansion in the next two to three years. Caesars 
Palace will add an 875,000-square-foot shopping plaza by the end of the summer. 
The Sahara has added another 575 rooms. The Imperial Palace is adding another 
547 rooms. The Flamingo Hilton will add another 750 rooms. And the Riviera, 
which will expand to 4,179 rooms over the next two years, said Allen, will 
temporarily become the world's largest luxury hotel until the MGM project just 
down the road supersedes it. 
In all, this city of about 600,000 permanent residents will have more than 
80,000 hotel rooms by the mid-1990s, and most of them will cater to families. 
"A reporter for Entertainment News came through here a few weeks ago and she 
told me, 'Gosh, I remember staying at the youth hotel when I was a kid and my 
parents came here on vacation.' Makes you feel old," said Las Vegas Hilton 
publicist Carol Stewart. 
The fact is Las Vegas' oldest and best-known kids' hotel -- the Las Vegas 
Hilton youth hotel -- is just about 20 years old, said Stewart. The 120-room 
wing of the venerable Hilton at the northeast end of the Strip blazed the trail 
for the families that are now flooding the city. Early on, Hilton executives 
understood that mothers and fathers would be far more likely to go gambling if 
they didn't have to worry about keeping the children amused. So they did it for 
them. 
"The youth hotel's got a pool table and video arcade and just about everything 
a kid would want: popcorn, hot dogs, hamburgers, a regular kids' menu," Stewart 
said. "Special little Murphy beds that come out of the wall and make the place 
into a dormitory. Supervised child care. Entertainment. It's tailored to 
children." 
And slowly, showroom entertainment is becoming more palatable to small fry too. 
"Splash!," a typical vaudevillian revue in an indefinite run at the Riviera 
Hotel, has a family version at 8 p.m. and a topless version at 11 p.m. The most 
expensive show on the Strip these days -- Siegfried &amp; Roy's $60-a-seat wild 
animal extravaganza -- is also the most Barnum and Bailey-esque. 
As far as music, the real-life yuppie families who visit Vegas increasingly 
reflect the upscale tastes of the make-believe Huxtables. 
"David Sanborn is a jazz musician we booked recently for three nights," Stewart 
said. "The first night, the room wasn't full but, then, the second and third 
night, he sold out. I think that's a definite trend: shorter runs for 
entertainers with an intense following. No banter or dirty jokes or fancy girls 
or dancing. Just music. The straight goods." 
Broad appeal entertainers who can pack the evolving gambler audience into the 
showrooms are harder and harder to find, let alone to persuade to work up acts 
for Vegas, she said. 
"Did you watch the Grammys ?" she asked. "You can see the incredible changes 
going on in the music business. 
"If you were thinking of buying any of those acts to try and sell out an 
1,800-seat showroom every night, which one would it be? Of all the people I saw 
on the Grammys, Bonnie Raitt would probably be the only one that could even 
think of filling a showroom. 
"The others may be new and interesting and have tremendous value within the 
industry, but for the kind of people that go to showrooms and the market you're 
dealing with, I don't think they're going to come and see a rap group, for 
instance." 
Despite the new wave of post-World War II moms and dads who are winding their 
way into the casinos, and dragging their children along with them, Las Vegas 
continues to attract a particular type of tourist, bred on television and 
facing middle age with a relatively good line of credit. 
"People who have enough money to come here and pay the price to go into these 
showrooms are not interested in rap or Milli Vanilli," Stewart said. "I'll 
probably be proven completely wrong in the next few years, but the ones who 
seem to endure are the ones who have real traditional talents. Who can really 
sing and can really do what they are purported to do, not just thrill the crowd 
because they've got 8,000 synthesizers behind them." 
"Don't you find that in moments of purest inspiration that there is that which 
is greater than your personality?" asked Phylicia Rashad. Yes, an interviewer 
answered tentatively. But what does that have to do with playing Vegas? 
"Right. OK. I've been practicing Sita yoga now for almost 10 years and when I 
first met Swami Mustananada, it was at a creativity conference," she continued, 
the words spilling out of her with a pleasant, manic urgency. "And he started 
his talk after welcoming people with love! and respect! Because he said that 
was the highest action that a human being could perform: To welcome another 
human being with love and respect. He said that was true religion. That was 
worship of God." 
But, Vegas? 
"And after he made that statement, he said, 'God is the great actor of the 
universe and he is playing many parts. He is the star of the show', " continued 
a woman who sounded less and less like Clair Huxtable with each sentence. 
"And then he went on to talk about creative process and about that energy, 
about that intelligence, about that source from which inspiration springs which 
is really one's very own self!" 
All around her, musical bedlam is breaking loose. The bass player is dancing on 
stage while the piano player plays football out on the floor with the 
percussionist. A couple of dancers twitch and sway on the opposite side of the 
S.I.R. studio while Rashad's choreographer, Michael Peters performs a lithe 
leap reminiscent of the steps he taught Michael Jackson for the now-legendary 
"Beat It!" music video. 
But Rashad remains calm. She lets the concept of mantra sink in for a moment, 
her seemingly permanently smiling eyes crinkled at the corners. 
What she's driving at, she says, is that it all ties in. She can't perform for 
two hours on stage before a Vegas audience without her mantra routine: one hour 
of chanting in a silent room she has set aside strictly for meditation every 
morning. 
It is the same mantra that the monks spoke throughout "Indiana Jones and the 
Temple of Doom," she says. The mantra is a panacea she draws upon whenever the 
frustrations of getting a vocal arrangement or a dance step just right prove 
too overwhelming. It's scientifically proven, she says. The brain waves flatten 
out when the mantra takes over. It gives her the power to concentrate, to focus 
and to let go -- to let her act happen instead of making it happen. 
"I'm not worried about it," she says about her appearance before the TV-fed 
family audience that is sure to come see her and Mr. Huxtable on stage. "I'm 
really not worried about it. I know better. I sit quietly for that hour every 
single day and experience that witness inside. Experience that part of yourself 
that watches the movements of the mind." 
Armed with her New-Age consciousness, Phylicia Rashad is more than prepared to 
gamble on a New Age audience in the heart of Sin City. It seems appropriate 
somehow. 
"Ohhhm naah mashi vaya," she says out above the din inside the studio. 
"Ohhhhhhhhm naahh mashi vaya." 
She grins her perfect grin and giggles. 
"All right! I'm ready!" she says, displaying a girlishness Cliff Huxtable's 
wife would never show. But, then, Mrs. Huxtable would probably never play 
Vegas, regardless of who was in the audience. 
