BERNARDI SAYS HE WILL FACE FOES IN FORUM 
In a sign that he is facing his toughest race, Los Angeles City Councilman 
Ernani Bernardi took the unusual step Tuesday of agreeing to face his 
challengers in a public forum. 
City Council members traditionally duck candidate forums because such events 
tend to give challengers an opportunity to gang up on the incumbent. 
But the 77-year-old Bernardi is in a largely new northeast San Fernando Valley 
district that was carved out by the City Council in 1986. Compounding his woes, 
seven challengers -- the most of his 28-year political career -- are opposing 
him in the April 11 election. 
"I think he is in a tough race," said Steve Afriat, a veteran City Hall 
political consultant. "There is a large number of constituents who are 
unfamiliar with him because of reapportionment." 
Bernardi said he was concerned that his opponents' attacks on him for refusing 
to appear with them might have some impact. 
Opponents have charged that Bernardi is afraid to face them. The councilman 
denied this and said he had avoided forums so far because they have been 
sponsored by his foes. 
In agreeing to face the other candidates, Bernardi laid down stiff terms, 
including refusing to answer questions from the audience and insisting that he 
be permitted to speak last. 
He said he would meet his challengers only once and would not participate in a 
debate format but would answer questions asked by a panel he felt was 
impartial. He also said the forum must be sponsored by what he considers an 
impartial group, such as the League of Women Voters. 
"There's no way you can debate with seven people," he said at a press 
conference in his City Hall office. "How can you debate when I'm the target?" 
"I'm only interested in discussing the issues," he said. "All they're doing is 
criticizing me without saying what they would do different." 
Some of Bernardi's opponents said they welcomed a chance to confront Bernardi 
before an audience. 
"I look forward to the opportunity to discuss the issues with him," said Lyle 
Hall, a labor-backed Los Angeles city firefighter and potentially Bernardi's 
toughest challenger. 
Hall, former president of the Los Angeles firefighters' union, said he did not 
care what conditions Bernardi put on the meetings. 
"I have not put any conditions on any of the appearances that I have made," he 
said. "I walked into what was viewed as potentially unfriendly territory, but I 
felt that's the system. . . . The purpose of having a candidates' forum is so 
the public can ask questions and talk about items of concern to them." 
Challenger Jules Bagneris III, president of the Lake View Terrace Home Owners 
Assn., said Bernardi "has been last on showing leadership on a number of 
issues, so if he wants to be last at a debate, that's no surprise. I don't care 
if he goes first, if he goes in the middle, or if he goes last. I will be 
there." 
