REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: TRAIN BUFF'S DREAM: RIDING THE RAILS TO PARIS AT 186 
M.P.H. 
It was a boyhood dream come true. 
I was about to board France's TGV, the 186-m.p.h. Train a Grande Vitesse, in 
the town of Rennes on March 17, when I was told that I would be sitting in the 
front cab, next to the engineer. 
The sleek, low-slung train looked like a high-tech version of the giant worm 
described in the science fiction novel "Dune." 
All those days and nights in my youth spent playing around with an American 
Flyer train set -- complete with tunnels my father built from wire, plaster and 
papier-mache -- replayed in my mind. 
This included, of course, those times when I opened the throttle on my electric 
transformer too far and sent my train careening around sharp curves into 
telephone poles, billboards and even an occasional passenger depot. 
Brrrng! With the sound of a school bell, which is the authorization to depart, 
TGV engineer Georges Beuve, a 28-year veteran of the French National Railroad, 
turned what looked like a steering wheel to increase the amount of electricity 
going from an overhead power line above the tracks into the train's 
all-electric motors. 
The engines answered with a whine reminiscent of "Star Trek's" starship 
Enterprise, only we were still earthbound. We glided out of the station and, 
within a minute or two, were traveling at more than 100 m.p.h. 
I was aboard the TGV as part of a tour by Orange County officials and business 
executives who had come to Europe to compare the French technology of steel 
wheels on a steel track with a train magnetically levitated without friction at 
a test track in Emsland, West Germany. The California-Nevada Super Speed Train 
Commission hopes to select one of the two technologies later this year for a 
proposed Anaheim-Las Vegas route. 
The sun-bleached town of Rennes, dotted with orange-tiled roofs, rapidly shrank 
behind us. Ahead, poles, trees and farms swished by in an endless blur. Another 
TGV approached us on the next track and looked as if it would hit us head-on. 
We were on a stretch of older tracks, and multiple steel rails seemed to weave 
through each other, crisscrossing several times. There was much more swaying in 
the cab than in the passenger compartments, in which I had earlier ridden from 
Paris to Rennes. 
Denis A. Doute, a French train consultant accompanying me, tried to be 
reassuring. Some of these crisscrosses can handle the TGV at very high speeds 
without a derailing, he said. 
The TGV's cab resembles an airplane cockpit but with fewer lights and dials. 
One light indicates what the last safety switch we passed over indicated about 
the condition of the track. Another indicates whether it's safe ahead and is 
backed up by a system of bells and buzzers. A small computer screen provides 
speed, time and other data, with analog backups, all right in front of the 
engineer. There's also a lever for the horn, a radio-telephone and a 
microphone. 
Behind us, a mainframe computer forms part of the cabin's rear wall, monitoring 
the train's performance and automating most of its operations. Attached to it, 
in the engine compartment behind us, is the "black box," which records 
performance data for evaluation later. 
Both the engineer and I sat on chair-stools facing the dashboard. 
As we hit a stretch of new track, under which is concrete instead of wooden 
ties, Beuve turned the wheel again to get more power. We hit 186 m.p.h. This is 
the maximum speed allowed by TGV officials, although they say the train can go 
much faster. 
We raised our voices slightly to be heard. Cows grazed on nearby fields, not 
lifting a head in response to the noise. They rushed by like videotape on fast 
forward. 
If only my father -- and the guys back in my office -- could see me now! 
 Cars on a nearby highway seemed to be in first gear. This felt strange. In 
Southern California, cars frequently overtake Amtrak trains I ride. 
Suddenly, without warning, the engines whined down. We rapidly lost speed. 
Normally this happens when the engineer coasts to save power or wants to avoid 
braking, which saves on maintenance costs. Beuve is trained to cut power at 
just the right times to ensure that the train will come to rest at the right 
spots without braking. 
But now something was wrong. 
"We have lost all power," Beuve announced calmly in French. "There is no 
electricity in the overhead line." 
He kept one hand on the power wheel while fiddling with the ignition switch. A 
fail-safe device requires that he touch the power wheel or floor pedals every 
so often, or else the train automatically brakes to a stop. 
A national railroad inspector also riding with us in the cab showed no sign of 
panic, either. He simply asked Beuve a few technical questions. 
After a few minutes of coasting, the motors kicked in again. Beuve learned from 
a radio message that another TGV train traveling about six miles behind had 
come onto the same electrical power grid, overtaxing an older power station. 
Slamming through the countryside at 186 m.p.h. again, suddenly there was a loud 
thump on the front windshield. 
"A bird," Beuve said in French. 
Doute said birds used to be a big problem but "most of them are smarter now. 
They have learned to stay away." 
Another TGV approached head-on, my stomach turning as it seemed to come within 
inches of hitting us. 
The train's windshield has a yellow stripe painted across the top, like the 
tinting on auto windshields, to help railroad workers see the train before it 
strikes them, Doute said. The train is painted a silvery gray and blue and 
fades into the background horizon easily. By the time someone hears it coming, 
it's too late. 
Entering a tunnel, it became pitch-black. The train has no headlights. I felt 
as if we were hurtling inside Disneyland's Space Mountain. 
Suddenly, a tiny dot of light ahead exploded into sunlight at the tunnel's end. 
My ears popped. 
We passed under a bridge. Doute said it was made of wood to please 
environmentalists. "They think the animals around here will like the wood 
better," he said. 
Another bridge was topped by electrified fencing to keep vandals away, although 
Doute said damage from vandalism is not frequent. 
One TGV engineer was killed, he said, when someone once hung a large rock over 
the side of the bridge, right at the height of the train's windshield. 
As we approached Montparnasse station in Paris, the train slowed gradually, and 
we passed a series of sound walls in different shapes that bounce noise at many 
different angles. 
Doute pointed out that we had reached Paris in two hours, even though we had to 
slow down for the last few miles through the Paris suburbs. 
"It's the network effect," Doute said. "We use old tracks for part of the trip 
but still gain a lot of time by traveling faster on the other section. . . . We 
have a saying that you don't have to go as fast as you can to attract 
passengers, but only as fast as necessary." 
The TGV Atlantique train quietly came to rest at exactly the right spot on the 
passenger platform. Beuve, the engineer, picked up a black briefcase and, 
wearing a light jacket, climbed backward down the steps. 
"Au revoir," he said, before disappearing into the warm, hazy Parisian 
afternoon. 
