HOOKED ON SHOPPING? THERE'S HELP; 
ADDICTIONS: THERAPIST'S BOOK OFFERS A 14-POINT RECOVERY PLAN. 
"Eve" is a shop-'til-you-dropper who regularly controls her urge to charge it 
by placing her charge cards in the freezer. But when she's bent on another 
binge-and-splurge episode, she microwaves the plastic back to life. 
"Jessica" lives on a remote island off the East Coast but still packs in six 
hours of shopping every day. This despite the fact that she's limited to one 
department store and a few hotel gift shops. 
The source of this information is Carolyn Wesson, a Silicon Valley 
psychotherapist, who found herself with a progression of patients like Eve and 
Jessica and discovered that a lot of beautiful clothes dressed some 
less-than-beautiful stories. 
A self-proclaimed shopaholic, Wesson has written "Women Who Shop Too Much: 
Overcoming the Urge to Splurge" (St. Martin's Press). 
Wesson found out that the addiction extends far beyond Imelda Marcos, the grand 
lady of conspicuous consumption, with her 508 floor-length gowns, 15 mink coats 
and 2,700 pairs of shoes. 
One can easily encounter a shopaholic and not even know it, since many do not 
possess an impressive designer wardrobe. 
"I buy a lot of things I don't need, mainly because they're on sale," confides 
an Orange County woman, in debt because of her daily lunch hour sprees. 
All told, an estimated 59 million American women use shopping as a way of 
coping with psychological problems, "stumbling to the nearest store for retail 
therapy," says Wesson. She limits the scope of her book to women because men 
tend toward other addictions such as alcohol, drugs, work and sports. 
Wesson offers a self-assessment quiz, indicating the characteristics of 
addicted shoppers: They routinely shop to avoid their emotions; they begin 
their shopping sprees with heart-palpitating highs but retreat with regret, 
self-recrimination and depression; they suddenly spend more without apparent 
reason; they may fall into substantial debt; they often buy things they never 
use. 
If you flunk the quiz, help is available through Wesson's 14-point recovery 
plan and through organizations such as Debtors Anonymous. 
The author theorizes that excessive shopping usually stems from the same causes 
as other addictions, such as "low self-esteem, a lonely childhood, parents who 
withheld love, emotional stress, an unhappy marriage or love relationship, a 
recent breakup -- all of which gives rise to feelings of deprivation and the 
urge to acquire possessions, even useless ones." 
To develop her theory of shopaholism, Wesson attended conventions and training 
sessions for Adult Children of Alcoholics, a national organization. She did 
numerous studies of addictive personalities she treated in private practice and 
read extensively on the addictive personality. 
Wesson notes that Los Angeles has an atmosphere particularly conducive to 
shopaholism. "Because of the movie and TV industry, there is an enormous 
emphasis on looks and appearances," she says. "Rodeo Drive is a mecca, the 
ultimate shopping experience, and one of the L.A. musts for women who shop too 
much." 
