SAN DIEGO SPOTLIGHT: MEDIA / KEVIN BRASS; 
TAPE OF GARVEY'S EX: WAS IT A SCOOP OR A SNOOP? 
KFMB-TV(Channel 8) reporter Lorraine Kimel was on Channel 8's "Sun Up San 
Diego" Friday morning talking about her exclusive interview with Rebecka 
Mendenhall, Steve Garvey's ex-fiancee. Kimel's phone interview was unique, the 
only time Mendenhall's voice has been heard since the story of Garvey's 
complicated love life broke two weeks ago. 
However, the interview was not supposed to happen. Mendenhall, who last week 
filed a paternity suit against Garvey, says her brief conversation with Kimel 
was recorded and aired without her permission or knowledge. 
Reached in Atlanta on Friday, Mendenhall, an assignment editor with CNN, said 
she is "disturbed" by Kimel's taping of the brief interview and that she has 
contacted her attorneys about it. Although she has talked to several reporters 
and issued short statements, she purposely has avoided giving radio or 
television interviews, even to her own network. 
"I just think it is an inappropriate way to deal with the situation," 
Mendenhall said. "I think it is a private matter." 
The interview Kimel aired Feb. 23 was brief and contained little information 
beyond what Mendenhall had already told reporters. When Kimel called, 
Mendenhall says she told her to contact her attorney. Kimel persisted, asking 
vague, conversational questions about Mendenhall's health. 
After she hung up the phone, Mendenhall says it occurred to her that Kimel 
might have taped the conversation. 
"The tone of her questions and the way she was aggressively pursuing a sound 
bite made me suspicious," Mendenhall said. 
Kimel denies covertly taping the interview. She says she first contacted 
Mendenhall to request an interview in the morning. Mendenhall told her to call 
back in an hour, so she could have time to call her attorney. Kimel 
acknowledges that when she called back, Mendenhall said she did not want to be 
interviewed and referred questions to her attorney. 
However, Kimel says she specifically told Mendenhall to pause before answering 
questions because she was using a "clicker" phone with an audio switch, the 
type of phone commonly used for television phone interviews, in order to tape 
the interview. Mendenhall says Kimel never mentioned anything about recording 
the conversation. 
"It was established when I called at 10 a.m. (the first call) that I was 
calling for an interview," Kimel said. "She never said, 'Don't tape this.' It 
was clear I was phoning for an interview. Someone in the business, especially 
in the television end, would know how it works." 
Channel 8 News Director Jim Holtzman said the original tape of the interview 
had been routinely recycled and was not available for review. 
"It is certainly our policy here to tell people they're being recorded," 
Holtzman said. 
Laws concerning the taping of phone conversations differ from state to state. 
"In California, if it is a confidential communication, all parties must give 
their consent to the taping," said Terry Francke, legal counsel for the 
California Newspaper Publishers Assn. 
However, the definition of a confidential conversation has never been addressed 
by the courts in the context of a journalistic inquiry, Francke said. Within 
the industry, though, it is considered extremely unethical to tape a 
conversation without a person's consent. 
Mendenhall said Kimel's actions were "unfair." Deluged by calls from reporters, 
Mendenhall changed her phone number shortly after Kimel's call and has 
generally refused to discuss the case with reporters. 
"I have talked to people from other television stations, people like Susan 
Farrell (KNSD-TV, Channel 39), and they've been very nice, very polite and I 
understand they're just doing their jobs," Mendenhall said. "They never 
recorded me. They respected my desire for privacy." 
Are Geraldo Rivera and Cheech Marin (of Cheech and Chong fame) going to be the 
new owners of KNSD-TV (Channel 39)? The king of trash television talked about 
his plans to buy television stations with a group of investors, which includes 
Marin, for an article that ran in The Times on Sunday. Rivera talked in-depth 
about a trip he recently made on George Gillett's private plane, talking 
business and relishing the pleasures of corporate schmoozing. Gillett, of 
course, owns Channel 39 and other stations, which he has been rumored to be 
looking to sell. 
The highly praised restored version of "Gone With the Wind" makes its San Diego 
debut at the Ken Theater on Sunday for a weeklong run. Reaction to the film has 
been so strong throughout the country that Landmark Theaters is planning to 
move the film to the Park Theater for an indefinite run, beginning March 19. . 
. . The La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art's retrospective of Roman Polanski's 
work continues on Wednesday with a 7:30 p.m. screening of "Repulsion," the 1965 
thriller starring Catherine Deneuve. 
A local writer sent a copy of San Diego Magazine to relatives in Saudi Arabia. 
When it arrived, all the plastic surgery ads, bikini shots and anything 
remotely suggestive had been cut from the magazine by government censors, who 
obviously have not yet seen a copy of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue. 
Stan Miller will be assuming anchor duties for Channel 8's main 5 p.m. newscast 
in April. Greg Hurst will be moving to the 6:30 p.m. edition. Longtime anchor 
Allison Ross is generally believed to be on her way out when her contract ends 
in June, but news director Holtzman said no decision had been made about Ross' 
future with the station. 
KGTV (Channel 10) is planning a Barbara Walters-like interview show to air 
after the Oscar ceremony and a Walters show on March 29. Scheduled guests 
include Mayor Maureen O'Connor, Ernest Hahn and Steve Garvey, who committed to 
tape the show before his paternity suit troubles were aired. The Garv, ever 
Garv-like, honored his commitment and taped the interview last week along with 
his new wife, although he reportedly is refusing new requests for interviews. 
