GAY LITERATI CELEBRATE NEW ERA OF ACCEPTANCE; 
PUBLISHING: THE NUMBER OF BOOKS BY AND ABOUT GAYS IS INCREASING, AS IS THE 
NUMBER OF SPECIALTY BOOK STORES. 
When Mark Thompson was named book editor of The Advocate in 1980, books from 
publishers seeking reviews would trickle in at the rate of three to five a 
month. 
A decade later, that trickle has turned into a torrent. "Now, I get three to 
five books every day," Thompson said. 
Thompson's workload is just one indication of the explosion in gay literature 
-- books by and about homosexual men and lesbians. 
Another sign of the boom is the burgeoning number of bookstores catering 
primarily to gays and lesbians: 37 nationwide, compared to seven a decade ago. 
A Different Light, with stores in Los Angeles, New York and San Francisco, 
stocks 11,000 gay titles, including novels, short stories, biographies, plays, 
histories, self-help books, mysteries and science fiction. The chain carried 
900 gay titles 10 years ago, said Richard Labonte, manager of the San Francisco 
store. 
Thompson and Labonte were among the 1,200 gay literati last weekend at OUT 
Write '90, a national conference designed to celebrate and sustain the boom in 
gay publishing. 
Those in attendance -- gay and lesbian writers, editors, publishers, 
booksellers, agents, critics, journalists and readers -- participated in two 
days of workshops and discussions on subjects as mundane as finding an agent 
and as weighty as "AIDS and the responsibility of the writer." 
"We are here to mark the coming of age of gay and lesbian literature," said 
Jeffrey Escoffier, co-publisher of OUT/LOOK, the national gay and lesbian 
quarterly journal that sponsored the event. 
"We are creating a literary infrastructure," added George Stambolian, who 
teaches gay literature at Wellesley College and is the editor of three 
anthologies of gay fiction titled "Men on Men." "We have gay newspapers, 
magazines, reviews, bookstores, readings, awards -- and now conferences." 
In addition to this gathering, a daylong symposium on gay literature will be 
held at UCLA on April 21, and Seattle's Alice B. Theatre will be host of a gay 
and lesbian theater conference in July, with activist playwright and novelist 
Larry Kramer ("The Normal Heart," "Reports From the Holocaust") as keynote 
speaker. 
Though it remains relatively rare for gay books to cross into the mainstream 
and sell widely to heterosexuals, they increasingly are being taught at 
universities, winning prizes and critical acclaim. 
Last year, Minnie Bruce Pratt, published by the lesbian-owned Firebrand Press, 
won the prestigious Lamont Prize from the Academy of American Poets for her 
collection of poems, "Crime Against Nature." And Yale University's Beinecke 
Rare Book and Manuscript Library has begun to accept the manuscripts, journals 
and letters of important contemporary gay and lesbian writers. 
Why this outpouring of gay and lesbian literature? Why didn't it occur in 1969, 
the year usually associated with the beginnings of the modern gay movement, 
when homosexuals rebelled during a police raid of a New York bar called the 
Stonewall Inn? 
Because, said OUT/LOOK's Escoffier, "it has taken 20 years for us to . . . 
develop our audience and reach a critical mass." 
"This is the literary reflection of an enormous social transformation," said 
Michael Denneny, a founder of Christopher Street magazine and a senior editor 
of St. Martin's Press, where he nurtures a line of gay and lesbian titles. 
"This is what happens when 25 million people stop thinking of themselves as 
sick, sinful or criminally deviant, and begin to affirm themselves and their 
lives." 
"There is a desperate urge to define ourselves as a community, and one of the 
ways we are able to do that is through books," added David Groff, a senior 
editor of Crown Books and a founder of the Publishing Triangle, an organization 
for gays and lesbians in the publishing business. 
Many point out that the new gay writing is more than self-affirming. At a time 
when AIDS is decimating the ranks of gay men -- 10% of the homosexual men in 
San Francisco have either died of or been found to have fully developed cases 
of AIDS, and another 40% are believed to be infected with the HIV virus -- 
writing has become a means of achieving immortality for writer and subject 
alike. 
"There is an incredible need to leave a written record," said John Preston, 
editor of the anthology "Personal Dispatches: Writers Confront AIDS." 
"I wish to leave a proper testament of what my people have gone through," added 
Paul Monette, author of "Borrowed Time: An AIDS Memoir," the critically 
acclaimed account of his lover Roger Horwitz's illness and death. "The impulse 
to write the book was very much to leave a record for the future." 
If there is an immediacy to their work, it is heightened by the fact that both 
Preston and Monette are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus that is 
thought to cause AIDS. "AIDS is an event we will be spending generations trying 
to know and to define," added Sarah Schulman, a New York writer who derived 
some of the material for her new novel, "People in Trouble," from participating 
in ACT UP, the AIDS activist group. 
Some observers believe the epidemic, like past cataclysms, will lead to a whole 
new category of literature. Said Mike Lyons, a Los Angeles playwright: "It is 
like after World War II, when suddenly there was an explosion of books: 'Catch 
22,' 'The Thin Red Line,' 'From Here to Eternity.' " 
But today's gay publishing boom encompasses much more than AIDS writing. 
There are self-help books for recovering gay and lesbian alcoholics, how-to 
books for lesbian parents, tomes celebrating mythological goddesses, legal 
handbooks for unmarried partners, books on religion and spirituality, erotic 
fiction, and more. In short, conference participants say, the body of work has 
come a long way from the the Angst-ridden coming-out novel of the 1960s and the 
celebratory sex-and-disco novel of the 1970s. 
Gay history and biography are also hot. 
"In the past, details about people's sexuality were left out -- often with the 
best of intentions," said Stuart Timmons, who is finishing a biography of Harry 
Hay, the father of gay liberation. "Being gay was considered a secret and a 
liability." 
But the presumption of heterosexuality also had the effect of robbing gay 
people of their heroes. That is changing. Consider Alan Berube's "Coming Out 
Under Fire: The History of Gay Men and Women in World War Two." 
Calling it "the definitive work on gay heroes and heroines of World War II," 
writer Studs Terkel wrote: "Their gallantry was in bold contrast to the 
cravenness of their detractors." 
The gay book market has been developed by small gay-owned and -operated presses 
as well as publishing industry giants. In recent years, St. Martin's, Crown, 
Harper &amp; Row, and New American have established large gay book lists. Some 
of their authors were first published by small gay presses. 
"Part of the role of the small press, by its very nature, is to discover and 
nurture new writers, and to see them move on," said Alyson, who recently lost 
Los Angeles gay mystery writer Michael Nava to Harper &amp; Row. 
"You may as well complain about the sun rising." 
Small presses such as Firebrand, Naiad, Seal, and Woman in the Moon are an 
especially important influence in lesbian publishing. Some have roots in the 
feminist publishing houses that grew up in the '60s. 
"These publishing endeavors came out of a sense that we had to have this kind 
of material, and that it didn't exist anyplace else," said Nancy K. Bereano, 
editor and publisher of Firebrand. 
Publishers large and small said they are able to make a nice profit on gay 
books, even those with relatively low circulation. "Our blockbuster -- our 
biggest crossover book by far -- was 'And The Band Played On' by (gay 
journalist) Randy Shilts," said Denneny of St. Martin's. 
The critically acclaimed expose of federal inaction and scientific bickering 
during the early years of the AIDS epidemic made bestseller lists and sold 
150,000 copies in hardcover. 
"But we have also found a way to make a neat little profit from small print 
runs. Our overhead is such that we can make a profit selling just 3,500 copies 
of a book." 
Crown, on the other hand, tries to buy rights to books that it thinks will sell 
at least 10,000 copies. "We need to develop the crossover market," said Crown's 
Groff. "And we need to develop a bigger audience among gay men and lesbians." 
One way to develop the market, participants agreed, is to persuade more 
colleges and universities to offer courses on gay and lesbian literature, 
culture and history. 
Groff said that, despite considerable progress, gay and lesbian authors still 
sometimes encounter condescending attitudes from society's cultural arbiters. 
As an example, he cited the generally favorable review of Paul Monette's new 
novel about AIDS widowers called "Afterlife," in last Sunday's New York Times 
Book Review. 
Monette "wants to go beyond Gay Lit and invite us all in," reviewer Judith 
Viorst wrote. 
Said Groff: "Can you imagine a reviewer saying that Alice Walker, in 'The Color 
Purple,' wants us to go beyond the plantation experience?" 
