HUNTER WHISKED TO NORTHERN CALIFORNIA PRISON 
Convicted tax evader Nancy Hoover Hunter was moved suddenly Friday from a 
downtown San Diego jail to a federal prison in Northern California, a transfer 
that caught even her defense attorneys by surprise. 
Robert Brewer, Hunter's San Diego defense lawyer, said he was "furious" when he 
learned that Hunter had been transferred Friday morning from the Metropolitan 
Correctional Center in downtown San Diego to a federal prison in Pleasanton, 
Calif., about 35 miles east of San Franciso. 
Hunter, convicted last December of four counts of tax evasion linked to the 
collapse of the J. David &amp; Co. investment house, is scheduled to go to 
trial again May 1 on 192 other counts on which her first jury deadlocked. Those 
remaining counts deal primarily with fraud and conspiracy charges stemming from 
her role at the failed La Jolla firm. 
The transfer out of San Diego was unexpected, Brewer said, because "we were in 
the process of preparing for her next case. We will take all steps necessary to 
get her back as soon as possible so we can prepare." 
"This is a jail facility for people who have active cases in the federal court 
in (San Diego)," said Joseph O. Barda, executive assistant to the MCC warden. 
"She no longer has an active case. Her trial is over." 
Although Hunter's second trial is to begin in four weeks, Barda said she was 
moved because MCC is crowded. "When you're a jail facility, every bed counts, 
and we're well over capacity here," he said. "So if there isn't an active case, 
bed space is precious to us." 
MCC, which has an official capacity of 546 prisoners, held 828 people Friday, 
Barda said. 
Nearly 1,500 investors lost about $80 million in the J. David fraud, a Ponzi 
scheme in which money from new investors was used to pay off old investors and 
little actual trading of stocks or money market funds was done. 
Prosecutors allege that Hunter played a key role in the scheme, creating false 
documents to lure investors to J. David and to lull them into maintaining their 
accounts while the firm slid toward bankruptcy in February, 1984. 
After an eight-month trial, a jury convicted Hunter Dec. 11 of the four tax 
counts, finding that she evaded about $1 million in taxes from 1980 through 
1983. The jury deadlocked, 11-1, for conviction on the 192 fraud and conspiracy 
counts and acquitted her of one other tax charge. 
Earlier this month, U.S. District Judge Earl B. Gilliam sentenced Hunter to 10 
years in prison on the four tax counts. 
Hunter's ex-lover, firm founder J. David (Jerry) Dominelli, pleaded guilty in 
1985 to fraud and tax evasion in connection with the Ponzi scheme. He is 
serving a 20-year sentence at the same federal prison in Pleasanton to which 
Hunter was transferred Friday. 
