BONUSES THREATENED BY BILINGUAL POLICY RIFT 
The president of the Los Angeles teachers union said Thursday he will oppose a 
group's efforts to rescind proposed bonuses for the district's 4,000 bilingual 
teachers. 
Wayne Johnson, president of United Teachers-Los Angeles, said the vote to 
rescind the bonuses, sought by Learning English Advocates Drive, a group of 
teachers seeking to end bilingual education, "will divide teachers at a crucial 
time." The union represents a majority of teachers in the Los Angeles Unified 
School District. 
The English advocates group has said it will try to reverse the union's policy 
of demanding higher pay for the district's 4,000 bilingual classroom teachers. 
But the group said Thursday it now may delay the referendum until after the 
teachers settle their contract dispute with the district. 
District officials said passage of the proposal would make it difficult to 
continue bilingual education in Los Angeles. 
'Bad for Teachers' 
"The referendum at this time is bad for teachers and it is bad for our 
organization," Johnson said. "I hope that it will either be withdrawn or the 
membership will reject it." 
Bilingual education has been a controversial issue in Los Angeles and 
throughout the nation. Advocates say it is the best method for teaching 
students who are not fluent in English; opponents say it slows the learning 
process. The Los Angeles school district now uses bilingual teachers to 
instruct students in basic subjects in languages other than English. Learning 
English Advocates Drive has advocated using English with interpreting help from 
a bilingual aide. 
Johnson and the union's executive board are engaged in a campaign urging the 
union's 22,000 members to reject, in a vote next week, the district's current 
offer of a 20% pay raise over three years. The union has asked for a 21% raise 
over two years. 
Johnson said the English advocate group's proposal is causing internal fighting 
that could jeopardize the union's position. The executive board late Wednesday 
agreed to oppose the English group's proposal, he said. 
Latino Parents Angry 
Johnson's rejection of the referendum comes amid growing pressure from 
bilingual teachers and Latino parents angry over the proposal. The school 
district has the nation's largest number of limited English-speaking students, 
mostly Latino. 
More than 200 teachers and parents met Wednesday at the Eastman Avenue School 
in East Los Angeles to sign petitions and write letters on behalf of the 
district's bilingual program. Teachers at the meeting said they were critical 
of their union for failing to reject the English group's proposal immediately. 
A second meeting at the union's downtown headquarters has been planned for 
Wednesday, said Mark Meza-Overstreet, a bilingual teacher and leader of the 
union's Chicano Education Committee. His committee has begun fund-raising 
efforts to pay for mailers and other materials to fight the referendum. 
Sally Peterson, president and founder of Learning English Advocates Drive, said 
the group is not an English-only organization. But she acknowledged that it 
receives financial support from two national English-only organizations: U.S. 
English and English First. Peterson said she is disappointed that the union 
leadership opposes the group's referendum. 
Bonuses Called Essential 
School district officials and other supporters of bilingual education say the 
annual bonuses are essential for recruiting and keeping qualified bilingual 
teachers. Without the pay incentives, bilingual teachers would go to other 
districts that pay more money, he said. 
The district and union negotiators have tentatively agreed on bonuses of up to 
$5,000 a year for fully certificated bilingual classroom teachers. 
Teachers and district officials say the referendum will have a big effect on 
how schools will teach the more than 160,000 Los Angeles students who speak 
only limited English, most of them Spanish-speaking. Some studies contend that 
elementary pupils tend to progress faster if they are taught academic subjects 
in their native language while they are learning English. 
But Peterson, a kindergarten teacher at Glenwood Elementary School in Sun 
Valley, disputes those studies and said her group favors English-speaking 
teachers with bilingual aides. 
