WALL ST. JOURNAL EDITORIALS INSPIRE, ANGER 
Amid revolution, one thing at the Wall Street Journal is unchanged: The 
independent nation-state of conservative Robert Bartley -- the editorial pages. 
Bartley's pages -- strident, gutsy, infuriating or inspirational (depending on 
one's philosophy) -- operate something like a naughty smart kid in school, 
pestering conservatives not to yield and seeking to humble liberals at every 
turn. 
"By far the best editorial page . . . in the world," said Commentary Editor 
Norman Podhoretz, fittingly unequivocal. 
"They have Stalinist tendencies that the end justifies the means -- a kind of 
intellectual dishonesty," said New Republic Editor Michael Kinsley, once the 
page's token liberal columnist. "You can use that if you say I'm also very 
grateful that they always allowed me to write whatever I wanted." 
However, both sides generally agree with Time magazine columnist Charles 
Krauthammer: Bartley's editorial section "is extraordinarily entertaining and 
informative, which is fairly unusual for an editorial page." 
In an era when most editorial pages try to instruct readers through arguments 
that, above all, are reasoned and moderate, the Journal is deliberately 
provocative. 
Bartley said the difference "is a matter of tactics rather than purposes. We 
want to be participants in the debates of our age and not, like Puck, standing 
above them, saying: 'What fools these mortals be!' " 
The Journal participated especially in the rise of supply-side economics, which 
began as an untested notion scrawled on a napkin by economist Arthur B. Laffer 
during dinner with a Journal editorial writer and soon became a national 
crusade. 
More recently, the Journal has championed open immigration policies and freer 
use of experimental drugs for terminally ill patients, positions consistent 
with its free-market world view. 
And often, on political matters, Bartley and his crew seem to relish the role 
of ideological kamikaze -- the first to jump the trench and charge. 
The most recent case is Bartley's controversial decision to reprint last month 
a 17-year-old story from the Atlanta Constitution reporting that Georgia 
Democrat Sam Nunn, now Senate Armed Services Committee chairman and leading 
opponent of John Tower's nomination as secretary of defense, had been involved 
in a drunk-driving incident and paid a fine for leaving the scene of an 
accident. Nunn was 26 at the time. 
The Tower debate had taken on "a rather hypocritical and take-no-prisoners 
partisan" tone, Bartley explained, "but the bottom line is here we spent a lot 
of time discussing the merits of it and finally said (that) maybe we should 
share this argument with the public." 
Last year, when George Bush's campaign operatives were peddling unsubstantiated 
rumors that Michael S. Dukakis had suffered psychological problems, Bartley's 
pages printed the rumors in an editorial criticizing Dukakis for not releasing 
his medical records. It even suggested that there might be a "family history" 
of mental instability because Dukakis' brother had had a mental breakdown. 
"What we ran was factual," Bartley said. 
And, in 1984, Bartley ran an article about Geraldine A. Ferraro and the Mafia 
that editors had rejected for the news columns. 
The article could find no link between Ferraro and the mob and even indicated 
that her husband had tried to keep his distance from it. But it outlined a 
connection that her father-in-law, Philip Zaccaro, reputedly had. 
"I guess, in retrospect, there are times that I had wished I had bucked that 
story back to them for more reporting," Bartley said. 
The motive in those cases, in part, is what Bartley sees as a pack mentality in 
the press that unconsciously skews to the left. 
"It is a unified mind-set," he said, not "a conscious effort to influence the 
news," but "I think that, de facto, there is a greater tendency to go after the 
conservatives. . . . And I guess we have counterbalanced that some with these 
political stories." 
