APPLE REMOVAL SPREADS TO FLORIDA 
Dade County Public Schools in Florida, the nation's fourth-largest school 
district, on Wednesday joined a growing list of school systems across the 
nation that have banished apples and related products from lunch menus because 
of fear of daminozide, a chemical used to treat some apple crops. 
It follows New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago and scores of smaller districts 
that have removed apples, apple juice and apple sauce from school cafeterias 
and vending machines. 
In Los Angeles County, 54 out of 82 districts as of Wednesday had stopped 
serving fresh apples and products made from them. 
However, at least two local districts -- San Marino and Antelope Valley Union 
-- said they have decided to return apples to school menus today after 
consulting outside experts and vendors, who told them that daminozide levels 
are not harmful or were not found in the products they use. 
In other districts, such as Culver City, Newhall Elementary and El Monte Union 
High School District, officials said they were still serving apple juice, 
because they were convinced that it did not contain daminozide in dangerous 
levels. 
Most districts said they are refraining from serving fresh apples and apple 
products until they receive official word from the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture and the state Department of Education that doing so would not pose 
a health risk to children. State Health Services Director Kenneth W. Kizer on 
Tuesday said districts were overreacting by not serving the fruit to students. 
Jack Hastings, food and nutrition director for Dade County schools, which 
provides 163,000 lunches a day, said: "When New York, Atlanta, Chicago and Los 
Angeles made the decision (to stop serving apples), we decided maybe we better 
do the same thing." 
He said Dade -- which includes Miami's schools -- would continue the ban "until 
we get some answer from a regulatory agency one way or another" about the 
safety of apples treated with daminozide, which has been linked to cancer in 
laboratory studies using rats. 
Back in Schools 
However, officials in the San Marino Unified School District, after receiving 
verification from suppliers that their products do not contain the chemical, 
decided Wednesday that it was safe to start serving apples and apple products 
again, Food Service Director Susan Delgado said. 
Likewise, students in the Newhall Elementary School District, who have not been 
offered any apples since Monday, will also start seeing the fruit again today, 
according to Food Services Director Terry Custer. 
Custer said he consulted the USDA and the Toxic Information Center, a San 
Francisco-based group funded by the state Department of Health Services, and is 
now convinced that it is "better to eat the apples than not eat them. . . ." 
"I'm satisfied now . . . that the whole thing has been blown slightly out of 
proportion," he said. 
In Newhall, Child Nutrition Director Geri Dee said the district's five schools 
have continued to serve apple juice on demand to students who, for health or 
other reasons, do not drink milk. 
Contributing to this article were researchers Tracy Thomas and Shawn Griggs. 
APPLE BAN 
Fifty-four out of 82 Los Angeles County school districts have quit serving 
apples or apple products to students because of concern over the chemical 
daminozide. 
ABC Unified School District 
Alhambra City and High School District 
Arcadia Unified School District 
Azusa Unified School District 
Bellflower Unified School District 
Beverly Hills Unified School District 
Bonita Unified School District 
Castaic Union School District 
Centinela Valley Union High School District 
Charter Oak Unified School District 
Claremont Unified School District 
Compton Unified School District 
Covina-Valley Unified School District 
Culver City Unified School District 
Downey Unified School District 
Duarte Unified School District 
East Whittier City School District 
El Monte Union High School District 
El Rancho Unified School District 
El Segundo Unified School District 
Glendora Unified School District 
Hacienda La Puente Unified School District 
Hermosa Beach City School District 
Hughes-Elizabeth Lakes Union School District 
Inglewood Unified School District 
Keppel Union School District 
La Canada Unified School District 
Las Virgenes Unified School District 
Lawndale School District 
Little Lake City School District 
Lowell Joint School District 
Lynwood Unified School District 
Monrovia Unified School District 
Mountain View School District 
Newhall School District 
Norwalk-La Mirada Unified School District 
Palmdale School District 
Palos Verdes Peninsula Unified School District 
Paramount Unified School District 
Pomona Unified School District 
Redondo Beach City School District 
Rowland Unified School District 
Saugus Union School District 
Soledad-Agua Dulce Union School District 
South Bay Union High School District 
South Pasadena Unified School District 
South Whittier School District 
Sulphur Springs Union School District 
Temple City Unified School District 
Torrance Unified School District 
West Covina Unified School District 
Whittier City School District 
William S. Hart Union High School District 
Wilsona School District 
