STAMPING OUT SMOKING; 
WITH $1 MILLION TO SPEND, COALITION TO PLOT ANTI-CIGARETTE CAMPAIGN 
Long Beach health officials are exploring ways of spending the city's share of 
tobacco tax money -- $1 million -- in an ambitious statewide effort to cut 
cigarette smoking by 75% by 1999. 
A coalition of more than two dozen local experts will meet for the first time 
next week to discuss strategies for the new tax money approved by voters more 
than a year ago, the first ever allocated for education to stop an addiction 
blamed for nearly one-third of the nation's cancer deaths. 
The money is the product of Proposition 99, which raised the tax on cigarettes 
25 cents a pack and imposed similar increases on pipe, cigar and other tobacco 
products. 
The tax generated $1.5 billion statewide, and just more than $1 million of it 
has trickled down to the Health Department and school district in Long Beach -- 
a city with a sizable population of minorities and children considered at "high 
risk" of tobacco addiction. 
Local health experts say they have their work cut out for them. 
"This is a very large community and it is a very diverse community with lots of 
populations at risk for using tobacco products," said Alan Henderson, chairman 
of the health sciences department at Cal State Long Beach. "This is money 
earmarked for education that has not been here before, and a lot can be done 
with that amount of money for the benefit of the people in Long Beach." 
But officials concede that the local money pales next to the $2.5 billion the 
tobacco industry spends on national advertising yearly, much of it, they say, 
aimed at minorities and adolescents. 
A recent cigarette called Uptown was pulled off the market by its manufacturers 
after health advocates decried a marketing campaign that clearly targeted 
blacks, who suffer one of the highest lung cancer death rates in the country, 
cancer experts report. 
And health officials have long complained that cigarette packaging and ad 
images are seductive to children, 70% of whom will try tobacco at some point, 
researchers say. 
"Considering the dramatic need for education, this is not a lot of money -- a 
drop in the bucket -- and it is very important that it be spent wisely by 
someone who can deliver," said Jayne Lastusky, executive director of the 
American Cancer Society's Long Beach unit and a coalition member. 
The coalition also will include representatives from the American Heart Assn., 
area hospitals, public schools and Cal State Long Beach. It will monitor the 
spending of $632,000 administered by the Long Beach Department of Health and 
Human Services and $408,000 by the Long Beach Unified School District. 
Most cities in Los Angeles County are served by the county's massive health 
department. Because Long Beach is one of only three communities that operates 
its own health agency, it has the unique opportunity to fight tobacco on the 
local level. 
Henderson said it is vital that education go "beyond pamphlets." The coalition 
will attempt to define the tobacco problem in Long Beach, determine how to stop 
those who have started and educate those who have not. 
Experts hope to see the money used to enhance programs like Smoke-Free 2000, 
aimed at educating first-graders to ensure that they will be nonsmokers when 
they enter high school. Another concept is a hot line with information about 
stop-smoking programs for schools, industries and individuals. 
The funds became available in January and the health department hired 
consultant Judy Ross to direct the tobacco control program last month. Already, 
though, there is concern that Long Beach has fallen behind schedule. 
While the coalition approaches its first meeting Wednesday, the state is 
already preparing to launch an anti-tobacco media blitz April 11. Competition 
will be stiff for millions more dollars available to agencies by request, and 
Long Beach could miss out if its plans are not firmed up soon, Henderson said. 
"I am concerned Long Beach is behind," he said. "This is more money than has 
been seen in a long, long time for health educators. And there is a lot of 
excitement among people in health education who have been toiling in the 
vineyards without any resources for so long." 
