CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS PROPOSITIONS; 
TAX MEASURE TAKES NEW TRANSIT PLANNING TACK 
If California voters approve Proposition 111 in June, billions of dollars will 
be generated for new transportation projects from the Oregon state line to the 
Mexican border over the next 10 years, Gov. George Deukmejian and other 
supporters of the measure say. 
Proposition 111 would double the state gasoline tax over a five-year period, 
increase truck fees and raise the legal limit on state spending. It also would 
lead to dramatic changes in state transportation planning, officials of the 
California Department of Transportation contend. 
However, as a $5-million campaign gets under way to promote Proposition 111 and 
a companion measure, Proposition 108, the emphasis is on what the new money 
would buy. 
Teams of advocates are fanning out across the state, offering rosy promises of 
new projects if the two ballot measures pass and predicting a bleak, 
traffic-choked future if they do not. 
In Los Angeles, they talk of building an interchange on Highway 101 at Valley 
Circle in the San Fernando Valley (cost: $25.7 million); of building an 
interchange connecting routes 60 and 71, near Pomona ($42 million), and of 
widening the Simi Valley Freeway ($10.3 million). 
Orange County residents are being told that the new state money is needed to 
ensure completion of the massive $1.9-billion Santa Ana Freeway widening 
project. In San Bernardino County, some of the new money would be used to build 
California 30, a long-awaited east-west link with Los Angeles County. 
In San Diego County, the sales teams are saying passage of Propositions 108 and 
111 would mean construction of an interchange between Interstate 5 and 
California 56, near Del Mar; upgrading California 76, near Oceanside, to a 
four-lane expressway; and starting the Interstate 15-40th Street Freeway, among 
about $225 million worth of projects. 
Assembly Transportation Committee staff members have estimated that Los Angeles 
County would receive about $4.5 billion of the estimated $18.5 billion in new 
revenue that would be generated statewide over the next 10 years. (Of that, 
$15.5 billion would come from increases in gasoline and diesel fuel taxes and 
truck weight fees, the rest from passage of three $1-billion rail bond issues 
in 1990, 1992 and 1994.) 
However, supporters are careful not to mention that passage of Proposition 111 
might lead to construction of such controversial projects as the extension of 
the Long Beach Freeway through the city of South Pasadena. That $470-million 
freeway link does not appear on the Caltrans list of projects that would 
definitely be completed but does appear on a list of "possible candidates" for 
Proposition 111 funding. 
State officials warn that Propositions 108 and 111 offer a last chance to 
relieve the traffic congestion that is making life miserable in and around 
California's major cities. 
"We have a window of opportunity to do something about the transportation 
crisis that's coming closer to more and more peoples' doorsteps," Caltrans 
Director Robert K. Best said in a recent interview. 
Failure to pass the ballot measures means that needed transportation 
improvements would be delayed 10 to 12 years or longer, said Pete Hathaway, 
deputy director for finance of the California Transportation Commission. 
However, certain major projects like the 18-mile Century Freeway and light-rail 
project between Los Angeles International Airport and Norwalk ($375 million in 
remaining costs) almost certainly would be completed, although they might be 
delayed if Proposition 111 fails and no other source of funding appears. 
The congestion crisis has been building for a long time, as the California 
Transportation Commission's 1989 report to the Legislature made clear: 
* Between 1966 and 1986, California's population increased by 42%; personal 
income, adjusted for inflation, by 103%; the total state budget, adjusted for 
inflation, by 130%; but state transportation spending, after inflation, 
declined by 35%. 
* The 1989 consumer price index was 325% higher than in 1965, but revenue from 
the state gasoline tax (now 9 cents per gallon) has increased only 30% since 
1966. 
* Since 1966, the number of vehicles in California has nearly doubled, and 
miles traveled on state highways have increased by 129%, but state highway 
construction spending has dropped to only 45% of 1966 levels. 
* California now ranks last among the 50 states in per capita spending for 
transportation, while only four states have a lower gasoline tax. 
As a result of these and other factors, the commission found, traffic 
congestion has been growing by 15% to 20% a year in the Los Angeles and San 
Francisco areas; stop-and-go driving conditions exist on 60% of the state's 
urban freeways; and congestion delays amount to about 400,000 hours per day, at 
an annual cost in lost work time of more than $500 million. 
The problem has become so serious that Deukmejian has abandoned his 
no-new-taxes approach and is leading the effort to gain voter approval of 
Propositions 108 and 111. 
"Freeway gridlock dirties our air," the governor said in a recent statewide 
radio talk. "It diminishes our quality of life. And it hurts our ability to 
create good-paying jobs for your children, because businesses will be forced to 
pack up and move out of our state, unless we take bold action now." 
As vital as the new money is, the change in state transportation planning that 
would be triggered by passage of the propositions, especially 111, is equally 
important, Best said. 
"For many years we have been designing projects to capture the revenue that was 
available," he said, which mostly has been Federal Interstate Highway money. 
"Now we're trying to turn that around and match the money with the project." 
The new approach is best seen in the $3 billion that would be spent on a new 
"flexible congestion relief" program, in which Caltrans engineers and local 
transportation planners would seek alternatives to building more freeway lanes. 
"We'll go in and look at all the ways congestion can be relieved in a 
particular situation," Best said. "It might be transit (bus or rail). It might 
be ride-sharing or improving the traffic signal system or upgrading the 
arterial roads that parallel the freeway. Or it might be that expanding freeway 
capacity is the best way to go." 
Allan H. Hendrix, chief of program development for Caltrans, said: "This is an 
acknowledgement that you can't solve congestion just with highway solutions." 
This new emphasis on flexibility pleases legislators who have criticized 
Caltrans in the past for trying to solve all congestion problems by building 
freeways or adding freeway lanes. 
"We're trying to change Caltrans from a highway department to an agency that 
looks at all the possible solutions to traffic congestion problems," said 
Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar), chairman of the Assembly Transportation 
Committee. 
Local transportation officials also seem to be pleased by the new approach. 
"This can't help but improve the way we've been making decisions," said Mike 
Hoffacker, executive director of the Sacramento Area Council of Governments. 
"The change will be gradual, but over the next few years I think you'll see the 
projects that are competing for state dollars will be the projects that are 
most effective in dealing with traffic congestion and air quality." 
In Los Angeles, the new flexibility might mean more money for projects like the 
Santa Monica Freeway "smart corridor," where a sophisticated, computerized 
system will tell drivers whether to remain on the freeway or switch to less 
crowded arterial streets. 
Or it could mean more money to extend the El Monte Busway to the Ontario 
Airport or to add a bus and car-pool lane to the San Diego Freeway, between Los 
Angeles International Airport and the Orange County line. 
In Orange County, Caltrans District Director Keith McKean said, flexibility 
might mean that planners would decide to improve the traffic signal system on 
streets running parallel to the Garden Grove Freeway, instead of adding lanes 
to the jam-packed freeway itself. 
In San Diego, the decision might be to relieve congestion by building 
extensions of the city's successful light-rail system, instead of new freeways, 
said Lee Hultgren, director of transportation for the San Diego Assn. of 
Governments. 
If the plan works, decisions like this all over the state will be made by 
Caltrans and by transportation planners for cities, counties and regional 
agencies. 
"We can't design everything in Sacramento," Best said. "We need to have a 
program where state and local players come together to produce the best 
possible transportation plan. . . . We need to go beyond just cooperation (with 
local agencies) and have true integration." 
He conceded that this would be a new and difficult role for Caltrans, which has 
a history of concentrating on highways and also has been accustomed to getting 
its way, more often than not, in disputes with local officials. 
"We have to get rid of the turf-guarding and all of that," Best said. "And the 
way you do it is with money. . . . That's why the new revenue is so crucial." 
If Propositions 108 and 111 -- especially 111 -- fail, next year's Caltrans 
budget "will be a disaster," Best said. "Every unit in the department will be 
cut or frozen." 
The budget would be cut by at least $300 million in 1991-92, he said, because 
Caltrans would eliminate all outside contracting and would begin to trim its 
own engineering staff. 
Earthquake retrofitting will continue, financed by the special quarter-cent 
increase in the state sales tax that Deukmejian and the Legislature approved 
after last October's Bay Area quake. 
Except for that, "basically, what we become is a maintenance and safety 
operation," said Caltrans spokesman Jim Drago, with little spending on anything 
else. 
PROP. 111: THE FINANCES 
Supporters of Proposition 111 on the June ballot say billions of dollars would 
be generated for new transportation projects if the measure passes. 
Where the money would come from: 
1: $13 billion, over 10 years, from a 9-cent increase in the state gasoline tax 
and diesel fuel tax -- a 5-cent hike to take effect Aug. 1, 1990, with an 
additional 1-cent-per-gallon increase on Jan. 1 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994. 
2: $2 billion from increased truck weight fees, for trucks over 4,000 pounds. 
3: $500 million from sales tax revenue that would result from the fuel tax 
increases. 
4: $3 billion from three separate general obligation bond issues for urban 
transit, commuter rail and intercity rail projects -- a $1-billion bond issue 
on June 5, 1990, another in November, 1992, and a third in November, 1994. 
How the money would be spent: 
$3.5 billion to complete projects the state Transportation Commission has 
approved but has no money to build. 
$3 billion for urban transit, commuter rail and intercity rail projects (if the 
three bond issues pass). 
$3 billion for "flexible congestion relief," which could include rail lines, 
busways, arterialstreet improvements, better traffic signal systems, bike paths 
and many other possibilities, as well as new roads. 
$3 billion in direct state payments to counties and cities for local road 
improvements. 
$2 billion for state-local "partnerships"; this money can be used for a variety 
of transportation purposes but cities and counties would be required to pay 50% 
of the project cost. 
$1.25 billion for the Interregional Road System, connecting important economic 
centers in rural parts of the state. 
$1 billion for "traffic system management" -- such things as ramp meters, 
computerized traffic signal systems and television surveillance of crowded 
highways and freeways. 
$1 billion for maintenance and rehabilitation of state highways. (This is in 
addition to the revenue being generated by the special quarter-cent state sales 
tax increase for earthquake repairs). 
$500 million for transit operations or construction. 
$150 million for sound walls. 
$100 million for freeway landscaping. 
