RECOLLECTIONS OF A COMMUNIST WHO DIED IN TIME; 
MEMORIES BY ANDREI GROMYKO (DOUBLEDAY: $24.95; 432 PP.; 0-385-41288-6) 
Andrei Gromyko lived a long and fortunate life not simply because he had a 
brilliant career. He was born into a poor peasant family, appointed ambassador 
to the United States while still quite young, and made foreign minister in 
1957, a position he held for the next 30 years. His career culminated in the 
pre-perestroika days, when he assumed what is theoretically the highest 
position in the Soviet government: chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme 
Soviet. 
Gromyko probably was most fortunate, though, in the timing of his death, for 
had he lived just a few months more, he would have witnessed the destruction of 
the values and institutions that had shaped him and that he himself had 
developed and reinforced for most of his adult life. At the time these memoirs 
were written, however, he was certain that his world was destined to remain 
essentially unchanged for the foreseeable future. Having died in time, Gromyko 
was able to maintain a belief in his own integrity and in that of the old 
world. 
The central portion of "Memories," for instance, explores the problems of the 
world that resulted from the Yalta Accords, a world Gromyko assumed to be 
inviolable. I can only guess at the unhappiness and disappointment that would 
have been Gromyko's had he heard Central Committee Secretary Alexander Yakovlev 
and Foreign Minister Eduard Shervardnadze declare, at the recently concluded 
plenum of the Communist Party, that Stalin's legacy and the consequences of 
Yalta had to be overcome before there could be true mutual equality in 
relations with Eastern Europe and an end to the division of Europe. 
Gromyko also would have been quite upset over the conclusions reached by a 
commission of the Congress of People's Deputies that had investigated, under 
Yakovlev's chairmanship, the German-Soviet pact of 1939. In his memoirs, 
Gromyko repeats the usual Stalinist cant by claiming that there was a pressing 
need for the agreement with Germany, and denying the existence of any secret 
codicils. The second Congress, however, finally denounced Stalin's immoral 
foreign policy and admitted what has long been known to everyone in the outside 
world. 
Official Soviet evaluations in the last few months also have negated the 
reasons Gromyko gives for the invasions of Hungary, Czechoslovakia and 
Afghanistan. The incursions were necessary, Gromyko argues here, to prevent 
these countries from escaping the Soviet orbit. To justify Moscow's military 
intervention, Gromyko presents the old, orthodox arguments of 
counterrevolutionary plots, Western mischief and threats to socialism. 
Gromyko's brief musings on Afghanistan are even more cynical, justifying a 
dirty conflict that lasted for more than a decade and claimed the lives of tens 
of thousands of Soviet soldiers and hundreds of thousands of Afghans. Had he 
lived just a few months longer, he would have been less than pleased to hear 
this war condemned not only by Western politicians or the mass media he so 
contemptuously dismisses here, but by Soviet parliamentarians denouncing aging 
oligarchs from the podium of the Congress of People's Deputies. 
Gromyko's analysis of the Cold War similarly repeats the cliches that populate 
Soviet international-relations textbooks. We read about Roosevelt's policies 
against the Soviet Union, Truman's betrayals and the attempts by Western 
politicians during the post-war period to destroy the wartime alliance among 
the Soviet Union, the United States and Great Britain, an alliance that Gromyko 
saw as natural and beneficial. 
Without idealizing in any way the foreign policy of President Truman and the 
West during the Cold War, I must note that Gromyko did not understand -- or 
possibly did not want to understand -- the abnormality of a lasting alliance 
among the three. 
Gromyko sees such a peace-time alliance as a natural consequence of a war-time 
alliance, but the former was in fact brought about only by extraordinary 
circumstances. If Gromyko's analysis had considered the difference of basic 
values and institutions between the United States and the U.S.S.R., rather than 
focusing on superficial and pragmatic distinctions, he would not have assigned 
blame for the start of the Cold War to Truman's personality or American nuclear 
monopoly, but rather to the politics of Stalin's regime. Almost in spite of 
himself, Gromyko shows the unnaturalness of a post-war alliance between the 
West and Stalin when he writes: 
"During the Conference, Churchill was replaced by (Prime Minister Clement) 
Attlee, but the new Labor government truly adopted the line taken by Churchill, 
and Truman and Attlee easily found a common language." 
The very fact that Churchill was replaced by Attlee, who then chose to pursue 
the policies of Churchill and Truman, tells us that the reason for the post-war 
split between the U.S.S.R. and the United States and Britain are not to be 
found in the machinations of Western politicians but rather in the deep-seated 
and basic differences between the goals and concerns of the Soviet Union and 
the West. 
The chapter "From Nixon to Reagan" is written in the same vein. Gromyko 
acknowledges advances in arms control and in preparation for the SALT 1 and 
SALT 2 talks, but has nothing to say about the real reasons for the collapse of 
the policy of detente, confining himself to accusations against the Carter and 
Reagan administrations. Not surprisingly, it also seems that Reagan was 
Gromyko's least favorite American President. 
Gromyko does not openly refer to this, but I assume that his dislike for Reagan 
stems from his realization that Reagan is almost a mirror image of the old 
Soviet leadership. President Reagan was almost as fanatical in his defense of 
Western institutions -- in his single-minded ideological orientation, in his 
militancy and in his uncompromising readiness to sacrifice all for the sake of 
an idea -- as were the leaders of the Soviet state at the time of its creation. 
Gromyko's evaluation of the Nixon-Reagan administrations in general, and of 
Henry Kissinger in particular, are fascinating. While recognizing Kissinger's 
talent, he describes him as a man who had no principles and who kept changing 
positions, always attempting to maintain the greatest possible visibility for 
himself. He correctly concludes that in spite of Kissinger's attempts to join 
the Reagan team willy-nilly by appearing to endorse the prevailing ideology, 
there was no room in the ideological and principled Reagan Administration for a 
man as pragmatic and unprincipled as Kissinger. 
In addition to descriptions and discussions of many aspects of foreign policy, 
the reader will find in "Memories" an entire gallery of 20th-Century 
luminaries: kings and princesses, outstanding governmental functionaries and 
movie stars, scientists and writers. In a few cases, the descriptions of the 
people whom Gromyko met are lively and perceptive; this makes the book quite a 
bit more colorful. As a rule, however, Gromyko surrounds his personal and, in 
some cases, very intriguing observations with predictable, black-and-white 
judgments based on the individual's social class, or his attitude toward the 
Soviet Union. 
The book's last chapter, dealing with Stalin and written especially for the 
American edition, is of great interest. As a whole, Gromyko's handling and 
discussion of the crimes of Stalin and his inner circle are quite correct, but 
he never manages to answer the questions he himself poses in the chapter: Was 
the road that the country traveled under Stalin's leadership an inevitability? 
Was there a chance, in spite of socialist revolution, to move the country away 
from the principles established by Lenin that led to the cult of an individual? 
To answer these two questions correctly he would have had to accept two 
important premises which did not quite fit with his Weltanschauung. First: Even 
before Stalin, there had been created in post-revolutionary Russia a 
totalitarian regime with an oligarchic ruling system that denied power or 
accumulation of personal possessions to the vast majority of the people. 
Second: After Lenin's death, the struggle for power among the oligarchs, 
without the participation of the people, led to the emergence of a charismatic 
leader who dominated the already existing totalitarian system with the help of 
a repressive-propagandistic apparatus. 
Thus, no matter how great the desire to blame all evil on Stalin, if we are to 
be objective it must be said that he only completed the structure that had been 
created immediately after the revolution. 
I must regretfully admit that for the last 70 years, our politicians regarded 
the outside world, as well as our internal affairs, solely in terms of black or 
white, with no shades of gray. "Memories" exemplifies that attitude. 
We can only hope -- for the sake of my country, as well as for the sake of the 
entire world -- that Gromyko's memoirs will be merely a monument to times gone 
by, times we hope will never return. 
