SNAPSHOTS: SPECIAL EDUCATION AND GIFTED STUDENTS MIX IN A DUARTE CLASS -- AND 
BOTH LEARN FROM THE EXPERIENCE. 
Jan Morris wasn't impressed when her fifth-grade son started tinkering with a 
watch, then proceeded to take a camera apart. 
But her interest was piqued when she discovered the boy was dissecting devices 
to understand how they work as part of his gifted and talented education (GATE) 
class at Valley View Elementary School. 
Morris, who teaches special education at the same Duarte school, had an idea. 
She thought her students, who have learning handicaps such as dyslexia or an 
impaired ability to concentrate, might benefit from rubbing shoulders with GATE 
students. 
She approached GATE teacher Lloyd Martinez and by January, her eight 
fifth-grade students were constructing model airplanes out of balsa wood next 
to their GATE counterparts. The joint class on planes and aviation history 
culminated in a recent excursion to the El Monte Airport. 
"Combining classes on different levels was like walking on thin ice," Martinez 
said of the six weeks he taught with Morris. "You don't know what's going to 
happen." 
Morris said her main concern was that Martinez's class not feel used. "We were 
careful not to change the program for the GATE kids," she noted. "There was the 
same high level of expectation." 
Morris said the match was ideal because of the small number of GATE students, 
24, and the greater freedom that class has in deciding how students want to 
learn. 
"In regular classrooms they don't take the time very often to do non-academic 
projects," she said. 
GATE students served as role models for her pupils by being attentive and 
focusing on their own work, she said. The once-a-week visits to the GATE 
classroom also gave her students a chance to socialize with mainstream 
students. 
"It's deadening to group children by ability. They become stifled," she said. 
In the mixed class, her students were stimulated by their GATE counterparts. 
"We identify with who we're around, so we should be around the best quality 
people" to perform best, Morris said. "There's nothing that teaches faster than 
a model." 
Kiwan Sims, a 10-year-old with a short attention span who has difficulty 
processing what he sees, was "in seventh heaven" in the combined class, Morris 
said. 
Sims said he didn't think he could make a plane at first but he did. "It was 
harder but I still liked it," he said, adding that constructing the wings was 
the hardest part. 
While Sims usually can concentrate on an activity for a maximum of five minutes 
before losing interest, he worked intently for two hours at a stretch with the 
GATE students, Morris said. 
When he gets restless, "if he (starts bothering) one of my other kids we would 
have a fight," she said. "But a model child with the skill of paying attention 
doesn't engage him and calms him down." 
She said the model-building assignment also boosted her students' self-esteem. 
"There's less pressure here," she said. 
Some GATE children altered their views of the special education students after 
working with them. 
"One kid was constantly asking for help," recalled Greg Hagopian, 10. "But he 
built a better plane than I did. I was shocked." 
Heidi Duffin, 10, had thought the special education class was for students with 
problems. But she said she did not notice any special problems, except that her 
once-a-week classmates were a bit slower. "It's kind of hard having to teach 
them all the time," she added. 
"It's difficult working with people that can't keep up with you," agreed Starr 
Pebley, 10. But "I learned that even if people are in special classes, they're 
still human beings. You can talk to them." 
Other GATE students had not even realized that their visitors were from a 
special class. 
The experiment was so successful, the two classes hope to build a pump to learn 
how the heart works. 
Alberta Schroder, coordinator of the district's elementary-level GATE program, 
said she would consider making the collaboration a permanent feature while 
planning next year's curriculum. 
"It's important that very bright people learn to communicate with others to 
understand that everybody is special," she said. 
