PSYCHIATRISTS SAY SUSPECT IN STUDIO GUARDS' SLAYINGS WAS INSANE 
Three court-appointed psychiatrists have concluded that a man who gunned down 
two Universal Studios security guards while stalking actor Michael Landon in 
1988 was insane at the time of the killings, authorities said Thursday. 
The conclusions have prompted the Los Angeles County district attorney's office 
to consider a possible plea agreement with Nathan N. Trupp that would avoid a 
trial. Trupp, 43, a former mental patient, has pleaded not guilty by reason of 
insanity. 
Trupp allegedly shot and killed guards Jaren Beeks, 27, and Armando Torres, 18, 
on Dec. 1, 1988. He later told investigators that he believed that the guards, 
who manned the main gate, were Nazis. He said he shot them after they refused 
to let him into the studio complex to see Landon, whom Trupp also believed to 
be a Nazi. 
At the time of the shootings, Trupp was the object of a nationwide manhunt over 
the killings, two days earlier, of three people at an Albuquerque, N.M., bagel 
shop. 
Trupp, who had been living in Albuquerque, told investigators that he shot the 
three victims because they sold him poisoned bagels. He then took a bus to Los 
Angeles to look for Landon. 
After being charged in the Universal killings, Trupp was found incompetent to 
stand trial by two psychiatrists who diagnosed him as having a psychotic mental 
disorder. 
Four months later, after being treated with psychotropic drugs at a San 
Bernardino County mental hospital, he was ruled competent. He pleaded not 
guilty by reason of insanity Dec. 6, 1989, and the three new psychiatric 
examinations were ordered. 
If Trupp is found not guilty by reason of insanity he would be committed to a 
state mental hospital for life unless psychiatrists conducting yearly 
examinations determine that his sanity has been restored. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Sterling E. Norris said the psychiatrists who filed reports 
with the court last month were chosen jointly by prosecutors and Trupp's 
attorney, Deputy Public Defender Stephen Lee Hobson. Hobson could not be 
reached for comment. 
"All the conclusions of all three psychiatrists are that he was insane at the 
time of the offense," Norris said. "Those are the bottom-line evaluations." 
Norris declined to acknowledge that the examinations' findings bolster Trupp's 
defense and also stopped short of saying his office is negotiating a plea 
agreement in the case. 
"We are communicating in relation to a possible plea," Norris said. "There 
still could be a trial. There might not." 
In making the decision on whether to go to trial, Norris said, he will seek 
input from prosecutors in New Mexico, where Trupp faces three murder charges. 
The case in Albuquerque has been on hold while the Los Angeles case proceeded. 
A hearing in which a trial date will be set or a plea by Trupp will be accepted 
by the prosecution is scheduled April 3 in Los Angeles Municipal Court. 
