IN LOVE WITH ST. GALLEN 
I have had a love affair with Switzerland since 1971. Of the 40 countries I 
have visited since, it is my favorite. I like its mountains, villages, trains, 
chocolate, small hotels, pure clean air -- and you can drink its water. 
At first I was a typical tourist, visiting all the popular Swiss stops: Geneva, 
Lausanne, Lucerne, Montreux, Zermatt, Interlaken, St. Moritz. Then I found such 
gems as Grindelwald, Wengen, Lauterbrunnen, Saas Fee, Arosa, Locarno and 
Ascona. 
Now I have discovered St. Gallen, the capital of the little-known region of 
eastern Switzerland. 
At an altitude of 2,200 feet in a lush, green valley between Lake Constance and 
8,200-foot Mt. Santis, St. Gallen is an hour's train ride from the Zurich 
airport and 2 hours, 20 minutes from Munich. 
Restored Homes 
Give it at least two days. You will need one day to explore the Altstadt, or 
old town. Its narrow, winding streets, many of which are reserved for 
pedestrians, are lined with attractive little shops and quaint old houses 
splendidly restored. Their turrets, bay windows and carved wooden balconies are 
peculiar to this part of Switzerland and southern Germany. 
On the second day take a 45-minute train ride to Appenzell, a charming village 
of painted buildings and narrow streets, where the Alpine scenery reminds you 
more of the rest of Switzerland. 
Usually, good skiing is available near the village, but on a recent cold, 
overcast day the mountains had only a light dusting of snow and the ski lifts 
were shut down in one of Switzerland's mildest winters in memory. 
If bad weather knocks out a visit to Appenzell, take a train to Zurich (about 
$20 U.S.) from where you can catch another train for a day's excursion to many 
of Switzerland's choicest pieces of real estate. Lake Constance is only 15 
minutes away, as is Bregenz, Austria, and its casino. 
Why St. Gallen is so unfamiliar, even to the natives of Basel, Geneva and Bern 
is a mystery. It has been around since AD 612, when an itinerant Irish monk 
named Gallus found the area attractive and settled here. 
By the 8th Century Gallus' hermit cell had developed first into a monastery and 
then into the Benedictine Abbey of St. Gall. 
In 1805 the abbey was abolished but its magnificent baroque buildings remained. 
They are the feature attraction of the old quarter. The cathedral's 
architecture is so impressive that UNESCO put it on its list of the world's 
chief cultural monuments. 
Even more impressive than the cathedral, however, is the abbey's library. To 
the Swiss this richly molded, elaborately ornate building, completed in 1767, 
has the most beautiful rococo interior on any side of the Alps. 
The library is a magnificent room, 94 feet long, 32 feet wide and 24 feet high. 
An intricately designed inlaid floor of walnut, fir and cherry gleams in the 
light shining through 34 windows. Visitors must wear slippers over shoes to 
walk on the library's floor. 
Library Treasures 
Baroque furnishings and ceiling frescoes aside, the library treasures are its 
800 biblical and liturgical manuscripts (out of 2,000 brought here by Gallus 
and other monks) and 100,000 leather-bound books that have survived fire, wars 
and theft for more than 200 years. 
The priceless manuscripts were beautifully handwritten as early as the 6th 
Century by creative artists among the monks. Some are illuminated. They inspire 
reverence, and after seeing them one can better understand the Greek 
inscription over the entrance to the library: "The Healing Place for the Soul." 
With the decline of the dollar, a visitor to St. Gallen during the Christmas 
holidays found prices that reminded him of New York City, London and Paris. 
A lunch of bratwurst, French fries and a glass of wine cost $14. In a small 
Italian restaurant a dinner of veal, a small side dish of spaghetti and a 
quarter liter of wine cost $26. No salad, no dessert, no coffee. 
A fondue lunch for two, with a small bottle of local wine at the Hecht Hotel in 
Appenzell, cost $35. Simple dinners, salad, veal or tafelspitz (delicious 
boiled beef), potatoes and half a liter of wine, costs up to $65 for two. 
A fixed-price dinner for two without wine was $90 at St. Gallen's Einstein 
Hotel. 
Still, it costs less to visit St. Gallen and Appenzell than the popular resorts 
of central Switzerland and the Bernese Oberland. 
The Swiss towns also are cheaper than Munich, Salzburg and Vienna, where double 
rooms in such luxury hotels as the Hilton and Sheraton can cost as much as $250 
to $300. 
Double rooms with bath at the little Hecht Hotel in Appenzell cost about $95, 
including breakfast, tax and service. It is small and central. 
Deluxe Hotels 
Einstein, one of four hotels classified as deluxe in St. Gallen, has 65 
immaculate rooms with spacious modern baths. A member of the Movenpick-Radisson 
chain, it is just a few steps from the old quarter and half a mile from the 
railroad station. 
The manager, Jurg Studer, has given "The Little Grand Hotel" some nice touches. 
Bathrooms have hair dryers and large heated bath towels. Linen towels are 
placed on the floor by beds at night. A bowl of fresh fruit is placed in the 
lobby for guests every evening. 
Like most Swiss hotels the Einstein has one of the best restaurants in town. It 
is on the top (fifth) floor and overlooks the old quarter. 
A double room in January went for about $165 U.S. Breakfast was not included. 
Other deluxe hotels in St. Gallen are the Metropol and Walhalla, both near the 
railroad station, and the Santispark. 
For more information on St. Gallen or Switzerland in general, contact the Swiss 
National Tourist Office, 250 Stockton St., San Francisco 94108, phone (415) 
362-2260. 
