MURDER-SUICIDE FINAL WORD ON PAIR OF EDUCATORS; 
CRIME: POLICE STAND BY THEIR FINDINGS AND CLOSE THE CASE. BLACK ACTIVISTS WHO 
EARLIER CRITICIZED OFFICIALS SAY THEY ARE NOW SATISFIED. 
San Diego police Wednesday closed the investigation into the deaths of two San 
Diego school administrators, calling it a murder-suicide after a week of 
investigation that turned up personal writings by Assistant Supt. George Frey. 
The bodies of Frey, 57, and Elizabeth Alene (Betty) Tomblin, 43 -- another 
official of the city school district -- were found shot in the head at Frey's 
home 11 days ago. Frey, who had been divorced three times, and Tomblin, who was 
married, purportedly were romantically involved. 
Police have adhered to their preliminary conclusion of murder-suicide, which 
was reached by the six-member homicide team, a coroner and a forensic 
pathologist 10 hours after finding the bodies. 
"The conclusion from the evidence is that George Frey shot Elizabeth Tomblin 
and then used the same gun to kill himself. Period," said Lt. Gary Learn of the 
homicide unit. 
According to a press release issued Wednesday by police, "The possibility that 
this crime was committed by another person was thoroughly pursued, but 
absolutely no evidence of this was found." 
Frey's writings helped police ascertain the unfolding of events, the release 
said. The writings included a diary and a letter to his daughter, one source 
said. The contents of those writings have not been disclosed. 
Although police closed the case Wednesday, they declined to answer a number of 
questions. They will not reveal who owned the .22-caliber semiautomatic pistol 
found next to the bodies. Nor will they say who notified them that Tomblin's 
car was parked outside Frey's Oak Park home. 
Frey and Tomblin were romantically involved over the years, friends and a 
police official say. The two had begun breaking up in December, said one friend 
of Frey, who asked not to be identified. 
"George cared very much for her," said the friend, who added that Frey had 
discussed his frustration at being at the same social events as Tomblin but 
having to mask the nature of their relationship. Tomblin directed the 
district's program evaluations department. 
While Frey was involved with Tomblin, he also dated other women, friends said, 
but they added that they were uncertain whether that was an effort to conceal 
his relationship with Tomblin, a tall, athletic blonde who introduced him to 
skiing. Over the years, the two took a number of ski trips together, including 
a 10-day vacation last spring to Innsbruck, Austria, the friend said. The pair 
made the trip when 25 members of a ski club organized by the school district 
went to Austria. Club members, however, stayed in a different village. 
Frey and Tomblin "were being discreet," the friend said. 
The revelation of a romance between Frey and Tomblin surprised some, including 
those who considered themselves their friends. Some flinched at learning what 
had been a carefully guarded secret, while others said it was simply not 
possible. The disclosure also complicated what had almost overnight become a 
controversial case. 
Believing police had too hastily labeled the case a murder-suicide, some black 
leaders last week called for further investigation and even threatened to hire 
a private investigator. Also last week, seven members of the Black Federation 
picketed outside the police station in an effort to persuade police to more 
rigorously investigate the deaths. 
Herb Cawthorne, the federation's chief executive officer, said he now feels 
police have adequately investigated the case. 
"It was a question not of police competence but of community confidence," 
Cawthorne said. "There are things obviously that police cannot tell us or 
anyone for the sake of the privacy of the families. But we were satisfied." 
The Rev. George Walker Smith, who conducted a memorial service for Frey on 
Sunday, said he will no longer be pursuing the case and will not hire a private 
investigator. 
"To me, it's closed," said Smith, who had known Frey for 25 years. 
In a printed release, police spokesman Dave Cohen said Wednesday that the 
preliminary conclusion by police was based on more than "50 hours of combined 
investigative time. The evidence to support this conclusion was compelling, and 
the determination to make the release was made in order to allay community 
concerns that a multiple murderer might be at large." 
Despite the brouhaha over the case, he said, it was handled no differently than 
any other major homicide. "That is, it was thoroughly and completely 
investigated," said Cohen, who added that police findings were buttressed by 
autopsies, information obtained by detectives and Frey's writings. 
The bodies of Frey and Tomblin were found along a short stairway leading to a 
sunken first-floor bedroom in Frey's home. Frey had fallen on top of Tomblin, 
who had also been shot in the left thigh. 
Tomblin's husband, Douglas, a Bonita veterinarian who lives in La Mesa, 
declined to return calls from a reporter. Douglas Tomblin, who neighbors say 
has left town, reported his wife missing March 16 after she did not come home 
from work. The next day, he filed another report with the sheriff. 
One police official said last week that Douglas Tomblin had been unaware that 
his wife was having an affair. 
