EVANS SCHOOL IS AN ISLAND OF REFUGE FOR IMMIGRANTS 
With just the clothes on her back, Siu Ling Li swam to freedom, from Canton 
across the South China Sea to Hong Kong. 
Jose Bautista twice risked muggings by Mexican bandits and capture by 
immigration officers. 
Chhuan Rong lost his brother to a Khmer Rouge bullet, dodged land mines on his 
way out of Cambodia, and spent three years in a teeming refugee camp in 
Thailand. 
Now all three are Los Angeles residents, their perilous journeys behind them. 
But their struggles are not over. Needing skills that will enable them not just 
to survive but to succeed in America, they are among the thousands of 
immigrants drawn each year to Evans Community Adult School in downtown Los 
Angeles. 
With 13,000 students from more than 80 countries, Evans is the nation's largest 
and most polyglot adult school. Known to many students before they set foot in 
the United States as the "biggest and best" adult school in Los Angeles, it 
plays an essential role in helping newcomers join the mainstream of American 
society. 
While massive immigration has brought fundamental changes and tensions to many 
Los Angeles communities, Evans is seen by students and teachers as an island of 
neutrality. 
"This place is heaven on Earth," said veteran teacher Dave Baker, whose 
beginning English class has Armenians, Chinese, Mexicans, Salvadorans and a 
woman from Ethiopia. 
Despite this diversity of cultures, Evans students say they all have the same 
goal. "We all want to learn English and function in this society," Bautista 
said. 
The campus pulses with activity. On most days, the school is open from 5:50 
a.m. to 9:15 p.m. Twice a week, amnesty classes run until 2:20 a.m. 
Anchoring the northeast corner of Sunset Boulevard and Figueroa Street, Evans 
is comprised of a gleaming red and white, cube-shaped building and several 
aging bungalows. The campus is plain, functional and free of graffiti. Except 
for the occasional multilingual notice, such as the ones posted inside some 
lavatory stalls on how to use the toilet, most signs are in English. 
The school draws much of its enrollment from the large immigrant communities 
that surround it -- Chinatown, East Los Angeles, Echo Park, Westlake and the 
Olympic and Wilshire corridors. But many students, bypassing adult schools in 
their own communities, come from farther afield, such as the San Gabriel and 
San Fernando valleys. 
Some students come straight from the airport, suitcases in hand. 
But the school struggles to fulfill its mission against a background of lagging 
resources -- and with increasing numbers of students who lack even the most 
basic literacy skills. 
Like most of the 27 adult schools operated by the Los Angeles Unified School 
District, Evans has a lengthy waiting list for English classes -- 1,500 at last 
count in February. 
The typical beginning English class at Evans has 50 students, which educators 
say is far from ideal, even when the pupils are well-behaved and highly 
motivated grown-ups. 
School administrators blame the backlog on a statewide funding cap, in 
existence for the last decade, which prevents enrollment in adult English 
classes from growing more than 2.5% a year. 
"Our city has changed so dramatically in the last few years," said Assistant 
Supt. James Figueroa, who oversees adult education for the Los Angeles 
district. He said demographic shifts have created a demand for adult English 
classes as well as courses in raising children. 
Once given a seat, however, Evans students seem not to mind the crowded classes 
or long waits to get in. They like the variety of offerings and the 
six-day-a-week, nearly round-the-clock schedule. They can take courses in 
English, citizenship, U.S. history, psychology, typing, computers and other 
basic subjects. 
Students range in age from 18 to 80. And the nationalities they represent could 
rival a United Nations roll-call. 
On any given day in the school's flag-strewn cafeteria, a visitor could find a 
Thai student sharing a lunch table with a Colombian, or a Shanghai native 
poring over a book with a Soviet Armenian refugee. 
In the classroom, the mix includes a Japanese executive's wife and a former 
Salvadoran journalist, or a Vietnamese factory worker and an Argentine 
physician, all struggling over the same English adjective, expression or figure 
of speech. 
The diversity of Evans' enrollment is so dizzying that sometimes a student's 
national origin stumps even the most sophisticated diviner of cultural 
background on the school's staff, such as the time a native of Nauru -- an 
independent republic in the West Pacific near the Solomon Islands -- enrolled, 
or when six Spanish-speaking Koreans from Peru showed up in the registration 
line a few years ago. 
The school traces its beginnings to 1937, when an adult Americanization Office, 
a precursor of citizenship school, was established on the campus of the Cambria 
Elementary School in downtown Los Angeles. Eventually, as the need increased, 
the Cambria Adult School was formed. 
In 1972, the adult operation moved to its own campus at Sunset and Figueroa, 
and Cambria was renamed Evans Community Adult School, after E. Manfred Evans, 
the first adult-education superintendent in the Los Angeles school district. 
Through the years, the school has remained true to its original purpose. 
Although officially open to all adults, Evans' main mission, said Principal 
Douglas Holmes, is to help immigrants become "competent (to live and work) in 
the United States." 
The school's biggest draw is the English language program, which starts with 
courses in "pre-literacy" for students who lack the ability to read and write 
in their native language and proceeds through seven levels of English 
instruction. After completing the English series, many students advance to the 
high school diploma program, which is next in popularity and offers general 
academic courses. 
Evans also offers the largest college preparatory program in Los Angeles for 
foreign visa students. According to foreign student adviser Peter O. Share, the 
school has about 350 such students, who pay tuition of $1,050 a year. Classes 
are free for all other students. 
For some of the students, the struggle to attain a better life in the United 
States is almost as painful as their flight here. 
Rong, who arrived in the United States two years ago after fleeing Cambodia, 
said he despairs of ever finding a decent job because he has a physical 
handicap and lacks sufficient education for skilled work. 
But Rong, who asked that his real name not be used, spends each weekday working 
toward a high school diploma at Evans, even though he finds the curriculum 
difficult. 
"Every lesson I have to read at least five times," said Rong, who shares a 
house near downtown with 10 relatives. "I have to study more than other people. 
I (learn) just enough to pass the class. I am worried all the time (about 
money)." 
Other students come to Evans already highly educated, wanting only to become 
fluent in English so they can continue to practice their professions in the 
United States. 
Some students see Evans as their second chance to obtain the education that 
eluded them earlier in their lives. Bautista, 23, who is student body president 
at Evans, offered himself as an example. 
"I thought I couldn't learn," Bautista said, detailing a past marked by 
frequent changes of schools because of his family's itinerant lifestyle. He and 
his family immigrated to the United States from Guadalajara, Mexico, when he 
was 9. But his father moved from one construction job to another during most of 
Bautista's youth. 
Eventually, Bautista dropped out of an East Los Angeles junior high school and 
went to work. He had never learned enough English to write a simple note, he 
said. 
But a sympathetic boss urged him to go back to school, so Bautista started 
taking English classes, soon advancing to Evans' academic program. Now he is a 
few months away from earning a high school diploma. His goal, he said, is to 
study theology in college and become a priest. 
At Evans, teachers "treat you with respect," he said. "You realize that you can 
learn and that . . . your dreams are reasonable, if you work hard enough." 
Li, 38, recalls just how limited her world was before she came to Evans. 
One of 11 children born in Nanning, China, to a well-to-do family, she was 22 
when she decided that life under communism was too stifling for her. With two 
brothers and a few friends, she escaped through Canton, swimming for hours 
across the South China Sea to reach Hong Kong. 
After spending five years in the British territory, she moved to the United 
States, got married, had two children and settled into a routine that she said 
consisted of staying home, taking care of her children, cleaning the house and 
tending her vegetable garden. 
"I was a very typical Chinese woman," Li said over lunch in the school 
cafeteria. 
Her husband wanted her to take a job in a sewing factory, but Li wanted to go 
to school to learn English. Eventually, they were divorced, and Li enrolled at 
Evans, taking classes in English, science, psychology and other subjects. 
Now she proudly describes herself as being "half-American, half-Chinese." And 
she said that learning English "changed my life" because it expanded her 
horizons. She expects to earn a high school degree by fall, but said her dream 
is to study psychology in college and become a social worker helping senior 
citizens. 
Like many Evans students, Li squeezes her classes into an already demanding 
schedule. She attends classes all day, goes home for a few hours, then works as 
a waitress from 8 p.m. to 4 a.m. With 10 minutes between classes and 30 minutes 
for lunch, Evans students have little idle time. 
The fast pace, along with the faculty's efforts at cross-cultural education, 
may contribute to what teachers and students say is a generally harmonious 
campus. 
Teacher Florene Rozen, who often provides cross-cultural sensitivity training 
to businesses and other private groups, said the rest of Los Angeles could 
learn a lot about human relations from Evans. 
"There is too much ethnic politics out there. That mentality is going to tear 
up L.A.," she said. "That's why I love this school. We are a perfect example of 
what can happen in America. Maybe Evans will save L.A." 
