NUCLEAR SMUGGLING ARRESTS; 
'TRIGGERS' BOUND FOR IRAQ; 5 SEIZED AFTER U.S.-BRITISH PROBE; 
INDICTMENT COMES FROM SAN DIEGO 
Customs officials said they foiled an attempt today to smuggle 40 U.S.-made 
nuclear trigger components to Iraq via London. 
They said five people were arrested, including an Iraqi who was picked up at 
Heathrow Airport and is being expelled from Britain. 
The officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the devices arrived 
from the United States two days earlier and were kept under surveillance until 
the alleged smugglers attempted to put them on a scheduled Iraqi Airways flight 
to Baghdad. 
In Washington, a U.S. Customs Service spokesman, Ed Kittredge, said the arrests 
resulted from an 18-month investigation by U.S. and British customs officials. 
A sealed indictment has been returned in the case in U.S. District Court in San 
Diego, he said. 
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said, "This issue raises once again our 
concern for the nuclear proliferation in the Middle East." He called on nuclear 
suppliers "to exercise special restraint in providing materials to this region 
of the world, and we continue to urge that all states adhere to the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty," including Iraq. 
The incident could further strain relations between Britain and Iraq. 
Earlier this month, Britain recalled its ambassador from Baghdad after the 
Iraqis hanged an Iranian-born journalist working for a British newspaper. Iraq 
accused the journalist, Farzad Bazoft, of spying. 
BBC-TV said customs officials, tipped off by their American counterparts, 
removed the nuclear devices and substituted harmless replacements, then waited 
for the packages to be collected from their freight shed. 
It showed footage of the operation which it said was shot by an NBC crew that 
had been following the investigation. 
The Home Office said the detainees also included three Britons and a Lebanese. 
It said the Iraqi was being deported because of attempted breaches of British 
laws restricting the export of high technology. 
The customs officials said the items were capacitors, electrical devices that 
form part of the detonation chain of a nuclear bomb. 
Prof. Paul Wilkinson, a Bradford University terrorism expert, said of Iraq: "If 
they're trying to smuggle in these highly sophisticated trigger devices, that 
means they're very serious about making nuclear weapons and soon." 
Tony Banks, a Middle East expert at the respected Jane's Defense Weekly, said 
nuclear triggers are devices for initiating an explosion in a nuclear weapon. 
"This is a very, very high technology. There are only a very few countries in 
the world capable of manufacturing this type of technology, and there is no 
other use for a nuclear triggering device than to trigger a nuclear weapon," he 
said. 
It is not known whether Iraq has nuclear weapons capability, but it has been 
developing a long-range missile judged by some military analysts to be capable 
of delivering a nuclear warhead. 
