LONG BEACH DROPS CHARGES IN POLICE 'STING' BY ACTIVIST 
Admitting the case was weak, the Long Beach city prosecutor Wednesday dropped 
charges that Don Jackson, a self-styled crusader against police brutality, 
resisted arrest during a secretly filmed "sting" in which a police officer 
appeared to shove Jackson's head through a plate glass window. 
Long Beach Municipal Judge Gary R. Hahn quickly agreed to the prosecutor's 
request for dismissal of the case against Jackson, who in turn claimed 
vindication of his efforts to expose police brutality. 
Videotaped by a hidden NBC television crew and later broadcast on the "Today" 
show, Jackson's Jan. 14 encounter with two Long Beach police officers focused 
national attention on allegations that the city's police force routinely 
mistreats minority members. The case drew the interest of black community 
leaders, entertainment celebrities and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who rallied to 
Don Jackson's side, donating money for his legal defense and lauding him as a 
hero. 
"I'm very elated," Don Jackson said outside the courtroom, where his trial on 
the misdemeanor charges was scheduled to start Wednesday. 
He later said he is considering suing Long Beach and the Police Department over 
his arrest and prosecution and will seek a formal censure of the city 
prosecutor. 
"I think it's shocking they even took the case this far. . . . I'm requesting 
that my attorney seek some form of ethical sanction against the lead attorney 
for this malicious prosecution," said Jackson, a Hawthorne police sergeant on 
disability leave. 
John A. Vander Lans, the city prosecutor, said he never would have filed 
charges against Jackson in January if he had all the information he now has. 
"The facts we had after the 20th of March changed my mind," said Vander Lans, 
who declined to specify exactly what had prompted him to seek the case's 
dismissal. 
However, he said it was not until last Friday that he had received all tapes of 
the incident from NBC, and it was not until Monday that he received an official 
transcript of a state Senate oversight committee hearing on the matter. 
Both Jackson and Mark Dickey -- the officer who appears to push Jackson into 
the window on the tape -- testified at that hearing, and Dickey admitted he had 
filed an inaccurate report on the arrest. 
Normally, Vander Lans said, his office would file a misdemeanor charge the day 
after the arrest. But in Jackson's case, he waited several more days, until "we 
thought we had all the facts." 
The videotaped arrest occurred late on a Saturday night, when Jackson and an 
off-duty corrections officer donned dirty old clothes and drove into Long Beach 
with a television crew following discreetly at a distance. Their mission was to 
demonstrate police abuse and capture it on film. 
Dickey and his partner pulled Jackson over, allegedly for a traffic violation. 
Moments later, as the cameras rolled, Dickey cursed Jackson and appeared to 
push him into a shop window, shattering the glass. 
Dickey, saying Jackson had used profanity and been belligerent, arrested 
Jackson on a charge of interfering with a police officer. 
It was not Jackson's first self-styled sting, nor, apparently will it be his 
last. Despite his career in law enforcement, he has stopped hundreds of times 
to watch police make arrests and sometimes used himself as bait. 
In Westwood last year, he was arrested after allegedly blocking a sidewalk, but 
the prosecutor for that community never filed charges against him. 
Jackson, who has filed a lawsuit accusing the Hawthorne Police Department of 
racial discrimination, said Wednesday he will renew his sting efforts after a 
brief respite. He added that he intends to establish a foundation to monitor 
civil rights abuses by any government agencies. 
After Wednesday's dismissal, Jackson's attorneys insisted that Vander Lans 
never had grounds to file charges against their client. They claimed the 
prosecutor had pressed the case in an attempt to fend off a possible lawsuit by 
Jackson. 
"The case was filed maliciously," insisted Thomas E. Beck, one of Jackson's 
attorneys. Beck attributed Vander Lans' abrupt about-face to Dickey's Senate 
testimony, in which the officer admitted that Jackson had never sworn at him, 
as he stated in his police report. 
Dickey, who attributed the errors in his report to a faulty memory, said he had 
so little faith in his own police report that he would not want it used against 
him if he were suspected of a crime. 
Dickey, who could not be reached for comment Wednesday, has been reassigned 
from patrol duty to desk duties pending the outcome of the Long Beach Police 
Department's internal investigation of the incident. 
The Los Angeles County district attorney's office and the FBI also launched 
their own investigations of the officers' conduct, and spokesmen for all three 
agencies Wednesday said the investigations will continue, unaffected by the 
prosecutor's decision to drop the case against Jackson. 
Completions Foreseen 
Curt Livesay, assistant district attorney, and Long Beach Police Chief Lawrence 
L. Binkley both said they expect their investigations to be completed within 
the next couple of weeks. 
Binkley, while complaining that Vander Lans had not informed him that he 
planned to dismiss the case, said he could not comment on the prosecutor's 
decision. "There's very little I can say about the actions of the elected 
official," Binkley said, referring to Vander Lans, who has been reelected to 
the prosecutor's post several times since first winning the position in 1978. 
A spokesman for the Long Beach Police Officers Assn. was freer with his opinion 
of the case's dismissal. "This has been a real big slap in the face, not just 
to police in Long Beach, but all over the state and throughout the country," 
complained association spokesman Mike Minton. 
As a result, he continued, "The Don Jacksons of the world are going to go out 
there and try to intimidate police officers, and somebody is going to get 
hurt." 
Long Beach officials seemed relieved that the case was over, questioning 
whether Vander Lans ever should have pursued it in the first place. "I kind of 
felt he had a weak case to begin with, but thought maybe he knew something I 
didn't know," Mayor Ernie Kell said. 
Called Isolated Incident 
Kell, noting that the publicity surrounding the case was not the kind the city 
wanted, termed the Jackson-Dickey episode "an isolated incident, an unfortunate 
incident." 
Larry Davis, chairman of a city commission that advises the City Council on 
public safety issues, called the dismissal "a good sign" that the community was 
prepared to deal with the brutality allegations raised by Jackson and others. 
"I think any reasonable citizen in this town on Jan. 16 could have reached the 
same decision it took (the prosecutor's office) 60 days to reach," Davis added. 
