CONTROVERSY OVER NEVADA MOUNTAIN; 
MONUMENT TO ATOMIC AGE: DUMP FOR NUCLEAR WASTE 
Standing amid the pale green sagebrush that carpets the hard desert floor 100 
miles northwest of here is a mountain with a monumental mission. If all goes as 
planned, in the year 2003 this barren rock bordering the Nevada Test Site will 
become a mausoleum for the legacy of the Atomic Age: nuclear waste. 
The goal is to bury spent fuel from commercial reactors and waste from weapons 
plants deep in the womb of Yucca Mountain, which in theory would imprison the 
deadly radioactive cargo for 10,000 years. Federal officials say the mountain's 
geology and location in a remote, arid region make it a promising choice for 
the nation's first high-level nuclear dump. 
But others are not sure that Yucca Mountain is up to the task. 
There are nagging questions, for example, about the threat earthquakes pose to 
the stability of the mountain, which rests astride an area crisscrossed by 
faults. And some scientists are dubious about predictions that little if any 
moisture would percolate down through the rock and breach the subterranean 
vault, where it could corrode the steel waste canisters and usher radioactive 
material into the water table. 
Although the U.S. Department of Energy is months away from launching formal 
studies to judge the mountain's environmental fitness for the job, a 
mushrooming group of skeptics is already questioning the agency's performance 
as manager. 
Among the critics are officials with the U.S. Geological Survey and the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission as well as the Nevada state government, which fiercely 
opposes the dump and contends that the department is bent on collecting only 
data that basks the mountain in a favorable light. 
"It is our opinion that DOE decided on Yucca Mountain in 1979 without any 
supporting data and has done nothing since but collect evidence that bolsters 
its case," said Robert Loux, executive director of the Nevada Nuclear Waste 
Project Office. "Their approach has been, 'If we run into a problem, we'll just 
engineer around it.' Well, our feeling is, the jury's still out on this site." 
Even a member of the Department of Energy's scientific team has raised a red 
flag. Jerry Szymanski, who believes Yucca Mountain is ill-suited for its 
proposed role as a $30-billion nuclear waste tomb, said the department's 
strategy for evaluating the site could result in "a lot of misdirected effort 
and wasted time." 
Dwindling Storage Space 
Meanwhile, the nuclear utilities, whose ratepayers have contributed nearly $4 
billion toward construction of the underground dump, are losing patience. Most 
of the nation's nuclear power plants are running out of temporary storage space 
for the dangerous waste, and restless operators are dismayed by delays that 
have plagued the Department of Energy's work at Yucca Mountain. 
Department officials vigorously defend their program and insist that they do 
not want to bury nuclear waste beneath Yucca Mountain if it is unsafe. Even if 
that was the department's agenda, officials argue, the myriad agencies and 
committees looking over their shoulder would not let it happen. 
"This is the most carefully monitored program I've ever seen undertaken by the 
federal government," said Carl Gertz, Yucca Mountain project manager. "Based on 
our information so far, it is a safe site. But we are far, far away from 
knowing that for sure. . . . Only hard science will determine that with any 
confidence." 
If Yucca Mountain passes muster after $2 billion worth of studies spanning 
seven years, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission will be asked to issue a license 
for the waste repository. Should that occur, many believe the United States 
will have solved one of the greatest technical challenges of our time: how to 
permanently isolate radioactivity from the biosphere. 
Since the Nuclear Age began more than 40 years ago, billions of dollars have 
been spent in the quest for a way to safely dispose of the deadly radioactive 
byproduct piling up at bomb-making plants and commercial nuclear reactors. 
Firing the waste into space, tucking it between polar ice sheets and burying it 
beneath the tectonic plates of the ocean are options that have been examined. 
On the Short List 
Experts ultimately settled on the idea of entombing the poisonous waste deep in 
a mined repository, and from the start, Yucca Mountain was on everybody's short 
list of potential sites. 
In 1986, the Department of Energy was directed to study three sites -- Yucca 
Mountain, Deaf Smith County, Tex., and Hanford, Wash. -- to determine which was 
best suited as dump host. But that approach was criticized as too costly and 
politically challenging, and in late 1987 Congress abruptly scrapped the Texas 
and Washington sites and zeroed in on Yucca Mountain. 
Nevadans, whose four congressional representatives at the time were freshmen 
with little clout, refer to the action as the "Screw Nevada Bill." 
To the casual observer, Yucca Mountain appears an inviting spot for a nuclear 
waste graveyard. Long, lumpy and the color of a Weimaraner's hide, it is 
nothing if not remote. From atop the mountain's spine, the only visible signs 
of life are contrails left by pilots from nearby Nellis Air Force Base and a 
dirt road that meanders across the lonely Amargosa Valley. 
In addition, the mountain is bordered by the 1,350-square-mile Nevada Test 
Site. Thus, much of the region's acreage already has been spoiled by the 689 
announced underground weapons explosions conducted at the site to date. Also 
attractive to government planners is the relatively sympathetic local 
population, which is familiar with things nuclear and has long relied on the 
Department of Energy as an employer. 
Mountain's Selling Points 
Federal officials say Yucca Mountain has some other important virtues as well. 
The region is dry, receiving just six inches of rain in an average year, and 
Department of Energy scientists predict that less than 5% of the rainfall soaks 
into the mountain. If that scenario proves correct, it dilutes the threat that 
water might dissolve the waste and flow in a poisonous stream into the water 
table. 
Finally, Department of Energy officials favor Yucca Mountain because it is 
formed of layers of volcanic ash called tuff which contains minerals capable of 
removing radioactive particles from water. 
The steel canisters containing the waste are expected to last from 300 to 1,000 
years. After that, the rock itself must prevent radioactive leakage from 
reaching settlements for 10,000 years, when most of the radioactive elements 
will have decayed. 
While surveys show that most Nevadans oppose the waste dump, some residents 
figure that it is a gamble worth taking. Robert Dickinson is one of them. 
Dickinson is a Las Vegas businessman who heads the Nevada Nuclear Waste Study 
Committee, a group with ties to the nuclear power industry. In an interview, he 
said the dangers associated with radioactivity have been vastly exaggerated, 
called opponents of the repository "anti-everything" and suggested that 
skeptical scientists like the Department of Energy's Szymanski are disloyal 
rabble-rousers. 
'Political Hysteria' 
"This thing has been clouded by political hysteria, and we think that the more 
Nevadans learn about what it really is, the more they will say, 'Is that all? 
Let's get on with it,' " Dickinson said. "Our politicians are doing the state a 
real disservice in the name of political heroics." 
Dickinson believes the repository could be a magnet for other nuclear-related 
technologies and help Nevada diversify its economy, which is heavily reliant on 
gambling. And he believes that if officials would abandon their "political 
puffery" and instead cut a deal with the federal government, Nevada could reel 
in some significant economic benefits as well. If the state agrees to the dump, 
he noted, it stands to receive $10 million a year during construction and 
another $20 million annually once it begins operation. 
"This site is an isolated area 100 miles from anywhere," Dickinson said. "It 
gets four inches of rain. It's next to a test site where we've exploded 700 
atomic devices. If it's safe, I say let's get on with it." 
But skeptics say Yucca Mountain's drawbacks are many, including more than 30 
active earthquake faults nearby. The Ghost Dance Fault, for example, cuts 
through the heart of the dump site. The presence of several volcanic cones just 
west of the mountain is also troubling to some. Research on one, the Lathrop 
Wells cinder cone, indicates it may have erupted as recently as 6,000 years ago 
-- suggesting the likelihood of future volcanic events. 
Although Department of Energy officials are not concerned with the impact fault 
movement would have on the repository, earthquakes could cause significant 
damage to surface facilities that will serve as temporary way stations for the 
waste. As for volcanic activity, government scientists said it is unlikely 
eruptions would disturb the waste dump. 
Other worries relate to the neighboring weapons test site and what effect bomb 
explosions might have on the mountain. But the Department of Energy's Gertz 
calls that a "non-issue," arguing that the repository would weather any tremors 
"like a grape in Jello." 
Debate Over Water 
Perhaps the most lively and crucial debate is over water -- namely, how fast it 
is likely to travel from the surface to the repository and beyond. Resolving 
this question is key to determining how soon water might dissolve the waste and 
carry radioactive atoms into ground water supplies. 
Department of Energy scientists believe most of the rainfall at Yucca Mountain 
evaporates, while the balance seeps slowly downward through pores in the rock. 
If they are correct, it would take thousands of years for moisture both to 
penetrate to the depth of the waste canisters and move onward into the water 
table. Under that scenario, the mountain likely would meet the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission's requirements for licensing. 
Hydrologists working for the state, however, suspect that water instead runs 
through fractures in the rock, meaning its rate of travel would be much quicker 
-- and might even be measured in months. 
"The trouble with this fractured tuff is that it's very unpredictable, complex 
and difficult to characterize," said Martin Mifflin, a Las Vegas hydrologist 
and consultant for the state. "The DOE is basing its figures on a lot of 
wishful thinking. Their posture that Yucca Mountain might be a suitable site is 
based on a lot of assumptions, which are not verified and are not conservative 
ones." 
Then there is Department of Energy scientist Szymanski's theory. He believes 
that a conspiracy of natural events at Yucca Mountain could cause the water 
table to rise and flood the waste repository, possibly leading to the expulsion 
of radioactive water at ground level. 
He has urged the department to investigate his concerns and other potential 
show-stoppers quickly or risk losing the public support it needs to succeed 
with the repository project. 
"If this is a lemon, I say let's find out now and get the hell out of there," 
Szymanski said in a recent interview in his Las Vegas office. 
So far, however, Department of Energy managers have declined to alter their 
study program. "I think we've taken Jerry very seriously and have incorporated 
many studies to try to ascertain what he's after," Gertz said. But "I don't 
agree with those who say we should just look at the potential disqualifiers and 
put off everything else." 
Critics have charged that the Department of Energy, like a parent who suspects 
his child is on drugs but fears the truth, is avoiding scientific inquiries 
that might raise doubt about Yucca Mountain's suitability. 
Document Cited 
Gertz disputed this charge, noting that the department recently released a 
6,300-page document outlining plans to sink two exploratory shafts into the 
mountain later this year and create an "underground laboratory" to determine 
whether the site is safe. 
"No decision has been made on this site yet," Gertz said. And Szymanski said he 
does not see "the dark forces" many critics believe are at work. 
But despite such assurances, state officials say the department's record of 
managing the nation's weapon production facilities does not inspire confidence. 
With the country's three primary bomb-building operations closed for safety 
reasons and faced with an estimated $81-billion cleanup, the department's 
credibility may be at an all-time low. 
"I grew up as a child in Las Vegas, and I remember well the DOE's predecessor 
suggesting it was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to go out on the flats and 
see the flash from above-ground weapons blasts," Nevada Gov. Bob Miller said in 
an interview. "I would suggest that was a poor recommendation, and I'm not 
convinced they are any better prepared to give us scientific certainty about 
the safety of below-ground storage." 
Even U.S. Energy Secretary James D. Watkins charged during his Senate 
confirmation hearings that managers of the department's weapons plants too 
often sacrificed public safety in an effort to protect secrecy and meet 
production goals. 
And last spring, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission called the Department of 
Energy's quality assurance program at Yucca Mountain inadequate and said much 
of the data collected during 10 years of studies there would be useless for 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission licensing. Specifically, 50,000 feet of core 
samples taken from the rock cannot be used because the Department of Energy 
cannot document from what depth they came. 
'Poor Quality Assurance' 
"They didn't have adequate planning or record keeping . . . and what it results 
in is some doubts about the data, how it was obtained, and so forth," said 
Robert M. Bernero, director of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's Office of 
Nuclear Material Safety and Safeguards. "The problem with poor quality 
assurance is you've wasted effort, but worse yet . . . people without good 
strict discipline can end up ruining the site." 
Gertz acknowledged the problem but said the core samples were collected in 
"scoping studies" and were "not necessarily intended for use in licensing 
procedures." 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has also charged that the Department of 
Energy's proposed site investigation was "too narrowly focused," Bernero said. 
The commission felt the department was failing to "take into account 
alternative hypotheses" and "might not be keeping an open mind," he said. 
Another blow came in August when 16 scientists with the U.S. Geological Survey 
complained in a stinging memo that the Department of Energy was barring them 
from performing research critical to deciding whether the site is suitable. The 
memo suggested that the department was interested only in data that would get 
the repository built. 
In "subjugating the technical program to satisfy DOE political objectives, we 
may succeed in making the program comply with regulations, while being 
scientifically indefensible," the scientists wrote. 
Gertz said the Geological Survey researchers were stalled because they failed 
to meet quality assurance standards, adding that the Department of Energy 
"merely wants to ensure the documentation of their work." Tony Buono, a 
Geological Survey scientist who did not sign the memo, agreed and said his 
colleagues are "just not accustomed to the rigorous oversight inherent in this 
project." 
In recent months, the nuclear power industry has joined the chorus of critics. 
Utility customers pour $400 million annually into a fund that will pay for 
disposal of nuclear waste. With delays already postponing the estimated opening 
of the repository for five years, operators at many of the nation's 114 
commercial plants have been forced to expand facilities for storing the deadly 
waste on their property -- an expensive undertaking shouldered by consumers. 
'Getting More and More Behind' 
"We're very concerned that the DOE has spent $2 billion of our money already 
and just seems to be getting more and more behind," said Diane Smiroldo, a 
spokeswoman for the Edison Electric Institute. 
State officials and others lobbying against the repository believe that in the 
end they will prevail in the battle over Yucca Mountain. 
Sen. Richard Bryan, who as governor fought doggedly against locating the dump 
in his state, noted that Nevada's congressional delegation is for the first 
time unified in its opposition to the project. Gone are the days when the 
state's Washington representatives suggested that Nevadans had a "patriotic 
duty" to host the facility. 
Momentum is also building in the Nevada Legislature. Last month, lawmakers 
approved two resolutions declaring their opposition to the dump and killed 
plans for a committee to negotiate with federal officials over economic bonuses 
Nevada could reap if Yucca Mountain is selected. Several lawsuits against the 
U.S. government are pending as well. 
"The scientific community that supports waste disposal at Yucca Mountain is 
suffering from a huge case of hubris," said Bob Fulkerson of Citizen Alert, a 
1,320-member activist group based in Reno. "It's just a matter of time before 
the gods strike them down and we win." 
A Mountain Home For Radioactive Waste 
The Department of Energy wants to bury 70,000 metric tons of deadly waste from 
commerical reactors and weapons plants 1,000 feet under Yucca Mountain. A 
116-mile grid of tunnels would house the repository. Waste would come by truck 
or rail for 26 years, then the site would be sealed. 
The Pros. . . 
The Yucca Mountain site has a natural advantage because it is formed of 
tuff-layers of volcanic ash that spouted from nearby volcanoes more than 13 
million years ago. The tuff contains zeolites, minerals capable of removing 
radioactive particles from water. Zeolites act like a strainer, allowing water 
to pass but trapping larger radioactive particles. 
. . .And the Cons 
Federal officials say Yucca Mountain's geology and its remote, dry location 
make it a good choice. But others are not so sure . Questions have been raised 
about the mountain's stability because earthquake faults run through it. There 
also is concern about possible volcanic activity in the area. And some 
scientists worry that moisture might seep through the rock to the storage 
vault, where it could corrode the waste canisters. If this scenario occurred, 
it could introduce radioactive materials into the water table, which stretches 
across the California border to Death Valley National Moument, 25 miles to the 
west. 
