NUCLEAR FUSION EXPERIMENTS WERE STARTED 'FOR THE FUN OF IT' 
The dramatic finding that could propel two virtually unknown chemists into 
scientific history began to take shape five years ago on a hike up Millcreek 
Canyon on the outskirts of Salt Lake City and culminated in a fateful decision 
in a family kitchen. 
On that day, Martin Fleischmann of the University of Southampton in England and 
B. Stanley Pons of the University of Utah, who for years had been intrigued by 
what they termed inexplicably "odd" data from separate research efforts, sat 
down in the kitchen of Pons' Salt Lake City home and agreed to embark upon an 
experiment "for the fun of it." 
"We like to talk about things that people ought to have done but haven't and 
whether we can do them," Fleischmann said in an interview here. "Sometimes we 
like to talk about the impossible just for fun. 
"We thought the idea was so stupid that we decided to finance it ourselves," he 
added at a press conference. They invested $100,000 of their own money in the 
research. 
Now, they say they have accomplished something that has eluded researchers for 
more than 30 years -- the successful creation of a sustained nuclear fusion. 
Although their findings have yet to be confirmed by independent researchers, 
Fleischmann and Pons may have opened an unexpected threshold in fusion research 
that could usher in a new age of limitless, safe and pollution-free energy. 
The two researchers are virtually unknown among the cadre of physicists who 
have been pressing costly government-funded research programs into controlling 
fusion reactions. 
But Fleischmann and Pons said they believed that it was their expertise in 
chemistry -- augmenting their knowledge of physics -- that led to the 
discovery. 
"Without our particular backgrounds, you wouldn't think of the combination of 
circumstances required to get this to work," said Pons, 46, a slightly graying, 
immaculately tailored man with a Julius Caesar haircut. 
'Combination of Knowledge' 
"We realize we are singularly fortunate in having the combination of knowledge 
that allowed us to accomplish a fusion reaction in this new way," Fleischmann 
said. 
The path to the discovery began in the late 1960s, said Fleischmann, a native 
of Czechoslovakia and naturalized British subject who will celebrate his 62nd 
birthday on Wednesday. Fleischmann was conducting research on the separation of 
hydrogen and deuterium isotopes at the University of Southhampton. 
In the course of enriching deuterium, Fleischmann noticed what he termed "odd" 
reactions. 
Pons, who studied under Fleischmann in 1975 as a graduate student in England, 
noticed similar oddities years later in separate research on isotopic 
separation in electrodes. 
It was during one of Fleischmann's annual visits to Utah to compare notes and 
to conduct joint research that the two began to seriously focus on the unusual 
findings. Hiking into Millcreek Canyon in the Wasatch Mountains, both 
researchers said they became increasingly excited about the possibilities. 
Discussion during a subsequent drive across Texas to attend a scientific 
conference settled the issue. 
A month later they met in Pons' family kitchen and drafted plans for the 
experiment that led to Thursday's announcement. 
'We Had to Try It' 
"The stakes were so high with this one, we decided we had to try it," 
Fleischmann said. "It had a one-in-a-billion chance of working, although it 
made perfectly good scientific sense." 
Almost immediately, they reported, there were strong indications that they were 
onto something important. But they also realized their approach was unorthodox. 
Rather than apply for a government grant, they used their own money. 
During the next five years they improved, tested and retested the procedure on 
weekends and at night in Pons' lab at the University of Utah. 
What they achieved, they said, was the first nuclear fusion reaction at room 
temperature, a reaction that they said they sustained for hundreds of hours. In 
a phrase, they were getting back more energy than they were putting into the 
system. 
If confirmed, the discovery could lead eventually to the use of nuclear fusion 
for the world's energy needs. Many believe that it could replace fossil fuel 
like coal, gas and oil, which is being depleted and is a major cause of such 
environmental problems as urban air pollution, global warming and acid rain. 
240 Articles 
During his 40-year career, Fleischmann has written more than 240 articles in 
the electrochemical, physics, chemistry and electrochemical engineering fields. 
He is a fellow of the Royal Society of England and was awarded a medal for 
electrochemistry and thermodynamics by the Royal Society of Chemistry in 1979, 
the Olin-Palladium Medal of the Electrochemical Society in 1985 and the Bruno 
Breyer award by the Royal Australian Chemical Society in 1988. In 1951 he 
earned the doctorate in chemistry at London University. 
Pons, an American born in Valdese, N.C., has written more than 140 articles and 
holds a doctorate degree in chemistry at the University of Southampton earned 
in 1979. He is a member of the International Society of Electrochemistry, the 
American Chemical Society and the Canadian Institute of Chemistry. 
Both Fleischmann and Pons are married. Fleischmann has four children and three 
grandchildren. Pons has six children. 
Assisting Pons and Fleischmann with the project was Marvin Hawkins, a 
University of Utah graduate student from LaJara, Colo. 
Thomas H. Maugh II reported from Salt Lake City and Larry B. Stammer from Los 
Angeles. 
