3 WEST GERMAN 'HACKERS' HELD AS KGB SPIES 
Authorities have arrested three West German computer "hackers" on suspicion 
that they carried out international electronic espionage and sold sensitive 
data to the Soviet intelligence service, the KGB, judicial officials said 
Thursday. 
The ARD television network -- which made public the breakup of the spy ring 
after one of its affiliates carried out a 10-month investigation -- said the 
hackers helped the KGB gain access to computer data banks of the Pentagon, the 
nuclear arms laboratory at Los Alamos, N.M., and the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. 
The KGB also received computer passwords and other materials from nuclear, 
space and commercial electronic data banks in West Germany, France, 
Switzerland, Britain and Japan, ARD said. 
"If current suspicions are confirmed, what we very surely have is a new quality 
of espionage against our data systems," Gerhard Boeden, Bonn's chief of 
domestic counterespionage, said in an interview with ARD. 
Existing Western computer systems are "not sufficiently" secured, said Boeden, 
who is president of the Federal Constitutional Protection Office. The agency is 
roughly equivalent to the FBI. 
Spokesmen for the Interior Ministry and the federal prosecutor's office did not 
deny the detailed ARD report. But they provided only sketchy information on 
grounds that an investigation is still under way. 
A government spokeswoman in Bonn on Thursday evening declined to comment on a 
report by the West German news agency Deutsche Presse-Agentur quoting 
unidentified government security sources as saying the case is "extremely 
grave." 
In Washington, the Pentagon issued a one-sentence statement saying: "Until 
possibly affected components of the Department of Defense have had a chance to 
analyze the report, we have no reaction." 
The hackers apparently provided the Soviets with opportunities to obtain North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization military secrets and information about sensitive 
high technology, the German news agency quoted the sources as saying. 
ARD described the affair as the most serious case of Soviet Bloc espionage to 
be discovered in West Germany since 1974, when Chancellor Willy Brandt resigned 
after a close personal aide was found to be an East German spy. 
Two men have been arrested in Hanover and a third in West Berlin, judicial 
officials said. Authorities have searched at least six residences in West 
Berlin, Hanover and Hamburg and confiscated a substantial quantity of evidence, 
they said. 
ARD reported that two KGB agents obtained top-secret computer data from the 
three hackers in exchange for money and drugs. 
The KGB is believed to have used computer passwords and other information 
obtained from the hackers to penetrate the U.S. Defense Department staff data 
bank OPTIMIS and U.S. military supply depot computers, ARD said. 
Other Penetrations 
It also was suspected that the Soviets penetrated computers of the West 
European nuclear research center CERN in Geneva; the European Space Agency; the 
Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg, West Germany; the 
French arms and electronics company Thomson, and other West European and 
Japanese electronics companies, ARD said. 
It said the hackers are believed to have helped the Soviets obtain access to 
Western technology for manufacturing silicon chips, which are the central 
components of modern computers. 
The group of hackers first met in Hanover in 1985, ARD said. Later they began 
cooperating with two KGB agents, at first freely and later under pressure and 
threats from the Soviets, it said. 
