FORMER PUBLISHER MAKING NEWS WITH FRANCHISE DEAL 
So you want to own a magazine but don't know a thing about publishing? No 
problem. If you have from $150,000 to $200,000 in capital, Barry Rupp has just 
the deal for you. 
You won't have too much room to make a distinctive imprint. You'll be obliged 
to call the magazine Business People. You'll have to adhere to a certain layout 
and editorial formula. You'll have to send a good chunk of the cash straight to 
Rupp: $40,000 for the franchise fee and $40,000 to buy a special package of 
desktop publishing equipment. 
No one is likely to mistake your magazine for the New Yorker. To begin with, 
you'll have a local publication in a small-city market with an unpaid 
circulation of about 10,000. And the articles will be strictly upbeat, 
"motivational" in character and intended to "build the prosperity of the 
community," Rupp said. 
The upside, he said, is a guaranteed profit. "We have a system, and we know 
what works." 
He points to the 20 existing magazines in towns such as Fort Wayne, Ind., and 
Worcester, Mass., as evidence that the formula is sound. The magazines, he 
said, provide a unique advertising outlet for local businesses who want to 
reach other businessmen. 
The jovial Rupp, who is the former chairman of Entrepreneur magazine, didn't 
come up with the Business People concept himself. Rather, he purchased the 
franchise rights for all territories outside of New England from Business 
Digest Inc. of South Portland, Me. But he hopes eventually to have as many as 
500 to 600 franchises, including one covering Costa Mesa, Irvine and Newport 
Beach. 
Although many magazines are based on formulas -- and even titles -- that have 
been tested elsewhere, they usually are published under licensing arrangements 
rather than franchises. 
"I've never seen a franchise like this," said Jerry Wilkerson, head of a 
company called Franchise Recruiters and former president of the International 
Franchise Assn. in Washington. 
Wilkerson said Business People appears to be a great idea, noting that Rupp 
will assume responsibility for developing the mailing lists and printing the 
magazine in addition to providing a format for the editorial content. 
"He's taking the hard part out of it," said Wilkerson, who thought that the 
ideal franchisee would be a local car dealer who was a good salesman and a 
man-about-town. 
Rupp said the ideal franchisee would be a "people person" with sales and 
marketing experience and good contacts in the community. Already, he said, he 
has received more than 1,000 inquiries from interested potential franchisees. 
"This is one of the few franchises that makes sense for an executive type, a 
guy who's maybe stuck in middle management and wants to get out on his own," 
Rupp said. 
Rupp himself is hardly a neophyte in franchising and publishing. He helped 
develop a highly successful Orange County franchiser called Stained Glass 
Overlay, and he and his partners subsequently purchased Entrepreneur magazine 
and moved it from Los Angeles to Irvine. 
He claims credit for turning around Entrepreneur, but he quit as chairman in 
1988 following a dispute with his partners that was later resolved through a 
lawsuit. As a consequence, Rupp doesn't run advertising in Entrepreneur to 
recruit franchisees. 
But Rupp isn't worried about finding interested applicants: "I haven't seen as 
neat a deal as this in a long time. The niche is there, and this system is just 
perfect." 
