1989 LOS ANGELES TIMES ALL-STARS; 
KINGS AND QUEENS OF THE COURT; 
STANDOUT MUIR ONLY SCHOOL TO GET 2 ON TEAM 
From all standpoints, it has been a memorable year for the girls basketball 
team at Muir High School in Pasadena. 
The Mustangs won the Pacific League title, finished second in the CIF Southern 
Section 4-A Division -- their best result since 1986 -- and reached the 
semifinals of the state Division II regional playoffs. 
Not to mention the honors that are starting to mount for the Mustangs off the 
court. Muir, which finished with a 24-5 record, is the only team to place two 
players on the Los Angeles Times All-San Gabriel Valley girls high school 
all-star basketball team. 
The Mustangs, a perennial valley power, are represented by center Lisa Salsman 
(6-2) and forward Karin Banks (5-10). 
Other team members are forward Rachel Acuff (5-7) of Temple City, forward 
Jennifer Allen (5-9) of St. Lucy's, center Ingrid Dixson (6-2) of West Covina, 
guard Sachi Ezaki (5-3) of Covina, guard Betty Lee (5-2) of Keppel, center 
Stacey Oughton (6-2) of Bishop Amat, forward Susan Peters (5-11) of Los Altos 
and guard Elizabeth Sirchia (5-6) of Diamond Bar. 
Banks and Dixson are juniors. The only repeater from last year is Peters. 
Acuff was described by one opposing coach as "the whole team" and, while that 
may be a bit of an overstatement, she meant a lot to the fortunes of Temple 
City. 
In leading the Rams to second place in the Rio Hondo League and the second 
round of the 4-A Division playoffs, Acuff averaged 20.5 points, 13.5 rebounds, 
nine assists and four steals to earn most valuable player honors in the league. 
It was a successful season for St. Lucy's, which finished with a 19-9 record 
and advanced to the 3-A quarterfinals before losing to eventual champion 
Brea-Olinda, and the team was led by all-around play from Allen. 
An all-league first-team selection in the Baseline League, Allen averaged 18.6 
points and 10.6 rebounds, leading the Regents in both departments. Among 
colleges recruiting her are Loyola Marymount and La Verne. 
Banks may have been overshadowed by Salsman on the Mustangs. She averaged 18.7 
points and 6.2 rebounds to place second on the Mustangs in both categories. 
A first-team All-Pacific League selection, Banks has attracted recruiters from 
Cal State Fullerton, Oregon State and Pacific. 
Another junior who has attracted recruiters is Dixson, a strong inside player 
who paced West Covina with 17.5 points and 11.3 rebounds a game. 
Dixson, who carried the Bulldogs into the 5-A quarterfinals, has been a 
two-time All-Sierra League first-team selection and was named most valuable 
player of the La Puente Tournament. She has been recruited by UC Irvine, San 
Jose State and St. Mary's. 
At 5-3, Ezaki was among the shortest players on the court. But she rarely came 
up short statistically for Covina. She averaged 15.3 points, 8.6 assists and 
6.3 rebounds as the Colts advanced to the 3-A quarterfinals. 
She also earned Valle Vista League most valuable player honors and was selected 
all-league for the third year in a row. Also an excellent student with a 3.9 
grade-point average, Ezaki expects to attend Claremont McKenna. 
In a similar manner, the 5-2 Lee was the biggest force at Keppel for three 
years. An outstanding floor leader, she averaged 20.7 points and 7.3 assists 
and also led the Aztecs in steals last season. 
That earned her the most valuable player award in the Mission Valley League for 
the second consecutive season. She is a three-time all-league selection. She 
said she is leaning toward attending Azusa Pacific. 
Bishop Amat has not been known for its girls basketball teams, but the Lancers 
made dramatic improvement from 4-16 two years ago to 16-8 this season, and the 
development of Oughton was a major reason. 
As a senior, Oughton averaged 20.5 points and 12.6 rebounds and was selected to 
the All-Angelus League first team. Considering a promising Division I prospect, 
she has signed a national letter of intent to attend Cal State Fullerton. 
More than one opposing coach called Peters the best player in the valley, and 
there certainly is evidence to support the statement. As a senior, she averaged 
about 23 points and 10 rebounds to carry Los Altos to a 26-2 record and the 4-A 
quarterfinals after the team reached the 3-A finals the year before. 
An excellent shooter who plays well underneath and away from the basket, she 
was named the most valuable player of the Sierra League the last two years. As 
a junior she was The Times' San Gabriel Valley section player of the year and 
CIF 3-A player of the year. 
One of the top all-around athletes in the valley, Peters was also an All-CIF 
selection as a setter in volleyball and has signed a letter of intent to attend 
USC on a volleyball scholarship. 
When it comes to dominant inside players, no one made more impact this season 
than Salsman. The latest in a long line of outstanding front-line players for 
the Mustangs, Salsman was the leading rebounder in the valley at 18.5 a game 
and was among the scoring leaders with a 20.7 average. 
So it is not surprising that she was selected most valuable player of the 
Pacific League. Salsman has signed a letter of intent with Arizona State. 
Sirchia, nicknamed "Bits" because of her size when she was younger, ranks among 
the top outside shooters in the valley with 54 three-point baskets as a senior. 
She was more than simply a strong shooter, though. Sirchia averaged seven 
rebounds and five assists in addition to 17 points and was a first-team 
selection in the Sierra League. 
Players receiving honorable mention are Natalie Kramer of San Dimas, Tristin 
Alfred of Walnut, Rose Jong of Muir, Judy Gilliam of Glendora, Grace Tellez of 
Sierra Vista, DeOndra Naulls of Pomona, Lisa Sloan and Chris Mendoza of West 
Covina, Teresa Tyler of Diamond Bar, Jonna Steffens of Los Altos, Debbie 
Macciola of Maranatha, Kadra Oliver of Marshall Fundamental, Amy Schroeder of 
Western Christian and Kristin Triepke of St. Lucy's. 
1989 ALL-STARS 
The all-star boys and girls teams, each consisting of 10 members, their coaches 
and parents will be guests of The Times at 9 a.m. Sunday, April 2, at the 
annual Times High School Basketball Awards Brunch where all-stars teams from 12 
circulation areas will be honored at the Anaheim Hilton. The featured speaker 
will be George Yardley, a former All-American at Stanford University, who went 
on to become the first player ever to score more than 2,000 points in an NBA 
season. The players and the coaches of the year from each area will be 
announced. 
The teams were chosen on the basis of a poll of area coaches, who are asked to 
fill out ballots nominating their own players and opponents, plus the 
observations of college scouts and sportswriters. Each player will recieve the 
traditional Times golden basketball plaque and award certificate. 
GIRLS PREP TEAM 
Name: Rachel Acuff 
School: Temple City 
Year: Senior 
Height: 5-7 
Average: 20.5 
Name: Jennifer Allen 
School: St. Lucy's 
Year: Senior 
Height: 5-9 
Average: 18.6 
Name: Karin Banks 
School: Muir 
Year: Junior 
Height: 5-10 
Average: 18.7 
Name: Ingrid Dixson 
School: West Covina 
Year: Junior 
Height: 6-2 
Average: 17.5 
Name: Sachi Ezaki 
School: Covina 
Year: Senior 
Height: 5-3 
Average: 15.3 
Name: Betty Lee 
School: Keppel 
Year: Senior 
Height: 5-2 
Average: 20.7 
Name: Stacey Oughton 
School: Bishop Amat 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-2 
Average: 20.5 
Name: Susan Peters 
School: Los Altos 
Year: Senior 
Height: 5-11 
Average: 23.0 
Name: Lisa Salsman 
School: Muir 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-2 
Average: 20.7 
Name: Elizabeth Sirchia 
School: Diamond Bar 
Year: Senior 
Height: 5-6 
Average: 17.0 
