PROFOUND TECHNICAL PROBLEMS FACE X-30; 
AEROSPACE: BECAUSE IT IS BEING DESIGNED TO GO 17,000 M.P.H., IT WILL NEED NEW 
MATERIALS, A NEW ENGINE AND NEW COMPUTERIZED CONTROLS. 
The aeronautics industry has not produced an aircraft capable of setting speed 
records since the early 1960s, but that is expected to change by the end of 
this decade. 
The National Aero-Space Plane, under development by Rockwell International and 
a team of three other firms, is being designed to fly at least 24 times the 
speed of sound or about 17,000 miles per hour, fast enough to soar into Earth 
orbit. 
The success of the $5-billion project depends on technology breakthroughs in at 
least three major areas: materials that can survive high temperatures, a new 
type of jet engine and computerized controls to operate the craft. 
The plane, also known as the X-30, would use a supersonic combustion ramjet 
engine or "scramjet." The scramjet is sometimes called a "flying stovepipe" 
because it consists simply of an inlet, a fuel combustion chamber and an 
exhaust nozzle. 
Unlike a conventional turbojet engine, which uses a mechanical compressor to 
feed high-pressure air to the engine, ramjets and scramjets rely on the force 
of air rushing into the inlet to compress and provide oxygen to the engine. 
A scramjet is similar to a ramjet, but with the important exception that the 
air flow into a ramjet slows to subsonic speeds before it is burned. In a 
scramjet, the air must be burned while moving at supersonic speeds. 
It may sound simple in concept, but burning liquid hydrogen fuel with oxygen 
moving at supersonic speeds is a daunting task. The air must mix with the 
liquid hydrogen, and the chemical reaction of burning must take place with 
precise timing. 
"In a scramjet, the mixing, transition and reaction (all occur at the same) 
time . . ., so everything is always dynamic," said Barry J. Waldman, the 
program's national director. 
An Air Force official in the Pentagon said serious questions remain as to 
whether engine combustion in the X-30 can be controlled adequately to prevent 
shock waves from interrupting the burning. 
A National Research Council report last year warned, "Flow instability poses 
the possibility of developing strong shock waves and catastrophic loss of the 
engine." 
Astronaut Joe Engle, who is consulting for Rockwell on the X-30 design, said 
the craft would have to be carefully flown, since abrupt maneuvers would affect 
the flow of air into the engine. 
Since such an engine can operate only during high-speed flight with onrushing 
air, the craft may have to carry two other types of engine: a standard turbojet 
to get it up to ramjet speed and a rocket for maneuvering in airless space. 
The scramjet cannot even be tested on the ground, so it will involve new risk. 
All previous manned spacecraft have had rocket engines that were tested 
repeatedly before their first flights. 
A partial test of certain X-30 components will be possible in a new wind tunnel 
-- or "shock tunnel" -- that Rockwell's Rocketdyne unit is building in Ventura 
County. It will create a Mach 25 air shock for a thousandth of a second over an 
area of a few square feet. 
The tunnel, called the Rocketdyne Hypersonic Flow Laboratory and costing about 
$18 million, is just one example of the profound technical problems involved in 
developing the X-30. The fluid dynamics of designing a craft to fly with 
lifting wings at very high Mach numbers is requiring the employment of several 
supercomputers. 
The inlets and exhaust nozzle of the scramjet, for example, include the 
underbody of virtually the entire aircraft. It is the first time that the 
propulsion system and airframe of an aircraft are so totally interdependent. At 
Mach 25 the aircraft would travel at nearly five miles per second and 
undergoing tremendous heating from the friction of air against its surface. The 
underside of the aircraft would heat up to 2,300 degrees Fahrenheit and the 
nose to 3,000. 
The skin of the X-30 will likely be made of a new material, known as titanium 
aluminide, according to Rockwell Vice President Robert H. Gulcher. 
If funding continues uninterruptedly, test flights would begin in 1996 and a 
flight into Earth orbit attempted in 1998. 
* MAIN STORY: A1 
