1989 ALL-STARS; 
LYNWOOD'S HIGH-SCORING KILLUM LEADS SOUTHEAST PREP BOYS ALL-STAR TEAM 
Unstoppable is perhaps the best way to describe Lynwood High School's Earnest 
Killum, the top scorer on the 1990 Times All-Southeast prep basketball team. 
Combining his ability to shoot from outside, drive to the basket and leap, the 
6-foot-4 1/2 Killum averaged 30 points and 7.5 rebounds a game. 
He played in 60 varsity games in two years under Coach Bill Notley and was 
never held under 10 points. 
Heavily recruited by colleges and universities, he is considering Oklahoma, 
Oregon State, Nevada-Las Vegas and Cal State Long Beach. 
It is the second consecutive year that Killum has made The Times' all-star 
team. 
Here is a look at the rest of the All-Southeast team, which includes three 
juniors and a sophomore: 
Juaquin Hawkins, Lynwood -- A 6-5 junior, Hawkins averaged 11 points and 9.5 
rebounds. "He has shown flashes of brilliance," Lynwood Coach Notley said. 
"Once he becomes consistent, he will be an outstanding player." 
Scott Day, Cerritos -- Day, a 6-foot senior, averaged 18 points and 5 assists, 
and shot 46% from three-point range. He had a high game of 34 points and was 
All-San Gabriel Valley League. "We relied on him for leadership and ball 
handling," Cerritos Coach Jim Chapel said. 
Mark Flick, Cerritos -- A good rebounder who can handle the ball, the 6-7 
Flick, a junior, averaged 15 points and 7.5 rebounds. Like Day, he was 
all-league. "He will lead the team next year," Chapel said. 
Brandon Titus, Gahr -- A 6-3 sophomore, Titus is a "legitimate gym rat," 
according to Gahr Coach Vern Stewart. "He will be very good because he loves 
the game so much," Stewart said. Titus averaged 17.6 points, 4.8 rebounds and 4 
assists. Confidence is one of his best assets. 
Paul White, California -- A three-year varsity player, the 6-8 White averaged 
21 points, 16.5 rebounds and 7 blocked shots. "He has leadership on and off the 
court," California Coach Paul Turley said. "He dominated from every 
standpoint." 
Ruben Oronoz, Whittier Christian -- "He allowed us to limit teams to one shot 
because he dominated the defensive boards," Whittier Christian Coach Bob Brown 
said of the 6-5 junior, who averaged 17 points and 10 rebounds. Oronoz can 
score from inside or outside. 
Sam Sybesma, Valley Christian -- This quick, 6-2 senior guard had averages of 
17 points, 3 assists and 3 steals. "His composure made him a great player," 
Crusaders Coach Harold DeBie said. 
Chris Beck, Brethren -- The hard-working Beck led the Warriors into the 
playoffs. A 6-2 senior, he averaged 10 points, 5.6 rebounds and 6 assists. 
Jason Pietsch, La Mirada -- The 6-8 senior was the Matadores' best all-around 
player, averaging 15.4 points and 7 rebounds. He played outside early in the 
season, then switched inside when the Suburban League started. He has a 3.75 
grade-point average. 
The Southeast all-star boys and girls teams, each consisting of 10 members, 
their coaches and parents, will be guests of The Times at 9 a.m. Sunday at the 
Anaheim Hilton for the annual Times High School Basketball Awards Brunch. 
All-star teams from 12 circulation areas will be honored and the players and 
coaches of the year from each area will be announced. 
The teams were chosen on the basis of a poll of area coaches, who were asked to 
fill out ballots nominating their own players and opponents, plus the 
observations of college scouts and sportswriters. Each player will receive the 
traditional Times golden basketball plaque and award certificate. 
Boys Prep Team 
Name: Earnest Killum 
School: Lynwood 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-4 1/2 
Average: 30.0 
Name: Juaquin Hawkins 
School: Lynwood 
Year: Junior 
Height: 6-5 
Average: 11.0 
Name: Scott Day 
School: Cerritos 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-0 
Average: 18.3 
Name: Mark Flick 
School: Cerritos 
Year: Junior 
Height: 6-7 
Average: 15.3 
Name: Brandon Titus 
School: Gahr 
Year: Sophomore 
Height: 6-3 
Average: 17.6 
Name: Paul White 
School: California 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-8 
Average: 21.0 
Name: Ruben Oronoz 
School: Whittier Christian 
Year: Junior 
Height: 6-5 
Average: 17.0 
Name: Sam Sybesma 
School: Valley Christian 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-2 
Average: 17.7 
Name: Chris Beck 
School: Brethren 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-2 
Average: 10.1 
Name: Jason Pietsch 
School: La Mirada 
Year: Senior 
Height: 6-8 
Average: 15.4 
