EXPERTS MAP STRATEGY TO CONTROL DEVELOPMENT IN AMAZON RAIN FOREST 
The chaotic development that is gobbling up the Amazon rain forest could 
finally be reined in with a new plan developed by officials of Amazon countries 
and leading scientists from around the world. 
"That's some of the most encouraging news about the Amazon rain forest in 
recent years," said Thomas Lovejoy, a tropical ecologist at the Smithsonian 
Institution and an Amazon specialist. 
"It contrasts markedly with a year ago, when there was nothing to read about 
conservation in the Amazon, especially in Brazil, except bad news," Lovejoy 
said in a recent interview. 
Sixty percent of the Amazon, the world's largest tropical rain forest, lies in 
Brazil, but the forest also covers parts of eight surrounding countries. 
Lovejoy was one of the organizers of an unusual workshop held in mid-January in 
Manaus, Brazil, a sprawling city of 1 million people in the heart of the 
Amazon. It was the center of Brazil's once-thriving rubber trade. 
The workshop, which brought together all the governments and scientists with 
interests in the rain forest, culminated with a plan to regulate development in 
up to 80% of the Amazon region. 
It was the first time that all parties concerned with the Amazon had met to 
pool their knowledge and agree on conservation priorities, the meeting's 
participants said. 
The plan devised at the workshop has no legal force. But it has broad 
government support and is likely to serve as a guide for national conservation 
programs, participants said. 
Many of the areas to be preserved will be open to so-called multiple-use 
development, which preserves the forest while allowing tourism and the 
commercial exploitation of fibers, fruits and medicinal plants. 
Brazil, struggling with a teetering economy and pressured by developers and 
peasant farmers to clear the forest for cattle ranching or farming, has been 
ambivalent about the need to conserve the Amazon. 
Brazil participated in the Manaus workshop, however, and the setting of 
priorities was "all done with the blessing of Brazil," Lovejoy said. 
Tropical rain forests are giant, living warehouses for thousands of plant and 
animal species. The Amazon alone is home to 30% of the world's plant and animal 
species. 
One study found that a single square yard of leaf litter taken from the deep 
shadows of the Amazon floor contained 800 ants representing 50 species. 
Towering forest canopies up to 300 feet above the forest floor are home to 
countless birds and insects that live their lives without ever setting foot on 
the ground. One group of orchid species grows only near the top of the canopy; 
an entirely different collection of orchids grows at the bottom. 
At the Manaus meeting, more than 100 specialists met in small groups to assess 
conservation priorities. 
Insect specialists compared data on such creatures as the stinging ant that 
defends acacia trees against predators. Mammalogists took inventory of the 
Amazon's screeching monkeys. Ichthyologists considered such oddities as the 
fish that eats fallen fruits and nuts on the Amazon River's banks when it 
overflows. Botanists, ornithologists and others did the same. 
Then they pooled their information and marked up maps of the Amazon. When they 
were done, the areas determined to be worth saving covered 70% to 80% of the 
Amazon. 
"The bulk of the Amazon is a biological priority; there's no way of getting 
around that," said Russell Mittermeier, president of Conservation International 
and an authority on endangered monkeys. 
Mittermeier emphasized, however, that the plan set realistic goals for the 
establishment of national parks and reserves, along with multiple-use areas 
where some development could occur. 
It is not realistic to build a fence around 70% to 80% of the Amazon, he said. 
Only the most critical areas should be placed off limits to development. 
"Ten (percent) to 20% of the entire Amazon should be in protected parks or 
preserves, ideally," he said. At present, 2% of the Amazon is protected. 
Brazil was not alone in its support for the conservation plan. 
"The results of this meeting are a major contribution towards the work that has 
got to be done," said Stanley Malone, director of the Suriname Forest Service. 
Suriname was one of eight Amazon countries that agreed in 1978 to develop a 
unified approach to management of the Amazon, Malone said. What the officials 
lacked, however, was a guide to which areas most need protection. 
That determination has now been made, based on the number of different species 
a given area contains, and on how many of those species are unique to the area. 
"Now we'll have to see what develops from this," Mittermeier said. A new 
Brazilian president, Fernando Collor de Mello, was inaugurated this month, and 
with him comes a new Brazilian environmental policy. 
Whether the policy will include support for the Manaus plan is uncertain. "As 
always, everything depends on key individuals," Mittermeier said. 
"I'm basically always optimistic," he said. "I feel sure that we can develop 
appropriate solutions, although it may take a lot of work." 
