U.S. BISHOPS ASK PONTIFF FOR VATICAN UNDERSTANDING 
In an outspoken appeal for Vatican understanding, American bishops warned Pope 
John Paul II on Wednesday that an authoritarian church alienates U.S. Roman 
Catholics who "consider that the divine right of bishops is as outmoded as the 
divine right of kings." 
An extraordinary four-day meeting between 36 American prelates and the Pope to 
discuss the changing role of bishops in the United States opened with powerful 
statements from two U.S. delegates challenging the Vatican to better comprehend 
the American church as an integral part of a singular pluralistic society. 
"As U.S. bishops, we value highly the founding principles of our country and 
its democratic traditions," Chicago Cardinal Joseph Bernardin, co-moderator of 
the meeting, told a press conference. "I do not see these freedoms or their 
exercise as being in conflict with our faithfulness to the universal, Catholic 
tradition that is ours." 
Bernardin's remarks and a subsequent address by Archbishop John L. May, 
president of the National Conference of Bishops, signaled the reluctance of 
American prelates to quietly accept dictates from the Vatican. The meeting is 
advertised by both sides as non-confrontational, but there were clear 
differences of opinion Wednesday as the Americans made plain they would be 
heard. 
"Today I think the Vatican understands how the Polish government must feel when 
Lech Walesa preaches solidarity," observed a theologian close to the Vatican. 
Behind the scenes, there was scuffling over how much of the proceedings should 
be made public. 
The Americans argued for public release of remarks that individual U.S. bishops 
have prepared for 10 give-and-take sessions with the Pope. A cardinal from the 
Curia, the Vatican's administrative arm, will also address each session, but 
the Vatican had planned for its spokesman to summarize the sessions for 
reporters without publicizing either American or Vatican texts. Whether the 
remarks will be officially forthcoming as the meeting progresses was unresolved 
Wednesday night. 
'Clash of Cultures' 
"The question of how much to say publicly is a good example of the clash of 
cultures that is the context for the meeting: American openness versus Vatican 
reticence," said an American priest who has lived in Rome for a long time. 
On a rainy afternoon, the Pope welcomed the Americans in a brief address 
calling for "a truly open exchange which aims to strengthen our partnership in 
the Gospel." Speaking in English, John Paul praised the bishops' "pastoral 
zeal" and urged them to be steadfast in "bringing the Gospel message to a world 
that does not often readily accept it." 
Then, with the Pope listening, came a bellwether opening session entitled "The 
Bishop as Teacher of the Faith," with prepared remarks by Curia Cardinal Joseph 
A. Ratzinger and New York's Cardinal John J. O'Connor. No Vatican account of 
the session will appear before this afternoon. 
"The atmosphere was very good. There were no criticisms; it was not an 'us and 
them' kind of thing," an American participant told The Times on Wednesday night 
after the first session ended. He asked not to be identified directly. 
In his remarks, delivered in Italian, Ratzinger -- who is known around the 
Vatican as the "deputy Pope" -- stressed a bishop's responsibility to 
evangelize even when his message is not popular or his audience anxious to 
listen, the American said. 
O'Connor, for his part, spoke of the difficulties of evangelization in a 
secular culture, particularly one as wed to change and mobility as the United 
States. The United States, he told the Pope, is a country where people expect 
to have a voice in the affairs of their institutions, including their churches. 
Sixteen American bishops, but none from the Curia, took part in a discussion 
that followed, the participant said. 
"The Pope listened intently. He probably will not speak again himself until the 
end of the meeting," the American said. 
The conference aims to reduce tensions between an independent-minded American 
church and a traditionalist Vatican headed by a strong, obedience-demanding 
Pope. Many American practices, ranging from accepting homosexuals as practicing 
Catholics to group absolution of sins and a tacit acceptance of artificial 
birth control, irritate Vatican conservatives. 
'Reality Is Distant' 
"There is almost bound to be the frustration of mutual incomprehension. For a 
Polish Pope and the largely Italian Curial staff, the American reality is 
distant. We, in turn, have as much difficulty understanding other peoples as 
they have understanding us," said Father Terry Tekippe, a New Orleans professor 
of theology who is spending a year in Rome as a visiting scholar. 
The two addresses by American delegates made public Wednesday stressed the open 
nature of the secular democratic society in which Catholicism has found root in 
the United States. 
"There is total freedom of thought in public educational and cultural media, 
and any form of censorship is abhorred," Archbishop May told the Pope in his 
opening address. He continued: "Authoritarianism is suspect in any area of 
learning or culture. Individual freedom is prized supremely. Religious doctrine 
and moral teaching are widely judged by these criteria. 
"To assert that there is a church teaching with authority, binding and loosing 
for eternity, is truly a sign of contradiction to many Americans who consider 
the divine right of bishops as outmoded as the divine right of kings," said 
May. His phrasing is from the Gospel of St. Matthew (16:19) in which Jesus, 
establishing his church, tells St. Peter: "Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth 
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be 
loosed in heaven." 
May stressed the size and vigor of the 53-million member American church and 
the diversity of the nation in which it labors. American bishops have long 
sought to persuade the Vatican that Catholic evangelization in the United 
States must take into account the country's particular cultural context. 
The Vatican, with a more global view, has proved unyielding. Said a Vatican 
loyalist after reading the opening speeches: "In the context of the universal 
church, the Americans are a small cultural minority. That kind of talk will not 
get a sympathetic hearing here." " 
In his address, Bernardin stressed the openness in which the American church 
operates. "We proclaim the Gospel in a communications-oriented society in a 
world that has become ever smaller. Because of the freedom of speech and the 
freedom of press inherent in our society, and because of the importance 
accorded to the church within the U.S. by our fellow Americans, discussions 
that at one time might have been considered intramural have significant 
repercussions throughout the world." 
AMERICANS AT THE VATICAN: THE ISSUES 
The Vatican meeting between American bishops and Pope John Paul II is intended 
to define the proper role of bishops. Among the specific issues likely to 
arise: 
The Vatican's rejection of artificial birth control. The Pope will likely 
insist that the bishops demonstrate greater adherence to a policy disregarded 
by most American Catholics, including many priests. 
The role of the increasingly outspoken National Bishop's Conference. The Pope 
believes that the bishops should deal individually with Rome. 
In some American archdioceses, the use of group absolution and the acceptance 
of homosexuals as practicing Catholics. 
The influence of American theologians who, John Paul believes, have too freely 
interpreted church dogma. 
The fact that some individual priests and parishes are allowed to set their own 
rules on such practices as how the sacraments are administered. 
The annulments of marriages gone bad, on which the Vatican considers the 
American church's standards too lenient. 
The growing pressure for lay preachers and a greater role for women in the 
American church. 
