ON YOUR OWN: MIXED FEELINGS ABOUT A RELATIONSHIP 
Question: After 18 years of marriage, my lover is in the process of separating 
from his wife and children. He assures me that I am not the cause of the 
breakup but the "final push" that he needs to end an unhappy marriage. I want 
to continue our relationship, but I am afraid that it will end when the 
separation process is completed. I feel that I may no longer be needed. Would 
it be better for him to adjust to single life on his own, or should I help him 
through it and take my chances? 
Answer: You seem to think there is a single right answer to your question, but 
there isn't. So you have to carefully examine your specific circumstances, 
listen to your heart and rely on your best judgment in reaching a decision 
about this situation. Explore these questions about yourself, him and the 
relationship: 
 -- Do I want a continued relationship with him after he is free? Does my 
writing this letter reflect some of my own mixed feelings about continuing? Do 
I need him to be unavailable in order to feel involved with him? 
 -- Am I picking up signs that he doesn't care enough about me to stay with me? 
Is he consciously or unconsciously using me as a transitional relationship? Do 
his feelings for me seem genuine, loving and deep? 
 -- Do I love him enough to go through some emotionally difficult times as he 
adjusts to such a drastic change in his life? Does he want me there to share 
those difficulties with him? 
Only you can decide what is best for you, but if the relationship is worth 
anything, you should not be making decisions about it unilaterally. You need to 
get together and discuss your concerns. 
Q: I am a widower, and four years ago I had the good fortune to marry a decent, 
intelligent, pretty woman. At that time, we signed a prenuptial agreement and I 
included her in my will for $175,000. 
Now, I am 70 (she is 68) and I have sensibly reviewed the situation. I have an 
income of $3,000 per month that ends with my death, and an income of $65,000 
per year, from investments, that can go on and on. If I die first, my wife will 
not have the luxuries I've provided for the past four years -- therefore, I've 
decided to leave her the $65,000 income per year for her entire life instead of 
the lump sum of $175,000. My three children, whose ages range from their 
mid-30s to mid-40s, and who are married and in good circumstances, are 
absolutely infuriated about not receiving benefits throughout my wife's 
lifetime. I think I will ignore them, but their indignation overwhelms me. Help 
me make a good decision. 
A: The first point to keep firmly in mind is that your money is your money. You 
worked for it, made decisions about investing it, and you have the right to 
dispose of it any way you like. Looked at that way, your children's 
"indignation" is inappropriate and should not coerce you to go against your own 
wishes. 
However, their feelings are, to a degree, understandable. As your children, 
they have shared one of the closest of relationships with you all their lives. 
Then, along comes this "stranger," and in four years you are willing to delay 
their inheritance in her favor. Perhaps they believe that she has pressured you 
unfairly or twisted your judgment, and you certainly owe it to yourself as well 
as to them to see if that has indeed been going on. 
You should feel secure that you made your parental contribution to them by 
raising them as best you could and providing them with the education and 
wherewithal to achieve their present "good circumstances." Further, no one but 
you can assess how dear your new wife is to you and how concerned you are about 
her continued well-being. 
If you review the situation and feel that there is some merit to your 
children's reasoning, there may be ways to make changes in your will that are 
not on an "all or none" basis -- perhaps apportioning the income between them 
and your wife according to some formula that makes sense to you. 
Finally, bear in mind that most people keep the terms of their wills secret, 
and, as you may have discovered, that often makes sense. 
