ASSEMBLY RACE DRAWS BIG YAWN FROM THE PUBLIC 
For proof of the relative obscurity of next month's special 78th state Assembly 
District primary, Republican Jeff Marston needs to look no farther than his own 
campaign. 
As he campaigns door to door, the reaction of many voters, Marston noted, has 
been along the lines of, "Aren't you about three months too late?" Even more 
telling, some of Marston's own campaign workers think that they are being 
pushed into high gear several months too early. 
"They say things like, 'Shouldn't we wait until May or so to do these things?' 
" said Sara Katz, one of Marston's consultants. "And we say, 'Well, uh, if we 
don't win in April, there won't be a campaign to worry about in May.' " 
Marston's experience dramatizes the stark contrast between the April 10 contest 
for Democratic state Sen. Lucy Killea's former Assembly seat and the two 
high-profile special state legislative elections held in San Diego County late 
last year. 
While Killea's 39th state Senate District race in December and the 76th 
Assembly District race won by Republican Tricia Hunter in October both drew 
national publicity as referendums on abortion, next month's eight-candidate 
campaign has received little more than cursory attention, even within local 
political circles. 
"For most people, there's not even an awareness that there's a race going on," 
Democrat Howard Wayne said. 
In contrast to the debate-a-day schedule and saturation press coverage that 
typified the two earlier special races, there have been few candidate forums 
and only occasional news stories on this spring's contest. As a result, fund 
raising has been sluggish, forcing some major candidates who initially talked 
of spending $200,000-plus to scale back their primary budgets by half. 
"Like everyone else, we've been revising our budget weekly, and it keeps 
dropping," said former Democratic San Diego City Councilman Mike Gotch, the 
race's consensus front-runner by virtue of name identification that easily 
eclipses that of the other candidates. 
The causes for the 78th District campaign's low profile begin with the absence 
of a major divisive issue such as that which dominated last year's special 
elections. 
Except for Democratic long-shot A. L. (Bud) Brooks, all of the major candidates 
-- Republicans as well as Democrats -- are abortion rights advocates, defusing 
that emotional subject as a campaign issue. And, although there are differences 
in the candidates' priorities and positions on some topics, Republican Jane 
Ramshaw notes that, on most major issues, "The message is pretty much the 
same." 
"There aren't any issues that are grabbing voters by the throat, throwing them 
to the ground and demanding that they pay attention," added GOP candidate Helen 
Rowe. "Some major issues such as gun control and abortion have quieted down. 
The volatility just isn't there." 
That lack of controversy, combined with what some consultants refer to as 
"voter fatigue" in the face of the third special state legislative race here 
within six months, is expected to exacerbate the low turnout typically found in 
special elections. With the Assembly race being the only election on the April 
ballot, most candidates expect a turnout of only about 20% of the district's 
nearly 195,000 voters, despite their aggressive solicitation of absentee 
ballots. 
From the outset, Gotch has been widely viewed as the candidate to beat -- a 
perception reinforced by the recent withdrawal of fellow Democrat Byron 
Georgiou, who dropped out of the race to challenge Democratic Rep. Jim Bates in 
June. Though clearly an underdog to the better-known Gotch, Georgiou was the 
top fund-raiser in the race and had compiled valuable political IOUs through 
his longtime party activism -- factors that caused him to be seen as 
potentially Gotch's most formidable opponent. 
However, even without Georgiou in the race -- even though his name remains on 
the ballot -- neither Gotch nor any other candidate is expected to surpass the 
50% vote margin needed in the primary to avoid a June runoff. 
Under the unorthodox procedures governing special elections, all candidates of 
all parties will appear on a single ballot in April. If no candidate receives a 
50%-plus majority in the primary, the top vote-getters of each party will 
compete in June for the remaining six months in Killea's unexpired term. 
On the same June ballot, the same candidates -- along with at least some of the 
losers from April -- also will compete in the normal state legislative primary 
for their parties' nomination for the two-year term that will be contested in 
November. 
That prospect of a rare "double election" in June creates the possibility of a 
split decision, with one candidate winning the special primary but losing the 
normal primary. Though the candidates regard that possibility as remote, the 
fact that the two contests will be waged before markedly different 
constituencies -- all voters would cast ballots in the special runoff, while 
partisan electorates will decide the primaries -- increases the slim chance 
that the two races could have different victors. 
In addition, the inclusion of both a special runoff and a normal primary on the 
same ballot may, understandably, confuse voters, prompting some to think that 
they must vote for different candidates in the two races. 
Even as they ponder the race's potentially perplexing format in June, the 
candidates have focused their energies on the April election, the first step 
toward their goal of a double victory two months later in the 78th District, 
which stretches along the coast from Ocean Beach to Pacific Beach, extending 
inland to the Miramar Naval Air Station in the north, south to downtown San 
Diego and east to East San Diego. 
Gotch's superior name recognition has cast a long shadow over the campaign, 
significantly influencing the strategies of Republicans and Democrats alike. 
The three Republicans in the primary -- Marston, Ramshaw and Rowe -- treat 
Gotch as the presumptive Democratic nominee and have structured their 
respective campaigns accordingly, portraying themselves as the party's best 
hope to offset his advantages in June. 
"What we're talking about here is who can beat Mike Gotch -- that's whom we 
have to assume we're going to be up against," Ramshaw told the San Diego 
Republican Businesswomen. 
Accordingly, both Ramshaw, an insurance broker, and Rowe, a lawyer, extol the 
virtues of their private-sector experience, with Ramshaw billing herself as 
"someone who can close the deal." Meanwhile, Marston, a one-time aide to former 
San Diego City Councilwoman Gloria McColl and Sen. S. I. Hayakawa (R-Calif.), 
argues that his public service provided a better training ground. 
If the Republicans all but concede Gotch a spot in the runoff, the other 
Democratic candidates, for obvious reasons, clearly do not. In particular, 
deputy state attorney Wayne has spent nearly as much time raising questions 
about Gotch's credentials as he has on explaining his own -- arguing, for 
example, that Gotch's eight-year City Council record would make him a more 
inviting target for the Republicans in June and November. 
Wayne, relatively well known within Democratic circles because of his lengthy 
political dues-paying service for the local party, has been especially critical 
of Gotch's environmental record, despite the fact that the former councilman 
has been endorsed by the Sierra Club. In his public appearances, Wayne 
consistently reminds audiences that Gotch voted for the controversial Belmont 
Park development and went to work for prominent developer Doug Manchester after 
leaving the council in 1987. 
"Mike Gotch used to be an environmentalist, but he's changed," one Wayne mailer 
says. "Mike Gotch's giveaway of Belmont Park is just a hint of what could come 
if he is elected to the Assembly." The detailing of Wayne's own qualifications 
in that eight-page brochure is limited to two brief sentences: "As a deputy 
attorney general, I've prosecuted corrupt politicians. I will never give away 
public park land to private developers." 
The two other Democrats in the race -- county probation officer Brooks and 
lawyer Judith Abeles -- have, of necessity, focused on trying to increase their 
own low name identification. But they, too, occasionally, take verbal potshots 
at Gotch. 
The eighth candidate in the race, Peace and Freedom Party member Jane Rocio 
Evans, a teacher, is little more than a political footnote, and concedes that 
she is running primarily to help publicize her party's platform. 
Recognizing that he has little to gain from a protracted debate over his own 
record, Gotch has taken a dismissive tack toward his opponents' attacks, 
typically waving them off by noting that "this preoccupation with 
second-guessing" underlines the fact that he is the only candidate with a 
public record. 
"The significant difference in this race is experience," Gotch said. "As the 
only one who has served in an elective capacity, I'm in the best position to 
hit the ground running." 
The other first-time candidates, however, have proudly worn their self-styled 
citizen-politician images as a badge of honor, hoping to tap into the public's 
general disdain toward politics. 
With rare exceptions, the candidates' standard stump speeches are long on 
generalities but short on specifics and are remarkably similar in their core 
themes. Protect the environment, improve education and health care, reduce 
crime and drug problems, gain more state funding for San Diego -- these and 
other broad, generally noncontroversial goals have marked the campaign 
rhetoric. 
Most of the candidates favor Proposition 111, a June ballot measure that would 
double the current 9-cents-per-gallon gasoline tax over five years to finance 
an $18.5-billion highway and transportation improvement program. Most also 
support a ballot proposition that would shift responsibility for the state's 
decennial legislative redistricting from the Legislature to an independent 
commission, a proposal that supporters contend would curtail gerrymandering. 
One notable aberration from the campaign's homogeneous tone involves Democrat 
Abeles' proposal that the use of drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamines be 
legalized, with the state regulating their production and distribution, as well 
as that of "legal drugs" such as liquor. Government control not only would 
raise public revenue, Abeles argues, but also could decrease drug use over the 
long term by minimizing dealers' economic incentives and users' "rebel 
behavior." 
"Legalizing drugs would take a lot of the punch out of their use -- forbidden 
fruit is always more attractive," Abeles said. "Besides, it's the grossest 
hypocrisy to have a 'Just Say No' ad followed by a beer ad. Alcohol and tobacco 
are just as bad as some illegal drugs." Abeles, a former ACLU staff attorney, 
said she refuses to subscribe to any magazine that carries tobacco 
advertisements. 
Brooks' anti-abortion position also distinguishes him from the field, but the 
other major candidates' abortion rights advocacy has largely removed that issue 
from the campaign. However, it remains a vital component of Brooks' strategy, 
which revolves around the possibility of abortion opponents coalescing behind 
his candidacy. 
With the primary scheduled to fall one week after California's first execution 
in 23 years -- the planned April 3 execution of Robert Alton Harris, convicted 
in the 1978 killing of two San Diego teen-agers -- the death penalty has been a 
frequent topic in the campaign. Abeles and Peace and Freedom candidate Evans 
oppose capital punishment, but the other candidates have seemingly tried to 
outdo one another with tough talk on the subject. 
"The (Charles) Mansons and Harrises of this world . . . should not be released 
on society, and society shouldn't have the burden of incarcerating them for the 
rest of their lives," Gotch said, typifying the rhetoric. 
San Diego officials' by-now familiar lament over the fact that the county ranks 
57th out of the state's 58 counties in per capita general revenue from 
Sacramento also has been a constant at campaign forums. And, though they have 
done little beyond offering platitudes about working harder to increase San 
Diego's share of state funding, each of the candidates has striven to find an 
angle on the popular issue. 
Democrats, for example, argue that, because their party controls the 
Legislature, the county's case would be strengthened by keeping the 78th 
District seat in their hands. Republicans respond curtly that the county's 
shortchanging occurred while the seat was in Democratic hands. Others search 
for catchy phrases to dramatize the issue, such as Ramshaw's offering: "The 
nation of Los Angeles and the Kingdom of San Francisco are holding us hostage." 
Injecting both candor and political reality into that discussion, Marston 
emphasizes that the outcome in the 78th District is unlikely to have an 
appreciable impact on San Diego's battle for more state funds. 
"It's naive to think that legislators from L.A. and the Bay Area are going to 
go back to their constituencies and say, 'We're going to cut back on our 
counties' funding because we've been shafting San Diego for years,' " Marston 
said. The ultimate solution to that problem, Marston adds, probably lies either 
in the county's lawsuits against the state or in a "Fair Share Initiative" that 
would adjust state tax funding formulas. 
"All politicians like to act as if they're going to be a savior," Marston said. 
"But there are times when you have to admit it's going to take a lot more than 
any one person to solve a problem. And this is one of those times." 
