ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: GARDEN GROVE; 
HIGH-TECH PROGRAM AIDS SIGHT-IMPAIRED 
Sixteen-year-old Matthew Brian Cox is a junior at Bolsa Grande High School in 
Garden Grove. He's a crack participant in the high school's Mock Trial Club, 
and the would-be barrister recently garnered an honorable-mention award in a 
countywide competition. 
Matthew is also blind. 
But he is able to find a legal advantage in his impairment. "I could read from 
my notes (in Braille)," Matthew said, "and keep looking in the direction of the 
judge." 
Matthew is one of nine students in Bolsa Grande's program for visually 
handicapped students that serves the Garden Grove Unified School District and 
neighboring districts. 
The district has recently added some high-tech equipment to help educate the 
program's blind and partially sighted students. 
"The students are able to make use of several different kinds of computers and 
other devices to help them in their work," said Connie F. Silva, who runs the 
program. 
Those devices range from the commonplace, such as tape recorders for playing 
back lectures or prerecorded audio versions of textbooks, to the futuristic. 
"We have an Apple IIe computer with a speech synthesizer," Silva said. "Most of 
the students have typing skills," and as they touch a key, the computer 
"speaks" the letter in a mechanical tone, she explained. 
In addition to the talking machines, the Bolsa Grande facilities include a 
machine that magnifies images on the computer screen, as well as the well-known 
Braille typewriter. 
After spending most of their day in regular classrooms, the students return to 
the Braille classroom for one or two periods. 
There, they can pick up Braille, large-print or taped copies of tests, 
handouts, texts and other materials, usually on the same day that sighted 
students receive them. Sometimes, if there's not enough time to transcribe or 
translate, Silva or an aide will read the material aloud to the student. 
But more than equipment is offered in the program. Students get encouragement, 
a sympathetic ear and individual help. 
"I think it's a great thing to have," said Brandi Winemiller, 17, a junior in 
the program with 20/2200 vision. "I feel good about the fact that I can get the 
help here I need. I honestly don't know what I'd do without it." JAMES 
TORTOLANO 
