NOT THE PRIME-TIME PAYERS; 
CAMPAIGNS: THE COST OF TV EXPOSURE IN LOS ANGELES IS MAKING IT TOUGH FOR 
STATEWIDE CANDIDATES TO GET THEIR MESSAGES INTO THE NO. 1 MARKET. 
It's hard to imagine a successful statewide candidacy that did not include 
television advertising in the major markets. But the rising costs of TV time, 
especially in the Los Angeles market, are rapidly becoming prohibitive for most 
candidates seeking statewide office. 
Mindful of this, Democratic Lt. Gov. Leo McCarthy recently proposed that he and 
the winner of the Republican primary for lieutenant governor split the costs of 
their 30-second TV spots, each contributing up to $500,000. Sens. Marian 
Bergeson (R-Newport Beach) and John Seymour (R-Anaheim), who are seeking the 
nomination, spurned McCarthy's unprecedented idea. But McCarthy's concern about 
high-priced TV time in California and its implications for political campaigns 
and debate deserves bipartisan attention. 
Conventional wisdom has it that only the nominees for governor -- Pete Wilson 
on the Republican side, either Dianne Feinstein or John Van de Kamp on the 
Democratic -- will be rich enough to afford frequently aired TV ads in major 
markets. If one of these candidates wanted maximum prime-time exposure in the 
Los Angeles market today -- viewers seeing a 30-second ad at least 10 times -- 
he or she would have to pay $830,000 a week. That price, it should be noted, 
will continue to escalate through the spring. 
Yet prime-time exposure is not the most cost-efficent. Bill Carrick and Hank 
Morris, Feinstein's media advisers, spent $450,000 to buy time in six non-prime 
periods in the Los Angeles market. The Feinstein ads began airing in late 
January when she was a virtual unknown here. The spots, of course, propelled 
Feinstein into the lead, the polls show, and may even have changed the 
chemistry of the race. Today, Carrick and Morris would have to pay $750,000 for 
the same result. 
Candidates for insurance commissioner or treasurer clearly won't be able to 
raise that kind of money. A possible solution is for TV station managers, out 
of public service, to incorporate candidate debates into their late-afternoon 
news programs or schedule them between 7 and 8 p.m., prime access time. 
Short of that, underfunded candidates will have few opportunities to get across 
their message on TV: They can either buy only in Los Angeles, or buy everywhere 
but Los Angeles. 
News that Democratic registration in California has slipped below 50% the first 
time in 56 years may turn out to be a harbinger of worse to come unless the 
party can attract more money. It's not that chairman Jerry Brown isn't out 
raising money. It's that his staff overhead -- 15 registration organizers are 
on the payroll -- is eating up all the receipts. 
The combination of party-recruitment costs and lackluster results may be why 
Brown did not renew the party's $7,500 monthly contract with organizer Marshall 
Ganz. Neither side is talking. 
In any case, Brown must raise $1 million a month to finance his aggressive 
efforts to reverse the party's registration decline. Already, Feinstein and Van 
de Kamp are under pressure to divert funds from their shrinking war chests to 
aid the registration drive. Not surprisingly, the candidates are balking. Which 
means that Brown may have to ask Assembly Speaker Willie Brown and Senate 
President Pro Tem David Roberti for some of the money they have amassed to 
defeat pro-Republican reapportionment efforts. 
Failure to meet the party's cash goals in the next six weeks, say informed 
sources, could mean additional staff cutbacks, which could translate into still 
fewer registered Democrats. For Jerry Brown, that would be a major setback. 
