SBA HONORS ADVOCATE FOR MINORITY BUSINESS; 
PACBELL EXECUTIVE CO-FOUNDED BUSINESS COUNCIL TO HELP BRIDGE GAPS BETWEEN 
ETHNIC GROUPS 
In 1965, Patricia A. Krone was appalled by the widespread destruction of homes 
and businesses during the violent race riots in the Watts section of Los 
Angeles. 
"The riots happened because people in the mainstream ignored minorities," said 
Krone, 55, a resident of Newport Beach. "A community committed suicide because 
the different ethnic groups didn't realize there was value in helping each 
other." 
That realization ultimately served as the inspiration for Krone's work as a 
co-founder of the Orange County Minority Business Council, a nonprofit group 
created in March, 1987. 
On Thursday, Krone was recognized as minority business advocate of the year by 
the U.S. Small Business Administration for her efforts on behalf of the 
council. 
Krone is one of eight winners chosen for their advocacy of small business in a 
national competition. Advocates are "individuals who have used their 
professional expertise and personal talents to further the understanding and 
awareness of small business in their community," said Michael Howland, acting 
regional SBA director in San Francisco. 
The eight people were picked from a pool of district winners by a panel of 
business, industrial and government leaders. Among the winners are three other 
Californians: Morris Van Asperen of Los Angeles, Joe Greenstreet of Marysville 
and Caryn Wiley of Westlake Village. 
Krone helped organize the minority business council in her role as a community 
relations manager for Pacific Bell in Orange. Besides Krone, other PacBell 
executives and representatives of the Orange County Chamber of Commerce and the 
Orange County Human Relations Commission helped establish the organization. 
The council is composed of chambers of commerce from the Latino, black, 
Vietnamese and Korean communities. It encourages members to cross cultural 
lines, promoting friendship and economic success. 
Krone, who was on a business trip in San Francisco on Thursday, said in a 
telephone interview that her goal was to encourage communication and 
cooperation among ethnically diverse business people in Orange County. 
And despite the accolades, Krone is still concerned that feelings of racial 
tension and competition among Orange County minorities might damage the 
county's economic vitality. 
"A community is healthy only when local businesses are strong," she said. 
Krone has also been a member of the county's Human Relations Commission for the 
past 10 years. She was president of the Orange County Mental Health Assn. from 
1981 to 1986. And she has worked with scores of other community interest 
groups. 
But it was her work with the Minority Business Council that earned her the SBA 
recognition. The council sponsors seminars, speakers and social events that 
often cross cultural lines. 
For example, she said that members of the Vietnamese community provided 
entertainment during a Korean harvest festival in October. 
"We have to learn to be together," she said, "before we can work together." 
Chuoc Vo-Ta, executive director of the Vietnamese Chamber of Commerce in Orange 
County, said Krone encouraged merchants to appeal to customers from outside the 
Vietnamese community. 
"She gives us advice," he said. "She advises people that it's time to get into 
the mainstream." 
James D. McClellan, chairman of the minority business council, said Krone has 
been an inspiration to the organization and the community. 
She "lets people see there is a commonality of business objectives across all 
cultures," he said. "And that sharing of ideas allows people to work together." 
SBA spokeswoman Sandy Sutton said the eight winners will be honored in May at a 
dinner in Washington. 
