EUROPE TAKES OZONE LEAD 
A day late, President Bush Friday joined the European-led parade for a total 
ban by the year 2000 on the chemicals that deplete the ozone layer in the 
atmosphere. It is embarrassing for this country to be following someone else's 
lead on critical environmental issues so much of the time, but Bush's reaction 
time was an improvement over the Reagan Administration's response to such 
things. It probably would be calling for more study. 
Still, there is a bit of a hitch. The Bush promise was made contingent upon 
finding safe alternatives. But the ozone-hole problem now is known to be so 
serious that there can be no conditions. The world must end the use of 
chlorofluorocarbons and other ozone-depleting chemicals just as soon as 
possible. Substitutes must be found. There simply is no other choice. 
Manufacturers of foam containers, such as the hamburger boxes used by fast-food 
outlets, already have found other chemicals. Chemists still are trying to 
perfect an alternative for chlorofluorocarbons in refrigeration units, and it 
is hard to believe they cannot do so during the coming dozen years. Apparently 
the British are close to a solution now. 
The erosion of the ozone layer, of course, is a new, cosmic sort of 
environmental problem that has not been dealt with before. Scientists for some 
years theorized that chlorine and bromine atoms freed from the breakdown of the 
chlorofluorocarbons were affecting the ozone layer of the stratosphere between 
9 and 15 miles above the Earth's surfaces. This is important because the ozone 
shields the Earth from harmful ultraviolet rays from the Sun. As the ozone 
layer is eroded, the penetrating ultraviolet rays can dramatically increase the 
incidence of skin cancer and cause other health problems. 
In the past four years, scientists have detected the alarming effect on the 
ozone layer above the Antarctic -- much greater than expected -- and just 
recently discovered "incredible" concentrations of chemicals in the Arctic 
region. 
The United States joined other nations in Montreal last year in agreeing to cut 
the production of chlorofluorocarbons by about 50% by the end of the century. 
But scientific observations of recent months have demonstrated that will not be 
sufficient. The complete ban by the year 2000 should be approved quickly by 
signers of the Montreal Protocol, and the ban should be made effective even 
sooner, when a substitute is found for chlorofluorocarbons for use in 
refrigerators, air conditioners and other such units. 
