POMONA'S GAY-HUMAN RIGHTS VOTE CRITICIZED 
I was dismayed and outraged with the Pomona City Council's decision to renege 
on their previous decision to allow a Gay-Human Rights Week (Times, Feb. 28). 
According to Mayor (Donna) Smith, who gave the deciding vote on this very 
controversial and heated issue, her main reason behind her decision to expel 
gays from Gay-Human Rights Week was that she did not want to give "special" 
rights to select groups. 
"Special" rights? Were Mexican-Americans asking for special rights in order to 
celebrate their culture and heritage on Cinco De Mayo Day? Were Afro-Americans 
asking for special rights when they asked to celebrate Martin Luther King Day 
and Black History Month? What about the Irish St. Patrick's Day, a day in which 
our Irish community celebrates their culture and heritage? 
Similar to other minorities, which includes Chicanos, Afro-Americans, Asians, 
Mexican-Americans and Jewish Americans, lesbians and gays have their own 
culture, their own heritage. Our history goes way back; for example, did you 
know that Plato was gay? We have experienced the violent prejudice during the 
infamous Stonewall Riots; we have suffered the loss of a great leader, San 
Francisco Supervisor Harvey Milk, who was assassinated because of his sexual 
orientation. 
The only difference between gays and lesbians being recognized as a unique and 
separate culture compared to other minorities is that we are not all the same 
color. Because our status as a minority group cannot be based on the color of 
our skin or religious orientation we are being refused the same recognition, 
through "pride weeks," that hundreds of other minorities are privileged to 
have. 
Many of the people who argued against the proclamation for a Gay-Human Rights 
Week claimed that lesbians and gays choose to be homosexual. I ask you this, 
why would I, as a lesbian woman, choose to live a life style in which I am 
forbidden to legally marry the person I love? In which I am unable to hold my 
partner's hand in public for fear of being attacked? Why would I choose a life 
style where, just by writing this letter and stating my name, I am at risk of 
losing my job or my life? Why would I choose a life style that is not 
recognized but rather ostracized by society? Gays and lesbians are too 
frequently looked upon as strictly sexual beings, but this is not the case. 
Lesbians and gays are your mothers, your brothers, your fathers, your sisters, 
your sons and your daughters. We are a loving people who have asked the City 
Council for the right to be recognized as a unique and separate culture. Yet, 
because of (Councilman) Clay Bryant's political game-playing (do his 
constituents realize that it was he who first introduced and approved the 
original proclamation?), (Councilman Mark A. T.) Nymeyer's ignorance and 
homophobia, and Mayor Smith's fear and weakness, gays and lesbians were denied 
the basic human rights given to all minorities in the United States; the right 
to celebrate our culture and heritage as the unique and contributing culture 
that it is. 
KIM HANRAHAN, Board member, Pomona-San Gabriel Valley Gay and Lesbian Coalition 
