SCHOOL BOARD RECOMMENDATIONS 
The April 11 election for the Los Angeles Board of Education is a critical one. 
The United Teachers-Los Angeles union is trying to get control of the school 
board. To be sure, teachers should get higher pay, and they should have an 
important voice at all levels of policy-making. But the union's tactics in its 
current contract negotiations with the school board indicate that it does not 
fully understand the school district's financial constraints. UTLA needs to 
work with the board and the administration; instead, it prefers constant 
confrontation. The loss is the students'. Their welfare -- not the union's -- 
should be uppermost in voters' minds. 
District 2 -- On the Westside, Mark Slavkin, a bright young man and deputy to 
Los Angeles County Supervisor Ed Edelman, is opposing Alan Gershman, the 
incumbent, who is a former teacher. Slavkin would bring an energy to the board 
that the low-key Gershman lacks. But, unfortunately, Slavkin's election could 
also give the union that majority it has been trying to get by stalling 
negotiations and targeting Gershman for defeat. Gershman argues that the board 
already faces deep cuts in instructional programs as a result of its current 
salary-and-benefits offer, and that has won him no friends among his former 
UTLA backers. 
A two-term member of the school board, Gershman chaired the committee that 
drafted the district's new high school graduation requirements that exceeded 
those required by state law. He has been active in creating the foreign 
languages magnet at Venice High School and the music academy at Hamilton High 
School, as well as adding 11 new elementary music teachers who offer classes to 
students across the city. He also has helped create the Bellagio Newcomers 
School for immigrant students. Gershman is not a flashy board member, but he 
has gotten the job done. He deserves reelection. 
District 4 -- Julie Korenstein was elected to the board in 1987 to fill out an 
unexpired term for the West San Fernando Valley seat. Endorsed by the union, 
her reelection will not, however, tip the balance of the board. Korenstein, a 
former substitute teacher in the school district, has supported the 
school-based health clinics, efforts to keep potential dropouts in school and 
volunteer work by students. 
 District 6 -- Roberta Weintraub, current school board president, has evolved 
from a one-issue anti-busing candidate into a leavening force in the panel's 
deliberations. As she herself puts it, one of the main things she has learned 
in her 10 years representing the East San Fernando Valley on the board is that 
one must change as the district changes. Some colleagues on previous boards 
didn't; she has. 
She has helped get board meetings televised on KLCS-TV, Channel 58, so that the 
public has a better picture of the board, and she is a firm backer of the 
important school-based clinics. She also has worked for promotion of more women 
to administrative jobs in the school system. Of critical importance at this 
point, she has worked hard to communicate to the press and the public the 
district's position and problems during current contract negotiations. 
Weintraub has proved an especially diligent, energetic board member who 
deserves reelection. 
The first order of business for the board is to resolve the current contract 
dispute and get on with the big job of improving education for the diverse 
student body in the Los Angeles Unified School District. We think the best 
board members to do that job will be Alan Gershman, Julie Korenstein and 
Roberta Weintraub. 
