SAN DIEGO SPOTLIGHT: POP MUSIC / THOMAS K. ARNOLD: CHEAP TRICK GETS MORE THAN 
JUST A CHEAP THRILL 
Much to their delight, the members of Cheap Trick have found that lightning 
can, indeed, strike twice. 
Nearly a decade after their initial flash-in-the-pan success, the veteran 
Midwestern rockers have finally realized their long-harbored hopes for a 
comeback. Their latest album, "Lap of Luxury," is their highest-charting LP 
since 1979's "Dream Police." Their recent single, "The Flame," is their first 
No. 1 hit, ever. 
And, on their current U.S. tour, Cheap Trick is once again playing 
multi-thousand-seat venues -- like the Starlight Bowl in Balboa Park, where 
they will appear Saturday night -- instead of the tiny nightclubs and military 
bases to which they've been relegated for the better part of the 1980s. 
"Having hits again has added 10 years to our career; it's added some quality 
time as opposed to quantity time," said guitarist Rick Nielsen in a telephone 
interview. "We appreciated our success the first time, but this time, we 
appreciate it even more. 
"Suffering all those setbacks and then being given a second chance -- we're 
thrilled." 
From 1979 to 1981, Cheap Trick enjoyed a brief reign as the hottest pop act in 
the country. They consistently topped the charts and broke box-office records 
with their buoyant, catchy music and a campy stage show that pitted Nielsen's 
clownish mugging and maniacal guitar gymnastics against lead singer Robin 
Zander's good looks and sensual gyrations. 
As is so often the case, however, Cheap Trick's days in the spotlight were 
numbered. But, even after the hits stopped coming, Nielsen said, "We continued 
to tour, we continued to try to make good records, and we didn't give up." 
In the end, Cheap Trick's perseverance paid off. When it came time to record 
"Lap of Luxury," Nielsen said, "we wanted to make the best record we could, as 
always, but we were also more determined than ever to have a hit, to get back 
on radio. 
"So, instead of putting whatever we came up with on the album, as we did in the 
past, we worked with outside writers and among ourselves to come up with 50 
songs, and then we got together with our management and our record company and 
picked the 10 we felt stood the best chance of becoming commercial hits." 
The ploy worked and, sure enough, put Cheap Trick back on top -- to the point 
that the band's average box-office take is "from double to 10 times what it was 
a year ago," Nielsen said. 
"Still, we're not exactly loaded," he added. "We've been in debt for so many 
years, it will take us two comebacks just to break even." 
Last November, Paul Abramson obtained zoning approval from San Diego's planning 
department to open a teen-age nightclub in the Adams Avenue Theater, pending 
his purchase of the building at a foreclosure auction scheduled for mid-March. 
According to the 27-year-old La Jolla entrepreneur, the club, named Van 
Richter, was to open sometime in May and offer the 17 to 25 "young adult" crowd 
a mix of recorded dance music and occasional concerts by underground bands like 
Cabaret Voltaire, Ministry and Front 242, most of them hipper-than-thou exports 
from Europe. 
But now the fate of the club is up in the air. Two weeks ago, Abramson received 
a letter from associate planner Kevin McGee, informing him that Van Richter's 
maximum legal area had been reduced from 8,000 square feet -- the entire 
building -- to just 5,000 square feet. 
No can do, Abramson said. 
"What they're basically asking me to do is turn what has always been a 
single-use building into a multi-use building, and that simply won't work," 
Abramson said. "I would have to hire a structural engineer to build a 25-foot 
retaining wall in there, and it would not only be impractical, but the cost 
would be astronomical." 
Planner McGee said his decision to "take a second look" at Abramson's permit 
was prompted by a request by the Normal Heights Community Development Corp. The 
CDC has long opposed the idea of a teen-age nightclub in Normal Heights, even 
going so far as to try to purchase the building itself last year before the 
foreclosure (their offer was rejected). 
"Under zoning restrictions in that area, the size of theaters, nightclubs and 
bars is limited to 5,000 square feet," McGee said, except in cases where the 
new business is similar to the business it is replacing. Originally, he added, 
"based on information Mr. Abramson had provided us with," it was determined 
that the club and the previous occupant, Lawrence Gray Ministries, were, 
indeed, similar, because one put on gospel concerts and the other techno-pop 
dances. 
"But, at the community planning group's request," McGee said, "we took it to 
the city attorney, and he didn't agree." 
Adamson said he would appeal the planning department's ruling. 
LINER NOTES: Mojo Nixon and Skid Roper's new album, "Root Hog or Die," should 
be in local record stores any day now. The dynamic duo of depravity's fourth 
Enigma Records release includes such irreverent ditties as "Debbie Gibson Is 
Pregnant With My Two-Headed Love Chile' " and "Louisiana Liplock," as well as 
an upbeat rendition of Woody Guthrie's "This Land Is Your Land," in which Nixon 
has added an uproarious mid-song rap. . . . The 13th annual concert series at 
San Diego State University's Open Air Theater gets under way March 25 with an 
appearance by British techno-pop heavyweights Duran Duran. Tickets go on sale 
Friday at 3 p.m. 
