BOOK REVIEW; 
ARTISTIC SENSE INFUSES A RICH CHARACTER STUDY; 
A CLOUD ON SAND BY GABRIELLA DE FERRARI, KNOPF $19.95, 323 PAGES 
Born in Peru to Italian parents and educated in the United States, Gabriella De 
Ferrari has written her first novel in her third language. Though trained as a 
diplomat, she became director of Boston's Museum of Contemporary Art, then 
curator of the renowned Fogg Museum. All three national cultures and both 
professional disciplines figure significantly in "A Cloud on Sand," which 
begins in a small Italian coastal village, moves on to a provincial South 
American city with a sizeable Italian population, and is suffused throughout 
with an artistic sensibility to landscape, color and form. 
The fact that the book is written in the English taught to an adult instead of 
the language naturally acquired by a child lends the prose a formal and 
somewhat dated quality perfectly suited to a story set abroad in the period 
from 1920 to the end of World War II. There's a lushness here, a sense of 
hyper-reality and an expansiveness of character that contrasts strongly with 
our contemporary home-grown pragmatism. The frame of reference is never taken 
for granted, but generously supplied by a variety of sensory images, so that 
the reader not only visualizes the exotic settings, but perceives the 
particular sounds, tastes and textures. At first the structure seems somewhat 
arbitrary and obscure. A woman named Marta, unidentified until the end of the 
novel, is asking questions of Antonia, eliciting the detailed answers that 
become the novel proper. After a brief prologue that takes place on a ship 
leaving Buenos Aires for the fictional town of Pica, in the country of Yayaku 
adjoining Chile, we're transported back to Antonia's girlhood in a small 
fishing village on the Italian Riviera. 
The time is the 1930s, and Artemisia is generally by-passed by foreign 
travelers eager to get from Genoa to Florence. Artemisia has few attractions, 
though it does boast a grand white stone villa set squarely in the midst of the 
crumbling medieval streets. This is Antonia's home, built as her father's 
capitulation to the wishes of her mother, Dora. After their wedding, Antonia's 
father had taken his capricious peasant bride to Argentina, where he was one of 
the newly prosperous Italian settlers. After one look at Buenos Aires, Dora 
refused to disembark, returning to Italy on the boat that brought her. Bowing 
to her indomitable will, her husband built the grand villa in Artemisia, 
visiting his family twice a year. In his long absences, Dora conducted herself 
as a single woman, taking a succession of casual lovers but soon settling upon 
the gentle and devoted Count Mora. He would be her protector for the rest of 
her days, acting in loco parentis for Antonia and her brother Marco, mitigating 
Dora's often baleful influence upon the children. 
In turn, Antonia falls in love and marries an Italian businessman living in 
Yayaku. Her character strengthened by the count's lofty ethical principles, 
Antonia remains in the remote outpost in which she finds herself, though she is 
still enough her mother's daughter to insist on living according to her own 
instincts and desires, not caring if she outrages Pica's tightly-knit and 
conservative Italian community. She becomes a strong and capable woman, a wife 
perhaps more adored than adoring, but essentially content with her 
extraordinary existence. 
De Ferrari gives us a spacious gallery of domestic interiors and landscape 
studies, re-creating the curious atmosphere of a European colony two continents 
away from its source; trapped in a time warp even more alienating than mere 
geographical distance. Against these rich, dense backgrounds, her characters 
grow in strength and vitality, welcoming us into a mysterious, vanished world. 
Next: "Springs of Living Water" by Karen Lawrence (Villard Books). 
