CYANIDE TRACES LEAD U.S. TO SEIZE ALL CHILEAN FRUIT 
In an action that may virtually eliminate peaches, plums, nectarines and red 
seedless grapes from grocery shelves across the country, the federal government 
announced Monday that it is impounding all fruit imports from Chile after 
traces of cyanide were found in a shipment of Chilean grapes. 
Government officials do not yet know how long the impoundment may last but 
warned that it could be for the remainder of the Chilean growing season, about 
five weeks. Chile is the nation's leading supplier of winter non-citrus fruit 
and virtually the sole supplier of soft "tree fruits" such as peaches and 
plums. 
Los Angeles-area grocers began to remove Chilean grapes from their shelves 
Monday night and were awaiting further word from the Food and Drug 
Administration on what other steps to take, said Jan de Lyser of the Fresh 
Produce Council in Los Angeles. 
"There's been some action already," De Lyser said. "Whatever they direct will 
be complied with." 
Vickie Sanders, a spokeswoman for Vons stores, said the chain had not yet been 
officially informed of the FDA order but had made an "internal decision" to 
remove red seedless grapes from Chile from its shelves. 
"What we're trying to do now is prevent people from panicking," Sanders said. 
"People see the word 'cyanide' and they may not notice that it's two grapes out 
of a shipment of 300,000." 
FDA officials stressed that, so far, there is no evidence of further 
contamination beyond the one shipment of grapes that entered the country in 
Philadelphia a few days ago. 
They noted also that, because cyanide is a quick-acting poison, consumers have 
no reason to worry about fruit they may already have eaten. 
Two grapes in the shipment were found to have a low level of cyanide. The 
finding "may be an isolated incident," FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young said. 
"But we can hardly take that chance." 
The FDA is advising grocers to remove Chilean fruit from their shelves. It is 
also asking consumers to check the source of any fresh non-citrus fruit they 
have at home and to discard any that may be of Chilean origin. 
Store Removes Fruit 
At a Ralphs market at Third Street and Vermont Avenue, stock clerks had removed 
grapes, blueberries and black plums from the shelves Monday afternoon, said 
store manager Carl Qudaimat. 
"We pulled all the questionable things off as a precautionary measure," he 
said. "It's all sitting in the back." 
Lewis Stone, a consultant to Agriculture Export-Import USA, a downtown Los 
Angeles fruit and vegetable broker, said there are few alternative sources for 
the inexpensive and plentiful Chilean peaches, apricots, nectarines and plums 
that fill U.S. shelves during the winter. 
Although Chilean fruit retails from about $1.50 per pound, alternatives like 
New Zealand fruit can sell for as much $5 per pound, Stone said. 
"It's going to affect the whole industry. The losses will be in the millions of 
dollars," Stone predicted. "Fortunately, we didn't have any (Chilean fruit) in 
the current shipment." 
California Crop in May 
Stone predicted that most shoppers and retailers would wait to find substitutes 
for the Chilean fruit until May, when "early" California fruit would begin to 
be available. 
Shoppers roaming the aisles of the produce section at a Vons in the 
Mid-Wilshire District reacted calmly to the news that some grapes and other 
non-citrus fruits had been pulled. 
"It doesn't seem to me like something to be concerned about," said Maurice 
Smith as he walked out with a bag of strawberries and bananas, joking that it 
was "safe fruit." 
The FDA began checking Chilean imports earlier this month after an anonymous 
caller warned the U.S. Embassy in Chile that fruits being exported from that 
country had been poisoned. From March 2, when the call was made, until March 6, 
Chilean fruit was held up at entry ports by federal officials; but no sign of 
poison was found, so importing was resumed. 
Originally, FDA spokesman Bill Grigg said, "the State Department advised us 
that the call was very probably a hoax." But, after cyanide in the grape 
shipment was confirmed Sunday night, officials took the situation seriously. 
The amount of cyanide found in the two grapes was too little to cause illness 
even in a child, Grigg noted. The grapes each contained .003 milligrams of the 
poison. A dose of 25 milligrams is needed to harm an adult, with 200 milligrams 
enough to cause death. Injury to children can be caused at lower doses, 
however. 
Because cyanide deteriorates over time, FDA scientists warned that the original 
level of poison in the fruit may have been higher. The amount of poison, Grigg 
noted, could be higher in larger fruits, such as melons, or in less acidic 
fruits, because acidity causes the poison to break down more quickly. 
The two grapes found to be contaminated were both punctured and discolored with 
a ring of a crystalline material around the puncture mark, Grigg said. FDA 
inspectors spotted them among thousands of grapes in hundreds of crates in a 
Philadelphia warehouse. 
"If they had been turned the other way, they wouldn't have seen them," Grigg 
said. 
The FDA plans to impound and test Chilean fruit until officials are confident 
that the fruit is safe, Grigg said. But, because that essentially means having 
to prove a negative -- that there is no poison anywhere in the tons of fruit 
entering the country from Chile -- the effect may be to block all Chilean 
imports for the rest of this season, he said. 
"It's a difficult thing to prove," Grigg said. "We really don't have a lot of 
experience in this area." 
"A lot of (fruit) will sit out on the boats" while FDA laboratories sample and 
analyze it, Grigg said. 
The ban could represent a dramatic financial blow to the Chilean economy. Fruit 
exports have soared since the early 1980s, reaching $486.9 million in the first 
six months of 1988, which include the bulk of the growing season, and a total 
of $584.1 million for the entire year. 
Table grapes are by far Chile's most important fruit export, accounting for 
$280.8 million, followed by apples at $104.2 million, according to the Central 
Bank of Chile. 
Interior Minister Carlos Caceres said early today that thousands of Chilean 
families will be hurt by the ban. 
In an indication of the government's concern over the matter, all television 
and radio stations were required to broadcast Caceres' remarks shortly after 
midnight. 
He noted that the Americans themselves had said that the amounts of cyanide 
discovered would not be enough to injure even a child, and said the Chilean 
government does not share the U.S. decision to impound the fruit "but 
understands the concern over their population's health." 
Caceres said the government immediately reinforced security throughout the 
fruit production process, from the growing fields to the ports. He said a 
number of chemical tests had been conducted in recent hours and no 
abnormalities were discovered. 
For the last several weeks, the major import from Chile has been the popular 
seedless red flame grapes. But, with grape season nearly over, the focus will 
shift to tree fruits such as peaches, plums and nectarines. 
The next traditional source of supply for many of those varieties is 
California's Coachella Valley, where harvests will not begin coming in until 
May, De Lyser said. 
Staff writers John H. Lee and Hector Tobar in Los Angeles, and James F. Smith 
in Santiago, Chile, contributed to this story. 
