THE EASTERN BANKRUPTCY; 
THE LOYALISTS; 
A FEW STALWARTS STAY ON THE JOB 
To maintain the pressure in their war of nerves with Eastern Airlines, striking 
workers have been snapping photographs of Eastern shuttle flight crew members 
as they arrive at Boston's Logan Airport. 
But if the strikers' goal is intimidation, it has not worked on Capt. Walt 
Shivers. The exuberant veteran pilot taxied his plane in front of the strikers' 
telephoto lenses this week with a sign perched jauntily in his cockpit window: 
"Flying &amp; Love It." 
"We're not making friends of those people by being here," said Shivers, one of 
200 pilots still working since Eastern filed for bankruptcy court protection 
Thursday. "But this is the hard core." 
About 1,500 of Eastern's hardest-core employees have worked to keep the 
beleaguered airline's planes flying this week, enduring resentment, harsh words 
and even threats from the union mechanics and pilots with whom they have long 
worked side by side. The mechanics went out on strike a week ago, and most of 
the pilots have refused to cross the picket lines. 
Jobs at Eastern have not been easy since the airline flew into heavy weather a 
decade ago. The airline's mounting financial problems have forced pilots and 
flight attendants to give back a portion of their salaries and to work in an 
atmosphere often poisoned by acrimony between labor and management. 
But if some people think that deregulation and Frank Lorenzo, chairman of Texas 
Air, Eastern's parent company, have taken the fun out of the airline business, 
the Eastern loyalists who have kept working still think they have pretty good 
jobs. Many accept the company's assertion that radical cost cuts are necessary 
for the airline to survive and say the strike was the last thing Eastern 
needed. 
"When the union told them to go on strike, it was like Jim Jones trying to get 
his people to drink the poison Kool-Aid," said Shivers, who was interviewed 
during a layover at New York's La Guardia Airport. "We're not drinking it." His 
reference was to the mass suicide-execution of more than 900 religious cultists 
in Guyana in 1978. 
Outside the La Guardia terminal of Eastern's New York-Washington-Boston air 
shuttle, a picket line of striking mechanics and pilots stood in front of huge 
placards reading, "Save Eastern" and "Stop Lorenzo." A striker with a bullhorn 
was trying to persuade travelers on the flights -- with fares now cut to $12 -- 
that the planes were unsafe and the flight crews inexperienced. 
During 1986 labor trouble at Eastern, Shivers had an argument over the phone 
with another pilot, who he said threatened to "come down and get me." Since 
then, Shivers has kept a sawed-off shotgun at hand at his Miami home, 
illuminated his house with special lights at night and bought a guard dog. 
Shivers said he had a vigorous exchange of opinions with some strikers at the 
Atlanta airport the other day. He had ventured into the terminal's waiting area 
to buy a pack of cigarettes, trying to hide his identity from the strikers by 
putting a wind breaker over his pilot's uniform. 
But they may have noticed his regulation black trousers and shoes, for he was 
soon surrounded by three angry flight attendants and a half-dozen pilots. 
Still, "it was all very civil," Shivers said. 
He regrets that the strike has probably hurt his relations permanently with 
other union pilots. "I know I'll probably never be able to sit in the jump seat 
of another union carrier," he said, referring to the cockpit seats where 
off-duty pilots are sometimes allowed to travel as a courtesy. 
Another working pilot, Capt. Steve Glasgow, had to ask Eastern to provide a 
security guard for his home in Charlotte, N.C., because of the reaction some 
colleagues have had to his outspoken anti-strike opinions. For about a year, 
Glasgow has mailed out a newsletter called "Pilots With Another View" to get 
across his opinion that the Air Line Pilots Assn. has been pursuing the wrong 
strategy. 
Glasgow said he and his wife have received a number of vaguely threatening 
anonymous calls, including one in which the caller told his wife, "We know your 
husband's away and that you're alone." 
Glasgow, a 22-year Eastern veteran, said of his fellow non-strikers, "I'm proud 
of the people who are here today." 
The Eastern loyalists recount how the periodic flare of labor troubles has been 
making their jobs harder for a long time. 
Flight attendant Ann Roever joined the airline in 1961 after graduating from 
college, turning down a number of teaching jobs. She had been on the job only 
six months when a strike caused the airline to abruptly uproot her from Chicago 
to New York. 
Since then, said Roever, who continues to work during the strike, "it seems 
like there have been so many labor problems." Among them have been slowdowns in 
which pilots intentionally fell behind schedule and job actions where ground 
crews would leave full planes stranded on runways, or leave unloaded baggage on 
the tarmac. 
But recently, the problems have gotten worse. "Eventually, you're just crisised 
out," Roever said. 
