THE ATHLETE OF THE FUTURE; 
HOW SPORTS SCIENTISTS ARE HARNESSING THE MECHANICS OF MOTION, THE CHEMISTRY OF 
STRENGTH AND THE POWER OF THE MIND 
A RESEARCH SUBJECT NAMED Orel Hershiser appears on a movie screen in an 
Inglewood laboratory. Hershiser is pitching the ball for the sake of science, 
so rather than Dodger Blue he wears only a baseball glove, shorts, socks, shoes 
and an array of electrodes and wires. As he throws, the upper body that looks 
slightly skinny on the mound is remarkably muscular and fluid. He uncoils and 
explodes across the screen in slow motion -- frame by frame -- hands, wrists, 
arms, trunks, hips and legs flowing together in perfect synchronization as he 
winds up and lets the baseball go. 
Three 16-millimeter move cameras are filming front, side and overhead views of 
the pitch at 500 frames per second. On an 8-foot-high console, 2,000-foot reels 
of 1/4-inch magnetic tape record microprocessed signals from every twitch of 
Hershiser's muscles. An oscilloscope's electrical wave traces his muscular 
activity, and a printer simultaneously spews out a copy of the image appearing 
on the scope. An electronics technician intently monitors the performance of 
these data-collection devices. 
Hershiser's cooperation with the scientists at Centinela Hospital Medical 
Center is helping define the path of athletic excellence to come. On film and 
on an electrical-energy graph, Hershiser is part of a study of human movement 
that seeks to enable doctors to understand how muscles function -- and 
malfunction. The information they're gaining could allow them to diagnose and 
treat injuries without surgery, and ultimately help prevent sports injuries. 
It's just one of the experiments being conducted in biochemistry, biomechanics, 
psychology and even genetics that may change the way American athletes are 
trained, treated and expected to perform in the next century. 
Surprisingly, in this country, "the whole idea that science has something to do 
with the performance of athletes is new," says Dr. Harmon Brown, chairman of 
sports medicine and science for the Athletic Congress, the governing body for 
track and field in the United States. Americans, he says, have been slow to 
accept the idea of sports as a legitimate focus for research. The Soviets 
pioneered the field before the 1952 Olympics, traveling around the world to 
film outstanding athletes and study their training programs. Then, in 1952, 
instead of copying what they had seen, they began designing their own research. 
The results were dramatically apparent in the 1972 Summer Olympic Games, when 
Soviet athletes, who just four years before had won 29 gold medals to the 
United States' 45, came away with 50 gold medals, besting the Americans' 33. 
Equally striking was the improvement of the East German team, which won nine 
gold medals in 1968 but took home 20 in 1972 and 40 in 1976. That showing 
helped jolt Congress into passing the Amateur Sports Act of 1978, giving the 
U.S. Olympic Committee the authority to fund research and create an 
organization to raise money for scientific support programs and research 
committees. 
As the fledgling U.S. sports-research program begins to bear fruit, it is 
changing the shape and psyches of American athletes, who are feeling increasing 
pressure to turn to sports science not for the quick fix of steroids and 
illegal performance enhancers but for safe, sophisticated ways to reach their 
potential. What follows is a sampling of the ideas and experiments that could 
help create the American sports superstars of the next generation. 
The Mechanics of Motion 
THE SCIENCE of biomechanics is based on observation. Watch the body perform a 
movement, analyze that motion and use the findings to adjust the next 
performance. Increasingly, scientists and coaches are using advanced technology 
to observe activity that is not readily visible to the eye, breaking a single 
motion into finer and finer parts and, theoretically, perfecting it. In coming 
decades, experts say, they'll be watching athletes move from the inside out. 
Biomechanical computer analysis established its place in sports training when 
the United States women's volleyball team won its first Olympic medal, a 
silver, in 1984. Head coach Arie Selinger gave much of the credit to Gideon 
Ariel, a Coto de Caza biomechanics expert and computer specialist. Using 
computer technology he developed in 1968 when he "married WordStar to 'Rocky,' 
" Ariel converted videotape images into colored stick-figure-type drawings that 
move in three dimensions. The simple images on the computer screen allowed 
Selinger and Ariel to see what a trained human eye missed: the precise angle of 
the players' joints as they jumped, served, blocked and spiked. Movement of the 
joints is a clue to the workings of the muscles, showing which muscles are 
working the hardest and pinpointing possible weaknesses. Selinger and Ariel 
used the computer data to adjust the team's training programs and, Ariel says, 
to make medalists of what might have been a 15th-place team. 
Such computer models are being used to answer specific questions -- for 
example, how far do a competitor's hips move above the hurdles during a race? 
That information might tell a coach that the athlete needed to lower his lead 
leg to clear the barrier more efficiently. It cannot, however, reveal exactly 
what is happening in the body. Providing that internal view is the next phase 
of sports biomechanics. The Hershiser study, which analyzes and compares the 
movements of seven professional and six amateur pitchers, is part of the 
attempt. 
The Centinela scientists record not only a slow-motion visual image of 
Hershiser but also a map of the electrical impulses produced by his shoulder 
muscles from windup to follow-through. An active muscle will "fire" -- transmit 
an impulse -- frequently. A muscle that is working less hard, perhaps because 
of weakness or injury, fires less frequently. Once scientists know how the 
muscles fire when one of the best pitchers in baseball history throws a ball -- 
and exactly which muscles are used in pitching -- they can use that model to 
help treat pitchers who are injured or in pain. By contrasting Hershiser's 
graph and those of other healthy pitchers with one produced when an injured 
pitcher throws, they can pinpoint the site of an injury by spotting muscles 
that aren't firing as a healthy muscle would. This will allow them to spot an 
injury long before surgery is necessary. 
The no-pain, no-gain maxim applies in the lab as well as in the gym: Before the 
film is shot, a lab technician uses long, hollow needles as thick as toothpicks 
to inject fine nickel-chromium wires into eight sites in the pitcher's 
shoulder. At each site, a 22-inch-long wire is carried by the needle directly 
into the belly of the muscle, as far as an inch deep. (There is a cot in a 
corner of the room for those who faint during the process.) The technician 
gently pulls out the needles, but the wires remain. For a few seconds, the 
muscle aches -- "it feels like a charley horse," says lab director Marilyn Pink 
-- until the wires find a comfortable place to lodge. Once they do, they act as 
antennae, conducting signals to a radio transmitter Hershiser wears on a belt. 
The transmitter amplifies the signals and broadcasts them to an antenna across 
the room, which relays them to a receiver on the computer console. Every muscle 
twitch is recorded on tape, then appears as a glowing green jagged line on the 
oscilloscope screen. High, frequent peaks on the screen show the firing of the 
most active muscles; smoother sections with lower, less frequent peaks show 
when muscle activity is winding down or impaired. 
"If you combine the patterns we get from the computer screen with the 
high-speed film, you can see how the muscles are interacting with each other," 
says Robert Gregor, an associate professor of kinesiology at UCLA who conducts 
high-speed film research on college athletes. "We can slow it down 
tremendously, and this allows you to go through the parts of the movement, 
quantify it and provide any analysis that might be helpful in strengthening and 
rehabilitating." The goal: to be able to give athletes a kind of "instant 
replay" analysis so that they can make immediate adjustments in technique and 
training. The Dodgers are using the results of the recently completed pitching 
study to tailor injury-preventing conditioning programs, says Bill Buhler, 
Dodger head trainer. 
Ariel hopes to give added scope to movement analysis by using holograms, 
three-dimensional laser images. Sitting in his office, he envisions a scenario 
from the 1990s: "If I want to see Carl Lewis jumping right on this table now, 
using laser technology, I could push a button and he will jump. I will look at 
it again and again. I will stop him in the air. Then I will take my jumper and 
I will superimpose him and I will see where there is a difference." Ariel adds 
that while his two holographic jumpers are leaping across a table-top, a 
computer will analyze information such as the strength of each jumper's takeoff 
leg; how high each raises his arms and legs, and how altering technique would 
change the performance. He may discover that if his jumper improved his leg 
strength by 10% he could outjump the champion. Combined with electrical data on 
muscle functioning, such 3-D analysis could take the guesswork out of training. 
The Chemistry of Strength 
AS ARIEL AND HIS PEERS search for ways to quantify and perfect the movements of 
tomorrow's high-performance athletes, biochemists are tracking the chemical 
mechanisms that underlie strength and motion. For some athletes, the chemical 
key to improved performance has been anabolic steroids. But the Ben Johnson 
scandal -- which blew the lid off a system in which coaches look the other way 
or help athletes break the law -- along with new evidence of harmful side 
effects casts some doubt on how long that will continue. Michael Yessis, an 
exercise physiologist and a professor of physical education at Cal State 
Fullerton who edits and publishes Soviet Sports Review, a quarterly magazine 
that publishes translations of Soviet sports medicine, says the Soviets already 
have reduced their use of steroids, not because of drug testing but because 
they have found that the drugs cause injuries. "They found out that, yes, 
steroids are effective for getting bigger and stronger muscles, but the muscle 
grows so fast the ligament and tendon can't keep up with it," he says. The 
muscle stresses connective tissues to the breaking point. 
"If you have a high-level athlete, you don't want to expose him to something 
that could ruin his career very quickly," Yessis says. For that reason, it's 
likely that athletes of the future will be seeking strength on very different 
chemical pathways. Doctors at the USOC are particularly interested in the 
question of how to fuel a super-athlete. "We see nutrition as probably the main 
area of performance enhancement," says Dr. Robert D. Voy, former chief medical 
officer of the USOC.. 
Although training tables and special diets long have been part of many American 
athletes' regimens, basic nutrition for the athlete is one of the least 
understood areas of sports science. "We continue to use nutritional research 
that was done in the '40s," says Ann Grandjean, director of the International 
Center for Sports Nutrition at the University of Nebraska Medical Center and 
chief nutritional consultant to the USOC. "That basically told us that if you 
have a person who is deficient, you can enhance his performance through proper 
nutrition." But once the deficiency has been treated, pumping nutrients into an 
athlete won't boost performance and may actually be harmful. 
So instead of striving to find a single superstar-producing supplement, 
researchers are concentrating on the basics: determining the precise 
nutritional needs of individual athletes. "We know that iron, say, is very 
important," says TAC's Brown, who acts as a sort of clearinghouse for research 
that affects track-and-field athletes. "But what about trace elements like 
copper and cadmium. What role do they play? What kind of deficiencies occur as 
a result of athletic training?" 
At the Beltsville Human Nutrition Research Center in Maryland, Helene N. 
Guttman, associate director of research, is overseeing experiments to find out. 
"We're working on projects that have to do with athletics and stress," she 
says. One recent study: "We did some experiments in which we saw the effect of 
copper deficiency on heart disease. Not enough copper in males would 
effectively make the heart explode if it was under any kind of stress. That's 
interesting in itself. But we've found that the relationship between two 
minerals that athletes sometimes take as supplements, zinc and copper, is 
critical. Pill pushers advise taking zinc supplements, but an excess of zinc 
interferes with the body's utilization of copper." And too little copper, added 
to the stress of an athletic event, could lead to dangerous -- even deadly -- 
copper deficiency. 
With such studies feeding into the nutrition research base, by 2000 it should 
be possible to determine exactly what each athlete needs in relation to the 
workout he or she is doing, Yessis says. One can envision a small computer set 
up at the training site. Once blood tests have established typical before- and 
after-workout levels of trace elements and other factors, such as hormones, 
amino acids and white and red blood cell counts, depleted during a typical 
workout the computer can calculate an athlete's needs and deficiencies can be 
instantly balanced. 
Ideally, computer models will work from data bases begun in infancy and will 
track the normal nutrient levels in the healthy athlete's body through his 
life, Guttman says. She envisions supplements that look more like food than 
pills -- a chromium-fortified apple, for example -- to help ensure that "what 
enters the mouth enters the metabolism in a usable form." 
Voy is certain that within the next decade, advances in nutrition "will have 
convinced (athletes) that a peak performance in sport can be gotten without the 
use of drugs. And it will be a lot safer and a lot longer lasting." Those who 
cling to a reliance on illegal substances as performance enhancers will be 
dissuaded from using them, Voy predicts, because "by the year 2000 I think we 
will have more sophisticated laboratory technology than we have now and it will 
be very easy for us to test athletes and control their use." 
Steroids may become passe for another reason: Researchers are zeroing in on the 
chemical processes that determine how much force muscles can produce. 
Eventually, they may be able to create steroidlike effects safely and legally 
with training alone. 
The key to muscle-building is a protein called myosin, which affects the 
muscle's ability to contract slowly or quickly, explains V. Reggie Edgerton, 
chairman of the UCLA kinesiology department. When a muscle has more of what is 
called slow myosin, it burns its fuel slower and contracts slowly. This type of 
myosin is associated with muscles involved in endurance events. Fast myosin 
creates powerful contractions that result in explosive movements needed for a 
floor routine in gymnastics or a 100-meter sprint. Currently, it is possible to 
increase the amount of slow myosin through training, but not the fast myosin. 
Gymnasts, it seems, are born, but long-distance cyclists can be made. And 
researchers such as Edgerton are trying to find out exactly what activity is 
needed to signal muscle cells to produce the kinds of myosin that will enable 
them to contract in ways that will enhance performance. 
"What we don't know is the specific chemical event that causes a gene to 
synthesize a given protein," Edgerton says. "Is it one type of exercise? 
Somehow, the (muscle activity) has to trigger a chemical to send a messenger to 
the cell to have it create the certain types of myosin. There is some 
mechanical /chemical link. If we knew what triggered certain types (of myosin), 
then we could design training programs." 
The Genetics of Champions 
IN NURSERIES of the next century, a young athlete's potential may be clear long 
before he can demonstrate it by hurling a block across the room or mastering 
motor skills more quickly than his peers. The process of spotting future 
champions, says Claude Bouchard, an exercise physiologist and anthropological 
geneticist at Laval University in Quebec, Canada, could begin with genetic 
testing at birth. "What we are doing is trying to find the genetic determinants 
that allow someone to adapt well to exercise," Bouchard says. "We are not 
talking about selective breeding, we are talking about identifying those who 
have the gene combination that shows a gifted athlete." 
Bouchard's ground-breaking research is focusing on the genes associated with 
the transformation of energy in the muscle, particularly the genes that are 
involved in replenishing adenosine triphosphate, or ATP. This substance is to 
the body what gasoline is to a car. It's the fuel that keeps humans running. 
The more effectively ATP is replenished, the more efficiently the human 
operates. In his labs, Bouchard and others have trained hundreds of what he 
refers to as "truly sedentary persons." His subjects have never taken part in 
sports or fitness activities. In fact, they rarely attended physical education 
classes in school. Bouchard put these individuals on a standardized, carefully 
monitored training program for several weeks. At the end of that time, he 
measured their maximum oxygen uptake, one way to determine how efficiently a 
person can replenish ATP. "We have found people who did not improve at all -- 
zero gain after 15 to 20 weeks of training. Others would improve by 100%," 
Bouchard says. 
Bouchard and his team call the zero-gain group "non-responders" and the others 
"high responders." "High responders are those very few, apparently very 
fortunate, who with exercise adapt very well, very rapidly, and they adapt a 
lot." These days, Bouchard is trying to discover the genetic markers that make 
a person a high responder, and he believes that in 20 years his team will have 
narrowed its focus to 10 to 20 genes. Not bad, he says, considering that it 
takes 50,000 genes to create a human. Individuals with these 10 to 20 genes 
have a much better chance of becoming good, even great, athletes, Bouchard 
says. "When you think about athletic performance, if when you train you improve 
your initial maximal oxygen uptake by 70% or 80%, it is going to have a lot to 
do with your interest in the sport and your desire to keep training. . . . 
Chances are the top athletes in the world are high responders," he says. "It 
will be impossible for us to tell that somebody will definitely achieve the 
elite status, but all the elite athletes will come from individuals who have 
these characteristics." 
The application of this research "is far down the line," he cautions. "Within 
10 years, we hope to have a battery of gene probes that will identify the genes 
associated with the gifted athlete. The probes are used to identify, but now 
only for a limited number of genes, the ones that we know are useful in certain 
movement. With that research, we can get the selected (children) into early 
training programs. I will not be involved with that, but it will take the form 
of channeling the motivation and the interest of the children so we have more 
chances to succeed." 
The Power of the Mind 
WITH ADVANCES in biology, chemistry and technology narrowing the differences 
among the bodies of athletes, increasing attention is being focused on their 
minds. "There is a world of muscular talent out there," says Ron Kendis, a UCLA 
sports psychologist, "but if the mental aspect is lacking, they don't perform 
to their highest level. It comes down to the mental toughness. Look at all the 
people who dove against (Olympic gold medalist Greg) Louganis. They were the 
best divers in the world. But he had not only the physical but the mental 
wherewithal to win over and over again, even after a setback. He has mastered 
the mental preparation. He could see himself at every phase of the dive from 
the takeoff to the splash. The mental aspect is the cutting edge." 
Sports psychology has only been around the United States as a gradu ate-level 
study for about 15 years, says Dorothy Harris, a pioneer in the field. She says 
research going on now will finally convince American coaches that this field is 
important. 
"Most of the research is being done on developing the ability to concentrate 
more effectively -- mental skills training," says David Yukelson, a sports 
psychologist for the athletic department at Pennsylvania State University and 
one of the few applied sports psychologists in the country. Right now, he says, 
"We can teach athletes how to refocus: not so much how to mentally prepare for 
competition, but how to stay composed during a game. If a pitcher has just 
thrown a perfect sinker that was hit over the fence for a grand slam, he needs 
to know how to let go of that. His next pitch has to be as relaxed and focused. 
That's building and maintaining the concentration skill." 
Researchers are also trying to understand visualization. In one study, Olympic 
skiers are connected to biofeedback equipment and trained to imagine traveling 
over a course. "They actually can get muscle activity as they take the course 
in their heads," Yukelson says. Eventually, mind and muscles know exactly what 
to expect at every turn and when to use certain energies. "They can plug into 
automatic pilot and move in the exact way we know will make them perform the 
best." 
Most intriguing, Yukelson says, is psychobiology: the body-mind connection. 
"It's the thing we know the least about and that can be the most helpful," he 
says. "If you look at champions in the Olympics, they report on being in a zone 
within a zone. Physiologically, the muscles are relaxed and fluid. Mentally, 
they are in a highly concentrative state; they are optimistic -- they are in a 
cocoon. But where are their brain waves at this state? We are working with 
getting an athlete into the alpha state. We don't know what that can mean to 
athletes, but that's what research is for. We'd like to know more about the 
brain waves of an athlete, and what gets them to that state, chemically and 
physically." 
Ideally, sports psychology will become as much a part of coaching as teaching 
new play patterns, Harris says. "A sport psychologist's time would be well 
spent working with coaches, who in turn could reach a lot more athletes." 
Putting It All Together 
DEVISING THE STUDIES, carrying them out and analyzing the data are just the 
first part of building the athlete of the future. Even when science 
concentrates on application -- such as Ariel's holograms or mapping the 
electrical firing of Hershiser's muscles -- there has to be a way to make the 
leap from research results to competition results. In this country, the liaison 
between scientists and athletes is first a coach and then, possibly, a team 
organization that also takes its cues from a coach. 
It's a system that often creates standout athletes, but it isn't a system that 
scientists think can create cutting-edge performances with any certainty or in 
any quantity, or make the best use of their research. "(Coaches) are scared of 
science and most of them shy away from it. They don't feel comfortable with it. 
And because of that they ignore what is going on in the labs," says geneticist 
Bouchard. Ariel and Yessis, as well as Bouchard, point to the fact that there 
are no standardized requirements for coaching, no assurance that coaches will 
even be marginally aware of sport sciences. "More than 80% of the coaches here 
have no training," Yessis says. "Look at the coaches in Little League and AYSO: 
It's parents." Virtually anyone with enthusiasm can get some sort of coaching 
job. "At the high school level, the coaches are English teachers and history 
teachers who might have a little background, but who need some extra money. 
College coaches are also mostly former players, but with no background in 
training and conditioning. Take (former UCLA basketball coach) John Wooden. 
What made him great? He was able to handle eight or 10 wild egos at one time. 
He focused on psyching the guys up for the big game and had them practice the 
best plays over and over. But it was all just based on his own experience. On 
the pro level, again many coaches come from the ranks of former players." 
It is a system, sports scientists say, that must be changed. "For (my) research 
to have any kind of effect on the field of sport performance, we are going to 
have to have almost a revolution in the people involved in the coaching field," 
Bouchard says. Ariel agrees. "(Coaches) cannot be just physical educators," 
says the man who has worked with U.S. Olympic coaches of track and field, 
handball and volleyball. "They have to have knowledge of physics, psychology, 
physiology." 
Ariel sees the computer as an antidote to the lack of scientifically trained 
coaches. He is beginning to collect information for his own sports data base, 
and he envisions extensive computer files crammed with the latest information. 
A coach will enter an athlete's age, weight, bone density, leg strength and 
recent sport performances, and the computer will tell the coach how the athlete 
should train to maximize his or her potential. This training plan will be based 
on data from similar athletes around the world. 
When scientists think about combining science and sports, however, they think 
in grander terms than simply improving the knowledge of the coaches. They talk 
longingly of the system of the Eastern Bloc nations. Nutrition specialist 
Grandjean remembers a conversation with an Eastern Bloc coach. "He told me that 
the U.S. has more information -- more computers, more scientists, more 
researchers than they do in his country. 'What you do not have,' he said, 'is a 
system to distribute that information. If I was told that my athletes had to 
eat peas to win, they would be eating peas in three days.' " 
Yessis says his surveys of Soviet research show that much of what the current 
U.S. research foreshadows is already reality in the Soviet Union. The Soviet 
and Eastern Bloc countries, Yessis says, train their coaches at government 
sports institutes with an emphasis on sports science. Coaches working with 
elite Soviet athletes must have been ranked athletes themselves and have 
completed postgraduate instruction in sports sciences. Many top researchers are 
former athletes. Nutrition evaluation, including frequent blood and urine 
testing, is as much a part of a Soviet athlete's routine as a warm-up jog. 
But most important, according to Yessis, the Soviets begin their 
athletictraining process by evaluating children psychologically and physically 
at a young age, and enrolling promising candidates in state schools where 
general education is combined with athletic training and where sports sciences 
can be applied and furthered. 
Yessis points to recent papers published in the Soviet Union about the use of 
high-intensity field currents to measure muscle fatigue. (The study was 
conducted on Olympic athletes and hopefuls.) The Soviets' system will allow any 
applications gleaned from the study to be easily disseminated. In this country, 
not only would athletes and coaches be unlikely to hear about the study and its 
results, but it also would be difficult to get athletes to interrupt their 
training to participate in this kind of experimentation. Robert Voy says what 
the Soviets have that the Americans don't is the "full attention of (the) 
athletes." 
None of the scientists think the Soviet system could or even should translate 
directly to the United States, where the tradition of individual effort is the 
norm, but all would like to apply some of the Soviet training techniques. 
Gideon Ariel is participating in a program started last year in Israel that he 
thinks shows the direction that would make U.S. athletics most successful. 
Ariel and a group of sports scientists he's chosen from a variety of East Bloc 
countries have identified sports in which Israeli athletes can be world 
dominant by 2000. One of those chosen was women's field hockey, Ariel says. 
Today in Israel, young girls who have excelled in sports such as volleyball are 
being tested for the movement skills needed for field hockey. "You begin with 
children who are 5 or 6 years old. You don't just play field hockey. You let 
them have gymnastics, swimming, resistance (weight) training and hockey. You 
teach them the mathematics of hockey-stick moves. All their lives they are 
learning everything from the point of view of field hockey." The team members 
will be well cared for, earning an education and financial security as 
repayment for the sacrifice required to be able to compete at the elite level. 
"We tried something like that in Colorado Springs for many years starting in 
1976," Ariel says. "But it didn't work, there was too much politics. And the 
results of the Olympics speak for themselves. For something like that to work 
here, it would have to be organized tightly -- the same way NASA would put 
someone on the moon." 
Yessis sees at least an evolution and expansion of privately run sports schools 
in this country, noting, for example, plans to build a large sports-training 
complex in Orange County in the next five years. Yessis predicts that these 
institutions will have individuals from all areas of sports science working 
with physically gifted children and their coaches. Children will combine their 
sports training with the rest of their education, as is done in the Soviet 
Union. The institutions will be expensive and probably elitist, but could point 
the way to making advanced training more available. 
Without such in-at-the-ground-floor programs, however, the trick to getting the 
full attention of the athlete may be through money. In 1981, the United States 
began to open its national teams to sponsorship and to allow athletes to earn 
money -- placed in a trust fund while they competed as "amateurs" -- from 
individual endorsements and even prize money. The leader in the process was the 
Athletic Congress, the governing body of track and field events. 
Although he sees an increasing centralization in the United States, Yessis 
believes that the way superstars are created here will be much the same way 
they have always been created: through the individual desire to win. That will 
bring coaches and athletes to science, as it does from time to time now, in 
search of the better techniques and the latest info. And their success will in 
turn propel the United States toward more and more centralized options that he 
sees as necessary to high performance. 
Already, he says, he is approached by parents asking him whether he can test 
their children to find out which sport is best for them. And in one case, 
Yessis is working with a coach and an athlete, trying to provide the sports 
science element in a training regimen. 
He has worked for five years with USC sophomore quarterback Todd Marinovich. 
Yessis met Marinovich and his father, former Oakland Raiders player and Los 
Angeles Rams scout Marv Marinovich, when Todd was 13. They have worked together 
since, applying Yessis' knowledge of biomechanics, exercise physiology and 
Soviet sports research to Todd's training. As a high school student at 
Capistrano Valley High School, Todd passed the football for 9,194 yards, more 
than any other high school quarterback in history. If he stays healthy and 
continues his march through the record books as a college quarterback, Yessis 
predicts that there's going to be greater interest from athletes, coaches and 
parents in what it takes to build a talent like Todd. 
"There are going to be coaches coming through, like a Marv Marinovich, who are 
going to be having outstanding athletes. Others will ask, 'Where did they come 
from? How come he's winning?' and then they will say to themselves, 'Maybe I 
have something to learn,' " Yessis says. 
Researcher Jill Gottesman also contributed to this report. 
