ACTIVISTS GET PARTIAL WIN IN MITSUI DISPUTE 
In a partial victory for consumer activist groups, the Federal Reserve Board 
said Wednesday that it may hold a public hearing on how well Mitsui Bank Ltd. 
and its California subsidiary serves the U.S. communities from which it takes 
its deposits. 
The decision comes months after more than 30 consumer groups protested Mitsui's 
proposed merger with Taiyo Kobe Bank Ltd. to become the world's largest bank. 
The protesters claimed Tokyo-based Mitsui and its Los Angeles-based subsidiary, 
Mitsui Manufacturers Bank, violated the 1977 federal Community Reinvestment Act 
(CRA) by engaging in "redlining," refusing to provide residential, commercial 
or consumer loans to blacks, Latinos and low-income people. 
The act requires bank regulators to examine whether a bank is meeting community 
credit needs when it seeks to acquire another bank. 
The ruling is the first time in California history that the federal agency has 
called for a hearing on a foreign-owned bank's community reinvestment 
activities here, said Robert Gnaizda, head of Public Advocates, a San Francisco 
public interest law firm and an attorney for the Greenlining Coalition, a group 
that challenged the merger. 
The Fed in effect is saying Mitsui's community reinvestment is "inadequate," 
Gnaizda said. "We are extremely pleased with the Federal Reserve's get-tough 
attitude," he said. 
The Fed said it had no jurisdiction over approving the merger of Mitsui and 
Taiyo Kobe, because both are based in Japan. However, the Fed did approve an 
application by a merged Mitsui and Taiyo Kobe to acquire Taiyo Kobe's New 
York-based trust company. 
Jerry W. Johnston, president of Mitsui Manufacturers, said: "We are quite 
confident that our CRA record . . . will be seen by the board." 
Mitsui Manufacturers is currently developing a plan that details how it meets 
community needs. This plan, if it shows community reinvestment activities that 
are deemed adequate by the Fed, presumably could result in a cancellation of 
the hearing. 
