FOOD AND COMMON SENSE: WINTER AND ALCOHOL DON'T ALWAYS MIX WELL TOGETHER, SO BE 
CAREFUL 
You've been on the slopes for hours, and it's time to head back to the lodge. 
Once you get in and get your gear off, you decide to have a good stiff drink to 
warm up before dinner. 
What's wrong with this picture? Alcohol does make us feel warm, and who can 
forget the image of the faithful Saint Bernard reviving stranded skiers with a 
cask of Cognac? 
But, in truth, that dog might do better carrying hot cocoa rather than Cognac. 
Winter and alcohol aren't always a healthy mix, and the warming effects of 
alcohol are purely illusory. The flush in the cheeks that it produces results 
from dilation of blood vessels in the skin. The net effect is not body warming 
but a loss of body heat. 
Of course, at appropriate times and in reasonable quantities, alcohol can be 
pleasant and safe. But it's important to understand how it acts in the body. 
Unlike foods, which must be digested before being absorbed, alcohol enters the 
bloodstream intact. Since it's absorbed from both stomach and small intestine, 
the presence of food can provide a barrier, slowing absorption and moderating 
physiological effects. 
Once in the blood, alcohol circulates through the body. Some enters the brain, 
where it acts as a central nervous system depressant. The first brain functions 
to be affected are reason and judgment, deluding us into feeling invincible. 
Thus, a drinker on the slopes -- as well as on a highway -- is a menace both to 
himself and to others. If alcohol intake continues, motor skills deteriorate. 
When levels climb high enough, alcohol has an anesthetic effect, which may be 
followed by respiratory failure and death. 
Drinking needn't produce such dire consequences as long as consumption doesn't 
exceed the liver's ability to metabolize, or detoxify, the alcohol. A healthy 
adult can metabolize only a single ounce of pure alcohol each hour. This 
approximates the amount in a shot of hard liquor, a glass of wine, or a bottle 
of beer. Nothing -- not coffee, vitamins or exercise -- can speed this 
metabolic process. 
Gulping alcoholic drinks, rather than sipping them, produces a stupor. But 
intoxication, even if only occasional, can affect more than just behavior. The 
liver, pancreas and intestines become acutely inflamed. Nutrients, such as 
amino acids and certain vitamins and minerals, may not be absorbed normally. 
Others are not converted to forms the body needs. 
Fat accumulates in the liver and, over time, can contribute to cirrhosis, or 
scarring, a life-threatening disorder. Levels of fat in the blood may also 
rise, while blood glucose levels often fall. Add to this the fact that heavy 
drinking frequently replaces nourishing foods, and it can spell nutritional 
havoc. 
The kidneys are also affected by alcohol, losing their ability to control water 
balance. This can lead to dehydration and retention of excess uric acid that, 
in turn, can precipitate gout in sensitive individuals. 
When athletes drink, the effects can be disastrous. Alcohol not only impairs 
motor skills, raising chances of injury, but the low blood sugar and 
dehydration that drinking produces can severely limit endurance. Performance 
may be affected still further by the shift in metabolism needed to process the 
alcohol. Buildup of lactic acid may occur. Although a normal by-product of 
intense exercise, high lactic-acid levels can contribute to muscle pain and 
soreness. Clearly, an athlete who has been drinking cannot perform at his best, 
although his judgment may be too impaired to realize it. 
Pregnant women -- and women who are attempting to get pregnant -- should also 
avoid alcohol. The risk of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, including physical birth 
defects, mental retardation and behavior problems, is greatest in children born 
to mothers who drink heavily. But even moderate consumption could be risky, 
especially early in pregnancy. 
Not everyone is an athlete or pregnant or a heavy drinker. Even so, alcohol 
does translate into empty calories. With seven calories per gram, it has almost 
as many as fat (which has nine per gram) and nearly twice as many as 
carbohydrates and proteins, which both have four. And alcohol calories contain 
little else. Usually, any vitamin and minerals in the drink come from what's 
been added to the alcohol, such as orange juice. Most mixers are also high in 
empty calories, containing substantial amounts of sugar and very little real 
fruit juice. 
While it may seem that a daily beer, martini or glass of wine poses little 
threat to the waistline, keep in mind that just the extra 85 to 140 calories 
per day can mean nine to 15 pounds in a year. And in small doses, alcohol may 
stimulate the appetite. That's fine if you want to gain a few pounds. But if 
you're trying to avoid adding extra weight, it can sabotage efforts. 
Frozen or Canned Vegetables: OK to Buy the Least Expensive 
Question: My friend and I are having a friendly argument about whether canned 
or frozen vegetables are superior. We're both along in years and living on 
limited incomes. I take the position of buying what's least expensive: canned 
vegetables. She sticks with frozen whenever possible, because they're richer in 
vitamins and minerals. Who's correct? 
Answer: You are. Price, taste and sometimes special dietary considerations go 
into the decision about whether to buy canned or frozen vegetables. Also, the 
practical matter of whether there's room in the freezer can figure in. 
Nutrients are lost as produce is processed either by freezing or canning. Any 
differences in vitamin and mineral content between the two are too small to be 
significant. You should keep in mind, though, that once you get the product 
home, you can affect its nutrient content by using proper handling techniques 
in the kitchen. Chief among these are using only a minimum of water and cooking 
frozen vegetables just until done. 
Q: During my first pregnancy I had terrible morning sickness. In anticipation 
of having another baby, I'd like to know whether there's any new dietary advice 
about measures to control the problem. 
A: Not really. For some people, several time-honored suggestions do seem to 
help minimize, if not eliminate, the symptoms of morning sickness. One is to 
eat a few dry crackers before getting out of bed. Second, some women seem to 
tolerate several small meals better than three large ones. Taking liquids a 
half-hour before or after -- but not with -- meals also may help. Avoiding 
fried foods and cutting back on fat in general, avoiding spicy foods and such 
strongly flavored vegetables as cabbage, broccoli, turnips and onions all are 
recommended as measures that can offer relief. But the best antidote is a 
little time. 
Fortunately, for those women who are vulnerable to it, the nausea and vomiting 
often begin to subside after about the 12th week of pregnancy. The main point, 
of course, is that while the discomfort during early pregnancy can curtail your 
normal intake, it's important to resume as soon as possible a diet to meet not 
only your own nutrient needs but those of the developing baby. 
Q: Our family agrees on very few vegetables besides broccoli, which we all 
love. I know it's rich in beta carotene and contains other compounds linked to 
decreased risk of cancer. These are great features, but does it provide other 
nutrients as well? 
A: Your family picked a winner, because broccoli is a nutritionally potent 
vegetable -- and a tasty one too. Government studies show that consumption is 
rising across the nation as more and more Americans come to appreciate broccoli 
for its flavor, as well as its contributions to nutrient needs. 
As you point out, it does contain considerable beta carotene, whose bright 
orange color is masked by the chlorophyll. In fact, a medium stalk provides 
nearly enough to meet the day's requirement for Vitamin A. While we don't tend 
to think of vegetables as sources of protein, the same stalk has nearly six 
grams, almost as much as an ounce of meat, making it one of the strongest 
vegetable sources. True, the quality is not equivalent to that in meat, but if 
eaten as part of a mixed meal, other foods can provide the amino acids it 
lacks, allowing the body to use it efficiently. 
Broccoli has still other assets. It's an exceptionally good source of Vitamin 
C; it provides a number of B vitamins, and it's one of the best non-dairy 
sources of calcium. All that, and a single stalk has just 50 calories. 
Broccoli does not take kindly to overcooking, which may explain its lack of 
popularity in some households. To avoid overcooking and at the same time 
conserve nutrients and flavor, stand it upright in about an inch of boiling 
water, cover the pot and let it cook for about 10 minutes, until barely done. 
