ASSEMBLY PANEL BACKS 5-CENT HIKE IN GAS TAX 
A proposed 5-cent increase in the state's gasoline tax survived its first 
legislative test Tuesday, winning overwhelming approval in the Assembly 
Transportation Committee. 
The committee endorsed the measure by Chairman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) and 
Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco) in an 11-1 vote, although several 
committee members indicated that some controversial provisions would have to be 
altered before they could vote for it on the Assembly floor. It now moves to 
the Assembly Ways and Means Committee. 
The bill, which requires approval by a two-thirds majority in both legislative 
houses, calls for substantial increases in gasoline taxes and truck weight fees 
to finance a 10-year, $21.5-billion program to upgrade the state's overburdened 
transportation system. 
It would hike the state gasoline tax by 5 cents and truck weight fees by 30% 
initially and then continue to increase the fees and the tax every two years 
for the next decade according to a formula based on the rate of inflation. By 
the year 2000, transportation analysts estimate, the state's 9-cents per gallon 
gas tax would rise to 24 cents per gallon. 
"This $20 billion over the next 10 years is not going to solve all the problems 
(but) it . . . will go a long way to getting us off the dime and getting us 
into the next century in far better shape than sitting on our duffs and doing 
nothing," Katz said. 
The committee vote on the bill generally followed party lines, although one 
Republican, Assemblywoman Bev Hansen (R-Santa Rosa), cast her ballot with the 
majority. The single vote in opposition came from Assemblyman Charles 
Quackenbush (R-Saratoga). Several members who were present did not vote. 
Katz will need support from the ranks of the Assembly's 33 Republicans to win a 
two-thirds majority on the floor. 
Assemblyman William P. Baker (R-Danville) said there is strong support among 
Republicans for transportation improvements. But he predicted that a major 
problem will be to get lawmakers to look beyond the concerns of their own 
districts. 
"We're going to have north and south splits and urban and rural splits. We're 
going to have every split you can find. Everybody's going to have to give up 
something before we can achieve that goal (to improve transportation)," he said 
afterward. 
In the committee debate, Baker, took issue with a key provision in the bill 
requiring cities and counties to reduce urban congestion by 5% each year for 
five years to be eligible for additional money for local street and road 
maintenance. 
He said the provision would penalize those areas with the severest traffic and 
growth problems and probably ensure that Los Angeles, for example, would be 
excluded "from getting into this pot." 
"I guess that's the difference between you and me," Katz said. "I'm willing to 
make Los Angeles take the heat for reducing congestion as part of getting their 
money." 
Katz said later that he would not compromise on the provision but that he did 
expect to accede to Republican demands for efficiency reforms within the state 
Department of Transportation. Many have complained that the department is 
overstaffed and that too much transportation money is being devoted to 
administration. 
The measure also faces another roadblock that was not debated by the committee 
-- Republican Gov. George Deukmejian's opposition to any gas tax increase that 
does not require voter approval. 
Although Katz's measure would not require voter approval, the voters would have 
to change the Gann amendment, a spending limit approved in a 1979 statewide 
election and named after anti-tax crusader Paul Gann, before any of the new 
money could be spent. Democrats and Republicans agree that the limit as now 
written would prevent spending any transportation funds raised by new gas taxes 
or truck weight fee increases. 
A "summit" called by the governor to discuss transportation issues is expected 
to consider the gas tax issue and the voter approval question at its final 
meeting later this month. 
Brown, the Assembly Speaker, said many of the businessmen invited to the 
"summit" have lost hope of reaching a compromise with Deukmejian, but "I am not 
that pessimistic." 
"I am hopeful that we can, in fact, produce a gas tax increase. 
