MOVIE REVIEW; 
'TROOP': THE RICH WERE NEVER THIS LOVABLE 
In "Troop Beverly Hills" (citywide), Shelley Long plays the Beverly Hills ditz 
as secular saint. Her hair is a flaming mass of just-out-of-bed baby-doll salon 
curls, her eyes twinkle with elfin lust. After a while, dipped into one 
cheerfully grotesque Theodora Van Runkle costume after another, she looks both 
nutty and scrumptious, like a human fruit fondue. 
Long is cast as Phyllis Nefler: a Beverly Hills housewife with a name that 
vaguely suggests "Double Indemnity" and a mania for Rodeo Drive shopping. 
Phyllis' muffler-salesman husband (Craig T. Nelson) is leaving her in disgust 
and her daughter is part of a notorious troop of failed scouts, or "Wilderness 
Girls," whom Phyllis, in another attack of dilettantism -- like her former 
enthusiasms for saving whales or Jane Fonda's workouts -- has agreed to head. 
If you know the rules of this kind of movie game, you know immediately that: 
a) Phyllis' girls will be eccentric but lovable, cutie-pie cliches just like 
Phyllis herself. 
b) Phyllis will take them on eccentric but lovable adventures, shot in pricey 
locales. 
c) Phyllis will have an opposing martinet (Betty Thomas as the insidious butch 
madwoman Velda Plendor), who will stop at nothing to humiliate her and drive 
her girls out of the Wilderness. 
Also: 
d) Everybody will wind up loving Phyllis to pieces and loving her girls to 
pieces, and everyone's family problems -- including the dictator's daughter -- 
will get straightened out and, more than likely, Phyllis will wind up back 
again with her husband, who will love her to pieces too. (Love. Ain't it 
wonderful!) 
e) Hopefully, we in the audience, would-be Wilderness Girls or not, will emerge 
happier, wiser and, like Phyllis, ready for the next shopping spree. 
f) While all this is going on, and while the speedy, gorgeous Shelley is 
zipping and stripping from one Van Runkle creation to the next (What a mad, 
whirling little fashion dervish she is!) we will be forced to see and hear more 
bad jokes than we would have thought humanly possible. 
What can you say about a movie that purports to satirize, however gently, the 
life styles of the rich and jaded, and winds up dragging in Robin Leach, Pia 
Zadora and a charity fashion show? What about a high concept which wants us to 
react to these super-rich children as if they were waifs besieged by an evil 
world of K mart-crazed bullies and sadists? What market researcher dreamed up 
this mix of lewd slapstick and smarmy sentimentality? Are we really expected to 
reflect on poignant pauses in the acting career of Edd (Kookie) Byrnes? Wonder 
what preposterous new gown lissome Long will peel into next? 
Part of this movie is like a sermon against greed delivered by a preacher in a 
snakeskin tuxedo with a diamond-studded cummerbund. Do we believe his oratory 
or his couturier? 
"Troop Beverly Hills" has been very gaudily well-dressed -- by Van Runkle and 
Hitchcock's frequent production designer Richard Boyle -- and director Jeff 
Kanew ("Revenge of the Nerds") gives it a little phony gloss and zip. Kanew is 
good at grotesque stage business, and he's encouraged Long into a symphony of 
dizzy ditz-shtick. Long is an actress who can't throw away a line -- though 
this is one case where she should have thrown away the whole script. But she 
gets points for sheer, daffy energy and rampaging pulchritude. 
On the other hand, Mary Gross, who recently has been amusing in movies where 
almost everyone else seemed to be sinking in a sea of flop sweat ("The Couch 
Trip," "Feds") has been handed a tailor-made Mary Gross part, but with no 
jokes. It's a technical challenge you wouldn't wish on Meryl Streep; Gross is 
finally reduced to showing off her cleavage in a pink tutu, while Long does 
bellyflops in the swimming pool. 
"Troop Beverly Hills" (rated PG, despite much bawdy innuendo) was based 
partially on the reminiscences of its producer, Ava Ostern Fries, once a 
chi-chi scoutmaster herself. This revelation gives you pause. Are people in 
Beverly Hills living in the middle of a badly written movie? Maybe not; maybe 
they only remember it that way. 
'TROOP BEVERLY HILLS' 
A Columbia Pictures release of a Weintraub Entertainment Group presentation of 
a Fries Entertainment and Avanti Production. Producer Ava Ostern Fries. 
Director Jeff Kanew. Script Pamela Norris, Margaret Grieco Oberman. Executive 
producer Charles Fries. Music Randy Edelman. camera Donald E. Thorin. Editor 
Mark Melnick. Production design Robert F. Boyle. Costume design Theodora Van 
Runkle. With Shelley Long, Craig T. Nelson, Betty Thomas, Mary Gross. 
Running time: 1 hour, 45 minutes. 
MPAA rating: PG (parental guidance suggested; some material may not be suitable 
for children). 
