DISNEY NO-AD POLICY IN MOVIE THEATERS SPARKS NEW DEBATE 
The Walt Disney Co. may have instituted a new no on-screen advertising policy 
with its release last Friday of "Pretty Woman," but it doesn't mean ads are 
going to disappear from the theaters. 
Disney's policy has ignited a debate in the film industry -- one that has set 
Disney apart from the seven other major studios, divided the ranks of movie 
chain operators between those who show ads and those who don't and set up a 
gray area for the theaters that will continue to show ads, but only in front of 
non-Disney movies. 
Then there are the exceptions to the Disney rule, like slides that are 
projected on screens before the lights go down or for theaters which have 
pre-existing advertising contracts that must run their course. 
Beyond those, there is the question of what constitutes an on-screen ad? Are 
they the slides shown on screens before the lights go down? The spots for 
Coca-Cola or the Los Angeles Times that precede a feature film? The previews of 
coming attractions? The casually placed Sony TV or Chevrolet Camaro or trip to 
Walt Disney World that may find their way into the storyline of a movie? 
One theater chain representative, speaking on the condition that he not be 
named, asked: "Where do you draw the line? If you restrict ads from the screen, 
do you also restrict ads in the lobbies? And what about those subtle plugs you 
see for products in the movies themselves?" 
Richard Cook, president of Disney's Buena Vista Pictures Distribution, makes a 
distinction between ads for products and ads for other movies -- usually known 
as trailers or previews. "Audiences want to see trailers. It's a welcome 
addition to the experience," he said. "(The difference is) you're talking about 
motion pictures to moviegoers." 
Cook said his office received "hundreds and hundreds" of calls and letters of 
support from the ticket-buying public in the days after Disney announced the 
new policy to exhibitors gathered last month in Las Vegas for the ShoWest 
convention. "We had five boxloads of letters," said Cook, adding that all you 
have to do to gauge an audience's feelings about ads is to sit in a theater 
with them and listen to them hiss. 
Disney is in a strong position right now to enforce its policy, exhibitors and 
others in the business agree. The studio has an apparently strong slate of 
upcoming films, and commercials were only being shown in about half of the 
nation's estimated 23,000 first-run theaters anyway. 
But despite the huge public support for Disney's position, the studio isn't 
exactly leading a charge. None of the other seven major studios has spoken out 
against in-theater advertising, and when contacted by The Times for this story, 
none was anxious to throw in with Disney. 
"I applaud (the policy) as a consumer," said 20th Century Fox marketing and 
distribution chief Tom Sherak. "But it's not up to me to tell them (theater 
owners) that they should or shouldn't do it. It has to come from the patronage. 
Exhibitors should sit in their theaters and see what the public sees. They 
might see that they might be hurting themselves in the long run." 
Cook says the realities of the market will ultimately determine the fate of 
screen advertising. With theater admissions relatively static for the last 10 
years, it cannot afford to risk erosion by giving them something they clearly 
don't want. In some parts of the country, he says, audiences are having to sit 
through 8 to 10 minutes of commercials before the feature begins. 
Privately, some of Disney's distribution rivals call the no-ads policy a 
blatant public relations ploy. The move was also seen by some industry 
observers as a well-aimed volley in Disney's increasingly public feud with 
MCA-Universal. 
MCA owns a 50% non-controlling interest in Toronto-based Cineplex Odeon, the 
second-largest theater chain in North America. In most of its 1,930 theaters, 
the chain shows commercials. 
Jo Mira Clodman, Cineplex vice president of corporate communications, confirmed 
that among the ads shown on Cineplex screens -- even those showing Disney 
movies -- are those for the relatively new Universal Studios Florida theme 
park, a direct rival to the nearby Walt Disney World complex. 
Cook, in response to a question about the timing of the Disney policy, said, 
"The impetus was not any one ad in particular." He said it is the concept of 
screen advertising that is the issue. 
The lone exception to Disney's policy is the use of slide ads shown during 
intermissions. In addition to plugs for the local car wash and video store, the 
"pre-screening" slides include public service announcements, trivia games and 
promotions. Cook says Disney's policy doesn't kick in until the lights go down 
and the movie-going experience begins, so slides are fine. 
Because of pre-existing contracts, some people seeing "Pretty Woman" over the 
weekend may have seen commercials. Disney could not say how many of the 1,325 
theaters where "Pretty Woman" is booked had such contracts. But when those 
contracts expire, it's a new, commercial-free game in Disney's world. 
Last week, the nation's largest theater chain, the 2,700-screen Denver-based 
United Artists Theater Circuit, announced it will go along with the Disney 
advertising ban, but only on the screens where Disney films are shown. 
As for the bulk of the United Artist theaters where Disney films are not shown, 
John Neal, vice president of communications for parent company United Artists 
Entertainment, said the theaters will continue to show ads for Coca-Cola, which 
it has been running since January. The United Artist chain, which sells Coke 
products, and the soft drink maker have an advertising arrangement, and the 
Coke ads are the only ones that United Artist theaters show on a national 
basis. However, Neal added, local United Artist managers may make private 
contracts for local advertising, such as with The Times. 
A few weeks after the Disney announcement, Cook confirmed that he met with 
representatives of the Los Angeles Times about the newspaper's on-screen 
promotions that are shown on about 1,000 screens throughout Los Angeles and 
Orange counties. Cook said a Times request for an exception was denied. 
"You can't make exceptions. We're not talking about the quality of commercials, 
rather the idea of having the commercials in front of movies." 
Cook notes that longstanding contracts between The Times and theater chains 
will keep the newspaper's ads on many screens where Disney films are shown for 
the immediate future. 
The Times and theaters have had an arrangement for years -- 40 years in some 
cases -- that provides theater owners with a discount on the rates they pay for 
movie listings. Unnamed chain sources were quoted in a recent Daily Variety 
story estimating their savings from the Times trade-out at about $2 million a 
year. 
A Times spokeswoman, Donna Freed, confirmed that the newspaper had sought an 
exception from Disney for the 30-second ads. "We feel the trailers are in 
keeping with the entertainment. It's not a hard sell," Freed added. 
