ONLY IN L.A. / PEOPLE AND EVENTS 
"Earthquake -- The Big One" suffered a minor disaster, and it wasn't one that 
Universal Studios Tour had planned. 
Refunds were given to 600 visitors who missed the simulated 8.3-magnitude 
earthquake because workers were tinkering with a real-life malfunction. 
The problem was that the attraction's subway set was minus one explosion. 
"There is a slab of concrete that falls from above and (a fuel) truck is 
supposed to slide down and explode, but it didn't do it like it was supposed 
to," explained spokeswoman Joan Bullard. 
The procession of tourist-crammed trams was held up for 90 minutes while 
workers tried to induce the truck to blow up. Finally, in the ensuing logjam, 
the drivers of several tourist-filled trams decided to bypass the quake. They 
no doubt felt it was a matter of either leaving the scene or rechristening the 
attraction "Traffic Jam -- The Big One." 
The names of Burns and Allen are united again, this time at Cedars-Sinai 
Medical Center. 
In recognition of the entertainer's $2-million donation, the hospital on Monday 
honored Burns, 93, and his late wife and comedy partner, Gracie Allen, by 
unveiling the Burns and Allen Chair in Cardiology Research. 
It's the latest in a long list of institutions named after philanthropic 
members of the entertainment community, including the Jerry Lewis Neuromuscular 
Research Center and the Jules Stein Eye Institute at UCLA, the George Lucas 
Instructional Center at USC, the Anthony Quinn Library in East Los Angeles, 
William Hart High School in Newhall and Will Rogers, Leo Carrillo and Dan 
Blocker state beaches. 
Other memorials include John Wayne Airport in Orange County and the Ronald 
Reagan State Office Building under construction in Los Angeles. 
Chevy Chase Country Club, however, was not named after the screen comic. 
First, apples and grapes. Now, a bunny ban? 
That would be the preference of the county Department of Animal Care and 
Control, which points out that every year parents get caught up in the spirit 
of Easter and buy their children rabbits. The big-eared creatures are initially 
cute and cuddly but much more difficult to take care of than dogs and cats in 
an urban area. 
The agency points out that county law also prohibits the sale of baby rabbits, 
ducklings and chicks, which often die or wind up in ill health at animal 
centers "after the vigorous handling and haphazard care" they receive from 
children. 
And, as though it needed saying, it is also illegal for any animal to be dyed 
or stained. 
It was a heartening sight after the recent reports of delays in the 
construction of Metro Rail. 
An entrance sign near City Hall said "Subway." 
However, a closer look revealed that the sign stood over a dummy station that 
was a prop for a television movie about a New York newspaper columnist. 
Even the hot dog vendor next to the subway was a fake, although his cart did 
conceal a birthday cake for someone in the cast. 
