2 DEPUTIES BALK IN DRUG SCANDAL, ARE SUSPENDED; 
INVESTIGATION: THE SHERIFF'S NARCOTICS OFFICERS REPORTEDLY REFUSED TO ANSWER 
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE MONEY-SKIMMING PROBE WITHOUT HAVING AN ATTORNEY PRESENT. 
Two more Los Angeles County sheriff's narcotics officers have been suspended 
after balking at questions posed by investigators probing a widening 
money-skimming scandal, an attorney for the two deputies and sheriff's 
officials said Tuesday. 
The officers were abruptly relieved of duty last Friday after refusing to 
answer questions about the alleged theft of seized drug money until their 
attorney could be present, said Richard Shinee, chief counsel for the Assn. for 
Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs. 
Shinee, who refused to identify the deputies, claimed the suspensions violated 
the rights of the deputies and were part of a "squeeze play" by sheriff's 
officials to try to pressure narcotics officers into cooperating with the 
money-skimming investigation. 
The scandal, which has already led to the indictment of 10 veteran officers and 
the suspension of eight others, has shaken the nation's largest sheriff's 
department and has spotlighted theft allegations against members of the elite 
narcotics squads that once handled major drug investigations. 
But Shinee said he is unaware of any evidence that the two newly suspended 
officers have been involved in any thefts. Instead, he said the deputies were 
questioned merely in an attempt to intimidate them and other officers into 
cooperating with investigatators. 
"My understanding is that these deputies were fully willing to participate in 
interviews, but with counsel present to ensure that their rights are 
protected," Shinee said. "And for simply attempting to secure that right, they 
were relieved of duty." 
Sheriff's officials also refused to identify the two deputies. 
"They were relieved because they chose not to talk to us as potential 
witnesses," said Undersheriff Robert Edmonds, who claimed the men disobeyed a 
direct order to answer questions. 
Asked if the officers were the targets of any theft allegations themselves, 
Edmonds said, "I don't want to characterize that any further except to say they 
were potential witnesses." 
Shinee, however, said he had listened to a tape-recording of the interview with 
one suspended deputy and disputed Edmonds' contention that the men were ordered 
to respond directly to questions. Shinee said the deputy was asked to respond 
voluntarily and asked for his attorney only after being told that theft 
allegations had been leveled against his entire crew. 
"Upon being advised that he was a possible suspect, he invoked his rights," 
Shinee said. 
The Times learned that the two deputies, who average nearly 20 years in the 
department, were among the estimated 40 officers on four teams investigating 
major narcotics cases. The crews were disbanded last fall after it was 
disclosed that some narcotics officers were accused of stealing drug money 
confiscated from narcotics traffickers and money launderers. 
A grand jury indictment alleges that the members of one major narcotics crew 
alone had stolen more than $1.4 million during an 18-month period. 
All nine members of that crew plus another deputy who worked on another major 
violators team were indicted last month on charges of conspiracy, theft and 
income tax violations. 
While Sgt. Robert R. Sobel pleaded guilty and agreed to cooperate with 
prosecutors, the remaining nine officers and the wife of one deputy -- who was 
also indicted -- pleaded not guilty. 
In an affidavit filed by the federal government and made public last week, 
investigators from the FBI and the Internal Revenue Service said that officers 
from three of the four narcotics investigation crews were involved in taking 
drug money and laundering the stolen cash or were aware of that activity. 
The fourth team was not cited in the federal affidavit. However, sources said 
the two deputies relieved of duty last weekend were assigned to that last crew 
before the teams were dismantled. 
The new suspensions are the first in several months and come amid more 
disclosures about the massive investigation that began in October, 1988, and 
escalated last year after the FBI and IRS joined the probe. 
According to the first of 57 search warrants and seizure documents unsealed 
this week, federal agents used a videotaped sting, wiretaps, information from 
drug dealers, tips from fellow deputies, financial records, interviews and the 
cooperation of Sobel to build their case against the suspected deputies. 
In a sweep last fall of homes and businesses owned by the indicted officers, 
sheriff's investigators and federal agents reported seizing tens of thousands 
of dollars in cash from private safes, bedroom drawers, briefcases and on 
tables. 
As much as $13,280 was found in one deputy's home, the search warrants said. 
Another $13,069 was discovered in another home and $11,706 in cash was found on 
a kitchen counter, in bedroom drawers and in a safe at another deputy's home, 
the warrants said. Some of that money, federal investigators claimed, came from 
stolen drug cash or was part of money that had been taken during an undercover 
FBI sting last August against the deputies. 
