MANDELA-BUTHELEZI MEETING ON S. AFRICA'S 'ZULU WARS' CALLED OFF 
Prospects for a speedy end to South Africa's "Zulu wars" dimmed Friday after 
nationalist leader Nelson R. Mandela called off a peace parley with his Zulu 
rival, Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi. 
The two black leaders had been scheduled to share a platform next week to try 
to stop the battles raging in Natal province between allies of Mandela's 
African National Congress (ANC) and Buthelezi's Zulu-based Inkatha movement. 
The weeklong conflict in Natal's townships forced thousands of people to flee 
and seek sanctuary in schools, hospitals and halls. 
After a six-hour meeting at Mandela's home in Soweto township outside 
Johannesburg, ANC officials said the meeting with Buthelezi had been postponed 
on the advice of Natal-based activists. 
"The atmosphere is not yet ideal for a joint rally in Natal," an ANC statement 
said. 
Police put the death toll from fighting in six black townships and surrounding 
countryside in the Edendale valley outside Natal's provincial capital of 
Pietermaritzburg at 37 since Sunday. 
Natal's strife seriously threatens the initiative launched last month by 
President Frederik W. de Klerk who wants talks with black leaders on writing a 
new constitution. 
De Klerk, alarmed that his proposed program of political reforms may be 
engulfed by the increasing violence, said the Natal conflict had reached 
unacceptable levels and his government might be forced to crack down. 
Zulu supporters of the leftist United Democratic Front, which is allied to the 
ANC, South Africa's biggest black opposition group, have been battling Inkatha 
for three years. 
More than 2,000 people are estimated to have been killed in the feud between 
the two anti-apartheid factions, who disagree over ways to end Pretoria's white 
minority rule. 
The simmering unrest has now exploded into a virtual civil war. 
Witnesses said large numbers of Zulus, armed with automatic weapons, spears and 
slashing knives called pangas, attacked each other Friday in the township of 
Imbali between Edendale and the white city of Pietermaritzburg. 
