PICTURESQUE SCHOONERS TO HOIST SAILS IN RACES FOR MUSEUM'S BENEFIT 
Landlubbers who associate schooners with large glasses of beer might be 
disappointed, but San Diegans who link schooners with sailing will be smiling 
this weekend and next as San Diego turns into the schooner capital of North 
America. 
The first of several schooner-only races will begin at 11 a.m. today outside 
Oceanside Harbor, when 18 of the ships glide down the San Diego County coast to 
a finish line off of Mission Bay. The Downwind Classic Schooner Race, part of 
the San Diego Spring Schooner Festival, which takes place this weekend, will 
benefit the San Diego Maritime Museum Assn. 
The schooner fleet will rest on Saturday and return to racing Sunday, meeting 
off the Mission Bay Channel entrance for a 1 p.m. start. The Billy Bones 
Traditional Schooner Race will end at a finish line in San Diego Bay. Proceeds, 
again, will go to the San Diego Maritime Museum. 
Most of those 18 boats -- as well as six or seven additional schooners -- will 
race again March 31 and April 1 in the America's Schooner Cup race hosted by 
the Kona Kai Yacht Club. Next weekend's races will benefit the Navy Relief 
Fund. 
"The Kona Kai races will be very spectator-friendly," said Joe Ditler, one of 
the organizers of the races. "You can see them from Shelter Island, Harbor 
Island, all around the bay." 
Schooners, picturesque boats that now carry mainly passengers on charter 
outings, once played an integral role in the West Coast's sailing fleet, 
according to Ditler, whose Coronado-based media promotions firm is known as 
"Schooner or Later." 
"Old pictures from the 1800s showed San Diego Harbor filled with schooners," 
Ditler said. "They carried everything you could imagine." Schooners were 
preferred to other types of sailboats because they were fast and, unlike 
square-rigged sailboats, they could easily sail both up and down California's 
coast. 
"Square riggers would come around and land in San Francisco, and you could sail 
them down the coast in a fast reach," Ditler said. "But, because of their 
square sails, they couldn't go back upwind. They'd have to ride out half way to 
Hawaii and come back in, which is a long and not very practical route." 
"The vogue thing to do is refurbish old schooners or build new ones from old 
designs," Ditler said. "They're a complicated ship, they have a lot of canvas 
and they take a large crew to sail." 
San Diego is home to about 15 schooners, each of which has "a long, interesting 
history," Ditler said. Although the schooner design originated in Holland in 
the 1600s, American designers refined the boats during the late 1800s and early 
1900s. 
Two local schooners, Bagheera and Dauntless, were designed by John Alden, who 
"was to yacht designs what Porsche was to automobile racing," Ditler said. "He 
designed many successful boats." 
