'MOLECULAR SCISSORS': NEW HOPE FOR AIDS; 
MEDICINE: THE ARTIFICIALLY PREPARED FORM OF RNA INTERFERES WITH THE INFECTION 
OF CELLS BY THE VIRUS. 
An innovative "molecular scissors" that interferes with the infection of cells 
by the AIDS virus has been developed by researchers at the City of Hope 
National Medical Center in Duarte. 
Molecular geneticist John J. Rossi and his colleagues report today in the 
journal Science that they have used a specially prepared form of RNA 
(ribonucleic acid) to create the scissors, which snips apart the virus' own RNA 
before it can be used as a blueprint for replication of the virus. 
The scientists have already inserted a gene for the artificially prepared RNA, 
called a ribozyme, into cultured human cells and shown that it sharply reduces 
infection of the cells, which should halt the progression of the disease. They 
are now working with Vestar Corp. of San Dimas to develop a way to deliver the 
ribozymes into the white blood cells of AIDS victims, where it would halt the 
replication of the virus. 
Nava Sarver, who is in charge of the National Institutes of Health's program 
for rapid development of new AIDS therapies, predicted that human trials could 
begin in as little as three years. 
The principal advantage of the technique is that it is extremely selective in 
its activity, attacking only the viral RNA and leaving the cell's own genetic 
materials intact. This approach to therapy should therefore produce virtually 
no side effects, unlike currently used drugs such as AZT. 
Many researchers believe that this approach may ultimately provide a completely 
new way to attack all kinds of viral infections, which are now almost 
impossible to treat. 
"It's a promising approach," said molecular biologist Sidney Altman of Yale 
University, "but we have to keep in mind that every year many promising 
approaches are discarded because they don't work." 
Perhaps ironically, the lineage of the ribozymes that would be used to attack 
humanity's newest infectious nemesis can be traced back to the oldest molecules 
on Earth, the ones that were present when life first arose. 
Many researchers now believe that the first life on Earth was composed entirely 
of RNA, which combined the functions of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), which 
carries the genetic information necessary for life, and proteins, such as 
enzymes, which carry out the biochemical functions necessary for life. 
Previously, researchers had believed that the primary function of RNA -- except 
for a few viruses, such as the AIDS virus -- was to serve as an intermediate 
between DNA and proteins. RNA provides a sort of working blueprint for cellular 
machinery, a copy of genetic information from DNA that is used in the 
production of proteins. 
In the early 1980s, however, Altman and molecular biologist Thomas Cech of the 
University of Colorado in Boulder independently discovered that RNA could act 
in the same fashion as enzymes, cutting apart RNA and moving it around in 
cells. Their discovery earned them the 1989 Nobel Prize for Chemistry. 
Immediately, many researchers saw the ribozymes as a new way to attack viruses 
and began developing ways to use them. Rossi and his colleagues are apparently 
the first to report success. 
Rossi and his associates took a fragment of RNA -- the "scissors" portion of 
the molecule -- from a plant and combined it with an artificially synthesized 
RNA fragment that would bind only to RNA that serves as a blueprint for a 
protein crucial to replication of the AIDS virus (which is known formally as 
the human immunodeficiency virus or HIV). 
In the test tube, they found that the ribozyme thus produced would in fact bind 
to the target RNA from the AIDS virus and cut it. 
They next used genetic engineering techniques to insert the gene for the 
ribozyme into human cells grown in a test tube. The cells produced the ribozyme 
and, when the researchers infected the cells with HIV, the ribozyme prevented 
the virus from reproducing and spreading. 
Most important, he said, the ribozyme "only targets what you ask it to target. 
And it's a natural molecule, so the cell sees it only as RNA, not as a toxic 
drug." 
Vestar and a half-dozen other companies around the country are developing a 
promising new way to deliver ribozymes. They encapsulate the ribozyme in an 
artificial sphere, about one-hundredth the size of a red blood cell, called a 
liposome. 
The liposome is composed of naturally occurring fat molecules that surround the 
drug to be carried and protect it from degradation in the blood stream. 
Theliposomes are also readily taken up by cells, so they provide a method of 
injecting the drug into target cells. Inside the cell, the fat molecules are 
absorbed, freeing the drug. 
The liposomes, like the ribozymes, are still largely experimental, although 
Vestar just received approval in Italy to market an anti-fungal agent carried 
by lipsomes. 
Consequently, said biochemist Sean Sullivan of Vestar, a great deal of testing 
will be required before the technique can be studied in humans. "But in all 
fairness to NIH and FDA (the U.S. Food and Drug Administration), any 
therapeutic that looks promising gets put on a fairly fast track. So the 
process could be accelerated." 
