U.S. FREES CHILE GRAPES, BERRIES; 
BUT OTHER FRUIT HELD BY MARKETS, DISTRIBUTORS MUST BE DESTROYED 
The Bush Administration on Friday lifted its five-day ban on Chilean grapes and 
berries, announcing that it would release the huge, impounded stockpiles at 
U.S. ports after enhanced inspections but that most Chilean produce now held by 
markets and distributors must be destroyed. 
Frank E. Young, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, said that a 
new system of increased inspections, coupled with stepped-up security measures 
in Chile, will ensure the "maximal layer of safety" of fruit from the South 
American nation, while stemming further economic losses to the Chilean and U.S. 
economies. 
However, he warned, "it is impossible to ensure 100% safety." He urged grocers 
and consumers to carefully examine grapes and berries for possible 
contamination and to discard fruit that is bruised, overly ripe or shows signs 
of suspicious damage. 
He estimated that Chilean fruit -- which makes up much of the fruit sold in the 
United States in winter months -- would be back on store shelves within five to 
nine days. 
Another Threat 
U.S. officials, who have been under intense pressure to end the crisis, 
announced the plan despite word that another telephone threat was received 
Friday in Santiago, warning that additional fruit exports will be poisoned. 
The fruit ban originally was ordered after two earlier telephone threats and 
the discovery of cyanide-tainted grapes in a Chilean cargo unloaded in 
Philadelphia. 
Young said he was advised of the new threat by the State Department about 
midday Friday, and he briefly considered postponing the announcement on ending 
the ban. But, he said, "every time a call comes in, do you stop everything 
that's going on?" 
The FDA chief said he is confident the timing of the latest call could have no 
bearing on the fruit already here. 
"Everything now will be at the new testing level, and all boats leaving from 
Chile will be subject to the new testing level," coupled with "increased 
security measures and increased inspection measures in Chile," he said. 
Young discussed the plan in a briefing after President Bush told reporters that 
the embargo had been justified, although "it has caused some economic hardship 
that I regret." 
Crucial Part 
The ban announced Monday emptied store shelves nationwide of all 
Chilean-produced fruit, which is a crucial part of Chile's export economy. 
Sixty-five percent of that nation's fruit crop is shipped to the United States. 
Bush, speaking with reporters aboard Air Force One en route to Washington from 
Colorado, added: "I think when the health of the American people might be 
threatened, you've got to take prudent action." 
Chilean Foreign Minister Hernan Felipe Errazuriz, at the White House for a 
meeting with Vice President Dan Quayle, called the U.S. decision "a workable 
solution," adding: "It takes into account the interest of the U.S. citizens and 
the Chileans." 
The new system will allow the release of the bulk of the Chilean fruit now 
being held at U.S. ports. The largest component is 918,000 cases of grapes, one 
of the fruits that can be cleared after inspection. 
Larger Fruits 
FDA officials said they have not decided what to do about the tons of 
larger-sized Chilean fruits that have been impounded, such as nectarines, 
peaches, apples and melons. These were not included in the new procedures 
because -- unlike small berries -- they are capable of holding much larger 
amounts of poison and if contaminated, are much more likely to cause injury or 
death. 
"These fruits have a lot longer shelf life and we want to do some more 
laboratory experiments," Young said. "We chose to do this (release the fruit), 
bit by bit." 
He said that he could not say when the larger fruits will be back on the 
market. "I would not be able to predict," he said. "I would not want to 
speculate." 
As for the fruit that left U.S. ports and is being held by grocery stores, 
distributors and other facilities, officials said that destruction probably 
would be necessary. 
The FDA said it would be the responsibility of the states to monitor the 
destruction, but indicated that the federal government may create some 
mechanism to salvage some of the produce if it can be returned for inspection. 
Officials also confirmed that the fruit, although banned from sale in the 
United States, could be shipped legally to other countries where no such 
restrictions apply. 
John McClung, a spokesman for the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Assn., 
called it "disheartening that hundreds of millions of dollars of fruit" might 
have to be destroyed, but that the members of his organization recognize that 
such action is important to restore "consumer confidence." 
He added: "It is very unclear how much product is out there between the docks 
and the retailers, in cold storage facilities and in the pipeline in between. 
We just don't know." 
Considerable Confusion 
Despite the federal announcement, there was considerable confusion among all of 
the parties involved -- including the FDA -- about precisely how the new 
inspection system will work. Young himself was unable Friday to spell out the 
technical details. 
He said that inspected boxes will be stamped in some way to indicate to 
retailers and others that the products have been cleared. 
The inspection system will apply to shipments on all boats that are already 
here or en route, but not necessarily to future shipments, "unless there is a 
problem," according to FDA spokesman William Grigg. "If things go well, we can 
phase down as the Chileans convince us that what they are doing is effective," 
he said. 
Young said, however, that "no program can assure 100% safety unless you look at 
each and every item," which is impossible. 
Therefore, he emphasized that grocers and especially consumers should be 
especially vigilant in examining their own fruit. "Cyanide promotes rapid 
spoilage," he said. "Most of us have a habit of discarding mushy berries. That 
should be done. Or you can see the site of an injection. I would urge consumers 
to look at their products carefully." 
McClung said there is considerable uncertainty within the industry about how 
liability will be resolved for the fruit that must be destroyed. Virtually all 
the parties involved have suffered severe financial hardship because of the 
ban. 
Further damage still could be done to the Chilean economy if no method of 
clearing the larger fruits is resolved soon. The peak of the grape season there 
has now passed, according to Bryan Silbermann, a spokesman for the Produce 
Marketing Assn., and over the next few weeks Chilean farmers will be harvesting 
more peaches, plums, nectarines and other tree fruits. 
Young said that U.S. health officials must make safety their paramount concern. 
"The day I start to look at health with regard to somebody's left hip pocket or 
pocketbook, then I am not focusing enough in regard to safety," he said. "I've 
got to look at safety. I can't allow economics or politics to interfere." 
Meanwhile, investigators reported no progress in determining who poisoned the 
grapes found in the shipment last weekend. Two red seedless grapes containing 
puncture marks and minute traces of cyanide were found in a crate unloaded in 
Philadelphia from the Almeria Star. 
Young said that State Department officials told him they believed "by voice 
analysis" that the newest telephone threat received in Santiago was from 
"possibly the same person" who telephoned the embassy twice in recent weeks 
warning of produce poisoning. 
However, State Department spokesman Nancy Beck said: "We do not know whether or 
not it was from the same person who called before." 
She said the call was received at the U.S. Embassy at 9:30 a.m. Santiago time 
and threatened "Chilean fruit exports." She said the department has provided 
"all the details" to the Chilean authorities and "will continue to provide our 
fullest cooperation to their investigation of this matter." 
Staff writers David Lauter, Doyle McManus and James Gerstenzang contributed to 
this story. 
Related stories in Business. 
