A DEATHLY SILENCE, TO COVER WHAT?; 
IRAQ: THE REGIME CAME UP WITH A BRUTAL CIRCUS TO DIVERT ATTENTION FROM ITS 
EFFORTS, LIKE THOSE GOING ON IN LIBYA, TO MANUFACTURE BATTLEFIELD CHEMICAL 
WEAPONS. 
Iraq's hasty hanging of British-based journalist Farzad Bazoft has been seen, 
quite correctly, as an attempt to impose a deathly silence on any journalist 
who might have the temerity to investigate events that could prove embarrassing 
to the regime of Saddam Hussein. 
A number of Middle Eastern reporters and editors, even a cartoonist, have been 
assassinated in Beirut, London and elsewhere for appearing to criticize this or 
that Arab government or its leader. But poor Bazoft is, as far as we know, the 
first to be tried and officially executed by a state while he was in the 
pursuit of a story. 
It is always helpful to look at the event from an Iraqi point of view. Gallows, 
like crosses, have great symbolic value. They are used, just as they were in 
Europe and America in times past, not just to punish but also to warn. In this 
case the message is clearly not directed first and foremost toward outsiders 
like British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who tried to get the death 
sentence called off, but to an audience much closer home. One part of it is to 
show that the police and the security forces are ever vigilant. But in this 
case there is much more to it than that. 
During the long war with Iran, the Iraqi army tested and perfected the use of 
several new battlefield weapons. One clearly was for the tactical use of poison 
gas. Through the use of helicopters and other methods, the Iraqis could target 
particular Iranian troop formations in an unusually precise way. This not only 
gave them an immediate military advantage but also played a major role in the 
progressive undermining of Iranian morale. It is an advantage that the present 
Iraqi leadership clearly intends to continue developing for use in any future 
war. 
In these circumstances the explosion that destroyed part of the secret military 
installation south of Baghdad last August was clearly a great embarrassment to 
the regime. It may be surmised that it also created a considerable problem 
because, the damage being so great, it proved impossible to discover whether 
the explosion was an accident or the result of deliberate sabotage. By accusing 
Bazoft of being an Israeli spy, the regime was able to suggest that, perhaps, 
the Israelis had something to do with the explosion without having to prove how 
it was actually done. Among many other things, this helped to create a useful 
alibi for the regime's own carelessness among those members of the Iraqi 
population who must know very well, whether through rumor or their official 
connections, that something at the secret plant had gone very wrong. Either the 
science used there, or the system of security, was grievously at fault. 
It may only be a coincidence, but it is also interesting to note that the very 
day that Bazoft was hanged there came news of another vast explosion at a 
secret Middle Eastern chemical plant. This time it was at Rabta, Libya, where 
mustard and nerve gas was being made. Once again, the destruction seems to have 
been such that there is no way for the authorities to discover whether it was 
an accident or the work of saboteurs. Once again, it makes the whole thing a 
little less embarrassing if attention can be focused on the alleged existence 
of foreign "spies," now described as German or French. 
Looked at in this light, Farzad Bazoft's execution seems part of a highly 
charged process in which at least two Middle Eastern regimes are trying to 
develop battlefield chemical weapons in plants that are either unsafe or open 
to sabotage -- or probably both. 
It is obviously a major story. With the hanging of Bazoft in Baghdad, 
journalists who might wish to investigate it in its local context have been 
well and truly warned off. But we can be sure that there will be many others 
who will take up the challenge to pursue it elsewhere -- in Washington, in 
Europe and in Israel. 
