ANNUAL BRAVO AWARDS FOR TEACHERS; 
3 HONORED FOR INTEGRATING ARTS IN EDUCATION 
Three Southland teachers shared the 1988 Bravo award, given annually by the 
Music Center for outstanding achievement in arts education. 
At a ceremony Monday at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, the Music Center honored 
Taffy Patton, who incorporates the arts into her sixth-grade curriculum at Vena 
Magnet School in Pacoima, Barrie Becker, who teaches dance at a juvenile court 
school in Los Angeles, and Phila McDaniel, who teaches art at Gardena High 
School. 
A First 
According to Music Center spokeswoman Connie A. Rivera, this was the first time 
in the award's seven-year history that three educators shared the prize. 
Usually two winners are named, one for incorporating the arts into a 
traditional classroom and one for achievement as an arts specialist. This year, 
two arts specialists were honored. 
The three winners were chosen from 97 Southland educators nominated by their 
principals. Ten finalists were announced in December. Each finalist was 
observed in the classroom by a panel of judges before the winners were chosen. 
The judges were educators and artists, including a representative from the 
charitable JefferyMelamed Memorial Fund, which sponsors the competition. 
Each of the Bravo winners received a statuette designed by artist William 
Crutchfield. The winners also received $500 gift certificates from Robinson's 
and audio equipment from Audiotronics for their schools. 
Patton, a Van Nuys resident, has been teaching for nine years. She was cited 
for the creativity with which she integrates the visual and performing arts 
into her Pacoima classroom. 
"Taffy inspires us all," Principal Diane Pritchard said. "I have never been in 
her class when the arts were not integrated into the entire program. That's her 
basic concept." 
Patton was cited for such imaginative classroom activities as a mock trial of 
Galileo, combining history and science, that her students researched and 
dramatized. In background information Patton supplied to the Bravo award 
committee, she wrote: "The ideal teacher juggles academic skills in one hand 
and whimsical invention in the other." 
Wards of the Court 
Becker, a Pasadena resident and veteran of 13 years in the classroom, teaches 
dance, drama and social studies to students at the Dorothy Kirby Center School, 
a juvenile court school located in a Los Angeles probation camp. Its 100 
students are wards of the court who have been placed there because of 
involvement in criminal acts. 
"Arts education is essential for the full growth and development of every human 
being," Becker wrote to the Bravo award committee. "The last thing a student 
has on his mind upon entering Kirby Center is taking a dance class. But, 
hopefully, by the end of his stay, it will be among the first." 
A teacher for 33 years, Rancho Palos Verdes resident McDaniel was cited for her 
ability to help students realize their artistic potential. She was also lauded 
for her campaign to create an art museum on the Gardena campus, with the 
school's extensive collection of paintings by California artists, collected 
since 1919, at its core. Also cited was her pioneering research on the folk art 
of the minority populations of China. 
 "I sincerely believe that the arts are basic to all educational programs at 
all levels of schooling and that art is not a frill, but truly the heart of 
education," McDaniel wrote to the award committee. The Bravo award was "a huge 
thrill," she said. 
