S. J. DIAMOND: 'NATURAL' FOODS MAY NOT LIVE UP TO LABEL 
Not satisfied with plenty, Americans want food pure and perfect -- unblemished 
but untreated, plump but not artificially fattened. It should be absolutely 
natural -- just as it came from nature -- but low in salt, cholesterol and 
saturated fat, and high in fiber and vitamins. 
Ever responsive, food manufacturers give us goods billed as natural, organic, 
no-sodium, low-cal, even "lite." Quickly queuing up along the cutting edge of 
science, they now provide more calcium and less saturated fat, eager to tell us 
right on the front of the label how they're helping to prevent osteoporosis and 
heart disease. 
Unfortunately, front and back of the label may not gibe: Sometimes one giveth 
health and the other taketh away. A "no cholesterol" shortening may list among 
its ingredients saturated fats that spur our cholesterol production. The 
low-fat soup promising reduced risk of heart disease also increases that risk 
with its high, blood pressure-raising salt content. 
The question is how best to protect the public against such abuses of its 
trust. Alternatively, one might question whether these are abuses and whether 
the public still has much trust and, therefore, needs outside protection. 
Take the "natural" foods, with their connotation of something presented as it 
was constituted in nature, unadulterated. Used with foods, "natural" also 
implies good and healthy: Bread mold and crude oil are also natural, but 
neither is desirable in a diet. Only the Agriculture Department is more 
specific about the word as applied to the meat and poultry products it 
regulates: They can't contain added color or artificial ingredients and must be 
"minimally processed" -- frozen, dried, perhaps cut up for packaging. 
Some Stretch Definition 
Some foods' ingredients clearly justify the label. Laura Scudder's All Natural 
Peanut Butter contains "Just peanuts . . . that's all!" Miller's 100% Natural 
Unprocessed Bran has one ingredient: 100% unprocessed red wheat bran. Bigelow 
Herbal Garden All Natural Cinnamon Orange Herb Tea has multiple ingredients, 
all patently natural: cinnamon, hibiscus flowers, apples, rose hips, orange 
peel, malted barley, natural flavors. 
Other food labels seem to stretch or contract the word's connotation. "Natural" 
may mean that all the ingredients, technically speaking, are found in nature. 
"Natural" yogurts, far from being just cultured milk and a flavoring, may 
include sugar, corn sweetener, modified food starch, gelatin, eggs, turmeric 
(All Natural Johnston's), or cream, tapioca and pectin (Mountain High Natural 
Yogurt), and the "natural" fruit (this in "V. S. Very Special All Natural 
Nonfat Yogurt") is only fruit-like, as in "Peach (corn syrup, peaches, modified 
food starch, natural flavors, citric acid, annato, turmeric)." 
Sometimes impressive percentages, ultimately nonsense, imply even greater 
naturalness. Capri Sun's 100% Natural Orange beverage, for example, is actually 
only 10% orange juice, its contents water, high-fructose corn sweetener, 
concentrated orange juice, citric acid and natural orange flavor. Similarly, 
Nabisco's 100% Bran cereal contains "100% Wheat Bran," sugar, malted barley 
flour, salt, fig juice and prune juice (the juices elsewhere described as 
"naturally sweet" despite the added sugar). 
More absurdly, Aunt Jemima's Butter Lite Natural Butter Flavor syrup "Contains 
No Butter" but something called "natural butter flavor." Lipton's Naturally 
Decaffeinated tea isn't decaffeinated by nature, but washed in "pure, sparkling 
spring water and effervescence like that found in mineral water and club soda." 
And Natural Brew coffee filters are -- who'd have guessed it? -- "a natural 
brown (paper) that hasn't been bleached white." 
Some of these labels do seem like false advertising on their front, but there's 
nothing secret: Anyone with two eyes can see the facts on the back. When 
consumers can self-protect, do they still require government help, regulatory 
or legislative? 
Reading fine print takes time, of course. "We don't deserve this. We work an 
honest day, and we want an honest deal," says Bruce Silverglade, director of 
legal affairs for the Center for Science in the Public Interest in Washington, 
which urges more comprehensive regulation of food labeling and deceptive 
claims. "The law traditionally has recognized that you can't correct a headline 
in small print," he adds, "and you can't correct the front of a label with the 
back of a label." 
Still, "natural" claims are comparatively easy for consumers to evaluate. Other 
claims seem more difficult -- how many calories qualifies as "low calorie"? How 
lean is "lean" meat? -- and the Food and Drug Administration or Agriculture 
Department set standards to which manufacturers must conform in making such 
claims. There are regulations covering sodium (e.g. "sodium-free" means less 
than 5 mg. per serving), calories (e.g. "low calorie" means less than 40 
calories per serving) and leanness of meat, and proposed regulations covering 
cholesterol content. 
They may also regulate "disease-prevention claims" -- "statements that relate a 
nutrient to a disease or the prevention of a disease," says Elizabeth Campbell, 
chief of the FDA's regulations and industry activities branch. At the moment, 
such claims (high fiber prevents cancer, low cholesterol prevents heart 
disease) would make the food subject to the FDA's drug clearance rules, but the 
agency wants to make it possible for food labels to educate the public about 
such discoveries. "The science is growing up so fast the FDA can't just say 'We 
don't believe that,' " says Lillie Taylor, FDA supervisory consumer safety 
officer. "We don't want to deny something that might be useful to people." 
Planning Guidelines 
So with a lot of advice and pressure, the regulators are working up guidelines 
that would permit such "educational" labeling while avoiding its problems -- 
the difficulty of determining scientific consensus behind each claim, of 
keeping manufacturers from touting the health benefit of one ingredient while 
obscuring the danger of others (the low-fat, high-salt product) and of 
standardizing wording so that manufacturers educate rather than promote. They 
have even suggested a new "interagency" agency just to handle the new load. 
It almost seems better to let consumers get their diet and health advice -- 
including recommendations for calorie and sodium consumption -- from the 
scientific community and to restrict the front of food labels to words like 
"soup," modified by "vegetable, "yummy," and "good." On the back, there would 
be required disclosure of all ingredients and their nutritional components, so 
consumers could themselves pick out foods that give them the kind and amount of 
nutrition they want. 
And every time we fret that we may have deprived the world of a potent and 
objective educational force by not permitting food companies to teach health 
and disease-prevention, we can just consider what many of them did with 
"natural." 
