AFTER A 6-YEAR SILENCE, BEGIN BEMOANS ICY TIES WITH EGYPT 
Former Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, breaking a six-year silence, 
Sunday praised Israel's decade of peace with Egypt but bemoaned their still icy 
relations. 
Commenting on political issues at length for the first time since becoming a 
recluse in 1983, Begin told Israel Radio that the 1979 U.S.-brokered 
Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty remains the only basis for a Middle East 
settlement. 
The 75-year-old Begin took issue with Washington's latest peace move, opening a 
dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization that broke a 13-year U.S. 
boycott of Yasser Arafat's organization. 
"This is in my opinion a negative, harmful phenomenon," he said in his 
characteristically hoarse voice. "The Americans, our friends, are in essence 
asked to reconsider this matter. 
'Absolute Normalization' 
"Until now, we have achieved something very important -- a peace treaty with 
Egypt, the largest Arab state. . . . It is impossible to talk about 
celebrations so long as there is no absolute normalization," Begin said. 
"We want a full peace, normalization in all fields," he said in an interview 
marking the 10th anniversary of the treaty-signing in Washington. 
Begin said he still opposes formation of a Palestinian state in the occupied 
West Bank and Gaza Strip as "a danger to Israel and the entire Middle East." 
He complained that Palestinians persist in clashing with Israeli soldiers in 
the occupied lands and sending guerrillas to raid northern Israel. 
"If this isn't terror, it is difficult to know what terror is," he said, 
referring to Arafat's renunciation of terror and recognition of Israel's right 
to exist that led to the Americans opening up a dialogue with PLO. 
Begin has lived in virtual seclusion in Jerusalem, leaving his apartment only 
eight times since his resignation in 1983 after reportedly becoming depressed 
over the death of his wife Aliza and Israel's losses in the 1982 Lebanon war. 
The once-fiery orator, who shared the Nobel Peace Prize with the late Egyptian 
President Anwar Sadat for the 1978 Camp David accords that led to the treaty, 
sounded weak. But he spoke clearly and showed a familiarity with recent 
political developments. 
