$34-BILLION DEFENSE CUTS; 
CHENEY WANTS STEALTH BOMBER ORDER SLASHED BY 57; 
5 ADDITIONAL WARPLANES FACE TRIMS 
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today proposed cuts of $14.3 billion in the 
embattled B-2 Stealth bomber program as part of a $34.8-billion package of 
warplane reductions aimed at taking advantage of warming East-West relations. 
Cheney, in testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, said he would 
cut the number of Stealth bombers to 75 planes rather than the 132 originally 
planned over the life of the program being developed by Century City-based 
Northrop Corp. 
The sleek, black bat-wing Stealth, at $530 million, is the most expensive 
aircraft ever. 
Cheney announced the proposals to the House Armed Services Committee, and 
several members expressed surprise, saying the high cost of fewer B-2 bombers 
would drive the cost of each one up to $815 million. 
Cheney said if the B-2 force were cut to as few as 30 planes, as some critics 
have proposed, "it isn't much good to you, frankly." 
He said two B-2 groups of 30 bombers would each be required for a credible 
bomber force and another 15 would be needed to maintain the two full wings. 
Northrop Corp.'s first Stealth test model flew for the first time last year and 
is scheduled for deployment later this decade. 
Critics in Congress say the plane, with its chief mission the delivery of 
nuclear warheads deep into Soviet territory, is not needed and would cost its 
weight in gold. 
Cheney also proposed cuts and delays in five other aircraft programs and said 
all the reductions would reduce President Bush's $306.9-billion defense request 
for next year by $2.4 billion and $34.8 billion through 1997. 
He also said that U.S. budget strains may require reducing the present 14 U.S. 
aircraft carriers to 12 but that no final decision has been made. 
Cheney proposed that 120 C-17 transport planes rather than the 210 originally 
planned be bought to replace the aging C-141 transport. The $200-million plane 
is built by the McDonnell Douglas Corp. 
He also proposed that the top-secret Navy A-12 attack plane program be cut to a 
minimum of 620 from the 858 originally planned. Some estimates say the plane 
would cost more than $106 million each as a replacement for the aging A-6 
attack bomber. 
Cheney proposed delay in production of the Air Force version of the A-12, the 
advanced tactical aircraft, until after 1997. It would have the same long-range 
attack mission as the present F-111 bomber and the F-15 fighter plane. 
McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics are jointly developing the plane. 
The reduction proposals represented the strongest sign yet that the Pentagon 
might be willing to contribute to the "peace dividend" offered by the lessening 
of East-West tensions. 
Cheney said the cut in the Stealth would shave $14.3 billion off the more than 
$70-billion cost of the B-2 program. But while announcing the cut, he issued a 
plea to save the bomber from being killed entirely. 
He told the committee that the B-2 is the only U.S. bomber that would be able 
to evade improving Soviet radar and weapon defenses in the next century for 
bombing raids in a war. 
