HOME IS NO ESCAPE FROM INDOOR AIR POLLUTION; 
CONTAMINANTS: WHETHER IT'S RADON, ASBESTOS OR LEAD PAINT, HOMES DON'T ALWAYS 
HAVE CLEAN AIR. FORTUNATELY, IN MOST CASES, CLEAN UP IS EASY. 
In our increasingly polluted cities, we can at least escape the miasma of dust 
and chemicals in the sanctuary of our homes. Right? 
Wrong. We may close the door on some outdoor pollutants, but can walk into the 
realm of indoor contaminants that can, in sufficient concentrations, pose a 
serious health threat. 
Take radon: a colorless, odorless gas that occurs naturally and is found 
everywhere at very low levels, it nevertheless can become a problem when it 
gets trapped inside buildings. 
It is known to cause lung cancer, and is blamed for between 5,000 and 20,000 
such cases a year, or about 10% of the U.S. total, says the Environonmental 
Protection Agency. 
Asbestos, what used to be a common insulator and fireproofer, is now recognized 
as a cause of lung cancer and asbestosis. Much asbestos-related disease comes 
from work environments, but the material is also present in many homes, 
especially in older buildings. 
Another common home pollutant is lead, most commonly found in paint, and 
released into the atmosphere by burning or sanding. 
There are more, but before you sell your home and take up residence in a 
sensory-deprivation chamber, know there are ways to detect these pollutants and 
reduce or eradicate them. 
Tracking down indoor pollutants may begin with an unexplained health complaint. 
Short-term problems traceable to an indoor source may include dizziness, 
headaches, irritation of the eyes, nose and throat, or simply fatigue. 
Such complaints may be cured simply by eliminating exposure to the source or 
improving ventilation. Others, however, may only show up years after long or 
repeated exposure. 
The EPA estimates that we spend about 90% of our time indoors, and those who 
spend the most time inside are those who are most susceptible to indoor 
pollutants -- children, the elderly, the chronically ill and those suffering 
from respiratory problems. 
Devices are available to measure pollutants. Radon, for example, can be 
measured with charcoal canisters or alpha track detectors. State environmental 
agencies usually can provide information on how to obtain them. 
Whether you are buying a home or just want to test your existing home, here's 
what to look for: 
 -- Radon: Most commonly, it comes from the breakdown of uranium in the soil 
and rock on which houses are built. Test for it, but get professional advice 
before trying to get rid of the source; seal cracks and other openings in the 
basement floor; treat radon-contaminated well water by aerating or filtering 
through granulated activated charcoal. 
The EPA says the average radon level in American homes is 1 1/2 picocuries per 
liter, but some homes have been found with up to 200 picocuries. Most levels in 
most homes can be reduced to 4 picocuries, the EPA says. 
 -- Asbestos: Usually found in deteriorating or damaged insulation, 
fireproofing, or acoustical materials. Homeowners should get professional 
advice on removal and not disturb materials suspected of containing asbestos. 
 -- Lead: The level of lead dust is likely to be 10 to 100 times greater in 
homes where sanding or open-flame burning of lead-based paints has occurred. 
The EPA recommends that homeowners test paint for lead if they suspect its 
presence. 
Cover lead-based paint with wallpaper or other building materials. Replace 
moldings and other woodwork or have them removed and chemically treated off 
site. Drinking water may also be tested. 
 -- Formaldehyde: Found in pressed-wood products and some types of foam 
insulation. Also in durable-press drapes, other textiles, glues and tobacco 
smoke. The levels in the home can be reduced by using "exterior grade" 
pressed-wood products containing phenol resins, maintaining moderate 
temperature and humidity levels, and increasing ventilation. 
 -- Carbon monoxide: Common sources are unvented kerosene and gas heaters, 
leaking chimneys and furnaces, down-drafting from wood stoves and fireplaces 
and gas stoves. It can also leak from adjoining garages. 
Reduce levels by keeping gas appliances properly adjusted, using vented gas 
space heaters and furnaces, installing exhaust fans vented outdoors above gas 
stoves, hiring professional help to clean, inspect, and tune up a central 
heating system. 
 -- Organic gases: Found in household products including paints, paint 
strippers, solvents, wood preservatives, cleansers, moth repellents and 
dry-cleaned clothing. The highest levels are most likely to be found after 
paint stripping. Proper ventilation is the best way to reduce their levels. 
 -- Biologicals: Including pollen and fungi; these can be produced by wet or 
moist walls, ceilings and carpets; poorly maintained humidifiers and air 
conditioners. Adequate ventilation and proper maintenance of air conditioners 
and humidifiers will guard against them. 
An EPA publication "The Inside Story -- A Guide to Indoor Air Quality" says the 
levels of pollution from individual sources may not pose a significant health 
risk in themselves, but together, could be a threat to residents. 
"Fortunately, however, there are steps that most households can take both to 
reduce the risk from existing sources and to prevent new problems from 
occurring," the agency says. 
