PARENTS FACE OFF ON BILINGUAL CLASSES 
Two groups of Latino parents marched outside a Sun Valley school Wednesday, one 
of them loudly chanting support for bilingual education and the other quietly 
backing teachers seeking the program's end. 
Gloria Soto, a parent who organized the group at Glenwood School that supports 
the anti-bilingual teachers, said, "The purpose of the march is to let the 
community and the district know that there has been so much slander regarding 
LEAD and the teachers at Glenwood." 
LEAD is Learning English Advocates Drive, a statewide teachers group organized 
by a Glenwood teacher who opposes teaching non-English-speaking students mainly 
in their native language. 
Soto's group carried bilingual signs that bore slogans such as "LEAD Loves All 
Children" and "Parents Support Sally Peterson," LEAD's founder. 
"We know what's going on at our school, and we know our students," said Soto, a 
longtime parent at the elementary school. "Mrs. Peterson doesn't want to 
abolish bilingual education. She wants reform." 
Soto said that many Spanish-speaking students are kept in bilingual classrooms 
long after they become fluent in English. As a result, she said, they enter 
junior high school far behind their English-speaking classmates. 
Soon after Soto's group of about 15 began walking, the second group of about 30 
began demonstrating nearby. The second group, made up of parents from across 
the district, denounced LEAD and later argued with the Glenwood parents. 
Latinos Parents Protest 
The bilingual supporters also had demonstrated April 18 at Glenwood, when about 
50 Latino parents from across Los Angeles protested LEAD's attempts to abolish 
the school district's bilingual education plan. Some of the parents who 
participated in last week's protest turned up again Wednesday, carrying what 
appeared to be hastily written placards touting bilingual education. 
LEAD "is against bilingual education because they cannot work with 
Spanish-language students," said Francisco Gonzalez, a parent from 28th Street 
School in central Los Angeles. "Under the new master plan, bilingual education 
will go very well, but these LEAD parents oppose it." 
The master plan emphasizes putting bilingual teachers in every classroom with 
more than 10 students who are not fluent in English. 
The 22,000 members of United Teachers-Los Angeles, the teachers' union, are 
voting by mail on a LEAD proposal to reject a proposed $5,000 bonus for 
bilingual teachers. Teachers who are not bilingual, but who are teaching in a 
bilingual classroom, would be asked to learn Spanish. 
Much Demand 
The district and union officials argue that rejecting the bonus could bring the 
end of bilingual education in Los Angeles because bilingual teachers are much 
in demand and could seek higher wages elsewhere. Results of that vote will be 
known next month. 
Peterson, a Glenwood kindergarten teacher, said the march "was a loving gesture 
. . . and I thought it was fabulous." 
She said LEAD, which draws financial support from conservative English-only 
groups, does not oppose bilingual education. LEAD supports teaching students in 
English with assistance from bilingual aides, she said. 
