ASIAN CAUSES ON SHORT END OF CHARITY GIFTS, STUDY SHOWS 
While charitable interests such as United Way have begun more active courting 
of Los Angeles' ethnic communities, a new report has found that less than half 
of 1% of all donations from foundations and corporations in the region went to 
Asian causes. 
Given that Asian-Americans make up about 10% of the population in Los Angeles 
County and have become the county's fastest growing ethnic group, Asian 
community leaders met Friday to talk about becoming better charity recipients. 
An initial reaction to the study might be that Japanese-Americans don't need 
help, said Bill Watanabe, president of the Asian Pacific Planning Council, 
which issued the report. He said that the council represents about 50 agencies 
that serve the 10 major Asian Pacific communities in Los Angeles. 
The report stated that some Asian organizations are hampered by "the general 
fallacy" of Asians being a "model minority" with fewer problems than other 
ethnic groups. 
Another problem, Watanabe said, is that Asian organizations historically have 
had limited success in applying for grants. Many Asian groups, because they 
have few or no ties to foundations, he said, assume that they will not get 
grants. 
"We are not criticizing or pointing fingers at the major funders," Watanabe 
said at the meeting in Marina del Rey. "This study was done more in the spirit 
of asking ourselves, 'Are we doing things right?' and 'Where do we go from 
here?' We hope the donors are doing the same." 
The study, which examined the four-year period from 1984 through 1987, profiled 
corporations and foundations across the nation, as well as in Los Angeles. It 
included a look at the philanthropic powerhouse, United Way. 
Of the 360 charities funded by United Way in the Los Angeles-area, only eight 
were Asian American groups. And, even though United Way funding increased from 
about $200,000 in 1984 to $350,000 in 1988, the latest figure still represented 
only 0.6% of its total donations. This year, United Way raised nearly $95 
million. 
The percentages for all corporate and foundation donations to Asian agencies 
nationwide were similarly low, the report stated. 
"We are not, in any way, going to fool ourselves into thinking that the United 
Way network reaches all ethnic groups," said Leo Cornelius, president of the 
United Way of Greater Los Angeles. "All I can say is we are taking a look at 
what funding ought to be." 
He added, however, "In some fashion, ethnic communities benefit from United 
Way's agencies which address the issues that transcend any one community," such 
as the lack of AIDS treatment centers and child care. 
Cornelius, who was credited by Watanabe for initiating a "perestroika-type 
effort" within the United Way, said that a 2-yearreassessment of the 
organization's priorities will end soon. 
The Asian-funding study concluded that agencies need to persist in applying for 
grants, thus giving donors the opportunity to learn more about the needs in the 
community. 
"People giving out the grants would like to know who they are giving their 
money to," said Jack Shakely, president of the California Community Foundation, 
one of the state's largest philanthropic donors. "They are human beings, after 
all." 
