BEACHES BELONG TO ALL -- EVEN IN HUNTINGTON BEACH 
Last Tuesday, when temperatures soared over the 100-degree mark, the Huntington 
Beach City Council took an action that will make beachgoing more prohibitive 
for many residents: It slapped a $2 surcharge on the parking fee at city 
beaches. 
That means that starting May 1, anyone using the municipal parking lots at the 
beach will have to pay a single-day parking fee of $6. The fee was levied to 
raise money to help rebuild the Huntington Beach pier that was badly damaged in 
last year's storms. 
At the same session, the City Council reduced the cost of annual parking passes 
for residents from $40 to $30. 
There are a couple of things wrong with those seemingly contradictory actions. 
If the city is so intent on raising money for the pier's reconstruction by 
increasing beach parking fees, why didn't it raise the rate for the residents' 
annual parking passes too? Or at least leave the residents' fee at the same 
level? 
The fact that Huntington Beach city officials noted that about 85% of people 
using city beaches last year were non-residents indicates their obvious intent 
to give local inhabitants a break and sock it to the out-of-towners. 
In the process, however, the city is also socking it to a lot of people who 
cannot afford costly entertainment and look forward to an outing at the beach 
as an inexpensive form of recreation. The $6 parking fee is high enough to lift 
more than occasional beachgoing out of their price range and make frequent 
attendance prohibitive. 
We recognize that the influx of thousands of non-residents puts a strain on 
coastal communities, clogging local streets with traffic and requiring more 
money to be spent for certain city services, like police and road maintenance. 
But that is balanced out by the economic advantages of tourism that a coastal 
location provides, as well as the convenience and pleasure seaside residents 
enjoy living close to the beach. 
At times some residents and officials forget that the public beaches belong to 
everyone and that people from Costa Mesa and Corona have as much right to use 
them as they do. 
Coastal communities cannot put up fences to keep non-residents out. Charging 
exorbitant parking fees that limit public access to the beach amounts to the 
same thing. 
