VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: OXNARD; 
SCHOOLS MAY MAKE PARENTS SIGN CONTRACT 
Parents of Oxnard Union High School District students may soon be asked to 
promise to send their children to school properly washed, dressed and fed in a 
move officials hope will enlist parental support for quality education. 
The Board of Trustees will consider today whether to take the unusual step of 
asking parents to sign a contract pledging to take an active interest in their 
children's education. 
The contract in part asks that "parents should send their children to school 
properly washed, dressed, fed, rested, in good health and with a positive 
attitude towards the schools." 
While the tasks outlined in the contract may seem routine to some, school 
officials say some parents need to be reminded of basic responsibilities toward 
their children. 
"I think it's absolutely essential," Supt. Bob Carter said. "Far too many times 
we have really done nothing more for parents than give them some handy tips. We 
feel it's high time to say to the parents of children in our district, 'There 
are certain things we expect from you.' " 
If approved by the trustees, the two-page contract will be sent home to parents 
next fall in their children's registration packets. Parent Teacher Student 
Assns. will hand out posters and brochures urging families to make sure that 
children attend school regularly, arrive on time and make up missed schoolwork. 
Unique in the county, the contract is similar to dress codes adopted by school 
districts statewide, said Hueneme High School Principal Terry Taylor, who wrote 
the Home-School Partnership, as the contract is called, with Alice Johnson, 
principal of Frontier High School in Camarillo. 
More than 11,000 students are enrolled in the district. 
The proposal was written at the request of groups alarmed by the low number of 
parents who turn up for teacher conferences and school events, Taylor said. 
"While we don't expect 100% response, it will certainly raise the awareness of 
adults in the community that we are an integral part of our children's 
education," she said. 
Board members expressed hopes that the proposed contract will remind parents to 
pay more attention to their children. 
"In many cases, we see the parent does not do his or her part to make sure 
their kids are dressed and to school on time. I'd say about 50% of parents 
don't feel that responsibility to their child," board member Bedford Pinkard 
said. "We hope this will remind parents to do the basic things." 
The trustees will meet at 7 p.m., in the district office, 309 S. K St., Oxnard. 
CAROLYN KUSKY 
