GOOD HEALTH MAGAZINE; 
PSYCHOLOGY; 
EASY DOES IT; 
STRESS IS AN IRKSOME PART OF LIFE; YET SOME SEEM TO COPE, EVEN THRIVE, UNDER 
IT. SIX CALIFORNIANS TELL HOW THEY MAINTAIN THEIR EQUILIBRIUM 
Midway through a steamy Friday afternoon, a tanker truck overturned on the 
Golden State Freeway northwest of downtown Los Angeles, spewing gasoline near 
the Colorado Street exit. Caltrans predicted that the tie-up would last until 
at least 7 p.m. Work-weary drivers swore, snarled and chain-smoked their way up 
the pavement, nearly all of them looking impatient -- except the pony-tailed 
woman in the battered white van. 
Seemingly oblivious to the sea of cars and trucks, the woman plucked a guitar 
with one hand and steadied the steering wheel with the other. Her solution to 
traffic-jam Angst wouldn't win an award from the California Highway Patrol. But 
in the eyes of stress-reduction experts, her heart -- if not her hands -- is in 
the right place. 
Stress, as anyone breathing knows, is a part of life. And it's becoming a 
bigger part, according to a 1989 Louis Harris Survey conducted for Prevention 
magazine. Last year, 63% of Americans polled reported feeling "great stress" at 
least once a week. Six years ago, only 55% said they felt greatly stressed that 
often. And, the survey found, stress most often strikes those with the highest 
and lowest incomes. 
Yet, some people seem to cope, even thrive, under stress. What follows are 
stories of how a few Southern Californians manage to maintain their physical 
and mental equilibrium despite their demanding pace. 
BING CLAWSBY, PART Siamese and totally arrogant, prances away from Michael 
Feinstein's concert grand piano and out of the living room of his Hollywood 
Hills home. He cares not a whit that he's supposed to be posing for a 
photograph. 
Bing is spoiled, as Feinstein is the first to admit. Feinstein indulges the 
feline, advising the photographer that his four-legged subject may or may not 
be back. "When I'm gone on tour," says Feinstein, a concert pianist and singer, 
"four people come by to take care of him." Bing's important to him not merely 
for companionship but for stress reduction. "They've done research, you know, 
that animals are wonderful for reducing stress," says Feinstein, scooping up 
Bing as the cat returns and coaxing him back under the photographic lights. 
"Just spending time playing with him is relaxing." 
Feinstein's schedule is anything but relaxing. In the past three years, he has 
made his Broadway debut in a standing-room-only concert, played to overflow 
audiences at the Hollywood Bowl and performed a live concert filmed for a BBC 
one-hour television special. Last September, his sixth album, a collection of 
MGM movie songs, was released. A devotee of American popular music of the '20s, 
'30s and '40s, Feinstein, 33, grew up in the Midwest listening to the music of 
George and Ira Gershwin, Irving Berlin and Cole Porter. Feinstein has won rave 
reviews from the nation's press, which has dubbed him "the master of the 
high-class cabaret circuit" and praised his "unique rendition of vintage show 
tunes." 
To cope with the stress of new-found fame, Feinstein has developed an eclectic 
program. Besides Bing Clawsby's companionship, he relies on exercise. He uses a 
rowing machine -- folded up under his grand piano when not in use -- at least 
three times a week when he's not on the road. Says Feinstein: "I don't 
particularly like exercise, but I feel better when I do it." 
Every morning, he does his exercises in reflexology, a system of hand and foot 
massage to promote health and reduce stress. "Another thing I do for relaxation 
is meditation," he adds. Feinstein also pays attention to his diet but not to 
the bathroom scale, a plan that appears to work for the trim pianist. But don't 
label him perfect. He confesses to occasional binges. "Chocolate and pizza," he 
says. 
Learning to say no to professional demands helps keep Feinstein on an even keel 
as well. "When you become successful," he says, "the first thing you do is say 
yes to everything." He's learned to resist. And even if he can spare only a few 
days off, he tries to get away. Joshua Tree and Angeles Forest are two favorite 
nearby destinations. He escapes when he can to his new second home in Santa Fe. 
Feinstein even finds relaxation in the source of his stress. "Music can alter 
your mood and transport you to another place. I can be in a very bad mood. But 
when I go on stage, I'm immediately in better spirits." 
EVEN THROUGH SHADED windows, the sun was bright enough for Karen Snyder to slip 
on her sunglasses before settling in to resume her shift as an air-traffic 
controller at John Wayne Airport in Orange County. This particular morning 
promised to be more demanding than usual. One runway had been closed, so 
taxiing planes that ordinarily would be turned left would have to be directed 
to turn right. 
In a given hour, estimates Snyder (who was recently transferred to Tucson 
International Airport), she's involved in about 125 transmissions -- some 
brief, others complicated. Twelve commercial planes plus numerous private 
aircraft can leave the airport during that time. Snyder's work hours are 
staggered. Within a week, her shifts can range from early morning to evening. 
Plane crashes are always a possibility. Last year, Snyder witnessed one that 
killed a family of five. Two minutes after takeoff, the plane went down and 
exploded in flames, narrowly missing players on a nearby tennis court. 
"The worst part is when there's nothing you can do, when you must just sit 
there and watch," says Snyder, who took a half-hour break after the crash and 
then returned to work. 
Then there are what Snyder, 33, describes as lesser hassles, including pilots 
who argue on the frequency. "They'll argue about all kinds of things. If they 
can't have the runway they want, or because they have been waiting for a long 
time to depart." To defuse them, Snyder's learned to keep her sense of humor. 
"Some pilots make fun of others' landings," she says, laughing. "Some make 
comments like 'Take that, runway.' " 
Off-duty, Snyder relies on exercise to quell stress. A triathlete, she swims 
six days a week, runs about an hour a day and bicycles three times a week. She 
lifts weights for two hours three times a week. But her stress-reduction 
techniques aren't all physical. Somewhere between eating right and pumping 
iron, she tries to squeeze in a good junk novel or two. 
And she's been known to rely on old-fashioned exasperation to get her sanely 
through a shift. It worked the morning of the runway closure, when one pilot 
couldn't seem to comprehend Snyder's crystal-clear directions to get off the 
Tarmac. 
"I am off the runway," he insisted, although parked smack in the middle. Snyder 
begged -- politely -- to differ and repeated her instructions through gritted 
teeth, at first to no avail. When the pilot finally moved and Snyder was sure 
he was safe -- and out of earshot -- she employed a little impromptu stress 
reduction. "What an idiot!" she muttered, setting off peals of laughter in the 
control tower. 
WHEN WORK GETS too hectic for Josh Reynolds, the Santa Monica entrepreneur goes 
in for a "relaxation tune-up." 
His personal body shop is in the Beverly Hills office of Dr. Gary Jay, a 
headache and pain-control specialist, who leads Reynolds into the Environ, a 
sensory stimulation "space-capsule." Jay and Frank Italiane designed the 
computer-controlled unit to teach people the relaxation response. As the user 
sits on a comfortable, vibrating chair, lights flash and a relaxation tape 
plays. Pleasant aromas waft in. Using biofeedback and neurological and 
psychological technology, the unit aims to quell both chronic and acute stress. 
A half hour in the unit, Reynolds and others attest, leaves users disinclined 
to swear in traffic or blow up at life's minor annoyances. 
Reynolds, 47, who counts the mood-stone ring as one of his inventions, uses the 
Environ about once a month, whenever he gets "out of groove." That's easy to 
do, considering his 12-hour-a-day schedule as chairman of Molecular Electronics 
in Torrance. Reynolds is developing products such as "tissue-friendly" contact 
lenses that repel bothersome protein deposits. He anticipates that the lenses 
will be on the market within a year or so. Until then, he's got much to 
accomplish, including the completion of a joint-venture agreement with a 
manufacturer and additional fund-raising for payroll and research. Reynolds 
spends about a week a month on the road, jetting to Europe, New York and Canada 
to meet with venture capitalists and suppliers. 
To keep himself in sync between Environ tuneups, Reynolds listens to back-up 
relaxation tapes at home and occasionally goes to mineral baths. "And I get a 
massage every two or three weeks." Other sure-fire stress busters are tennis 
and vegetarian cooking. 
Divorced, Reynolds spends as much weekend time as possible with his 8-year-old 
daughter, Christina, who lives nearby with her mother. He's adamant about 
squeezing work into the workweek -- not letting it spill into the weekend. 
AT WORK,DR. SOTERIA Karahalios finds herself in a double bind. As a 
cardiologist, she often must instruct her patients to reduce stress, slow down 
and learn to take life a little easier. 
Usually, she dispenses this advice as she's dashing from one patient to the 
next, trying to keep up with the demands of her busy Santa Monica group 
practice and her work as director of cardiac rehabilitation at nearby St. 
John's Hospital and Health Center. 
Last year, a new, if joyful, source of stress came on the scene. Karahalios and 
her husband, Dr. Alexander Dubelman, a cardiac anesthesiologist at Brotman 
Medical Center in Culver City, welcomed their first baby, Andreas Dubelman. 
Healthy now, the baby had a rough start, suffering respiratory problems so 
severe that he stopped breathing six times in three days, Karahalios recalls. 
"We thought the baby might die." 
At first, Karahalios cut back a bit on her duties so she could spend two 
afternoons a week with Andreas. Now she's back to her practice full-time. It's 
a full week, typically crammed with 12-hour workdays along with on-call duties 
one day a week and one weekend a month. "The patients we take care of need you 
there quickly," notes Karahalios, who can reach the hospital from her 
Mandeville Canyon home in seven minutes. "When it comes to the decision about 
treatment after a heart attack, the sooner the better." 
When life gets really hectic, she tries to escape with her family to Monterey, 
where they have a second home. If time allows, they travel to Greece, where 
many of her relatives live. Exercise helps, too. Complaining that she still has 
"baby fat" to shed, Karahalios runs 2 to 4 miles a day and bicycles with her 
husband on weekends. "Running helps keep my weight down and makes me feel as if 
I've had a chance to play," says Karahalios, 38. 
She's almost embarrassed to mention another stress reducer: her house plants. 
"I have about 30 plants. I go through the house, cut the dead leaves off and 
water the plants." 
WHENEVER A MEDICAL advance occurs, Ramon Aninag anticipates a busier-than-usual 
day. As an administrative assistant at UCLA's Health Sciences Communications 
office, he knows he'll be fielding more than the usual number of telephone 
calls from reporters, asking for a university expert to comment on anything 
from new AIDS research to the latest cure for hiccups. 
From 8 a.m. until 5 p.m. -- "I don't eat lunch" -- Aninag takes seriously his 
role as the first impression most callers have of the university. In a typical 
day, he handles up to 100 telephone calls. Besides calls from media, there are 
inquiries from physicians hoping to get help publicizing their research, along 
with a goodly share of misdirected calls. "Sometimes I can hear in the callers' 
voices that they've been transferred six times," he says, so he tries to be 
patient. 
When he's not answering phones, Aninag, 32, may be helping one of the 12 staff 
members with a computer problem in his newly added role of computer system 
trouble-shooter. 
Staying stress-free seems easy for Aninag, who loves fast social dancing and 
often dances until the wee hours on weekends. He tries to visit the gym 
regularly for weightlifting and other exercises. And he refuses to give in to 
frazzled freeway nerves. "I leave my car at home to reduce stress and save 
money," he says. "Parking is expensive." Instead, he catches the bus and 
relaxes during the 20-minute ride. 
CARLOS 'N CHARLIE'S on Sunset Boulevard was crammed full of record industry 
executives on a recent Saturday night. Next on stage was Joyce Simpson, one of 
five featured acts in the showcase evening designed to catch the eyes and ears 
of industry bigwigs. Clad in a silver sequined sheath, the vocalist cooed her 
way through the numbers. And wasn't the least bit nervous, she claimed later. 
This is just Simpson's after-hours diversion, after all. By day, she works as 
an administrator of international advertising for Warner Bros. in Burbank. She 
manages ads for films in 10 countries, handling seven or eight movies at once. 
Her job entails much telephone work. "In the morning, I'm talking to Europeans. 
After lunch, it's the Australians. Evenings, it's Far Easterners. 
"We're always working in the past, present and future," says Simpson, referring 
to the stages of production of the movies. "I'm dealing with so many movies at 
one time, I can start 10 or 15 projects a day. And I'm always working against a 
deadline." 
Last year, she also had to squeeze in a few conversations with the police. "In 
seven months, my car was stolen four times," moans Simpson, 30, who traded it 
after the last recovery. 
She's learned to handle her stressful schedule partly by paying attention to 
diet and exercise. Every other day, she gets up earlier than usual and walks 2 
miles in her neighborhood. "It makes me feel good and helps me put things in 
perspective." She tries to watch her diet and recently cut out all sweets. 
"It's made a difference," she says. Other tried-and-true stress busters: taking 
herbal baths with relaxing background music and turning a deaf ear to the 
outside world once she's home. "I don't ever answer the phone at home. I leave 
my answering machine on." 
