COUNTY DENIES NEGLIGENCE IN TODDLERS' POOL TRAGEDY 
Hit with a $10-million negligence claim, county officials on Tuesday defended 
their oversight of day-care centers and asserted they were not at fault in a 
March 30 pool accident in North Tustin that left one toddler dead and two 
others with severe brain damage. 
"We followed the law," said Dianne Edwards, chief of day-care licensing for the 
county's Social Services Agency. "The responsibility lies with the care 
providers and with the parents whose children were placed there, not with the 
county." 
While under the care of Orvel and Diana Brooks at their North Tustin home, 
three children, the oldest 22 months, fell into the family pool. One child 
later died and two others suffered serious injuries. Unlicensed as day-care 
providers, the Brooks' had twice been ordered by the county to close their 
operation because of inadequate fencing and debris at their home. 
In a complaint filed Friday with the county, which will likely lead to a 
lawsuit, Timothy and Sandra Polsfoot, the parents of a girl left comatose in 
the tragedy, accused the county of doing nothing to prevent the accident and of 
failing to follow up on its orders to the Brooks to shut down their child-car 
operation. 
The Polsfoots also filed a lawsuit this week in Orange County Superior Court 
seeking unspecified damages against the Brooks. The Brooks declined to comment, 
according to a family friend who answered the telephone Tuesday. 
Even as the Polsfoots acted on their legal claims, they received a medical 
report Tuesday indicating "next to no hope" that their 19-month-old daughter 
will ever regain consciousness, their lawyer said. 
'Enormous Medical Bills' 
"The doctors are just unable to say that (Melissa Polsfoot) is ever going to 
come out of it," said Santa Ana attorney Harold Horwitz. "She may reach her 
life expectancy, but she'll probably be in a coma, and the medical bills will 
be enormous." 
As a result, the Polsfoots are seeking $5 million in medical expenses from the 
county, and an additional $5 million in general damages. 
Horwitz said county officials "should have shut the place down or taken some 
affirmative action rather than just sitting on their duffs and saying that it's 
no big deal." 
The attorney said he expects the county to reject the Polsfoots' claim, which 
would then lead to the filing of a lawsuit in Superior Court. 
County's Actions Defended 
Edwards, the county day-care administrator, defended the county's actions in 
not closing the Brooks' service after issuing cease-and-desist orders. 
"That is a legal and time-consuming process and it doesn't ensure that the 
providers stop giving care," she said. "If someone is trying to circumvent the 
system . . . it is literally impossible -- given state enforcement laws and our 
current staffing -- to close these people down." 
The second survivor of the pool accident, 22-month-old Jonathan Weston of North 
Tustin, remained in stable condition Tuesday at United Western Medical 
Center-Santa Ana, a nursing supervisor said. 
The child who died was Arthur Griese, 14 months. 
