ARTS' FUNDING CHOICES LEAD TO COMPLAINTS 
Members of the San Diego Commission for Arts and Culture got an earful during a 
3 1/2-hour appeals hearing Friday for cultural groups dissatisfied with the 
commission's funding recommendations. 
More than 90 groups applied for a total of $5.28 million in hotel and motel bed 
tax money, approved last fall by the City Council for allocation to cultural 
groups and individual artists. 
Seated in August, the 15-member commission has been on a fast track, developing 
the funding criteria and instituting an application and review process that has 
brought it to this stage. 
But on Friday, representatives from about 50 disaffected groups picked a bone 
with the commission's recommendations. Given the limited supply of money and 
the large demand, much of Friday's meeting was predictable. 
With $5.28 million to distribute, the commission received requests totaling 
$5.7 million from San Diego's 12 biggest cultural institutions, groups with 
budgets larger than $2 million. 
On Friday, some mid- and small-sized groups questioned whether the commission's 
two evaluation panels read their applications. 
An evaluation panel made a huge error when it commented that the International 
Aerospace Hall of Fame served a "rather small public," said hall of fame 
director John Roche. "We do not serve a limited public," Roche said. "We've 
exceeded 220,000 people the last three years. And this year we will exceed 
239,000." 
The Hall of fame shares visitors and space with the Aerospace Museum in the 
renovated Ford Building in Balboa Park, Roche said. He said the organization 
has 600 members. 
Marshall Lewis of the Civic Youth Orchestra took issue with comments by a 
commission evaluation panel that the orchestra musicians represented few of San 
Diego's schools. 
Ninety-six schools are represented in the orchestra, he told the commissioners, 
adding that if the funding recommendation were not increased, the orchestra 
must consider disbanding half its programs. 
San Diego Repertory Theatre board member Jennifer Hankins took issue with its 
ranking of 3+ and panel comments about the Rep relying on a hit play to resolve 
its debt. 
"Severe cost controls and rigorous management are what 'saved' the 
organization," Hankins told the commission. 
Under a formula, the 3+ translates into only a 7% increase over last year's 
funding. 
The commission rankings were based on several criteria, including artistic and 
administrative excellence, community support, arts in education, educational 
programs and impact on the community. The highest ranked groups received a 
score of 4. 
A top score of 4 is good for an 11% funding increase above the 1988 level. 
Groups were divided into three categories based on budget size. Level I groups 
have budgets above $2 million. Level II, budgets of $100,000 - $2 million. 
Level III institutions are those with budgets below $100,000. 
The commission set aside $2.89 million for the 12 Level I groups; $1.42 million 
for the 32 Level II groups; and $401,830 for the 56 Level III groups that were 
recommended for funding. 
Level I groups receiving a top ranking of 4 included the Old Globe Theatre, the 
La Jolla Playhouse and the La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art. The San Diego 
Museum of Art received the lowest funded 2+/2 ranking for a Level I group which 
amounted to zero increase in funding from 1988, a commission spokesman said. 
The commission will consider Friday's appeals during a meeting Wednesday and 
may revise some rankings, said commission executive director Victoria Hamilton. 
Hamilton said a number of policy issues came "back to the table for us to work 
on over the next year. We'll be evaluating where the process is working and 
where we can make improvements." . 
Hamilton said the board will likely give tighter guidelines to applicants in 
1990, limiting, for instance, requests to a percentage of the current budget. 
The commissioners will probably make visits to all 1989 recipients to provide 
next year's panels with site evaluations, she said. 
Following Wednesday's meeting, the commission will hold a workshop with the 
City Council on May 3. The commission recommendations will then go to the 
council's Public Service and Safety Committee for a May 17 meeting and a May 31 
vote. 
