SHERIFF'S DEPUTIES IN ANTELOPE VALLEY WORK A TOUGH, LONELY BEAT 
They patrol the deserts and mountains of Los Angeles County's last frontier in 
Chevy Blazers, carrying semiautomatic rifles along with the Sheriff 
Department's standard-issue shotguns and pistols. 
They take on wandering bears, paramilitary groups, escaped horses, desert 
nomads, poachers and drug-dealing urban gang members who have set up shop in 
the Antelope Valley desert. 
And they like it. 
"I'm like my own station," said Deputy Richard Ingalls, who is the deputy in 
the unincorporated desert areas of Lake Los Angeles, Littlerock, Sun Village 
and Pearblossom. "I'm my own detective. I do my own follow-up work." 
Unlike police officers who commute to their beats from distant suburban 
refuges, Ingalls works out of his home in the far rural reaches of the Antelope 
Valley station's 1,500-square-mile patrol area. Like frontier sheriffs of old, 
the community deputies are well-known and often the only law around. 
"Let's face it, they're out there by themselves," said Sgt. Ron Shreves, 
spokesman for the Antelope Valley station. "There are situations where bravado 
alone is not going to prevail. Maturity is a big factor. You need someone 
experienced, someone able to talk to people." 
The Antelope Valley community deputy program was created five years ago to 
respond to complaints in Acton and Agua Dulce about slow response times and 
minimal contact with the Sheriff's Department. Increasing population and crime 
subsequently led to creation of a community deputy in the eastern valley and 
one in the western mountain communities of Leona Valley. The only similar 
patrols in the county are resident deputies in Gorman and on Catalina Island. 
"It's a necessity out here," said Greg Gerard, principal of Challenger Middle 
School in Lake Los Angeles, where 15,000 residents live amid desert buttes. 
"It's the only link we have. Prior to that, we would call the department and 
get a car in a half an hour or maybe four or five hours." 
Jim Gary, former president of the Agua Dulce Civic Assn., said the patrol has 
improved police protection and community relations during the day, when a 
deputy is on patrol. 
But at night, Agua Dulce residents believe they do not get enough service when 
other, rotating deputies are less familiar with the winding roads and stark 
canyons south of Acton, Gary said. 
"Ninety percent of the people still want quicker response times," he said. 
"Under the best conditions, it takes 20 minutes." 
Some residents have said the Sheriff's Department should consider shifting Agua 
Dulce into the Santa Clarita station's jurisdiction. Sheriff's officials at the 
Lancaster station said they are working to improve coverage and expect a new 
Palmdale station to improve matters, because deputies will be based closer to 
Acton and Agua Dulce and will be able to spend more time there. 
But deputies also said the potential for slower response times comes with the 
territory. 
A new problem for deputies is gangs, particularly in Lake Los Angeles and Sun 
Village. Local youths, some of whose parents moved from the city to escape 
urban threats, are claiming allegiance to Los Angeles-area gangs and causing 
problems in schools and neighborhoods. 
"It's a very big shock to the parents," Ingalls said. "They say, 'We moved here 
to get away from that.' And you tell them: 'You have to make a stand.' " 
Ingalls, 32, oversees a vast and diverse territory, about 400 square miles. Two 
other deputies help police the area bounded by the Kern County line on the 
north, the city limits of Lancaster and Palmdale on the west, the San 
Bernardino Mountains on the south and the San Bernardino County line on the 
east. 
On a crisp, sunny morning recently, Ingalls cruised from the peach fields of 
Pearblossom into Littlerock and Sun Village. Ranch-style houses with horse 
corrals alternated with tumbledown shacks and squalid trailer parks. Ingalls 
pointed out several of the local "rock houses" and surveyed a known drug 
location where two vacant-eyed women slumped on the front steps. He has put six 
houses out of the rock cocaine business in the past year. 
In addition to the cocaine trade -- run primarily by gang members who sell in 
the Sun Village area and in Palmdale and Lancaster -- Ingalls' turf has been 
home to heavily armed, well-disciplined members of outlaw motorcycle gangs who 
use remote spots for the production and sale of methamphetamine. 
And even among non-criminal residents, including many deputies and officers 
from other departments who live in the Antelope Valley, guns and ferocious dogs 
are common household items. 
