LEIBOVITZ UPSET OVER YANKING OF LENNON PHOTO; 
ART: THE PHOTOGRAPHER WHO SHOT THE PICTURE SAYS THE FULLERTON CULTURAL CENTER 
ACTION IS 'A SIGN OF SOMETHING VERY BAD THAT'S HAPPENING IN THIS COUNTRY.' 
"Disgraceful." 
Photographer Annie Leibovitz was reacting to a decision by officials of the 
Muckenthaler Cultural Center in Fullerton to yank her portrait of a nude John 
Lennon and his fully clothed wife, Yoko Ono, from an exhibit there. 
The decision is to be reviewed today when the city-owned center's trustees meet 
with their programming committee. Objections from some of the trustees 
triggered the action late last week. 
But meanwhile, in a sharply worded statement released Wednesday through her 
studio in New York, Leibovitz referred to the removal of the portrait as "a 
sign of something very bad that's happening in this country. The cultural 
atmosphere is becoming more and more conformist and cowardly." 
Liebovitz elaborated Wednesday afternoon by telephone, saying she was "taken 
aback" by the Muckenthaler's action. "I thought it was really grotesque," she 
added. "I really thought this was the kind of fight John Lennon would have 
loved. It's a good fight." 
Leibovitz's well-known photograph -- which appeared on newsstands around the 
world nearly 10 years ago, on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine -- was to 
have been part of an exhibit entitled "Heroes, Heroines, Idols and Icons." Some 
trustees who previewed the exhibit before it opened Saturday said the Lennon 
photo did not fit in with what they saw as a "positive show on heroism." 
Wes Morgan, Fullerton's community services superintendent, maintained that the 
decision had "nothing to do with censorship, nudity, John Lennon or Yoko Ono." 
Liebovitz said such reasoning is nonetheless "preposterous" and asserted that 
the same kind of argument was used "for implementing government censorship in 
the Soviet Union in the Stalin era. It has a name: the Doctrine of the Positive 
Hero. Music and art were condemned because the function of the art did not show 
the positive hero." 
The photo was taken Dec. 8, 1980 -- just hours before Lennon was shot to death 
outside his New York City apartment. It shows him in a fetal position, 
embracing a reclining Ono. His buttocks are visible in profile. The photograph 
raised some controversy when it ran on the cover of the Jan. 22, 1981, edition 
of Rolling Stone, and several Southern California supermarket chains refused to 
carry it. 
In the magazine, Leibovitz wrote: "I promised John that this would be the 
cover. I shot some test Polaroids first. . . . John said, 'You've captured our 
relationship exactly.' " 
"This is a photograph that shows affection and tenderness," Leibovitz said in 
the statement released Wednesday. "It's a good picture. It's a picture that 
tells the truth. It should be in the show." 
"When I was asked to pick a couple of photographs (for the exhibit), it was the 
first one I thought of," Leibovitz added by phone. "The photograph shows (that) 
he was never afraid to show how human he was." 
