NATIONAL LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
HURST STRIKES OUT 13 IN HIS FIRST 1-HITTER 
Bruce Hurst pitched a one-hitter -- allowing only a two-run home run by Lonnie 
Smith -- and struck out 13 Monday night to lead the Padres to a 5-2 victory 
over the Atlanta Braves at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium. 
Carmelo Martinez and Garry Templeton each hit home runs during a four-run sixth 
inning to support the first one-hitter of Hurst's 10-year career. The 
left-hander has struck out 10 or more 14 times. 
Hurst (1-1) retired the first two batters in the third inning before allowing 
his only walk, to losing pitcher Pete Smith, and delivering Lonnie Smith's 
first home run of the year on an 0-and-2 pitch. 
Hurst, who was hammered for nine hits and seven earned runs by San Francisco in 
his National League debut last week, retired the final 19 Braves in a row, 
striking out nine along the way. 
Hurst threw 100 pitches, 72 of them strikes. 
Smith (0-1) worked 5 1/3 innings and allowed eight hits and all the Padre runs. 
The right-hander struck out seven and walked two. 
The Braves held their 2-0 lead until the bottom of the fourth when Tony Gwynn 
lined a home run to right to pull San Diego within 2-1. 
In the sixth, Jack Clark and John Kruk opened with singles. Martinez, who went 
into the game with only one hit in 18 at-bats, hammered a 2-and-1 delivery deep 
into the left-field seats for a 4-2 lead. 
One out later, Templeton hit a home run to right. 
Cincinnati 8, Houston 3 -- Eric Davis' three-run home run highlighted the Reds' 
four-run fifth inning and Tom Browning earned his 18th victory in 20 decisions 
in the game at Houston. 
Bob Knepper's record dropped to 0-2. Last season, the Astro left-hander did not 
lose consecutive starts en route to a 14-5 record. 
Ron Oester of the Reds walked to start the fifth, was balked to second and 
moved to third on a sacrifice by Browning. Barry Larkin's single to left field 
scored Oester and, after Kal Daniels singled, Davis hit a home run over the 
center-field fence. 
In the second inning, Glenn Davis singled and scored on Kevin Bass' double. 
Davis hit his second homer of the season in the fourth and doubled home Billy 
Hatcher from second in the sixth. 
The Reds added three runs in the ninth on run-scoring singles by Todd Benzinger 
and Oester and Paul O'Neill's sacrifice fly. 
Browning (2-0) has lost only two decisions since last June 6. 
Philadelphia 7, Montreal 6 -- Von Hayes led off the ninth with his second home 
run of the game to give the Phillies the victory at Philadelphia. 
Mike Fitzgerald also hit two home runs for the Expos, the second giving 
Montreal a 5-5 tie in the sixth. 
Montreal took a 6-5 lead in the seventh when reliever Jeff Parrett walked 
pinch-hitter Wallace Johnson with the bases loaded. 
But the Phillies tied it in the bottom of the inning on a leadoff single by Bob 
Dernier, a walk to Hayes, a sacrifice and a wild pitch by Greg Harris. 
