WASHINGTON INSIGHT 
NEW ENVIRONMENT: When President Bush chose him to head the Environmental 
Protection Agency, William K. Reilly was considered a nonpartisan, patrician 
defender of the earth and all its creatures. Conservatives viewed him 
suspiciously. 
No more. Now Reilly is giving sharply partisan stump speeches, winning cheers 
from audiences, such as the recent Southern Republican Leadership Conference in 
Raleigh, N.C. 
Democratic criticisms, Reilly thundered, are "the actions of a party that 
doesn't expect to be back in power anytime soon." Bush, he said, is "taking 
back the issue of the environment and he's driving some Democrats crazy." 
QUORUM CALL: Congress can't seem to act on the Administration's $300-million 
aid request to help Nicaragua's spring planting. But it's sending the next best 
thing -- lots of congressmen. 
When Violetta Chamorro is inaugurated Tuesday as Nicaragua's new President, at 
least 25 members of Congress, a half-dozen sub-Cabinet members and dozens of 
other officials will fly down from Washington, all led by Vice President Dan 
Quayle. "The limiting factor turned out to be how many people we could fit on 
Quayle's plane," one official said. 
"There is a certain irony" in the failure to pass the aid, a State Department 
official noted. "Of course, we are confident that Congress will do the right 
thing . . . eventually, anyway." 
BETTER READ THAN RED? Rita Klimova, ambassador of the newly democratic 
Czechoslovakian government, sends out letters on old embassy letterhead 
emblazoned: "The Ambassador of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic" -- with the 
word "Socialist" crossed out by hand. 
YEN TO TRAVEL: President Bush's incessant travels are causing some changes in 
the White House press corps. With Bush traveling about one day in three, 
newspapers with only one White House correspondent are having trouble keeping 
up. Moreover, as the newspaper industry struggles with sharp declines in 
advertising revenue, many have decided full-time coverage of the President is 
simply too expensive. Besides, many of Bush's trips simply do not produce any 
news. 
The net result: roughly a 30% decline in the number of reporters following Bush 
over the last year. But as American reporters drop off the presidential press 
plane, some are being replaced by correspondents for Japanese papers: At least 
three now cover Bush full time. 
DELUGE: Unhappy with some details of a new Democratic spending blueprint during 
a House Budget Committee hearing, Rep. Jack Buechner (R-Mo.) sought to drive 
home his point by recalling the biblical story of Noah's Ark, in which all the 
animals went aboard Noah's vessel two-by-two, including a pair of skunks. 
"There may be a couple of skunks in this ark," Buechner declared, "but our job 
is to get it to float. You guys got your way of launching the ark, and we got 
ours, but the important thing is that the ship of state remain afloat." 
