ROSE'S SELLING OF MEMORABILIA COMES UNDER SCRUTINY 
The black bat rests on red velvet in a polished cedar case. Four strips of 
adhesive tape on the handle are worn where the hitter's hands once rested. 
Below the bat a proclamation reads: "On Aug. 11, 1986 Pete Rose used this bat 
to go 5-for-5 against the San Francisco Giants at Riverfront Stadium in 
Cincinnati. It was the 10th time in Pete's career that he'd hit safely five 
times in a game, thereby breaking the previous N.L. record." 
In the lower right corner of the case, there is a videocassette tape -- 
"Baseball The Pete Rose Way, Learn Baseball From a Living Legend." 
The tape has toppled from its upright position. 
Much the same way Pete Rose has fallen in recent weeks. Rose, the Cincinnati 
Reds' manager, is under investigation by the commissioner's office for, among 
other things, possibly betting on baseball games. His appetite for gambling has 
been documented as much as his hitting heroics once were. 
Ron Maslowski, owner of a video store, placed the Rose tape in the case after 
he won the bat at a video convention raffle in Las Vegas in 1986. 
Maslowski said Embassy Video, which made the Rose video, raffled off a Rose 
glove, an autographed ball and the bat at the convention. Maslowski was told 
Embassy paid $4,000 for the bat. 
"They told me to put (the bat) in the hotel safe," Maslowski said. 
When he returned home, he wanted his customers to see the bat, but took similar 
precautions. 
"I had this case made with the plexiglass cover and had it set on the wall," 
Maslowski said. "I probably could take the case apart, but it would be 
difficult. It's in there solid. 
"Somehow the tape has fallen since then. Maybe somebody is trying to tell me 
something." 
The message to part-time Connecticut baseball collectors, such as Maslowski, 
and to those whose business is baseball memorabilia, is to be wary of Rose 
items. 
The Internal Revenue Service reportedly is investigating whether Rose fully 
reported income from Pik Six wagers at Turfway Park in Florence, Ky., and 
income from the sale of personal memorabilia. 
Although Rose prides himself on his achievements, he has sold many of his 
baseball possessions, including his diamond-studded Hickok Belt for being the 
outstanding professional athlete in 1975. 
During the last two weeks, it has been reported that five to 10 people have the 
bat that Rose used in 1985 when he set the major league record with his 4,192nd 
hit. 
Maslowski hopes his Rose bat is the real thing. He believes it is, but he has 
doubts. 
"When my wife Ronnie and I went to the convention, it was only one week after 
Rose went 5-for-5," Maslowski said. "I didn't think much of it then. But, now I 
wonder: 'Why would a player want to sell off this bat so quickly, one that he 
should keep forever?' Did he need $4,000 quickly? Was it all part of a gambling 
payoff? I don't know. God only knows the reason and if the bat is legitimate." 
Neil Robert Sakow, owner of Neil's American Dream Museum in West Hartford, 
Conn., said that he has about 7 million baseball cards in his museum and 
"hundreds of thousands" of baseball mementos. He said he sold a Rose rookie 
card in early April for $800. 
Cards are fine. But when the merchandise changes to Rose memorabilia, Ray 
Karaban, owner of Ray's Card Corner in Seymour, Conn., is reluctant to engage 
in that business. 
"I heard that three or four years ago Rose was selling off his stuff," Karaban 
said. "Rose often would change his hat and uniforms between innings and then 
give them to a clubhouse kid to sell. It doesn't surprise me at all now to read 
about his selling of his memorabilia." 
Karaban has only one Rose memento in his store: an autographed 1975 Reds bat 
that also has Carl Yastrzemski's autograph. Rose was the Most Valuable Player 
of the '75 World Series between the Reds and the Boston Red Sox. 
Sakow said that Rose would not be the first ballplayer to sell duplicate items. 
"You hear about there being duplicate shirts, caps and bats with Rose," Sakow 
said. "Unless I get a memento first-hand from the player or from someone I have 
complete trust in, I stay away from Rose memorabilia. It's a crap shoot. I 
pride myself at having blue-chip items. I don't consider the Pete Rose stuff in 
that class." 
Maslowski's bat has the Mizuno label, the brand Rose used in 1986. The end of 
the barrel has get-the-mud-out-of-your-spikes scuffs. Pete Rose's autograph and 
the Aug. 11, 1986 date are written on the barrel. 
Beneath Rose's autograph, the Mizuno label reads: "Genuine Pete Rose." 
