UNBELIEVERS CRUSADING FOR CONTROL OF ATHEIST'S FORTUNE 
During his long life, there were many things the eccentric and outspoken James 
Hervey Johnson detested, among them blacks, alcohol, Jews, lawyers, Catholics, 
people on welfare, modern medicine, Mexicans, meat, liberals and communists. 
But there was one thing he hated most of all: religion. 
Johnson, a devout atheist and notorious tightwad, worshiped money. And now, 
several months after his death at age 87, atheists, including the most well 
known in the nation, Madalyn Murray O'Hair, are fighting for control of 
Johnson's estate, worth $16.5 million. 
According to his will, the millions were to be placed in a trust and the income 
used to "expose religion as against reason . . . and to publicize my views on 
religion and health" as well as to continue the Truth Seeker, a monthly 
magazine Johnson published and edited and which, at 116 years, is the oldest 
atheist publication in the United States. 
By all accounts a stubborn and cantankerous man, Johnson left legal control of 
his estate in the hands of his former banker, who happens to be a church-going 
Episcopalian, and the magazine is being run by a woman who is a Mormon. To 
O'Hair, this is blasphemy. 
She contends that Johnson's money was left to promote atheism and that it's 
ridiculous to think that anyone who believes in God has any notion of how to do 
that. Then why didn't Johnson leave his estate to O'Hair? Because he despised 
her. 
And she loathed him. She continues to refer to the man she says she knew for 40 
years as "James Scurvy Johnson." 
That so much attention is being paid to a man who had no close friends, was a 
chronic complainer and who routinely angered many of his acquaintances seems 
ironic. If it wasn't for the money and his will, his niche in history might 
have been that of "village atheist," in the words of Jack Schebesta, 58, who 
calls himself a humanist and freethinker and who knew Johnson for about 25 
years. 
James Hervey Johnson was born in Ohio in 1901 and as a child moved to San 
Diego. For many years he ran a downtown bookstore that dispensed atheist books 
and literature and led to contacts with people such as Schebesta and Bonnie 
Lange, the woman who today publishes the Truth Seeker and who remains his 
biggest supporter and praises him as a staunch individualist. 
Elected Assessor 
Johnson trumpeted his prejudices and beliefs in several ways. He posted 
hand-painted signs in his Hillcrest yard and staged seminars devoted to 
rationalists such as Voltaire, Thomas Paine and Robert Ingersoll. 
In the early 1930s, Johnson was elected San Diego County assessor, and later 
stunned those with Establishment views when he advocated taxing church 
property. He was removed as assessor after he was convicted on a charge of 
misusing public funds because he had exceeded his authority in giving back tax 
refunds. 
In 1952, Johnson's sick mother, then 79, took him to court on charges that he 
had assumed control of her money, cutting off her access to $31,000, and had 
failed to pay her $2,000 hospital bill. A hospital administrator testified that 
Johnson hadn't responded to numerous requests to pay the bill. In typical 
fashion, Johnson refused to discuss the case with acquaintances, telling them 
it was none of their business. Others say he took over because his mother was 
senile. 
Johnson, a vegetarian, was also a vehement booster of natural foods and 
holistic health concepts, but even here, he went to the extreme. Some of his 
associates said his excessiveness was part of a "Loony Tunes" diet. 
He fasted often, sometimes for a few days, sometimes for longer, to remove, he 
said, toxins from his body. He would go for long periods consuming nothing more 
than orange juice and condensed milk. He distrusted modern medicine and refused 
to take even the mildest of drugs, such as aspirin, because he believed he was 
a better master of his health. 
Had Skin Cancer 
Johnson had skin cancer, and it led to his left ear simply crumbling away. It 
was common for him to stick a paper towel in his ear hole. About three years 
ago, his condition became severe and he was hospitalized with bacterial 
meningitis. 
He died alone in an austere Hillcrest apartment last August, felled by a heart 
attack as he soaked for hours in his bathtub, a practice he found eased his 
pains. 
While still healthy, Johnson remained a bitter and hostile opponent of 
religion. 
In the early 1960s, he took over publication of the Truth Seeker and assumed 
control of the American Assn. for the Advancement of Atheism (AAAA) and the 
National League for the Separation of Church and State, two old-line atheist 
organizations. 
The magazine's former publisher had used it to rail against blacks and Jews, 
and under Johnson's reign the attacks against a broad range of purported 
enemies continued, ranging from those on welfare to those critical of South 
Africa. Through the Truth Seeker, Johnson offered publications such as "Racial 
Loyalty Pro White Paper," "White American Resistance" and wrote articles 
abusing Catholics and communists. He wrote statements such as "The 
Negro-breeding do-gooder does not understand geometrical increase of human 
beings," and "If gorillas could speak, equalists would denounce as racists 
whoever would refuse to accept them as brothers." 
Small Circulation 
It was vile and it was revolting and drove many people away, including those 
who tried to befriend him, according to several longtime associates. At his 
death, circulation of the magazine, an amateurish publication filled with 
typographical errors, was no more than a few hundred. 
According to his lawyers, Johnson amassed his fortune by selling property his 
family owned in San Diego and using the money to invest in the stock market. 
O'Hair and her supporters contend that he "stole" the money from wills left in 
his name by dead atheists. The accusation, however, has not been proven, and 
O'Hair's critics make the same charge about her. 
There is no dispute that when he died, he left behind a $16.5-million estate, 
most all of it consisting of tens of thousands of shares of blue-chip stocks. 
At least since 1983, O'Hair had been trying to get Johnson to relinquish 
control of his estate and the two atheist organizations. But in typical O'Hair 
fashion, her tact was bombastic. 
"You are a dying, defunct, discredited, old man who will grow moldy in an 
unmarked grave, having squandered atheist funds on the stock market," she wrote 
him six years ago. "In the interests of a movement which you have injured by 
your presence in it, it appears to me that you should be now making 
arrangements to turn everything over to American Atheists, which can do 
something since it is a viable, militant organization of excellent leadership, 
organization and elan." 
Lawsuit Filed 
In 1987, Johnson wrote a will giving control of the Truth Seeker to the AAAA. 
O'Hair was sent a copy of the document anonymously. In the fall of that year, 
O'Hair and her associates filed a lawsuit in federal court in San Diego, 
claiming that they were members of AAAA and held stock in the Truth Seeker's 
parent company. Additionally, the suit alleged that Johnson had commingled 
funds from the atheist organizations with his own personal bank accounts. 
The suit asked the court to recognize O'Hair and her supporters as the true 
owners of the corporations and the magazine, and O'Hair launched a duplicate of 
the Truth Seeker. 
And because there was a dispute over who owned stock in the Truth Seeker 
corporation, O'Hair allegedly printed up her own stock certificates, held a 
board meeting attended by her and her supporters and voted Johnson out of 
power. 
He might have been ill, but Johnson immediately launched a counterattack. 
O'Hair and the others, he said, were trying to take his money away, and they 
wanted to make sure that his non-atheist executor had nothing to do with the 
estate. 
Johnson did one more thing: he filed a hand-written, one-paragraph codicil to 
his will that took control of the Truth Seeker from the AAAA and essentially 
left it in control of the executor of his estate, Lawrence Y. True. And now, 
Johnson's lawyers have accused O'Hair in a civil lawsuit of racketeering for 
her alleged manipulations to take control of Johnson's organizations. 
Will Challenged 
A month after Johnson's death, O'Hair broadened her legal attack, formally 
challenging the will in probate court, disputing among other things the fees 
being paid to lawyers to defend the estate and the $10,000 a month being spent 
to produce the Truth Seeker, an amount she called "grotesquely large." 
Last Wednesday, O'Hair and other atheists received a crushing setback when 
Superior Court Judge Peter E. Riddle ruled against their probate lawsuit, a 
judgment punctuated when a disgruntled atheist in the audience rose and asked 
the judge what religion he was and whether he attended church on Sundays. A 
lawyer for O'Hair, Georgine Brave of San Diego, said it's likely there will be 
an appeal. 
The ruling allows True to begin spending money from the estate for, among other 
things, publishing the Truth Seeker and defending against O'Hair's other 
lawsuit in federal court, in which she is seeking control of the magazine and 
the two atheist organizations operated by Johnson. 
The fact that True is executor of the estate riles atheists almost as much as 
religion. "We can't stand by and watch this given away to a Christian," said 
atheist Stephen Thorne, 34, a mental health worker for San Diego County who 
briefly worked with Johnson. "That's like giving B'nai B'rith to Yasser 
Arafat." 
Although his salary for handling the estate has yet to be determined by the 
court, it's likely that True will receive about $80,000 a year for his 
services. His salary, plus payments to attorneys, accountants and others, will 
likely consume several hundred thousand dollars from the estate, a prospect 
that enrages atheists. 
Business Relationship 
For True, the entire episode has been disconcerting and has caused him grief in 
his own church. A lawyer by training, he spent much of his working life as a 
trust officer at Security Pacific Bank in San Diego. True knew Johnson for 25 
years because True had tried to get some of Johnson's business. "He did open a 
small trust account . . . but it was very difficult to get his business," True 
said. 
The two were never close, talking only a few times a year, with Johnson, who 
changed lawyers as often as most people change socks, calling him for advice. 
True, 66, retired last year to work full time on the estate. He says Johnson 
was well aware of his religious background when Johnson asked him to be 
executor in 1986. 
"I don't think he trusted atheists, and especially Mrs. O'Hair," True said. 
Even so, True says he and his wife agonized between his role as the trustee of 
a multimillion-dollar fund created to "expose religion" and his being an 
Episcopalian who is active in his congregation and regularly attends church on 
Sundays. 
"We had a lot of thinking about that. My family at one point early on said, 
'Don't do it. Don't accept.' So we went to see our parish priest and in a 
private meeting told him about (the dilemma). He said it was our moral 
obligation to carry out this edict," True said. 
'That Hurt Me' 
But that didn't stop some pillars of the church from open skepticism. "They'd 
see me and ask, 'What are you doing down there?' That hurt me to the quick." 
Atheists aren't the only threat to Johnson's estate. True and Johnson's last 
lawyer, Roy R. Withers of San Diego, say that, because of Johnson's 
obstinateness, nearly $9 million of the $16.5 million may be eaten away by 
taxes. 
"We used to fight like cats and dogs," Withers says of his former client, who 
wrote articles damning lawyers. Some of those fights centered on Johnson's 
vociferous refusal to shelter his estate from taxes by creating, for example, a 
tax-exempt foundation. "He just didn't want to listen," True says. 
O'Hair says she would rather have all the money consumed by taxes than have 
what's left of the estate be "run by anybody religious." 
Under the tutelage of True and Lange, who was appointed president of the Truth 
Seeker company by True, the Truth Seeker bears little resemblance to the 
magazine published by Johnson. 
New Look 
The latest issue, produced at a cost of $10,000, is printed on high-quality 
stock and slick paper, runs 36 pages and is heavy with articles such as "Carbon 
Dioxide and the Greenhouse Effect," "Can More Touching Lead to Less Violence in 
Our Society?" "GAIA: The Goddess of Science and Poetry," and "Invoking the 
Spirit of Eco-Feminism." 
Only near the last page is there any sign of Johnson or his beliefs, and that 
is in the form of a first installment of the serialization of "Superior Men," a 
book written by Johnson in 1949. The book apparently contains none of the 
racism and anti-Semitism that were to mark the author a little more than a 
decade later. 
Some atheists and others -- including those who have no allegiance to O'Hair 
and are alienated by her tactics -- believe the revitalized publication has 
nothing at all to do with fulfilling Johnson's intentions. 
"It's dreadful to say the least," said Schebesta, a retired pianist who says he 
is repulsed by what he calls O'Hair's vulgarity. "This is the most garbled, 
muddled metaphysical mush . . . that emphasizes the abolition of everything 
that is controversial. It's verbal nonsense. There is no reflection of 
(Johnson's) thought. Zero. Mr. Johnson might have been a bigot and a racist but 
at least he was clear." 
True and Lange say they have attempted to remove the racism and anti-Semitism 
from the Truth Seeker and want it to reflect a broader range of philosophy and 
promote more mainstream holistic health. True says he is even considering using 
some of the money from the estate for scholarships so students can study 
religion. 
Lange Not an Atheist 
Lange, who is being paid $3,000 a month as president of the Truth Seeker 
company, maintains that Johnson was no longer a strict atheist when he died. 
Johnson, she says, had changed into a freethinker, a philosophy she said 
includes atheists, agnostics, humanists, "all kinds of people," and it is the 
intent of the new Truth Seeker to reflect that. Lange, who says she knew 
Johnson better than anyone and that he never made derogatory statements about 
blacks or Jews in her presence, is not an atheist. 
