PLANE CRASHES ON O.C. TENNIS COURT; 5 DIE; 
PILOT SEEMS TO VEER FROM CLUBHOUSE AS TENNIS PLAYERS FLEE 
A private plane carrying a Canadian family of five crashed onto a tennis court 
at the Newport Beach Tennis Club Friday morning, exploding in a fireball and 
killing all aboard. 
The plane narrowly missed tennis players and the clubhouse. No one on the 
ground was injured. 
The plane had taken off from John Wayne Airport at 8:33 a.m. One witness at the 
airport said that just after the takeoff, the plane appeared to be flying 
abnormally low with at least one engine backfiring. Soon afterward, smoke was 
seen spewing from the plane. 
Air traffic controllers observing the plane's apparent distress radioed the 
pilot, who responded in a clear and calm voice, "We have to come back," 
according to a federal investigator at the crash scene. 
Witnesses at the tennis club said the plane turned but dove steeply toward the 
pricey Eastbluff residential community less than 2 miles from the end of the 
runway. It then nosed nearly straight down, in an apparent attempt to miss the 
tennis clubhouse, which contained an estimated 125 people. A shopping center 
and several schools are nearby. 
Authorities identified the victims as pilot Anthony Ronald Deis, 35, his wife, 
Marilyn Aletha Deis, 34, and their three daughters -- Amanda Lynn, 10; Jaclyn 
Dawn, 7, and Kimberly Lisa, 5. All lived in Camrose, about 50 miles southeast 
of Edmonton, the capital of Alberta. 
Anthony Deis was owner of three Richardson's Jewelry stores in Alberta, and his 
firm was listed as owner of the plane, a twin-engine, six-seat Piper Aerostar 
PA-60. 
The Piper Aerostar has had a history of engine-failure accidents during 
takeoffs and can be an unforgiving aircraft in the hands of an inexperienced 
pilot, according to aviation experts. 
Aviation Consumer magazine of Greenwich, Conn., said the Piper Aerostar has the 
highest accident rate among similar twin-engine aircraft. From 1977 to 1982, 
Aerostars were involved in 28 fatal accidents, and since 1983, the National 
Transportation Safety Board has recorded 20 fatal accidents involving the 
aircraft. 
Piper Aircraft of Vero Beach, Fla., ended production of the Aerostar in 1985. 
Friends said Anthony Deis had taken up flying in 1976, had well over 1,000 
hours of flying experience and had an advanced instrument rating. They said, 
however, that Deis had flown the Aerostar for less than a year. 
Oil Line Investigated 
Anthony Deis' brother, Tom, a police officer in Medicine Hat, Canada, said he 
contacted police in Orange County and was told that a repaired oil line was 
being investigated as a possible cause of the accident. 
He said the repair was done at John Wayne Airport on Wednesday. Airport 
officials confirmed that the plane had been serviced during its stay in Orange 
County, but neither federal nor Newport Beach police investigators would 
comment on the possible cause of the crash. 
Tom Deis said his brother's family had taken off from Camrose on March 22 for 
an Easter vacation to meet friends in Orange County and tour Disneyland. 
The family's flight plan filed Friday indicated they were returning to Alberta 
by way of Pocatello, Ida. 
The plane crashed about 20 yards from the corner of the clubhouse onto a tennis 
court where instructor Bernie Mitton was volleying with his students. 
Mitton, 34, of Irvine, who was treated for shock in a hospital emergency room 
but otherwise was unhurt, said one of his students shouted, "There's a plane 
coming!" He said he looked up and saw the plane falling nearly straight down. 
"I started to run into a corner, but it seemed like the plane just kept 
following me," Mitton said. "I ran out of the corner, and within seconds it 
crashed and immediately exploded and burst into flames. If I had stayed in that 
corner, I would have been dead. 
"As I ran away, it exploded behind me. You could feel the intensity of the 
heat." 
The plane hit with such force that only a propeller thrown to the side was 
easily recognizable as part of an airplane. 
The remains of the aircraft lay in a heap at the corner of the tennis court, 
where a chain-link boundary fence had been twisted and bent but contained the 
wreckage like a net. 
Little of the wreckage littered the adjoining court, where no one had been 
playing at the time of the crash. None of the wreckage was thrown to the other 
end of court where Mitton and his students had retreated. 
Steering Away 
The students, Bob and June Vermes of Irvine, said it appeared the pilot was 
trying to steer the falling plane away from the players. 
"I think he saw us and knew that he was coming toward this building," Bob 
Vermes said. "He veered into where he did and missed everybody." 
June Vermes said it appeared that "my husband actually was going in one 
direction and the plane was just veering as though the (pilot) was trying to 
avoid us, to miss us." 
Lois Jacobs, Ruth Bowman and Lisa Murdy, all of Newport Beach, were playing on 
a court about 50 yards away and saw the plane descending, while Mitton and his 
students scrambled to escape. 
The plane burst into "a huge ball of flame, then it exploded," Murdy said. 
"The explosion went straight up; it didn't spread out," Bowman said. "That's 
what saved them." 
Another of the club's six tennis instructors, Kevin Forbes, was two courts away 
from the crash and said he saw and heard four distinct explosions. 
Jeff Rich, the National Transportation Safety Board's chief investigator at the 
crash scene, reviewed a recording of the conversation between the pilot and the 
control tower at John Wayne Airport. 
He said controllers noticed that the plane was not climbing properly and 
radioed the pilot, asking if there were any problems. Several seconds later, 
Deis responded: "We have to come back." Controllers then lost contact with the 
plane, Rich said. 
Deis gave no indication that the plane was experiencing mechanical difficulties 
or that he was suffering from any physical ailment or problem, Rich said. Deis' 
voice was calm, clear and had no tone of concern or alarm, he added. 
Danger Was Apparent 
Bill Parker, owner of the tennis club, said the possibility of such a crash had 
been apparent to him for a long time. 
"Every day I see these planes take off. I can't tell you how many times I've 
thought of what might happen." 
Parker said that if the crash had occurred later, all the tennis courts would 
have been full. "We're just incredibly lucky no one on the ground was hurt," he 
said. 
The National Transportation Safety Board dispatched half a dozen investigators 
and workers to the scene, who in the afternoon began the laborious task of 
scooping up the remains of the craft and loading it into a trailer that would 
carry it to a warehouse in Carson for inspection. 
Rich, the NTSB investigator, said the removal probably would not be completed 
before this morning. 
Paramedics said they treated about 20 people at the club for shock, but 
considered only four of the cases serious. The Orange County chapter of the 
American Red Cross sent a psychologist, four psychiatric technicians and two 
nurses to the scene to counsel witnesses. 
Times staff writers Steven R. Churm, George Frank and George Bundy Smith 
contributed to this story. 
