110 DIE IN FERRY BLAZE; CAPTAIN CALLS IT ARSON; 
TRAGEDY: RESCUERS BEGIN GRISLY SEARCH OF THE DANISH VESSEL AT A SWEDISH PORT. 
ANOTHER 36 PEOPLE ARE MISSING. 
Police and firefighters late Saturday launched what was expected to be a grisly 
all-night search through the still-smoking hull of a North Sea ferry, looking 
for the bodies of victims who died in a possible arson attack on the ship 
during a voyage from Norway to Denmark. 
Firefighters reported finding at least 110 bodies as the stricken 
Danish-operated Scandinavian Star was towed from a point about 30 miles from 
the mouth of the Oslo Fiord to Lysekil, a small port on the west coast of 
Sweden. Another 36 people are missing and believed dead in one of Europe's 
worst ferry disasters since World War II. 
"There are still rooms in the boat which have not been investigated, and people 
also might be lost at sea," Lysekil Police Chief Roald Onsoe told a news 
conference Saturday night. "There is no more life on board." 
Earlier, an international air and sea rescue involving a score of ships and at 
least seven helicopters managed to carry a reported 321 other ferry passengers 
and crew members to safety in Norway, Sweden and Denmark. 
A spokesperson for VR-DANO Line, the ferry operators, quoted Scandinavian Star 
Captain Hugo Larsen as saying that piles of clothes had been used to set three 
separate fires outside cabins on the vessel, which was on a regularly scheduled 
overnight run from Oslo to Frederikshavn, Denmark. 
Scandinavian police were apparently taking the report seriously, though there 
was no immediate indication of what the motive for arson might have been. 
According to Larsen's account, crew members were able to extinguish two of the 
fires, but the third, on a different deck, raged out of control. 
The Scandinavian Star left Oslo at about 11 p.m. local time Friday, 3 1/2 hours 
behind schedule, and first radioed a call for help at 2:30 a.m. Saturday, said 
Lars Kalland, liaison officer for the Maritime Rescue &amp; Coordination Center 
of the Swedish Board of Navigation in Goteborg. 
For hours after the tragedy began, sea rescue services were incorrectly 
reporting that all the passengers had been evacuated from the ship. 
Most passengers were asleep in their cabins when the fire started. A crew of 21 
firefighters from Goteborg, who reached the stricken vessel near dawn, reported 
finding "children and grown-ups lying (dead) in their nightgowns," said Anneka 
Braide, a spokeswoman for the Swedish city's fire service, in a telephone 
interview. 
The victims appeared to have died from smoke inhalation rather than burns, she 
added. 
Survivors said they heard no fire alarm, and they complained that the ship's 
crew knew little about safety procedures. 
"I was asleep, and I woke up because I felt there was the smell of smoke," said 
one woman interviewed on British Broadcasting Corp. television. "And when I 
looked into the corridor, it was full of smoke." She said that crew members 
didn't know how to start the engine on the lifeboat she was aboard. 
A Soviet ship that picked up 44 survivors was among several craft that rescued 
passengers and took them to various Scandinavian ports. 
Braide said that the tragedy might have been far worse had the unpredictable 
North Sea weather not been at its best. The water was calm and the sky blue as 
the still-burning ship was towed toward Lysekil. 
"I think it's among the most difficult operations you can face as a 
firefighter," Braide commented, "because you have to go deep down into a ship, 
it's dark, the staircases are narrow, it's hot and it's smoke-filled. And so 
it's physically very dangerous and very difficult. And in this case, since 
there are so many deaths, it's also very tough psychological work, that you 
face death everywhere." 
Firefighters tried "to use as little water as possible" in order not to further 
destabilize the already listing ferry and increase the danger that it would 
capsize, the Goteborg fire service spokeswoman added. The metal hull of the 
ship got so hot, she added, that firefighters would no sooner put out one blaze 
than another would flare. 
The crippled ferry was finally towed into Lysekil at about 9 p.m. Saturday 
evening, more than 18 hours after first reporting trouble, said Kristina Allen, 
a spokeswoman at the special police incident room set up in the small port. 
She said in a telephone interview that "hundreds" of workers were preparing to 
search the ship and remove the bodies of victims. "The plan is that they're 
going to work through tonight," she said. 
Most of the approximately 400 passengers on the Scandinavian Star were 
reportedly Scandinavian tourists getting an early start on their Easter 
holiday. The crew, numbering about 100, was mostly Portuguese and Filipino. 
The vessel carried about 100 automobiles and 14 trucks as well as passengers, 
said the maritime rescue center's Kalland. 
The Bahamian-registered ferry is owned by the Danish shipping company VR-DANO 
Line, the Associated Press reported. SeaEscape Ltd. of Miami sold the ship to 
VR-DANO last month, a SeaEscape spokeswoman said in a telephone interview from 
Miami. 
AP reported that an engine room fire broke out aboard the Scandinavian Star in 
March, 1988, as the vessel sailed from Cozumel, Mexico, to Tampa, Fla. None of 
the 439 passengers on board at that time, most of them Americans, were injured. 
