HIGH SCHOOL ROUNDUP 
In other Metro Conference games: 
Sweetwater 4, Hilltop 2 -- Isaac Bruce went the distance and Raul Sanchez 
homered in the fifth inning to lead the host Red Devils (8-8, 3-2). 
Mar Vista 5, Montgomery 2 -- Jose Galaz's home run in the top of the second 
inning sparked the Mariners and Tim O'Neal went the distance for the victory. 
Marian 5, Southwest 2 -- Pitcher Leo Ortiz helped his own cause with a 
fifth-inning home run. Ortiz pitched all seven innings to get the victory. 
Chula Vista 10, Coronado 7 -- Chula Vista scored three times in the top of the 
seventh to break a 7-7 tie. Art Castro had three hits and three RBIs and 
Armando Navarro collected three hits and two RBIs. 
Avocado League 
Rancho Buena Vista 7, Ramona 1 -- Donovan Crocker pitched a three-hitter, 
struck out 11 and did not walk a batter to pick up the victory. Sophomore James 
Gore hit a two-run home run for the visiting Longhorns. 
Escondido 15, El Camino 3 -- Brian Frank led Escondido with four hits. Gerald 
Cabral, Mitch Anderson and Robert Erp each contributed three and John Cabral 
had two. 
San Pasqual 10, Oceanside 2 -- Dave Bejtasa led the way for the Eagles, going 
three for three with three RBIs. Jim Clayton and Kevin Herde each had two hits 
and an RBI. 
Carlsbad 10, San Marcos 7 -- Larry Griffith capped a six-run seventh inning for 
Carlsbad with a two-out grand slam as the Lancers rallied. 
Palomar League 
Fallbrook 10, Poway 8 -- Center fielder Dirk Fisher took over the county RBI 
lead with a grand slam in Fallbrook's eight-run second inning, giving him 31. 
Eric Larson went three for three with an RBI for Fallbrook (12-5, 2-2). Mike 
Gainsborough, second to Fisher with 30 RBIs, was three for four with two RBIs 
for Poway (7-9, 1-4). 
San Dieguito 3, Torrey Pines 2 -- Michael Henry scored the winning run on a 
passed ball in the bottom of the seventh for San Dieguito (10-7-1, 2-2). Justin 
Machado hit a two-run homer in the second to put San Dieguito ahead, 2-1. 
Vista 11, Orange Glen 7 -- Rodney DeLeon went three for four with one RBI, 
Geoff Dobbins was two for four with three RBIs, and Brian Fleming went two for 
five with two RBIs and a triple for Vista (13-3-1, 5-0). Jim Roby was two for 
three with three RBIs for Orange Glen (8-10,1-3). 
City Western League 
USDHS 15, Clairemont 1 -- Tony Moeder went four for five with a home run, two 
triples and six RBIs to lead the Dons. Jeff DesJardins went three for five with 
four RBIs and Steve Walker went three for three with two RBIs. 
Softball 
Avocado League 
Rancho Buena Vista 10, Ramona 0 -- Tanya Pasco went three for four with a 
triple and two RBIs and Rachel Boyer (6-2) pitched a five-hitter for Rancho 
Buena Vista (14-2, 5-0). 
Palomar League 
Vista 1, Orange Glen 0 -- Vista broke the scoreless deadlock in the fifth when 
Sahnnon Eck led off with a walk, then moved to second on Heather Sandifer's 
single. After another walk to Jeannine Reed, Rene Richardson singled in Eck. 
The victory gives Vista (5-0) first place and drops Escondido (4-1) into 
second. 
