HOSPITAL KILLING SUSPECT SHOWED SIGNS OF TROUBLE; 
TRAGEDY: RECORDS SAY FATHER WENT TO COURT TO BEGIN PROCESS OF HAVING SON 
COMMITTED FOR MENTAL PROBLEMS. PETITION WAS LATER WITHDRAWN. 
The man accused of shooting four people in a Mission Bay hospital emergency 
room has had psychiatric problems dating back at least 25 years, when his 
father went to court to have him examined for mental illness because he was 
"very hyperactive" and "on the verge of violence." 
Bradford Warren Powers Jr., 46, was held Monday in the San Diego County Jail 
and is scheduled to be arraigned this afternoon in Municipal Court on two 
counts of murder and two counts of attempted murder. 
Powers turned himself in to authorities about an hour after he allegedly opened 
fire Saturday in the emergency room of the Mission Bay Memorial Hospital, 
killing a nurse and student trainee, and wounding the on-duty physician and the 
father of a patient, police said. 
Homicide Sgt. Frank Martinez said police interviewed Powers and his family and 
learned that he was angry over the death Saturday morning of his father, 
well-known architectural illustrator Brad Powers Sr. 
The shootings occurred about eight hours after the elder Powers died in the 
emergency room. His relatives then returned to their La Jolla home, where they 
began discussing the emergency room death. 
"They said he was angry (at the hospital) just like they were," the sergeant 
said. "They were all angry. But there was no conversation about him going to 
the hospital and shooting these people. 
"Instead, he just got up and left, and the next thing you know he's in his car 
and drove to the hospital. He just disappeared and they didn't even know he 
left." 
Martinez described Powers as someone who "cared about his father very, very 
much." And witnesses said that the hospital assailant, when he walked into the 
emergency room, yelled, "You killed my father!" 
Court records show that Powers has been suspected of suffering mental problems 
in the past. 
In 1965, his father filed a petition in San Diego Superior Court to begin the 
process of having his son tested for mental illness with the possibility of 
having him committed to county authorities. 
Bradford Powers Jr. at that time was 21, single and unemployed, and he was 
examined by Dr. Carl E. Graner. 
"Graner states that he is in an acute psychotic episode and appears to be on 
the verge of violence," the father's petition said. "He refused medication and 
hospitalization." 
The elder Powers then described his son's behavior at home. 
"I noticed that, when he arrived home from a training cruise a week ago, he was 
very hyperactive and talkative and talked on and on about abuses he underwent 
on the cruise. 
"He said that a doctor accused him of malingering when he was in fact in great 
pain. He talked hour upon hour about this and would talk on no other subject. 
We took him to a medical doctor, who found nothing physically wrong with him 
and recommended a psychiatrist." 
The father said that his son was treated briefly in a local hospital, and then 
returned home. 
"But (he) refused to take the prescribed medicine," the father's petition 
added. "He was admitted to the psychiatric ward as an emergency." 
Two court-appointed doctors were lined up to conduct examinations, but the 
father withdrew his petition just five days after he filed the request. 
It was unclear if the younger Powers subsequently sought or received 
psychiatric treatment. Family members declined to talk to The Times on Monday. 
