RULE CHANGE WOULD HAVE GIVEN WINS TO 5 PITCHERS 
Baseball's decision not to adopt a temporary rule change allowing starting 
pitchers to pick up a victory after going just three innings instead of five in 
the first two weeks of the season cost several pitchers a victory. But there 
will be no asterisks attached to their statistics this year. 
The great debate started last month when the official rules-makers briefly 
considered a change. Oakland manager Tony La Russa was among those who liked 
the idea and its intent to protect pitchers who didn't work much during the 
lockout-abbreviated spring training. 
The decision not to change the rule cost Frank Tanana, Eric King, Walt Terrell, 
Jaime Navarro and Roy Smith one victory each. 
"It doesn't bother me," Tanana said. "I'm fine either way." 
Even if the rule had been adopted, it would have ended Sunday. It would not 
have made much of a difference, either. 
In a grand total of five games, a starting pitcher who went fewer than five 
innings would have gotten a victory. 
On the second day of the season, King pitched four innings and was relieved 
with the Chicago White Sox leading Milwaukee 1-0. Chicago wound up winning 5-3, 
and the victory went to King's successor, Scott Radinsky, who pitched 1 1/3 
innings. 
King, still without a decision, is to start Tuesday night at Texas. 
"I wasn't really against the rule or for it," King said. "It seemed like that 
would be a pretty easy win." 
Tanana thought he was headed toward a victory when Detroit took an early 8-2 
lead against Boston on April 12. He left after 4 2/3 innings after giving up 
three more runs, and reliever Urbano Lugo got credit for the win as the Tigers 
held on 11-7. 
"I didn't do the job, and that's the way it goes," Tanana said. "I was capable 
of going five, and I didn't do it. I didn't get the one key out." 
Neither Navarro, Smith nor Terrell has a victory yet. If any of them wind up 
with 19 wins, they can blame the three-inning rule for costing them No. 20. 
Last Wednesday, Milwaukee gave Navarro a 9-2 lead. But he left after allowing 
nine hits in four innings, and Tony Fossas got the victory as the Brewers beat 
Texas 11-6. 
The same day, Smith lasted 4 2/3 innings and was relieved with Minnesota ahead 
of Seattle. The Twins held on, and Terry Leach got the win. 
On Friday, Terrell pitched 4 1/3 innings and left with Pittsburgh leading 
Chicago. The Pirates won 9-4, and the victory went to Scott Roesler, who 
pitched only one inning. 
