CANADA BEATS U.S. IN WORLD HOCKEY 
Shawn Burr and Greg Adams scored two goals apiece as Canada rallied from a 1-3 
deficit to beat the United States 6-3 today in the World Hockey Championships. 
The loss was the second in two games for the Americans. They were crushed by 
Czechoslovakia 7-1 in their opener Monday. 
Although Canada won the game, it probably lost Joe Nieuwendyk for the rest of 
the tournament. The high-scoring Calgary center injured his left knee halfway 
through the first period. 
"He's in the hospital to have it diagnosed there, so we don't know the total 
extent of the injury," Team Canada coach Dave King said. 
"But I doubt he will play again in the tournament." 
Canada, runners-up behind the Soviet Union last year, moved to 2-0 in the 
preliminary round-robin portion, while Team USA fell to 0-2. 
The Soviet Union, winner of a record 21 world championships, earlier defeated 
winless West Germany 5-2 for its second straight victory. 
Nieuwendyk, who was checked along the boards by U.S. defenseman Jimmy Johnson 
of the Pittsburgh Penguins, was carried off the ice on a stretcher and taken to 
a hospital. The incident occurred at 11:25 in the opening period. 
Nieuwendyk had arrived only a few hours earlier from Toronto with fellow Flames 
Al MacInnis, Doug Gilmour and Theoren Fleury. The defending Stanley Cup champs 
were upset by the Kings in the first round of the NHL playoffs last weekend. 
"We didn't play very well after Joe's injury," King said. "But we were able to 
come back. We scored five straight goals, but the U.S. still never gave up and 
played really strong." 
Team USA plays the Soviet Union on Thursday, a team the Americans haven't 
beaten in international hockey since the 1980 Olympics, and could miss the 
medal-round for the fourth straight time. The U.S. last made the playoffs in 
the 1985 tournament in Prague, when it finished fourth. 
Taylor still hopes to add three more NHL players, possibly goalie John Casey, 
Neil Broten and Mike Modano of the Minnesota North Stars. 
"We have spots open for one goalie and two skaters," Taylor said. "We're also 
talking with Gary Suter from Calgary." 
Darcy Rota, a Canadian team official, said Nieuwendyk suffered knee ligament 
damage and "will probably fly home to Canada tomorrow or Thursday." 
