THE PLAYGROUND BECOMES THE BATTLEGROUND 
OUT IN THE middle of nowhere, due east of Brawley in the bosom of the Imperial 
Sand Dunes, it is plain to see. This is what the battle is all about. 
A two-lane ribbon of asphalt known as California 78 slices through the towering 
dunes, forming a line of unmistakable demarcation. North of the roadway is 
seamless sand, stretching in undulating, dun-colored swells. Closed to 
vehicles, the terrain is graced with clumps of green and gold dune grass, 
creosote bush and an occasional silver-leafed sunflower. The only marks are the 
boot prints of desert wanderers and the faint tracks of a coyote or kangaroo 
rat. A silence broken gently by the wind cloaks this empty place, a stillness 
perfect for reflection. 
The picture changes markedly just south of the highway. Here, all manner of 
vehicles are welcome, and the land is mostly barren. With the dunes' fertile 
mantle of soil churned loose by the fat, knobby tires of off-road vehicles, the 
only plant survivors are lonesome tufts of bursage and Mormon tea, which cling 
to hummocks carved by spinning wheels. There is not a pocket mouse in sight, 
but human life abounds. Helmeted riders astride two-, three- and four-wheeled 
machines zigzag across the dunes in a dizzying dance, kicking up thick wakes of 
sand as they go. 
The north side is protected as wilderness and treasured by hikers, 
photographers and others eager to explore it on foot. The south is a 
playground, treasured by thousands of weekend dune jockeys seeking a tonic for 
the stresses of the urban world. The contrast forms the grist for an unusually 
nasty and colorful war -- the struggle for control of the California desert. 
With most of the West's mountains and coasts and river valleys claimed and 
carved up, Southern Californians have come to covet the nearby desert's vast 
landscape of extremes. Imported water and air conditioning have made the desert 
habitable in comfort, even luxury. Reliable vehicles have made its most 
forbidding corners safe to explore. 
Since 1984, preservationists and off-road vehicle users have faced off in 
Congress, where U. S. Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.) and Rep. Mel Levine 
(D-Santa Monica) have introduced -- and reintroduced -- the California Desert 
Protection Act. The bill would answer environmentalists' worries about threats 
to desert plants and wildlife by tightening restrictions on the use of about 12 
million acres of public lands that are neither controlled by the U. S. military 
nor protected in existing parks and preserves. Off-roaders, however, view the 
proposed restrictions as an infringement on their right to explore and enjoy 
this last Western frontier. 
The outcome of past wilderness battles in Congress suggests a logical pattern 
for compromise. So the preservationists want to set aside 4 million acres as 
wilderness? The user groups argue for 2 million? Strike a bargain and settle on 
3 million. This fight, however, is so entrenched and so infused with anger that 
no such resolution is on the horizon. It is a struggle framed in terms that 
seem, at times, as stark as the landscape. 
EVEN 15 YEARS ago, few people went to the desert for recreation, and when they 
did, recalls Gerry Hillier, district director for the U. S. Bureau of Land 
Management, "it was basically one dune buggy, and it was Mom and Dad and the 
kids." The arid lands clearly have a new allure. On Presidents' Day weekend 
this year, 14,000 people swarmed the Imperial Sand Dunes, ignoring a cold 
February drizzle for the chance to, as one exhilarated vacationer described it, 
"get out and get crazy in the dirt." 
For these off-roaders, the spectacular mounds of sand that rise from the Yuha 
Desert in far southeast California are a beloved destination. Reaching peaks of 
300 feet, the dunes are the largest such sand mass in the state, stretching in 
a 5-mile-wide band from the Chocolate Mountains for 40 miles south to the 
Mexican border. 
The dunes' southern portion is designated a "free play" zone by its caretaker, 
the Bureau of Land Management, making it open to anything and everything with 
wheels. There is no speed limit, and near collisions are common as riders, 
often hidden from view by ridges in the ever-changing dunes, hurtle along. 
Although state law requires that the machines be equipped with mufflers, the 
piercing, chain-saw-like whine of the engines is, in some areas, almost 
deafening. 
Flanking the dunes are campgrounds packed with recreational vehicles. Radios 
blare as those awaiting their turn on the all-terrain cycles sprawl in lawn 
chairs, nursing beers or sampling treats off the hibachi. This is a family 
affair, with some campsites encircled by fleets of cycles of all sizes. 
Dave McWilliams introduced his son, Mike, to the sport at age 2. McWilliams, a 
truck driver from Hesperia for whom riding all-terrain vehicles is "a great 
stress reliever," says his family spends "every weekend we can" at the dunes. 
It is "healthy recreation," he says, a wholesome activity for children and 
adults. 
"It becomes a social gathering," says Sam Bell of Long Beach, who runs an 
industrial plating business. "It's space," adds his wife, Dana, who says her 
life revolves to a great degree around cleaning up after the previous weekend's 
desert outing and organizing the next. 
"It's fantastic freedom for the kids," explains Dana, a legislative officer for 
the American Motorcyclist Assn., whose four children range in age from 5 to 11. 
"You don't have any drugs. Out there, we turn them loose. They're safe. They 
have a ball. You have to take children and find these opportunities. That's why 
the desert means so much to me. It's freedom and it's safe. . . . And it's 
being taken away from us." 
Although the most far-reaching desert protection proposals would leave much of 
the Imperial Dunes' and most other "free play" areas intact, it's the off-road 
vehicle owners who are leading the desert fight. Their protests can be heard 
most clearly -- and perhaps understood best -- at Oldsmobile Hill. 
Deep within the dunes, about 2 miles from a paved road, this formidable rise 
draws a crowd of 4,000 riders on busy days. Revving the engines of their steel 
machines, they circle at the dune's base, ready to roar up the steep face. 
The melange of vehicles ranges from the garden-variety ATV to custom-made dune 
buggies such as "Blue Thunder," a San Diego-based favorite that is capable of 
zooming up the incline at 100 m.p.h. -- on its rear wheels. "This is the place 
to see who's got real speed," says Henry Shorr, business manager of a plumbers' 
union in Alta Loma. 
Riders such as Shorr have invested thousands of dollars in ATVs and view the 
desert as a refuge, a place to fly across the sand, unfettered by signs, 
signals, laws or other urban restrictions. In this era of drugs, gangs and 
other family stresses, the riders plan to hold tight to this form of escape. 
The Cranston-Levine bill, they say, is a hostile threat. 
Although the off-roaders, whose political muscle appears to have grown 
significantly in recent years, are the most vocal participants in the desert 
fight, myriad other less-visible desert users view the measure as an invasion 
of their rights. Among them are sheep and cattle ranchers, miners and rock 
hounds who prowl for gems in the craggy crevices of the desert's mountain 
ranges. Companies that string electric, telephone and fiber-optic lines across 
the desert are nervous as well, and the burgeoning number of entrepreneurs 
tapping its bounty to produce wind, solar and geothermal energy also are on 
alert. 
The mining industry, in particular, has marshaled its forces and launched a 
spirited attack on the proposed legislation. The California desert has been 
prospected for more than a century, and today, about $1.2 billion worth of 
sand, gravel and minerals -- mostly borates, sodium and so-called rare earth 
elements, as well as gold -- are unearthed there annually, the U. S. Bureau of 
Mines reports. 
The Cranston-Levine bill would allow existing mining operations to continue and 
would respect valid mining claims that existed at the time the law took effect. 
But further exploration of mineral resources within the new national parks and 
wilderness areas would be prohibited. That angers industry geologists, who 
dispute conservationists' arguments that the desert's mineral reserves have 
been well documented -- and claimed -- through decades of prospecting. "The 
absence of evidence is not evidence of absence," says Charles Davis, manager of 
government affairs for U. S. Borax, which runs an open pit borate mine in 
Boron, near Edwards Air Force Base. Only 20% of the desert, Davis contends, has 
been investigated for ore deposits. "It's like them saying back in the 1890s, 
'Let's close the patent office. We've already invented everything.' " 
Equally passionate are the sheep and cattle ranchers who turn their herds and 
flocks loose under permits issued by the Bureau of Land Management. Grazing 
would continue in all bureau-administered wilderness areas under the Desert 
Protection Act, but ranchers with animals in proposed national parklands would 
be barred from returning after their permits expire. 
"Our ranching families are our heritage -- mine and yours -- and they are far 
more endangered than any desert is," says Marie Brashear of Fontana, who is 
coordinating opposition to the Cranston-Levine measure. "They pay taxes. They 
own property and they've got rights." 
Largely silent in the debate is the desert's biggest single tenant: the 
military. Defense installations occupy roughly 3.2 million acres of desert 
lands from the China Lake Naval Weapons Center near Ridgecrest on the north to 
the Chocolate Mountain Gunnery Range in Imperial County. The Army -- contending 
that it needs additional room for training sites -- wants still more, seeking 
to add 240,000 acres to Ft. Irwin near Barstow. 
Critics have challenged the expansion, noting that the land targeted for 
acquisition includes important habitat for the imperiled desert tortoise. But 
many desert users, particularly off-road vehicle riders, insist that their 
access to the land should not be unduly restricted because of an endangered 
desert shrub or animal. "You come out here after a windstorm and you can't see 
a thing," says Jeff Blosdale of Redondo Beach, gesturing at the mosaic of ATV 
tracks marking the Imperial Dunes. "It fixes itself." 
TODAY'S FIGHT is over land that nobody wanted for hundreds of years, a vast, 
seemingly sterile territory long associated with the vivid image of death. 
Indeed, at times, the federal government literally could not give the desert 
away. Millions of acres were free for the taking under a series of homestead 
laws starting in the 1860s, but much of it went unclaimed, appearing, no doubt, 
too forbidding for even the most enterprising settler. 
Not surprisingly then, the desert went unspoken for when the National Park 
Service and U. S. Forest Service divvied up the most prized of America's 
natural areas -- Yellowstone, Yosemite, the Grand Canyon, the Sierra Nevada and 
the Rockies. In 1933, the Park Service adopted the desert's crown jewel, 
creating the 2-million-acre Death Valley National Monument, and three years 
later, the service protected 560,000 acres at Joshua Tree National Monument. 
But large amounts of desert remained unclaimed, with no a suitor to be found. 
In 1946, Congress created one -- the Bureau of Land Management. Awarded about 
340 million acres of federal real estate that included most of the West's 
desert, the BLM took as its mission a task quite unlike the 
preservationist-oriented charter of the Park Service: overseeing the "multiple 
use" of these forlorn, leftover lands. 
The BLM quickly became a solicitous landlord, leasing millions of acres of 
range to ranchers, miners, and oil and gas exploration companies. If the image 
of the national park ranger was one who wore a crisp green uniform and peaked 
campaign hat, the BLM fellow was the guy in jeans, a rumpled tan shirt and 
battered Stetson. His job, in the era between the end of World War II and 1976, 
was to simply cater to those who sought to use the desert for commercial gain. 
Although advised to watch for flagrant abuses such as overgrazing, the BLM was 
not charged with protecting the desert for the sake of the land itself. 
To environmentalists, this philosophy seemed like a crime, and by the 1970s 
they had begun amassing evidence to support their suspicion. Off-road vehicles 
-- sales of which exploded in the '70s -- were running roughshod over the 
desert's fragile crust, and marksmen were using tortoises and Joshua trees as 
targets. Poachers were preying on the desert's bighorn sheep, and vandals were 
plundering its prehistoric sites. 
Scientists, meanwhile, continued to unlock new windows on the desert's natural 
splendor. Through the years, their work revealed the desert as a cradle for a 
startling variety of life -- 1,836 species of plants, 420 birds, 94 mammals, 63 
reptiles, 43 fishes and 16 amphibians. Researchers documented 46 distinct land 
communities -- from riparian marsh to desert forest -- with many of them 
literally islands in the sky, worlds of animal and plant life that retreated to 
the mountaintops as the inland seas of the Ice Age shrank and evaporated. 
In 1976, cries lamenting damage to the desert reached a peak, and Congress -- 
sensitive to pressure from the politically potent environmental community -- 
passed the Federal Land Management Policy Act. That changed everything for the 
BLM. Suddenly, the agency had dual, often conflicting, objectives: Protect "the 
quality of scientific, scenic, historical, ecological . . . and archeological 
values" of the desert, Congress ordered, but allow users to have their fun as 
well. To stay true to this ethic, BLM officials were directed to draft a 
land-use plan for the desert. The subsequent effort was a landmark undertaking 
for the BLM, which had never dealt with issues such as preservation or 
wilderness protection. 
By 1980, the BLM plan -- the product of 100 community meetings, 40,000 public 
comments and $8 million in taxpayer money -- was complete. Although a flurry of 
lawsuits from some parties accompanied its birth, the majority of desert lovers 
regarded it as a compromise land-use plan that gave everyone -- wilderness 
supporters, rock collectors, off-road cyclists, miners, ranchers and just plain 
people -- a share of what the desert had to offer. 
For preservationists, however, the optimism that accompanied adoption of the 
document soon faded. In January, 1981, the Reagan Administration brought into 
office a dim view of strong federal land-use planning and a crusade to cut the 
domestic budget in favor of military spending. It could not have come at a 
worse time for the BLM's Hillier, who oversees the desert district from a 
Spartan office in Riverside. "We took about a 25% cut in personnel," Hillier 
remembers glumly. The BLM was forced to embark on its unprecedented management 
venture with only 20 rangers to patrol an area twice the size of Vermont. 
Preservationists could see that the staff cuts were hurting the BLM, but by 
1984 they were convinced that a lack of commitment to truly enforce the desert 
plan was the agency's bigger problem. The BLM, they argued, had not become the 
vigilant steward its leaders had promised that it would be. 
Topping the environmentalists' laundry list of complaints was the agency's 1982 
approval of a series of amendments to the plan that reduced by 400,000 acres 
the amount of land the BLM proposed to designate as wilderness. The amendments 
signaled "a retreat, a massive retreat from protection," Sierra Club leader 
Elden Hughes says. There were, he says, other atrocities. The Barstow-to-Las 
Vegas motorcycle race, a controversial annual event that had been canceled by 
the BLM in 1974, was inexplicably allowed to resume -- on a course that cut 
through desert tortoise habitat and a region being studied as possible 
wilderness. And, after failing to obtain a reclamation bond from operators of a 
mine in a wilderness study area in the Inyo Mountains, the BLM was forced to 
pay $25,000 to remove 20 drums of cyanide left behind when the mine was 
abandoned. 
By 1984, the preservationists were convinced the BLM lacked the will to enforce 
the desert plan. Unless the desert was appointed a new, more vigilant steward, 
preservationists concluded, the destructive forces bearing down upon it would 
leave only a tattered remnant for the ages. 
ELDEN HUGHES traces his love for the desert to 1938. He was a boy of 7 who 
caught his first glimpse of Death Valley during a family outing. The visit left 
a lasting impression. 
There was the towering Telescope Peak, looming 11,049 feet above sea level, and 
the fetid pond at Badwater, the lowest point in the United States -- at 282 
feet below sea level. There were sand dunes, seemingly endless salt pans and a 
quiet that seemed haunting to a child. And there was the odd, jagged ledge 
formed by an earthquake fault along the eastern edge of the valley floor. "I 
was a wee tad then," Hughes recalls, "but it was a memorable trip." 
And the first of many to come. Today, this Whittier resident is one of the 
desert's most ardent defenders, a self-described "wanderer" who rarely lets a 
month pass without traveling there. For Hughes, the desert provides a place for 
contemplation and exhilaration, for peace and inspiration. 
He might stand on the curl of a dune waiting for the light to shine just right 
on a blooming beavertail cactus he hopes to photograph. He might pack a lunch 
and prowl Caruthers and Keystone canyons in the New York Mountains, where 273 
species of plants create a stunning garden. Or he might inch quietly across a 
sunbaked bajada, hoping to fix his lens on an unsuspecting desert animal. 
"The special thing about the desert is its vastness, which gives you the 
feeling you're the first person there," says Hughes, a bear of a man with a 
silver beard. "If you stand in the Mid-Hills and look north to Telescope Peak 
and southwest to San Gorgonio and northeast to Mt. Charleston, you know there 
are works of man below -- a railroad, power lines -- but the desert is so vast 
you can't see them. That's what's special about the desert. It can swallow up 
the works of man." 
For another preservationist, Jim Dodson of Lancaster, the desert's magic lies 
in the ability of its inhabitants to survive what seem intolerable conditions. 
"You have to understand how marvelous it is that nature can provide these 
adaptation mechanisms that allow plants and animals to succeed in a land so hot 
and dry," says Dodson, budget officer for Edwards Air Force Base. "Until you 
see how much life there is, you won't really know the desert." 
To Hughes and Dodson, the desert is like a child -- precious, irreplaceable and 
vulnerable. And they are alarmed by what they see as random, often senseless, 
violence that is increasingly inflicted on its inhabitants and lands. 
Thirty-eight varieties of plant, animal and insect life are threatened or 
endangered in the desert, they say. The most recent listing, just last month, 
was the lumbering desert tortoise, California's official state reptile. The 
tortoise seems to be dying out at a disturbing rate, in part because of 
predation and loss of habitat, but also because of disease. Its demise, many 
environmentalists say, is an ominous symbol of the desert's plight. 
Still, these men are realists. With Southern California's population at 16 
million and threatening to swell, they recognize that human impact on the 
region's emptiest playground is inevitable. The trouble is, they say, things 
have gone too far. The desert, Hughes says, "is in crisis. There are areas that 
are still true gems, but we need to save them, now." Otherwise, the elements of 
the desert that they cherish will be lost for good. 
The best candidate for the role of rescuer, conservationists believe, is the 
National Park Service. The BLM -- derisively referred to as the "Bureau of 
Livestock and Mining" by some detractors -- has failed to give the desert the 
protection it deserves, they say. And so, the Sierra Club, Wilderness Society 
and other groups have concluded that the desert's best parts should become 
parkland. 
In 1984, Cranston agreed and introduced the California Desert Protection Act. 
Together with a companion House measure sponsored by Levine, the proposal would 
set aside 4.5 million acres of wilderness, enlarge Death Valley and Joshua Tree 
national monuments and make them national parks, and transform the East Mojave 
Scenic Area into a new, 1.5-million-acre national park. 
Off-roaders and other critics angrily contend that the legislation would fence 
off the desert for an elite few, those fit enough to survey its wonders on 
foot. "Locked out," they argue, would be families with children or grandparents 
or disabled members unable to experience the desert's special places if denied 
the right to enter by vehicle. 
But advocates describe the plan as a compromise that shields the desert's most 
spectacular and pristine features while leaving plenty of territory open to 
military maneuvers, all types of motorized recreation, mining and other uses. 
Without it, they say, the desert's future looks bleak. 
"Man can trash the desert, and in places man has," Hughes says. "Without 
protection, we'll have nothing to pass on to future generations. Wouldn't that 
be a sin?" 
IN DEATH VALLEY Canyon, near the foot of Telescope Peak, lies a startling 
geologic formation, one that blends billion-year-old Precambrian rock with 
limestone and lava from the Tertiary period of mere millions of years ago. At a 
loss for any rational description, scientists labeled this formation "Chaos." 
It could serve as a geologic metaphor for the continuing debate over the 
desert, one in which the clash of extremes has created a seemingly immutable 
deadlock. 
When the BLM's first desert-use plan was submitted to departing Interior 
Secretary Cecil D. Andrus in December, 1980, the secretary asked what the 
people in California thought about it, recalls Hillier, one of its prime 
architects. About 10% hated it as too restrictive, 15% thought it was not tough 
enough and 75% generally supported it, Andrus was told. "That's good enough for 
me," he responded. "If you ever lie awake worrying about satisfying those 25% 
on the fringes, you'll never get anything done." 
But alas for Hillier, the vocal, often shrill, fringes of both sides still dog 
the BLM. And the difficulties of establishing the agency as a resource 
protector on par with the Forest Service or Park Service have locked him, too, 
in the conflict. 
Wilderness legislation in the West always is a contentious issue, one usually 
reconciled only when both senators from the state involved compromise. But so 
far, Sen. Pete Wilson (R-Calif.) has refused to work out an agreement with 
Cranston and is not likely to do so as long as Wilson is running for governor 
of California. So the fight has moved to the Democrat-controlled House, where 
Levine has run into potent opposition led by Republican Rep. Jerry Lewis of 
Highlands, whose 35th Congressional District covers most of the San Bernardino 
County desert. An influential GOP leader, Lewis helped persuade the Reagan and 
Bush administrations to side with the BLM and oppose the Cranston-Levine plan. 
They support Lewis' bill, which essentially would ratify the present BLM desert 
plan into law. 
A key to the BLM campaign to hold onto the land it now controls is the argument 
that the East Mojave does not have the unique and significant resources that 
would qualify it as a new national park. In February, at Lewis' insistence, the 
BLM persuaded Park Service Director James M. Ridenour to sign a BLM-composed 
letter declaring that the East Mojave area "did not have the qualities needed 
to designate it as a national park," Park Service sources have disclosed. 
At a jammed hearing in California, Lewis brandished the letter for all to see. 
The BLM maneuver horrified old Park Service pros, who knew that sentiment 
within the agency actually ran with the Cranston-Levine plan. 
In fact, the Park Service had concluded in a 1987 report that East Mojave 
"would be a worthy and valuable addition to the National Park System." And even 
the BLM's own desert planning staff found in 1979 that East Mojave "readily 
qualifies for national park or monument status." But acknowledging that at this 
time, one informed environmentalist believes, would be a serious blow to the 
BLM. If Congress grabbed the East Mojave and gave it to the Park Service, he 
says, that would undermine the BLM's fledgling perception of itself as a 
preservationist force. "They have started to move in the right direction. One 
way to kill that feeling, that spirit, is to yank this away from them." 
Hillier insists that the BLM is making a sincere effort to provide the sort of 
long-term protection the desert needs. He bristles at the environmentalists' 
notion that the BLM is partial to off-roaders and miners. Hillier says he is 
carrying out the congressional mandate, which often angers the mechanized road 
runners as much as Sierra Clubbers. 
And he resents the implication by some preservationists that his agency has 
stood by while the desert was harmed by special-interest groups. "The fact of 
the matter is, in terms of off-road-vehicle use, you can fly over millions of 
acres of this country and never see a track," he says. 
Although his budget and staffing have improved, Hillier still faces an uphill 
battle to persuade Congress that the Cranston-Levine bill is not necessary, 
that the BLM can protect the desert well enough. Although the Park Service has 
suffered devastating budget cuts -- the 33% reduction in real dollars since 
1985 means that only 10 permanent rangers must patrol 2 million acres of Death 
Valley -- park status still carries prestige and tradition. There is a 
perception among some legislators that critical areas of the desert would be 
less vulnerable to neglect and abuse if they were in a park. 
Even if the dispute is not settled this year or next, the desert will survive. 
Critical portions are preserved in parklands now, and others will become 
protected wilderness. The BLM has proposed that Congress designate about 2 
million acres in wilderness areas of 6 million originally studied for 
preservation, giving them the protection the Sierra Club and others are 
demanding. Whenever this battle is over, it is almost certain that at least 2 
million acres of desert will be incorporated into the national wilderness 
protection system. 
Other portions have been designated as areas of critical environmental concern, 
to protect special natural features or endangered plant or animal life. And a 
1.5-million-acre region west of the Colorado River and bracketed by Interstates 
10 and 40 has been set aside as the East Mojave Scenic Area for management 
similar to that of a park, but not as restrictive. Such "interim" protection is 
vital, because both sides declare that they are in the trenches until victory 
is theirs -- and there is no talk of compromise. 
"No!" declares off-roader Dana Bell. "We compromised back in 1980. We gave up 
98% of the desert, and we don't want to give up the 2% we got." 
The Sierra Club's Hughes is equally adamant. "The Cranston bill was written as 
a compromise. It has taken park protection to save the desert so far, and we 
think that's what it will take in the future. Much of the desert is pristine 
and near-pristine. We are in time if we do it now, and we have plenty of 
horrible examples of what happens if we don't." 
Hillier, who has listened to such desert extremism for 14 years, has come to 
hear in it commonalities unacknowledged by either camp. "They both love the 
desert in their own way and, in fact, there's probably even a bit of hypocrisy 
on both sides," he says. "There's probably more than enough elitism on both 
sides." 
Sounding a bit wistful, and decidedly weary, Hillier sighs and adds, "The thing 
that probably has made it the most difficult over the last decade is the 
consensus that we had hoped for when we finished the plan has never really 
fully come together." 
