VIEWPOINTS; 
PROSECUTING S&amp;L CRIMES 
Earlier this month, the General Accounting Office released its harrowing new 
estimate of what the savings and loan crisis will cost taxpayers: at least $325 
billion and as much as $500 billion over the next 30 to 40 years. 
 As bailout costs mount, so does the evidence that fraud played a greater role 
in the fiasco than previously thought. Atty. Gen. Dick Thornburgh estimated 
last week that up to 30% of the S&amp;L failures can be blamed on criminals. He 
called it an "epidemic of fraud." 
 FBI Director William S. Sessions expressed similar views earlier this month in 
testimony before a House Banking Committee hearing in Dallas. He said FBI 
agents have found "pervasive" fraud in the thrift business, which he called a 
"national crisis." 
 The following are edited excerpts from an interview with Sessions conducted by 
Times staff writer James Bates: 
 Question: Where did this staggering amount of money go in the cases involving 
fraud? Have your agents been able to trace much of it, or has it just vanished 
forever? 
Answer: Let me give you some indication of where the money isn't. Obviously in 
land flips, or whatever you call them in California. That is where a piece of 
property might be priced at $1 million a month ago, was sold a week later for 
$2 million and a week later for $3.5 million and a month later for $5.3 
million. 
Obviously, it has enhanced value that was probably fraudulently placed on that 
land. If it was worth $1 million originally, the land is still there. So even 
though it is later priced and supposedly worth $5.3 million, your loss is $4.3 
million if the land was worth $1 million. 
Q: In their testimony, prosecutors in Dallas were pessimistic about how much 
money could be recovered through restitution. What's your view? 
A: It is always difficult to find money where these kinds of crimes are 
involved because a great deal of it is spent. If we can find where it was 
secreted and placed, then, of course we've got a chance to get it. But it is 
tough to find assets, and I would agree that the outlook there is generally 
pessimistic. 
Q: Many of the high fliers are still running around and have not been charged. 
The public looks at them and says: "Gee, if these guys were such crooks, how 
come they're not facing charges or in jail?" Why has it taken so long? 
A: I think the concern that you expressed, and the public's concern, will be 
addressed in large measure by the application of resources that have been 
provided now by the Congress, and that are in connection with FIRREA (the 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act, or thrift bailout 
bill, signed by President Bush last August). 
We have 202 allocated new agents, which will take us from around 400 to up 
around 600 agents who are going to be dealing with bank fraud and embezzlement 
cases. We have an additional 100 technicians, and the Department of Justice has 
brought on 118 new assistant U.S. attorneys. The application of those resources 
will help tremendously to hack into that backlog. 
Q: With the cost of the bailout rising, are you under any added pressure to 
bring these people to justice? 
A: I think there is plenty of incentive for that. A question was asked me the 
other day on my view of the impact on the American public. I said that it was 
my belief that the American public relied upon banking institutions and 
financial institutions being soundly managed by people who were honest. 
It is absolutely essential that this program go forward to the end, no matter 
how long it takes. And the statute of limitations is now 10 years (under 
FIRREA, the statute of limitations for certain crimes involving banks, S&amp;Ls 
and credit unions was raised from five years to 10) and we have capable 
resources, so it's very important that we do restore the confidence of the 
American people in their financial institutions. 
Q: Why wasn't this fraud spotted earlier? 
A: I think you'd have to ask that question more of the agencies that refer 
matters to us. We take the referrals, and those are criminal referrals. But 
until we have them, we don't have them. So the referral process is absolutely 
essential. 
Q: Have you found any evidence of organized crime involved in thrifts, or drug 
people? Some have written about the CIA being involved in thrifts. Have you 
found any of that in your investigations? 
A: Organized crime by its very nature has long had as one of its high 
priorities the taking over of institutions and businesses that legitimize its 
operation. So I don't think there's any question that is always a factor. 
Q: But widespread involvement in thrifts? 
A: I wouldn't want to speculate on that. As to the money laundering aspects and 
the overseas aspects, obviously people do have money laundering needs. If you 
can take from a drug operation and through a legitimate business, or an 
apparently legitimate business front, launder that money, then of course people 
are going to take those avenues. I think we will find more of that. 
As to the involvement of the CIA, I've responded to that before, indicating 
that we have no indication of involvement by the CIA. It may be that some of 
the personnel who are actually involved in these investigations, as 
representing the institutions, may have had some connection. I can't tell you 
that, and I wouldn't want to speculate. 
Q: Are the people you're looking at for alleged fraud all former executives 
with thrifts, or are some of them public officials? And are there many aside 
from thrift executives? 
A: I think you've pegged it correctly. That is, you've said, 'Are there 
outsiders as well as insiders?' We believe we will continue to find that there 
are outsiders involved. There are developers, there are appraisers, there are 
lawyers, there are accountants. All sorts of people outside the institution who 
may have some representative capacity or some developmental capacity in terms 
of condominiums or land sales, etc. 
Q: You're tracking down people who committed crimes several years ago. Why is 
it so important now to bring them to justice? 
A: Well, in five words: confidence of the American public. Confidence of the 
American public in the institutions is based upon belief that those 
institutions are being soundly and legally operated, that those people who 
operate them can be relied upon and that the functions of government for 
oversight, regulation and investigation are being properly carried out. So I 
think it's extremely important and critical that we follow these to the end. 
