PARTIES AGREE ON NEW E. GERMAN COALITION; 
POLITICS: CONSERVATIVES WILL HOLD 11 OF 24 MINISTRIES. TALKS ON UNIFICATION 
WITH WEST GERMANY CAN NOW BEGIN. 
After prolonged negotiations, East Germany's new political leadership agreed 
Monday on a broad, conservative-led coalition to guide the country toward 
unification with West Germany. 
The agreement means that the process of negotiating that unity can now begin in 
earnest. 
"It's nearly certain that we'll have the grand coalition we've been striving 
for," Prime Minister-designate Lothar de Maiziere said. 
De Maiziere said his victorious Christian Democrats will hold 11 of 24 
government ministries. The moderate left-wing Social Democrats, who finished a 
distant second in the voting, will hold seven portfolios and the centrist 
Liberals will hold three. Two small right-wing parties that allied with the 
Christian Democrats in the March 18 election -- the German Social Union and 
Democratic Awakening -- will take two seats and one seat, respectively. 
The leader of the Social Democrats, Markus Meckel, a 37-year-old Protestant 
pastor, was named foreign minister. 
He will represent a government of political neophytes that has also placed a 
clergyman and pacifist as defense minister. Rainer Eppelmann, a Protestant 
pastor and co-founder of Democratic Awakening, will effectively take charge of 
what was once considered the Warsaw Pact's premier fighting force, the East 
German army. 
Eppelmann was jailed both for refusing to do active military service and later 
for opposing deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in East Germany. 
Comments by Meckel following Monday's talks indicated that the Social Democrats 
may be prepared to back a compromise formula on the role of a united Germany in 
a post-Cold War Europe. 
West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher has proposed a united 
Germany inside the North Atlantic Treaty Organization but with no NATO forces 
stationed in what is now East Germany. 
Talking to reporters, Meckel said that he is against the stationing of NATO 
forces in East Germany but fell short of rejecting NATO membership. 
Among other portfolios announced Monday, 61-year-old Social Democrat economist 
Walter Romberg will become finance minister, and Peter-Michael Diestel, 38, 
general secretary of the German Socialist Union, will be named interior 
minister and also have the title of deputy prime minister. 
The distribution of portfolios is expected to be formally approved today by all 
member parties. 
The involvement of the Liberals and Social Democrats in the conservative-led 
coalition means that the government can, in theory, count on the backing of 
nearly three-quarters of the 400-member Parliament. Such support is expected to 
give political legitimacy to the tough decisions involved in the unity process 
and also facilitate constitutional changes that will be required. 
Monday's agreement also leaves the Communists as the only major opposition 
party. 
The composition of the new Cabinet means that political forces supported by 
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl will hold a clear majority in the new East 
German government. Such an alignment is expected to ease work on sensitive 
decisions leading to German unity, such as a currency union in which the West 
German deutschemark will become the all-German currency, replacing the 
non-convertible East German ostmark. 
The leaderships in both Bonn and East Berlin are pushing for implementation by 
July 1, but the terms have become highly controversial. Last Friday, hundreds 
of thousands of East Germans demonstrated in several cities in favor of a 
straight 1-for-1 exchange rate. They went into the streets after the 
conclusions of a West German Bundesbank report, which recommended in most 
instances an exchange rate of two ostmarks for each deutschemark, were leaked 
to the West German press. 
