KAZAKHSTAN: LIFE AND DEATH IN THE SHADOW OF THE MUSHROOM CLOUD; 
FALLOUT: SOVIET CITIZENS REMEMBER HOW THEY WERE MISLED ON NUCLEAR TESTING. THEY 
WONDER WHY THE U.S. HAS NOT AGREED TO STOP SUCH TESTS. 
"I witnessed the first H-bomb explosion," said Talgat Slyambekov. "Afterward 
they gave us a checkup and the military men gave us some vodka as protection 
against radiation." 
In this remote village on the northern steppe of Soviet Kazakhstan, the wind 
drives ice and snow against dilapidated shacks. The hardship of life is etched 
in the face of every resident. In Karaul, life has been especially hard. Since 
the dawn of the atomic age the Soviet Union has tested its nuclear weapons 
here. 
Karaul would seem an unlikely place to test the reach of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's 
reforms. But on the wind that howls across the barren landscape, glasnost has 
come to Karaul. In late February I talked with residents about the effects of 
nuclear testing on their lives. For four decades they have been afraid to 
speak, but now they voice anger and a deep sense of betrayal. 
"For 40 years," Slyambekov said, "the military-industrial complex has waged 
undeclared nuclear war against us. I call this genocide. They tried to 
eliminate us. No one ever told us that there was any danger." 
When the Soviet Union tested its first hydrogen bomb in 1953, Karaul was 
evacuated; 40 people were told to remain behind, Slyambekov one of them. "We 
never knew why they left us here." 
Rimhan Gabduilin also remained behind. He is a slight man with a thin voice, 
but speaks forcefully about the day he saw the mushroom cloud of the H-bomb. 
"Of the 40 people they left in this village, only six are alive today. All the 
others died when they were 50 or 60 years old. The military men told us it is 
not dangerous at all. If it isn't dangerous, why do they check the wind 
direction before any test? Why don't they explode the bombs next to Kurchatov 
City itself?" Kurchatov is the home of the secret-weapons laboratory that 
conducts Soviet nuclear tests. 
"They never asked for our permission to put this test site here," said 
Slyambekov. "They knew it was dangerous even back then. But we were really 
afraid to talk about it openly. It was a real secret. But with glasnost and 
perestroika we have some democratic change in this country . . . . For the last 
two years I've tried to do my best to abolish nuclear weapons and to eliminate 
this test site." 
"Please -- tell your government that we are all human beings," pleaded Zagnar 
Zunuszanov, a former party leader in the region. "Who wants to commit suicide? 
Who doesn't think about his children? Such a person would be a fool or a 
madman. Americans are not fools. Please tell them, and your government, that we 
shall not repeat history. We are just people trying to stop nuclear tests, but 
the United States keeps on testing. We are ready to close our test site. Why 
don't Americans do the same? Why do you let it happen?" 
The Soviet victims of the bomb are angry with their government. They are also 
puzzled and frustrated by the U.S. refusal to join the Soviets in a mutual test 
moratorium. From August, 1985, to February, 1987, the Soviets unilaterally 
stopped nuclear testing but failed to elicit U.S. reciprocity. Gorbachev has 
repeatedly pledged that the Soviet Union will enter a moratorium on a moment's 
notice if the United States will do the same. 
U.S. anti-nuclear activists have been unable to match the success of a new 
anti-testing movement in Kazakhstan called the Nevada/Semipalatinsk Movement 
(after two major nuclear test sites). 
Only a year old, the movement has had a profound impact on Soviet nuclear 
testing. Alexei Manshosov, first secretary in the Foreign Ministry's 
disarmament section, said the Nevada/Semipalatinsk Movement forced cancellation 
of 11 of the 18 scheduled tests in 1989. The test site has remained silent 
since October of last year, an unusually long time. 
In March, Moscow capitulated to one of the movement's most urgent demands. The 
government announced that nuclear tests in Kazakhstan would be phased out by 
1993 and testing moved to a remote island near the Arctic Circle, Novaya 
Zemlya. 
Men like Zunuszanov, Gabduilin and Slyambekov are part of the movement's 
strength, resolute in their support of charismatic leader Olzhas Suleimenov, a 
poet and writer. Suleimenov rode a wave of Kazakh anti-nuclear sentiment to a 
seat in the Congress of People's Deputies, and from there to the Supreme 
Soviet, where he is a formidable presence who has the ear of Gorbachev. 
Tajiken Humadilov, a proud veteran of the Great Patriotic War (the Soviet name 
for World War II), is also a strong supporter: "I spent my whole life working 
for the party, the Soviet people and the government. All this time I wondered 
why the United States -- a great, powerful country whose people believe in God 
-- wanted to stay ahead of us. For many years I believed that what our 
government was doing was necessary -- that we needed rockets and bombs to 
protect us from the United States. We didn't know whether the atomic mushrooms 
were armful or not. 
"Five people in my family died of cancer," said Humadilov. "My older brother in 
1960. My oldest son last year. My younger brother two years ago. My parents 
died of cancer when they were old . . . . So how can I support the creation of 
this weaponry after so many people died of it?" 
Humadilov's account reflects a trend in the Soviet Union -- what some call 
"radiophobia" -- to blame all illness on radiation from various sources. There 
could, of course, be other explanations for the illnesses in Humadilov's 
family, but like many others, he believes death is linked to the test site. 
Evidence is mounting in the United States and the Soviet Union that 
nuclear-weapons production and testing has taken a severe toll on health and 
the environment. The first independent medical reports on the impact of tests 
on residents of Kazakhstan will be issued during the International Citizens 
Congress on a Nuclear Test Ban this May in Alma-Ata. The congress is being 
convened by the Nevada/Semipalatinsk Movement and the International Physicians 
for the Prevention of Nuclear War. 
Ulogbek Baiurbekov shouted out as I was about to leave Karaul: "We veterans of 
the Great Patriotic War demand that this test site be closed," an ultimatum 
from a 75-year-old who fought in one war and witnessed preparations for 
another. 
What is so striking about the villagers' sentiments is how similar their 
stories are to those told by Americans from towns like St. George, Utah; 
Fredonia, Ariz., and Bunkersville, Nev. For years American "downwinders" (those 
who live downwind from the U.S. Nevada Test Site) have waged an unsuccessful 
legal battle against their government, for redress from injuries allegedly 
suffered as a result of nuclear tests. The U.S. government knew the tests posed 
a serious threat to those living downwind. But rather than warnings, government 
only issued false assurances. 
"It isn't money they want," said Steve Erikson, a spokesman for the 
organization Downwinders. "They want an admission by the government that it did 
this to them. All along the government has said, 'Oh no, we didn't.' It has 
left a lot of people with this nagging doubt about why their family members are 
dying or dead. It's a sense of justice they want, not money." 
Half a world apart, patriotic citizens -- downwinders who also believed in 
their government -- were enduring the same hell for the same reasons. Human 
guinea pigs were created, trust betrayed; loyalty and patriotism were 
exploited. 
In May at the International Citizens Congress, U.S. downwinders and Soviet 
downwinders will meet for the first time. They will have much to tell one 
another -- all consider themselves victims of the atomic bomb. 
