SACRAMENTO FILE: ASSEMBLY 
Committee Action: 
Pap Smears: The Health Committee approved a bill (AB 32) by Assemblywoman Sally 
Tanner (D-Baldwin Park) to regulate the cervical cancer screening (Pap smear) 
industry. A 13-2 vote sent the bill to the Ways and Means Committee. The 
governor vetoed a similar bill last year. 
College Scholarships: The Education Committee approved a bill (AB 400) by 
Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco) to set up a $2-million college 
scholarship program for high school students who contribute their time as 
community service volunteers. A 10-0 vote sent the bill to the Ways and Means 
Committee. 
Farm Products: The Agriculture Committee approved a bill (AB 1212) by 
Assemblyman Rusty Areias (D-Los Banos) to develop a "California grown" seal or 
logo for growers and processors to use voluntarily as a marketing tool to 
increase consumer awareness of state farm products. A 6-0 vote sent the bill to 
the Ways and Means Committee. 
Junk Fax Advertisements: The Utilities and Public Commerce Committee approved a 
bill (AB 576) by Assemblyman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) to make it illegal to 
transmit unsolicited advertising material to facsimile machine receivers. A 7-3 
vote sent the bill to the Ways and Means Committee. 
Automobile Repairs: The Finance and Insurance Committee approved a bill (AB 
103) by Assemblyman Lloyd G. Connelly (D-Sacramento) to prohibit automobile 
repair shops from giving kickbacks to auto insurance agents who refer business 
to them. A 12-0 vote sent the bill to the Assembly floor. 
Mountain Lions: The Water, Parks ands Wildlife Committee approved a bill (AB 
860) by Katz to outlaw sport hunting of mountain lions. An 8-4 vote sent the 
bill to the Ways and Means Committee. 
Senate 
Floor Action: 
Chain Schemes: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 34-0 vote a bill (SB 82) by 
Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) to crack down on investment pyramid promotional 
scams by increasing criminal penalties for establishing what the bill describes 
as "endless chain schemes" and by permitting participants to recover money 
invested in such schemes. 
Committee Action: 
Rapid Transit: The Transportation Committee approved a bill (SB 1), also by 
Robbins, to abolish the Southern California Rapid Transit District, 
transferring its powers and duties to the Los Angeles County Transportation 
Commission, which would be renamed the Metropolitan Transit Authority of Los 
Angeles County. A 7-5 vote sent the bill to the Appropriations Committee. 
Pesticides: The Toxics and Public Safety Management Committee approved a bill 
(SB 970) by Sen. Nicholas C. Petris (D-Oakland) to prohibit the Department of 
Food and Agriculture from renewing the registration of a household pesticide if 
there has been no detailed testing of the health effects of the product. A 6-0 
vote sent the bill to the Appropriations Committee. 
Automobile Radio Noise: The Transportation Committee also approved a bill (SB 
1130) by Sen. Cecil N. Green (D-Norwalk) to prohibit a driver of a motor 
vehicle from allowing radio sound system noise to be heard more than 25 feet 
away from the vehicle when it is being operated on any public road. Violators 
could be ticketed. An 8-4 vote sent the bill to the Appropriations Committee. 
Waste Incinerators: The Toxics and Public Safety Management Committee approved 
a bill (SB 54) by Sen. Art Torres (D-Los Angeles) to require environmental 
impact reports before hazardous waste incinerators could be built or operating 
permits renewed. A 7-0 vote sent the bill to the Appropriations Committee. 
Bill Introductions: 
Gasoline Prices: SCR 43 by Sen. Herschel Rosenthal (D-Los Angeles) requests the 
attorney general and the state Energy Commission to investigate charges that 
Exxon and other oil companies are using the Alaskan oil spill as an excuse to 
increase gasoline prices. 
