WEBSTER STRIVES TO STAY COOL AS STANLEY CUP CHASE HEATS UP 
Tom Webster and Terry Crisp, a study in contrast. 
One is moving on in the Stanley Cup playoffs, while the other might be moving 
out altogether. 
Webster appears calm, almost studious on the bench, while Crisp is fiery, 
emotional and loud. 
Webster is the epitome of decorum in public; Crisp was embarrassed during the 
series between the Kings and Calgary Flames by getting caught wiping his nose 
with his necktie on television. 
But don't be fooled. While Crisp may wear his emotions on his sleeve, Webster 
feels as much pressure in this, his first Stanley Cup playoff as a coach. 
Still recovering from inner-earsurgery, he has been advised to avoid stress, 
but that's not possible this time of year. 
Overtimes, double overtimes, games without Wayne Gretzky -- these are not 
situations conducive to reducing stress. 
So Webster sits on the bench and gulps down the antacid tablets stuffed into 
his pocket by his wife, Carole. 
But occasionally, the pressure boils over. 
Such as last Friday. 
The Kings were in their Culver City practice rink, finishing preparations for 
Game 6 of the series against Calgary. 
Webster was in a meeting with General Manager Rogie Vachon and assistant coach 
Rick Wilson when he suddenly stormed out. 
Vachon and Wilson later insisted they couldn't imagine what had precipitated 
the incident. 
Webster hurried past several club officials and reporters on his way to his 
car, parked in an adjoining alley. 
Two reporters approached the car, but Webster hit the gas and sped out onto 
Sepulveda Boulevard and roared away. 
Behind him, he left a number of shaking heads and dropped jaws. 
When a reporter finally reached him that night, Webster was his usual calm 
self. 
"I just had a bad day," he explained. "I needed to let off a little steam. I 
took a long walk and I'm fine." 
These may be the best of times for the Kings, but not when you've got your 
hands on the controls. 
Webster's biggest source of stress all year has been the midseason trade that 
brought Tony Granato and Tomas Sandstrom to the Kings from the New York Rangers 
for Bernie Nicholls. 
Nicholls has been on Webster ever since, blaming him for the trade and 
questioning his knowledge of the game, his coaching techniques and his right to 
make the move. 
Webster has seethed, but refused to respond publicly. 
Monday, after the Kings had eliminated the Flames in six games, Nicholls struck 
again, telling The National newspaper, "What is surprising is that the Kings 
could be coached into playing some defense." 
When that remark was relayed to Webster, he replied, "They (Granato and 
Sandstrom) certainly have added what we needed to beat Calgary, speed, 
character and the willingness to do something for the team instead of worrying 
about personal satisfaction." 
While Webster must now worry about his future in the playoffs, Crisp must worry 
about his future with the Flames. 
Newspapers in Calgary were demanding his head even before the series ended. 
He wasn't much more popular with some of his players, who felt he was a 
martinet. 
One, who asked that his name not be used, said before the series ended: "We 
can't lose. We either win the Stanley Cup or we get rid of Crisp." 
As he returned to Calgary, Crisp was still angry about the non-goal, the shot 
by Doug Gilmour in the first overtime of Game 6 that appeared to edge its way 
over the goal line before goalie Kelly Hrudey smothered it. 
Referee Denis Morel disallowed the goal, the Kings finally winning in the 
second overtime on Mike Krushelnyski's blind shot, fired as he lay on his 
stomach in the slot. 
Crisp, who almost knocked down the side boards as he yelled at Morel Saturday 
night, was still fuming when he talked with a Calgary reporter on the flight 
home. 
"He's compounding a lie," Crisp said of Morel. "One lie leads to another. You 
know the pattern. He told our guys, 'It didn't go over the line. There was no 
whistle.' Now, he's backpedaling (claiming he did blow a whistle). I mean 
that's a $700,000 call, at least. 
"Mistakes I can accept. This isn't sour grapes. It's fact, point-blank, 
obvious." 
Crisp added that even Webster had backed him up. 
"You know what Tommie Webster told me," Crisp said, "when we were shaking 
hands. He said, 'Crispie, that goal was yours.' Looked me right in the eye and 
said it." 
When asked about the remark, Webster said he couldn't remember his exact words, 
but wouldn't rule that out. 
Said Crisp: "I could take this if, in my heart, I knew we'd lost. We won that 
game. We should be heading back home, readying ourselves to play Game 7. He 
(Morel) took it away from us." 
Neither of the Kings' ailing defensemen, Tim Watters or Tom Laidlaw, are 
expected to play in Wednesday's opener of the best-of-seven Smythe Division 
finals. 
Laidlaw, sidelined since March 17 because of an injured lower back, is listed 
as very doubtful. Watters, sidelined since Game 4 of the series against Calgary 
because of a severe ankle bruise, is doubtful. 
Both John Tonelli (knee injury) and Dave Taylor (strained shoulder) are day to 
day. 
