JAMES FLANIGAN: LOCKHEED HAS POWERFUL NEW WEAPON: ESOP 
Keep it in the family. Lockheed moved to avoid takeover Tuesday by putting $500 
million worth of its stock into an employee stock ownership plan. That is, the 
big aerospace company is giving employees 17% of its stock so it can't be 
bought by predatory investors on the open market. 
There are two trends evident in Lockheed's restructuring. One is the forming of 
a merger wave, with aerospace-defense companies being forced to avoid takeovers 
the way other industries from airlines to supermarkets have had to do. 
The other trend is use of the employee stock ownership plan, or ESOP, to deter 
investors a company's management deems unwelcome. Polaroid recently used its 
ESOP to foil a buyout bid from Shamrock Holdings, and on Tuesday, Tribune Co., 
owner of the Chicago Tribune, used its ESOP to buy stock and blunt the advance 
of investor Robert M. Bass, who has purchased an interest in Tribune. 
The buyer Lockheed was trying to avoid is Harold C. Simmons, a highly 
successful investor who has built a $2-billion (revenues) conglomerate called 
Valhi Inc. by takeovers and investment gains. Simmons announced Monday that he 
had acquired 5.3% of Lockheed's stock. The company wasn't thrilled and launched 
a restructuring -- which includes sales of real estate and a subsidiary, plus a 
planned share repurchase -- as a defense against Simmons. 
"I'm disappointed, and I'm considering selling some or all of my stock," 
Simmons said Tuesday. In the past, Simmons has responded to management 
defensive tactics by redoubling his takeover efforts. But he seemed to be 
letting Lockheed go, with a swipe at the ESOP idea -- "If they're giving stock 
to the employees, that's obviously not good for the public shareholders" -- and 
the explanation that he'd bought into Lockheed in anticipation of consolidation 
and mergers in the aerospace industry. 
Tighter Competition 
"That's part of it," Simmons said. "It's a combination of value (in Lockheed's 
stock price) and consolidation. I think General Dynamics is attractive, and 
Rockwell and Raytheon, just to name three other companies." 
There are too many companies for too little business in aerospace these days, 
and the prospect is for years of shrinkage in defense budgets. In military 
aircraft, for example, the thinking among analysts is that seven plane makers 
will consolidate to four; that Grumman, Northrop and Rockwell may drop out of 
plane making, leaving the field to Lockheed, Boeing, McDonnell Douglas and 
General Dynamics. In a shrinking industry, some companies would become 
subcontractors, others would merge out of existence. 
It's the kind of outlook that excites market speculators but could prove risky 
for ordinary investors. It's always chancy betting on takeovers -- as witness 
Lockheed stock. It was selling at $46.75 on Monday when the news broke that 
Simmons had a 5.3% stake, and speculators, anticipating a takeover fight, sent 
it up $3 a share to $49.75. But on Tuesday, when the company announced its 
restructuring, speculators realized there would be no takeover and showed their 
disappointment by dropping Lockheed $2 a share to $47.75. 
Ordinary investors don't need such gyrations, but they still can win if they 
buy on the fundamentals. In Lockheed's case, they're not bad. The stock price 
is low -- six times 1988 earnings -- because Lockheed's profits are expected to 
decline in 1989, according to analyst Suzanne Patrick of Sanford C. Bernstein 
&amp; Co., a research firm. The C-5B transport program is phasing out and 
expenses continue for Lockheed's entry in the advanced tactical fighter 
competition. 
But profits are expected to rise again in 1990. Meanwhile, Lockheed's mainstay, 
the Trident missile program is not threatened by defense budget cutbacks, and 
the company, in the words of one defense analyst, is "a treasure house of 
technology." 
Yes, but is Harold Simmons right? Does an ESOP benefit employees at the expense 
of public shareholders? No. The theory behind ESOPs -- stock ownership plans 
devised in the 1930s by investment banker Louis Kelso -- is that they benefit 
the business by increasing employee commitment to the firm. The practice of 
ESOPs has been criticized over the years, however. One objection is that ESOPs 
may not be good for employees because they concentrate too many eggs -- job, 
salary and retirement savings -- in one basket. (In Lockheed's case, there is 
no such danger, as the ESOP is supplementary to a pension plan.) Also, the ESOP 
has been misused as a device for protecting management's power and 
prerogatives. 
Yet the new use of the ESOP, to defend against takeovers, seems a direct 
extension of the original purpose. For, certainly, people who work for the 
company have more at stake in its long-term survival and stability than do most 
acquirers. In a world of quick-buck artists and bust-up takeovers, can it be 
bad for business to place ownership with people who have a real stake in the 
company? Some trends are healthy. 
