AMERICAN LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
BREWERS HAVE A FIELD DAY ON PATRIOTS DAY AT FENWAY, WIN, 18-0 
The Milwaukee Brewers recorded the most lopsided shutout in club history, 
pounding out 20 hits and beating the Boston Red Sox, 18-0, Monday at Fenway 
Park. 
"Sometimes you get that buzz saw going and you have no control," Milwaukee 
Manager Tom Trebelhorn said. 
"I'm sure Joe (Morgan, Boston manager) felt he had no control. And I had no 
control. That's quite rare for us. We usually have a way of grinding them out." 
The Patriots Day crowd of 35,478 was the largest crowd at Fenway since Patriots 
Day in 1987. 
Milwaukee's Dave Parker had three doubles and a single, Greg Brock two doubles 
and two singles. Gary Sheffield, Edgar Diaz and Brock drove in three runs 
apiece. 
Milwaukee had nine doubles and one triple, but no home runs. Every starter 
except Dale Sveum got a hit. 
"We were just on a roll today," said Parker, who signed as a free agent after 
helping the Oakland Athletics to the World Series championship last fall. 
Milwaukee's Ted Higuera (1-0) gave up two hits in 6 1/3 innings. Tom Filer and 
Dan Plesac finished the combined three-hitter. 
Higuera, bothered by injuries last year, allowed only a single by Ellis Burks 
leading off the fifth inning and a single by Tony Pena. He struck out three and 
walked four. 
Boston's Mike Boddicker gave up six runs and six hits in 2 1/3 innings and 
Dennis Lamp followed by giving up three runs and four hits in 1 1/3 innings. 
Rookie Dana Kiecker gave up four runs in 1 1/3 innings, and Mike Rochford gave 
up four runs in 2 1/3 innings. 
"It was just one of those days," Boddicker said. 
The 18 runs by the Brewers were one short of the team record, set against 
Boston on May 31, 1980. The 18-0 loss was one run short of the worst shutout 
defeat for the Red Sox. 
The major league record for the largest shutout was the Pittsburgh Pirates' 
22-0 victory over the Chicago Cubs on Sept. 16, 1975. 
Toronto 4, Baltimore 2 -- John Cerutti pitched five shutout innings and the 
Blue Jays went on the beat the Orioles at Toronto. 
Cerutti gave up three hits, struck out five and walked none. Frank Wills 
allowed three hits in two innings before Tom Henke got the final six outs for 
his first save. One of the hits off Wills was a two-run homer by Cal Ripken in 
the sixth inning. 
Jay Tibbs, making his first appearance since July 2, gave up seven hits and 
four runs in five innings. He had surgery to repair a torn rotator cuff last 
Sept. 12. 
Cleveland 6, Kansas City 3 -- Cory Snyder hit three doubles and the Indians 
knocked out Mark Gubicza in a four-run second inning en route to a rain-delayed 
victory at Kansas City. 
Ten of the first 14 Cleveland batters reached base against Gubicza, who was 
charged with six hits and six earned runs in 1 1/3 innings. 
Tom Candiotti went five innings for the victory, giving up 10 hits and the 
three Kansas City runs. Al Nipper relieved in the sixth and pitched three 
scoreless innings. 
Jesse Orosco walked the only two batters he faced in the ninth before Doug 
Jones came on for his second save. 
The game was interrupted by rain for 41 minutes in the bottom of the sixth. 
Seattle 6, Minnesota 3 -- Jeffrey Leonard and Ken Griffey Jr. hit two-run 
homers off David West at Seattle as the Mariners ended a five-game losing 
streak. 
Trailing 3-2, Harold Reynolds drew a leadoff walk in the third inning and 
Griffey hit West's next pitch for his second home run of the season. 
Seattle starter Randy Johnson got the victory despite giving up two home runs. 
He yielded five hits in seven innings before Bill Swift opened the eighth. Mike 
Schooler went the final 1 1/3 innings for his second save. 
It was Schooler's 50th career save in his 110th game, breaking the American 
League record of 50 in 122 games by Cleveland's Doug Jones. The St. Louis 
Cardinals' Todd Worrell holds the major-league mark of 50 in 109 games. 
