YOUR MORTGAGE; 
PROS AND CONS OF BIWEEKLY LOANS 
QUESTION: What do you think of biweekly mortgages? I ask because I am 
considering refinancing my home and a lender I talked with was pushing biweekly 
loans. As she explained them, they pay off in about 20 years. But I'm not sure 
I like the idea of having to make loan payments every two weeks and having them 
withdrawn automatically from my checking account. If these loans are such a 
good deal, why don't all lenders offer them? 
ANSWER: Biweekly mortgages are good for lenders because they get their money 
back faster than with a traditional mortgage, which requires one payment each 
month. But most lenders don't offer biweekly because of the difficulty 
programming their computers for two collections every month. 
However, you can accomplish the same result by making the equivalent of 13 
instead of just 12 monthly payments each year. 
For example, suppose your monthly mortgage payment is $1,200. Just add $100 
extra to each monthly payment and you will be making the equivalent of 13 
payments each year. This should pay off your loan in 15 to 20 years, depending 
on the interest rate. 
Biweekly mortgages are popular with blue-collar workers who get paid every two 
weeks. The key is that the payment is withdrawn automatically from your 
checking or savings account. However, for most borrowers, there doesn't seem to 
be any great advantage to biweekly mortgages and it can be a bookkeeping 
problem to remember that the lender is going to deduct a loan payment from your 
checking account every two weeks. 
My suggestion is to take a 30-year mortgage with monthly, rather than biweekly 
payments. If you wish to have it paid off rapidly so you can save thousands of 
dollars in interest, just pay it off as if it were a 15-year mortgage. 
Depending on the loan amount and interest rate, your extra payment each month 
will typically be between $100 and $200. 
Negative Amortization ARM Could Be Risky 
Q: My wife and I want to buy our first home. We found a wonderful real estate 
agent. The first thing he did was to get us to fill out a loan application, so 
he could get us prequalified for a mortgage. He tried a local S&amp;L, which 
advertised the best rates, but we discovered their borrowers must have good 
income and perfect credit. Although we have excellent credit, our income is not 
very high. 
Next, the realty agent took our application to an "easy lender" who, he said, 
rarely turns anyone down. But all they offered us was an adjustable-rate 
mortgage with negative amortization. That means our monthly payment will stay 
reasonable, but we are not happy about the possibility that we could wind up 
owing more on the mortgage than we borrowed. What do you think of negative 
amortization mortgages? 
A: As you probably already know, adjustable-rate mortgages shift the risk of 
rising interest rates from the lender to the borrower. To help minimize the 
possibility of rising payments, which the borrower cannot afford, some ARM 
lenders offer loans with negative amortization. This means the payment can't 
increase by more than a specified amount if interest rates go up, but the 
unpaid interest is added to your mortgage balance. 
This is all right if the home also increases in market value. But if it 
doesn't, you could find your equity being wiped out. However, if you only plan 
to stay in the home for a few years, then a negative amortization loan would be 
all right because there probably won't be much negative amortization interest 
added to your loan's principal balance in a few years. 
If you plan to keep the home more than a few years, my suggestion is to shop 
around among lenders on your own. Perhaps you will discover a better lender 
where you can qualify for a loan that doesn't have negative amortization. 
Can Lender Transfer Loan Out of State? 
Q: About two years ago, we got our home loan from a local savings and loan. We 
have our checking and savings accounts with the same S&amp;L and it is very 
convenient for us. But last week we received a notice that our loan will now be 
serviced by an out-of-state lender we have never heard of. Both my husband and 
I get paid on the 15th of the month and we made our loan payments on the same 
day. Is there any way we can stop this? 
A: Welcome to the multibillion dollar world of loan servicing. You are the 
latest victim and there isn't much you can do. If it will make you feel any 
better, I have one mortgage that started out in California, moved to Texas, 
where it was transferred among several loan servicers, then it moved to 
Oklahoma and now it is in Toledo, Ohio, where the loan servicer is doing a 
terrible job. All during this time the loan has been owned by Fannie Mae, but 
the servicing keeps getting sold and transferred. The same thing is happening 
to your loan. 
