MANY SENT BY PARENTS TO SAFETY IN WEST; 
YOUNG REFUGEES SEEK HAVEN IN GERMANY 
Not long after Indian occupation troops hung him up by his thumbs in his native 
Sri Lanka, Sivanesweran, a Tamil teen-ager with haunted eyes, says he is 
grateful for refuge in West Germany. 
The youth is one of thousands of refugee children, mostly Sri Lankan and 
Iranian, who escaped war and misery to West Germany after their parents heard 
it requires no visas for travelers under 16, unique among Western nations. 
Parents in Sri Lanka and Iran have paid exorbitant sums to shadowy travel 
agents for passports and airline tickets to send their children to West Germany 
to stay until things get better back home, West German border police and social 
workers say. 
More than 2,500 children, traveling alone or with others they met on flights, 
swamped Frankfurt international airport in 1988. Even more are expected this 
year -- 319 children arrived in January and 149 in the first week of February. 
Since the end of the Persian Gulf war last August, most of the children have 
been Tamils, a religious and ethnic minority in Sri Lankan. But officials now 
anticipate a parade of children fleeing Afghanistan once Soviet troops have 
withdrawn from that war-torn country. 
Right to Seek Asylum 
Adult refugees also continue to stream into West Germany, taking advantage of 
the law enshrining the right of foreigners to seek asylum when they show up at 
the border or an airport. 
The arrival of a record 103,000 in 1988 and an unabated influx so far this year 
has spurred the governing Christian Democrats to propose legislation curbing 
asylum rights. 
Interior Minister Friedrich Zimmermann vowed last month to seek a visa rule for 
foreigners under 16. 
Pressure on the Bonn government to amend the asylum law magnified after a 
rightist party hostile to foreigners took 7.5% of the vote in a state election 
in January. 
But the proposed crackdown is opposed by the Christian Democrats' junior 
coalition partner, the liberal Free Democrats. They and opposition parties 
argue that Bonn is bound to preserve the asylum right as atonement for the 
nation's xenophobic Nazi past. 
Housed in Mansion 
Once the child refugees are processed through airport customs, they are shunted 
to the Villa Mumm, a former industrialist's 19th-Century mansion on a wooded 
hill in nearby Kronberg. 
The stucco, tile-roofed building served as a Nazi Gestapo school before being 
donated to Workers Welfare, a union-linked charity group, after World War II. 
On a recent visit by a reporter scores of mostly Tamil and Iranian children 
were playing pool in a game room, learning German with texts and notebooks, 
phoning home or just "hanging out" in chatting groups. 
But many suffer severe homesickness and nightmares of ordeals back home, even 
after being handed over to relatives or family friends who reside in West 
Germany, said Bernd Jacob, a staff social worker at the mansion. 
"I've only been here three days. I was held in Indian troop camps five times 
after being rounded up with other young people during hunts for Tamil Tigers 
(guerrillas)," Sivanesweran, the Tamil boy, said through a translator. 
"The last time, they hung me up by my thumbs." 
Bribes to Organizers 
After he was freed the fifth time, his parents decided that they could 
guarantee his life only by sending him to West Germany. They sold jewelry and 
other valuables to pay the $2,430, including bribes, demanded by travel 
organizers for the trip. 
Other Tamil children interviewed had similar stories of brutality in Sri 
Lanka's civil war. Most were waiting to be retrieved by relatives, themselves 
asylum seekers or legal residents in West Germany. A review process by welfare 
workers lasts from several days to several months. 
The process was tightened after reports that some children had wound up in 
brothels or fallen into the hands of people trading in human beings, welfare 
staff say. 
The Frankfurt Youth Affairs Office, with ultimate responsibility for resettling 
the children, complains of being overwhelmed by a national problem left to be 
handled by a local authority for national political reasons. 
