ASSESSING BLAME IN FREEWAY CRASHES 
Morning and night as we go to and from work, traffic radio alerts are the 
expected rather than the exception. 
On March 18 as we traveled north on the Ventura Freeway, we passed an accident 
scene in the south lanes. Tow trucks were positioning themselves to remove two 
automobiles. We measured the mileage of backed up traffic to be in excess of 5 
miles. The occupants of roughly 5,000 automobiles, with further ripple effect 
on thousands more, were the unwitting victims of that accident. 
In November of 1988, on the southbound San Diego Freeway near Westminster, an 
18-wheel rig overturned, blocking all the lanes on the freeway. Traffic backed 
up for 10 to 12 miles. Surface streets and adjacent freeways were clogged. The 
hour was 9 a.m. For hours there was no escape in any direction. What was the 
social and economic impact of that accident? 
On April 1, a tragic accident backed up traffic for 18 miles on Interstate 5 
near Camp Pendleton. 
On that same freeway near Westminster on Easter Sunday evening, the freeway was 
closed to northbound traffic due to a driver shearing off guy lines supporting 
high-tension poles. Live wires dangled on the freeway until the electricity 
could be turned off. Again, traffic was backed up for many miles and for many 
hours. 
We propose a law aimed at special handling of participants in freeway accidents 
that cause the terrible delays resulting in wasted man-hours, economic losses 
in businesses and industry and incalculable physical distress. 
The law would provide for a special hearing on the causes of every freeway 
accident that, in the opinion of the chief peace officer investigating the 
accident, has caused substantial delay. The judgment in such a hearing would 
run against the offending party. The state would be the beneficiary of such 
judgment -- required to be published as a notice to the world of the 
consequences of careless freeway driving. 
The measure of social and economic loss would be produced through expert 
testimony of traffic engineers supported by facts supplied by witnesses to the 
event of which there would be a ready multitude. 
Such damages could be monumental, probably not covered by insurance as it is 
currently structured, but would, nevertheless, be a shrieking warning to drive 
more carefully on the freeway. 
R.J. GUY 
A.D. GUY 
Corona del Mar 
