SOUTH COAST LEAGUE BASEBALL ROUNDUP; 
EL TORO ROLLS ALONG ON JOHNSON'S SHUTOUT 
Rob Johnson pitched a five-hit shutout and El Toro High School rolled to its 
11th consecutive victory, beating Dana Hills, 3-0, Friday in a South Coast 
League game. 
Johnson (5-1) helped the Chargers (15-5, 7-2 in league) lower their staff 
earned-run average to less than two runs per game. El Toro opened the season 
with three losses but has since won 15 of 17. 
"This team has more talent than our team two years ago that played in the 
championships at Anaheim Stadium," Johnson said. 
"Our team two years ago got hot in the playoffs and was on a roll for five 
rounds. This team is solid at every position with better pitching." 
Dana Hills (10-9-1, 4-5) had its leadoff batter reach safely in three of the 
last four innings against Johnson, but the Dolphins' only threat came in the 
fifth, when they got two of their five hits. 
Johnson wasn't overpowering -- only one strikeout -- but he benefited from 
three double plays and a nifty catch by shortstop Chris Sauritch to rob Dana 
Hills' Scott Holty of a hit in the third inning. 
"I threw mostly fastballs today because my curve wasn't working," Johnson said. 
"I tried to get them out as easily as possible and get the game over with 
quickly." 
El Toro scored the only run Johnson would need in the second inning. Scott 
Sebbo singled, Reggie Watkins doubled and Sal Schachter grounded out. The 
Chargers added another run on a homer by Sauritch in the third and scored an 
unearned run in the inning. 
"I didn't think we played that bad a game," Dana Hills Coach Bob Canary said. 
"We didn't bunch our hits together, and Rob pitched a great game. They're hot 
and playing good baseball right now." 
In other South Coast League games: 
Irvine 9, San Clemente 0 -- Mike Seal pitched a two-hitter, struck out 11 and 
walked five to lead visiting Irvine (11-9, 6-3). Bobby Garcia had two hits and 
scored twice, and Seal doubled and had two RBIs. 
Capistrano Valley 7, Mission Viejo 6 -- Trailing, 6-3, in the bottom of the 
seventh inning, Capistrano Valley (11-7-1, 4-4-1) scored four runs. David 
Guillen's single to left scored Ian Levine with the winning run. Mission Viejo 
led, 4-0, after two innings. 
