POINDEXTER TO PAY FOR ROLE BUT REAGAN MAY SUFFER MOST; 
IRAN-CONTRA: THE EX-WHITE HOUSE OFFICIAL ONCE SAID DEFIANTLY: 'THE BUCK STOPS 
HERE WITH ME.' IT IS A STATEMENT HE LATER CAME TO REGRET. 
When members of Congress wanted to know two years ago who was primarily 
responsible for the Iran-Contra affair, former National Security Adviser John 
M. Poindexter told them defiantly: "The buck stops here with me." 
"I made the decision," Poindexter testified to the Iran-Contra committees. "I 
had the authority to do it. I thought it was a good idea. I was convinced that 
the President would in the end think it was a good idea, but I did not want him 
to be associated with it." 
It was a statement the former presidential adviser would later come to regret. 
During his five-week trial on charges of conspiracy, lying and obstructing 
Congress, his lawyer, Richard W. Beckler, tried without success to portray 
Poindexter instead as a man who was only carrying out the wishes of President 
Ronald Reagan. 
But with his conviction Saturday on all counts, bringing down the curtain on 
the Iran-Contra prosecution of Reagan's former aides, it appears that history 
is likely to support Poindexter's original judgment of his involvement in the 
scandal. 
It almost certainly will be Poindexter -- not Reagan or Poindexter's gung-ho 
aide, Oliver L. North -- who suffers the most severe punishment for playing a 
central role in the scandal that scarred the Reagan presidency and nearly 
brought on a constitutional crisis. 
Of the eight men who have been tried or pleaded guilty in connection with the 
Iran-Contra affair, only Poindexter risks a jail term. North, who was convicted 
last year of only three counts, was fined $150,000 and sentenced to 1,200 hours 
of community service. And Robert C. McFarlane, Poindexter's predecessor at the 
White House, paid a $20,000 fine and served 200 hours of community service 
after pleading guilty to four counts in March, 1988. 
In an interview shortly after the verdict, Mark A. Belnick, former counsel for 
the Senate Iran-Contra investigation, said it was not surprising that 
Poindexter had been singled out by the American legal system to bear most of 
the responsibility for the Iran-Contra affair. 
"Next to the President, Poindexter was at the apex of the Administration," 
Belnick noted. "He had a heavy job; he bears a heavy responsibility." 
But Belnick and others involved in unraveling the complex Iran-Contra case were 
quick to note that while the former national security adviser will undoubtely 
suffer more in the short run, the long-term consequences of the scandal clearly 
will be felt by the man that Poindexter was trying to protect: Reagan. 
"Iran-Contra has diminished Ronald Reagan in the public's mind and in history," 
said John W. Nields Jr., who served as chief counsel for the House Iran-Contra 
investigation. 
The role of "fall guy" -- as North once described it -- was clearly one that 
Poindexter freely embraced on Nov. 25, 1986, when a stunned nation first 
learned that its President had authorized a covert sale of weapons to Iran and 
that top White House officials had secretly diverted $3.5 million of the 
profits from the sale to provide assistance to Contras in Nicaragua. At the 
time, the Administration was prohibited by Congress from using U.S. funds to 
aid the Contras. 
What surprised many Americans about the Iran-Contra affair was not so much that 
the President had been secretly assisting the Contras, whom he always had 
supported, but that he was involved in what appeared to be an arms-for-hostages 
swap with Iran. Since the beginning of his presidency, Reagan had pledged never 
to bargain with terrorists or hostage-takers. 
In his congressional testimony, Poindexter admitted that he had personally 
destroyed an official document signed on Jan. 17, 1986, by Reagan authorizing 
the Iran arms sale. He said he did so because it stated that the Administration 
was involved in trading arms for hostages, which Reagan had strongly denied. 
Poindexter also admitted that he personally had approved the diversion of 
profits from the Iran arms sales in February, 1986, as a way of providing 
"bridge financing" for the Contras. He said that he never told Reagan about his 
action because he knew it could damage the President if it ever became public 
knowledge. 
"I made a very deliberate decision not to ask the President so that I could 
insulate him from the decision and provide some future deniability for the 
President if it ever leaked out," he told congressional investigators. "Of 
course, our hope was that it would not leak out." 
Although public knowledge of the diversion did not hurt Reagan's popularity as 
much as Poindexter had feared, it caused a firestorm in the Democrat-controlled 
Congress. Congressional leaders accused Reagan of violating not only the Boland 
Amendment, which banned U.S. aid to the Contras, but also the constitutional 
trust he held as President to keep Congress informed of major foreign policy 
initiatives. 
Nevertheless, it was not the violation of the Boland Amendment or the alleged 
betrayal of the Constitution that ultimately caused Poindexter and other Reagan 
aides to run afoul of the law. All were charged with much smaller crimes, 
mostly conspiracy and lying to Congress. 
Unlike the Watergate scandal, which sent a number of high-level White House 
aides to jail, the Iran-Contra affair did not hinge on allegations that could 
easily be prosecuted by the criminal justice system. There are no criminal 
penalties for violating the Boland Amendment and no sanctions written into the 
Constitution -- short of impeachment -- for a President who betrays his duty to 
keep in touch with Congress. 
"At its core," said Nields, the former House counsel, "Iran-Contra was a 
political matter more than a criminal matter. The criminal trials were not a 
central part of the event. Watergate was at its heart and center a criminal law 
issue. There was some criminal conduct around the edges of Iran-Contra, but 
mostly the acts committed were wrongs against our political system." 
In addition, the Iran-Contra prosecutors were hampered somewhat by the need to 
protect government secrets that might have been disclosed had the Reagan aides 
been prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. Some charges were dropped in 
order to preserve classified information that the Administration sought to 
protect. 
But even though the prosecution of Reagan's aides revealed no substantial, new 
information about the Iran-Contra scandal, it provided the American people with 
an opportunity to see that the former President still refused to acknowledge 
accepted facts of the case. 
In eight hours of videotaped interviews played during Poindexter's trial, 
Reagan said he still doubted that $3.5 million actually was diverted to the 
Contras -- a remark that will undoubtedly be seen as important when historians 
begin writing their accounts of the Reagan presidency and the Iran-Contra 
affair. 
"He seemed to be blind," said Nields. "He didn't see what he didn't want to 
see." 
The Iran-Contra committees concluded in November, 1987, that while Reagan knew 
nothing of the diversion, he was responsible for creating an atmosphere at the 
White House that encouraged his aides to lie to Congress and to take the law 
into their own hands. 
Reagan's videotaped testimony appears likely to rank as one of the most 
memorable events in the entire Iran-Contra affair, along with North's testimony 
before the congressional committees in June, 1987. With his big, gap-toothed 
grin, and rows of medals pinned to the chest of his Marine uniform, North 
became an instant media hero. 
Constitutional scholars cringed as North, with no apologies, recounted every 
detail of how he set out to create "the enterprise" -- a quasi-governmental, 
covert operation funded with Iranian arms sale profits that would carry out the 
foreign policy objectives of the President without accountability to Congress. 
It was, he asserted, the President's prerogative to conduct business in that 
manner. 
Although North's attitude quickly divided the nation -- pitting conservatives 
against liberals, Congress against the President, Democrats against Republicans 
-- Iran-Contra experts note that many of those old wounds have since healed, 
especially since the start of the Bush Administration. 
"I was worried that it would polarize us," Nields said. "But there is now 
actually a better sense of cooperation between the Congress and the executive 
(branch), perhaps as a result of the Iran-Contra experience." 
IRAN-CONTRA DEFENDANTS 
John Poindexter is one of nine people who have been indicted by special 
Iran-Contra prosecutor Lawrence E. Walsh. Here are summaries of the other eight 
and their current status: 
OLIVER L. NORTH 
A retired Marine lieutenant colonel and former aide to Poindexter, North was 
found guilty by a jury on May 4, 1989, of three felonies: altering and 
destroying official documents, accepting an illegal gratuity (a $13,800 home 
security system) and aiding and abetting in the obstruction of Congress. He was 
sentenced last July 5 to two years' probation, fined $150,000 and ordered to 
perform 1,200 hours of community service in a District of Columbia drug 
education program for youths. He is appealing the conviction while carrying out 
the community service. 
ROBERT C. McFARLANE 
The White House national security adviser who preceded Poindexter, McFarlane 
pleaded guilty on March 11, 1988, to four misdemeanor charges of withholding 
information from Congress. He was sentenced on March 3, 1989, to two years' 
probation, fined $20,000 and required to perform 200 hours of community 
service. 
CARL R. (SPITZ) CHANNELL 
A political consultant who raised money for the Contras from wealthy Americans, 
Channell pleaded guilty on April 29, 1987, to conspiring to defraud the United 
States of income tax revenue. He was sentenced last July 7 to two years' 
probation. 
RICHARD R. MILLER 
An associate of Channell, Miller pleaded guilty on May 6, 1987, to conspiring 
to defraud the United States of tax revenue. He was sentenced last July 6 to 
two years' probation. 
RICHARD V. SECORD 
A retired Air Force major general and North's chief assistant for logistics, 
Secord pleaded guilty on Nov. 8, 1989, to a felony charge of making false 
statements to a congressional committee. He was sentenced on Jan. 24 to two 
years' probation. 
ALBERT V. HAKIM 
The businessman who controlled the money in the scandal, Hakim pleaded guilty 
to a misdemeanor charge of helping to supplement North's government salary by 
arranging to pay for a security system at North's home. He was sentenced to two 
years' probation and fined $5,000. Hakim also agreed to abandon his claim to 
$7.3 million from Iranian arms sales proceeds frozen in Swiss bank accounts. 
JOSEPH F. FERNANDEZ 
A federal judge in Alexandria, Va., last Nov. 24 dismissed all four counts 
against Fernandez, a former CIA station chief in Costa Rica, after Atty. Gen. 
Dick Thornburgh blocked disclosure of classified information that was ruled 
relevant to Fernandez's defense. Independent counsel Walsh has appealed the 
action to the Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. 
THOMAS G. CLINES 
A former CIA agent who assisted North in locating sources of arms and shipping 
them to the Contras, Clines is awaiting trial on a four-count income tax 
indictment. Clines has pleaded innocent to allegations that he under-reported 
his earnings in 1985 and 1986 and that he falsely stated he had no foreign bank 
accounts. Upon conviction, he would face a maximum penalty of 26 years in 
prison and fines of $1.2 million. 
