HUGE PROTEST AT ABORTION CLINIC TURNS VIOLENT 
At least 242 people were arrested Saturday after militant abortion protesters 
descended on a Los Angeles women's clinic during a violence-marred, seven-hour 
siege that capped a week of abortion rights protests in Southern California. 
The demonstration, organized by the national anti-abortion group Operation 
Rescue, failed to shut down the Mid-Wilshire clinic. As hundreds of abortion 
rights activists cheered them on, police cleared a path to the entrance and 
security guards escorted staff and patients inside. 
Throughout the day, abortions were conducted inside the Family Planning 
Associates Medical Group clinic while an estimated 1,200 demonstrators 
representing both sides of the emotional issue waved signs, chanted, sang and 
prayed. 
More than 340 police officers, including 14 on horseback, worked to control the 
crowd and make the arrests, drawing allegations of brutality from abortion 
protesters. Several people at the protest suffered cuts and bruises, witnesses 
said. 
Four of the Operation Rescue demonstrators, including Southern California 
leaders Joseph Foreman and Jeff White, were booked on suspicion of felony 
conspiracy charges after they allegedly instructed others to block doorways. 
Others were booked on misdemeanor trespassing charges. 
In many ways, the drama was a re-enactment, on a smaller but more volatile 
scale, of the massive protest at the clinic on March 25, 1989, that resulted in 
the arrest of 768 people. Just as last year's demonstration capped a weeklong 
wave of protests in Southern California, Saturday's demonstration concluded 
what anti-abortion organizers called a "Holy Week of Rescue" in commemoration 
of Easter. 
"There's no greater violence than the violence that goes on inside the clinic," 
said Susan Odom, an Operation Rescue organizer from Philadelphia. 
Activists representing both sides of the abortion debate described two violent 
clashes. The first occured about 7:30 a.m. when abortion foes tried to break 
through a defensive ring formed by the clinic's security guards and abortion 
rights activists around the clinic's back parking lot and entrance. The 
abortion protesters "rushed" the perimeter, clinic officials said. 
Leaders of abortion rights advocacy groups said the clinic was expecting the 
protest because "spies" for the Clinic Defense Alliance, a network of 
organizations formed to counter abortion protesters, had infiltrated Operation 
Rescue rallies. 
"We weren't prepared for them to jump the fence and start swinging on our 
in-house security," said Michael Monji, associate administrator for Family 
Planning Associates, which operates 30 clinics in Southern California. 
Previously, Monji said, "they just sat down." 
Security guard Jim Russell suffered a puncture wound in his arm that he said 
required six stitches. He said one protester pulled his arm down on the 
chain-link fence and another climbed over it. Another guard's face was bloodied 
in the melee, Russell said. 
Operation Rescue organizers acknowledged that protesters scaled fences to get 
near the clinic doors. Dave Conrardy, Southern California field director for 
Operation Rescue, said at least three protesters were beaten by the clinic's 
security guards. 
"The only thing our people were doing was crawling over a fence," Conrardy 
said. "Out of 80 people who tried, maybe 40 got over." 
The second clash occurred when police moved in to separate hundreds of opposing 
protesters outside on 6th Street. "The two factions were pushing and shoving," 
said Police Capt. Robert Riley, commander of the Rampart Division. Suddenly, 
Riley said, "there were groups of individuals who were pushed away that surged 
toward the officers." 
Witnesses said police responded by jabbing protesters with batons and moving in 
with mounted patrols. 
At a press conference later outside Los Angeles Police Department headquarters, 
where their comrades were jailed, Operation Rescue leaders decried police 
tactics and said they plan to sue the city. 
Pastor Al Howard of a North Long Beach congregation called His Nesting Place 
said he was jabbed in the groin by a police baton. Another protester said his 
hand was still numb from thin plastic handcuffs. One jailed protester was said 
to be wearing a cast where police had applied a nunchuka, a plastic martial 
arts device used in so-called pain-compliance holds. 
As in the protest last March, scores of anti-abortion demonstrators went limp 
as police made arrests, prompting officers to use the nunchukas to force them 
into waiting buses. As video cameras operated by the media, protesters and 
police rolled, scores of protesters grimaced, gasped and yelped in pain as 
officers applied the nunchukas around their arms and shoulders. 
Police refer to such techniques as "come-along holds" and said they would be 
unnecessary if protesters agreed to walk on to the bus. Brutality complaints 
were expected, said Lt. Fred Nixon, a police spokesman. "We get those every 
time we police one of these things," he said. "It's why we welcome the 
videotapes and media coverage." 
The confrontation capped weeks of formulating strategy. Organizers for both 
sides patrolled the protest area, communicating by two-way radios. Activists 
from as far away as San Diego and Ventura counties had been mobilized by each 
side. 
