FEELING TENSE? YOU'RE PROBABLY DOING YOUR JOB; 
STRESS: AS COMPETITION GROWS, SO DO WORKPLACE TENSIONS. FROM BOARDROOM TO SHOP 
FLOOR, EVERYONE FRETS. 
Working harder? Working faster? Feeling tense? Does your job seem less like the 
livelihood you once enjoyed and more like the sure-fire formula for a stomach 
ulcer? 
You're not alone. 
A broad spectrum of the U.S. work force -- from blue-collar workers to 
corporate chairmen, hospital nurses to flight attendants -- struggles today 
with work that is faster, more tension-packed and, overall, more exhausting 
than it used to be. 
"There are new pressures in the workplace, and they take a human cost," 
declares Harley Shaiken, a professor of work and technology at UC San Diego. 
Work and pressure have always kept close company. But lately, certain realities 
have been pounding the lone employee harder than ever. 
Foreign competition is an abstract concept -- until the threat of a shutdown 
hovers over your factory. Even for highly paid executives, job security has 
eroded sharply in an era of merger mania. At all levels of the job ladder, 
millions of people struggle with the migraine-inducing balance between work and 
child-rearing. 
Not surprisingly, job-related stress claims have skyrocketed. And if anything, 
the varied pressures facing workers will increase in the coming years. 
"I don't think there's any question that this is going on, and it will 
continue, and it's going to accelerate," said Eric G. Flamholtz, a professor of 
management at UCLA. 
Many U.S. manufacturers, for instance, now race faster than ever to be first 
out with new products, a key to surviving in the increasingly global economy. 
At home, decontrol of airlines and other industries has meant that flight 
attendants now must cater to more passengers per flight and pilots spend more 
hours maneuvering through crowded skies. 
"It's a job that I don't know if I could start today," said Shirley Barber, an 
Irvine resident who has worked as a United Airlines flight attendant for 19 
years. 
The 1980s' vogue of carving bloated companies into lean-and-mean corporate 
machines has left a trail of confused, emaciated labor forces in its wake. At 
the top levels, executives struggle as hard as ever for profit gains but with 
less job security than ever before. 
And everywhere, it seems, workers scramble to keep up with technology, such as 
computers and facsimile machines, that enables them to finish work and deliver 
it to impatient customers more quickly than ever. 
Certainly, such pressures aren't all bad. "American industry doggone-right 
better start working harder if it's going to keep up with the rest of the 
world," said James McN. Stancill, a USC professor of finance. 
Competition often results in lower prices and faster service. Higher living 
standards depend on productivity gains. And progress needn't always take a 
human toll: Experts agree that the biggest improvements in personal performance 
are attained when people work smarter and not just harder. 
Feverish Pace 
Only, the ideal of working smart isn't always met. The pressures to produce 
have transformed the climate of work in many places, creating "a feverish pace 
that seems to have emerged in the last three to five years," said Edward 
Sanford, chairman of Pepperdine University's economics, marketing and 
quantitative methods department. The stress level in business, he added, "is 
making life very obnoxious." 
At Cache Computers in the San Francisco Bay Area, the key to survival is 
rushing high-tech products to market faster than rivals in Asia and the United 
States. For employees, that often means 12-hour days as well as strict 
deadlines imposed on subcontractors: The performance of suppliers can make a 
crucial difference in a product's profit. 
Keeping up in the fast-paced world "is a little like trying to shoot ducks -- 
and they're coming off the pond quicker, one after the other," observed Bill 
Fenley, vice president of sales and marketing at the Fremont firm. 
Not that he's complaining. "We're all working harder, but at the same time, 
there's the thrill of victory when you know you've done a good job," Fenley 
said. 
Unbridled competition is not all caused by the global economy. For many 
industries, operating inside the United States has gotten tougher. The 
deregulation movement, for instance, has subjected such once-stable industries 
as airlines, trucking, buses and telephone service to the jolt of new 
competition. 
Employees feel it: For long-haul truckers, keeping to schedule has taken on new 
urgency. And airline employees -- once the beneficiaries of predictable, secure 
employment -- have gradually been squeezed harder by employers. 
Consider flight attendants. At the time of 1978 airline deregulation, United 
Airlines' DC-10s were equipped with 242 seats and employed up to 10 flight 
attendants per flight. Since then, United and its rivals have packed more and 
more seats into their jetliners. 
Today, it's not unusual for eight flight attendants to handle a United DC-10 
with 287 seats. And that adds up to more bending, reaching, walking, stowing 
suitcases and other chores for a typical flight. 
"I deliver a lot more things to a lot more people than I did before 
deregulation," Barber said. 
Cost Cutting 
In the quest to cut costs, industries have tried various strategies. Typically, 
more is expected of employees. 
Hospitals, for instance, have tried to combat health-care inflation by 
admitting only the truly sick for overnight stays. For nurses, this means a 
sharp rise in intravenous medications, dressing changes, careful monitoring and 
other sorts of care required by the acutely ill; virtually all patients are in 
serious shape. 
In the early 1970s, by contrast, perhaps only two patients out of 10 were that 
sick, said Kay Davis, a nurse and health-care consultant in Los Angeles. 
"You're looking at a drastic difference," she said. 
In other fields, new technologies have had the effect of an electronic poke in 
the shoulder to workers who once could take a bit more time. Take facsimile 
machines, which enable documents to be transmitted almost at once. While 
enormously convenient, the technology also can put new pressure on employees to 
finish work sooner than before. 
"In the past, clients would say, 'Give it to me in two days,' " said Michael 
Waldorf, a legal search consultant in Los Angeles. "Then there was Federal 
Express and overnight mail. Now people want it to be faxed. There's just a much 
faster pace." 
Increasingly, technology serves as an all-knowing work monitor, toting up the 
number of keystrokes and corrections made by word processors, allowing 
supervisors to eavesdrop on telephone calls, even watching over the workplace 
and cafeteria with video cameras, according to a recent report by 9to5, the 
National Assn. of Working Women. 
"Electronic snooping causes fear and stress, which leads to illness" rather 
than increased productivity, complains Karen Nussbaum, director of the 
Cleveland-based group, estimating that 10 million American workers now are 
subject to some form of electronic surveillance. 
Leaner Staffing 
A key change affecting corporate America in the 1990s is the reality of thinner 
work ranks in many places, a legacy of the cost-cutting and restructuring fever 
of recent years. 
Since 1982, about 4.5 million Americans at all levels of the career ladder have 
lost their jobs because of restructuring, said Jerome M. Rosow, president of 
the Work in America Institute, a nonprofit research organization in Scarsdale, 
N.Y. 
When the surgery is performed inartfully, say critics, employees pay the price. 
In their efforts to hop on the cost-cutting bandwagon, employers have been 
known to cut the wrong areas or fail to tell the remaining employees how they 
should absorb an increased work burden. 
Shyam H. Gidumal, a vice president of the Boston Consulting Group in Los 
Angeles, recalled one case where a firm unwisely cut back its sales staff as 
much as its accounting staff, saddling its embattled sales force with an 
impossible load. "What's happening is their customers aren't getting called 
on," he said. 
In a sense, there's nothing so unusual about today's pressures. Work is tough, 
after all, and a nation's gains in prosperity require major effort. The 
relatively worry-free period of U.S. economic dominance after World War II was 
far more peculiar than today's climate, at least by historical standards. 
For many younger Americans, these hard realities have yet to sink in. "I think 
we're not yet working as hard as our parents and grandparents worked -- or the 
foreign competition," said Philip H. Birnbaum-More, 46, a professor of 
management at USC. 
Yet, in some ways, workers today face forms of pressure that are quite 
different from the problems their grandparents contended with. More single 
parents than ever are attempting to balance the demands of work and family, for 
instance. 
Moonlighting 
Young mothers commonly try to hold on to jobs outside the home. Indeed, at a 
time when pay raises often lag inflation, moonlighting by women has reached 
record-setting rates, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. By the 
middle of last year, 5.9% of American women held two jobs -- a five-fold 
increase since 1985. 
"It's never been that high," said Audrey Freedman, an economist with the 
Conference Board, a business research organization in New York. "When the 
number first came through, the BLS thought there was some error, it was so 
high." 
In today's transient society, harried parents scrambling to balance work and 
family demands often live far away from relatives who might lend a helping 
hand. The problem seems especially acute in California, where many people have 
close relatives in other parts of the country, said Bryan Lawton, a clinical 
psychologist who counsels employees at Wells Fargo Bank in San Francisco. 
Frequently, he said, workers feel like they have "too much to do and too little 
time." 
Mental stress claims against employers skyrocketed more than 500% in the 1980s 
in California and now cost hundreds of millions of dollars annually, according 
to the California Workers' Compensation Institute. And although the state is 
more liberal in allowing such claims than most, workplace stress seems to have 
gone up everywhere, said Paul J. Rosch, president of the American Institute of 
Stress in Yonkers, N.Y. 
In a March survey commissioned by Revlon Inc., 36% of respondents cited their 
work situations as the largest cause of personal stress, more than any other 
cause. "Most Americans quite clearly perceive they are under more stress than 
they were five years ago -- and job stress is No. 1 on the list," Rosch said. 
Executives 
The discomfort isn't limited to those toiling at the lower rungs of the job 
ladder. Years of merger mania have eroded the security of executives who know 
they may be dumped if a takeover occurs. By some gauges, top executives seem 
more willing than ever to bail out of the corporate race. 
Back in 1979, 17.3% of 1,708 top-level managers polled by Korn/Ferry 
International, a major executive search firm, said they expected to work as 
long as possible before retiring. But the gung-ho group is shrinking. Asked the 
same question last year, only 9.6% of 750 executives polled expected to work as 
long as they could. 
"The destiny of the individual at the senior level is more in jeopardy than it 
has ever been -- and it has little to do with how good a job he's doing," said 
Robert S. Rollo, Korn/Ferry's managing director. 
There may be no easy solution for some of the anxieties that employees face 
today, such as merger fears or the stress of juggling work and family. But 
certain things can be done to ease the pain, according to workplace experts. 
Wells Fargo, Kaiser Permanente, Transamerica Life and many other companies now 
offer harried employees either counseling or other programs designed to help 
allay workplace stress. According to the American Institute of Stress, one firm 
reduced its annual workers' compensation claims to $93,000 from $272,000 with 
the aid of a program that made use of meditation, biofeedback and muscle 
relaxation techniques. 
In light of such financial realities, the California Workers' Compensation 
Institute advises employers to identify -- and eliminate -- the causes of 
workplace stress. Among the worst: insensitive managers, unrealistic deadlines, 
insufficient training and failure to give workers the chance to share their 
views, a situation that leads to a sense of isolation. 
"If you can spot the factors that lead to stress and deal with them, you're 
better off than trying to manage it after it happens," counsels Michael W. 
Jones, assistant general manager with the San Francisco-based organization. 
