AT THE GALLERIES /DAVID LEWINSON: THE SIEGFRIED LINE: IT FAILED FIRST IN WAR 
AND NOW AS A WORK OF ART 
In 1938, Adolf Hitler ordered the construction of a 400-mile long, 2 1/2-mile 
wide fortified rampart. Running from the Lowland countries to Germany's 
southern border with France, this Siegfried Line or Westwall, was intended to 
guard against invasion from the west. With plans already in mind to leapfrog 
over the older but equivalent structure in France, the Maginot Line, Hitler 
knew the uselessness of such defenses. 
Nevertheless, 8 million tons of concrete, a million tons of iron and steel, and 
a million tons of wood were poured into the project, as was a lot of 
"volunteer" labor. 
Barbara Westermann, a German-born New York based artist with interests in 
architecture and urban planning, responds to the phenomenon in her 
"Westwall/Crossing the Siegfried Line," an installation at the La Jolla Museum 
of Contemporary Art's token downtown space, located at 835 G Street. 
In the modest sized gallery, Westermann has arranged 104 concrete forms cast in 
a shape similar to one prong of the jacks that kids play with. These are 
aligned in rows that take up most of the floor except for an aisle through the 
middle rows and an area that transects the aisle at one end. These voids 
produce a cross; presumably the "cross" referred to in the show's title and, 
perhaps, a specifically Christian reference. 
At the far end of the gallery, atop a pedestal, is plaster mold that looks like 
you might get the form of a tree stump out of it, or maybe a foot and ankle. In 
fact, you get the concrete forms, but no added meaning. 
Less uncertain is a historic photograph mounted on the wall opposite the 
plaster element. It shows a couple of workers constructing the original wall. 
They carry a large, wooden form used to cast pyramid-shaped defenses against 
tanks. In the background are row upon row of pyramids, stretching to the 
horizon. The bland documentary character of the image, with only these two 
people in it, does little more than hint at what must have been a very awesome 
earthwork, a Great Wall of Germany, as it were. In fact, it takes considerable 
effort to make the photo yield any sense of the impressiveness inherent in its 
subject. 
Westermann's installation only hints at impressiveness, too. The concrete forms 
soon look like large, gray Hershey kisses rather than reflections of stern 
military deterrents. Even hunkering down on the floor next to the outer row of 
forms, to try to enhance the perspective through a kind of dramatic close-up, 
leaves a sense that something is missing. 
The problem is that the scale is wrong; too large to achieve the kind of 
explosive compression that a small model produces; too small to generate a 
feeling of resistance and mass. 
The presence of the crucifix in the arrangement of the concrete elements also 
seems weak. The behaviors that the artist is commenting upon -- whether 
manifested in the Siegfried Line, the Maginot Line, the Berlin Wall, or the 
Great Wall of China; even in the walls that we build around ourselves as 
psychological defenses -- reflect a sad but universal human reality that 
transcends particular religions. By injecting a purely Christian symbol into 
the work, Westermann draws attention away from this universal aspect and the 
work's ability to communicate suffers for it. 
This exhibition remains on view through July 9. For more information, call 
454-3541. 
Meanwhile, across the street, and offered by a very different kind of 
institution, is an exhibition of new photographs by Walter Cotton. The place is 
Java, a coffeehouse which has become the hub of downtown San Diego's modest but 
tenacious avant-garde art scene. Thus, it's an institution of a sort, and a 
valuable one. The nine Ektacolor photographs on view in a quiet back room 
reveal Cotton's new and on-going exploration of interfaces between photography 
and painting. The results are attractive and provocative. 
Cotton draws his imagery not from the "real world" that constitutes 
photography's habitual domain; instead he creates sparse compositions of forms 
in his studio and photographs these. He paints the floor and the walls, 
producing apparent spatial divisions by abutting contrasting light and dark 
shades. In this, he is a painter. He then places within this environment few 
items that might also be painted. These include tools, chunks of metal, wood 
blocks, shelves, folding screens, strips of white and black tape, and parts of 
dolls. Here, he acts as an installation artist, or sculptor. 
The photography that is the final outcome of Cotton's activity strikes the eye 
as marvelously rich and subtle. His manipulations in the studio produce images 
of a flattened space more suggestive of painting than of photography; while the 
spareness of details and their distribution across the scene framed by the 
camera produce compositional effects most readily associated with two 
dimensional design. 
The works' expressive qualities engage the focused serenity of minimalism, with 
an added twist of mystery that is a delightful consequence of Cotton's 
confounding of expectations concerning what one sees in what media. 
This is smart work that's very alert to the operations and ideas of 
photography, of art, and of the two in combination. His response to these 
achieves formal and expressive results very much worth looking at. 
The exhibition continues at Java, 837 G Street, through May 26. For more 
information, call 235-4012. 
