GARDENS IN SPACE; 
SCIENTISTS SOW THE SEEDS OF DINNER ON THE MOON 
Utah State University researchers Frank Salisbury and Bruce Bugbee see beyond 
hybrid wheat thriving in hydroponic gardens to a day when their experiments 
will help feed human colonies on the moon and Mars. 
It is that vision -- of mankind planted safely beyond the pale of earthly 
limitations -- that has kept the two plant scientists firm in their commitment 
to space agriculture despite tight funding and the knowledge that they may not 
live to see their research implemented. 
"It's long-range research that really has to be done now to be used later," 
said Bugbee, 38, the principal researcher for the university's controlled 
ecological life-support system project. 
"And it's just plain interesting," he added. "Something as complex as a closed 
life-support system is just fascinating. We're trying to duplicate all the 
functions of planet Earth in a relatively small capsule." 
Bugbee and Salisbury, 62, who serves on the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration's aerospace medical advisory committee, say it could be 30 years 
or more before a permanent human colony is established on the moon and another 
decade beyond that before Mars is settled. 
Nonetheless, they believe that their work will survive them. 
"I don't think we can seriously talk about a permanent colony on the moon or 
Mars without talking about (the life-support project)," Salisbury said. 
Plants raised under hydroponics are grown in nutrient-rich solutions rather 
than soil. 
Although funding for the hydroponic project -- about $130,000 a year since it 
was approved by NASA in 1981 -- is minuscule compared with the billions spent 
on the nation's manned space flight program, Salisbury and Bugbee point with 
pride to its accomplishments. 
Simulating as closely as possible the conditions of a lunar or Martian colonial 
farm through variations in lighting and atmosphere, the project has grown a 
Mexican dwarf variety of wheat with yields of 60 grams of edible wheat per 
square yard per day. 
That is five times the estimated world record of 12 to 14 grams, Salisbury 
said. 
Salisbury and Bugbee, believing that they are near the theoretical production 
limits for wheat in an extraterrestrial colony setting, say they will next turn 
their attention to wheat's performance in zero gravity -- a crucial 
consideration for the day when mankind embarks on space voyages too long to be 
sustained by stored food. 
To that end, they are preparing an experiment for a future space shuttle 
mission. NASA has approved the project, but it has yet to be scheduled for 
flight, the two said in telephone interviews from the school's campus in Logan, 
60 miles north of Salt Lake City. 
Food and Pure Air 
Salisbury and Bugbee say a space farm could feed the Mars mission's crew and 
purify air and water supplies. For example, a 13-square-yard space farm could 
feed one person indefinitely. 
Looking beyond exploration to colonization of the moon and Mars, the 
researchers believe that a farm about the size of a football field could 
provide the food and oxygen needs of 100 or more people. 
A hydroponic space farm, unlike those on Earth, would not be maintained as one 
huge unit but would be made up of a number of self-contained compartments to 
guard against the spread of plant diseases. Further, it probably would produce 
far more food than needed, ranging from 20% to 100% more, as a hedge against 
unexpected losses. 
