MINISERIES TAKES A 'VOYAGE' ABOARD THE ACHILLE LAURO 
All in the name of realism. That's why 10% -- $1 million -- of the budget of 
"Voyage of Terror: The Achille Lauro Affair" was spent to rent the real Achille 
Lauro. 
For those with short memories: The Achille Lauro was the Italian cruise ship 
hijacked five years ago in the Mediterranean by four Palestinian terrorists who 
murdered Leon Klinghoffer, a wheelchair-bound American. 
"Voyage of Terror" stars Burt Lancaster and Eva Marie Saint as Klinghoffer and 
his wife, Marilyn. The two-part movie airs Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 p.m. on 
KTLA. This first presentation of the syndicated Tribune Premiere Network is a 
German, Italian and French co-production that will air in Europe later this 
year. 
Re-creating the events for the $10-million miniseries proved to be not only 
costly but difficult and even dangerous for the producers, crew and cast. 
Troubles started with acquiring use of the actual Achille Lauro. 
"When the ship was owned by the (Italian) government, there was going to be no 
cost," said George Paris, vice president of Tribune Entertainment. "But then 
the government sold the ship, and it became a commercial venture. The new owner 
obviously couldn't give up the ship and interrupt its travel itinerary." 
The original captain served as the technical adviser, and several of the same 
crew members worked for the film's voyage and appear as themselves. For one 
week, the production took to sea on the same route as the ill-fated journey 
with 300 extras to film the violent sequences and terrorist activities. For the 
following 2 1/2 weeks, the crew and staff shared the ship with real tourists. 
David Lawrence, the American producer, remembered the original crew members 
were distraught when it came time to re-enact the hijacking. "There were tears 
rolling down their cheeks," he said. "We were re-creating things they had lived 
through." 
"It was very eerie," said Paris. 
Before production began on "Voyage of Terror," Lawrence talked with a good 
friend who was involved with "The Hijacking of the Achille Lauro," NBC's 
version of the event that had been shot in Australia and aired in February, 
1989. 
"He was amazed we had gotten the Achille Lauro and had gotten the complete 
cooperation of the Italian government," he said. "They had been warned to keep 
away from this project, because it was a life-threatening situation." 
"There were so many political aspects to consider," said Italian producer 
Fabrizio Castellani. "For instance, the American partner cared about the 
emotional aspects of the event and the Italian partner looked to the political 
aspects. It was a very delicate subject." 
The production also received a "fair amount" of pressure from governmental 
agencies of several countries because they thought "Voyage of Terror" showed 
the terrorists in a favorable light. 
"I heartily disagree with that," said Lawrence. "We are not saying the 
terrorists were good guys. We try to express their viewpoint. It's very 
difficult when you are juggling international situations." 
"Great care was taken not to paint a picture of the terrorists as four 
irresponsible terrorists who were out just to terrorize, but four young people 
-- these were all kids in their teens and early 20s -- who felt they were on a 
mission to help their countrymen," said Paris. "There was great care taken in 
trying to paint an accurate picture of the events, feelings and attitudes of 
the people involved. Those four kids looked at themselves not as terrorists, 
but as patriots." 
