23,000 AMERICANS CALL SCANDINAVIA HOME; 
EMIGRATION: FOR THE MOST PART, IT'S FAMILY HISTORY THAT PULLS THEM BACK TO 
SWEDEN AND NORWAY. BUT THERE ARE MANY REASONS THEY STAY. 
Erik Means may sit on the edge of a majestic fiord someday and regale his 
grandchildren with tales of the old country -- the United States. 
Viking blood stirs in a few people every year, calling them to their ancestral 
homeland. A New Yorker settles on a remote Norwegian farm, a Coloradan in an 
arctic village, a native of sunny California in chilly Stockholm. 
They are descendants of the 2 million Scandinavians who went to the United 
States in an exodus that peaked around 1900. Like Means, 27, they may have 
grown up hearing from their parents that Scandinavia was really home. 
Some seek roots, others economic opportunity, as their forebears did in 
leaving. Some married Scandinavians. 
"I finished college in Canada and didn't have any experience," said Means, a 
dual U.S.-Norwegian citizen reared in Hamilton, Canada. "My only real edge was 
that I was fluent in both Norwegian and English. The only place that was any 
good was Norway." 
About 12,000 U.S. citizens live in Norway and 11,000 in Sweden, but no record 
is kept of how many of those have roots in this region. 
On the other side of the ocean, Americans of Norwegian descent outnumber 
Norway's 4.2 million people. There are 4.3 million Americans of Swedish 
ancestry, roughly half Sweden's population of 8.5 million. 
"A lot more would come, at least for a while, if the opportunity presented 
itself," said Hans Eiyvind Naess, who directs a genealogical center in 
Stavanger, Norway. There are strict limits on immigration. 
In the poor years of the late 19th Century, about one person in four left 
Sweden and Norway for North America. Now, powerful industries and North Sea oil 
give Scandinavia one of the world's highest living standards. 
Romanticized tales of Scandinavia or hand-me-downs from homesick ancestors 
don't prepare the immigrants. 
"They seem to expect people to ride around in horse-drawn buggies, wearing 
traditional costumes," said Arthur Svennevik, a New Yorker now living on his 
ancestral farm in south Norway. 
"They expect things to be the way they were in the States 50 years ago and 
arrive to find that it is probably a more modern country than the United 
States," said Svennevik, who often spent summers in Norway as a child. 
Nor are regular visits much help, said Knut Dybdal, a folklore researcher born 
in Norway and reared in Compton, Ohio. 
"It's one thing to be a guest," he said. "It's another to settle. You can play 
by U.S. rules as a visitor. When you settle, you are expected to learn and play 
by Norwegian rules." 
One American called Scandinavia "deceptively familiar," seeming similar to the 
United States but fundamentally different. 
Steve Strid, a Swedish-American living in Stockholm, said the adjustment passes 
through phases. 
"At first, it was like being in a giant amusement park; everything was fun 
because it was new," said Strid, 31, of Sacramento. After a couple years, 
everything seems wrong and annoying, then acceptance comes, he said. 
Strid and others tried at first to assimilate, speaking only Nordic languages 
and associating with Scandinavian friends. 
Eventually, like their fathers who sought fellowship among people from their 
own countries, many hunger for the company of other Americans and seek each 
other out. 
Apathy about baseball can become a passion for it. Lukewarm patriots may become 
fierce defenders of their homeland. 
Few are ready to return to the United States, but just as few say they have 
settled in Scandinavia for good, although the years pile up quickly. 
"I came here for a year or two, 13 years ago," said Svennevik, whose parents 
were Norwegian. 
"I don't know if I'll stay forever; forever is a long time," said Means, father 
of a Norwegian-Danish-American infant son. 
Despite high taxes, an unfamiliar and sometimes meddlesome welfare state and a 
daunting cost of living, most people interviewed said they are better off in 
Scandinavia than they had been in the United States. 
"My friends think it's propaganda when I tell them about my lifestyle here," 
said Strid, a free-lance writer. "Most Americans seem to have a short circuit 
when I tell them I live in Stockholm. They just don't understand it." 
Dybdal, whose home overlooks a magnificent fiord, said, "If I could have the 
house and the kind of lifestyle I have here, I'd probably move back to Oregon." 
The concept of home changes. 
"Once you move across the Atlantic, you never really have a home again," Dybdal 
said. 
"I don't know where home is," said Victoria Hybert, a native of Denver who 
moved to arctic Norway with her Norwegian husband in 1969. 
Hybert had one Norwegian grandparent and was only vaguely aware of Norway, but 
"now I can't imagine moving back to the States." 
"Here it's safe, and people still do things like go for walks in the park on 
Sunday afternoons," she said. 
The immigrants don't forget being Americans, but some watch their children 
become Scandinavians. 
"My three boys are more Norwegian than American," Hybert said. "But I'm always 
telling them stories about the States." 
