S.D. POLICE CONSIDER ELECTRONIC DRUG DETECTOR 
An electronic drug detector was given a public demonstration at police 
headquarters Friday, but drug-sniffing canines don't have to worry about losing 
their jobs. It will be several months before the department decides whether to 
buy the machine. 
"I think it's great, and is something that applies to the San Diego Police 
Department," said Matt Weathersby, the department's community relations 
spokesman. 
"We're not trying to replace dogs, and we're not competing with them," said Dr. 
David Fine, head of the drug and bomb detection program of Thermedics Inc., the 
Massachusetts-based maker of the machine. "They can be used together. The 
machine can be used to support the canine findings or to help train them." 
The detector is equipped to pick up quantities of narcotics undetectable to the 
human eye, Fine said. According to Weathersby, dogs are trained to detect 
usable or larger amounts of drugs. 
The decision to purchase the machine lies with the police administration 
office, which will judge whether it is sound, whether it is needed and whether 
the funds are available, Weathersby said. 
"There will be months of testing before a decision is made," he said. "We want 
to be 100% sure that the (machine) is correct, because the evidence we gather 
has to hold up in court. Our own lab will evaluate it later and make 
comparisons." 
The $150,000 machine, called the Sentor, was observed for three days at the 
Police Department. It was demonstrated by representatives of Thermedics, which 
develops and manufactures biomedical products and analytical instruments. 
Sentor is an offshoot of an explosives detector that was manufactured five 
years ago for the U. S. Bureau of Diplomatic Security, which protects American 
personnel in foreign countries, Fine said. The new machine is adapted to detect 
drugs, and is programmed for cocaine, heroin and methamphetamine. Other drugs 
can also be programmed in. 
Thermedics representatives have been in San Diego for two weeks showing their 
product to federal, state and local law enforcement agencies. Fine said several 
agencies are considering purchasing the device but that no contracts have been 
signed. 
The device picks up air molecules from enclosed areas such as packages, luggage 
and cars. A detachable, hand-held sampling gun sucks in air before being placed 
in a portable unit that, in 30 seconds, separates and analyzes any narcotics. 
