AFRICA STRUGGLES TO FEED ITSELF, FIGHTING INTRACTABLE FOES; 
AGRICULTURE: BESET BY DISEASE AND INFESTATION, THE CONTINENT HAS HAD NO 'GREEN 
REVOLUTION.' IT FIGHTS TO PRESERVE A FRAGILE FOOD CHAIN WHILE POPULATION SOARS. 
There is a valley here that demonstrates why there has been no green revolution 
in Africa. It lies just north of the city, past the last village on the rutted 
track through the red soil, luxuriant with the dense foliage of the plants that 
feed and sustain the growing population. But around the second bend in the 
road, there is an ugly scar: Leaves of the plantain trees have been seared, as 
if by a giant blow torch, victims of the dreaded black sigatoka. 
The fungus disease was brought accidentally to Central Africa from Latin 
America, and in 17 years it has spread ruin over millions of acres, finally 
reaching this remote valley 2,000 miles from where this plague started. About 
60 million people in Africa depend on plantains for at least a quarter of their 
carbohydrates. Today, the disease represents the newest challenge to plant 
scientists struggling to preserve the fragile African food supply. An 
innovative solution is at hand, but it will not attract the same global 
attention as the high-yield dwarf varieties of rice, wheat and corn of Asia's 
green revolution. 
"One reason there is no green revolution in Africa is that so much of our 
research has to be directed to resistance-breeding and developing ways to 
protect the gains we have made," said Laurence D. Stifel, director general of 
the International Institute for Tropical Agriculture here. The IITA is one of 
13 international research facilities around the world that are at the very 
center of efforts to assure the survival of three-fourths of the world's 
population. 
These are the institutions best known for the grains that have helped food 
supplies keep up with population growth. Norman Borlaug won the 1970 Nobel 
Peace Prize for his work in Mexico on some of those developments. The research 
centers have played an equally decisive role in Africa, but without such 
spectacular achievements. Here the struggle is a rear-guard defense against 
plant disease and infestation. 
Ask Stifel to identify the greatest achievement at the IITA, and his answer is 
a surprise. There are many achievements to talk about: high-yield, 
pest-resistant varieties of cassava; improved varieties of cowpeas that bring 
nitrogen to the soil and protein to the diet even in drought-prone areas, and 
minimum-tillage farming techniques that improve productivity while reducing 
weeds. And dozens more -- all important achievements. But the project that 
Stifel talks most about is defense against the mealybug that was threatening 
destruction of Africa's cassava, the basic food of millions of people. 
A disaster of incalculable dimensions was in the making as the voracious 
mealybug attacked the cassava. African farmers have no money for chemical 
pesticides. IITA scientists knew there could be only one solution -- a natural 
predator. They found it after a search over thousands of miles of remote areas 
of Latin America, the land where cassava first was grown. A parasitic wasp. A 
rapid-breeding program was instituted and millions of the insects were 
released, from airplanes in remote areas, from ground parties in accessible 
areas. "Villages step back from hunger not even understanding why the 
destructive mealybugs have disappeared," Stifel reported. 
The problems of Africa are so intractable that researchers, armed with the most 
advanced science and technology, have been frustrated over and over again. No 
where is that better illustrated than in the search for a way to expand 
livestock production. Animals are needed not just for the protein, but also for 
hides, for the manure that can be used as fuel and fertilizer and to pull plows 
and wagons in a region with only a few tractors. Much of the grasslands can be 
put to use only as feed for cattle. But vast areas of East and Central Africa 
are infested with ticks and tsetse flies that carry theileriosis and 
trypanosomiasis, that waste and often kill the herds. 
There were great expectations, a decade ago, that a vaccine could be developed 
to protect the livestock. Development of a vaccine remains the priority at 
another of the great international centers, the International Laboratory for 
Research on Animal Diseases (ILRAD) on the outskirts of Nairobi in Kenya. But 
vaccines have proven incredibly elusive. 
In the process of seeking vaccines, however, the scientists at ILRAD have made 
other advances of great consequence. From 10 years of work has emerged the 
first clear understanding of how the bovine immune system functions. "This new 
knowledge of bovine immunology opens the way to new research globally, an 
enormous contribution even to American farmers," according to Jack Doyle, the 
Scotsman who is ILRAD director of research. 
As the pursuit of vaccines continues, ILRAD has also moved ahead on another 
course, breeding cattle tolerant of trypanosomiasis. Scientists had worked a 
dozen years without much success using the cattle common is East Africa, the 
hump-backed Zebu, that were brought here around 2000 BC from Asia, by way of 
Egypt. Now they are making extraordinary progress using the Ndama cattle from 
West Africa, progeny of animals driven from the Middle East by way of Spain at 
least 7,000 years ago -- cattle that are cousins to the longhorns that were 
carried to the American Southwest. Those prehistoric cattle runs have been 
traced and dated through ancient cave drawings. Unlike the Zebu, the Ndama is 
disease tolerant. But the animal still faces another kind of resistance: 
Farmers dislike its relatively small stature and reduced milk capacity. 
The 13 international agricultural research centers, including IITA here and 
ILRAD in Nairobi, are independent, individually funded by governments, 
foundations and international agencies. They are loosely coordinated through 
what is called the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, 
based at the World Bank in Washington. The bank itself has proven the guardian 
angel of the program, expanding its contribution when other donors have lagged. 
The last pledging conference in November produced $240 million, representing an 
increase hardly equal to the rate of inflation, $35 million short of the 
budgets proposed by the centers. That has forced postponement for at least a 
year of expansion plans, including urgently needed new programs in vegetables 
and tropical forestry. Delays of that sort prolong the malnutrition that stalks 
so much of the developing southern hemisphere. 
Some of the obstacles to progress are political. Donor governments in the West 
are cutting back on their investment in agricultural research at the very 
moment that the need is most urgent. American farmers continue to try to thwart 
any crop-development program perceived to create potential competition for U.S. 
exports. So it is that tropical soybean development, essential to addressing 
the protein deficiencies prevalent in all of Africa, was constrained by edicts 
from the U.S. Department of Agriculture mandated by Congress to protect the 
soybean farmers of the Middle West. 
Another obstacle to progress is the weakness in extension services to deliver 
new technologies to the farmers. But it can be done. 
Kwasi MacZormelo, 31, single, with three years of post-high school technical 
training, is one of the new generation of high-technology farmers of West 
Africa. But high technology is a relative term. "Chemical weed control is too 
costly, so I use my own strength," he explained, as one of his co-workers 
applied a short-handled hoe to the field behind him. He farms four acres near 
Kumasi, Ghana. Small, intensely tilled farms have been proved best in these 
tropical areas. He harvests two crops of cowpeas, one of corn and is 
introducing one of Africa's newest techniques, planting leucaena trees between 
crop rows. The fast-growing tree enriches the soil and reduces weeds with the 
shade of its leaves, which also serve as mulch, and its branches are useful for 
firewood, always in short supply. 
The new plant varieties and growing technologies being used by MacZormelo have 
their origins in the international agricultural centers. In this case, the 
research began at both the International Center for the Improvement of Corn and 
Wheat in El Batan, Mexico, and IITA in Ibadan. Roberto Arias, a Savadoran 
agronomist, represents the El Batan center in Ghana, coordinating its research 
with the Ghana Grains Development Project sponsored by the government of 
Canada, and Ghana's national institutions, including the Crop Research 
Institute in Kumasi. "We are trying to develop a methodology so that research 
and extension services are complementary," Arias said. 
This tenuous network for delivering new varieties and new technologies will be 
crucial in resolving the black sigatoka infestation affecting plantain trees. 
That is because the only realistic solution is to develop new varieties of 
plantains that are resistant or tolerant to black sigatoka, and then distribute 
the new plants to the vast areas impacted by the disease. 
The IITA is nearing completion of plant development -- five resistant varieties 
have been identified from a collection of more than 200 different varieties, 
but now they must be field tested to see if the fruit is acceptable. At the 
same time, a dozen other varieties have been crossed with disease-resistant 
stock to produce hybrids now being field-tested. 
It is painstaking, tedious work, unspectacular, but just as important as the 
green revolution in the struggle to feed a global population that grows by 
250,000 people a day, and to try to meet the basic needs of the 280 million 
Africans who live in absolute poverty. 
