ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: COUNTYWIDE; 
CHENEY PAYS BRIEF VISIT TO EL TORO 
Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, stopping Tuesday at the El Toro Marine Corps 
Air Station on a tour of the state's military bases, restated his intent to 
close down several facilities nationwide as part of defense budget cuts. 
However, Cheney provided no specific details about the future of the El Toro 
jet fighter base, the Tustin Marine Corps Helicopter Air Station on Red Hill 
Avenue, Camp Pendleton in San Diego County or any other military base. 
During his 30-minute visit, Cheney sat in the cockpits of two fighter planes 
parked on the apron at the air station and was greeted by Maj. Gen. Royal 
Moore, commander of the 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing. 
In a brief press conference after the plane inspections, Cheney said he was 
visiting military sites "in the midst of our ongoing budget debates . . . to 
understand as much as possible what our capabilities are and what our problems 
are." 
Both Cheney and Assistant Defense Secretary Peter Williams declined to comment 
on the future of Orange County's bases, except to say that the El Toro base is 
not on the current list of closures. 
Irvine city officials have spoken of consolidating operations at El Toro with 
Camp Pendleton in north San Diego County. Although city officials have kept a 
close eye on that possibility, they were not notified of Cheney's visit and did 
not have plans to meet with him, said City Manager Paul O. Brady Jr. 
"We'll certainly talk to local officials and hear their arguments," Williams 
said. "Nothing is immune from scrutiny these days." 
Cheney visited Navy operations earlier Tuesday morning in Coronado and was 
scheduled to tour a Lockheed plant in Burbank and McDonnell Douglas facilities 
in Long Beach after leaving El Toro. 
Cheney, a former House Republican whip, also took time to criticize a 
$24-million budget cut proposed by Congress for 1991, in addition to the cuts 
it has already asked. 
"I think it would be unwise if that happens," Cheney said. "The only place we 
could take cuts would be in personnel. I think it would do a lot of damage in 
California and everywhere." WENDY PAULSON 
