INNOVATION: CYBERPUNK AND THE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY 
For people who adore Norman Rockwell art, Reader's Digest and mayonnaise, John 
Naisbitt's best-selling "Megatrends 2000" offers tantalizing insights into the 
future. People who prefer to shock their neurons with obscure ethnic cuisines 
and Mapplethorpe photography are better off reading cyberpunk -- a genre that 
completely redefines the ecology of technology and the technology of ecology. 
Cyberpunk is science fiction with an attitude; glossily dystopian visions of 
pop cultures dissolving in the sleaze of their own technologies. Characters 
"jack on" to global networks of computer-generated artificial realities; 
technology isn't a creation of a scientifically trained elite but of 
disillusioned masses and greedy entrepreneurs groping for new media to get 
high. "The street finds its own uses for things" is a cyberpunk motto. Crack is 
a cyberpunk-like phenomena. 
"Certain central themes spring up repeatedly in cyberpunk," notes Bruce 
Sterling, the Texas-based cyberpunk polemicist who edited the popular 
"Mirrorshades" anthology. "The theme of body invasion: prosthetic limbs, 
implanted circuitry, cosmetic surgery, genetic alteration. The even more 
powerful theme of mind invasion: brain-computer interfaces, artificial 
intelligence, neurochemistry -- techniques radically redefining the nature of 
humanity, the nature of self." 
These themes are crammed into densely intricate prose that creates, in 
Sterling's metaphor, "the literary equivalent of the hard-rock 'wall of sound' 
" designed to pummel the reader with imagery that alternately stimulates the 
imagination and depresses the spirit. Picture a Tom Clancy embittered by the 
technology about which he now rhapsodizes and amplify the intensity of that 
prose a few thousand volts and you have a glimmer of what the cyberpunk genre 
is like. 
But scrape through the layers of metaphor and post-Modern posturing by the 
cyberpunks (they're called "Techno-Goths" in England) and you find some 
jaggedly profound insights -- the sort of insights that Naisbittesque futurists 
don't see and can't grasp. 
In cyberpunk, human beings are analog machines of flesh and neurochemicals that 
can be engineered, edited and transformed into fleshy nodes on cyberspace 
networks. People meld into the machinery. By contrast, the machinery -- the 
networks, computers and gloomily engineered urban landscapes -- are eerily 
organic. They are almost living things. They're the "natural" environment. They 
recall the line from Buckminster Fuller -- who was anything but a cynical 
cyberpunk -- that "natural is whatever nature allows." 
Cyberpunk takes Fuller's definition of nature right to the edge and beyond. In 
cyberpunk worlds, the lines between "natural" and "artificial" become arbitrary 
to the point of meaningless. Technology isn't something distinct from the 
environment or a part of the environment -- the technology is the environment; 
it's every bit as "natural" as a blade of grass or a drop of (acid) rain. 
Is a human being less "natural" because he or she wears eyeglasses or needs to 
be hooked up to a dialysis machine? Are farms more "natural" than cities -- or 
is the technique of agriculture itself an unnatural act? Psychotropic drugs and 
infectious diseases are "natural," aren't they? 
If a city depends on freeways and automobiles to provide for its citizens, are 
automobiles a natural or unnatural technology? When we talk about "The 
Environment" and "The Ecology," do we mean a pre-Industrial Age kind of 
ecology, or do we mean an environment robust enough to cope with both the 
benefits and excesses of technology? 
Unlike most contemporary fiction, the cyberpunk genre cynically reminds us that 
our notions of environment and ecology are purely arbitrary and fantastical; 
the word "natural" has been leeched of any real meaning. We live in a world 
where we seem to define "natural" as the absence of technology. But, as William 
Gibson, widely considered the father of the cyberpunk movement, says, "Where 
can you go today in the world where the environment isn't affected by human 
technology? . . . The bill is coming due on that first hundred years of 
industrialization." 
The irony, of course, is that building things is what we do. Man is often 
described as homo faber -- man the toolmaker. It's as natural for us to make 
tools as it is for birds to sing and plankton to recycle oxygen. We can't help 
it. 
The idea that Nature pristine is what's ecologically "correct" and that man is 
the ruthless despoiler of once-vibrant ecosystems is sheer lunacy. Quite 
frankly, the societies on this earth that lack technology seem to endure life 
rather than enjoy it. These societies may be more ecologically "correct" than 
Los Angeles or Des Moines -- but so what? Our technologies are a part of the 
ecosystem. The question is, what kind of part do we want them to play? 
The Exxon Valdez "Shucks, folks, it was an accident. Sorry about that -- will 
you take a check?" attitude is disgusting. It displays contempt for the very 
idea of ecological balance. But does the Valdez disaster mean that society is 
inherently wrong to consume fossil fuels? Greenpeace and EarthFirst! might say 
yes. I would say no. The idea that we're evolving into a post-industrial 
agrarian economy where we stay home and chew our cuds and telecommute via our 
personal computers is bonkers. 
Events such as Earth Day and all the assorted hoopla beg some very fundamental 
questions: Is the "environmental movement" dedicated toward a more intelligent, 
more rational approach to management of waste products? Or is it a lifestyle 
movement that seeks to radically alter consumption? Or is it an anti-technology 
movement that wants to eliminate the pace of technical change? Or is it less a 
question of ecology than geopolitics -- a struggle between Northern wealth and 
Southern poverty? 
"Ecology is about to become a political commodity," says cyberpunker Sterling, 
who points out that much of the movement is "preservationist and 
conservationist; there's a siege mentality. The battle has to be taken to the 
enemy, which is the urban environments with their slabs of concrete and toxin 
production." 
In other words, break up the cities. No thank you. My view is as apolitical as 
possible: We should avoid making a mess and quickly clean up when we do. The 
irony here, as Gibson and Sterling point out, is that we need technology to 
measure, track and clean up the messes that other technologies make. 
No matter which way we turn -- be it greenhouse effect management, solar and 
geothermal energy generation or a new era of biodegradables/recyclables -- we 
are going to be in a shotgun marriage with technology. The cyberpunks paint 
worlds where that marriage is as hellishly oppressive as anything a post-Modern 
Dante could conjure up. But, in the real world, shotgun marriages don't have to 
be unhappy or end in divorce. 
Environmentalists have to grit their teeth and learn to accept that human 
technology is as natural as snowfall in the mountains. Technologists have to 
understand that, unlike a generation ago, they can't escape the messes that 
they have helped create -- so they better prevent them or do a far better job 
of cleaning them up. Things will still get worse before they get better. But 
they will get better. 
