NONFICTION IN BRIEF 
SECOND CHANCES Men, Women and Children a Decade After Divorce by Judith S. 
Wallerstein with Sandra Blakeslee (Ticknor &amp; Fields: $19.95; 329 pp.) 
When he first arrived at Judith Wallerstein's Marin County Center for the 
Family in ransition shortly after his parents' divorce, six-year-old John 
wouldn't say a word, preferring to gather baby dolls in the center's play-room. 
Setting the dolls firmly on their feet, he placed miniature tables, chairs and 
beds on their heads. On the steep roof of a nearby dollhouse, he then put 
mother and father dolls in precarious positions, gently catching each one as it 
began sliding off the roof. "Are the babies the strongest?" Wallerstein asked. 
"Yes," John shouted excitedly. "The babies are holding up the world." 
It's easy to underestimate the burdens lying on children's slender shoulders 
after their parents' divorce, for years often pass before any sign of emotional 
trauma appears in the form of anger, promiscuity, depression or fears of 
abandonment and betrayal. Children have difficulty discussing divorce, 
Wallerstein suggests in this provocative book, based on a 15-year study of 60 
families, because it so deeply threatens their sense of identity. Children 5-8 
tend to feel personally rejected by divorce, Wallerstein contends, for they are 
unable to conceive of a larger social world in which decisions are made 
independently of them. Children between 9 and 12, on the other hand, are 
beginning to widen their social circle, envisioning the family not as a world 
of its own but as a stage on which they perform for the world. And so, while 
divorce tends to trigger feelings of inadequacy among younger children, older 
children are more likely to feel anger, for their parents have removed their 
stage, the foundation for their sense of self. 
In proposing solutions to these and related problems, Wallerstein avoids doling 
out the painfully obvious advice that makes so many self-help books seem 
condescending. While not faulting the institution of divorce, "a useful and 
necessary social remedy," she suggests that parents' understandable urge to 
spare the details from their children is misguided. "Children have a right to 
understand why the divorce is happening (for they) cannot mobilize their 
energies to cope with a crisis that they do not comprehend." 
Early reviews have criticized Wallerstein for failing to follow children from 
happily married families to see if they too suffer from the feelings of 
alienation, apathy and loneliness she attributes to divorce. This criticism is 
in part valid, for her subjects often are not as atypical as she makes them out 
to be; one-fourth of the children in her study, for example, become sexually 
active in junior high school, not an unusually high figure for the general 
population. Wallerstein's decision to limit her study to 60 families she could 
get to know well imbues this book with a level of intuitive sophistication, 
however, that would have been impossible to achieve had she taken on a more 
weighty and impersonal study based on telephone or mail surveys. 
