BUSH LIKELY TO PROPOSE PAY INCREASE FOR JUDGES; 
FEARS EXODUS FROM U.S. JUDICIARY BUT CONGRESS, DEPRIVED RECENTLY OF BIG SALARY 
HIKE, MAY BALK 
Although no final decision has been made by President Bush, a consensus is 
emerging in the White House for seeking congressional approval of a 25% pay 
raise for federal judges, senior officials said Wednesday. 
The President and his aides appear to be moving gingerly on the sensitive 
subject in light of the huge public backlash against a recent broader pay hike 
measure and are not ready to propose raises, the officials said. But some 
action is growing more likely. 
Pay Now Is $89,500 
A 25% increase for jurists would amount to $22,375 for district judges, raising 
their annual salaries to $111,875 from $89,500. The hike would be offered in an 
effort to counter a feared exodus of judges attracted by six-figure salaries in 
the private sector. 
Even a proposal to increase the pay of judges -- without touching the salaries 
of members of Congress and top government officials -- could threaten to 
rekindle the angry debate over compensation that embroiled Congress in January 
and February. 
And Sen. Majority Leader George J. Mitchell (D-Me.), a former federal judge, 
predicted that any proposal by Bush to raise the salaries of judges without 
giving a similar increase to members of Congress would probably be rejected. 
On Feb. 7, after the House and Senate voted to forgo a proposed 50% pay 
increase, Bush called attention to the particular need to increase the pay of 
judges. According to a senior aide, when Bush signed the legislation that 
rejected the broader pay increase, the President added to the written statement 
announcing his decision an expression of "my special concern about the level of 
compensation for members of our federal judiciary." 
Said one Administration official, "Given the political situation, everyone 
feels it's the wisest course of action" to limit the proposal to the pay of 
judges. 
May Decide Next Week 
He and others said that Bush is not likely to make a final decision on the 
judicial pay increase, which would require congressional approval, until next 
week. 
"You'll find the potential for agreement between the legislative and executive 
branches is greatest there," rather than on salary hikes for legislative or 
executive branch officials, one official said. 
However, another official indicated that warning flags are being raised by 
members of Congress, giving him some cause for concern about whether a 
scaled-down pay raise limited to judges could be approved. 
Mitchell said most members of Congress viewed linking their pay and that of 
federal judges as the only leverage they have for obtaining a pay raise 
themselves. 
"There appears to be a widespread feeling that de-linking salaries would make 
it more difficult for members of Congress ever to get increases in pay," 
Mitchell said. 
Resignations Predicted 
At the heart of the concern over raising judicial salaries, regardless of the 
pay given to executive branch officials and members of Congress, is the 
possibility that the salary level is leading to an increase in resignations 
from the federal judiciary. 
The American Bar Assn. has estimated that one-fourth of the nation's more than 
1,000 federal judges may be planning to leave their posts because of 
dissatisfaction with their salaries. 
"Failure to reverse the trend of resignations could cause the federal judiciary 
to be viewed as merely a steppingstone to higher-paying jobs," U.S. District 
Judge Robert H. Hall, president of the Federal Judges Assn., warned. 
