TEST OF ROCKET THAT WOULD DESTROY MISSILES SUCCEEDS 
In what officials called a major first step toward developing space-based "Star 
Wars" weapons, Defense Department scientists announced Thursday that they have 
successfully tested an experimental space vehicle designed to destroy incoming 
nuclear missiles by crashing into them. 
The 21-second flight of the 6-foot rocket took place Monday inside a cavernous 
Air Force laboratory at Edwards Air Force Base near Palmdale. 
Officials from the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Office said the test 
significantly boosted efforts to develop and deploy the first phase of a much 
larger space-based defensive network. 
'Proved That It Could Walk' 
An earlier test of the vehicle "proved that the baby could stand up," Pentagon 
spokesman Dan Howard said. "This one proved that it could walk." 
But skeptics of the Pentagon's "Star Wars" program said successful tests of 
such components, although positive, do not demonstrate that the space-based 
interceptors would provide an effective and affordable defense against Soviet 
missiles. 
"It's a modest step and they have much to be modest about," said John Pike, a 
space analyst with the Washington-based Federation of American Scientists. 
"To use a sporting analogy, each of these players is doing well in batting 
practice, but let's see how the team does in the World Series," Pike said. 
"While it's not surprising that individual gadgets would work, that doesn't 
mean the overall system would work as anything militarily useful." 
Next Test in June 
The next test flight of the projectile is scheduled for late June, when the 
Pentagon will seek to determine whether the vehicle's on-board homing sensor 
can detect the presence of a target designed to look like a ballistic missile 
in flight. 
Monday's test was intended to prove that the test vehicle could take off and 
orient itself, using tiny on-board rockets, toward a computer target. 
"The components themselves represent an order-of-magnitude improvement in 
technology," program manager Alan Weston said of Monday's test. "Integrating 
them and demonstrating them as a flight vehicle was a first as well." 
Weston said that in one of the test's most significant results the test vehicle 
pointed with "very fine" accuracy at the tiny computer target and stayed homed 
in on it. "This has never been done before," he said. 
Program officials believe that such tests are proving the viability of 
technologies that will be used in the earliest phase of "Star Wars" 
deployments. Those are expected to concentrate on small rockets that slam into 
missiles in flight, destroying them. 
One of the most promising of such systems has been dubbed "Brilliant Pebbles" 
-- swarms of small computer-equipped rockets in space, ready to intercept 
Soviet missiles. Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has identified Brilliant Pebbles 
as the focus of intensive development efforts in coming budgets. 
"What we're demonstrating here applies directly to Brilliant Pebbles as well as 
to any system that's launched from the ground into space," said Lloyd 
Stoessell, the official in charge of the program at the Pentagon. 
