'URBANOPOLIS' FERVOR NOT UNIVERSAL 
I was shocked when I read Leon Whiteson's article on "Universal's 'Urbanopolis' 
" (April 15). It seemed to me that Whiteson failed to point out that there are 
many people who are not as enthusiastic about MCA's previous, current and 
proposed development as those whom he interviewed. 
The map for Universal City with Whiteson's article does not show that there is 
an established neighborhood of single-family residences west of Barham 
Boulevard and north of the Hollywood Freeway. This neighborhood, Hollywood 
Manor, is just east of Universal City's property line. 
MCA Development is now forced to contend with neighbors in Hollywood Manor who 
are concerned by MCA's present grading of a road and applications MCA has put 
forth that seek to alter a conditional use permit issued 10 years ago by the 
county to protect the homeowners interests and their properties. 
The "City Walk" project is directly linked with our concerns as MCA/Universal 
is faced with the problems of inadequate parking and its need for a new public 
access road that will bring their customers in and then send them out on their 
way onto the already heavily congested Hollywood Freeway. 
It is an altogether common occurrence to find the Hollywood Freeway at a 
virtual standstill as it winds through the Cahuenga Pass. The traffic situation 
is no better at Barham, since this throughway is being used for access into 
Burbank, North Hollywood and Glendale. 
The proposed developments will certainly have a detrimental effect on the 
traffic flow through these areas. If MCA/Universal is allowed to continue its 
avoidance of an environmental impact report, the present situation could reach 
gridlock. 
It will take much more than an MCA model of "Urbanopolis" to bring our 
community toward the state of being "not unhappy." It will also take a thorough 
legal and political investigation before we can join Jane Blumenfeld in calling 
the MCA project "pretty exciting." 
JULIAN A. OGALDE 
Hollywood Hills 
