NATIONAL LEAGUE ROUNDUP; 
JOHNSON STRIKES BACK, METS ROUT CUBS, 10-1 
Frank Viola extended his scoreless streak to 13 innings and a struggling Howard 
Johnson doubled twice to drive in three runs as the New York Mets beat the 
Cubs, 10-1, Monday at Chicago. 
Johnson struck out four consecutive times Sunday night in Montreal and the 
first two times at bat Monday against Steve Wilson. 
But in the sixth inning, he drove a changeup just out of the reach of the third 
baseman Luis Salazar for a run-scoring double to give New York a 2-0 lead. 
"My only thought in the sixth inning was to move the runner (Keith Miller) up 
to third," Johnson said. 
His two-run double an inning later off reliever Jeff Pico was the beginning of 
the end for the Cubs. Pico had two out and none on when the Mets started the 
rally that turned the game into a rout. Before it was over, Mike Marshall hit a 
two-run triple and Mark Carreon, playing for injured Kevin McReynolds, added a 
two-run homer as the Mets opened a 9-0 lead. 
Carreon and Marshall had three hits apiece. 
Viola struck out eight, walked none and allowed four hits in six innings before 
Alejandro Pena relieved for his first save. 
Wilson allowed three runs and five hits in 5 1/3 innings. 
Cincinnati 5, Atlanta 3 -- Barry Larkin, who has at least two hits in all six 
games, keyed a three-run first inning with the first of his four hits at 
Atlanta as the Reds remain the only unbeaten team in the majors. 
Cincinnati jumped on Pete Smith for four hits in the first and made it easy for 
Jack Armstrong, who ran his scoreless string to 11 innings before the Braves, 
losers of four in a row and five of six, scored in the sixth inning on Lonnie 
Smith's sacrifice fly. 
Armstrong allowed five hits, no walks and struck out three in seven innings. 
Rob Dibble pitched the final inning for his first save. 
Chris Sabo, Billy Hatcher and Larkin, who was four for five, ran their hitting 
streaks to six games. Larkin, batting .571, is 16 for 28. 
Montreal 5, Philadelphia 4 -- The Montreal Expos took advantage of four walks 
and Spike Owen's first home run to score three runs in the seventh inning and 
beat the Phillies at Montreal. 
Trailing, 4-2, Owen homered off Terry Mulholland, who gave way to Jeff Perrett, 
who loaded the bases on walks to pinch-hitters Mike Aldrete and Larry Walker, 
and a bunt single by DeLino DeShields. 
Tim Raines singled home pinch-runner David Martinez to tie the score. 
Todd Frohwirth relieved Parrett and issued back-to-back walks to Tim Wallach 
and Andres Galarraga to force home Walker with the go-ahead run. 
St. Louis 6, Pittsburgh 4 -- Terry Pendleton had a two-run double, and Jose 
DeLeon and five relievers combined on an eight-hitter as the Cardinals won at 
Pittsburgh. 
Jose Oquendo and Vince Coleman also had RBIs as St. Louis ended a six-game 
losing streak against the Pirates that dated to last year. 
John Smiley, still recovering from off-season elbow surgery, retired the first 
two hitters before Todd Zeile walked and Pedro Guerrero singled. Pendleton 
doubled down the right-field line, scoring both runners when the ball struck 
the bullpen fence and bounced away from Bobby Bonilla. 
The Cardinals made it 4-0 in the fourth on doubles by Bob Brunansky and 
Oquendo, and Coleman's RBI single. 
