PADRES DOUBLE THE FUN; 
BASEBALL: FOR THE SECOND NIGHT IN A ROW, PADRES SCORE 13 RUNS. THIS TIME THEY 
CLOBBER THE BUMBLING CUBS, 13-3. 
On a night when the Chicago Cubs would have had trouble catching the ball if 
they were playing with a softball, it didn't matter to the Padres. 
The Padres are too busy hitting to pay attention to much else. 
They were so excited to play the defending National League East champions that 
they went right out and got 13 runs and 19 hits Tuesday in a 13-3 romp in front 
of 18,351 in San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium. 
This week in baseball: 
Because Manager Jack McKeon flipped Bip Roberts and Roberto Alomar in the 
batting order -- Alomar is now hitting first and Roberts second -- the Padres 
are averaging 13 runs a game. 
Of course, the first time he tried that trick was Monday, against defending 
National League champion San Francisco, and the Padres got 13 runs on 17 hits 
and won 13-3. 
The last time the Padres had back-to-back games in which they scored in double 
figures was Sept. 11 and 12, 1987, when they defeated Houston 11-0 and 10-2 in 
San Diego. 
The Padres lead the league and are second in the majors with 79 runs scored. 
Toronto has 81. 
"Before last night, we really weren't hitting the ball that well," Tony Gwynn 
said. "(The lineup) looks good on paper, but our problem was going out there 
and getting it done. The key is giving these guys the opportunities. Sooner or 
later, they're going to knock some runs in." 
Said Roberts: "Things are just clicking for us right now. Hopefully, we can 
ride it until the wave hits the beach. The big thing for us right now is to be 
consistent." 
The Cubs were pretty consistent. They bobbled balls in nearly every inning. 
Their line:: four errors, a wild pitch and several bobbles. Four of the Padres' 
13 runs were unearned. Second baseman Ryne Sandberg was unaffected, however, 
and played his 103rd consecutive errorless game. 
Despite the fact that the Cubs did their best to turn Padre hits into errors, 
seven Padres still managed to collect multiple hits. And of the starting 
lineup, Jack Clark was the only Padre who went hitless. 
Take a run through the batting order: 
Tony Gwynn, Benito Santiago and Garry Templeton all had three hits. Roberto 
Alomar, Bip Roberts, Joe Carter each had two. 
Oh, yes, even pitcher Dennis Rasmussen had two hits for the first time since 
last Aug. 21 at Philadelphia. In the Padres' three-run fifth, Rasmussen lined a 
single past a drawn-in Cub infield to score two runs. The two runs-batted in 
were as many as he had for the entire season in 1989. 
Career years? The Padres are beginning to have career games. Carter had a 
career-high seven RBIs Monday. 
Statistics? Santiago, after going three for five, is hitting .420. He entered 
the game at .400, third in the league. He has a hit in 11 consecutive games, 
the most since he hit in 34 in a row as a rookie. It is the second-longest in 
the National League this year. 
Templeton, also three for five, raised his average from .209 to .250. 
And to think, the Padres were facing Greg Maddux, who entered the game with a 
sparkling 2-0 record and 1.84 earned-run average. He was gone after the fourth, 
having allowed eight hits and six runs -- three earned. He allowed two more 
hits and three more runs than he had in his two previous outings this year 
combined. 
It was the Cubs' fifth loss in a row, and Manager Don Zimmer closed the doors 
for a 15-minute meeting after the game. "I don't like what I watched," Zimmer 
said. "I mean, who would? You name it and we did it. Maybe you get one like 
that, you get it out of your system. And I hope we did, because I've seen 
everything tonight." 
Rasmussen (1-0) went eight innings, allowing three runs -- on home runs to 
Andre Dawson and Shawon Dunston -- and nine hits. 
The Padres hit Maddux softly in the first and hard in the fourth. And third 
baseman Luis Salazar made two errors. 
The trouble started immediately, when Alomar led off the bottom of the first 
with a ground ball a few steps to Dunston's right at shortstop. Dunston was 
slow getting over, and the ball snuck through into left field for a single. 
Alomar scored even though none of the next three batters hit the ball out of 
the infield. 
Roberts followed with a bunt, which Salazar bungled for error No. 1. Gwynn then 
blooped the ball toward the mound, and Maddux made a diving stab but missed. 
The bases were loaded, but Jack Clark grounded into a double play, scoring 
Alomar and moving Roberts to third. 
Then, with Carter at the plate, Maddux balked, allowing Roberts to score. 
So the Padres checked in with two runs and three hits for the inning -- and 
just three of seven batters got the ball out of the infield. 
If Cub outfielders were feeling put out, though, the Padres fixed that in the 
fourth by nearly hitting for the cycle in one inning. All that was missing was 
a home run. 
Santiago tripled to right. Templeton singled to right-center. Alomar tripled to 
left-center. Roberts took the next pitch and put it in nearly the same spot for 
a double. Gwynn was walked intentionally, and Clark reached first on Salazar's 
second fielding error. 
By the time the Cubs could come up for air, the Padres had four runs, four hits 
and a 6-2 lead. 
Padre Notes 
Former Padres Marvell Wynne and Luis Salazar were in San Diego Jack Murphy 
Stadium Tuesday for the first time since they were traded to the Cubs Aug. 31. 
There were smiles and handshakes around the batting cage before the game as 
they both spent some time visiting with former teammates. Padre outfielder 
Shawn Abner said he hadn't talked with Wynne since the day Wynne was traded. 
"He's too cheap to call me," Abner said, smiling. Yeah, Shawn, but couldn't you 
have called him? "I didn't like him as much as he liked me," Abner said. . . . 
Cub broadcaster Harry Carey, a member of the broadcasters' Hall of Fame, was 
stopped by a guard as he entered the stadium before Tuesday's game. Carey said 
the guard looked like a young student, and said the guy said he needed to check 
inside of Carey's black briefcase. Said Carey: "He said, 'I've got to look 
inside of that suitcase.' I said, 'That ain't no suitcase.' But he said he had 
to look in it anyway. Everybody around was howling . . . he was the only one 
taking it seriously." 
