STIFFER SENTENCES FOR CON MEN CHEER FRAUD TASK FORCE LEADERS 
Condense 3 years' worth of boiler-room battle into one sentence and it would 
probably read something like this: Convictions keep coming, sentences get 
stiffer, but the problems persist. 
That's life with the Southern California Fraud Task Force, a group of 21 
federal, state and local law enforcement agencies charged with the Herculean 
job of stamping out telemarketing crime in the Southland. 
The group's 108-page annual report released last month paints a bittersweet 
picture of great success tempered with painful resignation. 
On the bright side is the trend toward stiffer sentences, a practice that 
Robert C. Bonner, U.S. attorney for the Central District of California, 
contends will have a great deterrent factor. Bonner kicks off the report by 
congratulating his department on the hefty sentences given of late to convicted 
con men. 
"Substantial custody sentences in telemarketing cases have become commonplace," 
Bonner says, as he goes on to compare the light punishments of 1986 with 
20-year sentences handed out in 1988. 
During 1986, the task force's first full year of operation, only four 
defendants in telemarketing cases were sentenced to 5 or more years in prison. 
In 1987, the report says, the number was the same: 4. 
But 1988 was a banner year for sentencing: 20 defendants received sentences of 
5 or more years. One of those con men was sentenced to 25 years, and three were 
given 20 years in prison, the report says. 
A page later, however, reality kicks in: 
"Members of the public continue to be defrauded by fast-talking swindlers who 
use the telephone to convey their pitches," Bonner writes. "The considerable 
coordinated efforts of all the above agencies have still not been able to stop 
a nationwide crisis where frauds emanating from Southern California now 
victimize the public of an estimated $3 billion to $4 billion a year." 
One problem, says Assistant U.S. Atty. David Katz, the task force head, is the 
lack of resources and manpower. 
Law enforcement experts place California at the center of the telemarketing 
fraud map, but the annual report says that Southern California has only a third 
as many FBI agents as New York City and only half the number of federal 
prosecutors. 
"The lack of law enforcement resources is a key reason for the widespread 
descriptions of Southern California as 'the fraud capital of the world' and of 
the coastal area around Newport Beach as the 'Cote de Fraud,' " Katz says in 
the report. 
HOW SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA TASK FORCE HAS FARED 
The Southern California Fraud Task Force has been in operation for 3 years and 
takes credit for disposing of nearly 300 cases. Eight of those cases have yet 
to come to trial, according to the task force's annual report. Forty-seven 
others are either at the indictment stage or the defendants are fugitives. The 
convictions each year: 
1986 36 
1987 90 
1988 74 
1989 (to date) 14 
The task force also contends that sentences have gotten stiffer in the years 
that the group of agencies has been cooperating in the fight against 
telemarketing fraud. Following is the number of sentences of 5 years or more in 
each year the task force has been in operation: 
1986 4 
1987 4 
1988 20 
1989 (to date) 2 
