DAVIS MODIFIES SUIT ON NWA TAKEOVER DEFENSE 
Billionaire Marvin Davis today revised his lawsuit challenging the "poison 
pill" takeover defense of NWA Inc., the Northwest Airlines' parent company he 
wants to buy in a $2.7-billion hostile tender offer. 
The lawsuit in the Court of Chancery in Wilmington, Del., originally sought to 
invalidate the pill. But at a hearing today, lawyer Gilchrist Sparks said Davis 
is asking only for the elimination of a provision that would prevent a new 
board of directors from dismantling the pill for 180 days. 
Davis has launched a proxy fight to take control of the board of directors at 
the company's May 15 annual meeting. If he were to succeed, a provision in the 
"poison pill" plan would prevent the new board from dismantling the takeover 
defense for 180 days. 
Such a provision would cripple the new board from accepting legitimate buyout 
offers, thus hindering Davis' proxy fight, Sparks said. 
"Six months is a very long time," Sparks said. "Stockholders want to get the 
money now, not in six months. So they will vote for whoever will get them the 
money now." 
Chancellor William Allen said he would rule soon on the request. 
Sheldon Raab, a lawyer for Northwest, objected to the request. He said the 
180-day waiting provision "has the purpose and effect of getting would-be 
acquirers (such as Davis) to come to the board and negotiate." 
It is a way of "buying time to get higher bids, explore alternatives to get 
maximum shareholder value," Raab said. "The job of a corporation's director is 
not to shoot himself and his shareholder in the foot," but to make a 
"deliberated" decision on their behalf. 
Meanwhile, Northwest Chairman Steven G. Rothmeier says he would like a "white 
knight" investor to come forward and work with current management if Northwest 
Airlines cannot remain independent. 
Rothmeier told the Wall Street Journal that the best course would be for the 
company to remain independent and follow the growth strategy he has charted for 
the nation's fourth-largest airline. But he said the company is exploring 
putting a large stake in NWA in the hands of friendly investors. 
"There are potentially friendly investors out there," said Rothmeier. 
Davis' tender offer stands at $90 a share even though the stock has been 
trading well above that price. NWA stock closed Friday at $102.50 on the New 
York Stock Exchange, up $3.75. 
