CHARGES NOT EXPECTED IN ABDUCTION OF SECT FOLLOWER 
Based on a telephone conversation, the San Diego Police Department believes 
that a 37-year-old member of the religious group Great Among the Nations does 
not intend to file charges against her parents or the four men who abducted her 
last week, an investigator in the case said Thursday. 
Lt. Jim Clain said police Detective David Morris spoke with Dina Geerlings on 
Thursday morning but authorities do not know Geerlings' whereabouts, nor have 
they spoken with her in person. 
Clain said that Geerlings' parents have told Morris she has been "successfully 
deprogrammed." 
Geerlings was abducted from a parking lot in the 8300 block of Vickers Street 
in Kearny Mesa on April 20, near a bookstore where she was employed. The men 
reportedly shoved her into a car after an altercation between the abductors and 
three women who are members of Great Among the Nations. 
Geerlings a Longtime Member 
The 17-member group claims to be a fundamental Bible study and evangelism 
ministry, although its critics say it is a cult. Geerlings is a longtime member 
of the organization, which now has headquarters in Coronado. She is the 10th 
member of the group to have been taken from it over the past five years. 
"David is confident that Geerlings is the one he talked to, and she says she 
doesn't want to prosecute," Clain said. "To some extent, this concerns us. It 
would be much nicer if we could talk to her face to face, so that we'd know 
everything was on the up and up. I wish we knew more. 
"If she doesn't want to prosecute, I guess we'll have to wait -- wait and see 
if there are further developments. We have no way of knowing if she was making 
these statements to us (while under duress). She says she's not being held 
against her will, but we really don't know. At this time, we'll have to be 
satisfied with the telephone account." 
Does Not Know Whereabouts 
Benjamin Altschul, the founder and pastor of the controversial group, said he 
does not know Geerlings' whereabouts or how to reach her on the telephone. 
"Her parents are coming down personally to speak to the police, but they will 
not tell the police where she is," Altschul said. "They're telling the police 
that she's seeking rehabilitation and that she's OK. I believe the police need 
to see her and want to see her. I find it curious that they aren't being 
allowed to see her." 
In a related case, the district attorney's office is prosecuting family members 
and two deprogrammers who are alleged to have kidnaped and falsely imprisoned 
last year Ginger Brown, who was released after four days and returned to the 
group. 
