BIG LAST HALF FROM WORTHY SAVES LAKERS; 
GAME 1: HE FINISHES WITH 34 POINTS TO PICK UP L.A. AFTER ROCKETS LEAD BY SIX AT 
HALFTIME. 
They sometimes call him "Big Game" James, and Friday night certainly qualified 
as such. So, James Worthy adjusted his goggles, hitched his shorts and went to 
work on methodically dismantling the Houston Rockets. 
In leading the Lakers to a 101-89 victory over the Rockets in Game 1 of their 
first-round series, Worthy dominated offensively as seldom before seen and was 
a integral part of the Lakers' defensive scheme that all but shut down Akeem 
Olajuwon. 
If it seemed as if Worthy was everywhere on the Forum court, well, he was. 
Worthy scored 34 points, had 11 rebounds and, despite six turnovers, was a 
steadying force. 
He made 17 of 22 shots -- including his first nine in the second half -- by 
exploiting defender Buck Johnson inside, burning Buck outside and leaving all 
Rockets behind on the fast break. 
For years now, Worthy's internal body clock has emitted a blaring wakeup call 
whenever the playoffs arrive. Friday night, a big game from James was needed 
more than ever before in a first-round game. 
"James always has good efforts for us in the playoffs," Magic Johnson said. "I 
think tonight rates with some of the other good ones he's had. He picked up 
everybody, got everybody going. He did a lot of different things to lift us." 
As a result, the Lakers won their 19th consecutive first-round playoff game. 
They have never lost since the NBA switched to the best-of-five format in 1984. 
They will try for a 2-0 advantage on Sunday, when the Rockets no doubt will try 
to slow Worthy in what is the most lopsided matchup in the series. 
After the Lakers trailed by six points at halftime, Worthy simply would not let 
the team lose this one. He made four of his last five shots late in the second 
quarter, when he said he finally loosened up after trying too hard early, and 
then sank nine straight well into the fourth quarter. 
Worthy's first miss was a jump shot to beat the 24-second clock with about six 
minutes to play. By that time, the Lakers had a 13-point lead. The outcome had 
been decided. 
Of course, Worthy was not the only Laker to have a big game. 
Johnson, who, like Worthy, overcame a slow start, had 23 points and 14 assists 
to offset six turnovers. A.C. Green added 13 points and was one of center 
Mychal Thompson's helpers on Olajuwon. 
Thompson, who claims he has no chance guarding Akeem Olajuwon without several 
other warm bodies near, outplayed the Rockets' younger, stronger and -- on most 
nights -- better center. 
Thompson scored 12 points, had eight rebounds and five blocked shots. But it 
was his defense against Olajuwon that mde a difference. 
Olajuwon, briefly felled by a cut over his left eye, had only four points 
through three quarters and finished with 13 points and 14 rebounds. That's not 
a bad night for anyone other than Olajuwon, who made only five of 13 shots and 
attempted only four free throws. 
"James was a big reason why we won, but I think the guy who helped us the most 
defensively was Mychal T," Laker Coach Pat Riley said. "He played excellent 
post defense. I haven't seen too many centers block Akeem Olajuwon's shots. The 
combination of Mychal's defense and the team defensive help turned Akeem into a 
passer." 
That might not have been such a bad thing for the Rockets had their supporting 
players shot better. The Rockets made just 43.2% of their shots, with guards 
Eric (Sleepy) Floyd and Vernon Maxwell combining to sink only 14 of 37 
attempts. 
"I thought Akeem did a good job passing the ball, but we just weren't hitting," 
Rocket Coach Don Chaney siad. "We may have to start to do something to get him 
the basketball more. To be successful, we have to have him involved." 
Maxwell had 20 points and power forward Otis Thorpe 21, but the Rockets were 
not in sync offensively after the Lakers got themselves together late in the 
first half. 
If such a thing is possible from a veteran team such as the Lakers, they came 
out too inspired and jittery for the playoff opener. It resulted in four 
turnovers for Worthy in four minutes. Johnson, too, was forcing drives to the 
basket. 
In the first half, therefore, the Lakers had 16 turnovers, made only 47.5% of 
their shots and definitely had to feel fortunate to be trailing only by six 
points. 
"In the first half, we weren't playing good, but at least we were playing 
hard," Johnson said. "That was the worst I ever played. There was no timing. It 
happened and we dealt with it. We just said, 'let's settle down,' and then 
James took the game over." 
Worthy, normally unflappable and poker-faced, was uncharacteristically pressing 
in the first half. Riley said he noticed it because it happens so rarely. 
"In the first half, James was squeezing the air out of the ball," Riley said. 
"I think we were too ready to play. But (Johnson and Worthy) both calmed down. 
It happens to the great players, too. We were too keyed up." 
Worthy had regained composure with about four minutes left in the half. He sank 
four of his last five shots of the half, two coming inside and two on jump 
shots. Then came a vintage Worthy second half, which included long jumpers, 
spin moves inside, fast-break dunks, even a finger roll. 
Although he does not get easily riled, Worthy admitted to feeling a little too 
eager for the playoff opener. After all, he, Johnson and Thompson had sat out 
that publicized -- and expensive -- final regular-season game. 
"I was over anxious," Worthy said. "I was trying to force the issue. I had to 
settle down and play within myself, take my time. After a few minutes, 
everything was all right. 
"I think we (he and Johnson) are both going to learn from this game. They 
played well. 
