FRANCE WANTS TO SLAM EUROPE'S OPEN DOOR TO U.S. TV 
The rally was called by an organization with a French revolutionary name, the 
States General of Culture, and the several hundred French screenwriters, actors 
and directors gathered in the old Mogador Theater were in a rebellious mood. 
However, the main target of their wrath Monday night was not the Bourbon 
monarchy, but the American television industry. 
They were assembled in a last-minute appeal to the government to change its 
mind about a compromise decision it made in the European Commision last month 
to eliminate quotas on non-European -- mainly American -- programs on European 
television. A critical vote on the proposed "Television Without Borders" 
project of the European Commission is scheduled for Thursday or Friday in 
Brussels. 
For years, a large segment of the French film community, including such famous 
actors and directors as Jean-Paul Belmondo and Claude Berri, has called for a 
quota on non-European content of televised features. The artists see the quota 
as a protective measure for their national industries, especially when the 
commission-sponsored "Television Without Borders" project takes effect in 1992. 
Most members of the 12-nation European Community, particularly Britain and West 
Germany, opposed the quota system. 
But until recently, the French government had backed the artists in their 
demands, calling for 60% European content. Because news, sports, commercials 
and even such things as quiz shows would not be counted in the formula, the 
quota would mainly affect television series and feature films, the main imports 
from the United States. 
On March 13 in Brussels, the French government gave up the fight, agreeing to a 
vaguely worded proposition that only requires that European television networks 
"whenever possible, by means available," attempt to achieve a majority of 
European produced programming. 
"France was totally isolated on this point," Edith Cresson, French minister for 
European affairs, explained in an interview in the newspaper Le Monde. Cresson, 
who has been the object of fierce criticism in the French press for giving up 
the quota, said the government decided not to exercise its veto." 
However, the States General of Culture, which claims to represent more than 
6,000 artists in France and Europe, urged Cresson to reconsider, using the veto 
if necessary, when members of the Council of European Ministers meet again 
later this week. 
"The March 13 decision," said States General leader Jack Ralite, a former 
Communist Party minister in government, "is a virtual coup d'etat against the 
cultures of European countries." 
He and other impassioned speakers at the Mogador Theater, including actor 
Claude Pieplu, singer Guy Beart and actress Genevieve Fontanel, portrayed a 
bleak future for the already troubled European film industry if "Television 
Without Borders" is implemented without a quota system. 
The organization claims that more than 60% of all films distributed in Europe 
originate from the United States, an increase of 50% in the last decade. In 
addition, they say that more than 40% of all audio-visual purchases consist of 
purchases of American programs by Europeans. 
Despite the appeal, officials in Brussels said Tuesday tat they think the full 
text of the proposal will be approved this week "with only minor changes." 
