INDICTMENT CITES 13 AS SMUGGLERS OF 26 TONS OF POT 
Nine Orange County residents, including a Tustin attorney, are among 13 people 
indicted in the alleged smuggling of at least 26 tons of marijuana to the West 
Coast from Southeast Asia, U.S. Atty. Robert C. Bonner announced Thursday. 
Federal agents said the ring transported the drug in several shiploads between 
1984 and 1987, usually transferring their illicit cargo to smaller vessels 
before landing in San Francisco. 
The 30-count indictment, which also alleges several conspiracies to defraud the 
Internal Revenue Service and violate federal tax laws, was unsealed late 
Wednesday after the arrests of five of the defendants. 
A sixth, Tustin attorney Neil C. Pearson, 50, surrendered to federal 
authorities Thursday morning. All were arraigned Thursday afternoon before U.S. 
Magistrate Venetta Tassopulos in Los Angeles. 
At the request of Assistant U.S. Attys. Steven D. Clymer and Russell Hayman, 
Tassopulos set bail for Pearson at $1 million. Pearson's attorney, James 
Riddet, called the amount an "absolute outrage" and said his client had made 
himself available to federal prosecutors almost from the beginning of the 
18-month investigation. 
Pearson could not raise the $1-million bail, Riddet said, and was being held in 
the Metropolitan Detention Center in Los Angeles. 
According to the indictment, former Maui resident William Uhler, 39, now a 
resident of the Orange County, community of Sunset Beach, and Eugene LaForce, 
53, of Cave Junction, Ore., organized and directed at least four major 
marijuana shipments. 
Uhler, LaForce, longtime Maui resident Walter M. Hillinger, 56, and others 
allegedly brought eight tons from Thailand aboard a ship named the Lloyd B. 
George in September of 1984, transferring it off the coast of Mendocino County 
to two smaller vessels that carried it to San Francisco. 
Arrested in Hawaii 
Hillinger was arrested Thursday morning in Hawaii, the U.S. attorney's office 
said. 
Another seven tons of marijuana allegedly was brought to California in 1985 
aboard the Lady Fame, an 80-foot oil supply vessel whose ownership reportedly 
was traced to a partnership that included several names from the obituary 
columns of the Orange County Register. Federal authorities said the ring went 
to great lengths to cover up ownership of the vessels. 
In 1987, the prosecutors said, Uhler, LaForce and the others smuggled 11 more 
tons of marijuana from Thailand to a point between Hawaii and Tahiti, where it 
was put aboard another vessel, the Natalie Rose, and carried to the West Coast. 
In addition to the drug charges, Uhler, Pearson, Cypress income tax preparer 
Dovie M. Briggs, 56, who is Uhler's mother-in-law, and Terry P. Dee, 47, of 
Seal Beach, former owner of Faber Laboratories, a Fullerton business that 
tested crankcase oil, were indicted on federal income tax charges. 
Uher and Dee are accused of knowingly signing false returns for 1984 through 
1987. Dee allegedly arranged to have Faber send regular payments to Uhler so 
that he would appear to have a legitimate income. Uhler then repaid Dee and his 
wife, Jeanne, 34, in cash, according to the indictment. 
Millions in Drug Money 
The indictment also charges Pearson, Dee and Briggs with conspiring with Uhler 
to help him conceal millions of dollars of drug income. Pearson is alleged to 
have held title to a Maui house that Uhler purchased in 1984 for $375,000. The 
federal government seized proceeds from the house when it was sold in June of 
1988. 
Briggs' husband, Clyde, said he had not seen his wife for two days and learned 
from a friend that she had been arrested. "She's innocent as hell," he 
insisted. "She hasn't even smoked a Camel cigarette in her life." 
Others indicted were Larry A. Doyle, 49, of Newport Beach; Charles E. Larsen, 
45, of Costa Mesa; Martin E. Levine, 49, of New York City and San Francisco; 
Michael A. Tzouanakis, 35, of Costa Mesa; Walter M. Ulrich, 39, of Sunset 
Beach, and Dennis Tobin, 33, of Morro Bay. 
Ferried Cash 
Federal prosecutors said Levine helped organize the smuggling trips and that 
Doyle oversaw loading of one of the ships. Tzouanakis purportedly ferried cash 
to Southeast Asia to pay expenses. Larsen was accused of skippering two of the 
vessels and Tobin reportedly was a crew member. 
Ulrich is already serving a 15-year sentence in Thailand for marijuana 
smuggling, Clymer said. The five others still are being sought. 
Uhler, LaForce, Pearson and Ulrich face possible life in prison if convicted, 
prosecutors said. 
On Thursday afternoon, Tassopulos ordered Tzouanakis held without bail. She set 
bail for Terry Dee at $750,000, for his wife at $50,000 and for Briggs at 
$100,000. Uhler was to remain in jail overnight and have a bail hearing today. 
Times staff writer George Smith contributed to this article. 
