LOOKS: BURNING ISSUES; 
NEW HEALTH SCARES CAUSE CONFUSION AND CONTROVERSY OVER SUNSCREENS 
ALTHOUGH SKIN-CARE and medical experts continue to urge the public to wear 
products with a sun-protection factor (SPF) of at least 15, choosing the right 
protection is becoming increasingly difficult and, in some ways, downright 
frightening. 
Last month, news agencies reported that some sunscreen products containing 
Padimate O were contaminated with the nitrosamine 
N-methyl-N-nitroso-p-aminobenzoic acid octyl ester (known as NPABAO). Other 
nitrosamines have been found in cigarette smoke, automotive exhaust and even in 
some foods. Some nitrosamines have been shown to cause cancer in lab animals. 
The news caused concern among those who wear sun protection daily. 
So far, however, according to John Wenninger of the Food and Drug 
Administration, there is no conclusive evidence that the nitrosamine found in 
sunscreens containing Padimate O is a carcinogen. Wenninger, an FDA official 
who was involved in the research that spawned the reports, says: "There is no 
information to indicate that using a sunscreen represents a health hazard. 
"We have not yet been able to tell if the nitrosamine in sunscreens can 
penetrate the skin," he continues. The FDA has issued no new warnings about 
sunscreens, and no products or ingredients have been withdrawn based on the 
findings. More research is under way. "Certainly, consumers should not stop 
using sunscreens," Wenninger says. 
But consumers face yet another confusing issue. Many sunscreen users believe 
that products labeled SPF 15 or higher provide adequate protection. However, 
the SPF numbers, established by the FDA, refer only to protection against the 
sun's ultraviolet B (UVB) rays, once thought to be the only harmful rays. Now, 
ultraviolet A (UVA) rays, the so-called tanning rays, are considered as 
dangerous as UVB, according to the American Academy of Dermatology. But numbers 
to indicate the amount of UVA protection have not yet been standardized. 
Dan Beio, manager of personal-care products for Amway, explains that UVA rays 
penetrate deeper into the dermis, "resulting in long-term damage, such as 
cancer and the breakdown of the collagen and elastin fibers, which support the 
skin. UVB rays burn the upper layers, apparent as a sunburn. UVA damage is 
indicated by a tan that takes 24 to 72 hours to show up." 
Iris Model of Clinique reports that although an SPF 30 blocks about 99% of UVB 
rays, "we cannot guarantee that for UVA." However, she says, ingredients such 
as benzophenone, octyl salicylate and Padimate O also screen a broad range of 
rays, including UVA. 
According to industry reports, the $450-million-a-year sun-products category is 
one of the fastest-growing segments of the personal-care market. Yet, consumers 
are still not sure which products to buy. Ruth G. Sikes, a representative of 
the American Academy of Dermatology, urges consumers to read labels and 
continue wearing products with an SPF 15 or higher. "It is still the first line 
of defense against the ravages of the sun," she says. 
