NBA ROUNDUP; 
HAWKS HELP PLAYOFF CHANCES BY BEATING PISTONS 
Are the Detroit Pistons beginning to feel the pressure that has made it so 
difficult for NBA champions to repeat? 
The Atlanta Hawks, fighting to earn a spot in the playoffs, came into the 
Palace at Auburn Hills, Mich., on Friday night and defeated the Pistons, 
115-111. 
The Hawks' Dominique Wilkins scored 25 points and made a key defensive play as 
the Pistons lost for the sixth time in 11 games. Detroit's Central Division 
lead is two games over Chicago. Those teams meet in the final game of the 
season at Auburn Hills. 
With Atlanta leading, 113-111, with five seconds left, the Pistons were trying 
to set up a tying basket. Wilkins intercepted a pass by Isiah Thomas, was 
fouled and made both free throws. 
"I laid back and hoped he would pass it to the outside, and when he did I 
jumped out and took control of it," Wilkins said. 
The victory moved the Hawks into the final playoff spot in the Eastern 
Conference. 
"It was a very big win for our team against the world champions," Atlanta Coach 
Mike Fratello said. "We can't afford to lose anything." 
The Pistons were called for seven technical fouls, three for illegal defense. 
"(The officials) called it as they saw it," Detroit Coach Chuck Daly said. 
"It's their decision, they're the law. They made quite a few zone calls, and 
that was interesting." 
The loss was only the fifth in 38 home games for the Pistons, who were 27-0 at 
the Palace when scoring 100 or more points. 
"We don't want to let the division title get away," said James Edwards, who led 
the Pistons with 29 points. 
Chicago 116, Milwaukee 106 -- Michael Jordan had 26 points and 10 assists at 
Chicago and the Bulls raced to their ninth consecutive victory. 
The Bulls improved their home record to 34-5. They trail by two games overall 
and only one game in the loss column with six games to play. 
Ricky Pierce had 22 points and Greg Anderson 20 for the Bucks, who need a 
victory to clinch a playoff spot. 
"It would be great to win the division, and we will give it our best shot," 
Jordan said. "We see the Pistons within striking distance." 
Minnesota 117, Orlando 102 -- Tyrone Corbin had 36 points and 19 rebounds at 
Minneapolis as the Timberwolves handed the Magic their 11th consecutive defeat. 
Tony Campbell had 27 points and former UCLA standout Pooh Richardson had 26 for 
Minnesota. 
Portland 124, Dallas 92 -- Clyde Drexler played less than three quarters at 
Portland but scored 22 points to lead the Trail Blazers. DAN HAFNER 
