WEEK IN REVIEW; 
VENTURA COUNTY; 
BUILDER BARS RADON TESTS BY POTENTIAL HOME BUYERS 
In a move that raised state regulators' eyebrows, a major developer selling 
nearly 1,000 new houses in the Camarillo and Oak Park areas is prohibiting 
prospective customers from testing for radon gas before closing their house 
purchases. 
Pardee Construction Co. is also requiring all California customers to sign a 
contract agreeing not to hold the company responsible if the cancer-causing gas 
is found after the sale is completed. 
According to officials with the state Department of Real Estate, Pardee is the 
first major California developer to place restraints on potential buyers since 
the radon gas danger was revealed two years ago. And, as state health officials 
continue studying the radioactive gas, they say they expect that the number of 
developers asking customers to sign radon disclaimers to rise, especially in 
Ventura County, where the highest levels of the hazardous substance in the 
state have been identified. 
In the first statewide residential radon study, state researchers monitored 385 
houses in California, including 15 in Ventura County. 
On a statewide basis, only 1% of all the houses surveyed exceeded the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency's recommended maximum radon concentration of 4 
picocuries per liter. But in Ventura County, it is estimated that between 10% 
and 15% of the houses could exceed that level. That estimate is based on 
sampling over a 12-month period. 
Using standard statistical techniques, researchers say, they are able to 
extrapolate the statewide results with a fair degree of accuracy. 
A more extensive yearlong survey of 1,000 homes in the Ventura region is 
scheduled to be completed by the state in June. 
The gas, which seeps up from the ground, is believed to be the second-leading 
cause of lung cancer in the nation. 
Bernie Yantz, Pardee's assistant vice president of California sales, said his 
company began asking customers to sign the radon disclaimers about a year ago 
after an East Coast developer was sued by a homeowner. 
"We have every right to dictate our terms," Yantz said. "So far the disclaimer 
has not hurt us." 
Pardee's Ventura County developments requiring customers to sign the contract 
include the Capri subdivision on Lindero Canyon Road in Oak Park, and the 
Montelena and Fairfield subdivisions in Camarillo, near Santa Rosa Road. 
Although Yantz said no one has challenged Pardee's radon disclaimer in court, 
lawyers with the state Department of Real Estate, the state attorney general's 
office and the California Assn. of Realtors all questioned the validity of the 
contracts. 
"It seems unreasonable for the developer to say, 'I won't test for radon and 
you can't test, but if you find it later, I won't be held liable,' " said Gail 
Ruderman Feuer, a deputy attorney general. "We need to look at it further." 
Barry Barfield, an attorney with the California Assn. of Realtors, agreed. 
"This could open up a brand new area of law" and set a state precedent, 
Barfield said. 
Les Bettencourt, a managing deputy commissioner with the Department of Real 
Estate, said he would discourage buyers from signing the contracts. 
"I would have a problem with it," Bettencourt said. "The consumers should be 
allowed to test for radon. It's almost like the developer is saying, 'Hey, we 
know there's a problem, but we don't want you to find out about it.' " 
