SUPERVISORS OK PLAN TO DOUBLE COUNTY JAIL CAPACITY OVER 20 YEARS 
A multibillion-dollar plan that calls for nearly doubling Los Angeles County's 
jail capacity to 43,230 beds over the next 20 years was approved Tuesday by the 
Board of Supervisors. 
The plan was opposed by Asian and Latino residents who objected that it does 
nothing to relieve an overconcentration of detention facilities in their 
downtown and East Los Angeles neighborhoods. 
The 395-page document proposes 12 new jails at unspecified sites throughout the 
county, but it is simply a "planning document," required by the state, 
supervisors pointed out. Any new jails beyond those already approved, they 
said, face considerable financial and political obstacles. 
Supervisors had to approve the plan to qualify for $161 million in state bond 
funds to increase the capacity of the downtown Men's Central Jail to 9,000 from 
its present 6,800 inmates. The bonds would also be used to build a 1,000-bed 
jail in Lynwood. 
The plan brought out opponents of the Central Jail expansion for another try to 
kill the project, approved by the supervisors in August. The city of Los 
Angeles also has filed suit to block the expansion. 
Sharon Lowe, representing the Latino and Asian Coalition to Improve Our 
Neighborhoods (L.A. Action) told supervisors that the neighborhoods from 
Chinatown to East Los Angeles are already overloaded with existing and proposed 
jail facilities. 
Undersheriff Robert Edmonds, referring to city opposition to the jail 
expansion, responded, "We're still waiting for the city of Los Angeles to offer 
us a suitable site somewhere else in the city, because they are our biggest 
customer." 
Edmonds added, "We don't disagree with the need for more decentralization . . . 
but we need to proceed with expansion of the Central Jail to relieve problems 
facing us there." 
Some 250,000 minor offenders have been released early from the 11 county 
detention facilities since June, 1988, because of a court order limiting the 
jail capacity countywide to 22,000 prisoners, Edmonds told supervisors. 
In addition, prisoners at the Central Jail have been forced to sleep in 
hallways and in the jail chapel. 
The Central Jail expansion calls for building a two-story "inmate reception 
center" flanked by two concrete towers -- seven and eight stories -- on what is 
now a parking lot across from the existing jail on Bauchet Street. A five-story 
tower at the rear of the complex will house a jail hospital. 
The plan approved Tuesday projects a need for 43,932 jail beds countywide by 
the year 2010, costing more than $3.5 billion. 
The county now houses 22,000 prisoners at jails licensed for about 15,592. 
"The jail plan provides a decentralized approach to siting future detention 
facilities based on projected county population distribution and projected 
arrests by region," says the report, prepared by private consultants at a cost 
of $274,000, 
The plan was approved by the board on a 3-1 vote, with Supervisor Ed Edelman, 
in whose district the Central Jail is located, dissenting. Supervisor Pete 
Schabarum was absent. 
County Chief Administrative Officer Richard B. Dixon has recommended that 
supervisors place a half-cent sales-tax increase in Los Angeles County on the 
November ballot to raise $400 million a year for jail operations. No decision 
has been made on that request. 
