STATE BOARD, NOT COURT, TO DECIDE WHAT IS OWED; 
EX-MASSAGE PARLOR OWNER REBUFFED ON TAXES 
A Superior Court judge has ruled that it is up to the state Franchise Tax Board 
to determine how much money former college professor and massage parlor owner 
Hal Mintz owes in unpaid taxes stemming from his no contest plea to two counts 
of state income tax evasion. 
Judge David Perez, who last December sentenced Mintz to four years probation 
after Mintz pleaded no contest to the tax charges and to conspiracy to maintain 
a house of prostitution, had been expected to decide the matter. 
But last Wednesday the judge tossed the decision back to the Franchise Tax 
Board after an attorney for the state argued that the court had no authority to 
rule on the matter. 
The state claims that Mintz owes more than $80,000 for 1985 and 1986. Mintz 
claims that the amount is less than $12,000. 
Long Appeals Process 
Anthony Glassman, a lawyer for Mintz, asked that the judge set the amount, 
saying that to go through a long appeals process with the Franchise Tax Board 
would present a "financial burden" that his client is unable to bear. 
Mintz resigned from his $45,000-a-year post at East Los Angeles College last 
August after widespread publicity about his massage parlor in West Hollywood. 
He had taught at the college for 19 years and was chairman of its business 
department at the time of his resignation. Mintz has since gone to work as an 
assistant office manager for a commercial real estate and development company. 
His massage parlor, at 8574 Santa Monica Blvd., across from City Hall in West 
Hollywood, was closed in February, 1988, after authorities said it was being 
used as a house of prostitution. 
According to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, at least 10 women had 
been arrested for sex-related offenses there since 1984. 
Failure to File 
The tax evasion charges stemmed from Mintz's failure to file a return with the 
Franchise Tax Board for 1985 and 1986. Prosecutors said that records seized at 
Mintz's home in San Marino showed that the he earned at least $200,000 each of 
those years. 
As part of a plea bargain arrangement, prosecutors agreed not to charge the 
former professor with pimping and pandering, which carry mandatory state prison 
sentences. 
In imposing four years of probation, the judge ordered that one year be spent 
under house arrest, and that Mintz pay $10,000 in fines and all taxes owed the 
state. 
In addition, Mintz has assumed all costs of his house arrest, which authorities 
say amounts to about $10 a day. 
Electronic Transmitter 
He was fitted with an electronic transmitter that allows law enforcement 
officials to ensure that he does not leave his home except for work, religious 
services or medical emergencies. 
The beeper-like device, which Mintz wears strapped above his ankle, is about 
the size of a chalk board eraser, and sends signals every 72 seconds through a 
transmitter connected through his telephone to a surveillance office in 
Torrance. 
On Wednesday, Glassman argued that the plea bargain arrangement with 
prosecutors stipulated that a judge would determine the amount of taxes Mintz 
owes. 
However, the judge agreed with Deputy Atty. Gen. Herbert Levin, who argued that 
the courts have jurisdiction over such matters only after the appeals process 
provided by the Franchise Tax Board has been exhausted. 
