FOR THE CANDIDATES, (MOST) VERDICTS ARE IN; 
BERNARDI IS ONLY COUNCIL MEMBER FACING A RUNOFF 
Portrayed as too old and too set in his ways to represent the ethnically 
changing northeast San Fernando Valley, Ernani Bernardi, the 77-year-old dean 
of the Los Angeles City Council, faces a difficult runoff against a political 
newcomer after Tuesday's municipal primary election. 
Bernardi was the only one of eight council members up for reelection who did 
not win outright, drawing 42% of the vote. Instead, he faces a June 6 
confrontation with the closest of his seven rivals, Lyle Hall, a 49-year-old 
former president of the city firefighters' union who had strong labor support. 
The 28-year council veteran blamed his showing in Tuesday's election on "a very 
slick, hard-hitting campaign against me which involved a torrent of last-minute 
mailings full of distortions," a low voter turnout and a large field of 
candidates. In addition, he was running in a largely new 7th District, which 
was redrawn by the council in 1986. 
Bernardi predicted that he will make a strong comeback in the runoff. "It will 
be an entirely different campaign," he said at a packed news conference in his 
City Hall office. "It will be one against one instead of one against seven." 
Hall, a fire captain who received the department's Medal of Valor, said the 
election results simply showed voters are ready for a change. 
Elsewhere in the city, council incumbents Marvin Braude, Joan Milke Flores, 
Gilbert W. Lindsay, Gloria Molina, Joy Picus, Michael Woo and Zev Yaroslavsky 
were reelected to four-year terms, as were City Atty. James K. Hahn and 
Controller Rick Tuttle. 
In the council's 7th District, political analysts said Bernardi was hurt by the 
low voter turnout -- about 23% of the city's registered voters went to the 
polls -- and the large field. The field included one candidate, Irene Tovar, 
who had strong roots to the district's fast-growing Latino community, and 
another, Al Dib, the only Republican in the nonpartisan race who aggressively 
courted the GOP vote. 
"We just had too many candidates and too few votes," Bernardi's political 
consultant, Lynn Wessell said, adding that Bernardi supporters stayed away from 
the polls, believing that their candidate would easily win. "Some of our people 
just didn't think they needed to vote." 
But Arnold Steinberg, a political consultant not involved in the campaign, said 
Hall's attack on Bernardi's age and council absenteeism "struck a responsive 
chord" among voters. 
"Whenever someone doesn't do well, it's easy to blame low turnout," Steinberg 
said, adding he doubted that voter apathy was the sole factor behind Bernardi's 
poor showing. 
"The change in district had to make a big difference," said Councilwoman Picus, 
another representative from the San Fernando Valley. 
In the 1986 council redistricting, Bernardi lost many of the Anglo, 
working-class neighborhoods in Van Nuys that provided the core of his support. 
The new district is still heavily blue collar and middle class, but it is 
nearly 50% Latino. 
Picus said Bernardi, who has never been in a runoff since he was first elected 
in 1961, did not campaign hard until the closing days of the campaign. 
"I think he has a very good chance of winning . . . but needs an aggressive 
campaign," she said. "He's never done that before. We're all telling him to do 
it. . . . Ernie didn't wage a campaign until the very end." The big field, she 
said, made it difficult because each one could pick off a little piece of his 
constituency. 
History has not been kind to incumbents forced into runoff elections. Of the 
three City Council members forced into runoffs in the last 12 years, only 
Councilwoman Peggy Stevenson survived a 1981 battle against Mike Woo, but she 
was defeated by Woo four years later. 
Scrappy Fighter 
Bernardi, who has a reputation as a scrappy fighter of the city bureaucracy, 
said he was ready to fight for his seat. 
"It will be a contest between someone who is independent and someone who is 
beholden to the special interests," he said, alluding to Hall's support from 
the city labor unions. 
Hall's campaign manager, Harvey Englander, promised more of the same 
hard-hitting tactics. He said future mailings will continue emphasizing Hall's 
"youth and vigor" and that Bernardi's reputation as the council's maverick has 
hurt the district. 
On Tuesday night, Englander, watching a televised news report of an energetic 
Hall followed by a tired Bernardi sitting behind a smoked-glass cubicle at his 
campaign headquarters refusing to comment on the race, remarked: "Ernani 
Bernardi looked beaten in that photograph we saw on television tonight. It'll 
be easy to raise funds now." 
At his press conference, Bernardi said: "If my math serves me correctly, I need 
to get only one out of every four votes cast for one of my opponents (other 
than Hall) in order to gain the margin necessary for victory. The odds are now 
in my favor." 
As for his age and health, he said, "I'm just as aggressive as I have ever 
been." 
Refused to Answer Questions 
Bernardi contended that Hall distorted his attendance record. But 15 minutes 
into his press conference, Bernardi refused to answer any more questions and 
loudly hummed "Stars and Stripes Forever." 
Both runoff contenders immediately began courting the other candidates in an 
effort to win their endorsements. 
In other council races, Picus narrowly defeated five challengers to win 
reelection in the West San Fernando Valley's 3rd District. She attributed her 
close race to the low turnout. 
"People who are angry vote," she said. "If they're not voting, then they're 
pretty satisfied with the status quo" and with "the way the city is being run." 
Yaroslavsky easily won reelection in the 5th District, which extends from the 
Westside to the Valley. His toughest foe, environmental activist Laura M. Lake, 
had tried to weaken Yaroslavsky by blaming him for the district's considerable 
development woes. But Lake garnered only 33% of the vote. She blamed her loss 
on Yaroslavsky's high name recognition and fund-raising skills. 
In the 13th District, Woo easily turned back challenges from four candidates, 
each of whom had hoped to bring together a potpourri of disaffected voters 
unhappy with Woo over everything from Hollywood redevelopment to unreturned 
constituent phone calls. 
Woo, who outspent his leading challenger by more than 10 to 1, described his 
showing as a "strong mandate." He attributed his success to a "textbook 
campaign," which identified likely voters and relied on extensive precinct 
walking, telephone banks, campaign coffees and targeted mailings in his Silver 
Lake-to-Studio City district. 
Hollywood Hills attorney Berndt Lohr-Schmidt, Woo's No. 1 challenger who 
finished with a disappointing 16% of the vote, said Woo's victory resulted more 
from low voter turnout than widespread support. 
Flores, whose 15th District extends from Watts to San Pedro, outpolled 
Wilmington activist Jo Ann Wysocki by a nearly 3-1 margin. Flores -- who 
outspent Wysocki 33 to 1 -- described the victory as the equivalent of "getting 
an A on your report card." 
Times staff writers Stephanie Chavez, Alan Citron, Frederick M. Muir, Dean 
Murphy and James Quin contributed to this article. 
