NEW LAW AIDS PROSECUTION OF SILBERMAN; 
CONGRESS BROADENED SCOPE OF 'STING' MONEY 
The recent tightening of federal laws prohibiting money laundering is expected 
to give the government a significant advantage in prosecuting prominent San 
Diego businessman Richard T. Silberman and others charged with conspiring to 
disguise funds they allegedly believed came from drug traffickers, attorneys 
familiar with such cases say. 
The change, adopted by Congress in November, makes it illegal to conduct a 
financial transaction with money portrayed as proceeds of illegal activity -- 
even if the funds involved actually are federal money used by government agents 
in an undercover "sting." 
Although few, if any, cases have been tried under the new provision, some 
defense attorneys believe they will now have a tougher time clearing clients 
accused in money-laundering schemes -- particularly if the FBI has wiretapped 
conversations or other proof showing a defendant thought he was dealing in 
"dirty" money. 
One lawyer, summarizing the defense bar's collective sentiment on the newly 
toughened law, complained that the change gave federal agents "carte blanche" 
to set up stings to "manipulate people into breaking the law." 
"This has given the government the power to create an artificial world to test 
the virtue of whomever they elect to target," said San Diego attorney Eugene G. 
Iredale, a veteran of many money-laundering cases. 
Prosecutors, however, argue that Congress had merely sewn shut a gaping 
loophole in the law that hindered their efforts to convict money launderers. 
'... a Dirty State of Mind' 
"The gist of it is, people who believe they are laundering money should be 
punished," said Assistant U. S. Atty. Gordon Greenberg, chief of the financial 
investigations unit in Los Angeles. "Whether the government says it is dirty 
money or it is in fact dirty money doesn't change the state of mind of the 
defendant. The bottom line is, the defendant has a dirty state of mind." 
Silberman, 59, was arrested April 7 at a San Diego hotel, allegedly while 
negotiating with an undercover agent to launder $1.1 million the agent told him 
were profits from Colombian cocaine trafficking. Also arrested was Chris Petti, 
62, a reputed organized-crime figure who allegedly acted as a middleman linking 
Silberman with the undercover agent. 
Prosecutors allege that Silberman, a powerful fund-raiser for local and 
statewide Democratic candidates, conspired with Petti and two Los Angeles 
County men -- Darryl Nakatsuka, 42, and Jack Myers, 43 -- to launder a total of 
$300,000 during two transactions in November and February. All but Petti, who 
was ordered held without bail Thursday, are free on bail and awaiting a 
preliminary hearing Friday. 
An FBI affidavit says that Silberman, who is married to county Supervisor Susan 
Golding, last year asked his longtime acquaintance Petti to drum up some 
money-laundering business for him. FBI agents came upon Silberman during their 
2 1/2-year investigation of Petti, who allegedly has ties to the Cosa Nostra 
crime family of Chicago. 
Prosecutors said recent changes in federal laws aimed at money launderers will 
make obtaining convictions in cases like the one embroiling Silberman markedly 
easier. Indeed, until three years ago, there were no statutes specifically 
calling money laundering a crime. 
Before 1986, there were "exceedingly hypertechnical requirements necessary to 
prove a money-laundering case," said San Diego Asst. U. S. Atty. Phillip L. 
Halpern. The tool most commonly used to convict money launderers in that era 
was one requiring the filing of a currency transaction report (CTR) for 
financial deals involving sums exceeding $10,000. 
Fraught With Problems 
But that approach was fraught with problems. "It was a much more convoluted, 
difficult method of bringing these prosecutions," Greenberg said. 
For one thing, a cunning mover of dirty money could find ways around the 
requirements. Many launderers simply broke their transactions down into sums 
under $10,000, while others filed false reports or used complex investment 
tools -- like multilayered stock swaps -- difficult for the government to 
track, prosecutors said. 
"For example, a smart guy would go to a bank and give one teller $9,900, then 
go to another teller with another $9,900," Halpern said. "There were a lot of 
ways to get around this." 
Assuming a launderer was nabbed and charged under the CTR statute, his 
conviction was by no means assured. Although there were some victories in cases 
at the district-court level, there was a split on the issue among the federal 
appellate courts nationwide, Greenberg said. 
Overturned Convictions 
Specifically, some courts -- including the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals -- 
overturned some convictions on grounds that the duty of filing the CTRs was on 
the bank, not the customer, Greenberg said. 
"So what the customer did -- absent collusion by the bank -- wasn't illegal," 
said Greenberg, who watched in dismay as many convictions he won in the lower 
courts were voided by the 9th Circuit justices. 
"For a while, I had the dubious distinction of losing more cases before the 9th 
Circuit than any other prosecutor in the history of man," Greenberg recalled. 
In 1986, however, Congress passed the sweeping Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986. 
That legislation prohibited the structuring of a financial transaction 
deliberately to avoid a reporting requirement. 
Passed New Law 
Lawmakers went further, however, by passing a law aimed straight at money 
laundering. The statute makes it illegal to accept funds known to have come 
from "specified illegal activities" and to attempt to promote that illegal 
activity or conceal the money's "nature, location, source, ownership or 
control." 
"That was a tremendous help," said Halpern, who prosecuted the first 
money-laundering case brought under the 1986 law in San Diego. "It is very, 
very broad because a transaction is defined in the statute as moving money by 
just about any means." 
For example, "if you sell a used car to disguise the proceeds of specified 
illegal activity or to further that illegal activity, you're guilty," Halpern 
said. 
(The law was so broad, it initially struck fear in the hearts of criminal 
defense attorneys, who feared they could be prosecuted if they accepted money 
of suspect origin from a client. Congress amended the statute to exclude 
attorney's fees.) 
More Firepower 
Last November, Congress gave federal prosecutors still more firepower in their 
war against those suspected of bankrolling the narcotics trade. 
Under this newest amendment, a money launderer can be convicted even if the 
funds he handled were provided by the FBI in an undercover investigation. The 
change allowed government agents wider latitude in constructing stings to snare 
those seeking to "cleanse" dirty money through often untraceable investments. 
"Prior to that, we'd do stings but we wouldn't use federal money," Greenberg 
said. "We'd have to set up large undercover shops and wait for the defendants 
to bring their money in." 
Attorneys said adoption of that change was spurred in part by a case involving 
former Georgia Rep. Pat Swindall, who was charged with money laundering after 
he agreed to accept an $850,000 home construction loan from an undercover agent 
posing as a representative of underworld figures. Because the money involved 
was not truly "dirty" money, Swindall's prosecution was viewed as frail. The 
charges were later reduced to perjury. 
Imaginary Operation 
"The defense in Swindall was to be that the whole thing was an imaginary FBI 
operation and so he couldn't be laundering money because the money was clean," 
said Los Angeles attorney Terry Scott, who works with Barry Tarlow, the noted 
lawyer hired to represent Myers in the San Diego case. "The funny thing is, we 
will never know whether that defense would have worked because the government's 
fears (that it would) limited the subsequent indictment to perjury." 
Defense attorneys argue that the recent change gave government agents excessive 
authority to engage in stings designed to lure innocent people into committing 
crimes. 
"They gave the FBI unlimited power to set people up," Iredale said. "It permits 
the government to dangle huge sums of money in front of people having financial 
problems and create an artificial situation that would never exist in reality. 
They wind up prosecuting people who, but for the sting operation, would never 
have violated the law." 
But Halpern said the new amendment merely "gives the government the ability to 
effectively ferret out money laundering as it has done with other types of 
narcotics activity." 
Pivotal Factor 
In any case, attorneys suggested that the pivotal factor in money laundering 
prosecutions is the question of knowledge -- that is, did the accused launderer 
know or believe the money he was handling emanated from a dirty source? 
"If you don't prove that, you have no crime," Halpern said. "You'd better hope 
you've got them on conspiracy." 
A 76-page affidavit contains quotations from transcripts of numerous wiretapped 
conversations, and prosecutors believe those quotes reveal Silberman's belief 
that the $300,000 emanated from drug traffickers. 
In one instance, after the undercover agent referred to "the drug types" he 
worked for, Silberman allegedly said, "Let's us not even . . . use any of the 
words anymore, OK?" Later, he reportedly said, "You and I never have to use the 
word." And, responding in another conversation to the agent's description of 
his employers as "Colombian cocaine drug lords," Silberman allegedly said, "I 
don't want to hear that." 
Context of Conversation 
Defense attorneys -- like prosecutors interviewed by The Times -- declined to 
comment on the Silberman case. But, in general, they said that to challenge 
such seemingly incriminating statements -- which prosecutors undoubtedly will 
play for jurors -- they would describe the context of the conversation and 
point out the statements that the prosecution chooses to reveal and those that 
they don't. 
"The government will pick the words that buttress their position and will often 
ignore things said immediately before," San Diego lawyer Charles Goldberg said. 
"It is important for the jury to hear the whole conversation to understand the 
tenor and get a flavor for whether it was in jest . . . and what the parties 
were really thinking." 
In addition, attorneys defending Silberman and his co-defendants likely will 
attack the FBI's extensive use of wiretaps -- which can be an Achilles heel in 
some prosecutions and often are crucial in money-laundering cases. Technical 
challenges to wiretaps can range from arguments that the wiretap order, which 
must be issued by a federal judge, was overly broad to claims that agents had 
not exhausted all other avenues of investigation before resorting to a bug. 
This case may have added vulnerability on the wiretap front. In trailing Petti 
and Silberman, the FBI used a so-called "roving wiretap" -- a new, wide-ranging 
tap authorized under a 1986 law challenged vigorously by civil libertarians. 
The law permits the electronic surveillance of a person on any telephone he 
uses -- rather than the mere bugging of a specific phone -- if the government 
proves that person has attempted to thwart interception. 
More than a dozen lines from homes, businesses and pay telephones were tapped 
in the Silberman investigation, and the San Diego trial will involve the first 
court test of the roving tap's constitutionality. 
"Congress has been very specific in its limitations on the use of wiretaps 
because they did not want an indiscriminate invasion of privacy," Goldberg 
said. "The defense always closely scrutinizes the wiretaps in these cases." 
Although he conceded that the defense is likely to challenge the roving tap on 
4th Amendment invasion of privacy grounds, Asst. U.S. Atty. Charles F. Gorder 
Jr., who is prosecuting the Silberman case, said the orders permitting the tap 
were meticulously drawn. 
"The requirements are very specific and we've met them," he said. 
