PREP BASEBALL ROUNDUP; 
CAPISTRANO VALLEY SCORES TWO IN 8TH TO EDGE TUCSON 
Capistrano Valley High School scored twice in the top of the eighth inning and 
held on for a 3-2 victory over Tucson in the first round of the Far West 
baseball tournament Monday at Valencia High School. 
With the score tied, 1-1, after seven innings, Mike Lavin led off the eighth 
with a home run down the left-field line to give the Cougars (7-6-1) a 2-1 
lead. After Capistrano Valley loaded the bases with two outs, John Mackay 
singled to center for a 3-1 lead. 
In the bottom of the inning, Tovo Alverez led off with a home run to left to 
cut Tucson's deficit to 3-2. But Capistrano Valley pitcher Travis Burgus got 
the final three outs. 
Burgus (4-2) pitched a five-hitter, striking out 10. He had a two-hit shutout 
through six innings, but Tucson scored an unearned run in the seventh to send 
the game into extra innings. 
In other first-round games: 
Miami Westminster Christian 2, La Quinta 1 -- Javier Gomez (7-0) pitched a 
three-hitter and struck out 10 for Westminster Christian (17-6). Ron Caridad 
hit a solo homer in the first inning for Westminster Christian. Peewee Diaz led 
off the seventh inning with a single and scored on a one-out double by Mickey 
Lopez. 
Castro Valley 9, Esperanza 5 -- Steve Tahsler's third-inning solo homer gave 
visiting Castro Valley (11-2) a 4-3 lead that it never relinquished. Jason 
Perez went two for three with three RBIs for Esperanza (11-3). 
El Dorado 13, New Jersey Paramus Catholic 5 -- Matt Svoboda had a grand slam in 
the first inning to lead the host Golden Hawks. Gar Ballone had four hits and 
scored three runs and Steve Wemmer had three hits and three RBIs for El Dorado. 
Fountain Valley 4, Fresno Bullard 0 -- Jeff Hale (3-2) pitched a five-hitter 
and struck out four and Joe Penaflor had a home run and two RBIs as Fountain 
Valley (6-9) defeated Bullard (10-4), USA Today's No. 1-ranked team in the 
nation last season. 
In the Pride of the Coast tournament: 
El Modena 7, Bolsa Grande 3 -- El Modena (7-5) scored three runs in the first 
inning when Mike Vermillion hit a two-run triple and scored on error by the 
third baseman in a championship quarterfinal game at Corona del Mar. 
Estancia 4, Glenn 1 -- Cody Rodman (5-1) pitched a three-hitter to lead 
Estancia in a championship quarterfinal game at Estancia. Paul McDaniel, Colby 
French and Jeff DeSandro each drove in a run for the Eagles. 
In consolation play: 
Orange Lutheran 3, Rancho Alamitos 2 (13 innings) -- Phil Matheson hit a 
two-run home run in the top of the 13th inning to give Orange Lutheran a 3-1 
lead in a game at Newport Harbor that was scoreless until the 12th inning. 
Los Amigos 12, Corona del Mar 2 -- Matt McCredy had two home runs and four RBIs 
and Steve Poynter had two hits with a home run and three RBIs to lead Los 
Amigos (6-8) at Costa Mesa High. 
In the Anaheim Lions tournament: 
Sonora 2, Riordan 1 -- Andy Beisel pitched a one-hitter, striking out nine, and 
Tracy Coffman scored the winning run on a balk in the sixth inning for Sonora 
(8-6). 
Troy 6, Woodbridge 4 -- Steve Friedrich went two for four and drove in two runs 
and Guy Pinelli had two hits and pitched 1 1/3 innings to earn his first save 
for Troy (4-6) in a quarterfinal game at Brookhurst Park. 
