SUPERVISORS TO VOTE ON COUNTY ARTS AGENCY 
The Orange County Board of Supervisors is scheduled to vote Tuesday on whether 
to develop a countywide arts agency, according to an aide to Supervisor Thomas 
F. Riley. 
If created, the agency might further be designated by the supervisors as the 
county's "state-local partner" with the California Arts Council, or official 
arts representative to the state. Meanwhile, the supervisors are considering 
whether to give that designation temporarily to an ad hoc committee of local 
arts leaders. 
As a "state-local partner," an agency can receive state and federal grants for 
redistribution to local arts groups. The county has been without such a partner 
since the Orange County Arts Alliance dissolved in 1988 and is now one of six 
counties (among 58 statewide) without a partnership. According to one estimate, 
Orange County is losing out on as much as $30,000 in state arts money every 
year as a result. 
Riley placed the vote on Tuesday's calendar after reading a report that he had 
requested from the county administrative office on the county's role in local 
arts support. 
"The report indicates the need for the county to take a leadership and 
coordination role to bring together public and private efforts to establish a 
countywide (arts) program," Riley said. 
The proposed agency would be developed with cooperation from the CAO, the 
Environmental Management Agency, the Department of Education, the Orange County 
Public Library and the League of Cities and would be funded with up to $50,000 
in special district augmentation money normally used for county parks. A 
structural and funding plan would be submitted to the supervisors during their 
1990-91 budget hearings, to begin in July. 
Other potential funding sources -- such as an endowment fund, grants, 
membership dues and private contributions -- are to be considered as well. 
Riley recommends that the county contribute no more than the $50,000. 
"If this agency is to truly benefit the entire county of Orange, it should 
probably represent funding sources other than just the county," said Riley aide 
Stephen Blanchard. 
