NOVEMBER GAS TAX VOTE CALLED FOR BY GOVERNOR; 
SPECIAL ELECTION WOULD DECIDE ON $20-BILLION TRANSPORTATION PLAN, INCLUDING 
9-CENT FUEL HIKE 
Gov. George Deukmejian, a longtime opponent of tax increases, Tuesday called 
for a special November election to allow voters to consider a $20-billion 
transportation improvement plan that would include a 9-cent-per-gallon gasoline 
tax hike. 
Minutes before convening the final meeting of his transportation summit, 
Deukmejian outlined a 10-year financing plan for upgrading California's 
transportation system. 
As the governor proposed it, the special election would place three related 
measures before the voters: 
* A lifting of the state's constitutional spending limit as it applies to 
additional revenue raised by the proposed transportation package. The spending 
limit, called the Gann amendment after its author, Paul Gann, was approved by 
voters in 1979. 
* An initial 5-cent-per-gallon gasoline tax hike, to be followed by 1-cent 
increases each of the next four years. 
* A $2.4-billion general obligation bond issue for mass transit. 
Truck Fee Increase 
As part of the overall plan, Deukmejian also proposed legislation that would 
impose substantial increases in truck fees. 
While the governor has the authority to call a special election, the 
Legislature must approve the measures that actually appear on the ballot. 
The governor said the plan was being presented in "the spirit of compromise" 
and represented his assessment of what would be needed to raise an additional 
$20 billion over the next decade and provide California with "a first-class 
transportation system." 
In an attempt to show that he has not broken faith with his anti-tax 
constituency, the governor insisted that he was not making specific proposals 
but merely picking and choosing the suggestions made by the summit's 
participants that he believed "should be included in a transportation plan if, 
in my judgment, it is to succeed." 
The plan, however, was so specific and detailed that many Republicans and 
Democrats alike immediately viewed it as the governor's official proposal. Sen. 
William Campbell (R-Hacienda Heights) offered to revise transportation 
legislation he is proposing to mirror the governor's plan. 
Campbell acknowledged that his legislation was defeated Tuesday in the Senate 
Transportation Committee, but he said he will ask for reconsideration. The 
committee meanwhile, approved 7 to 2 a proposal by Senate President Pro Tem 
David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles) and Sen. Quentin L. Kopp (I-San Francisco) to 
increase the gas tax 10 cents. 
While some business and political leaders taking part in the transportation 
summit meeting were visibly annoyed by the governor's refusal to firmly pledge 
his support for the transportation plan, others interpreted his latest remarks 
as a softening of his position. They said they were encouraged by his 
willingness to both call a special election quickly and to consider a gas tax 
increase that would eventually rise as high as 9 cents. 
"It is an important offer but not a conclusion to which we are going to accede 
without a lot of discussion and negotiation," Roberti said. 
Both Roberti and Assembly Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco) said they are 
troubled that Deukmejian apparently intended to keep the spending limit intact 
for all other state programs. 
"If he intends to do it only for transportation, it won't work," Brown said. 
"We won't do it only for transportation." 
Roberti said the health-care system in California could have "real problems" if 
it is not also included in the Gann modifications. 
"I prefer to see the Gann limit lifted across the board," he said. 
Deukmejian conceded that the final summit meeting ended without reaching a 
consensus on a transportation plan, but he believed it had narrowed the issues 
enough so that the Legislature would eventually be able to fashion a plan that 
he could endorse. 
Although he agreed he had compromised on some issues, Deukmejian said he did 
not believe his "no new tax" reputation had been tarnished. 
Earlier, the governor had said he would "not stand in the way" of a gas tax 
ballot measure but had given no indication that he would support it. On 
Tuesday, he surprised transportation leaders by actually suggesting an increase 
and hinting that it could get his endorsement. 
Nonetheless, Deukmejian said he had steadfastly insisted that tax increases had 
to be presented to the voters, even though most of the people attending his 
summit -- more than two dozen legislative, business and labor leaders -- 
opposed that idea. Statewide polls have indicated that a gas tax increase of 
more than a few cents would be defeated. 
As the final meeting ended, several business leaders said they were now looking 
for ways to win voter approval of a 9-cent gas tax increase. 
David Ackerman, a lobbyist for the Associated General Contractors of 
California, praised the governor for calling for a special election, saying it 
improved the tax increase's chance of passage. A special election, with its 
relatively low turnout, would probably draw a higher proportion of voters who 
favor the increase, he predicted. 
"I think the governor has come a long way, and I think he really deserves 
credit for it," added Tom Ellick, president of the California Manufacturers 
Assn. 
But for any transportation plan to win public approval, Ellick contended, it is 
essential that Deukmejian stump the state in favor of a gas tax increase. 
"It's going to take that kind of leadership for the public to understand how 
important this is to the economy of the state," Ellick said. 
Jack Maltester, president of Californians for Better Transportation, said he 
believes that the major accomplishment of the governor's summit was the 
agreement that an additional $20 billion needs to be pumped into transportation 
in the next decade and that a gas tax increase is essential to do it. 
Californians now pay 9 cents per gallon in state gasoline tax and another 9 
cents in federal tax. In addition, they pay a 6% state sales tax. 
