INNOVATION: NEWSPAPERS MUST REACH OUT, TOUCH READER 
The headlines may be snappy, the stories all crisp and comprehensive and each 
photo compelling to the eye, but the sad truth is that the type of newspaper 
you are now reading probably is obsolete. 
It's not that video has superseded print as this culture's medium of choice 
(although it has), or that newspapers are inherently incapable of capturing and 
holding people's attention. It's that most newspapers -- as currently written, 
designed and published -- are giving people less and less of what they really 
need. 
Newspapers are misnamed; the idea that newspapers are about the news is simply 
wrong. If you look at the history of newspapers, what you will discover is that 
their role was less as a vehicle for news than as a medium to create 
communities of interest. 
Consider your own reasons for reading this paper: Is it just to get the latest 
information? Or is it to feel connected to a part of a larger community? 
Remember, one of the most successful ad campaigns in history was not "Reach Out 
and Inform Someone" -- it was "Reach Out and Touch Someone." People want to 
feel connected; news is just one way to continually energize those connections. 
So the real issue here is less "packaging the news" than creating these 
communities. That's why tomorrow's newspapers have to be fundamentally 
different from today's. Editors and publishers need to explore ways to build 
newer and tighter relationships with their readers and advertisers. Instead of 
relying on editorial rhinoplasties and promotional gimcracks, successful 
newspapers will use emerging technologies to redefine their roles as the vital 
community medium. 
The problem is that most newspaper editors are prisoners of print; they think 
purely in terms of texts -- stories, quotes, photos, charts and columns (like 
this one). Their notion of high technology is the newsroom word-processing 
system. Publishers are little better -- innovation to them is high-speed insert 
machines and ink that won't smear onto readers' fingers. Everything revolves 
around delivering news and advertising in a nice paper package. 
That's shortsighted. Newspapers have to stop treating their readers as readers 
and start treating them as people. People want to do more than just read; they 
want to act. They want to connect with people and ideas on a variety of levels. 
What newspapers should become -- and must become -- are gateways to these new 
connections. Increasingly, newspapers are going to shift from being editorial 
and design driven -- new coverage, columnists and formats -- to technology 
driven, with telecommunications, audio/video and computational media used to 
redefine the role of the printed page. The intelligent deployment of technology 
is the key to transforming an audience of passive readers into an active 
community of shared interests. 
For example, there is no reason why each newspaper section can't have its own 
answering machine to take reader comments and suggestions. Transcribe these 
verbal "letters to the editor" and weave them into the section. Print a 
custom-tailored questionnaire in the business section on taxes or in the sports 
section on the all-star team and encourage people to fax in their responses. 
These "fax polls" offer a way to build new links with the reader, and 
technology can turn the reader into a participant. USA Today has done something 
like this with 900-number telephone polls with some success -- but it's handled 
more like a vox populi gimmick than an integral part of the paper's editorial 
mission. 
But integrating text and telecommunications makes sense. Newsday in Long 
Island, N.Y., has enjoyed significant revenue from its 976 sports and weather 
phone lines. Why not put a 900 number at the end of a story on, say mutual fund 
investment options? For a small fee, the reader can call the number to get more 
information from the journalist who did the story. The way you do it is have 
the journalist tape a five-minute interview on the story and then "index" the 
interview so that people can use their touch-tone phone to access the bit of 
information they want. 
Blending print with this sort of audiotex service strikes me as an obvious way 
to get people to view the newspaper as a community information resource. There 
are all kinds of news and service-oriented stories that lend themselves to such 
audio augmentation. Most journalists I know would love to be able to write 
stories that get people interested enough to pick up a phone and call. 
There are enough personal computers out there that urban and suburban papers 
should give serious thought to putting up advertiser-sponsored computer 
bulletin boards. This isn't anything like the humongously expensive/disastrous 
videotex ventures of the 1980s. 
These bulletin boards offer low-cost communications and access to a very 
desirable demographic. Think of it as an on-line newsletter for special 
interest groups. The bulletin board can point out relevant stories in the 
newspaper, and the newspaper points people with more specialized interests 
toward the bulletin boards. Putting past movie reviews or restaurant reviews 
on-line might be a genuine service. 
One also shouldn't ignore the role technology could play in creating a new 
level of responsiveness in advertising. There's nothing stopping a newspaper 
from serving as a clearinghouse for more information on its advertisers. For 
example, why shouldn't a newspaper offer to fax a restaurant menu of one of its 
advertisers to a reader requesting it? My gosh, some weekly newspapers already 
offer telephone mailboxes for their personals ads. Why shouldn't daily 
newspapers offer such services for its classified ad clientele? 
Yes, there are a bunch of newspapers, ranging from this one to the Hartford 
Courant, now exploring how best to transmit fax versions of themselves. And 
yes, Times Mirror, the parent of this newspaper, lost millions trying to turn 
the pig's ear of videotex into a silk purse of publishing profitability -- but 
those approaches to technology are nothing more than an extension of the print 
mind-set. 
They treat technology as a medium for dispensing data instead of as a tool to 
craft communities. The idea here is to get more than people's eyes involved in 
the newspaper. The goal is to use the newspaper as both a platform and a 
springboard to other media. Ideally, these media enhance the value of the 
newspaper and vice versa. 
This technology-driven vision of the future of newspapers doesn't in any way 
jeopardize the next generation of Ben Hechts and Mike Roykos any more than the 
rise of television has killed the novel. There will always be a place for 
people who can write stories with style or present ideas with elan. But editors 
and publishers need to understand that their newspapers have to coexist and 
co-evolve within a new ecology of multiple media. It's not enough to publish 
all the news that's fit to print. You have to use all the tools you can to 
build and serve a community of people who want to do more than just read what 
you've written . . . and then turn the page. 
