POLICE, STADIUM BLAMED IN BRITISH SOCCER DEATHS 
Poor police crowd control, inadequate emergency medical facilities and 
shortsighted design of the soccer stadium here were being blamed Sunday as the 
death toll rose to 94 in the nation's worst sports disaster. 
The victims were asphyxiated or crushed to death at a national soccer 
championship playoff match Saturday when thousands of additional spectators 
surged at the last minute into an enclosed and already overcrowded viewing 
terrace, trapping early arrivals against fixed metal barriers. 
A clearly shaken Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher announced a full-scale public 
inquiry into the disaster during a four-hour visit Sunday to the site of the 
tragedy and to some of the 50 injured fans still in the hospital. In all, more 
than 200 were injured. 
"Whatever decisions we have to take will be taken, because we cannot go through 
this again," Thatcher said during a half-hour tour of Sheffield's Hillsborough 
Stadium, where Saturday's semi-final championship contest between Liverpool and 
Nottingham Forest turned into a nightmare of panic and agonizing death. 
After hearing several survivors tell of the event, Thatcher described their 
experiences as "a story, in the midst of tragedy, of tremendous, heroic courage 
and, of course, still fantastic anxiety." 
Hero schoolboy Ian Clarke, 16, told Thatcher how he used the life-saving 
techniques he learned as a swimmer to give mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to "10 
or 12" victims before collapsing himself. 
"As the crowd moved away I could see people lying there with their faces going 
purple, so I helped drag them away," Clarke said. "We got about eight of them 
back alive, but I'm not sure about the others. 
"I went back to get a few more from the terracing, but there was another surge 
and I was knocked on the ground. It was like being underwater when you can't 
get back up and you've got no air. I was trying to fight, but there were dead 
bodies on top of me. 
"The only way I can describe it -- it was like something out of a horror 
movie." 
In a country suffused with grief and anger after the tragedy, the inquiry is 
considered likely to bring legislation that could drastically alter the 
traditional face of Britain's most popular sport. 
10,000 Mourners at Service 
At Liverpool, the blue-collar port city that was home to most of the victims, 
up to 10,000 mourners attended a memorial service Sunday evening. Three 
thousand filled Liverpool's huge concrete and glass Roman Catholic cathedral, 
while more than twice that many stood outside under chilly, overcast skies. 
The first 25 fatal victims identified by police Sunday ranged in age from 10 to 
62 and included two sisters, aged 15 and 19. Most of the dead were young men. 
London's Sunday Times and Sunday Telegraph both published extraordinary, angry 
front page editorials about the tragedy. 
"A slum sport played in slum conditions," railed the Sunday Times. "Despite 
disaster after disaster, nothing seems to shake the complacency or incompetence 
of those who run the country's most popular spectator sport. Football (soccer) 
stadiums and their administration remain a disgrace. They are filthy, dangerous 
places; spectators only put up with them because of their enthusiasm for what 
happens on the pitch (field)." 
"Pitiful indeed is the country that cannot ensure the safety of its people 
while at play," declared the Sunday Telegraph. "Inquiries are set up after each 
successive tragedy. New precautions are decreed. But to no avail. Football 
calamities are becoming as much a natural part of Britain's fate as are 
earthquakes in South America or famine in India." 
The Football Assn., which administers professional soccer in Britain, is to 
decide early this week whether to cancel the rest of this year's national 
championship playoffs -- a move comparable to halting the Super Bowl in the 
United States. 
Saturday's tragedy also raised new questions over a ban that prevents British 
clubs from participating in European competition. The sanction was imposed 
after British fans attacked their Italian rivals during a May, 1985, match at 
Heysel Stadium in Brussels, Belgium, triggering a riot in which 39 people died. 
The Union of European Football Assns., which is the ruling body of European 
soccer, voted only last week to lift the ban for the 1990-91 season. But its 
action was conditional on the continued good conduct of British fans and the 
agreement of the British government. 
While there was no Heysel-type hooliganism in Sheffield on Saturday, the 
incident is nevertheless bound to raise more questions internationally about 
the behavior of British soccer fans. 
Here, however, it was the police who appeared to be getting most of the blame 
on Sunday. South Yorkshire County Police Constable Peter Wright has confirmed 
that a senior police official at the scene ordered a 16-foot-wide gate to be 
opened at the back of the grandstand just minutes before game time Saturday. 
Most survivors say it was that action that produced the last-minute surge of 
fans into the ground-level, standing-room-only spectator terrace behind the 
goal at Liverpool's end of the stadium. 
'Life-Threatening Situation' 
Police said the decision was made to relieve what they called a 
"life-threatening" situation that was developing outside the stadium as crowds 
of frustrated fans, unable to gain admittance, surged against closed 
turnstiles. 
The police are also accused by some critics of losing control both outside the 
stadium and inside, where the last-minute surge of entrants was allowed to jam 
the already crowded center sections of the Liverpool end zone rather than being 
funneled into two less crowded sections on either side. 
The tension among the police was clear here Sunday when a senior officer waved 
off reporters' questions and walked abruptly out of a press conference after 
announcing that there is also to be an internal police inquiry into the actions 
of his forces. 
Dr. John Ashton, a professor of medicine at Liverpool University, charged that 
once the incident occurred, "there was no organized (medical) response at all. 
There was nobody in charge, no plan, no organization at all. I had to make sure 
the people who were still alive and most seriously injured were got off to 
hospital first." 
Ashton described the scene as "absolute chaos" and complained that there was no 
resuscitation equipment available on the spot. 
'Appalling ... Disgrace' 
Dr. Glyn Phillips, another practitioner who rushed onto the field to help the 
injured, said he asked for an electric shock machine at one point and was told 
there was none at the stadium. Later, he was given an oxygen tank that turned 
out to be empty. He called the situation "appalling" and "an absolute 
disgrace." 
Criticisms of stadium design are potentially the most significant in the long 
run, raising the possibility of fundamental change in spectators' habits here. 
Hillsborough's perimeter fence, for example, originally installed between the 
stands and the playing field to cut down on crowd violence and prevent rowdy 
fans from disrupting play, turned into a death cage Saturday, preventing 
crushed fans from using what would have been their only avenue of escape. 
The fence was installed at the insistence of local police and over the protest 
of the Sheffield club's safety consultant, Dr. Bill Eastwood. Similar fences 
are used in the stadiums of most top professional clubs. 
"Perimeter fencing has been the product of an obsession with hooliganism as 
distinct from concern with safety," said Roy Hattersley, the opposition Labor 
Party's shadow home secretary. "Yesterday I think we saw the ending of 
perimeter fencing and the terrible things that happen when pressure becomes 
unbearable," the politician said in a British Broadcasting Corp. television 
interview Sunday. 
Spectators' Habits 
There were also calls to replace standing-room-only spectator terraces with 
regular seats, a move that would drastically reduce the capacity of the 
country's soccer grounds and radically alter spectators' habits spanning 
generations. 
Many British fans have historically preferred to watch their favorite soccer 
team while standing shoulder-to-shoulder on huge, open concrete terraces behind 
the goal and swaying to home-team chants. Even at Hillsborough, which is 
considered one of the most up-to-date stadiums, nearly 60% of the listed 
capacity is made up of standing-only terraces. 
To someone more used to American football stadiums, these terraces are 
claustrophobic affairs even under normal circumstances. And as Saturday proved, 
they can be deadly in abnormal ones. 
"There has to be a fundamental re-think about this issue," said Football Assn. 
chief executive Graham Kelly at a London press conference Sunday. "We have got 
to get our football clubs to get to their supporters and say: Are you sure that 
in this day and age, you want to go through turnstiles and a tunnel and stand 
in a place like that?" 
Kelly added that Britain would not have "a cat in hell's chance" of hosting a 
future World Cup soccer competition without stadiums in which all spectators 
had seats. 
However, Jill Smith, an administrator for the English Football Assn., said 
"clubs have tried to change the way fans watch matches by eliminating terraces 
and making their stadiums all-seating. But the public in England demands the 
right to stand." 
