GETTY PROJECT DISPLAYS ART BY CHILDREN 
In a rather unusual type of East-West cultural exchange, the artwork of 
children from 11 Los Angeles-area school districts is being shipped to Beijing 
for an exhibit. 
"I think (Chinese children who see the exhibit) are gonna say 'oooh' and then 
'I want to draw one of those,' " said 8-year-old Christine Tate, whose 
self-portrait is part of the exhibit of art from programs developed by the 
Getty Institute for Educators on the Visual Arts. 
The Getty-developed programs -- called discipline-based art education -- aim to 
establish art as a regular course of study in elementary schools, and to place 
emphasis on sequential activities that enable students to develop their 
abilities for making art, examining art and reading and talking about art. The 
program, which is taught in 21 area school districts (in kindergarten through 
secondary school classrooms) centers around aesthetics, art criticism, art 
history and art production. The Getty Institute holds staff development 
programs to train both teachers and administrators in discipline-based art 
education, and provides set curricula to help school districts establish the 
program. 
"Discipline-based art education has changed the look of our school and the look 
of our classrooms," said Bev Pyott, a fifth-grade teacher at Torrance's Anza 
School, during a weekend reception for the student artists and their parents 
and teachers. "But the production part, having them put the concepts to work, 
is just a small part." 
The teachers and administrators interviewed at the reception had nothing but 
praise for the Getty-developed programs, and they aren't the only ones to laud 
it. In fact, the collection was formed because of the enthusiasm of a visiting 
high school art teacher from Beijing, Hou Ling, who suggested that such an 
exhibition would help Chinese art educators learn more about the theory and 
practices of discipline-based art education programs in American schools. 
"The idea (of putting together an exhibition to be sent to China) was to share 
not only the imagery, but the students' philosophy behind this way of 
teaching," said Steven Mark Dobbs, senior program officer for the Getty, who 
has been negotiating with Ling on the logistics of the exhibition since the 
summer of 1987. 
The negotiations and preparations now nearing completion have been a lengthy 
process, Dobbs said, because language barriers force all correspondence between 
himself and Ling to be translated from one language to another, and because the 
Chinese government has several agencies that must give their approval before 
the exhibit can be sent to China. 
As a result, Dobbs said, the Getty Institute has had no confirmation on where 
the artworks will be displayed once they reach Beijing. Dobbs added, however, 
that the exhibition is being sent as a permanent gift to the Chinese, and the 
Getty hopes that "once it reaches China, it will be circulated widely by the 
Ministry of Culture." 
"We have no confirmation of the exhibit even going elsewhere," Dobbs said, "but 
my feeling is that it will. . . . We hope that it will become a resource for 
Chinese educators to learn from." 
The exhibition consists of 27 pieces of student art work (including adept 
attempts at impressionism, pointillism, and abstractionism; life-like 
renditions of lobsters, birds and other forms of animal life; fairly 
sophisticated landscapes and seascapes and collages, and several 
self-portraits), samples of writing by students about the art they have 
studied, and calligraphic explanations (in both Chinese and English) about the 
philosophy of discipline-based art education. The student artists range in age 
from 5 to 13. 
Most of the youngsters at the reception could manage only shy nods when asked 
about the exhibition and their drawings. But their teachers and parents were 
more than happy to talk about the excitement of the exhibit and the 
Getty-developed art program. 
"We're so thrilled about this," said Alicia Larson, the mother of 7-year-old 
abstractionist Ronnie. "And (in the program) they take the time for individual 
little things like field trips to museums -- Ronnie (an ardent fan of the 
"Pinkie" and "Blue Boy" paintings) had never been before." 
Said Mary Norton, the mother of 9-year-old Jennie (who rendered a monkey in the 
style of Georges Seurat): "I'm excited about this whole concept and the concept 
of this exchange. We don't usually do things like this -- it's usually done on 
an adult level." 
The Getty is hoping that the exhibition will do more than just provide them 
with an opportunity to show off the results of their program. "In China the 
philosophy and emphasis of art education is to encounter discipline . . . and 
mastery," Dobbs said. "There really is more at stake (with sending this 
exhibition) than just looking at pretty and naive images that kids have drawn 
on the other side of the Pacific. There's an opportunity for penetration of 
intercultural (philosophies)." 
But to 12-year-old Antonio Uzeta, an aspiring animation artist for Walt Disney 
whose collage of a fish is being sent in the collection, the exhibition has a 
much simpler meaning. "It will be real neat for everyone to see it up there (in 
China) -- to see what we do here," he said. 
