NONFICTION IN BRIEF 
FEEDING THE RAT Profile of a Climber by A. Alvarez (Atlantic Monthly Press: 
$17.95; 152 pp.) 
The compulsion to go climb a rock is inexplicable to those of us who shudder 
while simply reading about the experiences the author finds so thrilling: 
climbing straight "up a vertical wall," for instance, "with nothing but air and 
the wheeling swallows between my feet and the scree far below." Mountaineering 
mostly seems to be hard work: a struggle against gravity in unforgiving terrain 
offering none of the rewards of most wilderness adventures, such as the 
rollicking thrill of white-water rafting, or the primal mystery of deep-sea 
diving. 
A. Alvarez doesn't entirely demystify the mountaineer's motivations in these 
rousing, sensitive and evocative pages, but "Feeding the Rat" is unquestionably 
one up on the traditional explanation, "Because it's there." A British writer 
("The Savage God") and poet whose books on gamblers, roustabouts, paranoiacs 
and divorcees have painted him as a hagiographer of people living on all sorts 
of edges, Alvarez devotes most of these pages to profiling his friend, Mo 
Anthoine, a professional mountaineer. 
Alvarez met Anthoine in 1964, after Anthoine had left his stepmother, a 
"Dickensian tyrant," to join a 1960s community of other young English rebels in 
a small Welsh town, "all of them self-made internal exiles, like Russian 
dissidents, who had gone there to climb and then stayed on, taking odd jobs to 
keep themselves fed." Anthoine's goal was to keep the jobs as odd as possible, 
for he feared that the workaday world would ruin his "feeling for climbing." 
And indeed, as Alvarez presents it here, climbing emerges as a metaphor for all 
types of escape from a predominately drab ethos. 
Towns often appear as "dank," "dingy," and "mournful," but in rebels such as 
Anthoine, Alvarez finds a colorful individual, his character brightened by 
continual striving for the better. "If you just tootle along you can think 
you're a pretty slick bloke until things go wrong and you find you're nothing 
like what you imagined yourself to be," Anthoine says. "But if you deliberately 
put yourself in difficult situations, then you get a pretty good idea of how 
you are going." 
UNFRIENDLY SKIES Reflections of a Deregulated Airline Pilot by Captain "X" and 
Reynolds Dobson (Doubleday: $18.95; 236 pp.) 
While the name suggests a character in a Buck Rogers' space opera, "Captain X" 
is in fact a senior captain at a major American airline who felt obliged to use 
a pseudonym, as journalist Reynolds Dobson writes, to avoid the "disciplinary 
action" that is mandatory for any licensed air transport pilot who admits an 
error, "no matter how ancient, no matter how unavoidable." 
Our captain's anonymity has its drawbacks, encouraging him to play a bit too 
easily with the facts: He alludes to a recent survey where "a majority of 
commercial pilots" said their planes were "less airworthy" than in recent 
years, but doesn't cite the survey or offer any details about it. The pseudonym 
also encourages an emotional honesty that might trouble those of us who prefer 
to see him as a fatherly captain to whom we are entrusting our fate: "Captain 
X" views some flight attendants as sex objects, for instance (registering 
disappointment when they "slam their (hotel room) door and, click, shove the 
bolt behind them"), and admits that "when there's word of an air disaster (and) 
. . . it's your line that's involved . . . the feeling is electric. . . . The 
crash of that Eastern (jet) would create some seniority advancements, for the 
pilot and his crew were all killed by the impact." 
There is at least some compunction behind these words, though, and they do not, 
of course, invalidate what he has to say about deregulation, a 1978 act that 
ended price restrictions, opened all markets to all domestic carriers and 
sanctioned buyouts and mergers of route structures. By allowing massive mergers 
such as the Texas Air binge (which added 177 new cities to the company's route 
structure and shifted about 8,000 pilots), deregulation has forced captains to 
fly unfamiliar routes with unfamiliar flight crews. "It was not unusual for a 
pilot from one airline to be teamed with a co-pilot from another," Captain X 
writes, "and the two of them sent off to some hell-and-gone airport neither one 
of them had ever seen before. That's a formula for disaster." And indeed, since 
1982, there have been almost 4,000 near-collisions, with the '87 figure more 
than double that of 1978. 
Much of "Unfriendly Skies" is cursory, not discussing the dangers of the new 
"hub-and-spoke" system of controlling traffic, for example (it requires 
additional take-offs and landings, thus heightening the chance for an 
accident). Captain X does target a host of other problems, though, and advocate 
some promising solutions, such as computers that can prevent the crew's 
attention from waning on the new super-automated planes; these computers can 
"act like gadflies," he writes, "asking pilots questions that the pilots must 
answer so that the machine will be satisfied that it's got a mentally alert 
companion flying with it." 
BYZANTIUM by John Julius Norwich (Alfred A. Knopf: $29.95; 408 pp.) 
John Julius Norwich sheds a lurid light on the Dark Ages in these pages, 
evoking the superficial spectacle of Byzantine wealth as well as the underlying 
political dreams, machinations, and palace vice. Though sometimes verging on 
"Life-styles of the Medieval Rich and Famous," "Byzantium" is generally an 
engaging account of a period that few of us are likely to have studied in 
school. 
Norwich envisions history as an art, selecting only those details that will 
enhance the drama of his narrative, rather than as a science, where 
cause-and-effect is objectively determined. These pages illustrate the dangers 
of taking that philosophy too far, however, for by emphasizing the human drama 
he thinks will interest us the most, Norwich overlooks the social, cultural and 
economic movements that gave form and direction to the Middle Ages. Norwich 
doesn't explore, for instance, the implications of declining urbanization in 
the 6th and 7th centuries (it frustrated intellectual advancements in the 8th 
Century) or of the shift in spiritual allegiance from Roman deities to a single 
Christian God (it introduced the concept of "Orthodoxy" to the world). Thus, 
it's no surprise that Norwich is often mystified by the Byzantine people's 
behavior. "That a plebeian mob," he writes at one point, "should be inflamed to 
fury not by political slogans but by such questions as the relation of the 
Father to the Son or the Procession of the Holy Ghost puts a great strain on 
our understanding, but is true none the less." 
His treatment of the Muslims is similarly dismissive. "Insofar as anyone knew 
anything about them, they were presumed to be little better than savages . . . 
making not the slightest attempts toward unity or even stable government." 
Then, Norwich writes, "in the twinkling of an eye, all was changed" as the 
Arabs expelled the Byzantine army from Syria in AD 636. Armies organized "in 
the twinkling of an eye" rarely overthrow empires, of course, and this case is 
no exception: Prior to 636, the Arabs had, in fact, developed culture as well 
as political unity. Many lyric odes about the nature and power of God, for 
example, had been composed by Muslims from the 4th Century to the 7th Century. 
It is somewhat ironic that Norwich's account should depart from the notion that 
the past exists to enlighten the present, for the Middle Ages themselves were 
darkened by a similar departure. Norwich never claims to be a scholar, though, 
and so this work remains compelling, if not enlightening, for its lively 
enthusiasm and curiosity. 
RELIGIOUS CHANGE IN AMERICA by Andrew M. Greeley (Harvard University Press: 
$25; 128 pp.) 
The rather bizarre premise of this book -- using something as secular and 
scientific as government and university public-opinion polls to illuminate 
something as ethereal as spirituality -- seems particularly striking in 
"objective" charts such as "Figure 9.1: Model for explaining contact with the 
dead among widowed." Andrew Greeley knows that social science has its limits, 
though: "There are no social indicators," he writes, "which can be used to 
measure" the changing impact religious doctrines have on people's daily lives. 
Greeley does argue persuasively that changes in the practice of religion can be 
measured, however, discrediting the predictions of many social scientists that 
America is rapidly becoming "secularized": "Rates of church attendance, prayer 
and belief in life after death have remained remarkably steady." 
Greeley, a novelist and sociologist at the University of Arizona, occasionally 
strays from his dispassionate style, offering ethnocentric interpretations: At 
one point, for example, he calls Americans "the best-educated and most 
modernized" people in the Western world and suggestively links this "fact" to 
the unusually high percentage of Americans who believe in an afterlife. 
"Religious Change in America" is a responsible and intriguing work on the 
whole, though, for Greeley reports many important trends with great clarity, 
such as the feeling that science is diminishing our spiritual awe: "It is, as 
the German Scripture scholar Rudolph Bultmann remarked, 'difficult to believe 
in the mystery of lightning when one can control electricity with the flick of 
a light switch.' " 
