KEATING DENIES HE TRIED TO GET OFFICIALS FIRED; 
HEARING: BUT HE ACKNOWLEDGES TAKING COMPLAINTS ABOUT ONE TOP OFFICIAL TO THE 
WHITE HOUSE CHIEF OF STAFF. 
Financier Charles H. Keating Jr. on Wednesday rejected a suggestion that he 
tried to remove any thrift regulator who challenged him, but he acknowledged 
that he took his complaints about one top official as far as to the White House 
chief of staff. 
Office of Thrift Supervision attorney James Murphy, defending the government's 
April, 1989, seizure of Keating's Lincoln Savings &amp; Loan Assn., suggested 
during the hearing in U.S. District Court that Keating believed that every 
regulator who challenged him was motivated by personal animosity and that 
Keating tried to have that person fired or removed from his case. 
Keating, finishing eight days of testimony in a hearing related to his suit to 
recover the thrift, denied that. 
"Had I been listened to, this country would be $500 billion better off," he 
said. 
However, asked whether he had tried to get Edwin Gray, chairman of the Federal 
Home Loan Bank Board, fired, Keating replied: "I spoke with the Administration 
about it. Yes. I thought he was wrecking the industry." 
In response to a question from U.S. District Judge Stanley Sporkin, Keating 
identified then-Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan as the Reagan Administration 
official. 
Keating told reporters that he did not believe the meeting in Regan's office 
influenced Regan, who he said had become unhappy with Gray long before. 
Gray has said Regan tried to force him to resign before his term expired at the 
end of June, 1987. 
The Regan meeting is only one example of the length of Keating's political 
reach. Five senators who accepted political contributions from Keating are 
being investigated by the Senate Ethics Committee for having met with 
regulators on his behalf in April, 1987. 
The Office of Thrift Supervision has asked Sporkin to dismiss Keating's suit. 
Sporkin could eventually decide to uphold the seizure, find it invalid or order 
a full trial. 
Earlier in his testimony Wednesday, Keating testily dismissed a government 
attorney's suggestion that he had used Lincoln in an attempt to persuade Saudi 
investors to support his Arizona real estate ventures. 
"That's absurd!" Keating responded. 
The contention that Keating used the federally insured deposits in Lincoln for 
his holding company, American Continental Corp. of Phoenix, is a key point in 
the government's argument justifying the seizure of Lincoln. They estimate 
Lincoln's collapse will cost the taxpayers $2 billion. 
