GREAT AMONG NATIONS FOLLOWER REPORTEDLY ABDUCTED; 
KIDNAP OR RESCUE FROM A CULT? POLICE WONDER, AGAIN 
Even as a member of a religious group in Coronado prepares to testify that she 
was kidnaped and falsely imprisoned by her family and deprogrammers, 
authorities are wondering if they have yet another in a string of similar cases 
on their hands. 
If so -- and the answer may unfold today -- there is some disagreement among 
them about how to handle it. 
San Diego police say they are investigating the reported kidnaping of Dina 
Geerling, 37, a longtime member of a group called Great Among the Nations who 
was reported abducted Thursday in the parking lot of her San Diego workplace. 
Witnesses told police they saw four men force Geerling into a brown Chevrolet 
sedan that then sped out of a parking lot in the 8300 block of Vickers Street. 
18th Case in 5 Years 
Hers was the 10th abduction -- or rescue, or kidnaping, depending on various 
points of view -- in five years involving members of the group, which, up until 
Thursday, had 17 close-knit members. The group calls itself a fundamental 
Christian Bible study and evangelism ministry, while critics characterize it as 
a cult whose members finance what they say is the lavish life style of the 
group's leader, Benjamin Altschul. 
Police Detective David Morris, who investigated three abductions of members 
when the group was in Tierrasanta, said he received a phone call Wednesday from 
"someone who is close" to Geerling's family, reporting that the woman would be 
released today unharmed. 
Morris said he considers the six days Geerling was held in custody, by unknown 
people at an unknown location, an apparent attempt to deprogram her. 
Whether the abductors will be arrested on suspicion of kidnaping and false 
imprisonment or allowed to go free because they rescued her from the group will 
be determined after he talks to Geerling, Morris said. 
"If she wants to prosecute, I'll arrest the people on the spot," Morris said. 
"I'm treating this like a regular kidnaping. But I need cooperative witnesses. 
If she says she was rescued, and she is thankful, are we going to go to court 
on that? It's not a kidnaping if they are rescuing her. It all depends on what 
she says. . . . " 
Carefully Defined 
But both the district attorney's office and the leader of Great Among the 
Nations say they believe a crime was committed, even if Geerling doesn't want 
to press charges. 
Gary Rempel, a deputy district attorney who is prosecuting the parents, sister 
and two other men on charges of kidnaping and falsely imprisoning group member 
Ginger Brown last year, said the law carefully defines when a person can be 
abducted from others and not face prosecution. 
The criteria are met, Rempel said, if the person is taken away from a dangerous 
situation and promptly turned over to authorities for his own safety and 
well-being. 
"If (the abductors) were truly concerned about her, I'm sure they would have 
delivered her forthwith to the police or the FBI," Rempel said. "We would have 
heard that she was safe with police. But, with this newest case, when you get 
into the fifth or sixth day, you have to wonder if she is being deprogrammed or 
whether they are trying to brainwash her." 
'Family Member to Us, Too' 
Altschul said he was relieved Tuesday with word that Geerling would be released 
unharmed, but distressed that police hadn't pursued the case with greater 
vigor. 
"We never kidnaped her into Great Among the Nations. She is a family member to 
us, too," he said. "If Dina decides after this kidnaping to do something 
different with her life, that is her First Amendment right, and I respect that. 
"Will she still associate herself with our ministry? I won't know until I ask 
her. But I would be flabbergasted and very shocked if she will not go on doing 
what she did before with us, because she very much liked it." 
Rempel, the prosecutor, said he was surprised by Geerling's abduction, 
especially given the district attorney's decision to prosecute Brown's parents, 
sister and two men allegedly involved in her kidnaping and false imprisonment. 
All five face felony criminal charges when their preliminary hearing begins May 
8 in Vista Municipal Court. 
Morris said he had no leads on the case until he received a call Wednesday from 
someone "close to the family who said she is OK and that they haven't been 
beating her and that they'll meet with me tomorrow." 
"There's no doubt in anybody's mind that she is OK," Morris said, although he 
added that he wasn't allowed to talk to Geerling or any of her relatives. "I 
was told everyone is in seclusion. I don't even know what city they're in." 
