MORNING BRIEFING: AGENCY HAS POOR TRACK RECORD ON THIS ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN 
A New York advertising agency ran into problems when it prepared a radio 
commercial to promote the 40th anniversary of Yonkers Raceway. 
The commercial started: "The year is 1950 and Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower is 
president. The Army-McCarthy hearings are going full blast." 
One problem. Actually, two. Harry Truman was president in 1950. The 
Army-McCarthy hearings started in 1954. 
A corrected commercial was prepared. Eisenhower was replaced by Truman, and the 
McCarthy hearings were replaced by Bobby Thomson's historic home run for the 
New York Giants. 
Still one problem. Thomson hit his home run in 1951. 
Richard Lipman, head of Lipman, Richmond and Greene, the agency that prepared 
the commercials, said, "So, we were off by a year or two here and there." 
A third commercial was prepared. The reference to Thomson was dropped and not 
replaced. 
Lipman said, "We finally gave up on trying to be factual." 
Trivia time: What do Don Slaught of the Pittsburgh Pirates and Todd Zeile of 
the St. Louis Cardinals have in common? 
Counter punch: Wallace Matthews of Newsday, in a story on the recovery of 
boxing publicist Irving Rudd from heart surgery, recalled Rudd's classic line 
when somebody said, "Howard Cosell is his own worst enemy." 
Rudd said, "Not while I'm alive." 
Add Rudd: Of his relationship with fighter Thomas Hearns, he said: "There's 
nothing I wouldn't do for him and there's nothing he wouldn't do for me. And 
that's how it's been for 10 years -- we've done nothing for each other." 
Who needs it: Walt Hriniak, batting coach of the Chicago White Sox, runs a 
hitting school in the off-season, and one of his pupils over the winter was 
Cory Snyder of the Cleveland Indians. 
In a recent two-game series against the White Sox, Snyder went four for eight, 
with a homer. 
White Sox Manager Jeff Torborg said, "I think from now on, Walt said he's not 
going to do any more work with guys from other clubs." 
Sixty years ago today: On April 28, 1930, the first night game in organized 
baseball was played at Independence, Kan., in the Western Assn. Muskogee 
defeated Independence, 13-3. 
Strong words: Kevin McHale of the Boston Celtics told the Boston Globe he would 
vote for Philadelphia's Charles Barkley as the league MVP. 
Asked why, he said, "Because he's a much better person than the rest of them, 
and that should count for something." 
Hmmm. 
Shear madness: The Oakland Athletics' Rickey Henderson might have lost his job 
as clubhouse barber after the hatchet job he did on pitcher Mike Norris. Said 
Norris after being left with nothing on the sides and a thatch on top, "I'm 
afraid to face my girlfriend when we get home." 
A's announcer Lon Simmons told Norris, "It looks like you cut your hair in a 
pencil sharpener." 
Trivia answer: Both are catchers from UCLA. 
Quotebook: St. Louis Manager Whitey Herzog, after the Cardinals had played on a 
32-degree night in Pittsburgh: "One thing about baseball -- the dugout heaters 
only work when it's hot." HARLEY TINKHAM 
