BASEBALL MISCELLANY 
NAMES AND NUMBERS 
Misleading: The Houston Astros have had a reputation for outstanding pitching, 
but they have not had a productive starter come out of their farm system since 
James Rodney Richard in 1971. In fact, there are only five Houston farm 
products currently on major league pitching staffs: Dave Smith and Charlie 
Kerfeld of the Astros, Don August and Mark Knudson of the Milwaukee Brewers and 
Pat Perry, who is on the Dodgers' disabled list. 
Relief From Relief: With Steve Bedrosian burdened by his son's battle with 
leukemia, the San Francisco Giants' bullpen was 0-4 with one save in five 
opportunities and a 6.08 earned-run average entering a weekend series in San 
Diego. And against left-handers, Dan Quisenberry's famed sinker wasn't sinking. 
They were five of seven vs. Quiz, not including three sacrifice flies. 
Nasty, Indeed: Randy Myers packed his camouflage fatigues, plastic hand 
grenades and Soldier of Fortune magazines when he left the New York Mets for 
the Cincinnati Reds, where he unveiled his macho manner and material and said 
that, henceforth, the Reds' bullpen would be known as the Nasty Boys. A 
definition of nasty? Through Thursday and an 8-0 start, the Reds bullpen had a 
4-0 record with five saves and a 1.86 ERA. 
House of Tudor: Coming back from the arm problems that sidelined him for almost 
the entire 1989 season with the Dodgers, John Tudor has made two victorious 
starts for the St. Louis Cardinals, allowing no runs in 13 innings. "This is 
definitely far above my expectations," he said. "I don't think anyone could say 
they anticipated this. It's been a long time since I felt this good this early, 
but I don't think anyone knows how I'll hold up over 30 or 35 starts. I hope it 
continues, but there's no guarantee. The hitters aren't hitting my mistakes 
yet." 
Oil Canese: The Montreal Expos pulled out a 5-4 victory over the Philadelphia 
Phillies Monday although Dennis (Oil Can) Boyd left after five innings, 
trailing 4-2. "It was one of them nights, but the only thing I care about is 
whether we won," Boyd said. "Looking at it like that I kind of think I held 
them to a good deficit . . . know what I mean?" ROSS NEWHAN 
