BUSH TELLS FEARS ON BALTIC STATES; 
SECESSION: HE SPURNS PLEA BY ETHNIC AMERICANS TO TAKE STRONGER ACTION. THE 
PRESIDENT INVOKES THE MEMORY OF THE BLOODY SOVIET CRACKDOWN IN HUNGARY IN 1956. 
President Bush raised the image of the bloody Soviet crackdown in Hungary three 
decades ago as he told leaders of Baltic-American ethnic groups Wednesday that 
he cannot do more to back independence movements in Lithuania, Latvia and 
Estonia. 
As if to underscore Bush's fears, Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev warned 
in broadcast remarks Wednesday that secession movements within the Soviet Union 
could lead to "such bloody carnage that we won't be able to crawl out of it." 
During a 70-minute meeting with ethnic group leaders, Bush repeatedly cited 
Hungary's 1956 uprising, when the Dwight D. Eisenhower Administration 
encouraged a revolt against Soviet domination, only to stand by powerless when 
the Soviet army rolled in and killed thousands of people. 
"He is very, very worried about what happened in Hungary. He remembers it very 
clearly," said Mari-Ann Rikken of the Joint Baltic-American National Committee. 
"He wants to find a way out . . . that will not result in a cataclysm for the 
Soviet Union and that will not result in a blood bath." 
Meanwhile, in a televised question-and-answer session with a congress of young 
Communists, Gorbachev warned that a blood bath is exactly what the independence 
movements in the Baltics could lead to, wire services reported. 
Given the more than 100 different ethnic groups in the Soviet Union, many of 
them with strong nationalist sentiments, any move to redraw boundaries "would 
pit all peoples and all nations against each other and bring about a situation 
in this society the likes of which has never been witnessed by our country or 
by the world," Gorbachev said. 
Advocates of independence for the Baltics argue they are a special case 
because, unlike other parts of the Soviet Union, the three republics were 
independent nations until they were annexed in World War II. But Gorbachev has 
insisted that a move by any one republic to secede could unravel the entire 
Soviet fabric. 
"If we begin to divide up, I'll give it to you bluntly. We'll end up in such a 
civil war, in such bloody carnage that we won't be able to crawl out of it," he 
told the young Communist gathering. 
Gorbachev has made predictions of disaster before, but the latest remarks were 
among his most pointed on the secession crisis that bedevils the Kremlin 
leadership. 
The forces threatening to pull the Soviet Union apart have seemed to gain 
strength steadily all year. Lithuania declared independence more than a month 
ago, and nationalists in Estonia and Latvia have been pushing to follow suit. 
In addition, Moscow earlier this year had to call in the army to put down 
fighting in the southern republics of Azerbaijan and Armenia. And in recent 
days, officials have confronted nationalist demonstrations in Georgia and a 
strengthened independence movement in the vital western republic of the 
Ukraine. 
Leaders in both Moscow and Washington have been eager to avoid bloodshed in 
Lithuania, fearing that violence there would stop progress across the entire 
spectrum of East-West relations. Already, hard-liners within the Bush 
Administration have been citing Lithuania as an argument against quickly 
reducing U.S. troop strength in Europe or the overall size of the U.S. defense 
budget. 
The President has taken a characteristically cautious line. And the account of 
his remarks in Wednesday's meeting, confirmed by White House Press Secretary 
Marlin Fitzwater, provides the best glimpse so far of his reasons. 
Bush is under pressure from Lithuanian President Vytautas Landsbergis and from 
conservatives at home to take a strong stand in favor of independence for the 
Baltics, which the United States has supported, in theory, since the annexation 
by the Stalin regime in 1940. 
But, as he told his visitors, Bush fears that strong rhetoric from Washington 
could spur pro-independence forces in the three republics to move too far, too 
fast and bring about what Fitzwater called "a situation that would create the 
use of force." 
The result of those conflicting pressures has been a delicate diplomatic dance. 
On the one hand, the Administration has warned the Soviet leadership against 
using force to end the independence movement. On the other, Bush has refused to 
recognize the pro-independence government in Lithuania, and his aides generally 
have refused to comment on specific Soviet moves. 
The 14 representatives of Lithuanian-, Latvian- and Estonian-American groups 
asked Bush to take a far higher profile and begin "interim steps" short of 
actual diplomatic recognition that could strengthen the Lithuanian claim to be 
a legitimate government. They left, however, with little to show from their 
session with the President and his top advisers, including Secretary of State 
James A. Baker III and National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft. 
"We believe that our present position is the correct one, and the President did 
not indicate that we are willing to change," said Fitzwater. 
"We are disappointed with the official policy of the United States," said 
Anthony B. Mazeika, a real estate agent from Mission Viejo, Calif., who serves 
as director of the Baltic American Freedom League. He added that he believes 
that if the United States had made a statement of support for the new 
Lithuanian government after it declared independence, "I think Mr. Gorbachev 
would have been a lot more resilient and supportive of this process." 
In addition to refusing any moves toward recognition of the Lithuanian 
government, the Administration also continues to support the idea of referenda 
on secession in each of the three Baltic republics. The Baltic-American groups, 
in a letter presented to Bush, opposed that idea. Pro-independence groups, 
particularly in Latvia and Estonia, fear that large numbers of ethnic Russians 
who have moved to the Baltic lands since the Soviet takeover could vote down 
independence if a referendum were held. 
Gorbachev, in his remarks, predicted that even the Lithuanians, who 
overwhelmingly supported pro-independence candidates in elections earlier this 
year, would reject secession if it were put to a vote. Once voters realize the 
economic and political problems secession will bring, he said, they would 
realize Lithuania "needs independence, but within the framework" of the Soviet 
Union. 
Although the Baltic-American groups made no concrete progress, their officials 
said they were pleased that after months of trying, they at least had succeeded 
in holding a meeting with Bush. 
Many of the ethnic organizations represented in the Oval Office meeting are 
strongly anti-Communist and have had long ties with the Republican Party. "We 
used to wear out the threshold of the previous Administration," said Rikken, 
the spokeswoman of the the Joint Baltic-American National Committee. 
The decision to hold the meeting now comes at a time when Bush and his aides 
have been toughening their rhetoric on the Baltic situation, warning that 
Soviet actions in Lithuania could put U.S.-Soviet relations "at risk." 
But the rhetoric has not, so far, been matched by any specifics. While the 
Administration has warned that "very serious adverse consequences" to 
U.S.-Soviet relations would result from a Soviet crackdown in Lithuania, State 
Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler repeated Wednesday that officials have 
never spelled out to the Soviets what those consequences might be. 
For the United States to be too specific on the subject would be foolish, 
Tutwiler said, adding: "Let them gamble and see what happens." 
Times staff writer Norman Kempster contributed to this report. 
