FEES RAISED FOR BOATERS AT 2 VENTURA MARINAS 
Despite testimony from a roomful of concerned boaters, Ventura Harbor 
commissioners have voted to raise fees for boat slip rentals and for sailors 
who live aboard their vessels in the harbor's two major recreational marinas. 
Beginning in June, more than 1,125 boaters who rent slips at Ventura Isle 
Marina and Ventura West Marina will pay about 5% more for their slips. And 
about 130 "live-aboards" at Ventura West will pay the 5% increase, plus 10% 
more to reside on their boats. 
The fee for live-aboards at Ventura Isle Marina was not raised Wednesday 
because commissioners approved a fee hike of $25 per person in January. The 
slip fee increase approved Wednesday means that a couple living at Ventura Isle 
Marina on a 40-foot vessel will now pay $532, a $16 increase. 
At Ventura West, the increase for live-aboards, including the hike in slip 
fees, means that a couple living on a 40-foot boat will now pay $487 per month, 
an increase of $31. Boaters at the marina pay extra for electricity. 
Boaters jammed the hearing room to voice concern about the increases, calling 
on marina owners to improve security and maintenance. Many of them, however, 
praised Ventura West Manager Tom Kotal for running a ship-shape marina. 
Though boaters took a more conciliatory tack at the meeting, in a five-page 
letter signed last week by three dozen Ventura West boaters, the marina was 
vilified as a "cash cow." The boaters said that "a decision has been made to 
milk the facility for as much as possible and to put no more back into the 
facility than absolutely necessary." 
The boaters asked for better security in parking lots and improved maintenance 
in bathroom, laundry and other facilities. Boaters at Ventura Isle Marina also 
questioned the slip fee increases, saying maintenance needs to be improved. 
In answer to the letter, Ventura Harbor General Manager Richard Parsons said 
port district officials have "walked the harbor," and marina owners and 
managers "do a good job." 
Kotal defended his operation's maintenance but said he plans to hire a private 
security guard to patrol parking lots at night. 
Marina owners lease their property from the harbor, paying 20% of their gross 
profits as rent. Harbor officials retain the authority to approve any fee 
increases. 
Though only one rate increase has been rejected in recent years, Parsons said, 
the commissioners are not rubber-stamping rate hikes. "These fees are not out 
of order," he said, quoting a consumer price index increase of 6.5% last year 
in the Los Angeles area. 
But some small boaters still say they are being priced out of the market. 
Ventura Isle boat owner David Webb, in a protest filed with the commissioners, 
said marina owners "seem intent on making the ownership of a boat totally 
impossible for all but the very rich." 
