NEWS AND BRIEFS; 
WHERE CLOUDY DAYS MEAN CHEAPER STAYS 
If you know a good rain dance, San Diego should be high on your list of weekend 
getaways. 
Staking their chances on the area's traditionally good weather, the city's 
three Sheraton Hotels have come up with an unusual offer: If the sun doesn't 
shine at least once during a 48-hour visit, guests stay for free. 
The offer is good through May 24 at the Sheraton Grande Torrey Pines, the 
Sheraton Harbor Island and the Sheraton Grand on Harbor Island. If the clouds 
don't cooperate, the room rate is $129 per night, based on availability and a 
minimum two-night stay. 
"We realize this is a gamble, but we're willing to bank on Mother Nature," said 
Larry Saward, general manager of the Sheraton Harbor Island. 
For more information and reservations at any Sheraton, call toll-free (800) 
325-3535. 
Airport Blues: According to figures compiled by the International Civil 
Aviation Organization and published in the Paris-based Aeroports magazine, the 
number of travelers using airports in the United States declined by 1% in 1989, 
mainly because of saturation of capacities both on the ground and in the air, 
as well as higher air fares. 
However, Chicago, Los Angeles and Dallas all bucked the trend, with increases 
of 2.1%, 3.7% and 7.5%, respectively. 
American airports remained among the world's busiest. New York's Kennedy, La 
Guardia and Newark airports handled a combined 74.4 million passengers, the 
most in the world, followed by Chicago's two airports with 67.7 million. 
London was third with 62.8 million, followed by Tokyo, Los Angeles, Dallas, 
Paris, Atlanta, San Francisco and Denver. 
Any Port in a Storm: Wine lovers have a new spot in which to pass the time if 
they're delayed by weather or any other reason at Chicago's O'Hare Airport. 
A "Wines of America" retail store and wine bar has opened at the airport, and 
it features 230 different wines from 32 states. It is billed as the first 
complete collection of wines from states across America. 
"Most people can't believe that there is a port from Louisiana or a sherry from 
Minnesota," said Essi Pourhadi, director of operations for Carson 
International, the company that runs the food and beverage concessions at the 
airport. "We feature wines from unexpected states like Hawaii, Mississippi, 
Ohio and Colorado, as well as the best wines from California, Oregon and 
Washington." 
Travelers can find the wine collection at the round building between Terminals 
2 and 3. Bottles can be purchased and shipped directly from the airport. 
Irish Ayes: Northern Ireland, usually in the headlines over one of the world's 
longest-running guerrilla conflicts, had a record year for tourism in 1989 with 
more than 1.2 million visitors, up 20% over the year before. 
Tourists Beware: A Thai government plan to issue identity cards to prostitutes 
who pass regular tests for acquired immune deficiency syndrome and other sexual 
diseases has been criticized as "misleading" and "a gimmick to keep the 
tourists coming" by a leading Thai AIDS campaigner. 
Thailand's brothels, bars and massage parlors lure thousands of foreign 
tourists as well as locals. The government estimates that there are 80,000 
prostitutes in Thailand, but social workers say the figure is much higher. 
"This is the government promoting the sex industry," said Sommatra Troy of the 
Thai AIDS Society. "Just carrying the card doesn't mean a girl is free from 
AIDS. 
"Should the customer have to show a card too?" 
Sommatra said the system was also open to forgeries and corruption by officials 
issuing the cards, and accused the government of acting out of concern for the 
tourist industry -- Thailand's biggest foreign exchange earner -- rather than 
for prostitutes. 
On a Musical Note: A project is under way in Mexico City to invigorate the 
cultural life of Garibaldi Square, the plaza where troupes of costumed mariachi 
musicians long have serenaded visitors. 
The Mexican government has dedicated nearly $1 million to create a music hall 
and conservatory nearby. Construction is scheduled to be completed by the end 
of the year. 
Plans also include parking facilities to control traffic congestion in the 
square, a popular tourist destination. 
FYI: The Smithsonian Institution in Washington has opened an information center 
on the National Mall to help visitors sort through the 14-museum complex. In 
the Smithsonian building known as The Castle, the center is open daily from 9 
a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
The center includes two orientation theaters, interactive touch-screen 
terminals, two monitors that list current activities and two electronic wall 
maps. 
Rail-Splitter: A special introductory two-for-one offer for all package tours 
aboard the California Sun Express has been announced by Princess Tours rail 
division. 
The offer will apply on packages for which travel takes place on or before May 
31. 
The privately owned California Sun Express started operating April 1 as part of 
Amtrak's Coast Starlight between Los Angeles, San Luis Obispo and Oakland. 
For more information, contact your travel agent or Princess Tours toll-free at 
(800) 835-8907. 
