RED SOX RALLY FOR 6-4 VICTORY 
Like the Boston Marathon leaders passing near Fenway Park, the Boston Red Sox 
had a finishing kick. 
Led by Mike Greenwell and Marty Barrett, the Red Sox rallied for five runs in 
the eighth inning Monday to beat the Baltimore Orioles, 6-4. 
Greenwell triggered the rally with a two-run homer and Barrett capped it with a 
two-run single. In between, Rick Cerone got an RBI with a bases-loaded walk. 
"When Ellis (Burks) led off the eighth with a triple, we knew we were going to 
pull it out," Barrett said. "Then two pitches later Greenwell hit the home run 
and we were ahead 3-2." 
Greenwell said his fourth homer of the season came off a changeup by reliever 
Brian Holton (1-2). 
"I was able to stay on it because it was up," Greenwell said. "If it were down, 
it would've been a different story." 
The Orioles scored two runs in the ninth, but fell short in their bid to win 
consecutive games on the road for the first time since August 1987. 
"Holton is going to have to establish his fastball in this league," Baltimore 
Manager Frank Robinson said. "If ballclubs are patient enough, they can give 
him a tough time late in the game." 
Robinson didn't get much help from the Baltimore bullpen. 
With two on in the eighth, Mark Williamson came in and walked two batters to 
force in a run. Kevin Hickey replaced Williamson and struck out Wade Boggs 
before Barrett lined a single to right. 
"We finally got a hit with the bases loaded and it won us a game," Boston 
Manager Joe Morgan said. 
The Orioles opened the ninth with three singles off Lee Smith (1-1) who 
replaced starter Wes Gardner in the eighth. The third single, by Randy 
Milligan, drove in Cal Ripken and made it 6-3. 
Bob Stanley relieved Smith and got Francisco Melendez on a fielder's choice 
before pinch-hitter Jim Traber made it 6-4 with a sacrifice fly. 
Stanley then earned his second save by retiring Rene Gonzales on a game-ending 
fielder's choice. Gardner went seven innings, allowing four hits and matching 
his career high with eight strikeouts. 
Boston took a 1-0 lead in the first on a double by Barrett, a pair of walks and 
a sacrifice fly by Jim Rice. 
Gardner retired the first nine batters before Brady Anderson opened the fourth 
with a ground double just inside the first base bag. Anderson took third on 
Phil Bradley's bloop single and scored the tying run as Mike Devereaux grounded 
into a double play. 
Baltimore took a 2-1 lead in the sixth inning when Gonzales walked, stole 
second and third and scored on an infield grounder. Gonzales, who stole only 
two bases in 92 games last year, has four steals this season. 
