AL MARTINEZ: REQUIEM FOR A CLOWN 
For a man who had spent his life making others laugh, Martin Ragaway's final 
observation seemed a bitter punch line to 35 years of comedy writing. 
Kept alive by tubes at St. Vincent's Hospital, unable to speak, he gestured for 
a pencil and a pad and wrote laboriously, "Game's over, we all lose." 
Then, his body eaten with cancer, Ragaway closed his eyes and was dead at 66. 
Or 62. I never did know his real age. 
"How old are you?" I asked impatiently when I first met him a few years back in 
a Studio City bar called Residuals. 
Ragaway had been side-stepping the question for an hour, telling jokes, making 
comments, waiting for laughs. He had the quick, furtive moves of a chipmunk, 
and even sitting still seemed in motion. 
"S-Sixty," he finally replied with a slight stammer. 
"You don't look it," I said in false praise. 
"O-k-kay," he shot back, "59." 
Before I could respond he was out of the starting blocks again and halfway 
around the track with, "You hear about the widow in Miami Beach? She meets a 
guy and says, 'I've never seen you around here before.' 
"He says, 'I've been in prison for 34 years. I poisoned my wife, cut her into 
small p-pieces and put her in the garbage disposal.' 
" 'Oh,' she says, 'then you're a s-single man!' " 
Ragaway never stopped entertaining. He told stories, he repeated anecdotes, he 
made up gag lines. Sometimes he stammered, sometimes he didn't. The faster he 
talked, the less he stammered. 
He had his own newsletter, "Funny, Funny World," composed of jokes, offbeat 
news items and comments on the news. He began by sending it to friends. In a 
few years it had a circulation of 10,000. 
It was another way of telling a story, of defining with wry insight the nature 
of the existence he would ultimately call a game. Ragaway was a man obsessed 
with laughter, the ultimate entertainer, the quintessential clown. 
Then why didn't he leave us laughing? 
I last saw him three months ago. I didn't know he was dying. None of his 
friends did. He didn't look well, but he never looked well. That's what made my 
false compliment seem funny to him back at Residuals. 
The face was pale and craggy, the eyebrows arched in a sad and quizzical 
expression, his hair dyed a funny auburn. Only the eyes were bright and 
riveting. Only the eyes were alive. 
He talked about his years of comedy writing the last time we met, about how he 
churned out gags for Skelton, Benny, Hope, Gleason and a lot of others you 
wouldn't remember if I told you. 
There was a biographical quality to his monologue. He wanted me to remember. 
The cancer he had secretly fought for almost two years was winning. 
Ragaway had written for radio first and then television. He produced scripts 
for 400 sitcom episodes, or maybe 800. He told different stories. "All those 
episodes," he'd say with incredulity, "and I'm s-still able to dress myself and 
t-tie my own shoes." 
He loved making people laugh but hated laugh tracks, and it drove him crazy 
when sitcom actors couldn't deliver the lines he sweated to create. 
Of one particular performer he'd say, "She's so dumb she thinks a d-double 
entendre is a strong drink." 
"My father was always entertaining," his daughter Jill said. "At a dinner party 
he'd sneak a look at a matchbook cover he'd written words on during the day to 
remind him of jokes. When we'd see the matchbook cover come out we'd say, 'Oh, 
oh, here it comes.' Then he'd start in." 
Ragaway's last note perplexes fellow comedy writer Bill Larkin. "It didn't seem 
like Marty. He was always up. His only goal in life was to entertain. But maybe 
being up and entertaining just covered his real attitude. Who knows?" 
Humor is born in dark places of the soul, masking anguish with a tilt toward 
absurdity. The humorist defines not only human folly but his own dreadful 
inadequacies, and to come face to face with them is to look the devil in the 
eye. 
I think at the end Ragaway was observing life's ironies more than its 
futilities. He was acknowledging that we all play a game we can never win, no 
matter how well we play it. 
"Humor," he once said to me, "is based on little realities. Everything's a 
joke." 
Last week he must have realized the joke is ultimately on the clown. 
