THIS WALKING TOUR IS ALWAYS ON SHAKY GROUND 
Half a dozen turkey vultures are doing lazy loops overhead, eyeing the hilly 
Northern California countryside for a quick meal, as we follow silently behind 
our guide. 
It's a bright, sunny afternoon with only the slightest whisper of a breeze. The 
calmness, however, contrasts sharply with the jumbled and disordered terrain, 
which was once the scene of epic violence -- not of the human sort, but by the 
hand of nature -- and will surely be again. 
Watching the vultures, a visitor wonders whether these birds of prey sense the 
danger underneath them. But these reveries are disrupted by our guide. 
"And here," the guide announces cheerfully (too cheerfully, the visitor 
thinks), "you see where the earth cracked open." 
He points to a row of blue wooden posts on a grassy rise dead ahead. 
We were walking over a particularly memorable part of the San Andreas fault, 
the great geological scar that slashes like a dagger through much of 
California. 
In the early morning hours of April 18, 1906, the ground first ripped apart 
near here, unleashing the horrible events that virtually destroyed San 
Francisco some 50 miles away (as the crow, not the vulture, flies). 
About three dozen of us, of all ages, have joined our guide to walk the 
Earthquake Trail, a living textbook in seismology created by the National Park 
Service to provide some lessons about quakes, as well as to debunk the myths 
about them. 
The trail, only seven-tenths of a mile long in the very heart of the 1906 fault 
zone, is one of the less well-known delights of the Point Reyes National 
Seashore, a great natural wonderland of wildlife and scenic vistas overlooking 
the Pacific that attracts some 2.2 million visitors a year. 
Most come for such pleasures as watching the powerful surf crash onto the miles 
of beaches, or viewing the annual migration of gray whales from a famed 
century-old lighthouse atop brooding headlands, or hiking along the park's 
thickly wooded ridges and ravines. 
Yet the Point Reyes peninsula, hooking out into the Pacific like a long-noised 
gargoyle on a medieval cathedral, has another distinction. It sits on the 
eastern edge of a portion of the earth's crust known as the Pacific plate, 
whereas most of California, along with the rest of the United States, occupy 
the North American plate. 
The San Andreas fault, running along the eastern edge of the peninsula, marks 
the boundary between the two plates. 
"Here you can have one foot in North America and the other is Asia," says our 
guide with slight exaggeration as he playfully straddles the path with his legs 
far apart. 
Actually, the fault zone isn't a single, narrow crack, but a fractured 
landscape of ridges, small hills and rolling meadows hundreds of yards wide. 
But in one way, he's right. Geologically, Point Reyes isn't really part of 
North America. 
As we followed the Earthquake Trail's meanderings through the fault zone, we 
passed by old, moss-covered trees, some of them still tilted from the 1906 
shake. We paused at a meadow where the park service raises big, friendly Morgan 
horses. Then we strolled along a weathered scrap that still shows where the two 
plates moved past each other. 
There was no need for hammer and pick on this field trip; we were getting our 
geology effortlessly. The gentle path had been paved, and signs along the way 
explained the earthquake phenomenon in words, diagrams and old photos, e.g., an 
old steam locomotive tossed on its side by the 1906 jolt. 
They even provide safety tips on what to do when the earth starts shaking while 
you're at home (stand in a doorway, turn off electrical and gas lines), though, 
disturbingly, none for while you're walking along a major fault. 
The trail is open to walkers free of charge year-round, as is the rest of the 
seashore. It begins just a few steps from the seashore's Bear Valley Visitors 
Center, a splendid little natural history museum about the rich flora and fauna 
of Point Reyes, off Route 1, near the town of Olema. 
Although walkers can take the trail on their own at any time, on this day, as 
on every Sunday at 2 p.m., the National Park Service provides one of its 
ranger-naturalists as an instructional guide. 
After last October's Loma Prieta quake that shook the Bay Area, traffic on the 
trail picked up in a sudden burst of public seismic awareness, even though 
Point Reyes escaped the earth's angry wrath. 
Still, the rugged landscape along this section of the San Andreas fault is as 
good as any for learning how a quake can reshape terra (not so) firma. 
Our leader was an affable young Georgian, Ed Amerson, who admitted he was not a 
seismologist but had plainly done his homework. 
He told us that geologists, in jest, refer to Point Reyes as "an island in 
time" because it will eventually break free from California and became an 
island. "But don't worry," he added. "That won't happen for another five 
million years." 
This isn't millinerian science fiction, Amerson assured us. It's a fact of 
plate tectonics, geology's new orthodoxy, which holds that the earth's surface 
is composed of a half-dozen continent-sized plates, as well as a number of 
smaller ones. 
They move constantly, bumping and grinding against each other and slowly 
changing the planet's face, as well as creating spectacular geological 
curiosities like Point Reyes. 
For a long time, geologists wondered why the bedrock of Point Reyes was 
essentially hard granite, while just across the fault was softer, pulverized 
stuff called Franciscan sediment. Now, thanks to plate tectonics, says Amerson, 
they know why. 
Point Reyes once was part of the Sierra Nevada, east of Los Angeles, but as the 
Pacific plate slid past and under the North American plate, it ripped Point 
Reyes away from its mountainous granitic birthplace and, in the past 150 
million years, carried it 350 miles north, like a parcel on a conveyer belt. 
This slow-motion journey, as the tossed landscape shows, wasn't smooth, 
however. It progressed in fits and starts, accompanied by earthquakes. In the 
big one of 1906, Point Reyes lurched northwestward about 20 feet. 
Ever the tutor, Amerson whipped out two little kitchen sponges to demonstrate 
the plate action. 
"Let's imagine one of them as the Pacific plate and the other as the North 
American," he said as he brought the edges of the sponges firmly together. 
"The plates have bumped, just like these sponges. Normally, they're supposed to 
slide smoothly past each other, the North American plate moving in a westerly 
direction and the Pacific toward the northwest. 
"But here, along this part of the fault, they've snagged, warping the rock as 
the strain builds from the pressure of the plate movements." 
As he demonstrated with the sponges, you could see them bend and swell, storing 
up the energy from the force he exerted on them. 
Then -- snap! He suddenly let the sponges break free. The effect was so 
artfully timed that some of the visitors gasped. 
"When the rock has stored its maximum energy," he says, "the earth cracks, 
right along the plate boundary, and the ground on each side of the fault 
lurches in opposite directions to relieve the pressure. The sudden break sends 
out seismic waves in all directions. It's these waves that we feel as an 
earthquake." 
Signs along the trail tell us that we are standing on the epicenter of the 1906 
quake -- the place directly above the original break in the ground. Not so, 
according to seismologist Bruce A. Bolt of the University of California at 
Berkeley, who says that the park service is a little shaky in its facts. 
Recent investigations have located the epicenter a few miles south of Point 
Reyes, under the waters of the Pacific just outside the Golden Gate. 
But the Australian-born Bolt doesn't want to quibble with the authorities of 
his adopted country. "The earthquake walk is certainly at the site of the 
greatest measurable ground movement," he says. "Besides, it's a jolly good 
place to see what quakes can do." 
You can still see signs of that movement in an old wooden fence that had been 
built directly across the fault. One section of the fence is now offset some 16 
feet from the other, vividly demonstrating how much the plates lurched past 
each other. 
