GARDENING; 
LUMMIS GARDEN BLOOMS FOR OPEN HOUSE 
Time for a bit of horticultural free-associating. 
What do you think of when you hear the words water-conserving plants? 
Cactuses? Succulents? A sandy, austere and generally grayish landscape? 
If so, you are not alone. And the Historical Society of Southern California has 
a surprise for you. 
Its newly completed water-conserving garden, outside the Charles F. Lummis Home 
in Highland Park, is lush with shoulder-to-shoulder greenery, blossoms of many 
hues and even a lawn of sorts. The garden, designed by landscape architect Bob 
Perry, will be the featured attraction at the society's third annual Lummis 
Garden Open House, Sunday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. 
Green Despite Heat 
"This garden in the middle of August and September, when it's really hot, still 
looks green and pretty," says Suzie Chamberlain, coordinator of garden 
volunteers. It demonstrates, she says, the number and variety of attractive 
blooming plants that are drought- tolerant. 
Begin at the gate -- recently moved down Carlota Boulevard so visitors must 
walk through the garden -- and you'll see the subdued colors of the Mexican 
sage up against the shock of orange that is the California poppy. At their feet 
are delicate baby blue eyes, another spring-blooming California native. 
And that "lawn" in the center is actually dwarf pink yarrow (Achillea 
millefolium). Grown from seed, it can exist on a mere 15 minutes a week of 
summer watering and needs no watering in the winter. Left to its own, the 
yarrow would grow spiky pink flowers up to about 2 feet in height, but 
infrequent mowing can keep it down as a grass substitute. 
"We were looking for a surface you could walk on, sit on and, because the 
garden is cared for by volunteers, not have to mow on a regular basis," 
Chamberlain says. 
Non-Native Plants Too 
Though the garden contains a number of plants native to this area, it also 
includes species that originate in Mexico, the Mediterranean and South Africa 
-- "places with a climate like ours, with a long dry spell every year," says 
Chamberlain. 
The 15-minute-a-week watering standard holds for the entire 1.8-acre garden. 
As an alternative to the usual flower-bed color provided by thirsty pansies, 
marigolds and impatiens, the Lummis Home garden offers herbs (rosemary, sage, 
thyme, lavender), poppies (such as the hardy, 5-foot-tall matilija poppy) and 
easily sown wildflowers. 
Deceptively fragile-looking spring flowers adorn the abuse-tolerant rockrose, a 
low-growing shrub that can stand up to salt spray, frost, scorching heat and 
poor dry soil. "Carmel Sur" manzanita, Chamberlain says, could take the place 
of ivy as a border planting. 
For shade, consider the Western sycamore tree, the California holly (or toyon), 
the yellow-flowered sweet acacia or the singleleaf pinon pine. 
Bulbs and even ferns also are represented in the water-conserving garden. 
Most of the species in the garden can be found at or ordered through retail 
nurseries. 
Drip-Irrigation System 
Another feature of the garden is the recently completed drip-irrigation system. 
Such a setup, Chamberlain explains, can apply precious water right where it is 
needed, with virtually no evaporation. 
Simple to install, the system involves plastic tubes laid on the ground and 
covered with mulch. It is practical for plants widely separated, but not for 
those crowded together as in, say, ground cover. 
Sunday's open house celebrates completion of the 3-year project to redesign the 
major garden area. The effort was financed largely by donations from the Los 
Angeles Department of Water and Power, the Metropolitan Water District, the 
Stanley Smith Horticultural Trust and the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy. 
Mayor Tom Bradley is scheduled to speak at the open house at 1:30 p.m. The 
event also will include tours led by botanists and naturalists, sale of 
hard-to-find plants and seeds, free refreshments and sale of books on gardening 
and local history. 
Lummis Home 
The Lummis Home, called El Alisal (the Place of the Sycamore), is itself a 
chapter in Southland history. With its rough-cut beams and granite boulders, 
the structure was built on the west bank of the Arroyo Seco around the turn of 
the century by Charles Fletcher Lummis, who, having walked from Cincinnati in 
143 days, burst onto the local scene in 1885. 
Enchanted by the Spanish roots of Southwestern culture, Lummis laid the stones 
himself for the house that became a museum of the Southwest and a Spanish 
fantasy. A scholar, journalist, social activist and rabid Southern California 
booster, the eccentric Lummis surrounded himself with artists and writers at 
Saturday-night soirees in El Alisal. 
Although today it is headquarters of the historical society, visitors Sunday 
will see a house that has been largely preserved as Lummis knew it. 
The Lummis home is at 200 E. Avenue 43, Los Angeles, just off the Pasadena 
Freeway. Admission to the event is free. Information: (213) 222-0546. 
