A NEW KIND OF BACHELOR FATHER; 
WHEN SINGLE WOMEN OPT FOR PARENTHOOD, THE MAN ISN'T ALWAYS IN ON THE PLAN 
He was a Jewish/Unitarian minister hitchhiking at the corner of Venice and 
Sepulveda. And he had no idea the woman who picked him up had long sought to be 
what she considered a "politically correct" single mom. 
Before meeting him, she had even placed an ad for a man to father her child in 
the liberal Mother Jones magazine, figuring "men of the political left were 
more open to alternate forms of parenting." 
But years later, after failing to woo a set of desirable genes with her 
classified come-on, L.A. Weekly Health Editor Carolyn Reuben had given up 
classified ads for serendipity. 
She remembers reading the hitchhiker's apparel accurately: "Professional man 
temporarily stranded without a car." She pulled over. He hopped in. As she 
recounts what followed, the two 38-year-olds fell instantly, magically in lust 
-- possibly even love. 
'Knew This Was It' 
"We just both knew this was it. . . . We started trying to have a child right 
away. We were sure we were going to be a family," says Jonathan Reich, the 
hitchhiking clergyman who worked at the Unitarian Society Los Angeles West when 
the couple met in late 1985. 
By May of '86, they'd created a pregnancy. And by August, they'd split up. 
"It turned out that we didn't get along, that we could never make our 
relationship work. But she really wanted to have the baby," says Reich, now 42. 
Enter the dilemma that more and more men are facing as the biological clocks of 
their single, childless sex partners wind down. 
Consider just a few of the possible permutations when a pregnancy occurs but 
the mother wishes to remain unmarried: 
Does the father consider himself a mere sperm provider -- a surrogate father, 
as it were -- free to walk away from fatherhood and its 
legal/financial/emotional responsibilities? 
Or does he jump in, get involved in the pregnancy, childbirth and rearing of 
the child even though he may have neutral or even angry feelings for the 
mother? 
Might Prefer Self-Destruction 
How about the guy who wants to participate in fathering, but the mother would 
prefer he simply disappear or self-destruct? 
Or the man who has been asked by a woman to father a child for her, but with 
the knowledge that there will be no romantic involvement and perhaps no 
co-parenting privileges? Can he live with that initially -- and perhaps later, 
when there is a child eager to know its father? 
Nobody keeps statistics on how many men find themselves pondering these and 
other complexities of the late 20th Century, but there are some indicators that 
suggest the number is likely growing. 
UCLA's annual Southern California Social Survey found that attitudes toward 
single motherhood have loosened considerably. A whopping 50% of Southern 
California women surveyed said that, if they were to find themselves childless 
and approaching the end of their childbearing years, they would consider having 
a child without a husband or live-in partner. 
According to UCLA social psychologist Belinda Tucker, who supervised the 
marital questions area of the survey, men were not asked if they would consider 
fathering a child for a single woman outside of marriage. But after a report of 
the survey's results was recently published in The Times, Tucker received 
plenty of incensed, if informal feedback. 
"The reaction of a lot of men around here (UCLA) and a lot of people who called 
was a threatened one," she says. "They really didn't like the fact that so many 
women would say 'You're not needed.' I kind of wish now that we had asked men 
that question." 
And Dr. Kyle Pruett, a clinical professor of psychiatry at Yale University and 
author of the recently published "The Nurturing Father," reports that since his 
book has come out, "I've heard of, well, I guess the adjective is a startling 
number of stories of men who have considered themselves rather casual 
biological donors, witting or unwitting. 
"I guess the one thing that I would want to emphasize is that no matter how 
casually a man may think about this at the begining of the relationship or 
non-relationship, it comes as quite a surprise to many men to learn that a 
donation of spermatozoa often carries with it more than protein," Pruett says. 
"And that the emotional interest in the fetus, its health, its growth and 
development and its eventual birth and delivery have captivated more than a few 
of them, even when they're not emotionally involved with the women. 
"The idea that their genetic contribution takes shape in another body haunts 
many of them emotionally, many more than you would think." 
Information Found Him 
Pruett stresses that he didn't go looking for this information. It found him -- 
rather off-guard as it turned out. "I sort of bought the party line before, the 
sort of one-night-stand male sperm contribution, disappearing on the morning 
train," he admits. "It turns out to be maybe a myth we'd like to perpetuate 
because it makes the situation easier to deal with." 
In the case of the minister and the health editor, the relationship quickly 
turned disagreeable. However, both agreed they "weren't committed to each 
other, but we were both committed to the child," Reich says. Thus he attended 
natural childbirth classes with Reuben, took pictures during the birth and cut 
their daughter's umbilical cord. 
Though both parents acknowledge there were hot fights over visitation 
scheduling -- and threats of solving the problem in court -- the two eventually 
worked through their differences on their own. 
'We Healed' 
"Gradually what happened over time was that we healed from the hurt we had 
inflicted on each other," says Reich, who is a doctoral student now married to 
a professor in De Kalb, Ill., with whom he is expecting a child in November. 
In the meantime, he flies to Los Angeles every six to eight weeks to visit his 
daughter and regularly sends Reuben child support payments, "giving what I 
think is generous and what I can afford . . . it means I skip the $3.50 gourmet 
lunch in the chandelier room and make myself a sandwich." 
As for Reuben, she's pleased with the way in which the arrangement finally 
worked out and says she has been approached by several single men eager to be 
fathers asking if she knows any more women looking to become single moms. 
"What I think is absolutely necessary is not a mating service, but a referral 
service to connect the men who are longing to be fathers with the women who are 
longing to be mothers," she concludes. "If love looms, that's wonderful. But it 
doesn't have to be that way." 
Keith Vacha would agree. A gay man who lives in San Francisco, he clearly 
wasn't in love with the lesbian woman for whom he agreed to father a child. 
But he had been wanting to have a child for about 10 years. 
An Unfulfilled Need 
"I have a nurturing side of me that needs to be fulfilled," he explains. "I 
didn't believe the fact that I'm gay should be an obstacle in stopping me from 
loving a child. And having known so many people from 'broken' homes where 
there's been ugly divorce and they seemed to survive, I thought it was possible 
to have a two-household family where there was a lot of love for the child." 
After discussing this possibility with several heterosexual women, Vacha says 
he was distressed to learn that their first questions seemed to center on 
money: "How are we going to do this financially?" Vacha claims he wasn't 
opposed to contributing child support but after he gave his name to the leader 
of an East Bay group called Lesbians Considering Motherhood, he found the 
potential mothers there "more financially independent" and concerned about the 
emotional welfare of a child. 
With one of them, he wound up discussing the possibility of a co-parenting 
arrangement, a discussion that continued off and on for 2 1/2 years before it 
reached fruition. 
"We had similar temperaments. I felt we were able to resolve conflicts. She was 
actively looking for a father to be actively involved. That was the only way 
I'd do it," says Vacha, 37, a social service administrator, writer and author 
of "Quiet Fire: Memoirs of Older Gay Men." 
At-Home Project 
A simple, at-home artificial insemination was arranged, with the woman using an 
eyedropper of Vacha's sperm. "A lot of people are under the impression they 
have to go to a doctor's office when it's the oldest, easiest thing to do," he 
points out. 
(Indeed, according to Los Angeles psychologist Annette Baran, co-author of 
"Lethal Secrets, The Shocking Consequences and Unsolved Problems of Artificial 
Insemination," the practice of such at-home, low-tech artificial insemination 
has been commonplace since the late 19th Century. "We've been using it for 100 
years," she says. "We learned it from animal husbandry. You don't need any 
special equipment or training.") 
Because Vacha and the mother of their child have been open about their birthing 
and parenting arrangement, theirs is not the sort of clandestine arrangement 
chastised in Baran's book -- which argues against keeping donor insemination 
pregnancies a secret from the offspring and others. 
Not Without Problems 
But that's not to imply Vacha's co-parenting experience has been entirely 
problem-free. 
"I was involved through the entire pregnancy. I was at the birth . . . and took 
care of the baby alone when she was 6 months old," Vacha recalls, adding that 
his daughter is now 3 years old. 
"I think our problems are the same as any parents . . . trying to bring up a 
healthy child in a difficult world. You want the child to feel free and good 
about herself, for instance, and know she has unlimited potential. But at the 
same time you have to turn around and say, 'No, you can't throw things against 
the wall.' I think everyone goes through that." 
Vacha doesn't anticipate any unusual difficulties stemming from the fact that 
both the child's parents are gay. "She's growing up in a world with a lot of 
gay people and heterosexual people both," he notes. "And she goes to a school 
where there are many different kinds of parenting situations." 
Even one of Vacha's relatives who warned he'd be miserable with the arrangement 
and "stuck with all the financial responsibilities," wound up being the first 
to send him a Father's Day card. And he points to a bonus he didn't count on in 
the beginning. He and the mother of his child "have come to care for and love 
each other -- the only thing our daughter gets from us is respect and care, a 
lot of positive enforcement." 
But what about the men for whom Father's Day greetings are either nonexistent 
or excruciating reminders of battles lost, feelings ignored, rights denied? 
"For many of the guys I get (coming to United Fathers of America), becoming a 
father is not voluntary. They're not told that in the beginning," says Rod 
Bivings, president and founder of United Fathers of America, which is based in 
Los Angeles. "I have yet to get a case in which a woman has asked a man to 
father her child. Usually it stems from the normal series of (sexual) events." 
Bivings' organization represents fathers with all sorts of paternity, 
visitation and custody disputes, and he estimates that between 25% and 30% of 
the group's 1,000 paid members are single men who have fathered children the 
old-fashioned way -- through physical intimacy -- and who have then been denied 
what the organization considers to be their father's rights. 
He acknowledges that "the responsibility for birth control should belong to 
both men and women," and points out that as a result of deceptions, today's men 
are "becoming more careful about it." 
'A Very Hot Topic' 
"(The issue has) become a very hot topic," Bivings continues. "I hear about 
some of those it turns out well for, but men don't come to see me unless 
they're in a world of hurt and need a way to solve their problems. This is sort 
of like their last resort." 
One Los Angeles man in such a world of hurt says he unwittingly fathered a 
child after a brief sexual relationship with a woman. The man, who agreed to 
speak only on condition of anonymity, claims the woman broke off their sexual 
relationship after she became pregnant and eventually told him to get lost. 
He says his attorney has advised him that it might not even be worth it for him 
to gain legal visitation rights -- because the mother had demonstrated her 
willingness to lie about his conduct during court hearings, and because she 
apparently is intent on fighting an expensive, emotionally draining legal 
battle. 
Even if he won visitation rights, the man says his attorney warned him that the 
mother could continue to lie to the court about his behavior with the child, 
and he could easily face additional trauma and aggravation during the child's 
first 18 years. Or the mother could move out of state, in which case he would 
still have to pay child support -- which is automatically adjudicated with 
visitation rights -- yet have a difficult time seeing his child. 
Currently, the man, who says he was duped into fathering the child, is upset 
that he has no visitation rights and is unhappy with his attorney's advice. 
'It's Beyond Sad' 
"I could be in this for years, paying money to an attorney while paper is 
floated back and forth and I still wouldn't be able to see the child. It's 
cruel. It's beyond sad," he says. "I have to treat this as though my child is 
dead. I am in a serious period of grief and nobody cares. I love my child. I 
was trying to do something decent, being a father." 
The man says his attorney has advised him to walk away, find a wife, start a 
new life and have another child -- all for his own good. 
His response? 
"I don't even trust women anymore at the moment." 
According to Dick Woods, director of Iowa-based National Congress of Men, the 
man's situation is hardly rare. 
"I see a lot of paternity by deception," says Woods, whose group serves as a 
clearinghouse for men's rights groups such as United Fathers of America. 
"Father's rights cases have generally not done well in the courts. Probably 
half of those who have brought the cases have won some kinds of rights, but the 
father has to have the money and the stick-to-it-iveness to go through a very 
difficult process." 
For that and other reasons, Woods' organization routinely advises men not to 
participate in knowingly fathering children for single women. 
Lack of Rights Noted 
"We strongly recommend against it, mainly because of (the man's) liability and 
lack of rights," he says. ". . . First off, he is at tremendous risk of her 
quitting her job, going on ADC (Aid to Dependent Children), then if she has 
personally agreed and maybe even signed a legal paper not to come after him for 
child support -- even if that's happened, when she goes on ADC, the state will 
come after him anyway for money. That's a federal law." 
Visitation Rights 
As for state laws, Woods adds that there are wide variations among the states 
on visitation rights, paternity statutes and custody procedures. 
But frequently, amicable solutions are created outside the judicial system. One 
man who reached an out-of-court settlement for joint custody of a son he 
fathered is Bret Hampton. 
"It was sobering," says Hampton, 39, recalling the time he learned he had a 
son. "I was closing in on 30 and it came at a time when I was starting to 
wonder if I was going to be married and have kids." 
Though the mother of his son refused to even talk to him for quite a while 
after their child was born, Hampton remembers that he persistently tried to 
make peace with her and to win the right to interact with the boy, now 9. 
"Right now she and I are getting along pretty well but it's taken years to get 
to this point," says Hampton, a video editor who works in Los Angeles. 
As for his son's feelings, Hampton feels he's become comfortable with the 
arrangement: "On one hand, all he's ever known is he has two parents who don't 
live together. I think he'd like one of us to get married. He sometimes asks me 
if I'm going to get married -- or asks the person I'm dating." 
Though Hampton is obviously delighted to have a son in his life, he's adamant 
that he would never help a single woman have a child if he were asked. 
"I like kids too much," Hampton insists. "I'd want to be involved. It would 
bother me too much not to know what was happening. I think you make a mistake 
if you assume anything." 
