DESIGNERS DELIVER GOOD NEWS FOR FALL 
At the end of his show here Thursday, designer Giorgio di Sant'Angelo knelt 
down on the fashion runway, leaned into the crowd and kissed the editor of 
Vogue magazine, Anna Wintour, on the cheek. She smiled and blushed. 
That suggested something about why designers stage fashion shows. They want to 
get out the news of their latest collections, and they hope the news will be 
good. 
This season many will get their wish. Reactions have been positive to clothes 
that look fresh, but at the same time familiar. Active wear shapes -- 
especially parkas, down-filled vests, ponchos and stretch pants -- are all 
being recast in luxury fabrics for ready-to-wear dressing. They give fall 
fashion an air of excitement. 
Navajo Blanket Print Coats 
There are other themes to watch for too. Men's bathrobes inspire the Burgundy 
velvet and gold silk Jacquard coats Donna Karan is showing for evening, and the 
Navajo blanket print version Ralph Lauren offers for day. 
Color is replacing black. Not harsh, hyper-bright shades, but warm, flattering 
tones of blue, green and deeper red. A number of designers are using these 
shades for the narrow-cut suits they prefer as office wear. Calvin Klein, 
however, substitutes taupe or deep sand for black. 
White shirts are still a staple, especially for Karan and Ronaldus Shamask. 
Often they are shown tucked into narrow-leg pants. Pants have stirrups at 
Lauren, Karan and Roehm. They are cropped at the ankle at Klein and Shamask, 
for the cutting-edge silhouette. 
Short, Narrow Skirts Return 
Skirts are making a return to style, after two seasons when they were 
overshadowed by pants. Short, narrow skirts look best now. (For day, Oscar de 
la Renta and Geoffrey Beene show them above the knee, Bill Blass and Calvin 
Klein show them to the knee.) 
Ankle-length is second choice. (Shamask prefers it for day and night. Louis 
Dell 'Olio for Anne Klein shows it as often as knee-length. Isaac Mizrahi 
offers some skirts to the ankle, but more are cut above the knee.) Only 
mid-calf lengths look out-of-sync for fall. (Karan shows many at that length, 
so does Roehm.) 
The other interesting development in fashion now has to do with casual dress. 
Younger-spirited designers in particular are giving over as much as a third of 
their collection to clothes for traveling, touring, lounging, and working as a 
self-employed business person unrestricted by a corporate dress code. 
Roehm shows stretch pants, tunics, ponchos and parkas as the essence of her 
casual collection. Karan teams oversize cashmere sweaters with stretch pants, 
and often adds a Sherpa jacket or coat for her high quality, super-casual look. 
Klein shows tight, suede jeans and cable knit cashmere sweaters tied one over 
the other for expensive-looking casual wear. Marc Jacobs of Perry Ellis offers 
witty, flag-motif stoles, and suede pants tucked into thigh-high boots. 
Standouts in Mizrahi's casual collection are his strapless, tartan plaid kilt 
dresses, and his black, broadtail knapsack jacket to wear with a silk taffeta 
shirtwaist dress. He filled the deep patch pockets of the jacket with wild 
flowers for his show. 
But evening parkas are by far the most surprising fall addition, and Isaac 
Mizrahi shows them to their best advantage. The 27-year-old designer started 
the trend with his first collection, about a year ago. 
Silk Parka 
His newest designs include a satiny, sable-colored style he tosses over short, 
strapless, body-skimming dresses in the same color. And his formal wear 
includes a floor-length silk parka, worn with a white silk shirt and dazzling 
black, sequinned pants. 
Calvin Klein shows a quilted velvet parka with narrow velvet pants for night. 
Michael Kors styles parkas, as well as gray flannel sweat-shirt dresses with 
drawstring hoods, for day. 
Karan upgrades the down-filled vest for fall. Hers is Bordeaux velvet, worn 
with navy, crepe, stretch pants and an ivory silk blouse. 
It works, where some others do not. Jacobs of Perry Ellis mixes bright, satin 
down vests with strictly daytime shirts and pants. The playful yet dressy outer 
wear loses something in the translation. 
Having mastered her unique approach to day wear, Karan's evening wear is her 
more inventive group for fall. She shows slinky, elasticized-crepe dresses that 
mold to the body in a sensual way. Her bathrobe coats and smoking suits look 
rich and modern. 
Norma Kamali is also showing bathrobe coats, in embroidered velvet, 
flamboyantly oversized and reminiscent of the late Victorian era. But they 
don't quite work; they look too much like costumes. 
Kamali's strength lies in her belted, black jumpsuits with white collar and 
cuffs. They fit like unitards and look right for youthful, swift, supple 
bodies. 
Di Sant'Angelo, known for his small evening collections, drapes and knots 
fabric around the body in characteristic form for fall. His smartest daytime 
coat dress is made of a fabric he calls bonded foam that has the look and feel 
of surfers' Neoprene wetsuits. 
Super-slim model Cheryl Tiegs sat in the front row at the Di Sant'Angelo show, 
and her sort of long, lean figure is best suited to his body-contoured 
collection. 
'Blanket Dressing' 
Early in the week, audiences started talking about the "blanket dressing" seen 
on many designer runways this season. The term refers to the variety of big 
wraps worn layered over each other, or knotted over suit jackets, for day as 
well as night. 
Louis Dell 'Olio for Anne Klein put his huge shawls over tunic sweaters and 
sarong-like skirts in red or black wool, for day. Bill Blass shows enormous 
evening wraps in chiffon, over long, fluid dresses. Some have a single sleeve, 
which apparently makes them difficult to wear. Even his runway models struggled 
to keep them from twisting and tangling. 
The blanket idea makes sense for Los Angeles, where temperatures seldom require 
a heavier wrap, and driving makes it difficult to wear snug-fitting coats or 
jackets. 
Other good ideas for Southern California are the light-weight, very full shell 
coats that almost every designer includes in his or her fall collection. 
Geoffrey Beene makes the most beautiful version. His is ankle-length, tangerine 
mohair lined with black-and-tangerine gingham check taffeta. He shows it over 
black pants and a burnt orange fencing-style jacket. 
If Mizrahi is New York fashion's new young Turk, Beene is the uncontested 
master. Other daytime looks in his fall collection are built on black 
jumpsuits. He adds bolero jackets or brief, almost off-the-shoulder jackets he 
calls shrugs. Some have hoods. His daytime suits have matching shawls wrapped 
several times around the shoulders for a nose-tickling look. 
His taffeta evening skirts have hems of lingerie lace that show only in front, 
where the skirt rises slightly. And gold, lingerie lace floats to the floor, in 
an outfit with a matching hooded cape. 
Among his imaginative accessories are a glen plaid taffeta stole for day, 
black-net and lace gloves, and a confetti-dotted net stole for night. 
But the newest invention from this ingenious designer's studio is his shrug. He 
made the first one in black lace, for Glenn Close' Oscar outfit this year. 
Close was in the front row when Beene showed his remarkable fall collection. 
