LAKERS ALLOW NUGGETS TO TIE, THEN LOSE IN OVERTIME, 114-108 
Officially, this was an overtime loss for the Lakers. They played the 
five-minute extra period with every intent to beat the Denver Nuggets. But, as 
confirmed afterward, the Lakers really lost it in the final seconds of 
regulation. 
Holding a three-point lead with nine seconds to play, seemingly all the Lakers 
had to do to win was not allow a three-point basket. But the worst-case 
scenario unfolded, as Walter Davis sank a three-point shot, sending the teams 
into overtime. 
From that point, the Lakers pretty much expired. The Nuggets took control and 
posted a 114-108 victory, one in which the Lakers felt they simply gave away. 
"I think we gave them a gift," Laker Coach Pat Riley said. "It's happened to us 
a lot of times. The three-pointer was inexcusable. You don't leave a guy open 
on the perimeter." 
This was a game that meant more for the Nuggets to win than the Lakers. Denver 
is jockeying for playoff position, while Riley pretty much conceded that the 
Lakers will not catch the Detroit Pistons for the league's best record. The 
loss left the Lakers (48-22) three games ahead of the second-place Phoenix Suns 
in the Pacific Division. 
So, if the motivation was with the Nuggets, so, too, was the proper execution 
of big plays at the end. 
The Lakers, seemingly more susceptible than usual to the fatigue that hits 
visiting teams in the mile-high city, were playing without backup Mychal 
Thompson and, in the final minutes, without guard Michael Cooper, who suffered 
a bruised thigh. 
After Magic Johnson made a layup -- but missed an accompanying free throw after 
being fouled -- to give the Lakers a 97-94 lead with 37 seconds to play, the 
Nuggets scored quickly on a layup by Danny Schayes. But the Lakers got that 
back on Byron Scott's jump shot with 13 seconds to play. 
That was when the Lakers broke down. Lafayette Lever inbounded the ball to 
Schayes at the high post. Two Lakers converged on Schayes, who passed to Davis 
open on the perimeter. Davis swished a three-point shot to tie it, 99-99. 
The Lakers, however, still had a chance to pull it out in regulation. 
A.C. Green inbounded the ball to Johnson, the Lakers' designated last-second 
specialist. With Lever guarding him closely, Johnson could not shake free. 
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar approached to set a screen, but that didn't free Johnson, 
either. With time running out, Johnson flipped a pass to Abdul-Jabbar, who 
missed a 17-foot jump shot at the buzzer. 
Overtime was all Denver, as Alex English scored six of the Nuggets' first seven 
points for a 106-101 lead. The closest the Lakers would pull in overtime would 
be 106-104 after Abdul-Jabbar's three-point play. 
The Lakers made just three of seven free-throw attempts in overtime, perhaps an 
indication of their fatigue. 
Even Riley, when he emerged from the locker to meet the media afterward, gave a 
weary sigh. But his may have been more from frustration than fatigue. 
Even though the Lakers were outscored, 15-9, in overtime, Riley still pointed 
to Davis' three-point basket as the Lakers' biggest transgression. 
"Schayes was inside the three-point line, so you let him drive to the basket 
and score," Riley said. "We had a three-point lead. For some reason, our 
defense tried to help on Schayes and left their guys open. 
"This is the third time this has happened to us. We left guys open against New 
Jersey (in December, when Chris Morris' three-point basket sent the game to 
overtime) and against Milwaukee (also in December, when Craig Hodges' field 
goal won it). We can't let that happen. It's a gift." 
Johnson, who had 20 points, 17 rebounds and 15 assists, agreed. 
"We had the game," Johnson said. "But we just lost it ourselves. Any time you 
are up three points with, what, nine seconds left, you're supposed to have it. 
"We should have guarded all the perimeter guys. A basket like that cost us the 
game." 
Scott, who had 17 points, was guarding Davis on the play. He sagged inside and 
recovered too late to put a hand in Davis' face. 
Had Cooper not suffered a bruised thigh with 1:26 to play in regulation, Riley 
said he probably would have had him in for defensive purposes. 
"Coop, in that situation, would have really helped," Johnson said. "He's good 
at denying the shot." 
But the Nuggets have a multitude of three-point specialists, including Michael 
Adams, who sank four of eight three-point attempts. 
"I'm sure they wanted to go to anyone on the perimeter," Riley said. "It was 
just a defensive breakdown. It's always fatiguing coming up here. But we've got 
to forget about this and go home and play Milwaukee (tonight)." 
Laker Notes 
In addition to Magic Johnson's 16th triple-double of the season, the Lakers 
received 22 points and 13 rebounds from A.C. Green and 25 points from James 
Worthy. . . . With a basket on short jump shot with 5:46 to play in the second 
quarter, the Nuggets' Alex English passed Elgin Baylor to move into seventh 
place on the NBA's all-time scoring list. English led the Nuggets with 31 
points. 
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar was presented with a golden nugget chain and a vacation 
package to Vail as part of a halftime ceremony on the 20th stop on his farewell 
tour. Dan Issel, the former Nugget center, was the master of ceremonies. 
Abdul-Jabbar on his sky trip: "If you don't see me again during the playoffs, 
you'll see me up in the mountains trying to learn how to ski." . . . Lafayette 
Lever aggravated a pulled hamstring in Thursday night's game against Seattle, 
but played 41 minutes Saturday night and had 22 points and 12 rebounds. 
