APPROVAL NEAR FOR COLLEGE CHILD-CARE PROGRAM 
After years of delay, Glendale Community College officials this week said they 
are close to creating a preschool child-care center that would also serve as a 
teacher training and parent education facility. 
College trustees late Wednesday were expected to approve a contract to build a 
day-care center for 60 youngsters, primarily children of teachers and students 
but also for the general public. The center is scheduled to be completed by 
fall, 1990. 
"The college has been trying to get a program like this for 25 to 30 years," 
said Melita Baumann, associate professor of child development. "The need is 
dramatic." 
Survey of Needs 
The college and the Greater Glendale Child Care Council, a public advocacy 
group, are conducting a survey to determine child-care needs in the Glendale 
area. Results are expected to be released in June. Earlier studies by various 
agencies have estimated that 2,500 to 4,000 preschool children living in 
Glendale are in need of day care. 
Baumann said her phone "rings all the time" from parents in search of child 
care. 
However, she warned that the cost of the program at Glendale College may be 
high -- probably more than $100 per week per child -- because many of the staff 
will be credentialed teachers hired to train other professionals. Baumann said 
the college is attempting to seek grants and donations to reduce the cost of 
child care for low- and moderate-income parents. 
State Financing 
College officials hope that about 90% of the estimated $1-million cost of the 
child development center will be paid through state funds. A state public works 
review board is scheduled to hold a hearing Friday to determine the state's 
share of the project, said Clarence Wolfe, college director of facilities. 
He said the lowest bid for the project -- $910,383 by the general contracting 
firm of Pearson and Johnson -- is $122,000 higher than the budget approved by 
the office of the state chancellor of community colleges. 
Wolfe said that "bids came in higher than anticipated because the project was 
delayed." He said construction "is over a year behind schedule" because the 
college has encountered soil stability problems on the construction site and 
was awaiting the passage of a school bond issue last November. 
Wolfe said the facility, to be built on college-owned land at the upper end of 
the campus near Mountain Street and the Glendale Freeway, would have four 
classrooms and a central laboratory-teaching area as well as offices, play 
areas, a kitchen and restrooms. 
In all, the facility would cover more than 6,000 square feet. The college's 
preschool teaching laboratory is now housed in a 690-square-foot classroom in 
the school's administration building, Wolfe said. 
Need for Children 
Without a child-care center, the school has had "to beg, borrow and steal 
children" to study in its preschool training program, Baumann said. Students 
are assigned to work in other child-care facilities in the community to gain 
first-hand experience. 
Unlike most day-care centers that do not accept children under the age of 2 
years, 9 months, Glendale College plans to start toddlers in its program as 
young as 18 months old. Baumann said an understanding of the educational growth 
of infants will be integral to training student-teachers. 
Care of very young children will require a higher-than-normal ratio of staff to 
children, Baumann said. "We want to make sure there is a good one-on-one 
training program," she said, which accounts for part of the high estimated cost 
of day-care services. 
60 Children 
Baumann said the program initially will be limited to 15 children in each of 
four classrooms. Additional classrooms may be added later, if possible. 
Jill Larson, coordinator of parent education, said the day-care center also 
will be used for parenting classes. She said more than 500 adults are enrolled 
in 22 such classes, which are now held on the college's Montrose campus. 
