HELMSLEY ASKS THE STATE TO DROP TAX EVASION CHARGES 
A lawyer for Leona Helmsley urged a judge Thursday to dismiss state tax evasion 
charges against the self-styled hotel queen and prove that there is not "one 
law for the wealthy . . . and another for everyone else." 
Dabbing her eyes and nose with a tissue, Helmsley sobbed softly as her 
attorney, Sandor Frankel, said his client had been "ground up in the justice 
machine for nearly five years." 
Helmsley, 70, was convicted of federal tax fraud and sentenced last fall to a 
four-year prison term. The sentence has been stayed pending her appeal. 
Helmsley now faces prosecution for allegedly cheating on her state taxes. She 
is accused of disguising millions of dollars in renovations at her Greenwich, 
Conn., mansion as business expenses incurred by the hotel empire that she and 
her husband Harry run. 
Outside state Supreme Court in Manhattan, Helmsley told reporters she was being 
unfairly pursued by prosecutors because of her celebrity status. She said she 
would fight the charges and prove her innocence. 
"Enough's enough," said Helmsley. 
She burst into tears again and her team of eight lawyers and a handful of 
bodyguards rushed her toward her gray limousine. 
"I am not going to jail. I've done nothing wrong. My only crime is that I'm 
Leona Helmsley. For that I'm guilty," Helmsley said. 
Harry Helmsley, 81, who was ruled mentally incompetent to stand trial in the 
federal case, is expected to undergo a competency examination in April in the 
state case. A hearing was slated for April 30. 
On Thursday, Frankel urged Justice John Bradley to dismiss charges against 
Helmsley, saying they were improper because they grew out of immunized 
testimony she gave to a 1985 grand jury investigating sales tax evasion. He 
also said the state charges were based on the same allegations as the federal 
charges and therefore represent double jeopardy. 
He said Helmsley's conviction on federal tax charges, combined with her state 
charges on tax evasion, gives the impression "there is one law for the wealthy, 
well-known and vilified and another for everyone else." 
Frankel said the public has already gotten a clear message that tax evasion is 
wrong from the ordeal of Helmsley's federal trial and her stiff prison 
sentence. 
"I think the public on the outside looking in would say, 'It's not worth it. 
The destruction of human life -- what for?' " Frankel said. 
But Assistant Atty. Gen. Alfredo Mendez said it would be in the interest of 
justice to prosecute Helmsley to the fullest extent of the law. 
"We're talking about at least $1 million dollars. I just think about the number 
of police officers, teachers and school lunches that New Yorkers go without 
when people don't pay their taxes," said Mendez. 
The judge said he would rule on the dismissal motions May 17. 
