COLUMN ONE; 
AGONY FOR A CAMPUS: GO CO-ED?; 
A NEW WAVE OF WOMEN'S SCHOOLS IS DEBATING WHETHER TO ADMIT MEN. FOR OAKLAND'S 
MILLS COLLEGE, AND OTHERS, THE CHOICE MAY BE TO ADAPT OR FAIL. 
The elegant bell tower at Mills College survived the earthquakes in 1906 and 
1989, chiming with soothing regularity on the leafy campus. The bells still 
ring at what many educators consider to be the finest women's college on the 
West Coast, but some people now hear the tolls as mourning the end of beloved 
traditions. 
Facing declining enrollment and financial worries, Mills' trustees next month 
are expected to decide either to admit undergraduate men for the first time in 
the school's 138-year history or to begin a strong push for part-time and older 
women students. Either way, Mills will change a lot, symbolizing the situation 
of many women's colleges nationwide. 
"We must either become more attractive to a greater number of women or we must 
admit men," Mills' President Mary S. Metz said. The school wants to increase 
the number of undergraduates from the current 777 to 1,000 without dropping 
standards. In the mid-1970s, there were more than 900. 
The specter of coeducation is causing much debate and anxiety at Mills, a 
beautiful 135-acre campus that has 5,500 trees and is cut off from the 
surrounding Oakland neighborhood by a barbed-wire fence. 
"It's a very overwhelming, very emotional issue," explained Robyn Fisher, 
student body president, who said most students want Mills to remain a women's 
school. 
Although it may be of little consolation to those students, Mills is not alone 
in its dilemma. Over the last 30 years, the number of women's colleges in the 
United States has dropped from 298 to 94, according to the Women's College 
Coalition, a Washington lobbying organization. Most of those changes -- 
campuses either going co-ed, merging with men's schools, or closing -- took 
place in the late 1960s and early '70s as previously men-only colleges also 
went co-ed. Such women's schools as Vassar and Sarah Lawrence in New York state 
changed at that time. 
Now, a second, smaller wave of conversion to coeducation is occurring. Wheaton 
College in Massachusetts, Goucher in Maryland, Marymount in Virginia and 
Colby-Sawyer in New Hampshire have admitted men over the last three years. 
Mills and Chatham College, a 121-year-old school in Pittsburgh, are considering 
doing so for the fall of 1991. 
Other than Mills, only two women's colleges still exist west of the Rockies: 
Mount St. Mary's in Los Angeles and Scripps in Claremont, both of which say 
they have no plans to change their mission. Mount St. Mary's is a Catholic 
school; Mills is nondenominational. And Scripps is part of the Claremont 
college system, allowing its students to regularly take classes with men. 
If Mills goes co-ed, it would be the end of a tradition dating back to the 
founding of the school as a genteel refuge for daughters of Gold Rush 
prospectors. 
Some students are threatening to transfer and are wearing T-shirts bearing the 
slogan: "Better Dead Than Co-Ed." Professors argue about how the presence of 
men in the classroom might affect teaching and whether the school might 
actually raise its academic stature nationally by admitting men. 
"If we become co-ed like other schools, we will not necessarily be successful," 
said Barbara Li Santi, associate professor of math and computer science at 
Mills for nine years. "I don't know of students who are beating the doors down 
now to come to Mills College. To lose our distinction could make it worse." 
Moreover, she and many other teachers at Mills worry that even a small number 
of men will dominate classroom discussions and campus activities. They cite 
scholarly research showing that young women at co-ed schools tend to defer to 
men in intellectual debate while women at single-sex colleges are more likely 
to graduate and obtain advanced degrees than women at co-ed schools. Words like 
"nurturing" and "empowering" are used regularly by students, alumni and faculty 
to describe a Mills education. 
Linda Routsong, senior class president at Mills, explained: "I would not like 
to see Mills College go co-ed because I feel it's very important in the 20th 
Century for women to have a place to study without being intimidated in the 
classroom." 
Some students and teachers contend that before enrolling males, the college 
should put five years or so of added effort into recruiting female transfer 
students and older women who are resuming their educations. 
The opponents of coeducation point to mixed results among former women's 
colleges that have gone co-ed. While some of those institutions show a general 
pattern of enrollment growth and stronger finances, some have encountered 
extreme social and academic difficulties. 
However, others think a co-ed Mills could carve out a niche as the best small 
private nondenominational college on the West Coast north of Occidental in Los 
Angeles and south of Reed in Portland, Ore. Mills, they say, could build on its 
strong reputation in music, art, dance, English, education and history and 
expand into new areas such as environmental studies while attracting students 
who want an intimate campus and much faculty attention. 
"We can be a Swarthmore of the West," said Ted Thomas, a sociology professor at 
Mills for 26 years, referring to the highly regarded liberal arts college in 
Pennsylvania. Thomas would prefer that Mills remain a women's college if 
demographics were running in its favor. But he says switching to coeducation 
now appears "the least risky option." 
Besides, Thomas added, "intellectual vitality" is at stake. Many classes at 
Mills have 15 or fewer students, some as few as five. "It's nice to have small 
classes, but when some are getting down to four or five (students), it's too 
small for a good exchange of ideas," he said. 
The basic problem for women's colleges is that, according to various surveys, 
only between 3% and 10% of women who graduate from high school even consider 
enrolling at a women's school. 
"I think it is difficult to convince 17-year-olds that this is an environment 
that will educate them better," said Zina Jacque, Mills' dean of admissions and 
financial aid. "Their perception is that it's like coming to a nunnery." 
(In fact, there are 50 men among the 264 graduate students at Mills and 
undergraduates can ride a shuttle bus to take courses in the extremely social 
atmosphere at UC Berkeley. More than a third of Mills' professors are men.) 
Recruiting has been more difficult in the last few years with the decline in 
the overall college-age population, a trend expected to last until the 
mid-1990s when children of baby-boomers start to reach college age in large 
numbers. In California, the situation is especially difficult because of price 
competition from UC and Cal State. Excluding room and board, tuition and fees 
at Mills total $12,700 this year, compared to $1,700 for a state resident at a 
UC campus. 
But, according to the Women's College Coalition, full-time undergraduate 
enrollment at women's schools is up 3.6% over five years ago and part-time 
students have increased significantly. 
Meanwhile, such women's schools as Smith, Mt. Holyoke and Wellesley are doing 
fine and a few campuses such as Russell Sage College in Troy, N.Y., recently 
decided to remain single-sex by more aggressively recruiting older women. 
"We know (women's colleges) are viable. We know they can market themselves. We 
are absolutely confident of that," said coalition spokesman Peter Mirijanian. 
"When things like Chatham and Mills happen, it is a distraction we have to deal 
with. But the day we don't have a case on the merits is the day we have 
problems. I don't think we have those problems." 
However, Robert Zemsky, director of the Institute for Research on Higher 
Education at the University of Pennsylvania, disagrees. "The sort of question 
you ask is: Is the conversion of women's colleges to co-ed going to be fast 
enough that those who remain single-sex colleges retain a good share of the 
market?" Zemsky said. "Nobody's got any data to say the market will go to zero, 
but it is very difficult marketing." 
In a recent interview, F. Warren Hellman, the prominent San Francisco 
investment banker who is chairman of Mills' Board of Trustees, declined to 
state his position on coeducation in advance of the May 3 meeting when a 
decision is scheduled to be made. But many on campus believe Hellman is tilted 
toward going co-ed. 
Mills is not in a dire financial crisis, Hellman explained. In fact, its 
endowment is now about $72 million, a respectable amount for a small school and 
nearly triple what it was a decade ago. In addition, Mills has had much success 
in seeking donations to build a new library and to fund scholarships. 
But with declining enrollment, Hellman said, the school is dipping into the 
endowment too much to meet operating costs. Last year's budget was balanced by 
eliminating 17 non-teaching jobs. This year, four full-time faculty jobs are to 
be cut from the teaching staff of 167. Mills also needs $7 million to repair 
its administration headquarters, a grand Victorian building that was damaged in 
last October's earthquake. 
"I guess it's the feeling of the board that we have to make some changes while 
we are still strong in terms of a substantial endowment, a fine faculty, and 
providing a fine educational experience, rather than waiting until the college 
is in very severe financial difficulty," Hellman said. 
His critics contend that Hellman ignores the philosophical benefits to 
single-sex education. "I keep being beaten about the ears with moral issues," 
Hellman said. "But isn't another kind of moral issue whether you have some 
unbelievable asset in a jewel of a campus and you under-utilize it? Is it 
better to have no campus at all? . . . The trustees are trying to act in 
long-term interests of the college and if students want to get mad at anybody, 
they should get mad at high school students for not wanting to come to a 
women's college." 
No one expects that changing to coeducation would be easy. Zemsky, of the 
University of Pennsylvania, likened such conversions to "stepping off a 
six-foot-high diving board, knowing there is a swimming pool below you but not 
knowing how deep the water is." Other experts say it takes at least 10 years to 
work out problems and approach enrollment parity between the sexes. 
More than 20 years after going coeducational, women still outnumber men 70% to 
30% at Sarah Lawrence, while at Vassar females have a smaller edge, 55% to 45%. 
"I don't think success or failure should be based on those numbers," said 
Marilyn Katz, dean of studies and student life at Sarah Lawrence. "You should 
base it on the experience of the men, and the men here overall have had a good 
experience. I don't think we've ever been sorry about it." 
Katz, who graduated from Sarah Lawrence in 1954, said coeducation has created 
"a more charged" social atmosphere than when she was a student there. "There's 
a low level of spring fever all year long," she said. 
Goucher College near Baltimore began to enroll men two years ago. "I would be 
lying to tell you the first year was sunshine and roses," said spokeswoman Judy 
Phair. "There were some pretty tough times because some women students were 
unhappy and let the male students know it." About 30% of current freshmen there 
are men. 
Wheaton College in Norton, Mass., had a court fight with alumni donors angry 
that the school began to admit men in September, 1988. In an out-of-court 
settlement, the school returned a total of $127,000 to donors from a 
$26-million fund-raising campaign. On the positive side, applications to 
Wheaton reportedly have doubled over the last three years and enrollment has 
grown 15%. 
To accommodate men, who are outnumbered 5 to 1, Wheaton is building a new 
sports facility and buying longer beds. But the school balked at what 
administrators jokingly call "the great bathroom question." Stand-up urinals 
are not being installed in dormitory bathrooms. 
Meanwhile, life at Mills remains tense as the campus awaits the May 3 meeting. 
Counselors are planning so-called "grief therapy" sessions for students if the 
trustees vote for coeducation. The alumni office has been trying to defuse 
anger among potential donors. 
A few days ago, on the steps of the tea shop, which is the center of campus 
social life, student government treasurer Lisa Kosiewicz was selling T-shirts 
and sweat shirts. "These may soon be a collector's item," she explained. On the 
front of the shirts was the school motto -- "Mills College: Not a Girl's School 
Without Men, but a Women's College Without Boys." 
Business was brisk. 
