LATE-NIGHT WORK MAY SLOW VENTURA FREEWAY; 
TRAFFIC: THREE OF FOUR LANES MAY BE CLOSED AS THE ROADWAYS ARE WIDENED. 
REPAVING AREAS WILL BE INDICATED. 
Ventura Freeway motorists face possible late-night traffic slowdowns on 
weekends for the coming year when three of the freeway's four lanes may be 
closed as part of a $61-million widening project. 
Starting in Van Nuys this weekend, workers will repave a 1.5-mile stretch of 
the freeway in the Sherman Oaks area with reinforced concrete. Three westbound 
lanes between the Haskell Avenue and Balboa Boulevard exits will be closed from 
11 p.m. Friday to 10 a.m. Saturday, and from 11 p.m. Saturday to 11 a.m. 
Sunday. The westbound Balboa Boulevard on-ramp also will be closed during the 
same hours. 
"We expect congestion that may take a few minutes longer for the average 
motorist to get through," said Jack Hallin, Caltrans' deputy director for 
construction and maintenance. "We've had very good experiences the last couple 
years when the first phase of the project was under construction. Of course, 
the trade-off is this work is needed to provide an additional lane in each 
direction. 
"We expect the added lanes will provide some relief in traffic for a few years 
but the way development out in Ventura County is going, eventually this lane 
will fill up too." 
The freeway also may be closed weeknights as work continues to add a new lane 
to each side of a 15-mile stretch between Woodland Hills and the Hollywood 
Freeway in Universal City. It is the last phase of the Ventura Improvement 
Project, begun in 1988 with road renovations in Agoura Hills. The project is to 
be finished by September, 1991. 
Hallin said past road closures did not cause major backups because forewarned 
motorists used surface streets. He said he expects the coming closures to slow 
motorists on summer weekend nights and mornings, but said traffic backed up 
only a mile during past closures. 
"There were backups, but because the public got the information, they tended to 
stay away or go through earlier." 
About once a week, Caltrans will release information on the times and locations 
of freeway closures. Warnings, including electric signs that flash messages, 
will be set up alongside the freeway to alert drivers to closures and advise 
them on alternate routes. Motorists may call 1-800-CALL-VIP for up-to-date 
information on closures. 
