HIGHWAYMEN : ON THE ROAD AGAIN; 
CASH, NELSON, JENNINGS AND KRISTOFFERSON -- THE LAST OF THE NASHVILLE LEGENDS? 
-- TOUR WITH HARD-EDGED BRAND OF COUNTRY MUSIC 
This is the last cowboy song 
The end of a hundred year waltz 
The voices sound sad as they're singing along 
Another piece of America's lost. 
 -- "The Last Cowboy Song" by Ed Bruce and Ron Peterson 
Standing next to each other on stage at the Rosemont Horizon Arena, Willie 
Nelson, Waylon Jennings, Johnny Cash and Kris Kristofferson look like -- and 
represent -- a living Mt. Rushmore of country music. 
Survivors of a collective 12 marriages, more than 115 years on the road and 
untold bottles of whiskey and pills, these legendary veterans of America's 
honky-tonks and highways have put their wild times behind them and now call 
themselves the Highwaymen -- after a Jimmy Webb song that was the title of 
their million-selling joint album in 1985. 
For years, however, they were known in Nashville as "outlaws" because of their 
renegade lifestyles and artistic independence -- their refusal to tailor their 
music to bland, crossover-pop guidelines that rob country music of its 
tradition and soul. 
Rather than dance to Nashville's tune, each of the four introduced his own 
beat. They wore their hair long, had as much of an ear for Bob Dylan as for 
Hank Williams, courted young rock audiences as well as older country ones and 
put together ambitious concept albums rather than just three-minute jukebox 
singles. 
So, it was no surprise that the nearly 10,000 people in the Rosemont Horizon 
audience -- teen-agers to grandparents -- responded wildly at the first notes 
of their songs about restless idealism and troubled times. 
But there was a melancholy edge to the first-ever tour by the four veteran 
singer-songwriters. While celebrating the great country-music tradition, the 
shows also raised questions about the tradition's future. 
Country music continues to develop best-sellers, but it hasn't produced a male 
artist of Mt. Rushmore stature since Nelson, Jennings, Kristofferson and Merle 
Haggard arrived in the late '60s. (Emmylou Harris and Dolly Parton are two 
female greats from the late '60s and '70s). 
Instead of strong individuals singing meaningful songs, the top of the charts 
is generally filled now with creditable vocalists who either imitate the old 
country greats or bury all traces of emotion under lush arrangements in hopes 
of another "Urban Cowboy" crossover to the pop market. 
Is another piece of America being lost? 
"I wonder about that," Cash said shortly after the Rosemont Horizon concert. 
"There hasn't been a new Kristofferson in 20 years, or a new Nelson or Jennings 
. . . someone who made a difference in the business . . . someone who came 
along stepping out where no man has gone before in our business. 
"I think it is the 'Urban Cowboy' syndrome, Nashville (record executives) still 
trying to sell country records to the people who are buying cowboy boots in New 
York City. I worry about it a lot, but don't like to think of this tour as a 
last round-up. I'd like to believe it's an inspiration, a new beginning." 
It's a measure of people who don't understand 
The pleasures of being in a hillbilly band. 
I got my first guitar when I was 14 
Now I'm over 30 and I'm still wearing jeans. 
 -- "Amanda" by Bob McDill 
Jennings, a Buddy Holly protege who became arguably the most dynamic country 
singer of his generation, was in his late 30s when he recorded "Amanda" in 
1974, and he's proud that the lyrics still apply. He's over 50 now, but still 
wearing jeans. 
"The pleasures of being in a hillbilly band?" he said, repeating the reporter's 
question as he waited outside a Chicago hotel in his shiny Silver Eagle bus for 
the ride to Detroit, where the Highwaymen were to perform next. 
You'd think that Jennings would have an answer ready after singing the song 
some 2,000 times. But he paused. 
"I think it's the freedom," he said tentatively, as if he's never been able to 
adequately define what being a country music star means to him. 
"Being in a cowboy band is a way of getting through life without having to give 
in -- and the jeans is part of it. People used to tell us to dress differently, 
sing differently, make records differently because that was the way to get 
ahead in Nashville," Jennings continued. 
"But we weren't interested in just getting ahead. I didn't see why a country 
singer couldn't do a Beatles song as well as a Hank Williams song, or why we 
had to wear sequins on our pants. Johnny and Willie and Kris all felt the same 
way and that made us outsiders. But we fought and we won." 
Like Cash, however, Jennings worries about some of the trends in country music 
these days. 
"It's getting to sound like rock 'n' roll did in the '70s, when everything 
seemed mass production -- no more personality or character," he said. "Every 
record is starting to sound alike." 
In separate interviews, Kristofferson and Nelson also complained about country 
music's tradition and spirit being endangered by record company executives and 
radio programmers who want safe, easily digested records rather than 
challenging or adventurous ones. 
Not everyone in country music agrees. 
A few country music executives say privately that they suspect an element of 
sour grapes in the Highwaymen's complaints about the state of country music 
today. 
"No one can ever take away what Willie and Waylon and Johnny and Kris did for 
country music," said one record man who asked not to be quoted because he 
considers himself a friend of the musicians. "But times change. New favorites 
emerge and that's what happened with them. 
"Their tour is an example," he said. "They used to be able to headline arenas 
by themselves, but they have to join together to sell that many tickets. 
They'll still have hit records, but they won't be the force anymore that they 
once were. Nobody stays on top forever." 
Lon Helton, country editor of the trade magazine Radio &amp; Records, thinks 
many of the Highwaymen's complaints about the slick "Urban Cowboy" syndrome are 
out of date. 
"No question about it, the 'Urban Cowboy' days (of the early '80s) gave us a 
lot of overproduced music, but things have changed greatly. There's an emphasis 
again on traditional artists and I feel the envelope of country music is wider 
and deeper than it has ever been." 
Helton and others interviewed nominated numerous artists when asked about 
people who might eventually be considered the equal of a Cash or a Nelson. 
Among those named: Randy Travis, Clint Black, Kathy Mattea, Dwight Yoakam, 
Garth Brooks, Ricky Van Shelton, the O'Kanes. 
Ironically, Lyle Lovett and k. d. lang, who won Grammys this year for best male 
and female country vocalists, were also cited (see box on Page 77), but several 
experts questioned whether the two artists are really committed to country. 
No one, however, came even close to suggesting that any contemporary artist yet 
approaches the influence or talent of any of the Highwaymen. 
Larry Daniels, general program manager of award-winning KNIX-FM/KCW-AM radio in 
Phoenix, declared, "I have great expectations for the future of country music, 
however, today's breed of artists are sound-alikes. 
"When you look at Johnny Cash, Kristofferson, Willie and Waylon, each has such 
an individuality. There's no way you could mistake them. They all helped 
reshape country music. No one since can really make that claim." 
The teaming of those four singers on the tour -- which coincided with the 
release of the "Highwayman 2" album -- was especially touching for Cash's wife, 
June Carter, a descendent of the original Carter 
Family -- the first group to be elected to the Country Music Hall of Fame. 
Carter has seen all the greats of the music since the '40s -- sharing a stage 
with everyone from Williams to Presley, but this tour has special meaning for 
her. 
"There's something just warm and good about this show," she said during a sound 
check for the Chicago show. "You can tell they're friends and that they are 
having fun. I also see survivors and it it almost makes me cry. I want to say, 
'Thank you God,' . . . They've all been through hell and fire water. 
"But I always knew they'd all be all right because I think God touches certain 
people . . . that He gives them the talent and the experience so that they can 
help other people with their music . . . help heal the heartbreaks and lift the 
spirit." 
He's a poet, he's a prophet 
He's a pusher, he's a pilgrim 
And a preacher and a problem when he's stoned. 
He's a walkin' contradiction 
Partly truth and partly fiction 
Takin' every wrong direction 
on his lonely way back home. 
 -- "The Pilgrim: Chapter 33" by Kris Kristofferson 
Kristofferson sometimes seems the "baby" of the Highwaymen because he takes 
such good care of himself physically, running and working out with weights. Yet 
at 53, Kristofferson, who is as well known as an actor as a musician because of 
roles in such films as "A Star is Born" and "Heaven's Gate," is a year older 
than Jennings and only slightly younger than Nelson (56) and Cash (58). 
Another reason Kristofferson appears part of a different generation is that he 
was the last of the four to arrive in Nashville. He's also separated from the 
others by background. Nelson, Jennings and Cash grew up in small towns in Texas 
(Nelson and Jennings) or Arkansas (Cash), dreaming about following the mournful 
wail of the passing trains to the big city. 
Kristofferson, on the other hand, didn't grow up in rural isolation -- or 
poverty. He was the quintessential All-American boy: the son of an Air Force 
general, a Golden Gloves boxer, a Rhodes Scholar, a teaching post at West 
Point. 
But he turned his back on it all in the mid-'60s and went to Nashville to write 
songs. To support himself and to be close to the singers he wanted to pitch, 
Kristofferson worked as a janitor at Columbia Records' recording studio. 
Bill Ivey, executive director of the Country Music Foundation, says one of 
Kristofferson's greatest contributions to country music was his infusion of the 
urban perspective into what had been chiefly a rural tradition. 
"Kris wrote about the everyday concerns of adults living in a kind of urban 
society and dealing with problems of relationships in really tough, hard-edged 
songs. As a writer, he probably had as great an impact on Nashville as Hank 
Williams did. 
"That's the quality most needed in Nashville today -- that hard-hitting kind of 
against-the-grain, never-say-die spirit that Kristofferson and Cash and the 
others had." 
Cash, Jennings and Nelson were already heroes to Kristofferson by the time he 
settled in Nashville. He not only tried to write some songs tailored for their 
styles, but also used them as subject matter for songs. 
In songs such as "The Pilgrim: Chapter 33" and "Sunday Mornin' Comin' Down," he 
wrote about the self-destructiveness and idealism of the Nashville music scene 
in the late '60s 
Recalling that period, Kristofferson said: "I fell in with a group of writers 
in Nashville that you might call the underground, . . . people who thought 
songs were something meant to be taken seriously. 
"I can remember we would stay up for days after days at a time, take whatever 
you needed to keep going. You had a tradition of crazy poets and artists. To 
think that Hank Williams did everything he did and then he died when he wasn't 
even 30 doesn't tell you to sit back and pace yourself." 
If the Outlaws once flirted with danger, times have changed. They are healthy 
now. Jennings, who underwent triple bypass surgery in 1988, carries an exercise 
bike with him on the bus. Cash, who underwent double coronary artery bypass the 
same year, praises the virtues of a fruit-protein drink he enjoys each morning 
for breakfast. 
One of the joys of Nelson's day is holding his 15-month-old son, Luke. 
Kristofferson jogs every morning. The tour too is a real family affair, with 
children and all the wives -- or, in Nelson's case, his steady companion and 
Luke's mother, makeup artist Angie D'Angelo. 
Enthused about the response on the brief Highwaymen swing, the four singers are 
now thinking about a West Coast tour, possibly in the fall. 
Amanda, light of my life 
Fate should have made you 
A gentleman's wife. 
 -- "Amanda" by Bob McDill 
Jennings' bus driver is named Steve Miller, but everyone calls him Dog, a 
nickname he inherited from his father. "I started out as Pup for years," he 
said with a touch of pride. 
It was just after 1 a.m. and Dog was waiting for the signal from the drivers in 
Nelson's and Kristofferson's buses that they were ready to roll to the next 
city. Cash prefers to sleep in the hotel, then travel by bus to the next city 
in the morning. The others, however, like the road late at night when 
everything's dark and mysterious and a bit more romantic. 
"What's holding us up?" Jennings asked the driver, who explained that the crew 
was still loading some equipment on another bus. 
The customized buses -- which cost between $300,000 and $500,000 and get about 
five miles per gallon -- travel together, out of a spirit of kinship and so 
that help is available in case of trouble. 
Jennings is a ruggedly handsome man with a surprisingly quick humor and a 
playful, puppy-dog disposition -- now that he has bid farewell to the demons 
that possessed him during his pill days, a time when even his friends sometimes 
stepped back and gave him room when he approached. 
The road late at night is a good time for reminiscing, and Jennings talked 
easily about the old times as the bus moved down the highway. He talked about 
the time when he first came to Nashville in the mid-'60s in a new yellow 
Cadillac. He put 300,000 miles on the car touring before stepping up to an old 
Dodge motor home. 
But he mainly talked about people -- how he roomed briefly with Cash, a teaming 
that generated tales of wild times that are legendary in country music. Often 
high on pills, both men, the story goes, would kick down the apartment door as 
often as unlock it because they'd lose their keys. 
Jessi Colter, Jennings' wife for just over 20 years and a singer-songwriter who 
had a Top 10 pop-country hit in 1975 with "I'm Not Lisa," sat next to her 
husband on one of the padded seats near the front of the bus. 
Almost an hour after discussing the line in "Amanda" about the joys of being in 
a hillbilly band, Jennings returned to the song. "You know what other line hits 
me every time I sing it? The one about a gentleman's wife. I think of Jessi. 
"She was what made me finally quit (drugs). I looked at her face one day and I 
could see what I was doing to her, the pain I was causing. Nothing else had 
been enough. . . . The fact that I almost ruined my voice, that I couldn't even 
see straight some nights on stage." 
None of the Highwaymen likes to talk about leaving the road, but Jennings seems 
the one who might be able to live easiest without it. He says he usually gets 
restless after a few weeks at home, but he also misses his 10-year-old son, 
Shooter. He hopes to concentrate on summer tours so that he can bring Shooter 
along, he says. 
"It's funny how your dreams and goals change over the years," he said. "You 
know what my ambition is now? I want to live to see what he becomes. All of my 
other children are grown now and doing well, but there is something special 
about him. I guess it's the fact that I had him so late in life that I realized 
I have to give him a lot real quick." 
 On the road again 
 Just can't wait to get on the road again 
The life I love is making music with my friends 
 And I can't wait to get on the road again 
 -- "On the Road Again" by Willie Nelson 
Gates Moore -- "Gator" to his friends -- didn't like the way ice was forming on 
the side mirrors the next night as he steered Nelson's bus, the "Honeysuckle 
Rose," from Detroit to Minneapolis. 
If the temperature on this chilly, late-night run dropped even another degree 
or two, Gator -- who has driven Nelson's tour bus for almost 10 years -- feared 
the roads would become so treacherous that he'd have to reduce his speed to 20 
m.p.h. or less, which could add four to five hours to the more than 12-hour 
journey. 
Back in the lounge area, Nelson, who spends more than 200 days a year on the 
road, didn't care if the trip took a few more hours. He's more comfortable on 
the bus than he is in hotel rooms. In fact, he often stays out in the bus in 
the parking lot rather than go into the hotel with his band members, most of 
whom travel on a separate bus. 
He pulled a videocassette from a shelf and slipped it into the VCR. "This is a 
promotional tape that explains the Cowboy Channel that we're hoping to put on 
the air this fall," he said. 
Against a fanfare of music, the narrator's voice declared: "The Cowboy Channel 
is for the free spirit in all of us . . . from the back roads to the board 
rooms, Americans are celebrating their heritage." 
The proposed cable channel's lineup will include old Western TV shows, 
including "The Rifleman" and "Bonanza," as well as original music programming. 
Cowboys were Nelson's first heroes -- symbols during his childhood almost 50 
years ago in Abbott, Tex. of an independence and freedom that exempted adults 
from the routine of regular, 9-to-5 jobs. 
But cowboys had largely disappeared from the American scene by the time Nelson 
was old enough to strap on spurs, so he turned in the late '50s to what looked 
like the next best thing. He became a country-music singer. 
Nelson had some early success, writing such hits as "Crazy" for Patsy Cline and 
"Night Life" for Ray Price, but he found that the hard-core emotion of early 
heroes like Hank Williams and Lefty Frizzell was no longer in vogue in 
Nashville by the time he arrived there in the early '60s. 
The pop-country Nashville sound, with its lush strings and soothing, anonymous 
background vocals, was prized on record because it had the best chance of 
crossing over into the pop market. 
But Nelson helped country regain its passion and emotion. He gave up on 
Nashville in the late '60s, returning to Texas where he built a 
redneck-longhair coalition that was the core of the "Outlaw" movement. His long 
hair, jeans and red bandanna on stage still reflect the cross-cultural mix of 
those days. 
Nelson has enjoyed the best record sales in recent years of any of the 
Highwaymen, but even his are well below what they were for much of the '70s and 
early '80s, when concept albums such as "The Red Headed Stranger" and 
"Stardust" were multimillion-sellers. 
In an effort to rebuild his momentum, Nelson has gone along with Columbia 
Records' desires to make his music sound a bit more polished. He in effect 
turned creative control of his next scheduled album over to an old pal, veteran 
producer Fred Foster, and simply went in and did the vocals. 
Bob Montgomery, a Columbia Records executive in Nashville, is delighted with 
the results. He thinks there may be five hit singles in the collection. 
Nelson, however, seemed a bit uncertain as he listened to the record on the 
bus. He wondered if some of the character of his music hadn't been sacrificed. 
When the album ended, he replaced it in the tape deck with another album -- a 
collection of old country standards that he shelved, he said, because he didn't 
sense any interest in it by Columbia. He seemed more moved by the second tape 
and spoke about someday releasing it, perhaps on his own label. 
When that tape ended, Nelson stared through the window, into the darkness. 
Does he ever get tired of all the bus trips and all the nights on the road? 
"No way," he said quietly. "It's like that Billy Joe Shaver line, 'Movin's the 
closest thing to being free.' I think there's some truth in that. I've never 
stayed in one place for long. I worked a lot of sit-down jobs in the early days 
out of necessity, but I was always wishing that Hank Thompson or one of those 
big bands would hire me so I could step onto the bus with them. . . . and I've 
never wanted to get off since." 
But if this world keeps on a turnin' 
For the better or the worse 
And all he ever gets is older and around 
From the rockin' of the cradle 
To the rollin' of the hearse 
The goin' up was worth the comin' down. 
 -- "The Pilgrim: Chapter 33" by Kris Kristofferson 
Johnny Cash is known in country music as the Man in Black because he favors 
black shirts and pants on stage to underscore his support for the underdog. But 
he was wearing a green shirt as he sat in his Minneapolis hotel room just 
before noon the day of a show at the Met Center. 
A portable word processor was by his side, rather than a guitar. His jaw was 
severely swollen, the aftermath of some dental work done before the show. 
"I'm writing a book," he said in that deep, distinctive Southern drawl. "Got 
about 120 pages done on that word processor. I love that thing. I wrote my 
other two books by hand and it was like carving in stone. 
Though Cash came out of Memphis' Sun Records in the late '50s with Elvis 
Presley and Carl Perkins, he stayed with country rather than move into rock 
because he had grown up idolizing country singers Hank Williams and the late 
Jimmie Rodgers. 
But he took country music in new directions, mixing elements of folk and blues 
as he tried to capture in song elements of the working man's life in this 
country. 
"I wonder what would happen if I were starting out today in the music 
business," he said. "I think the only job I'd be able to get would be singing 
in a coffee house somewhere because that's where I could sing songs that 
mattered to me. I sure couldn't get into singing most of the things you hear on 
the radio." 
Cash paused as his wife, June Carter, handed him a glass of his favorite 
protein drink. 
"I hope this tour is going to make a difference in our business," he said, 
finally. "Sometimes I feel the people in charge of this business today are 
looking for someone who looks good in a video when they should be looking for 
someone who has something real to say. 
"You've got 33 songs on the show and I think they are all important. The 
reviewer in Detroit said something about it being a nostalgia thing, but it 
really isn't. The songs are just as now and as alive as they ever were because 
a good song is about real life and real emotions and those things don't get out 
of date." 
