HEALTH; 
NEW FRONTS IN THE AIDS WAR ; 
AN ACTIVIST GROUP FOR THE '80S AIMS TO 'SHAME PEOPLE INTO ACTION' 
Peter Staley, a $200,000-a-year bond trader, was on his way to work on Wall 
Street one morning when he ran across a group of boisterous demonstrators. 
Many carried black signs bearing pink triangles -- the symbol of Nazi 
oppression of homosexuals -- and the words "SILENCE = DEATH." Others dramatized 
their rage at the slow testing of potential drugs for acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome by "hanging" an effigy of U. S. Food and Drug 
Administration chief Dr. Frank Young. A handful blocked traffic on lower 
Broadway and were arrested. 
"ACT UP! FIGHT BACK! FIGHT AIDS!" the 250 men and women shouted. "ACT UP! FIGHT 
BACK! FIGHT AIDS!" 
"That night, when I turned on the TV, I was blown away by how they were able to 
transmit their anger to an entire nation," said Staley, diagnosed with an 
AIDS-related condition in 1985. "I decided that these were my people." 
That was two years ago. Staley, 28, since has left Wall Street to become the 
unpaid fund-raising chairman of the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, a 
burgeoning alliance of elite professionals and street activists "united in 
anger and committed to direct action to end the AIDS crisis." 
The group includes art directors who design eye-catching posters, television 
producers who teach demonstrators to talk in "sound bites" and lawyers who 
defend group members arrested for acts of civil disobedience. There is even a 
pharmaceutical chemist, Dr. Iris Long, who critically analyzes research 
protocols for clinical trials of experimental drugs. 
Taking Fight to Streets 
At a time when other AIDS groups lobby quietly behind the scenes or tend to 
dying patients, ACT UP is taking the AIDS battle into the streets. Its members 
say they are fed up with a system they are convinced is not doing all it can to 
prevent the carnage. 
Its activities range from guerrilla theater -- tossing condoms at officials who 
oppose safe-sex education, say, or staging "die-ins" at offices of companies 
making exorbitant priced drugs -- to elaborately choreographed acts of civil 
disobedience like last week's siege of New York's City Hall, where 200 were 
arrested. 
ACT UP has supporters and detractors among other AIDS activist groups and the 
public. Critics say its tactics may do as much harm as good by alienating 
people. 
"We are not out to make friends," Staley said. "We are out to shame people into 
action." 
As the movement has grown, it has come to encompass women, blacks and Latinos, 
as well as the gay white men who launched the group two years ago. "We have 
tapped into the fear, anger and grief surrounding the epidemic, and have turned 
it into action," said Avram Finkelstein, the art director who designed ACT UP's 
SILENCE = DEATH logo. 
Life-and-Death Stakes 
It is as if the passion and activism of the '60s have been updated for the 
careerist and entrepreneurial decade of the '80s. And it all comes with an 
intensity of energy that could only be justified by the life-or-death stakes. 
"I am getting tired of candlelight vigils when, in fact, blow torches may be 
necessary," said Mark Sikorowski, 37, a managing partner of a New York design 
firm. Actually, while ACT UP members court arrest, the group eschews violence, 
preferring nonviolent civil disobedience in the Gandhi tradition. 
Before last week's demonstration in New York, its biggest action occurred in 
October, when demonstrators surrounded and shut the FDA headquarters in 
Rockville, Md., and 187 people were arrested. 
Born, appropriately, in New York City, ACT UP now has chapters in two dozen 
cities and perhaps 5,000 adherents who regularly attend meetings and take part 
in its actions. 
Trying to Change System 
"We come from the system that we are trying to change," explained Ken Woodard, 
an art director for DDB Needham Worldwide who designs advertisements for 
Volkswagen and Seagrams by day and for ACT UP by night. 
Though of the system, ACT UP's members work within and outside the system to 
achieve group goals. ACT UP's initial goal was to increase availability of 
experimental treatments to people with AIDS and those infected with the virus. 
More recently, the group has sought better prevention and treatment services 
from cities like New York. 
Woodard's latest creation for ACT UP, which ran as a full-page ad in last 
week's Village Voice, is an arresting portrait of New York Mayor Edward I. Koch 
in front of a sea of graves. "What does Koch plan to do about AIDS?" the ad 
asks. "Invest in marble and granite." 
Koch has drawn the activists' ire for refusing to meet with them in the 
epidemic's early years and for presiding over a crumbling health-care system in 
which patients must sometimes wait days for a bed in overcrowded hospitals. 
Impact of the Group 
While ACT UP has been unable to bring forth a cure for AIDS, whose death toll 
is approaching 50,000 in this country, some of its chapters around the country 
have started to have an impact: 
 -- In Los Angeles, the County Board of Supervisors voted to speed creation of 
a 20-bed AIDS ward at County-USC Medical Center after ACT UP staged a 
seven-day, around-the-clock vigil at the hospital. 
 -- In San Francisco, producers of the television drama "Midnight Caller" 
revised a script after ACT UP disrupted filming an episode that activists 
claimed would incite violence against gays. 
 -- In Boston, the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. reversed its policy 
and began paying for treatments of aerosol pentamidine to prevent pneumocystis 
pneumonia, the biggest killer of AIDS patients, after ACT UP members blocked an 
entrance at the insurer's headquarters. 
 -- And in New York, a sit-in at the offices of a Japanese pharmaceutical firm 
ensured that supplies of a potentially promising anti-viral drug sold over the 
counter in Japan would continue to flow to the U.S. The group's ubiquitous 
posters and stickers have also forced into the public consciousness an epidemic 
that most New Yorkers would rather not think about. 
Altered AIDS Debate 
Perhaps more importantly, ACT UP has helped to alter terms of the national 
debate on AIDS. "We have refocused the discussion to the rights of people with 
AIDS to gain access to drugs and decent health care," said Ann Northrop, a 
former CBS News producer and ACT UP member who trains fellow activists to 
deliver pithy sound bites. 
Indeed, earlier this year, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the National 
Institute on Allergies and Infectious Diseases, took the unprecedented step of 
publicly urging the FDA to ease its restrictions on a pair of drugs that appear 
to prevent AIDS patients from going blind. 
"You had Tony Fauci, the nation's top AIDS official, sounding like ACT UP," 
said Steve Morin, an aide to Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-San Francisco). 
The FDA has also unveiled reforms aimed at speeding drugs to critically ill 
patients, though activists claim the changes are largely cosmetic. 
Though mainstream AIDS groups sometimes cringe at ACT UP's confrontational 
tactics, especially its penchant for personal attacks, they generally support 
it. 
"The people with the power to change things must be made to know the extent of 
the anger and sadness and frustration," said Dr. Mathilde Krim, the founding 
chair of the American Foundation for AIDS Research. "In a democracy, it is 
almost a necessity, a duty, to speak out." 
'Rocks the Boat' 
Urvashi Vaid, communications director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force, added: "There's a certain complacency that sets in as the epidemic 
drones on and on. ACT UP rocks the boat, and that is good. But tactics that 
confront and provoke can alienate too." 
FDA chief Young -- who was hanged in effigy at ACT UP's first rally two years 
ago -- has mixed feelings about the group. "On one hand, seeing demonstrators 
can make people realize some of the deep, deep concerns," he said. "I worry, on 
the other hand, that scientific decisions won't be made objectively if they are 
subjected to political pressure. And that might slow things down." 
Still, he said, he fully understands the demands of AIDS patients and people 
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus for access to experimental 
drugs. "I had a melanoma myself. If it ever mestatasizes (spreads), do I want 
to have access to experimental drugs? Yes." 
ACT UP traces its roots to March 10, 1987, when playwright and activist Larry 
Kramer delivered a fiery speech to about 70 people at the Gay and Lesbian 
Community Center as part of its monthly speakers series. He had long felt that 
the gay community's political energy was being sapped by grief and denial. His 
goal was to shatter denial about with the magnitude of the epidemic -- with a 
sledgehammer, if necessary. 
"Two-thirds of this room could be dead within five years," Kramer thundered. 
"How many dead brothers have to be piled up in front of your faces in a heap 
before you learn to fight back and scream and yell and demand and take some 
responsibility for your own lifes?" 
Politicized Gay Men 
While Kramer supplied the rhetoric, art director Finkelstein had begun a 
separate effort to politicize gay men using visual imagery. He and a group of 
five friends came up with the idea of using the pink triangle, which 
homosexuals were forced to wear in Hitler's concentration camps, over the words 
SILENCE = DEATH. 
When Finkelstein's group learned about ACT UP, the two groups joined forces. 
ACT UP printed 1,000 SILENCE = DEATH buttons for $160 and sold them for $1 
apiece, clearing an $840 profit, "enough to finance a good-sized demo," 
Finkelstein noted with satisfaction. 
"The logo has turned out to be quite marketable," said Staley, the former Wall 
Street bond trader. "We've put it on T-shirts, sweat shirts and, now, tank 
tops." 
Staley has used his financial acumen to build ACT UP into a $300,000 a year 
group, deriving roughly equal amounts from merchandising, direct mail and 
benefits and foundation grants. 
More New Members 
The group is constantly renewing itself with new members. In New York, about 
4,000 people are on ACT UP's mailing list and 300 to 400 attend its weekly 
meetings, where chaos often reigns; ACT UP has no president or board of 
directors and tries to operate by consensus. 
Meeting are sometimes punctuated by the announcement that a member has died, 
reminding people why they are there. 
"I am HIV-positive," said Gregg Bordowitz, who trains ACT UP members for civil 
disobedience, "and I feel, very simply, that a war is being played out in my 
body. 
"One of the ways I can wrest power from that situation is to literally put my 
body on the line, to be arrested. So let them drag me through the streets, take 
my fingerprints, put me in court. Because I am not going away." 
