SCIENTISTS GROW FRUSTRATED OVER FUSION CLAIM 
Scientists at major research institutions throughout the country are growing 
increasingly frustrated over their inability to replicate a supposedly simple 
experiment that purportedly achieves nuclear fusion at room temperature. 
Although there have been scattered confirmations of parts of the experiment 
announced a month ago at the University of Utah, no U.S. laboratory has been 
able to verify the entire experiment. Not even one of the major research 
laboratories best equipped to repeat the experiment has succeeded. That 
includes national laboratories at Los Alamos, Brookhaven and Livermore that are 
in the forefront of energy research. 
Doubts Remain 
That track record is why many of the nation's top scientists remain doubtful 
that B. Stanley Pons of the University of Utah and Martin Fleischmann of the 
University of Southampton, England, really did achieve fusion in a flask, as 
they claimed on March 23. 
At this point, no matter which way it turns out, this scientific mystery will 
go down as one of the most unusual chapters in the history of science. 
Either Pons and Fleischmann, both of whom have solid reputations in the field 
of electrochemistry, have committed a blunder of extraordinary proportions, or 
the best and the brightest minds in energy research have been befuddled by an 
experiment that looks so simple it would not be a serious challenge for a 
freshman chemistry student. 
Recently, a team at Stanford University announced that it has detected excess 
heat that cannot be caused by a chemical reaction, and therefore is most likely 
nuclear in nature, and another team at the University of Florida has detected 
significant amounts of tritium, a hydrogen isotope that is produced in fusion 
reactions. 
But those claims of success only add to the frustration of other scientists who 
have been skunked in the race to repeat the experiment. 
Nowhere is that more apparent than at Caltech, where a multifaceted team of 
experts has labored in vain to come up with something that would either prove 
or disprove the Utah claim. Last Friday afternoon, a seminar on "cold fusion" 
had to be moved from a classroom to the campus' largest auditorium to 
accommodate a crowd of several hundred. 
Many of those who showed up rushed to the front rows of the auditorium, 
expecting to see a demonstration of the fusion experiment, but electrochemist 
Nathan Lewis shattered that dream in an instant. 
"Our results," he said as he faced the packed auditorium rather sheepishly, 
"are zero." 
To Continue Efforts 
Scientists there will continue their efforts, however. 
Details of the work at Caltech, which were disclosed at the seminar, are 
embargoed until the scientists publish reports in professional journals, but 
the human drama revealed at the session may be of greater interest anyway. 
Researchers at Caltech began working on the problem within hours of the Salt 
Lake City press conference, and "we've been working pretty much around the 
clock ever since," Lewis told the seminar. 
Scores of experiments have been completed as the scientists there tried to 
guess exactly how the Utah group had set up the experiment. From the beginning, 
researchers have been hampered by a lack of details, a shortfall that grows 
more puzzling as time goes on. 
"It (the experiment) could easily be defined, but it hasn't," Lewis said. 
"We're frustrated about that." 
Shows Exasperation 
At one point, he asked in exasperation why Pons has not taken one of his 
experiments to one of the major national laboratories and asked scientists 
there to test it with their sophisticated equipment. Why not, he asked, when 
"everybody knows they were first now." 
Pons could not be reached because even though he has used the media to stake 
his claim, he now declines interviews. 
While Pons has not taken one of his experiments to a major lab, his partner 
has. Fleischmann is a consultant to England's Harwell Laboratory, operated by 
that country's Atomic Energy Authority, and he has taken some of his own 
experiments there for further testing. However, Harwell officials have declined 
all comment until their research is completed, which could take at least 
another month. 
These days, as scientists who have grown weary from long nights in the 
laboratory try to explain their inability to replicate the experiment, touches 
of bitterness often surface. During the Caltech seminar, speakers were 
frequently interrupted by applause and cheers when they suggested repeatedly 
that Pons and Fleischmann were so eager to claim credit for their work that 
they made their announcement prematurely and that their work was seriously 
flawed. 
Not Answering Questions 
Much of the criticism stems from the fact that Utah researchers have still not 
answered some of the basic questions other scientists have been asking about 
the experiment. 
Not everyone at the Caltech seminar was ready to write off Pons and 
Fleischmann, however. 
"What they are saying," one colleague muttered to another as they left the 
auditorium, "is if you guys are so smart, figure it out for yourselves." 
If other claims from reputable institutions are to be believed, some people 
have done just that. 
The most difficult research for the doubters to dismiss at this point comes 
from Stanford University. A seven-member team, led by materials science 
professor Robert A. Huggins, announced last Tuesday that a series of carefully 
controlled experiments there had confirmed that the Utah experiment does 
produce excess energy in the form of heat. 
Use 'Heavy Water' 
Furthermore, only experiments that used "heavy water" that has the isotopes 
necessary for fusion produced the heat. Control experiments that used ordinary 
water produced no energy, thus ruling out the chance that the heat was caused 
by some form of chemical reaction. 
When Lewis was asked about the Stanford results in the Caltech seminar, he 
shrugged and said "he (Huggins) is a good guy." 
But he said he did not know enough about the Stanford work to comment further. 
The differences between Stanford and Caltech suggest that there is some little 
secret about the experiment that Stanford researchers have figured out. 
Otherwise, Stanford will join a list of institutions that have announced 
success and then had to back off. Both Texas A&amp;M and the Georgia Institute 
of Technology have had to bury their pride and admit that earlier claims of 
success were in error because of problems with equipment. 
That backpedaling illustrates one of the other frustrations of the project: 
While the experiment itself looks easy, detecting the results is extremely 
difficult. 
Devilish Bit of Irony 
And in that there is a devilish bit of irony. 
The laws of physics, as now understood, suggest that Pons and Fleischmann 
"would not have been around to hold their press conference" if they had 
achieved the level of nuclear fusion that they claimed, said Caltech physicist 
Charles Barnes. The experiment should have become so radioactive that it would 
have been lethal to anyone within about a mile unless properly shielded. 
However, the experiment produces so little radioactivity that it is not even 
necessary to shield it, and thus is very difficult to measure, according to the 
Utah scientists. 
And that, to physicists, is the biggest mystery of all. 
Scientists are still searching for a credible explanation of why the experiment 
suppresses the radioactivity that should be the "signature" of a fusion 
reaction. 
Pons and others have theorized that the energy produced by the reaction is 
absorbed in the apparatus and released as heat instead of high energy neutrons 
or gamma rays, but other scientists find that explanation difficult to accept. 
A Curious Event 
Another scientist at MIT came up with a theory similar to Pons', leading to one 
of the most curious events in the entire drama. 
Top scientists at MIT had announced a couple of weeks ago that they were 
abandoning their effort to replicate the experiment because they had been 
unable to validate any of the Utah claims. But when a colleague announced that 
he could explain how the experiment works, MIT did a back-flip and announced 
that it was going to patent the theory for a process that other MIT scientists 
had concluded doesn't even work. 
And so it has gone, week after week. 
It may be months before all the answers are known, although Pons is now working 
with a team of about 60 people at Los Alamos National Laboratory, offering some 
promise of an early resolution. Los Alamos, like just about everybody else, has 
been unsuccessful in its efforts to replicate the experiment on its own. 
But the scientist who is leading that team said the lack of success has not 
diminished the interest in the Pons-Fleischmann experiment. 
When Pons spoke there recently, about 700 people showed up to hear what he had 
to say. He told them they had been doing the experiments wrong and he will work 
with them in the days ahead. 
