ALABAMA'S 'DULL' AMPHITHEATRE SHOW 
I would like to respond to your review of the Alabama concert at the Pacific 
Amphitheatre ("Despite Fog, Strobes, Alabama Delivers Dull Show," by Jim 
Washburn, April 10): 
Perhaps you were unable to see distinctly or hear clearly the pure adulation 
and excitement the audience displayed for Alabama. 
Your comment about the songs they performed -- that they "sounded like little 
more than commercials for a very weak beer" -- really reveals your ignorance to 
the popularity of the group. This group was again voted in the People magazine 
poll as "America's favorite group." Many of those songs went to No. 1 on the 
country music charts. I highly doubt they would have achieved No. 1 status if 
the songs had "forgettable melodies," as you stated. 
Your comment about Randy Owen's "continual 'We love you (fill in regional area 
here)!' interjections" again shows your lack of knowledge of the group. Alabama 
has millions of fans across America and abroad. This is an excellent gesture to 
make the fans in every city feel special. I know Alabama is not the only group 
to do this. Randy has always been energetic and emotional in concert. That's 
just Randy. 
The song "The Fans" was written especially for the fans by Alabama. That means 
a lot in this fast-paced world of so-called superstars who eventually forget 
their roots and the people who helped them attain their popularity. 
Your reference to Teddy Gentry's "The Borderline," which you state was "so 
removed from real grit and feeling that it could make Marty Robbins puke in his 
grave," was a cheap shot. (You call yourself a journalist?) The song is a 
ballad. Did you honestly ever listen to the lyrics of Alabama's songs? 
Apparently not. 
It is quite evident from your review that you have never been to an Alabama 
concert before. For some reason, it appears you have a chip on your shoulder 
about Alabama. You might be well advised to stick to reviewing pop music 
concerts because you obviously don't know anything about country music. 
DEBBIE COX 
Placentia 
