WALL STREET / JOHN CRUDELE: WAGE INFLATION BECOMING MORE THAN A BAD DREAM 
Sitting next to me is Hugh R. LaZee, the only person in America without a job. 
Question: Hugh, how long do you think you can hold out before going to work? 
Answer: John, it's getting pretty tough to turn down some of the offers I've 
received. You know, I'm 45 and I don't have any skills or ambition, but heck, 
these companies are making it pretty hard for me to keep saying no. 
Q: What kind of offers have you received? 
A: Well, several fast-food joints want to pay me $10 an hour to put those 
little pickles on their burgers, $10.50 if I'll also handle the ketchup. And 
one wants to make me a manager at twice that. But I think I'd like to become a 
nuclear engineer instead. I'm told that's where the real big bucks are. 
Q: Brilliant Burgers isn't paying the minimum wage anymore? 
A: Where you been? This is 1991. Nobody makes the minimum anymore. Even 
journalists must be doing better than that. 
Q: Yeah, some. 
While this 1991 scene might seem like worker heaven, today it's actually 
considered one of the worst things that could possibly happen to this country's 
economy. Call it the inflation fighters' nightmare. 
And it is this very nightmare that is keeping investment professionals from 
sleeping soundly the night before the government releases its monthly 
employment figures. 
There will never be full employment in this country, not in the sense that the 
nation has run out of people looking for jobs. 
In fact, experts suspect that "full employment" these days actually means an 
unemployment rate of 5%. And that's exactly where the U.S. civilian 
unemployment rate was in March -- its lowest monthly level in 15 years. 
According to government figures released earlier this month, there were 180,000 
additional jobs created in March. That figure would have been a more bothersome 
205,000 new jobs if the growth hadn't been offset by the fact that 25,000 
airline workers went on strike. 
"The tightness in the labor market is currently generating stronger wage 
inflation than we've had in the last five years," says John Hagens, an 
economist with WEFA Group of Bala-Cynwyd, Pa. He predicts that the inflation 
rate will be 5% this year, one percentage point above what is considered by 
many experts to be a natural and acceptable level. 
From now on, investors will hear the drum roll each time the employment figures 
are due. Experts say a critical point has arrived. If the rate of unemployment 
continues to go down and new jobs are created at the same brisk pace, the 
Federal Reserve Board could panic and send interest rates shooting up. 
Some experts, including Hagens, are predicting that the economy will slow down 
over the next few months, resulting in a jump in the unemployment rate to about 
6% by this time next year. 
But on the employment front line, experts say they don't see any signs of a 
slowdown. James E. Challenger, head of the Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas 
outplacement service, says his clients are having little trouble finding new 
jobs. And even older workers are in strong demand. "Our clients, in the last 
quarter, got jobs in 3.03 months. And that's fast," says Challenger. The normal 
period between jobs is 3.2 months. "We're in a very good hiring period," 
Challenger adds. 
The same strong demand for workers is apparently being felt on college 
campuses. Victor R. Lindquist, head of Northwestern University's Placement 
Center and director of the Lindquist-Endicott Report, says college kids haven't 
had it this good in years. 
"Salaries are up, job opportunities are going up and recruiting on campus is 
up," says Lindquist, whose survey dates back to 1945. Overall the job market 
for college graduates is 8% stronger this year than in 1988. 
And CV magazine, which is geared toward college students, said a job fair that 
it held last week in Boston was strongly attended by corporations looking to 
fill positions. Marian Salzman, president of New York-based CareerVision, which 
publishes the magazine, says: "This year is the first year of a seller's 
market, where college graduates are in a better position than in recent years 
to pick and choose among employers." 
Where is this all heading? "Obviously," says Charles Lieberman, head of 
Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp.'s financial markets research, "at some 
point we run out of workers." 
Then, Lieberman says, people -- including retirees and those who've voluntarily 
left or never entered the labor force -- will have to be lured by generous 
salaries. That generosity will result in higher inflation. 
"The solution is to slow down economic growth to a sustainable point," says 
Lieberman. The country, he says, seems able to absorb 1.8 million new jobs a 
year without aggravating inflation, but not the 2.4 million new jobs now being 
created. 
Experts admit that they really don't know where the crisis point is for the 
labor markets and inflation. Most, in fact, contend that labor force-induced 
inflation -- like the United States had in 1979 -- is the kind of problem that 
creeps up gradually rather than appearing in a flash. 
Says Donald Straszheim, chief economist for Merrill Lynch Capital Markets: "It 
works more like a dimmer switch than a light switch." 
A management training company called Motivational Systems in West Orange, N.J., 
estimates that as many as 25 million American workers would quit their jobs if 
they didn't feel appreciated. In a survey, the company asked workers if they 
would leave their present company for a similarly paying job at a company with 
a reputation for giving recognition and praise. Twenty-seven percent of the 
1,020 people surveyed said they would . . . 
