COLUMN ONE; 
RETHINKING PRIORITIES ON AIDS; 
THE INFECTIONS THAT PREY ON THOSE WITH DAMAGED IMMUNE SYSTEMS HAVE BEEN TARGETS 
OF LITTLE INTEREST TO RESEARCHERS. THE EMPHASIS HAS BEEN ON FINDING A CURE FOR 
THE SYNDROME. 
A recent international conference on the status of AIDS drug research here drew 
an overflow crowd of hundreds of medical professionals. But by the final 
morning's session -- one devoted to the infections that prey on people with 
immune systems laid waste by AIDS -- the hall was virtually empty. 
"I expected it," said John McGowan, associate director for basic research and 
development for the AIDS division of the National Institute for Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, the leading federal agency in AIDS research. "It didn't 
surprise me at all." 
Throughout the scientific community, there has been little in the way of basic 
laboratory work or clinical studies toward finding or testing treatments for 
the opportunistic infections that plague and eventually kill most people with 
AIDS. And attracting researchers to the area has been a continuing problem. 
The lack of activity reflects a belief held by most of those doing major AIDS 
research: that the greatest advances will come from developing drugs for the 
virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome, rather than from drugs 
to treat each infection that accompanies the underlying condition. 
Thus there has been a full-court press to discover and study antiviral drugs 
but far less interest in finding treatments for the virulent forms of cancer, 
meningitis, pneumonia and other infections that strike AIDS patients. 
But that attitude is rejected by those who are infected or ill. For them, the 
most pressing and immediate concern is to survive with AIDS as long as possible 
by defeating each infection that develops. 
"If you can give us two more years, you'll have two more years where you can 
find your cures," said Mark Harrington of the organization ACT UP (AIDS 
Coalition to Unleash Power). 
The situation also frustrates primary care physicians who are on the front 
lines treating AIDS patients, and the National Institute for Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), which recently initiated a major push to ignite 
interest in the opportunistic infections arena. 
"There is no question we need to do more," said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, NIAID 
director and the federal government's director of AIDS research activities. 
"From a scientific viewpoint, it's obviously much more interesting and exciting 
to do the antiviral work," Fauci said. "But you also must address the problem 
of what you do for those people who are already infected and whose immune 
systems have deteriorated. This is an issue of major public health importance." 
Experts say there are many reasons work in this field has been moving so 
slowly. First, they say, few known drugs are effective against many of these 
infections, which are rare in people with healthy immune systems. 
Further, too few basic laboratory scientists or pharmaceutical companies are 
interested in looking for new drugs. The number of diseases involved 
complicates the search, and drug manufacturers often perceive the potential 
market to be quite small and not worth the effort. 
"Where do the new (drug) molecules come from? They come from laboratories or 
companies that get excited about this kind of research," said Dr. Daniel Hoth, 
director of the AIDS division of NIAID. 
Hoth said: "Researchers in academia will get excited about testing these drugs 
(in humans) if they sense the challenge is doable, but the major problem is 
that there aren't a lot of drugs out there. The fundamental issue is that we 
need to find new molecules." 
Researchers also noted that it would be discouraging to conquer one infection 
with a drug that is available now only to have an infection of a different 
nature strike in its stead. 
"We need to put people with AIDS into remission" by finding a way to restore 
their damaged immune systems, said Dr. Robert T. Schooley, an AIDS researcher 
at Harvard University and Massachusetts General Hospital. 
Until that happens, Schooley said, "each successfully treated infection will 
add a little bit to life expectancy, but in a lot of ways, it's just exchanging 
one cause of death for another. I wish life were simple enough to believe that 
treating the opportunistic infections would make the disease go away. But it 
isn't." 
He likened the situation to leukemia years ago, before therapies were found to 
place that disease into remission. Those afflicted with leukemia also were 
vulnerable to life-threatening infections. 
"As the antibiotics got better, we were able to keep people alive longer," he 
said. "But unless we were able to put the leukemia into remission and have the 
immune system returned, the patients would all die of infections anyway. In 
AIDS, the tempo is slower, but the process is the same." 
Nevertheless, there has been at least one dramatic instance of a drug already 
in use demonstrating a significant ability to extend the lives of AIDS 
patients. 
That drug is pentamidine, used to treat pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, which 
was killing AIDS patients with brutal swiftness. A group of San Francisco 
physicians showed that it can stave off even a first episode of pneumocystis 
carinii when it is taken in aerosol form as a preventive measure. 
And now, virtually all individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) whose immune systems have begun to show signs of serious 
deterioration -- placing them at great risk of developing pneumocystis -- are 
advised to take aerosol pentamidine. 
"That was a major breakthrough," said Harrington of ACT UP. "It refutes the 
whole argument that we can really save lives only by treating primary HIV." 
NIAID, recognizing that too little attention has been paid to opportunistic 
infections, recently initiated several efforts in the area. 
The agency plans to sponsor a "drug discovery" group with the single goal of 
looking for new drugs. Such groups have been operating in the antiviral area 
since 1986. 
Typically, a group involves a partnership of academia, industry and government, 
drawing upon the resources of dozens of drug companies and about 100 different 
institutions. The agency has slated $3 million this year for the work on 
opportunistic infections. 
"Should we discover a compound that looks promising, then we will have the 
capabilities to develop it and bring it into human trials," McGowan said. 
And the agency's community-based AIDS research program, which involves primary 
care physicians who treat AIDS patients, within the next few months plans to 
begin trials of known drugs to determine if they could be used to prevent any 
of the opportunistic infections. 
The physicians are eager to participate in this overlooked aspect of AIDS 
research, said Dr. Lawrence Deyton, director of the program. 
"The most important thing on their minds is: How do I keep my patients alive 
longer?" Deyton said. 
Unlike academic researchers, who are primarily concerned with the behavior of 
the virus and how it affects the workings of the immune system, "doctors in our 
program are primary care providers," Deyton said. 
"The scientific questions they are going to ask are going to be of primary 
clinical concern. They're asking different kinds of questions in a different 
setting," he said. 
"These docs are different in their emotional makeup," Deyton added. "They're 
not as interested in publishing, or in winning the Nobel Prize. For them, the 
rewards are truly exhilarating when they can make these little inroads." 
Deyton said that the first trial will seek to find a way of preventing 
toxoplasmosis in the brain, a life-threatening parasitic infection seen with 
increasing frequency in AIDS patients. 
As with other opportunistic infections, many people are exposed to the organism 
that causes toxoplasmosis, but only those with damaged immune systems become 
ill; others who have been exposed to the parasite have developed antibodies to 
it. The trial will seek to identify those at risk and to administer them low 
doses of those drugs usually used to treat the disease after it develops. 
"If this turns out to be effective, we're going to be sparing a lot of people a 
very serious infection," Deyton said. 
Similar trials will try to prevent mycobacterium avium, or MAI, a 
tuberculosis-like condition that frequently strikes in the later stages of 
AIDS. It is a frequent cause of death and disability in AIDS patients and is 
difficult to treat. 
"There's a certain pessimism about MAI because we've known about the organism 
for a long time, but it has so far resisted efforts to find a meaningful 
therapy -- even before HIV disease became common," said Dr. Paul Volberding, an 
AIDS researcher at San Francisco General Hospital. 
Dr. Michael Gottlieb, the Los Angeles immunologist who identified the first 
AIDS cases in 1981, is planning to conduct his own trial of an 
anti-tuberculosis drug to see if it can prevent the onset of MAI. His work is 
being sponsored by the maker of the TB drug. 
Gottlieb finds himself in an unusual position, having seen both sides of the 
AIDS research dilemma. In the early years of the epidemic, he was affiliated 
with UCLA and took part in antiviral studies. Today, having severed his ties 
with the university, he is in private practice, treating primarily AIDS 
patients. 
"Research on the virus itself is the big win," he said. "When I was in academic 
research, like most researchers, I focused on the virus. But now that I'm in 
full-time clinical work, I realize the importance of finding and testing new 
drugs to treat these infections which contribute so heavily to patients' 
suffering. My perspective has changed." 
