FLY-BY-NIGHT STADIUM FANS; 
SWARMS OF MOTHS ECLIPSE PADRES' FIRST PERFORMANCES 
Two seasons began at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium this week. The Padres began 
another quest for a National League championship. And the moths opened their 
season with a series of swoops and divebombings that had spectators dodging 
more than hard-hit foul balls. 
So far, the moths are off to the better start. The Padres earned their first 
victory in three tries against San Francisco on Wednesday afternoon, but the 
moths -- which for years have been attracted to the stadium lights -- are in 
the midst of what might be their most productive season in stadium history. 
Although the insect, known as the white-lined sphinx, is harmless to 
agriculture and wildlife, its size makes it alarming to humans. With a wingspan 
of 3 to 4 inches, it is among the largest moths. 
So Big They're Scary 
"They're so big they scare people," said Tom Baker, chairman of entomology at 
UC Riverside. 
The problems at the stadium appear to be part of a sudden Southern 
California-wide population boom in white-lined sphinx moths, according to 
several regional insect experts. The moths, which usually prefer desert-like 
climates, have been observed in large numbers in most parts of San Diego 
County, even in some areas close to the coast. 
Although the experts had no hard data on the increased population, all said 
they had noticed that the moth is more numerous and more widely distributed 
this spring than in the past. 
"I've seen them flying around in the morning on the freeway, and that is quite 
amazing," said Brian Harris, a lepidoptera technician at the Los Angeles County 
Museum of Natural History. "I haven't seen that in a long time." 
The experts had no sure explanation for the population growth. But most 
speculated that it was a combination of favorable weather and the natural 
cycles that affect the population of the white-lined sphinx. 
"They seem to run in cycles, every three or four or five years their population 
just explodes," said David Faulkner, curator of entomology at the San Diego 
Natural History Museum. 
The moths that are flying now are the result of eggs laid last summer, Faulkner 
said. He said the white-lined sphinx is a hardy moth 
that probably was not affected seriously by the lack of winter rainfall. 
That means they are here to stay, but only for another few weeks. The best news 
for stadium-goers and residents all the way from Mission Hills to Del Mar is 
that the adult moths have a life span of only four to six weeks. 
"They are just going to disappear on their own," said Kathy Williams, a biology 
professor at San Diego State University. "In a matter of weeks, they won't be a 
problem. They're a beautiful moth; they are just making a bad name for 
themselves because they were at the wrong place a the wrong time. If this 
happened before the baseball season, no one would have cared." 
But, because their population burst coincided with the baseball opener, stadium 
management is left to search for a quick cure. 
"We've always had them, but I've never seen them quite like this," said Bill 
Wilson, stadium manager for four years. "Everyone is complaining." 
Usually Nocturnal 
Normally, day games provide a respite from the bothersome moths. But not this 
year. Their numbers have made the usually nocturnal creatures quite bold. 
"They're flying around like crazy now, and the lights aren't even on," Wilson 
said one afternoon from his stadium office. 
The problem is so acute that a crew will spray the stadium later in the week in 
an effort to control the moths, Wilson said. The work will be done while the 
Padres are in Houston for a three-game weekend series with the Astros that 
starts Friday night. 
Wilson said the spraying should provide relief in time for a seven-game stand 
starting Monday night against the Atlanta Braves. 
But the Natural History Museum's Faulkner said spraying is useless. 
"That will only kill the moths that are there now," he said. "As soon as they 
turn the lights back on, a new group will be drawn right back." 
Another Boom Later 
Countywide, residents can expect another outbreak of the insect, probably later 
in the summer when the eggs laid by this group eventually develop into adult 
moths. 
Under normal circumstances, Wilson said, he would not resort to spraying. He 
said swallows nesting in the stadium are usually able to keep the moths in 
check, but this spring the birds appear overwhelmed. 
Even the hungriest of swallows, entomologist Baker said, would have a tough 
time controlling such a large population of adult moths. 
"Those are big, big moths," he said. "A swallow eats one of those, and he won't 
have to eat again the rest of the night." 
