MAN AND WHALES: JUST TOO CLOSE FOR COMFORT?; 
NATURE: HUMANS MAY BE DRIVING HUMPBACKS FROM BREEDING GROUNDS. A U.S. AGENCY 
WEIGHS GUARANTEEING THE MAMMALS 100 YARDS OF PRIVACY. 
Hawaii's humpback whales, known for their lively stunts and haunting songs, 
attract people from around the world. But the feeling doesn't seem to be 
mutual. 
As jet skis and motorboats crowd the west Maui coastline, the humpbacks seem to 
be leaving the balmy near-shore waters they once favored as calving grounds. 
"It's like having chain saws in your nursery," says Mark Ferrari, executive 
director of the Maui-based Center for Whale Studies, which has documented a 
precipitous decline in cow-calf sightings off Lahaina over the last decade. "It 
keeps you from going in there." 
With whale watching gaining popularity around the country, one question keeps 
surfacing: From a whale's point of view, how close is too close for comfort? 
The debate divides scientists and has hampered efforts to protect the mammoth 
mammals from their fast-growing human fan club. But a federal agency may settle 
the matter this summer by guaranteeing whales 100 yards of privacy wherever 
they roam in U.S. waters. 
The protective zone already applies in Hawaiian waters. Only scientists with 
federal research permits are allowed to get closer to the humpbacks, which 
migrate here from Alaska for winter and spring. Along coastal stretches of Maui 
and Lanai favored by mothers and calves, the minimum distance is 300 yards. 
Aircraft may approach no closer than 1,000 feet. Violators are typically fined 
from $400 to $1,500. 
The set-back regulation was imposed in Hawaii in December, 1987, by the 
National Marine Fisheries Service out of concern that people were inadvertently 
pushing the humpbacks from vital breeding grounds. The boisterous beasts are 
among the world's most endangered whales, with a population estimated at 1,500 
to 2,000 in the North Pacific. 
Like all whales, the humpbacks depend heavily on their acoustic sense and are 
sensitive to noise. When boats approach, studies show that whales may stay 
underwater longer, change breathing patterns and direction and have difficulty 
communicating. "They are wild animals and they need space," says Gene Witham, 
enforcement agent in the Fisheries Service Honolulu office. "These whales were 
hunted up until 1966 in the Pacific. It's very possible that some of the adults 
can remember." 
The agency is poised to extend the 100-yard rule nationwide, although it may 
grant a few exceptions, according to Margaret Lorenz, marine resources 
management specialist at National Marine Fisheries Service headquarters in 
Washington, D.C. The move would unify widely varying regional guidelines and 
give them the force of law. 
That could mean big changes for some whale watch operators and other boaters 
around the country. In California, the guidelines now set no minimum distance, 
but simply recommend how to handle vessels within 100 yards of a whale. In New 
England, they allow boats to get as close as 100 feet. 
Bob Fletcher, president of the San Diego-based Sportfishing Assn. of 
California, which includes whale watching, says his members consider the 
100-yard setback a "reasonable compromise as long as enforcement agents use 
common sense." Under the regulation, if a whale approaches a boat, rather than 
vice versa, the operator would not be cited. 
But the proposal alarms some commercial whale watchers in Massachusetts and a 
few on the West Coast. They consider themselves a key force in educating the 
public about whales and argue that the new rule could undercut that goal. 
"I think it would eliminate whale watching," says Ronn Storro-Patterson, whose 
McKinleyville-based company, Biological Journeys, runs whale tours along the 
West Coast. 
"From 100 yards, we don't see a whole lot. If that's the way whale watching is 
going to be regulated, I don't think people are going to spend the money." 
Critics also point out that imposing a blanket distance ignores the fact that 
whales react differently to disturbances and that boats emit various levels of 
noise. But taking such variations into account would be a regulatory nightmare, 
officials say. 
While Lorenz acknowledges that 100 yards is "somewhat arbitrary," she says 
simplicity is the name of the game. 
"We have to have something we can enforce," she said. "A hundred yards is an 
easy distance for people to measure. It's like a football field." 
Until now, the only recourse for enforcement agents has been to prosecute 
people under the Endangered Species Act. To do so, they must prove that a whale 
has been harassed, a tough standard to meet because it is so subjective. 
The fisheries service plans to publish the proposed rule this summer, and allow 
60 days of public comment before it is made final. "We expect a bloody fight," 
she added. 
Despite such concerns, the 100-yard rule went over without a splash in Hawaii, 
where whale watch operators carry an estimated 100,000 passengers a year. 
Lahaina, once a support base for commercial whaling, now is a magnet for 
tourists enchanted by the acrobatic humpbacks. The animals delight onlookers by 
thrusting their 40-ton bodies skyward and slapping the waves with their long 
pectoral fins. Some boats use hydrophones to amplify the humpbacks' complex 
songs, which can last 20 minutes before repeating. 
"People didn't squawk about the setback," says Mike Salzer, vice president of 
Ocean Activities Center, one of Maui's largest whale watch operators. "It 
hasn't affected our whale watching at all. We've always given the whale plenty 
of berth." 
Most violators have been private boaters. Last year, an Austrian was fined 
$1,500 for gunning his Zodiac repeatedly at a pod of humpbacks. The publicity 
over that and other cases has helped discourage potential violators, according 
to Witham. 
Local officials are now ready to take whale protection a step further. The 
Hawaii Legislature is considering a ban on jet skis and parasails in west Maui 
waters during the December-May whale season. Legislators contend that the 
noisy, erratic behavior of the "thrill craft" disturbs whales, not to mention 
people. 
Researcher Ferrari supports the thrill craft ban. He remembers identifying a 
calf that was playing happily, then seeing it a week later with a propeller 
scar down its dorsal fin and the top of its right pectoral fin chopped off. 
"It obviously had been run over by a boat," he said, noting that parasail boats 
have unprotected propellers 
Calves that have had such run-ins are likely to die at the hands of predators, 
he said. And whether or not whales are hit directly, the loss of near-shore 
habitat where mothers rest and nurse their young hurts the species' chances for 
survival. 
"The whales don't come down here so we can look at them," said state Rep. 
Rosalyn Baker, who represents west Maui. "They come down here to regenerate 
their species. It's very important that their activities not be interrupted if 
we're serious about protecting them." 
