FOR LATINOS, NEW DAWN IN PSYCHOLOGY; 
THERAPY: AN UNUSUAL PROGRAM USES ELEMENTS AND SYMBOLS OF SPANISH-LANGUAGE 
CULTURE TO TREAT EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS. 
The man stood with his hands dangling at his sides, staring vacuously at the 
woman before him, as the audience watched from folding chairs placed in a 
semicircle. 
"I get sick of not seeing you working," the woman said in Spanish. "I want you 
to do something." 
He shrugged. "I've changed," the man said. "I've come back because I want to be 
a family again. I'm not the furniture you thought I was." 
The action was interrupted by a young man in shorts who jumped up from one of 
the chairs and pretended to do a commercial. Then came the ponderous voice of 
an offstage narrator asking the big questions of the moment. 
"Will Rosendo find a job? Will he get sick again? Will he learn to be a man?" 
The stuff of soap operas? 
Certainly. 
But also the stuff of an unusual therapy program using elements of Latino 
culture -- in this case the Spanish-language soap operas popular in Southern 
California and Mexico -- to treat the problems of Latinos. 
Except for the absence of a camera, the format was pure television. The actors 
were patients with psychological problems, playing roles crafted for them by 
the therapist. 
The situations were real, taken from the lives of the participants. 
Rosendo, a Guatemalan immigrant, had stopped going to his job as a laborer 
months before, complaining of back pains. Instead of working, he had stayed 
home in a funk, sitting on the couch until his wife threatened to leave him 
unless he got professional help. 
Another member of the group, a woman from Mexico, had been referred by a 
psychiatrist after her 17-year-old son fatally stabbed her husband, who had 
abused her for years. 
The problems are not uniquely Latino. 
But, said Ignacio Aguilar, the appropriate treatment just might be. 
"Traditional psychotherapy is (non-Latino)," said Aguilar, 63, a licensed 
clinical social worker who coordinates the program at Bellwood Health Center, a 
private 67-bed facility in Bellflower. "We have to use cultural ways of dealing 
with them." 
The goal: by using elements of the culture familiar to them, to reach 
Spanish-speaking people who cannot relate to traditional psychotherapy. 
It's a tall order, of course. Even traditional therapy, based on the belief 
that people can master problems by openly exploring and confronting them, is, 
at best, an iffy proposition. Most therapists concede that mental health is in 
many ways subjective, and that progress is not always steady, obvious or 
measurable. 
Adding culture to the equation makes it even more complex. 
While traditional psychotherapy encourages self-exploration as a means of 
personal growth, experts say, many Southern California Latinos come from 
backgrounds in which the daily struggle for survival makes therapy seem 
luxuriously self-indulgent. 
In such a context, problems are borne stoically rather than solved, and one's 
"fate" is seen as one's master. 
But culture introduces a whole new element to the mix, Aguilar said. 
By inculcating would-be patients with the forms and symbols of their own 
culture, he maintains, experts can create naturally therapeutic situations. 
Soap operas are a case in point. While popular in many cultures, they seem to 
have special significance to Latinos, some of whom relate to the soaps more 
than they do to their own lives, he said. 
So performing psychodramas patterned after soap operas, he said, creates a 
non-threatening environment in which patients feel free to act out their 
problems, and, thus, to begin to deal with them constructively. 
In addition, Aguilar said, the program uses Latin American proverbs, folklore, 
poetry, crafts, music and dance to treat patients suffering from depression, 
anxiety, panic and alienation. 
It also uses symbols from the Aztec calendar to characterize specific ailments 
and to chart the patients' progress. 
To be sure, this isn't the only mental health program struggling to accommodate 
the rapidly expanding ethnic diversity of Southern California. Several area 
centers feature programs tailored to the needs of Southeast Asian refugees. And 
a number of centers -- including El Centro in East Los Angeles -- attempt to 
treat Latinos by employing therapists who are bilingual and bicultural. 
But Aguilar is seen by many as ahead of the field. 
"We talk about utilizing these techniques," said Rebecca Bejar, a licensed 
clinical social worker at El Centro, "but Ignacio (Aguilar) has been one of the 
forerunners in actually implementing them." 
Geraldine Esposito, executive director of the Sacramento-based California 
Society for Clinical Social Work, the largest group of its kind in the state, 
sees Aguilar's work as "marvelous" and "trend-setting" because "it approaches 
people with respect." 
And, said Sergio Martinez-Romero, a social psychologist who teaches at Cal 
State Los Angeles and president of the California Hispanic Psychological Assn., 
the Bellwood program goes a step beyond most by not only translating 
traditional therapy into Spanish, but also by using symbols and imagery of the 
culture itself to get patients involved in the therapeutic process. 
"It is able to reach people where they are and bring them to a place where they 
can be treated," Martinez said. 
As a group, Latinos are not always easy to treat. 
While, in general, their symptoms are not unique, mental health professionals 
say, the problems, especially for recent immigrants, are often made worse by 
the experience of trying to fit into an intolerant, alien culture. 
"Here the (Latinos) are part of the landscape," said Aguilar, who was born in 
Mexico. "Their culture hasn't been recognized; it's been put down." 
As a result, he said, many Southern California Latinos who were born in other 
countries suffer a wide range of problems in adjusting. 
Some who experienced traumatic political conditions in their home countries 
react with a natural distrust of the institutions and authority figures they 
encounter in the United States, said psychologist Jorge Cherbosque. Besides 
feeling guilty for leaving loved ones behind, he said, some immigrants who came 
from war-torn countries suffer post-traumatic symptoms, such as flashbacks and 
sleep disturbances. 
"What we're discovering is that many immigrants from Latin America are 
developing symptoms which many therapists are overlooking," said Cherbosque, 
who teaches cross-cultural psychology at Antioch College's Marina del Rey 
campus. 
While the symptoms are understandable, he said, they still can be serious. 
The immigrants are "coming to a society where they feel they don't belong," 
Cherbosque said. "They don't identify with America and they feel secretly 
guilty for abandoning their homelands." 
Bellwood patients, who are often referred to the program by therapists, social 
workers or physicians, voluntarily admit themselves to the facility for stays 
averaging a month, Aguilar said. 
But cultural differences sometimes interfere with therapy, he said. For 
instance, Latino culture emphasizes collective values and family 
interdependence, while U.S. culture is geared more toward individualism, he 
said. Thus, Latinos, who often hold fast to traditional male and female roles, 
tend to submerge individual problems rather than disrupt family unity, while 
Anglos find it easier to muster the self-absorption necessary for therapy. 
And while most Anglos are entirely comfortable with the idea of psychotherapy, 
Aguilar said, most Latinos see the process as sterile and cold. 
"In Hispanic culture, there is no such thing as mental health care -- you're 
either crazy or you're not," Aguilar said. 
In many Latin American countries, and often among Latinos in Southern 
California, he added, those who can't be cured by herbs or spiritual healers 
called curanderos are taken into their families' bosoms and kept apart from 
society. 
Aguilar began developing his unorthodox approach to therapy during a 17-year 
career at Metropolitan State Hospital in Norwalk, where, he said, some of his 
methods initially met with resistance from colleagues. 
Among the more controversial of his ideas, he said, was offering private 
"spiritual" healing sessions to patients for whom such rituals seemed 
meaningful. The practice, while not violating the conditions of his license or 
professional ethical code, did exceed the sympathies and understanding of some 
fellow therapists. 
He left the hospital for Bellwood last year, he said, because he believed the 
private facility would offer more latitude in pursuing his cultural techniques. 
In the six months since the therapy program -- called Amanacer, or "a new dawn" 
-- began, more than 40 patients, most employed in blue-collar jobs, have been 
treated, Aguilar said. While the cost of treatment, including room and board, 
is about $560 a day, an administrator said, most of the charges are covered by 
insurance. 
Aside from the soap-opera psychotherapy, Aguilar said, other therapy methods 
employed are craft sessions, in which patients create colorful Mexican weavings 
while informally discussing problems; Latino music and dance classes to release 
tension and increase self-esteem, and sessions utilizing Spanish poetry, 
folklore and myths containing universal themes that speak to patients of 
situations in their own lives. 
"We have lots of myths in our culture, and they trigger feelings," Aguilar 
said. "Sometimes the best method of treatment is a metaphor." 
One group, the therapist said, uses seasons of the year to connote points on 
the road to mental health and such symbols as turtles, flowers and cactus from 
the Aztec calendar to indicate specific personal qualities -- sluggishness, 
delicacy, abrasiveness. 
Although no data yet exists on Amanacer's success at returning people to 
functional lives, Aguilar said the program is working -- an assessment shared 
by many of his patients. 
"I'm very appreciative," said the woman whose teen-age son was imprisoned for 
her husband's murder. 
Speaking through an interpreter, she said: "The program has given me value and 
self-worth. If I had found this earlier, I would have been able to stop what 
happened." 
Said Teresa, a depressed patient who came to Bellwood after years of 
unsuccessful treatment by Anglo therapists: "We can understand each other. It's 
a big relief to be able to talk to someone who comes from the same culture." 
Back in the soap opera, Rosendo, about to return home to his wife after a month 
of treatment, seemed to be getting a new lease on life. 
"I feel stronger," he said. "I didn't want to face the rock that I was. I'm 
ready to go to work." 
Off to the left, Aguilar, playing the narrator, interjected a series of solemn 
questions. 
Would Rosendo, he wondered aloud, be able to solve his problems? Would he be 
able to find a job? Would everything be OK? 
Tune in next week. 
