TRIAL OKD IN SPERM DONOR'S PARENTING SUIT 
An Oregon woman who does not want to share parenting rights with the California 
man who donated his sperm for her artificial insemination lost a Supreme Court 
appeal today. 
The court, without comment, let stand a ruling that Kevin McIntyre is entitled 
to a trial in seeking to prove he donated sperm only after Linden Crouch said 
she would let him help raise the child. 
Crouch said no such agreement was made. 
Nationwide, more than 20,000 children are born each year through artificial 
insemination, the court was told. 
In most cases, women are inseminated with sperm obtained through a sperm bank 
from donors who remain anonymous to them. But McIntyre, of Moraga, Calif., has 
known Crouch of Ashland, Ore., for more than 13 years. 
Crouch gave birth to a daughter, Glenellen Susan, on Nov. 24, 1986, after being 
artificially impregnated with sperm she had asked McIntyre to donate. 
He said Crouch told him before he agreed to donate his sperm that she wanted 
him to share parenting with her. He said she also agreed to his request for 
visitation rights. 
In other action today, the high court: 
 -- Agreed to use the case of a Mississippi Death Row inmate to provide new 
guidelines for police questioning of suspects. 
The court said it will hear an appeal by Robert S. Minnick, a convicted 
murderer who said his confession was unlawful because he was denied his right 
to have a lawyer present. 
 -- Refused to reinstate the California murder conviction of a Black Panther 
Party member who was shackled during his 17-month trial. 
The court, without comment, let stand a ruling that the shackling at Johnny 
Spain's trial violated his rights. 
 -- Rejected an appeal by a Utah city accused of unlawfully promoting religion 
by subsidizing the Mormon Church and by putting a church symbol on city 
property. 
The court, over one dissenting vote, refused to kill a lawsuit that says the 
city violated the constitutionally required separation of church and state. 
 -- Refused to give new life to a copyright lawsuit over actress Shirley 
MacLaine's 1983 best-selling book, "Out on a Limb." 
The court, without comment, let stand rulings that MacLaine's book about 
reincarnation and other spiritual subjects did not infringe on the copyright of 
a 1977 book written by Charles Silva. 
 -- Rejected an appeal by a former member of the Church of Scientology of 
California who wanted the church declared a phony religion. 
The court, without comment, rejected an appeal by Larry Wollersheim of Aspen, 
Colo. 
Still pending before the justices is an appeal by the Church of Scientology of 
California aimed at overturning a $2.5-million "emotional distress" award won 
by Wollersheim. 
 -- Rejected a chemical company's challenge to federal standards for clean 
water. 
The court, without comment, left intact rules that govern more than 1,000 
factories producing organic chemicals, plastics and synthetic fibers. 
