LOBBYIST FOR VEGAS TRAIN PROJECT CHOSEN; 
GOVERNMENT: THE CONTRACT WILL GO TO ORANGE COUNTY'S INFLUENTIAL AND 
CONTROVERSIAL FRANK MICHELENA. 
A bistate commission overseeing plans for 300-m.p.h. train service between 
Anaheim and Las Vegas is scheduled to award a no-bid consulting contract today 
to Frank Michelena, one of Orange County's most influential and controversial 
lobbyists. 
Paul Taylor, executive director of the 16-member California-Nevada Super Speed 
Ground Transportation Commission, said he personally recommended Michelena to 
panel members, who are scheduled to vote on several consulting contracts today 
at a meeting in Ontario. 
Michelena has proposed raising money from private sources to help fund some of 
the commission's activities. 
Michelena has given gifts to members of the Orange County Board of Supervisors, 
including board Chairman Don R. Roth, and has helped raise campaign funds for 
them as well while lobbying on behalf of companies that have matters pending 
before county government. 
Roth is vice chairman of the commission, which is scheduled to receive bids in 
July from firms interested in building and operating a high-speed train system 
between Anaheim and Las Vegas. Three companies have indicated that they will 
bid on the project and will propose either magnetically levitated or 
wheel-on-track rail systems. 
The final project must be approved by both state legislatures, which have 
mandated that construction and operation of the rail system be at private 
expense. 
Commission officials said Michelena is scheduled to be hired under a 
$5,000-a-month contract that is to be shared with Sacramento lobbyist Paula 
Treat. She shepherded the bill that created the bistate panel in 1987. 
Until now, the commission's expenses -- totaling several hundred thousand 
dollars -- have been paid out of donations of tax money from the cities of Las 
Vegas and Anaheim, on the premise that administration is separate from 
construction or operation of the planned rail service. 
"We're involved with a nonprofit corporation to finance studies and also, 
probably, to make grants to the commission," Michelena said Thursday. The SST 
Super Speed Foundation, he said, will be led by Dave Boren of Huntington Beach, 
who is retired from the bowling alley business. 
"We have not raised any money at this point," Michelena said. "We have a lot of 
heavy selling to do." 
Michelena said he believes that most commission members want to make all of the 
panel's funding private so that no additional money will be needed from Las 
Vegas, Anaheim or other cities along the proposed route. 
Taylor and Roth said Thursday that the commission does not have to seek 
competitive bidding for the contract. 
California Deputy Atty. Gen. Jack Winkler said some public agencies are 
authorized to award no-bid contracts for professional services, but he declined 
to comment specifically on the Treat-Michelena contract. 
"I don't think there is any hokeypokey going on," Roth said of the the proposed 
contract. "We have to have money to keep this commission afloat, and we can't 
do it on osmosis." 
Roth acknowledged Michelena's extensive political ties to elected officials but 
pointed out that recently Michelena was unsuccessful in attempting to persuade 
the Board of Supervisors to renew the county's contract with a traffic school. 
Treat donated $350 to Roth's reelection campaign Nov. 29, 1989, according to 
mandatory political finance reports filed with the county registrar of voters. 
Roth listed $140 worth of gifts from Michelena -- lunches and a candy basket -- 
on his mandatory statement of economic interests for 1989-90. 
Michelena, a former supervisor's aide, has been questioned by law enforcement 
authorities in a variety of political corruption cases over the years, 
including the successful prosecution of former Anaheim fireworks magnate W. 
Patrick Moriarty. Michelena lobbied for Moriarty both locally and in 
Sacramento. But Michelena has never been charged with wrongdoing. 
Also scheduled to be awarded a contract today is Anaheim-based Willdan 
Associates, an engineering firm that contributed $250 to Roth's reelection 
campaign on June 14, 1989. Between 1988 and 1989, the company contributed 
$2,000 combined to two other bistate commission members: state Sen. Bill 
Leonard (R-Redlands) and Assembly Transportation Committee Chairman Richard 
Katz (D-Sepulveda). 
The proposed Willdan contract was competitively bid, Taylor said. 
