COLUMN ONE; 
FEW VIET EXILES FIND U.S.RICHES; 
REFUGEES HAVE FORGED AN ENDURING STEREOTYPE OF ECONOMIC AND INTELLECTUAL 
OVERACHIEVEMENT. BUT MOST LIVE IN POVERTY, WITH SIGNIFICANT LANGUAGE AND 
CULTURAL HANDICAPS. 
They were generals and peasants, schoolteachers and spies, physicians and 
fishermen, and they became in America a poignant symbol of the refugee's will 
to succeed. 
Nearly 600,000 Vietnamese fled to this country to escape the long war that 
rampaged throughout Southeast Asia, tearing lives and the political order 
asunder. 
A few became millionaires. Many more have earned doctorates and found business 
success. Their assimilation forged an enduring stereotype of economic and 
intellectual overachievement. 
But, 15 years after the fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975, Vietnamese in the 
United States are still suffering from the legacy of defeat and the pain of 
exile. 
In fact, a majority of Vietnamese refugees in the United States today live in 
poverty. 
The disparity is glaring in Orange County, home to Little Saigon, the nation's 
largest Vietnamese community. Among the 100,000 people who have flocked to the 
neighborhoods along Bolsa Avenue are wealthy exiles such as former Premier 
Nguyen Cao Ky -- and thousands of refugees on welfare. 
"Americans drive by Bolsa Avenue, and it's so thriving, so prosperous, that 
that's their image of Vietnamese refugees. It's not true," said Tuong Duy 
Nguyen, executive director of Vietnamese Community of Orange County Inc., a 
social service agency. "Most refugees are still living under the poverty line." 
Vietnamese-Americans of all backgrounds continue to describe themselves as 
refugees, not immigrants. And many say they are homesick. 
"Most of our people have a hidden depression," said Garden Grove businessman 
Phong Duc Tran. "We were uprooted suddenly from our country and had to come 
here. The Koreans, the Japanese, they planned for years to come here; they 
wanted to come here. 
"We didn't." 
The image of Vietnamese success in America is largely based on one segment of 
the refugee population -- the Westernized, highly educated elite who left South 
Vietnam just before or shortly after Saigon surrendered. 
But most, in fact, arrived after 1978, with significant language, cultural and 
educational handicaps. Many remain dependent on welfare, stuck in minimum-wage 
jobs, or consigned to an exploitative underground economy. Last year, refugee 
unemployment was twice the national average. 
The collapse of Saigon came much more quickly than most South Vietnamese 
dreamed. Sixty-one percent of the 1975 arrivals had less than 24 hours to 
prepare to leave. Tales of well-connected South Vietnamese scrambling aboard 
U.S. helicopters in 1975 with suitcases stuffed with gold were probably 
exaggerated. Though some did take family jewelry or gold, their only portable 
asset, many more fled with nothing but their clothes. 
What the first refugees did bring, however, was education, class and 
connections. Sociologists quickly discovered that the 130,000 refugees who fled 
in 1975 tended to be well-to-do (more than 40%, for example, had owned 
automobiles in Vietnam) and Westernized. Many had studied abroad or had 
American friends. 
Most important, the 1975 arrivals were far better educated than their 
countrymen. Forty-eight percent had university degrees, whereas less than 1% of 
the Vietnamese population as a whole did. Three-quarters spoke at least some 
English. 
Armed with these advantages -- and an outpouring of sympathy from the American 
public that has not been sustained -- the first Vietnamese adjusted relatively 
quickly. Though many did stints as janitors and dishwashers, most soon landed 
middle-class jobs. Men and women worked day and night, shared housing and 
pooled their earnings. By the early 1980s, federal tax returns show, household 
income of the 1975 arrivals had equaled the U.S. average. Many of their 
children were valedictorians. 
But such refugees account for only about one-third of the Vietnamese-American 
population. The other two-thirds have less education, less upward mobility and 
less hope -- characteristics that prompted one scholar to compare them to the 
permanent American underclass. 
The later arrivals tended to be young, rural people who spoke little English 
and had few skills of value in the West. For example, a survey of Southeast 
Asians in San Diego County found that the average 1975 arrival was a high 
school graduate but that the average 1980 arrival had not completed sixth 
grade. 
They had survived not only war, but often prison camp, persecution, genocide, 
rape by Thai pirates, and the numbing degradation of refugee camps. 
"They arrived en masse, overwhelming existing resettlement programs," said 
Ruben G. Rumbaut, professor of sociology at San Diego State University. "And 
they arrived at the worst possible time -- during the highest inflation in 
memory, followed by the worst recession in 50 years." 
The boat people have stayed poorer for longer than the first refugees. In San 
Diego during the recession of 1983, for example, Rumbaut found that 75% of all 
Southeast Asian refugees were living below the poverty line, but that only 25% 
of the Vietnamese who arrived in 1975 were. 
Today, 1.2 million Southeast Asians live in the United States. Most statistics 
tend to lump them as a group, masking important differences. A closer look, 
however, shows that post-1978 arrivals -- and in some cases their children -- 
are not climbing the economic ladder nearly as fast as their predecessors. 
After a decade in this country, some are still stuck near the bottom rung. 
"The majority of the new arrivals don't speak English very well, that's for 
sure, and they don't have marketable skills," said Tuong Duy Nguyen, who argues 
that English and job-training programs are inadequate and geared to produce 
only short-term results. "Nearly 100% get entry-level jobs, but they have no 
hope for promotion because they have no skills. . . ." 
Contributing to welfare dependency is a rising divorce rate. One Vietnamese 
social worker estimates that divorces among refugees have tripled, the product 
of long separations, treacherous shifts in traditional sex roles, and more 
lenient divorce laws. California welfare officials have also noticed an 
increase in the number of single-parent refugee households. 
To be sure, the later arrivals are slowly improving their incomes. But by the 
late 1980s they had yet to match the income of the 1975 arrivals. 
The gap has sparked subtle tensions within the Vietnamese community. 
Over lunch in a chic French-style restaurant in Orange County's Little Saigon, 
a proud and educated man from an upper-class background complained that the 
latest refugees are lazy and abuse American generosity. 
"When I left in '75, I didn't know what my future was," said the man, who now 
owns a flourishing business and drives a Mercedes-Benz. "I just wanted freedom. 
And I accepted (sic) to die at sea. But now the Vietnamese who come here, they 
know they'll have welfare, they know they'll have an easy life. . . . They are 
not prepared to work." 
Others say the new arrivals have simply been worn down by more than 30 years of 
war, followed by 15 years of poverty and repression. 
Quynh N. Nguyen of Lakewood, a former South Vietnamese navy captain who fled in 
1975, blamed the communists for what he sees as the latecomers' tendency toward 
demoralization and dependency. 
"I talk to my friends and relatives who came later," Nguyen said. "They are 
exhausted, mentally and physically, and do not have the will to live." 
Recent arrivals are aware of such attitudes and resent them. 
"The latecomers, they say, 'Those who came in '75, they stick their nose in the 
air,' " said Christine Nguyet Pham, who arrived in 1989 and is now a caseworker 
for Orange County Refugee Community Resources Opportunity Project Inc. 
But if the 1975 arrivals seem elitist, some of the latecomers, who tend to have 
less experience of the West, often have wildly unrealistic attitudes about life 
in America, according to several recent arrivals from Vietnam. 
Many denizens of Ho Chi Minh City read letters from rich relatives and dream of 
joining them in a life of ease, said Tien Tat Chu, a former re-education camp 
inmate who arrived in Huntington Beach in January. "In Saigon, they say that 
even the lamppost wants to go to America." 
Vietnamese, accustomed to a slower, more social way of life, are unprepared for 
the hustle and bustle of American capitalism, said Pham, calling it a "work, 
work, work machine." 
A growing number of scholars argue that the myth of the miraculous Southeast 
Asian refugee has made life more difficult for the struggling majority. Such 
stereotypes imply that those who are not instant successes have only themselves 
to blame, said Steven J. Gold, assistant professor of sociology at Whittier 
College, the scholar who compared the plight of the newly arrived refugees to 
that of the American underclass. 
Kristy Tran, a 19-year-old Golden West College student who arrived in 1979, is 
one of those struggling. When she was 5, her father was arrested by communist 
soldiers. He never returned. At 10, her mother sent her off by boat with two 
cousins. Now she studies, works and lives in a rented room so she can save 
money to send back to Vietnam. 
"Sometimes I think I'm weak, that I cannot handle the pressure, that I just 
want to forget the people in Vietnam and my mom," she said. "But I have to 
support them. Fifty dollars here can support my mom and my brother (there) for 
a month. I send them about $600 a year." 
Most Americans, Tran said, think Vietnamese are rich, and some are jealous. 
"Sometimes I go to the gas station, and American guy comes up to me and ask me 
for a dollar because he thinks I have money," she said. "Americans only base 
(their attitudes) on the action of one part of the community and judge all of 
them." 
To some Americans, including a group of Orange County combat veterans recently 
interviewed, the Vietnamese refugees are a living symbol of a humiliating 
military defeat. 
Vietnamese-Americans are well aware of such sentiments and often feel wounded. 
In a 1989 Times Orange County poll of 400 adults, 62% said there is "a lot" or 
"some" prejudice against Vietnamese. 
Rich or poor, refugees are unanimous in noting that America's welcome has grown 
cooler of late. 
Liem Huu Nguyen, for example, a peasant boy turned successful attorney, is the 
stuff refugee myths are made of. But he says he might not have done as well had 
he arrived in America in 1985 instead of 10 years earlier. 
Nguyen, born in a tiny village in central Vietnam, was once a skinny boy who 
went to school hungry. "My friends discovered that I never ate lunch," he said. 
"In fact, I never ate breakfast." When he was 12, friends brought him home to 
dinner, and he asked them why the soup was so delicious. 
"They said it had meat in it," Nguyen explained. 
Nguyen's youth and peasant background made him atypical of the 1975 arrivals. 
His English was poor, and he was unschooled in Western ways; his first contact 
with American culture had come as a teen-ager, when some passing GIs threw him 
cigarettes, chewing gum and a Playboy magazine. 
Nevertheless, an hour after Saigon surrendered, he climbed aboard one of the 
last South Vietnamese army helicopters leaving the Can Tho army base. At the 
age of 18, he found himself in a foreign land called Oklahoma. 
But, he says, Americans he met in 1975 bent over backward to help him. He was 
admitted to Oklahoma State, although his English was still inadequate. Once 
there, his grades were not good enough to join an international fraternity to 
which he wanted to belong. He went begging to the dean and was invited to join. 
Nguyen earned a master's degree, then a law degree at Hastings School of Law in 
San Francisco. He now has a private practice in San Jose and Oakland. Many of 
his clients are young Vietnamese who have run afoul of the law. 
These young arrivals, he said, have been given fewer opportunities and received 
less hospitality from communities that already feel burdened by large Southeast 
Asian populations. 
Nowadays, he said, "America is sick of refugees." 
Many Vietnamese-Americans say they are deeply grateful for the help they have 
received. But they feel they dare not ask for more. 
"The community now is strong enough to help their fellows," said Xuan Nhi Van 
Ho, executive director of the Orange County Refugee Community Resources 
Opportunity Project. "Many Vietnamese community leaders don't want the 
government to feel that refugees are a burden on them. . . . If we keep asking 
for more help, they will cut the refugee quota." 
And Vietnamese worry that they have developed a bad image. Many are mortified 
by the presence of Southeast Asian youth gangs, which have grown more violent 
and almost always prey on their own countrymen. 
Gangs and crime were cited as the single most serious community problem in The 
Times survey, named twice as often as problems with jobs or assimilation. But 
in recent interviews, Vietnamese-Americans expressed both shame and anger over 
what they see as overheated media coverage of the gangs, of welfare fraud, 
microchip theft and other crimes committed by Asians. 
And though the recent flood of books and films by Americans about the Vietnam 
War may be cathartic for Americans, Vietnamese find them distorted and 
offensive. 
"We despise these movies tremendously," said Duc Au, host of a Vietnamese radio 
program at UC Irvine. Au said the films show Vietnamese people as prostitutes, 
faceless enemies or victims of American -- never communist -- atrocities. 
Vietnamese are never shown as soldiers fighting for their own country alongside 
the Americans, he said. 
"If I didn't know anything about the Vietnam War at all, I would think the 
Americans did all the dirty work and the Vietnamese were back in the cities 
having fun," Au said. 
Such images are especially undermining to young Vietnamese, said Thieu Quang 
Nguyen, 27, a graduate student in computer science at UC Irvine. 
"Most of the things associated with the word Vietnam are negative: the Vietnam 
War, the cheating in Little Saigon, the gangs," Nguyen said. "And kids grow up 
hurt inside." 
It is another paradox of the Vietnamese experience that the number of 
Vietnamese dropouts and juvenile delinquents is increasing at the same time 
that many other young Vietnamese are astounding their teachers with their 
academic prowess. Such contradictory realities belie facile stereotypes about 
Asian students as disciplined super-achievers. 
In San Diego in 1986, Rumbaut and his colleagues found that although only 7% of 
the city's students were Vietnamese, 23% of the year's valedictorians and 
salutatorians were. And Vietnamese-American students had, on average, higher 
grades than whites. But Vietnamese were dropping out at slightly higher rates 
than white students. 
That pattern is repeated at Orange County's Westminster High School, where 52% 
of the straight-A students are Indochinese. But by 1987, the Vietnamese dropout 
rate had soared to nearly double the school average, prompting the district to 
launch a special anti-dropout program for them. 
Rumbaut found that it was the children who came to the United States without 
one or both parents who were far more likely to drop out of school or get in 
trouble with the police. 
Likewise, Liem Huu Nguyen, who has represented many youth offenders, said most 
of his clients are recent arrivals who come from 
broken families and speak little English. 
Much of the Vietnamese-American experience cannot be explained by the mere 
facts of background, income or education. What drives many refugees is the 
immeasurable desire to reconstruct, from the shards of their former identities, 
lives to be proud of, families that are whole and enduring. 
In a 1984 mental health survey of Vietnamese, almost half reported feelings of 
depression, anxiety, hopelessness or worthlessness, compared with only 
one-quarter of Americans. 
Time does appear to be healing many of those wounds, the study found. But scars 
linger. 
Dr. Ton-That Niem, once a secretary of health in Vietnam, now a psychiatrist 
specializing in refugee mental health, said he has treated many refugees with 
post-traumatic stress disorder. Many were rape victims or had seen relatives 
killed. Others, particularly middle-age women, complain of insomnia, anxiety, 
headaches, stomachaches and backaches -- and a terrible feeling of isolation. 
"They say, 'I came here, I cannot go out. I cannot drive. All my children or 
grandchildren are gone to work or in class.' 
"Then they break into tears and say, 'Had I known life (would be like this), I 
would not have come here.' " 
Niem says Westerners underestimate the pain that Vietnamese, especially elders, 
feel about the separation from their ancestral homeland and its 4,000-year-old 
culture. 
There are, however, signs of hope in Little Saigon. 
On weekends, the shopping district is jammed with families pushing strollers 
and children who chatter away in English and Vietnamese. Despite their poverty, 
Vietnamese-Americans have the lowest infant-mortality rate of any ethnic group 
in the nation. Researchers cite abstinence from smoking, alcohol and drugs. 
Business is booming. There are cultural festivals, Vietnamese-language classes 
for children, more than two dozen newspapers, a $1.2-million senior citizens 
center under construction, a television station and a vibrant nightclub scene. 
Most of all, Little Saigon is a place to be Vietnamese in America, but at ease. 
After 15 years of exile, many are also reaching back to Vietnam for solace. 
A growing number of Vietnamese say privately that they support normalization of 
relations between Washington and Hanoi. Risking the wrath of devoutly 
anti-communist fellow exiles, thousands have quietly returned to visit. 
During the Tet Festival this February, so many Californians headed for Vietnam 
that it was virtually impossible to get a seat on a plane, according to one who 
made the trek. 
Mai Cong, chairman of Vietnamese Community of Orange County and a community 
activist, said she has not been back, but she has made peace with her memories 
of home. 
"It's the memory of your childhood, the places where you were raised, where 
your parents are, where your ancestors are buried," Cong explained. "It's 
priceless. It is inside you." 
Times staff writers Tony Marcano and Thuan Le contributed to this story. 
Legacy of War: Vietnamese in America 
The Vietnam Exodus 
1. In April, 1975, hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese flee south as coastal 
cities surrender. 
2. U.S. Marines begin evacuating remaining Americans from Saigon. However, 
enemy shelling closes Tan Son Nhut Air Base, forcing evacuation by helicopter. 
3. Gen. Duong Van Minh surrenders unconditionally on April 30 at 10:24 a.m. By 
then, more than 100,000 South Vietnamese had already fled. 
4. In 1978, Vietnam invades Cambodia, and China invades Vietnam. Vietnam then 
expels its ethnic Chinese. The exodus of "boat people" begins. 
Life in the U.S. 
Most of the refugees who arrived in 1975 hailed from Vietnam's military, 
professional and social elite. They account for fewer than one-third of all 
refugees. Later arrivals tended to be rural, with less education and fewer 
skills, and have had far more trouble achieving economic self-sufficiency. 
Average Years of Education: 
1975 arrivals: 11.9 
1980-83 arrivals: 5.2 
White Collar in Asia 
1975 arrivals: 79% 
1980-83 arrivals: 49% 
Farmers or Fishermen in Asia 
1975 arrivals: 3% 
1980-83 arrivals: 38% 
Living in Poverty in 1982 
1975 arrivals: 25% 
1980-83 arrivals: 90% 
Refugee Household Income in '86 
1975 arrivals: $17,861 
1980-83 arrivals: $12,907 
Average U.S. Household Income in 1986: $17-$18,000 
Southeast Asian Refugee Arrivals 
A total of 918,558 Southeast Asian refugees-567,600 of them Vietnamese-have 
arrived in the United States since 1975. More than 40% have settled in 
California. 
1975: 130,000 War evacuees 
1980: 167,000 Boat People 
1989: 37,000 
Source: Federal Office of Refugee Resettlement (1989), California Dept. of 
Finance (1990). 
On Being Vietnamese in America 
