DOWNTOWN LANDMARK PURCHASED; 
IRA YELLIN, PARTNERS, TO SPEND $4 MILLION TO RESTORE VENERABLE BRADBURY 
BUILDING. 
Developer Ira Yellin's dream to make Broadway the focal point of downtown took 
another step toward reality last week with his purchase of the historic 
Bradbury Building, owned by the McKelvey family since 1943. 
The 96-year-old city landmark at 304 S. Broadway, across the street from 
Yellin's recently purchased Grand Central Market and the Million Dollar 
Building, closed escrow last Monday for slightly more than $8 million. 
'Monument Forever' 
"We plan to keep the Bradbury a monument forever and will do major work, 
cleaning up the facade and the interior so it will be a polished gem when we're 
finished," Yellin said, estimating restoration cost at $4 million. 
Alan Alexander, one of Yellin's partners in the deal and his roommate at 
Harvard Law School 25 years ago, said that although ground-floor retail space 
is leased, offices in the five-story building have been empty for 18 months 
while seismic work was being done. 
Elevators to Remain 
"Now, we'll do the interior with remodeling to be consistent with the 
building's historic nature," Alexander said. 
The old caged elevators in the Romanesque-style building, designed by George 
Wyman, will remain, he said, "because they are like experiencing Europe in 
downtown L.A." 
The elevators, bathed in light filtered through a skylight, and the lace-like, 
wrought-iron railings in the building have attracted many film makers over the 
years. The 1982 movie "Blade Runner" was shot there. 
The charm of the Bradbury, named for Lewis Bradbury, the mining 
millionaire-turned-real estate developer who built it, made it difficult for 
the McKelvey family to sell the building, said family member Dale Dougherty of 
Western Management Co. 
"Grandfather started this company in 1934," he said, "and the Bradbury Building 
was his first major investment. Everybody in the family is getting up in years, 
and they agreed three years ago to liquidate all holdings, but some wanted to 
sell the Bradbury, and some didn't. Grandfather had the final say." 
Opportunity to Buy 
Yellin said, "I was fortunate they came to me once they decided to sell and 
asked if I wanted to buy the Bradbury, saying they would give us the 
opportunity before they went public to market it. I went into escrow with two 
friends." They were Alexander, a Century City attorney and member of the 
Beverly Hills City Council, and Jim Neal, an investment banker. 
"The toughest obstacle was the timing," Neal observed. Escrow closed on the 
Million Dollar Building on Dec. 30, and escrow opened on the Bradbury in 
January. 
"During the last month," Yellin said, "we met (local attorney) Sydney Irmas and 
his wife, Audrey, who love architecture and design. They became our financial 
partners." 
'Grand Central Square' 
Now Yellin and various partners control three of the city's most important 
landmarks, which they are refurbishing to be part of what he calls "Grand 
Central Square," with upscale restaurants and offices filled with lawyers, 
politicians and consultants spilling over from the Ronald Reagan State Office 
Building, being built at 3rd and Spring. 
Yellin, who helped form a nonprofit group of merchants and developers known as 
"Miracle on Broadway," admits that Grand Central Square is a lofty idea, since 
many offices on Broadway are empty, but said: 
"When you think of Baltimore or other cities with a lot of urban renewal, you 
will see that it's the historic buildings that make a city a place where people 
want to walk around. We have that kind of potential in this part of town." 
