GOLD-MINING CYANIDE BLAMED IN WILDLIFE DEATHS 
Declaring that thousands of birds and animals are being poisoned, Rep. Mel 
Levine (D-Santa Monica) and the Wilderness Society called Monday for a federal 
investigation into gold mining operations in California and Nevada that use 
cyanide to extract the precious metal. 
More than 6,400 migratory birds and other animals, including deer, coyotes, kit 
foxes, rabbits and chipmunks, have been killed at the Nevada mines since 1984, 
according to figures compiled by Nevada officials and released at a press 
conference Monday at the Federal Building in Westwood. 
Most of the mines are in arid areas, and birds and animals searching for water 
are attracted to the cyanide-laced holding ponds that are an integral part of 
the mining operations. There are 93 such operations in the two states. 
"It's an environmental scandal taking place in the remotest areas of California 
and Nevada," Patricia Schifferle, the California-Nevada director of the 
Wilderness Society, said Monday. She said the death rate in 1988 was twice 
1987's in Nevada. There are no figures available for wildlife deaths at 
California mines. 
At the same time, Levine's office released a letter urging the House 
subcommittee on mining and natural resources to request an investigation by the 
General Accounting Office, the investigatory arm of Congress. 
But the mining industry issued a statement later in the day charging the 
Wilderness Society with issuing misleading information. 
"Any characterization that the California mining industry is responsible for 
significant numbers of bird deaths or that it disregards its environmental 
responsibilities is absolutely untrue," said Bill Tilden, chairman of the 
mining industry's Desert Conservation Institute. 
An "informal survey" of 10 of 93 mining operations turned up fewer than 200 
dead birds last year, Tilden said. He said the information was collected by the 
U.S. Bureau of Land Management. By the time Tilden issued his statement, Bureau 
of Land Management offices had closed and his figures could not be verified. 
The call by Levine for a General Accounting Office investigation came on the 
eve of a public hearing scheduled for tonight by the Bureau of Land Management 
on a controversial plan to open a mine 100 miles south of Las Vegas in the 
Castle Mountains of the eastern Mojave Desert where a new 1.5-million-acre 
Mojave National Park is proposed. 
Known as "heap leach" mining, the method has become popular in the last decade 
because it enables microscopic bits of gold to be economically extracted from 
low-grade ore. 
Heap leach mining involves saturating heaps of ore dug from nearby strip mines 
with a cyanide solution. The solution, which is about 0.1% cyanide, bonds to 
the bits of gold and is then drained into a holding pond where the gold is 
separated from the solution. Companies can produce an ounce of gold for about 
$200 or less and sell it for about $400. It costs about $300 an ounce from deep 
mining and standard milling methods. 
Schifferle charged Monday that the Bureau of Land Management was "ready to 
approve" the mining operation proposed by Viceroy Resource Corp., a Canadian 
firm based in Vancouver. 
"The BLM continues to approve these mining operations. . . . I believe we have 
a case of Valdez-type indifference," Schifferle said, referring to 
circumstances leading up to the 11-million-gallon crude oil spill March 24 from 
the Exxon Valdez in Alaska. 
BLM spokeswoman Barbara Maxfield denied Monday that a decision has been made on 
the Castle Mountain proposal. But she said the General Mining Law of 1872 
requires the bureau to approve the Castle Mountain mine unless it would result 
in "undue or unnecessary" degradation of the habitat. 
Ross Fitzpatrick, president of Viceroy Resources Corp., could not be reached 
for comment Monday. But he told The Times a year ago that steps would be taken 
to protect birds and wildlife from entering the ponds, including floating 
covers on the surface and the use of air cannons and multicolored flags to 
scare birds away. 
The Castle Mountain mine proposed by Viceroy would extract about $40-million 
worth of gold from 2.8 million tons of crushed ore each year, according to 
company President Ross Fitzpatrick. The strip mine will be 600 feet deep and 
2,200 feet across. 
Schifferle warned that, based on the known deaths of birds and wildlife and 
other cyanide heap leach gold mines, the mine proposed in the eastern Mojave 
should be prohibited. 
Schifferle said mine owners are exempt from state and federal hazardous waste 
cleanup and prevention laws. She said the mining industry is not required to 
pay royalties to the federal government or the cost of cleaning up public lands 
and restoring them to their original condition. She pointed out that such 
royalties and cleanup charges are routinely paid by the oil and gas industry. 
The 7 p.m. BLM hearing tonight at the San Bernardino County Government Center, 
as well as hearings Wednesday in Barstow and Thursday in Las Vegas, are on a 
final environmental impact statement. The public comment period closes May 15 
and a decision on the proposal is expected in mid-July, Maxfield said. 
