PUBLISHERS MORE WILLING TO INNOVATE; 
NEWSPAPERS FEAR BEING BYPASSED BY ADVERTISERS 
Like a flu that won't go away, a deep foreboding is again settling over the 
nation's publishers about the future of the daily American newspaper. 
The advertising structure is changing. Readership is declining. 
And now, as publishers concluded their annual convention here Wednesday, 
concern is rising that a significant number of advertisers increasingly are 
using new technology to sell their products directly to consumers -- bypassing 
traditional advertising media altogether. 
The term "bypass" is even becoming a buzz word for lost advertisers. 
In reaction, publishers themselves seem more willing to explore innovation. 
They recognize that their ability to reap ever higher profits from building 
circulation and raising advertising rates is no longer working. 
As consultant Christine Urban told the American Newspaper Publishers Assn. 
meeting, newspapers are "severely threatened for share of mind, share of 
market, share of future." 
"There is a strong underlying concern in the industry today," said Tom Johnson, 
publisher of The Times, "about declining readership and the threat of bypass." 
It is a change of mood for publishers who seemed buoyant at their convention 
only two years ago, when videotext -- the idea of an electronic newspaper sent 
each morning to readers equipped with special computer terminals -- failed to 
materialize. 
With the boom during much of the 1980s, said Cox Newspapers President David 
Easterly, many publishers got "fat, dumb and happy." 
But it was made clear this week that now there are other problems. And they 
don't come only from readers wanting new ways of getting information. 
It is coming from bypass, the loss of advertising to direct marketing. 
Consider the case of Kimberly-Clark, maker of Huggies disposable diapers. The 
company recently spent $3.5 million to develop a database that identifies 75% 
of the new mothers in America. The system contains not only their identities 
but their demographic characteristics and a history of what kinds of products 
they buy. 
With that knowledge in hand, Kimberly-Clark can start building the personal 
loyalty of those consumers -- through educational pamphlets, discounts, and 
other telephone and direct-mail customer services. The company hopes to create 
the kind of personal relationship that Americans once had with local merchants 
in the days before national chains and suburban malls. 
In turn, as the children of those mothers grow older, the database will allow 
the company to sell products through campaigns that will be more tightly 
targeted and cost-efficient than through traditional advertising. 
"We can no longer dismiss direct marketing as junk mail," said Hearst President 
Frank Bennack. 
Direct Mail Booming 
Rather, it is coupons and catalogue sales, point-of-sale promotion and 
telemarketing. 
Indeed, these techniques have grown so fast, according to Bennack's figures, 
that direct mail now represents 14% of all advertising, and catalogue sales 10% 
of all retail sales. 
In 1986, the average American received three direct marketing solicitations 
each day, and half of all adults ordered something via mail. 
The growth will slow in the next five years. Still, telemarketing is expected 
to grow by 20% and direct mail by 11%, while traditional media, such as 
newspapers, television and magazine advertising, will grow by only 7%, Bennack 
said. 
And now, with deregulation, the regional "Baby Bell" telephone companies are 
seeking to move into electronic publishing and direct marketing, a specter that 
particularly worries publishers because the phone companies control the lines 
of communications. 
Tuesday, for example, New York Telephone announced a system that will connect 
anyone with a personal computer and a telephone to services offering everything 
from excerpts of USA Today and Newsday to stock quotes and home shopping. 
These factors are combining with more familiar pressures on newspapers. The 
industry has suffered a recession for more than a year now, in part because 
mergers resulted in a significant consolidation in the retail department 
stores. 
Not only has fewer retailers meant less advertising, but the survivors now 
carry so much debt that they have scaled back their ad budgets. Also, national 
advertising has never fully recovered from the recession of the early 1980s. 
And readership is still falling, particularly among young adults. In 1967, 
according to industry figures, 60% of people aged 18 to 29 read newspapers. By 
1986, that number had fallen to 33%. 
In response, some newspapers are now trying to use the same technology that is 
threatening their base. Some are experimenting with making their movie reviews 
available by telephone. Readers call in and get the review and show times for 
any movie they want, using the technology made possible by touch-tone phones 
and computer circuitry. 
The Providence (R.I.) Journal has several such phone services, including Soap 
Opera Updates, which offers a plot summary of the soaps in case a viewer missed 
an episode. And these are designed to work with the newspaper: Consumers must 
check the paper to get the daily access code for Soap Opera Update. 
The Ft. Worth Star-Telegram sells its wire service to readers via computer for 
less than $10 a month, and some papers are considering making their classified 
ad listings available by computer in a way that they are instantly up to date. 
Consumers don't have to wait for the next day's paper. 
The Boulder (Colo.) Daily Camera's Infocall service lets readers get sports and 
other information over the phone. Although the paper itself has only 30,000 
subscribers, it gets more than 77,000 calls on the service each month. 
Marginal Improvements 
And some papers, such as the Hartford Courant in Connecticut, are experimenting 
with making their next day's paper available by fax machine the afternoon 
before. 
But all of these are marginal improvements. More must be done, publishers 
believe, to change the basic product of the newspaper. 
Today, with rising immigrant populations, ethnic diversity and greater market 
segmentation in general, there are "fundamentally new markets that need 
fundamentally new newspapers," said consultant Urban. 
Even these, however, may not address the problem of bypass. For the economics, 
at least for now, favor the new direct marketing techniques. 
The cost of newspaper advertising, for instance, is rising at a much higher 
rate than the cost of direct marketing. Newspaper and TV advertising rates have 
risen 54% since 1982, well above inflation, Bennack said. Telephone marketing, 
meanwhile, has actually gotten cheaper. 
Direct marketing also aids consumers who "want help sorting through the 
clutter" of ever more confusing information and an increasing proliferation of 
products to buy, he noted. 
One of the audio-visual presentations that publishers saw this week said it 
simply. "Once life was simple," it began. "Those good old days are long gone." 
