TAKEOVER RUMORS FOLLOW F. HOFFMAN-LAROCHE ACTION 
Swiss drug giant F. Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Co. asked Friday for trading of its 
shares to be suspended pending an announcement on Monday, triggering market 
rumors that it might launch a major takeover or a restructuring. 
Immediately following the unusual announcement rumors swept through European 
and U.S. markets that Roche, the jilted suitor of U.S. drug company Sterling 
Drug, was planning to acquire another major pharmaceutical firm, namely Syntex 
Corp. 
Shares of Syntex jumped $2.875 to $47.25 and was the most actively traded stock 
on the New York Stock Exchange. Syntex declined comment, citing company policy. 
Roche said in a statement it would divulge "a series of measures which are of 
considerable significance for the structure and future development of the Roche 
group." A company spokesman declined to elaborate. 
Sources close to Roche said the company has been looking seriously at Syntex 
and U.S. drug concern Rorer Group Inc., which markets a successful line of 
non-prescription medicines. 
Named as Likely Suitor 
U.S. analysts generally ruled out the possibility that Roche was interested in 
SmithKline Beckman Corp. because of lock-out provisions in its merger agreement 
with Beecham Group PLC. Swiss and U.S. analysts said Roche's other potential 
targets include Schering-Plough Corp., Marion Laboratories Inc. and 
Warner-Lambert Co., but Syntex was the focus of much of the speculation Friday. 
Roche has been repeatedly named as a likely suitor for a U.S. drug company 
after its unsuccessful and hostile $4.2-billion bid for Sterling Drug last 
year. Sterling was subsequently bought by Eastman Kodak Co. for $5.1 billion. 
Roche's bid for Sterling prompted a wave of takeover speculation in the 
lucrative and clubby U.S. pharmaceutical industry, which is now undergoing the 
biggest consolidation in its history. 
Swiss and U.S. analysts, however, believe Roche will not announce a takeover 
Monday but instead may unveil a restructuring of its expensive shares and 
dividend rights certificates and outline the reorganization of its large 
chemicals business. 
"Roche is under siege and they will have to restructure and make an 
acquisition," said independent pharmaceutical analyst Hemant Shah, a former 
employee at Roche's U.S. headquarters in Nutley, N.J. 
Rumored to Have War Chest 
Shah said Roche invested hundreds of millions of dollars in fine chemicals 
about 15 years ago and is now losing business to lower-priced Japanese and 
other foreign competitors. Chemicals accounts for more than half of Roche's 
revenue. 
Roche has been rumored for months to be building a huge war chest for an 
acquisition. A revamp of Roche's 50-year-old share structure could help finance 
potential takeovers by widening its shareholder base, analysts said. 
