SAUDI KING ENDS CAIRO VISIT, PLEDGES TO SUPPORT EGYPT'S RETURN TO ARAB LEAGUE 
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, winding up the first visit to Cairo by a Saudi 
monarch in 15 years, Friday pledged his influential support for Egypt's 
reinstatement in the Arab League and endorsed the recent political concessions 
made by the PLO as a "rare opportunity" to negotiate peace in the Middle East. 
The Saudi monarch, in an interview with Egyptian newspaper editors, also 
confirmed that Riyadh will help finance the reconstruction of an Iraqi nuclear 
reactor destroyed by Israel in a 1981 air raid. 
Both Israeli and U.S. officials have warned that Iraq, like its antagonistic 
neighbor Iran, is trying to develop a nuclear weapons capability. While that 
effort was set back by the Israeli air strike against a French-made nuclear 
reactor near Baghdad nearly eight years ago, Rear Adm. Thomas A. Brooks, 
director of naval intelligence, testified recently before the House Armed 
Services Committee in Washington that Iraq was again "actively pursuing" a 
nuclear capability. 
Crash Nuclear Program 
Asked Friday about a Washington Post article quoting Israeli sources as saying 
that Iraq is engaged in a crash program to develop a nuclear warhead, President 
Bush said in Washington: "I don't want to give credence to the fact that Iraq 
is in the process of building nuclear weapons. I cannot confirm that. Anytime 
you see representations that there will be nuclear proliferation, it has got to 
concern us." 
King Fahd, in his remarks to the newspaper editors, which were published 
Friday, denied that the reactor in question was meant to manufacture nuclear 
weapons, which, he noted, Israel is widely assumed to already possess. 
Affirming Saudi Arabia's "readiness to help rebuild" the Iraqi nuclear plant, 
Fahd proposed that Israel and Iraq both agree to inspections by the 
Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency to "determine which (reactor) 
is for military uses: the one in Israel or the (Iraqi) one. . . . " 
The Saudi monarch was referring to Israel's top-secret nuclear facility at 
Dimona, which successive Israeli governments have refused to allow the IAEA to 
inspect. 
Flurry of Interest 
While Fahd's remarks about Iraq's postwar nuclear development plans provoked a 
flurry of interest among diplomats and other observers here, it was his strong 
and seemingly unequivocal endorsement of Egypt's readmission into the 22-member 
Arab League that was, from the Egyptian point of view, the most important 
outcome of his long-anticipated visit. 
"Egypt's presence within the Arab group is indispensable . . . to effective 
joint Arab action," Fahd said in a joint communique issued with Egyptian 
President Hosni Mubarak at the end of his five-day visit. 
The Arab League suspended Egypt's membership 10 years ago after Mubarak's 
predecessor, the late President Anwar Sadat, signed a separate peace treaty 
with Israel. Although most Arab countries, including Saudi Arabia, resumed 
diplomatic relations with Cairo more than a year ago, Egypt's formal return to 
the Arab fold has been stymied by opposition from Syria, which the normally 
skittish Saudis have been reluctant to antagonize. 
In the complex currents of inter-Arab politics, however, several recent shifts 
have emerged to prod the Saudis into taking a bolder stand on this issue. 
The most significant of these, Egyptian and other Arab analysts said, was an 
agreement last February among Iraq, Egypt, Jordan and Yemen to form the Arab 
Cooperation Council, a loose economic confederation. 
While the economic significance of this grouping is doubtful, given the 
near-bankrupt state of its members' economies, its political point was not lost 
on the Saudis, whose regional influence could be eclipsed by the emergence of 
any post-Persian Gulf War alliance between Iraq and Egypt, the two largest Arab 
military powers in the Middle East. 
Egypt and Iraq have been pressing the Saudis for more economic assistance, and 
the fact that Fahd's decision to visit both countries -- he stopped off in Iraq 
before coming to Egypt -- followed the Arab Cooperation Council's formation was 
not mere coincidence, a senior Egyptian official admitted privately. 
"The Saudis decided to come when they saw that Egypt's weight was being 
siphoned off toward Iraq and Jordan," this official said somewhat gleefully. 
The joint Egyptian-Saudi communique said the two sides had agreed to establish 
a committee to increase economic "cooperation," but there was no confirmation 
of local press reports suggesting that Fahd had ordered Saudi banks to lend 
Egypt $2 billion to meet a serious shortage of wheat and other essential 
commodities this year. There was also no indication that Fahd had brought Egypt 
a quick-fix check of several hundred million dollars, as had been rumored. 
However, if Fahd's visit failed to meet Egyptian expectations on the financial 
side, it clearly boosted Mubarak's prestige in several other ways, diplomats 
and Egyptian officials agreed. 
"Fahd in Cairo, more than any other single visit or event, symbolizes Egypt's 
return to the Arab fold," a Western diplomat said. 
By throwing his substantial weight behind Egypt's quest for readmittance into 
the Arab League, Fahd has virtually assured that Egypt's suspension will be 
lifted at the next Arab League summit, diplomats said. 
Because it speaks directly to Egyptians' sense of pride, the gesture of the 
visit is considered extremely important to Mubarak, who is facing growing 
discontent at home over inflation, food shortages and other increasingly 
visible signs of Egypt's worsening economic crisis. Indeed, the effusive, 
almost fulsome, fuss that Egypt made over Fahd seemed to be aimed at least as 
much at boosting Mubarak's image as Fahd's, analysts said. 
The support the Saudi monarch gave to Egypt's diplomatic efforts to convene a 
Middle East peace conference was also seen here as strengthening Mubarak's hand 
on the eve of his first visit to Washington since President Bush took office, 
the analysts added. 
Praising Bush as a "far-sighted thinker" who will "spare no effort to solve the 
Middle East problem," Fahd told the newspaper editors that Saudi Arabia "fully 
supports . . . the constructive position" on the peace process that Mubarak 
will try to persuade Bush to embrace when they meet in Washington on Monday. 
This position, the joint communique added, calls for the convening of an 
international peace conference, under the auspices of the U.N. Security 
Council, as "the only formula" that can lead to peace in the Middle East. 
The communique also endorsed the recent decisions by the Palestine Liberation 
Organization to renounce terrorism and recognize Israel's right to exist as a 
"positive development in the Palestinian position (that) offers a rare 
opportunity all the parties should seize to reach a just and comprehensive 
settlement" to the Middle East conflict. 
Mubarak held talks last week with King Hussein of Jordan and PLO Chairman 
Yasser Arafat to agree on the tack he will take in Washington. Now, with the 
added weight of Saudi Arabia's support, he will go to the White House with the 
enhanced stature of spokesman for an influential Arab consensus on the peace 
process, Egyptian officials said. 
