HOT TOPICS: HIGH LIFE A WEEKLY FORUM FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS; 
WEIGHING THE QUALITIES THAT OTHER PEOPLE LIKE 
Sometimes, a simple smile can win someone over. Other times, it takes delving 
under the surface a bit more. 
Hot Topics wonders, "What quality do people most like about you?" 
"People like the way I can encourage them to do something that they can succeed 
in. I get them to be optimistic and act more confident." 
Liza J. Gampon, 17, 
junior, Ocean View 
"My ability to listen -- I would like all of my friends to know that I'll be 
there for them if they need to talk to someone." 
Caroline Blair, 16, 
sophomore, Irvine 
"My kickback and easygoing attitude toward life." 
Chelsea Mitchell, 17, 
senior, Heritage 
"Because I'm gullible or they think I'm nice." 
Sun Kim, 16, 
sophomore, Villa Park 
pl,8.2 
"My demented sense of humor." 
Sean Addison, 17, 
junior, Savanna 
"My trust. I know if people spill their beans to me, I won't spill it all over 
the world." 
Sammy Yoo, 17, 
senior, Whittier Christian 
"People say I'm a good dancer." 
Amber Beregiggan, 18, 
senior, Fullerton 
"I don't argue much, I play tennis and I'm very agreeable." 
Scott Harvey, 15, 
sophomore, University 
"Because they want to know kids from other countries, and because I'm a little 
bit different from the American kids." 
Rikke Johansen, 17, 
senior, Liberty Christian 
"My competitiveness." 
Kevin MacAnich, 18, 
senior, Huntington Beach 
"The values and set of goals I have for myself." 
Jaron Fried, 15, 
sophomore, Katella 
"My tight pants." 
Nick Romo, 17, 
senior, Estancia 
"I'm sarcastic and I have a dark sense of humor. I'm even sometimes cocky, but 
I'm not sure if people like that or not." 
Kevin Randall, 18, 
senior, Capistrano Valley 
"My magnetic personality." 
Christy Westad, 15, 
sophomore, Laguna Hills 
"Only God really knows, but some people do admire my talents." 
Tonya Kovista, 15, 
sophomore, San Clemente 
"I can only hope that people like me for one reason: that I don't force them 
to." 
Shawn White, 17, 
junior, Ocean View 
"One of my friends described me as genuine. I think that was the ultimate 
compliment." 
Josette Varrato, 17, 
senior, Irvine 
"My personality and the way I care about people." 
Melissa Tedisco, 14, 
freshman, Liberty Christian 
"My beautiful eyes." 
Carrie Montalbano, 17, 
junior, Savanna 
"That I try to be a loyal friend; I won't turn my back on them." 
Chuck Bajaj, 16, 
sophomore, Huntington Beach 
"By making presumptions about what others think of you, all you succeed in 
doing is molding another person's mind. Whereas, they might be thinking 
something completely different about you, you might end up trying to live for a 
presumed reality." 
Jonathan Beck, 17, 
junior, Ocean View 
"I'm honest and to the point." 
Chummy Alexanian, 15, 
sophomore, Whittier Christian 
"My new car." 
Alysha Straub, 17, 
senior, Estancia 
"My friends like me because I'm honest, dependable and they know what to 
expect." 
Joel Griffin, 17, 
junior, University 
"I'm a giving person, and I'm willing to listen to other peoples' problems." 
Roselo Tobias, 17, 
junior, Capistrano Valley 
"Probably my creativity and artistic ability." 
Sarah Miller, 18, 
senior, San Clemente 
"My generosity of possessions and time." 
James Barret, 16, 
sophomore, Katella 
"I'm such a pushover." 
Taryn Smanot, 15, 
sophomore, Laguna Hills 
"People often think I'm a very quiet and shy person, but that's not true. I 
like to help people when they need help, and I speak up when someone is being 
treated unequally." 
Felice P. Hung, 17, 
senior, Ocean View 
"The ability to take things in stride and to not worry about what might 
happen." 
Jim Raugust, 18, 
senior, Whittier Christian 
"The way I am so different and daring." 
Sonal Kapadia, 16, 
sophomore, Irvine 
"My humility." 
Charlie Choi, 18, 
senior, Heritage 
"I'm empathetic. I guess people like that because they need someone to 
understand them." 
Michelle Jack, 17, 
junior, Capistrano Valley 
Next Week's Hot Topic: 
Of what are you superstitious? 
Hot Topic responses gathered by Tina Nguyen (Capistrano Valley), Sydney Truong 
(Estancia), Colleen Cruz (Fullerton), John Doney (Heritage), Jane Wey 
(Huntington Beach), Adria Silva (Irvine), Amy Johnson (Katella), Megan Kenney 
(Laguna Hills), Tom Prendergast (Liberty Christian), Felice Wu (Ocean View), 
Cindy Shaver (San Clemente), Jonathan Han (Savanna), Kiley Coble (University), 
Heather Lee (Villa Park) and Gabe Martinez (Whittier Christian). 
