OLVERA STREET UPGRADE 
Because Olvera Street in Los Angeles is the birthplace of the state's biggest 
city, people care about preserving it. Recently the parties most directly 
involved negotiated a tenuous compromise that could start the process of 
preservation -- if the agreement doesn't break down first. 
Under the compromise, city officials would grant Olvera Street's 77 small 
businesses the right to purchase up to 50% interest in any private project to 
rehabilitate the area. The merchants, some of whose families have been on the 
street since it was made into a tourist attraction in 1929, have been fearful 
that development could result in their replacement by an "overly commercialized 
Mexican Disneyland." 
City Councilman Richard Alatorre played a pivotal role in the compromise. Most 
of the property around Olvera Street is controlled by the city, and Alatorre 
represents the area. In the debate over Olvera Street's future, Alatorre has 
been critical of some of the demands made by the merchants. Many of the 
merchants, in turn, are suspicious of Alatorre. The potential problems that 
could scuttle the compromise stem from that estrangement. Some merchants want 
to control the entire Olvera Street development project,while Alatorre insists 
they should be content with 50%. The councilman also questions whether they can 
legally bid for full control of the project under the terms of the agreement. 
The city attorney's office studied Alatorre's question, and concluded that 
there is no legal reason to bar the merchants from bidding for the entire 
project. But Alatorre has raised a valid point, nonetheless. 
Even if the merchants can come up with the financial and technical wherewithal 
to oversee the Plaza's development -- a big assumption -- fairness dictates 
that the project be open to bid by all interested parties. If the merchants 
have the best bid, fine. If not, they must be willing take "no" for an answer. 
After all, with an offer of 50% control, they would have more say on the 
Plaza's future than they had when the negotiating began. 
More compromises are going to be necessary before Olvera Street is spruced up. 
For example, preservationists insist that special care is needed if the old 
buildings there are to be refurbished with historic accuracy. Their concerns 
must also be taken into account. They will be if everyone who cares about 
Olvera Street is willing to compromise even further. 
