DUCKS' FRIEND FILLS THE BILLS; 
WILDLIFE: ON ONE HAND, BIRDS AT A CONDO COMPLEX ARE SUSTAINED BY A RESIDENT'S 
SURRUPTITIOUS FEEDINGS. ON THE OTHER, THE CREEKS THEY THRIVE IN HAVE BEEN 
DRAINED. 
Each morning before daybreak, Evelyn Leeds crawls out of bed, wraps herself in 
warm clothes and heads into the darkness to break some rules. 
Armed with birdseed and a water bucket, Leeds creeps around her condominium 
complex to scatter food for the scores of ducks that have taken up residence in 
ornamental creeks in the development. Such secrecy is needed at the Quail Creek 
complex, where residents caught feeding the ducks are subject to fines at the 
discretion of the homeowners association. So far, Leeds has racked up $400 
worth. 
"They call me the duck lady of Quail Creek around here," said Leeds, a 
three-year resident of the 300-unit complex. "But it's carnage out there. If 
someone didn't feed those ducks and their babies, they would all die and I 
won't let that happen." 
Leeds decided to go public with her dilemma after a decision by the homeowners 
association this month to drain the cement-lined creeks, leaving the ducks and 
many recently hatched ducklings wallowing in silt. 
She believes the draining is part of an effort to rid the complex of the ducks, 
who now are so numerous that they waddle along Quail Creek sidewalks and 
parking lots. In the last few weeks, Leeds said, at least two ducks have been 
run over by cars and killed. 
"They just don't know where to go," Leeds said. 
Gylver Wagnon, president of the board of directors of the Quail Creek 
Homeowners Assn., said the timing of the creek drainage was unfortunate. Creeks 
must be cleaned periodically, Wagnon said, but the draining was not aimed at 
destroying the mallard and Muscovy ducks. 
"Some people are fonder of the ducks than others and not everyone agrees on how 
to deal with them," Wagnon said. "But I think everyone would have hoped that 
the cleaning and repairing of the creeks would have been finished before the 
baby ducklings came out. Usually, we try to do it during wintertime. But the 
collecting of permits and approvals took longer than expected." 
Feeding the ducks is not against the rules, per se, Wagnon said. But if the 
duck population is deemed responsible for damage to the grounds, someone who 
feeds the ducks can also be held responsible, he explained. 
"It's kind of like feeding the bears at Yellowstone," Wagnon said. 
The situation at Quail Creek presents a dilemma for state and federal wildlife 
officials, according to Lt. Mona Cole, supervisor of Orange County wardens for 
the state Department of Fish and Game. While state and federal laws protect and 
regulate migratory and domestic birds and animals, there are no laws governing 
birds residing in man-made creeks that are increasingly becoming part of the 
Southern California landscape, Cole said. 
"This is an issue that is becoming a problem for us," Cole said. "I don't think 
humans have thought this through enough. These are birds and animals who fit 
somewhere between wild and domestic and are extremely dependent." 
Whether intentionally or not, developers who install creeks and lakes in their 
projects are likely to lure wild birds and animals who end up relying on humans 
to a certain extent, Cole said. 
"Once you replace nature with some type of pseudo-habitat, you wind up with an 
animal who is dependent on that habitat. Then who is responsible for the 
well-being of these creatures?" Cole asked. "The impacts of development on 
wildlife, especially in a place like Orange County where this is happening so 
quickly, are just now being felt and being studied." 
The duck trouble at Quail Creek began to intensify about a year ago when the 
county drained a lake in nearby Laguna Niguel Regional Park, resulting in more 
ducks moving to the condo complex, Leeds said. 
"The ducks that were displaced came here and we had an overflow," she said. 
"They were fighting for space and food, quacking loudly, and people started 
complaining." 
By mid-April, ducklings began hatching alongside the creeks -- and then they 
were drained. "The babies are getting stuck" in the silt, Leeds said. "It's 
awful to watch." 
Another Quail Creek resident, Stephanie Newman, took up the plight of the ducks 
at a Thursday meeting of the homeowners association board. Newman said she 
asked the board what could be done to help the ducks while the creeks were 
drained. 
"I was told the duck situation would take care of itself," Newman said. 
Despite the risk of further fines, Leeds said she plans to continue her 
early-morning feedings. 
"It's terrible stuff to be forbidden to give them food or water. It's like 
Auschwitz," she said. "This is a beautiful spot outside, but some of the people 
inside are scary." 
