ASSEMBLY UNIT APPROVES PLAN TO RAISE GAS TAX 5 CENTS 
A proposal by Democratic Assembly leaders to raise the state's gasoline tax by 
5 cents a gallon was easily approved Wednesday by the Ways and Means Committee 
and sent to the floor of the lower house. 
With Republicans splitting their votes, the measure by Transportation Committee 
Chairman Richard Katz (D-Sylmar) and Speaker Willie Brown (D-San Francisco) won 
the endorsement of the fiscal and budget screening committee by a 15-6 vote. 
Two Republicans -- Assemblyman William Baker (R-Danville) and Assemblywoman 
Cathie Wright (R-Simi Valley) -- joined all the Democrats in approving the 
measure. But afterward, Baker cautioned that the Republican votes favoring the 
proposal should not be interpreted as a sign that Democrats are beginning to 
win over the GOP. 
"My vote means I want to see a transportation plan pass but I don't think it's 
in its final form yet," Baker said. "I think the state desperately needs a 
transportation plan for the next 10 years. I think Mr. Katz is a player and I 
want to encourage him." 
Baker said Republicans are still hoping that Democrats will compromise with 
Gov. George Deukmejian and agree that the gas tax proposal should be subject to 
voter approval in November. 
"Katz's bill is moving very, very well and I'm optimistic," he said. 
Both Katz's bill and a proposal by Sen. Quentin Kopp (I-San Francisco) for a 
10-cents-a-gallon gasoline tax hike require a two-thirds majority vote in both 
legislative houses, but do not need a vote of the people. 
Deukmejian has insisted that any gas tax increase must be approved by the 
voters. But Democratic lawmakers have steadfastly maintained that the 
Legislature would be abdicating its responsibility if it allows the electorate 
to make the ultimate decision on a gas tax hike. 
Katz's bill also calls for a 30% hike in most truck weight fees. Under the 
proposal, the gasoline tax and the fees would continue to be increased every 
two years for the next decade according to a formula based on the rate of 
inflation. 
By the year 2000, Katz said, the proposal would raise $21.5 billion in 
additional revenue to be used for upgrading state and local highways and 
improving and expanding mass transit facilities. 
State Spending Limit 
Although voters would not have to approve Katz's specific proposal, they would 
have to change the state spending limit before any funds raised by new gas 
taxes or truck weight fees could be spent. The spending limit, called the Gann 
amendment after anti-tax crusader Paul Gann, was approved in a statewide 
election in 1979. 
Deukmejian has proposed that the limit be modified to exempt any new revenues 
raised for transportation. Democrats have insisted that any modification must 
cover spending on an array of state services. The governor has proposed asking 
voters this November to both change the spending limit and authorize a gas tax 
increase. 
