RACKETEERING SUIT DISMISSED; NAMED BANK, 16 DEFENDANTS 
A federal judge has dismissed a civil racketeering suit against the Bank of San 
Pedro and 16 other defendants that alleged they conspired to bankrupt a local 
businessman who was trying to market a pollution-reducing fuel additive. 
Steven Richman, the bank's attorney, said the decision handed down Monday by 
U.S. District Court Judge William Rea clears the bank and prohibits any 
rehearing in federal court for the other defendants. 
Richman said the bank was named in the suit only because one of the defendants 
was a director. "There were no allegations of wrongdoing against the bank," he 
said. 
The suit, filed in February, alleged that James Birakos, former media liaison 
for the South Coast Air Quality Management District; Steven Podesta, a former 
Bank of San Pedro director, and others waged a three-year campaign of 
questionable business tactics, including check forgery and the use of spies to 
infiltrate a business owned by Richard Skaggs of San Pedro. 
The judge granted the bank's motion to dismiss the case, saying that there was 
no issue of fact involving the bank that could be decided at trial. But the 
ruling did not address factual issues involving other defendants and does not 
bar a suit in a state court against them on the same issues. 
Skaggs' attorney, Raymond Mulligan of Irvine, did not contest the bank's motion 
and said he plans to refile the case against all defendants except the bank in 
a state court in several weeks. "We feel we would have a cleaner and better 
shot at prevailing by pursuing a state action," he said. 
He added that the federal case had been hurt when two witnesses who had been 
expected to bolster the racketeering claims decided not to testify. 
Birakos said Thursday that he intends to bring a defamation suit against Skaggs 
because of the lawsuit. "It was a cheap publicity stunt and nothing beyond 
that," he said. "It is absolutely unbearable and unethical, and we are 
preparing litigation to right this awful deed." 
The dispute stems from Skaggs' efforts to market and distribute a fuel additive 
intended to reduce pollution. In 1987 he formed a company called Renergy 
International Inc., which Birakos still heads. 
Renergy was financed by Podesta, a major shareholder, with a $75,000 loan from 
the bank. 
Skaggs alleged that he was forced out of Renergy by the defendants and that 
when he tried to market the fuel additive under the name of his own company, 
Omstar Products, his former partners interfered, forcing Omstar into bankruptcy 
last year. 
The suit also alleged that Birakos forged Skaggs' signature on a $3,000 check 
made out to Birakos and that Podesta ordered a teller at the Bank of San Pedro 
to cash it. 
Birakos said there was no forgery and that Skaggs authorized him to sign the 
check. 
Once the two sides became competitors, the suit alleged, Birakos, Podesta and 
others affiliated with Renergy sent spies pretending to be potential customers 
to Omstar offices. 
Birakos said it was Skaggs who engaged in such tactics, once posing as a 
Renergy employee and instructing the post office to send Renergy mail to 
Omstar. 
Richman, attorney for the bank, said he had filed a motion for summary judgment 
and that Skaggs decided not to contest it. 
