THE COUSTEAU WATCH: THE LESSON TO BE LEARNED FROM VALDEZ 
At a small inlet on Knight Island in Alaska's magnificent Prince William Sound, 
thick oil smothered every rock, every pebble, every grain of sand, soaking the 
beach and covering my boots. 
I was traveling with David Lawn, district supervisor in Valdez for Alaska's 
Department of Environmental Conservation, on his hourly rounds as he tracked 
the recent massive oil spill from the Exxon tanker. Lawn lifted a stone with 
his toe. He loves the wild, untouched sound so much that his voice cracked when 
he spoke of what has happened to it. 
"There's even oil under rocks that probably have never been turned over by 
human hands," he said, nudging another stone as if trying to find perhaps just 
one that had escaped. 
David Grimes, a fisherman accompanying us, often set his salmon nets off this 
beach. "It will be a long time before we are fishing here again," he murmured 
wistfully, his eyes scanning the sea as two fishing boats slipped by, towing 
what looked like mere threads of orange boom. The boats were trying to gather 
one of the thousands of traveling oil slicks that had dispersed from the 
largest oil spill in U.S. history. 
It is not just that once-pure water is now marbled with globs of oil. It is not 
just that beaches have been so dirtied one would simply rather not look at 
them. It is not that I saw even bald eagles, the very symbol of the United 
States, sullied with grease. Or that these great birds will feed on oil-soaked 
animals and may die, too. It is that in Prince William Sound, the spill has 
created ecological anarchy. 
Standing on this island, sometimes ankle-deep in oil, I felt that the details 
of what happened the night the captain of the Exxon Valdez left his command 
were increasingly irrelevant. All that seemed to matter was how to prevent 
another Prince William Sound -- not just the spill itself, but its chaotic 
aftermath. 
We cannot eliminate human frailty or error. But we can at least equip ourselves 
with more than the hope it will never recur. 
Around the middle of May, seals will begin to pup on beaches that, when I saw 
them, were covered by oil. In June, salmon migrations will start. Waterfowl 
begin migrating en masse into Prince William Sound early in May. Will these 
creatures be safe? Not unless the cleanup proceeds with much more precision 
than it has. 
Of course, currents, weather and time move the oil unpredictably. Yet, I 
watched from a helicopter while the oval trap of an oil skimmer uselessly 
collected apparently unsoiled water, even as oil slicks floated free on either 
side. Obviously, the skimmer's operator could not see the oil from water level. 
I wondered why they didn't use planes and helicopters to spot for the skimmers. 
Later, the question was put to Dennis Kelso, Alaska's commissioner of 
Environmental Conservation. "We've been asking that ourselves for two weeks," 
he said on April 7 at the airport, speaking of the cleanup effort mounted by 
Exxon and the U.S. Coast Guard. 
At a press conference the next day, Coast Guard officials agreed that spotting 
was the most effective way for skimmers to work. But no one seemed able to 
explain why the system hadn't been adequately used since the oil first spilled 
out of control. 
Nothing as complicated as the Prince William cleanup can operate perfectly. But 
all on the scene, as well as President Bush, have agreed that the spill exposed 
a terrifying fact: Contingency plans for such an occurrence were almost totally 
inadequate for an accident of this size and type, where so much oil spilled in 
such an environmentally sensitive area so quickly. 
Perhaps I was swept up in the emotion of seeing the oil spill's devastating 
effects, but it seems to me that ports handling oil in volume ought to 
immediately establish emergency response centers, as common to each as a city 
hall. Such centers must be more than words on paper. They would store adequate 
cleanup equipment, coordinate emergency housing and communications, and above 
all hold regular drills for resident cleanup personnel so that a meaningful 
response can be tested and refined -- in good weather, bad weather, all 
weather. 
Better cleanup capability will have to become a cost of doing business in oil, 
not only in the United States, but throughout the world, for this accident 
could have occurred with any ship, any captain, anywhere. 
Perhaps the sound will be back to "normal" in 10 or 15 years. But for many who 
live and work on the sound, it might as well be for the rest of their lives. 
As I left Knight Island, I noticed a single white feather on the ground. I 
thought it was the only unspoiled trace in this dark place. But David Grimes, 
too, had a find. He picked up a tiny shell, the size of his fingernail, 
apparently untouched by the spill. "Here's a clean one for the future," he 
said, smiling his first small smile of the day. 
The only adequate response to the events of Prince William Sound is to try to 
ensure that they never happen again. Otherwise, all of this will just have been 
a very expensive and tragic practice run. 
