TALK IN OIL CLEANUP TURNS FROM SAVING SPILL AREA TO RESTORING WHAT'S BEEN LOST 
The incessant whir of helicopters and whine of small planes fill the air over 
Valdez these days, and a sign on the airport terminal door reminds people to 
remove oily boots before coming inside. 
In dingy motel rooms, scientists hunker over computers and squint at walls 
plastered with maps. 
Out on the water, shimmery ribbons and pudding glops of oil still taunt an 
ever-growing fleet of vessels and experts hired to clean up the worst oil spill 
in U.S. history. 
Three weeks after the tanker Exxon Valdez gushed millions of gallons of crude 
oil into Prince William Sound, the frantic battle has turned into a weary war. 
There is no longer talk of whether this fragile environment can be saved, but 
what can be salvaged. 
"We're entering a new phase, and that's damage assessment," said Dr. William 
Evans, administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
"Our focus in the coming months and years will be to determine what will be 
necessary to restore or replace the fisheries and other natural resources that 
have been lost as a result of this spill," Evans told a news conference after 
arriving in Valdez on Thursday. 
The new phase is one of painstaking detail and bungled bureaucracy, of manpower 
at its most tedious and machinery at its most sophisticated. 
It is the phase where victories are measured by the number of oiled otters 
scrubbed clean with dish-washing detergent or by the number of feet of 
containment boom shielding a salmon hatchery. 
Severe Effects Expected 
Although long-term effects of the spill are expected to be severe, for now, at 
least, there is a feeling that the oil has taken its best shot. 
"We're not expecting further damage," said Ed Wieliczkiewicz, public affairs 
officer here for the U.S. Coast Guard, which is overseeing the spill response. 
Despite the armies of manpower and machinery, it is clear that nature so far 
has done more than man to heal the horrible wound. 
Wind and waves have churned the heavy black pool from the Good Friday spill 
into a thinner, far-flung spatter. 
So far, the state has identified more than 3,000 individual beaches or 
shorelines requiring cleanup, but has evaluated and given the go-ahead for work 
on only 44. 
Assessment of the soiled beaches includes archeological surveys and careful 
scheduling to avoid heavy activity during mating or reproductive seasons for 
any of the marine mammals or 30 species of birds in the sound. 
The rock-by-rock swabbing Exxon has undertaken at a few of the islands hit by 
the first thick wave of oil has proven inadequate, and tests involving 
high-pressure hoses were under way this week. 
"I don't think beach cleanup will return Prince William Sound to its original 
condition," said Dennis Kelso, commissioner of the state Department of 
Environmental Conservation. 
"We can only mitigate the damage, not eliminate it," he added. 
Exxon agreed Thursday to put $15 million in escrow for damage assessment alone 
-- a sum Evans described as a mere "down payment" to the state and federal 
government. 
Exxon spokeswoman Jan Cool said no figures were available for the overall cost 
of the cleanup so far. 
And while the company has set no target date to complete the monstrous task, 
nature has deadlines of her own in this frozen wilderness. 
"We have a fairly short opportunity to work in the sound now before the weather 
changes in August or September," Kelso said. 
"We've got this window between now and the end of summer and then, if the work 
is not completed, it will have to wait until next season," he said. 
But scientists say that the longer the delay, the tougher the job, since the 
oil is gradually solidifying onshore into hard, asphalt chunks. 
Meanwhile, the toll of injured otters and birds is multiplying quickly enough 
to warrant a second rehabilitation center. 
The state Department of Fish and Game estimates that the 250 otters and 1,407 
birds reported dead represent only a "minuscule percentage of the animals being 
lost to this event." 
Biologists say they will never know the full extent of damage. Oiled birds may 
not die until they're inland, where their carcasses will provide poisoned 
picnics for bears and other animals. 
Some 11 million waterfowl and shore birds are expected to migrate through 
Prince William Sound in a few weeks, and the first humpback whales already have 
been spotted. 
Many of the birds will pass over the eastern edge of the sound without 
encountering the oil -- unless Alaska's fickle spring storms change the 
direction of the slick. 
Since the March 24 disaster, about 40% of the oil has evaporated or dispersed 
naturally. Barely 8% has been recovered by skimming or burning. The remaining 
oil appears to be split almost equally between Prince William Sound, the Gulf 
of Alaska and the shoreline. 
A Soviet super-skimmer is expected to arrive in about a week to help vacuum the 
water's surface, and Exxon continues to do trial applications of chemical 
dispersants on small patches of oil. 
110 Cleanup Vessels 
Altogether, according to Exxon, about 1,000 contractors are working on the 
cleanup effort. The arsenal also includes 110 vessels and dozens of aircraft. 
The sheer scope of the task and the tangled string of state and federal 
agencies involved has resulted in snarls on virtually a daily basis: equipment 
being sent to the wrong site, workers idled for hours while waiting for 
instructions, precious time squandered on official forms or permits or 
requests. 
"Whenever you have a large operation with a number of agencies, there is going 
to be an opportunity for logistical problems," conceded Cool. 
Kelso puts it more bluntly: "There are lots of ways things can get screwed up." 
Two national consumer organizations urge a boycott of Exxon gasoline. Business, 
Page 2. 
