MISDIRECTED ACCUSATIONS BY TOM ELY 
Ventura County Community College District Trustee Tom Ely's excuses and 
explanations regarding his alleged gambling debts, car accident and 
questionable spending of district funds are hard to swallow and even harder to 
stomach. 
It's obvious he has placed blame everywhere but where it should be placed. 
First, he says, the dumb cops didn't properly analyze the seriousness of the 
car accident and therefore didn't properly deduce that he and his wife, Ingrid, 
were injured. 
Then, some horrible person in the name of medical science prescribed 
painkillers that clouded his and his wife's judgment. 
Next, those nasty old people from the casino took advantage of said clouded 
judgment, forced the Elys to accept a free room, poured free alcohol down their 
throats and caused them to run up a sizable debt on top of the one they already 
owed. 
Next, some evil person uncovered and released information about the gambling 
debts in an attempt to destroy Ely's bid for county supervisor. 
Then, those rotten reporters misquoted Ely and misreported facts. 
Next, the terribly negligent college district put a phone and fax machine in 
Ely's home and even approved a rental car because his car was being repaired. 
It also approved sending Ely, and in some instances his wife, on several 
trustee trips, conferences and conventions, all in the name of conducting 
district business. 
Some of his fellow trustees, scoundrels that they are, had the audacity to 
question his ethics, judgment and expenditures. An auditing firm called in to 
investigate Ely's expense record wasn't smart enough to understand district 
policy, and that, compounded by the inept way the district's administrative 
services handles record-keeping, led to an erroneous report. 
To top things off, that publicity-seeking district attorney dared to do his job 
and initiated a criminal investigation of Ely's expenditure of college district 
funds, and some cold-hearted judge ruled in favor of some high-rolling, 
freewheeling bankers and lawyers whose flawed records indicate that Ely hasn't 
paid his bills. 
It is hard to believe that the person at the center of all this attention is 
completely in the right and without guilt while all the other people or 
entities are misinformed, misguided, mistaken or just plain malicious. 
Consequently, it is not hard to believe actions that were dumb, horrible, 
nasty, evil, rotten, negligent, inept, erroneous, publicity-seeking, 
cold-hearted, high-rolling, freewheeling or flawed were more likely made by 
that person. 
I heartily call for Ely's resignation as a trustee of the college district. 
Furthermore, I would find the other trustees remiss in their responsibilities 
if they do not do likewise. 
TERRY JUMP 
Oxnard 
