EXPERTS SPLIT ON JAIL TIME FOR PETE ROSE 
Legal experts were divided today over whether Pete Rose will have to serve jail 
time for his income tax offenses. 
"It's a total wild card. You never know what the outcome is going to be," 
former Abscam prosecutor Thomas P. Puccio said. "There is no usual thing. The 
tendency has been to treat each one of these cases on its own facts. If you 
commit a bank robbery, you go to jail. With tax charges, it's not so clear." 
Rose pleaded guilty today to filing false federal income tax returns for 1985 
and 1987. He could get up to six years in prison and a $500,000 fine, but U.S. 
District Judge S. Arthur Spiegel probably will not sentence him for several 
months. 
"Pete Rose was a legend and a hero to so many of us baseball fans. But if he 
seriously violated our tax laws, he should not be treated like a legend but 
like anybody else and face the prospect of hard jail time," New York state 
Atty. Gen. Robert Abrams said. 
Hotel queen Leona Helmsley took her tax case to trial last year and was 
sentenced to four years and fined $7.1 million. However, she was convicted on 
33 counts -- including conspiracy, evasion and fraud charges -- and was accused 
of avoiding $1.8 million in taxes. Rose admitted under-reporting his income by 
$354,968 over a four-year period. 
"My own view is that neither Pete Rose nor Leona Helmsley belongs in jail," 
said Harvard Law School professor Alan M. Dershowitz, Helmsley's appellate 
lawyer. "But whatever the appropriate sentence is in this should be equally 
applicable to a fallen baseball hero as well as to the wife of a hotel chain 
magnate. 
"If he ends up getting a lesser sentence than she got, a think a lot of 
Americans will regard it as sexist justice and improper justice. My hope is 
that neither serve any time in prison. I think both have been punished enough 
by the public outcry and the public scrutiny of their lives." 
Steven B. Duke, a law professor at Yale, thinks Rose probably will do time. 
"It is the position of the Justice Department that tax evaders should go to 
jail," Duke said. "It would be rather hard for a judge to say that an exception 
should be made here. But it wouldn't be outrageous for him not to go to jail. 
Maybe weekends or something like that." 
