ANALYSIS; 
MIDEAST EDGES INTO BALANCE OF TERROR MODE 
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's threat to strike back with chemical weapons in 
the event of an Israeli attack has formally introduced the deterrent 
balance-of-terror concept to the volatile Middle East, Israeli analysts say. 
Israel completed the equation by responding with veiled threats of massive 
retaliation. 
This give-and-take Monday gave rhetorical shape to a development long in the 
making: buildups by Israel and the Arab powers, notably Syria and Iraq, to make 
it too costly for either to try to destroy the other. 
Israel has its top-secret, if well-known, atomic weapons program. Iraq and 
Syria have chemical weapons and perhaps the capability of delivering them with 
missiles. 
Zeev Eytan, a researcher at the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies in Tel 
Aviv, commented: "Hussein's contribution is to make his threat known. Until 
now, he had always denied reports of a chemical buildup or was silent on them. 
Hussein has taken a step to making a deterrent credible. He has announced it." 
Hussein's open threat has prompted Israel to try to frighten him out of using 
chemical arms. 
A statement by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir assured Hussein that Israel 
harbors no aggressive intentions against anyone -- an apparent effort to allay 
fears that Israel is prepared to launch an attack on Iraqi missile 
installations or chemical weapons plants. 
The soft touch was followed by a brandishing of Israel's own deterrent 
potential. 
"Israel is strong, the force is with it, and Iraq is not out of the range of 
our ability to harm it severely," former Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin said. 
"We should take (Hussein's) words into account. On the other hand, we have a 
smashing response, many-fold stronger than the threats of Saddam Hussein." 
The "smashing response," Israeli analysts believe, is Israel's stockpile of 
nuclear weapons. 
Israeli experts noted that Hussein's threat expanded the potential use of 
chemical weapons beyond what Iraq had dared before. In its war with Iran, Iraq 
used chemical weapons on its own citizens -- Kurdish guerrillas -- and against 
Iranian troops, first to turn them back and later, on at least two occasions, 
to spearhead an offensive. 
Hussein stopped short of attacking Iranian cities with chemical weapons, 
something he has now threatened against Israel. 
"The rules of the game have changed," said Dore Gold, another researcher at the 
Jaffee Center. 
Along with the rules, the language is also changing. Terms like first strike 
and assured destruction are being thrown around, as if the language of the Cold 
War had migrated south. 
Many question marks remain in the military balance between Israel and Iraq, 
analysts caution. For example, it is not clear that Iraq actually has the 
binary chemical weapons Hussein apparently alluded to Monday. Binary chemical 
weapons consist of two different chemicals, which are relatively harmless while 
separated but can be deadly when combined. They are the type usually put in 
missiles. 
Hussein may have been referring to some combination such as, say, mustard gas 
and cyanide, rather than truly binary materials, Israeli experts conjecture. 
Israel observers have little doubt that Iraq aspires to build such weapons -- 
and to go beyond that. The recent disclosure of an Iraqi attempt to obtain 
triggers for nuclear bombs confirmed that Iraq wants to revive a program to 
make nuclear weapons. 
Sooner or later, according to analyst Gerald Steinberg of Bar-Ilan University, 
Iraq will acquire nuclear weapons. 
"The question," Steinberg said, "is what should Israel's response be? I think 
the Israeli government is moving toward a different position, a position of 
deterrence . . . meaning that any move to deploy those weapons, or attempt to 
put them on missiles or aircraft that could be used against Israel, would lead 
to an Israeli first strike." 
Don Kerr, a military analyst with the International Institute for Strategic 
Studies in London, suggested that Hussein's speech was double-edged, meant to 
rattle the chemical saber but, more important, to insist that Iraq is not 
developing a nuclear capability and should not be the target of an Israeli 
preemptive strike. 
By Kerr's reasoning, whatever Iraq may have in terms of chemical warheads, its 
delivery system is not yet ready to threaten Israeli cities. 
"It's not a threat of enormous significance" in terms of what damage or loss of 
life the Iraqis might be able to inflict, Kerr said. But it does have other 
effects: It stirs fear, and fear creates instability. 
The main message of Hussein's speech, Kerr said, should be read in nuclear 
terms: "Leave me alone, you have no reason to be afraid of me." Of the chemical 
threat, he said, "It represents Hussein to the Arabs as a strongman." 
If Israel perceives a real threat in Iraq's chemical arsenal, it is faced with 
a dilemma in terms of its response. The Israeli armed forces have a limited 
number of chemical weapons, Israeli officials have said, and only for 
experimental purposes. That leaves Israel with conventional weapons -- rifles, 
artillery, tanks and jets -- or nuclear weapons, with nothing in between for a 
calibrated response. 
A military source said: "What would be Israel's answer to a chemical attack? Or 
its use on the battlefield? Nuclear? It's something that has to be considered." 
There is a growing perception that Israel will not launch a preemptive strike 
to destroy either Iraqi missiles or chemical weapons facilities. Israeli 
warplanes knocked out an Iraqi nuclear reactor nine years ago, but times have 
changed, experts here say. 
At the time of the attack on the reactor, Iraq was preoccupied with its war 
with Iran. (That conflict is now on hold after a cease-fire was signed in 
August, 1988.) Also, Iraq lacked the missile punch to hit Israel from afar. 
Recently, Hussein has placed missiles within range of Tel Aviv. 
Some Israeli observers still view Syria, which has troops within minutes of 
Israel's borders, as a greater threat than the Baghdad government. Iraq must 
still keep an eye out for Iran. In addition, Iraq's large armies would need 
three days to cross Jordan and arrive at Israeli-controlled territory. 
"You can create a lot of havoc with chemical weapons," Arye Shalev, a retired 
army general, suggested, "but you can't conquer a country with them. You need 
the troops on the ground for that." 
Daniel Williams reported from Jerusalem and Nick B. Williams Jr. reported from 
Nicosia, Cyprus. 
BACKGROUND 
International law forbids the use of chemical weapons but not their manufacture 
or stockpiling. The United States and Soviet Union are known to have sizable 
stockpiles of nerve gases and similar chemical weapons. According to the 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, at least eight other 
countries are reliably reported to have them: Afghanistan, France, Iran, Iraq, 
North Korea, Libya, Syria and Vietnam. In addition, six other countries -- 
Myanmar (Burma), China, Egypt, Ethiopia, Israel and Taiwan -- are thought to 
have such weapons. 
