PROSECUTOR SUSPENDED; LED PROBE OF ALLEGED MAFIOSO 
A federal prosecutor who headed a controversial investigation into a reputed 
organized crime figure's business ties to MCA Inc. has been suspended from his 
job and barred from his office at the Los Angeles organized crime strike force, 
The Times has learned. 
Marvin Rudnick, who had been at odds with his Justice Department superiors 
since 1987 over the Salvatore Pisello-MCA investigation, was notified last 
Thursday that he has been placed on paid leave pending a decision on whether to 
fire him, according to knowledgeable sources. 
Rudnick was called into the office of strike force chief John L. Newcomer, 
ordered to hand over his keys to the office and then escorted out of the 
Federal Building in downtown Los Angeles, sources said. 
Justice Department officials refused to confirm the report, calling it a 
"personnel matter," and Rudnick's lawyer said he was warned by department 
officials in Washington not to make any statement. 
"We've been, I guess you could say, warned by the Justice Department in 
Washington not to make any statement about this, and we intend to abide by 
that," said the attorney, Michael L. Kadish. 
Rudnick, 41, has been the subject of an internal Justice Department inquiry 
stemming from his handling of a strike force investigation into Pisello's 
business dealings with MCA Records from 1983 to 1985. 
In September, 1987, MCA lawyers met with top officials of the U.S. attorney's 
office in Los Angeles and later hired an influential Washington attorney to 
contact the top leadership of the Justice Department's organized crime and 
racketeering section about Rudnick's handling of the investigation, which they 
characterized as irresponsible. 
After complaints from MCA that the prosecutor was maligning the company with 
unsupported organized crime allegations, Rudnick's superiors reportedly ordered 
him to limit the investigation to allegations that Pisello had evaded taxes on 
his income from MCA. 
Convicted of Tax Evasion 
Pisello, who has been identified by the FBI as a member of New York's Gambino 
crime family, was convicted last year of evading taxes on more than $300,000 in 
income earned in a series of transactions with MCA's records division. Rudnick 
tried the case under Newcomer's close supervision. 
None of the MCA executives who dealt with Pisello were charged with any 
wrongdoing. All said they had been unaware of Pisello's alleged Mafia ties, 
which he himself has vehemently denied. 
According to a variety of federal sources, the Justice Department's office of 
professional responsibility opened an investigation to determine, among other 
things, whether Rudnick had violated federal grand jury secrecy laws by 
publicly revealing that top MCA executives had notified him of their intention 
to exercise their 5th Amendment privilege against self-incrimination if called 
to testify about the Pisello case. 
The office's findings have not been made public, but sources close to the probe 
have said the report supported Rudnick on the grand jury secrecy issue. The 
report did, however, conclude that Rudnick has been insubordinate with his 
superiors. 
On Thursday, sources said, Newcomer handed Rudnick a one-page letter signed by 
Edward S. G. Dennis Jr., acting assistant attorney general for the department's 
criminal division. Attached to the letter was a memorandum to Dennis from David 
Margolis, chief of the Justice Department's organized crime unit, which stated, 
in effect, that Rudnick had not been following orders from Newcomer. 
"This is to notify you that you are being placed in a temporary non-duty status 
with pay effective immediately upon your receipt of this letter for the period 
of time necessary to consider and resolve the accompanying proposal to remove 
you from federal service," said the letter, the contents of which were read to 
The Times. 
Rudnick may be entitled to an internal hearing, some sources said, and is 
expected to seek help from current and former Justice Department attorneys, 
some of whom have told The Times they believe he is being "railroaded." 
'Barbaric and Unconscionable' 
John DuBois, a former strike force attorney who worked with Rudnick on the 
Pisello case, said he does not believe Rudnick did anything wrong. "Their 
action is barbaric and unconscionable," he said of the decision to suspend 
Rudnick. 
Rudnick has prosecuted a number of high-profile white-collar crime cases during 
his 13-year government career. He has been a special attorney with the Los 
Angeles strike force for the last nine years. Rudnick is married to Times staff 
writer Kathryn Harris. 
This story was reported by William K. Knoedelseder Jr., Kim Murphy and Ronald 
L. Soble. 
