THE COLLEGES / MIKE HISERMAN; 
CSUN CLEARS THE AIR THEN SECURES PLAYOFF BERTH 
With six matches left in the regular season, a playoff berth seemed assured for 
the Cal State Northridge men's volleyball team -- until a four-game losing 
streak turned certainty into doubt. 
The Matadors needed at least one victory in their last two matches to clinch 
their first playoff appearance, and both matches were on the road against 
Brigham Young. 
So what does one do? 
If you're Coach John Price, you call a team meeting. 
The move might have scored few points for originality, but at least it was 
effective. 
After a nearly three-hour meeting April 5, Northridge swept its final two 
Western Intercollegiate Volleyball Assn. matches and just might pull an upset 
or two in the WIVA's postseason tournament beginning Wednesday at CSUN. 
Price had called team meetings before but never at such length. "I had no 
intention of it lasting that long," he said, "but there was a lot said. 
"It wasn't yelling and screaming. It was mostly me begging and pleading. We 
were really down on ourselves and I was trying to make a point that we were 
still in a great spot." 
Price did most of the talking, except when the players asked him to leave so 
they could hash out problems among themselves. 
There had been an unusual amount of finger-pointing during the team's losing 
streak, Price said. Some teams might have talent enough to rise above such 
squabbles, but the 1990 Matadors are not among those. 
"In volleyball, you really have a lot of egos," Price said. "More teams than 
not rely on pure talent. Our talent alone is not good enough. Our talent is 
good, but we still have to play together and we weren't doing it." 
Price reminded the players of already established goals. 
"We wanted to make the league tournament," Price said. "But we also wanted to 
be the type of team that played together, encouraging each other. 
"But the point of the whole thing at the end was, is this just talk, or are we 
really going to do what we're talking about?" 
So far, it appears as though the players are serious. Northridge is 13-10 and 
ranked eighth in Division I. Since the two wins at BYU, Price said, there has 
not been a bad practice. 
Bird in the hand: Price spent most of Thursday morning driving to a recruit's 
home, believing that he would return with a signed letter of intent. Instead, 
the player changed his mind and asked for a few more days to decide. 
Such is the life of a college coach. But no matter how frustrating things get 
on the recruiting trail, Price knows that he already has one ace in the hole. 
Bill Ortgiesen, a 6-foot-6 outside hitter, is an impact player waiting in the 
wings. Ortgiesen, a transfer from UC Santa Barbara who is redshirting this 
season, already might be the team's best passer, according to Price. 
Prime time: Thursday's setback aside, Price has found a receptive audience on 
the recruiting trail this season. 
"It's funny, but when you win it's like your opinion is valid all of a sudden," 
Price said. Credit CSUN's three-game sweep of Pepperdine on live cable 
television with an assist. 
In previous years on the summer-camp circuit, Price often found himself 
explaining where Northridge was -- even to players from such Southland areas as 
Orange County and Manhattan Beach. 
"Now when I call a kid or a coach and say, 'I don't know if you're familiar 
with our program, but . . .' They'll say, 'Oh, yeah, I saw you guys on Prime 
Ticket. You guys are good.' " 
Two-liners: Kevin Franklin, the former Taft High guard and The Times' Valley 
Player of the Year in 1987, has left the Nevada Reno basketball team, citing 
personal reasons. Franklin led Reno in scoring with a 19.2 average last season, 
but he struggled after the death of his mother in January, never again scoring 
more than 20 points in a game. . . 
With Scott Sharts back in pitching form, Northridge Coach Bill Kernen has been 
able to set a pitching rotation for the first time this season. CSUN's starters 
in four games next week will be the same as they were this week -- Sharts, 
Craig Clayton, Vale Lopez and freshman John Bushart. . . 
The Northridge softball team can secure its eighth consecutive California 
Collegiate Athletic Assn. championship by winning three of four games against 
Cal State Bakersfield and Cal State Dominguez Hills this weekend. CSUN (7-1 in 
conference play) needs at least a split against Bakersfield (10-2), which has 
beaten the Lady Matadors in six of their past eight meetings over two years. . 
. 
Percy Knox of Arizona moved into second place on the Pacific-10 Conference list 
in the long jump with a personal best of 26 feet 3 inches in a meet last 
Saturday. As an Antelope Valley High senior, Knox won the 1987 state title. . . 
Paavo Salmi, the Cal Lutheran tennis player who suffered a collapsed lung while 
playing in a hockey game last month, returned to the court Thursday when CLU 
played at Westmont. Salmi, who still has separated ribs, will have to work his 
way back up the ladder to the No. 1 position he had held. 
