ECONOMY UNSETTLING GOP'S STRATEGY IN WYOMING RACE 
Wyoming is one of the most overwhelmingly Republican states in the union, yet 
local Republicans felt pressured to prevail upon Senate Minority Leader Bob 
Dole to make the long trip here Thursday to help Craig Thomas against Democrat 
John Vinich in a special congressional race. 
That move speaks volumes about the peril facing the GOP -- and the opportunity 
offered Democrats -- in this state and throughout this economically hard-hit 
region. 
Indeed, even as Dole was flying here from Washington, the Commerce Department 
released figures showing that the Rocky Mountain region had slipped into last 
place in per capita income for the first time since the government started 
keeping such figures 60 years ago. The regional average was $14,282, 13% below 
the national average of $16,444. 
"The economy here is lousy," said Dr. Louis Stadnik, a retired ophthalmologist 
and longtime Republican who came to the airport to hear Dole. "If this guy 
(Thomas) goes down, the Democrats can win anywhere." 
Worried About Losing Face 
Right now both sides agree that the race is too close to call. But in 
Washington, Republican leaders are badly worried about losing face in this 
contest for Wyoming's only House seat, which will be decided Wednesday. 
Republican Dick Cheney won that seat with 68% of the vote last November, but he 
vacated it to become defense secretary. A GOP defeat here, coming on the heels 
of setbacks in two other special elections in the last month in districts 
George Bush swept easily last November, could well damage Republican efforts to 
recruit candidates to challenge the Democratic control of Congress in 1990. 
But there's more at stake than prestige. For both parties the Wyoming campaign 
is a crucible for testing their strategies in the struggle for the Mountain 
West. 
Republicans have dominated this region, stretching from Canada to Mexico, from 
the Sierra Nevadas to the edge of the Great Plains, in presidential and 
congressional elections for a decade. In Wyoming they have controlled both 
Senate seats and the House seat since 1978. 
Now, however, political pros and scholars think the Democrats have a chance to 
turn the tide, largely as a result of what Dole called the "double whammy" that 
has afflicted the region: the simultaneous slump in the key industries of 
agriculture and mining. 
"This region is more up for grabs than at any time since the 1970s," said Prof. 
David Magleby of Brigham Young University, a specialist on party strength in 
the region. 
"I know that Wyoming has been hit on the chin more than once," Dole told a 
rally here Thursday. "But things are getting better. More jobs are being 
created. And that's the name of the game." 
Democrat Vinich, who came within a whisker of defeating Republican Sen. Malcolm 
Wallop last November, has his own ideas about that. He attributes Wyoming's 
problems in large part to alleged Republican failure to deal with unfair 
foreign trade practices. 
"Washington is letting countries like Japan, Korea and West Germany get away 
with too much," one Vinich commercial charges. "Between cheap foreign labor and 
unfair trade barriers they're hurting America, and I'm tired of seeing Wyoming 
people and Wyoming's economy pay the price." 
Thomas, like Vinich a state legislator, contends that Wyoming must look to the 
private sector, particularly small business, for more jobs. 
This week Thomas issued a 13-point plan for creating jobs, pledging among other 
things to support a proposed Wyoming-to-California natural gas pipeline and to 
fight environmental proposals that might hinder the marketability of Wyoming 
coal. "My first and last priority will be fighting for Wyoming people and 
jobs," he declared." 
Both candidates have had trouble getting their messages across. First, Thomas 
was forced to refute reports, based on an interview with Edward J. Rollins, 
co-chairman of the national House Republican Campaign Committee, that Rollins 
had taken personal charge of Thomas' campaign. 
Then, Vinich got himself into trouble by charging that a bill Thomas supported 
in the Legislature would allow early release of some convicts by shifting 
prisoners from state prisons to county jails. That assertion was disputed by 
former Gov. Ed Herschler, who happens to be a Democrat. 
Some voters have been turned off by the campaign. "There's been too much 
mudslinging all around," said Carol Christensen, a Glen Rock housewife as she 
browsed through a shopping mall near Casper, the state's largest city. 
John Loos, a retired oil worker from Casper, said he had intended to vote for 
Vinich in hopes of boosting the economy. "But I've read so many bad things 
about him that I don't know what to do." 
Whatever the confusion about the candidates there's little doubt about the 
state's economic difficulties. Wyoming's labor force peaked in 1982 at 241,000 
when demand for energy was still relatively strong. By last February that 
figure had dropped to just under 208,000. 
Though the economic decline began during Ronald Reagan's first term, it did not 
appear to affect Reagan's appeal. 
