CREATIONISTS SUE FOR RIGHT TO GIVE MASTER'S DEGREE; 
EDUCATION: INSTITUTE IN SANTEE SAYS THE STATE HAS VIOLATED ITS CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHTS BY WITHDRAWING ITS PERMISSION TO ISSUE DEGREES. 
A small, private Christian graduate school filed suit in federal court Friday 
alleging that the state Department of Education, Superintendent of Public 
Instruction Bill Honig and other state administrators have violated its 
constitutional rights by withdrawing its license to issue master's degrees. 
In a 23-page complaint filed in U. S. District Court in San Diego, attorneys 
for the Institute for Creation Research in Santee alleged that Honig and his 
department have deprived the school of freedom of speech, free exercise of 
religion and due process. The suit seeks an injunction against the state for 
withdrawing its approval, unspecified damages and court costs. 
"The question is not what view of origins is correct," the suit says, "but 
whether a private institution may be forced to indoctrinate its students in the 
state-approved interpretation and to censor an alternative interpretation." 
In March, after a state Board of Education evaluation team recommended that 
state approval be removed, Honig denied approval to the institute to grant 
master's of science degrees. Since then, administrators at the institute have 
accused Honig of being a "religious bigot." 
"If the state can tell a private Christian school that they can't teach 
Christian doctrine, then the state has too much power," said John Morris, 
administrative vice president of the institute. "We're not asking the state to 
rule that creationism is the valid scientific interpretation, and we're not 
asking for inclusion of creationism in the public schools. We are asking for 
freedom of speech." 
Morris and others claim that Honig's aim is to shut down the institute, which 
adheres to a strict biblical interpretation of the creation of the Earth and 
life on it. The institute has granted about 20 master's degrees in biology, 
geology, physics and science education since 1981. 
But William L. Rukeyser, special assistant to Honig, disputed that claim. 
"ICR's continued existence is not at question. Nobody is trying to shut down 
ICR," said Rukeyser, who had not yet seen the lawsuit. "But we cannot legally 
describe ICR's current curriculum as qualifying for a master's of science 
degree. . . . If they wish to grant master's of creationism degrees, that would 
be fine with (Honig). If they want to describe it as a degree in a system of 
beliefs, that would be fine. 
"What is at question is essentially truth in advertising," Rukeyser said. He 
compared the institute's claims to a car salesman offering "to sell me a used 
Ford, but calling it a Chevy." He also said that, if the institute sought 
independent accreditation, as do most private colleges and universities, "then 
they wouldn't have to deal with what Bill Honig thinks." 
Morris said: "I've been trained in only evolutionary schools, and I have many 
close friends who are evolutionists. We're not saying evolution is not a valid 
viewpoint. We're saying there's a better viewpoint. 
"We're not Bible-thumping fundamentalists," he said. "We are scientists who are 
also Christians. We don't teach the Bible; we don't teach theology; we teach 
science. But Honig has said that, because our school has this creationist 
flavor, our science is no good." 
The lawsuit points out that the Department of Education licensed the institute 
in 1981, 1984 and 1988, "when the graduate school was not as strong 
academically as it was in 1989 and is today." The approval was withdrawn, the 
suit claims, only after Honig's intervention turned the approval process into a 
"sham." 
The suit says the five-member team that visited the school in late 1989 was 
"carefully stacked" to guarantee a negative evaluation. The team included two 
science faculty members from UCLA, one from UC San Diego, one from California 
State University, Long Beach and one from Cedarville (Ohio) College. 
The suit also accuses Honig and the department of violating California law by 
changing regulations governing the procedure to be followed when a license 
renewal has been challenged. 
Rukeyser disagreed. 
"At every step of the way, what we've done has been with legal guidance, and we 
are quite convinced that all the laws involved have been followed," he said. 
Instead of suing, he added, "ICR would be much better served by using its 
resources and energy to bring its faculty and curriculum up to the standards 
where they could seek accreditation from a non-governmental association." 
The suit claims that Honig and his colleagues have balked at licensing the 
institute because they "wrongly contended that such approval implied state 
endorsement of the school's philosophy." 
Because the school is not accredited, it needs a state license to operate. 
Morris said endorsement is not the issue. 
"There are approved by Mr. Honig's office homosexual brothels that teach 
homosexual technique. Do they endorse that?" Morris asked. "The brochure is 
full of nude men doing things to each other. So hopefully we're not talking 
about endorsement here." 
Rukeyser retorted: "Does he claim that any of those institutions are claiming 
to offer master's of science degrees? I don't think so." 
