SUPPORT FOR $178 MILLION TO NEA CALLED 'OVERWHELMING'; 
ARTS: THE CHAIRMAN OF A HOUSE PANEL EXPECTS THE PROGRAM TO SURVIVE A NEW ROUND 
OF ATTACKS. 
The chairman of the House subcommittee dealing with the $178-million funding of 
the embattled National Endowment for the Arts said Wednesday he believes that 
"overwhelming" support will ensure continuation of the program despite a new 
volley of attacks from congressional colleagues. 
Rep. Pat Williams (D-Mont.), after hearing a dozen congressional witnesses 
testify before his Education and Labor subcommittee on postsecondary education, 
told reporters he feared that the NEA was in jeopardy last year because of 
public furor over its sponsorship of assertedly pornographic and blasphemous 
art works. 
"But we are now finding, both inside and outside Congress, overwhelming support 
for reauthorization," he said. "The only question is whether there should be 
restrictions on the money." 
Williams said he opposes any censorship powers for the endowment, but the 
majority of witnesses called for a ban on tax dollars for projects that are 
obscene or attack religion. Reps. Dana Rohrabacher (R-Lomita) and Mel Hancock 
(R-Mo.) demanded outright abolition of the NEA, and others asked for 
restrictions to bar support of exhibits such as the Robert Mapplethorpe 
photographs that sparked public outcry last year. But Reps. Rosemary Oakar 
(D-Ohio), Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) and Ben Nighthorse Campbell (D-Colo.), a 
silversmith who claimed to be one of the few artists in the House, warned 
against congressional attempts to impose censorship. 
Oakar deplored "all this negative stuff which I think is somewhat sick" aimed 
at about 20 of 302,000 grants. She praised President Bush for increasing the 
requested amount this year and for his opposition to censorship language. 
"We have stayed out of it, and we ought to keep staying out of it," she said of 
proposals for congressional restrictions on the NEA. 
Members of the subcomittee accused opponents of unfairly branding endowment 
backers as supporters of pornography. 
"I haven't done that, but I can't say that those who do are illogical," 
Rohrabacher replied in an exchange with Rep. Paul B. Henry (R-Mich.), the only 
Republican member of the subcommittee supporting unrestricted NEA funds. 
Williams said he hoped this would be the final hearing on reauthorization of 
the NEA's budget and that he would have a bill ready to go to the House floor 
by "late spring." Earlier, representatives of artists' groups announced the 
formation of the National Campaign for Freedom of Expression, decrying controls 
on the government arts program. At a breakfast news conference, they said they 
would work to defeat Rohrabacher and Sen. Jesse Helms (R-N.C.), leader of 
Senate efforts to block funds for allegedly obscene or blasphemous works of 
art. "Mr. Rohrabacher next year will be going back to his surfboard," predicted 
Jeffrey Chester, Los Angeles representative of the National Alliance of Media 
Art Centers. 
Charlotte R. Murphy of Washington, executive director of the National Assn. of 
Artists' Organizations, said Helms and other conservatives "have made this a 
campaign issue and we'll be prepared to respond. We have support in every 
congressional district." 
