HORSE POWER; 
DRESSAGE RIDER YIELDS CENTER STAGE TO MEN LIKE DIMITRIUS, A SMUG, SELF-ABSORBED 
PERFORMER -- AND EVERY BIT A STEED 
You've heard of a male chauvinist pig? Dimitrius is a male chauvinist horse. He 
stands in his stall with a smug look of superiority as four women dote over 
him. They braid his mane. They rub baby oil around his nostrils. They smear 
black polish on his hoofs and white talc on his legs. They wipe the gook from 
his big brown eyes and brush his coat with a velvet cloth. He is king of the 
stable and they are his handmaidens. 
"You want some sugar, sweetie?" says one of them, Betsy Allen, nuzzling him and 
talking baby talk. "I want you to look soooooo good." 
Dimitrius not only enjoys this royal treatment, he expects it. "He's arrogant," 
says his groom, Kathryn Zahlis, "and he gets even more arrogant right before a 
performance." 
Talk about karma. Some horses slog through a career behind a plow or on the 
kiddie birthday-party circuit. Tweezed, painted, polished, buffed and adored, 
Dimitrius spends his life in the fast lane -- the best hay, the cleanest stalls 
-- surrounded by fawning women who love him. 
What Dimitrius gives them in return is a star performance in dressage, an 
Olympic event in which the horse does intricate maneuvers for a rider who can 
only provide nonverbal commands. Most horses are born with brains that can't 
comprehend anything more complex than "giddyup" and "whoa." Dimitrius 
understands thousands of commands and performs them well enough to compete in 
Grand Prix dressage, the sport's major leagues. 
There is a good chance that Dimitrius will be taking a round-trip plane ride to 
Europe this spring to represent the U. S. Equestrian Team. He won't even have 
to eat airline food -- his owner-rider, Marie Meyers of Newbury Park, will 
bring his own special supply. 
It is Meyers who has been responsible for pampering Dimitrius -- and turning 
them both into a world-class dressage team: They were the first alternate on 
the U.S. Olympic Equestrian Team last year. 
But when Meyers bought the Dutch-born horse 12 years ago, Dimitrius was an 
excitable 3 year old, too unpredictable and undisciplined to make it big in 
dressage, and she was a 20-year-old rookie. 
"He was crazy then," Meyers says. "Women will shoot me, but he was too strong 
for me. He would have been better off with a man." 
This isn't a pleasant chapter in Dimitrius' otherwise storybook life. Meyers 
had him gelded. But the operation changed his attitude. Obedience is at the 
core of dressage -- a horse's compliance with his rider's orders determines the 
score. Over years of patient training, Dimitrius and other blue-chip horses 
develop a rapport with their riders, who claim the relationship borders on the 
supernatural. 
"There's almost telepathy between Marie and Dimitrius," Zahlis says. "He can 
sense what she wants and she knows what he needs." 
The bond is so close, Zahlis says, that "Dimitrius thinks Marie is his mother. 
He just tolerates the rest of us." 
The rest includes the 16 or so female students who help Meyers train horses. 
Meyers runs a sort of "Dressage U." The students work for free at her barn in 
the Bell Canyon Equestrian Center, mucking stalls for the chance to pick up 
something more important -- knowledge. "Marie is really generous with that," 
Zahlis says. 
When Meyers competes, Zahlis and another assistant are part of her team and get 
paid. Like Grand Prix auto racing, dressage has always been an expensive sport, 
dominated by wealthy Europeans, and getting more expensive all the time. Meyers 
bought Dimitrius for $4,000. Today, breeders get as much as $300,000 for a 
horse that already has been schooled. Travel, also costly, is a necessity to 
get exposure for the horse among judges and breeders. 
At the Western World Cup Dressage Competition recently, Meyers rented 11 stalls 
at the L. A. Equestrian Center, four of them for her horses and the rest for 
equipment: saddles, blankets, tack, storage trunks, and a cooler-size vacuum 
called Electro-Groom. When it came time for Dimitrius to compete (called 
"performing a test"), he was groomed like a French poodle and put on his game 
face. 
"You seem to be in a very good humor today," Meyers whispered in his ear after 
getting in the saddle. 
But you never know with horses. "Horses have lots of bad days, just like 
humans," Meyers says, "but the problem is, they can't let you know if they're 
feeling crappy from the horse in the stable behind them kicking the barn door 
all night." And Dimitrius can go into a funk. "He knows when he makes a mistake 
and he gets upset," Zahlis says. "It's like he let us down." 
With Meyers dressed in traditional black tails and derby, Dimitrius pranced 
into the Large Oval -- a dirt ring 20 meters by 60 meters -- and performed for 
the five judges. He looked relaxed and athletic -- as if he, and not Meyers, 
had memorized the 24 precise maneuvers. Misty-eyed, Allen leaned on the fence 
and watched him actually skip across the ring, turning in the best showing of 
the competition. 
"No matter what he does, I cry," Allen says. 
After riding, Meyers jumped off Dimitrius and got a hug from a fellow rider. 
"Fabulous trot," the other rider said. "You had it going." 
Dimitrius was standing right there, with his usual smug look. 
