PLANET WORSE OFF SINCE FIRST EARTH DAY IN 1970; 
ENVIRONMENT: GAINS HAVE BEEN MADE IN 20 YEARS BUT WORLD'S PROBLEMS NOW ARE 
POTENTIALLY MORE DEVASTATING. 
In the 20 years since the first Earth Day, nature has proved itself to be 
surprisingly resilient. Witness the comeback of the American bald eagle after 
the banning of the pesticide DDT or the cleaning of the once-inflamed Cuyahoga 
River in Ohio. 
But the progress the world will celebrate next Sunday on Earth Day 1990 has 
brought little respite. New, potentially more devastating threats to the 
environment have emerged, forcing the world to recast its environmental agenda 
for the remainder of the 20th Century. 
Whereas the environmental movement 20 years ago worried about an individual dam 
or a single highway, the world today is facing the loss of its tropical forests 
and the extinction of half of its species within the next few decades, as well 
as a potential warming trend that could forever change the climate of the 
planet. 
"In 1970, we were accelerating as we headed toward the cliff," said Carl Pope, 
conservation director of the Sierra Club. "We applied the brakes during those 
20 years and now we're maybe half-way there." 
New controls on vehicle emissions have improved air quality over many cities, 
including Los Angeles, but the very fabric of the atmosphere is shredding 
because of an ozone-destroying pollutant not even recognized two decades ago. 
Lake Erie, which was so polluted by sewage in 1970 that many conservationists 
considered it "dead," has been cleaned up and now has a $600-million fishery. 
But not far away, Lake Michigan is believed to be so contaminated by airborne 
pollutants and industrial chemicals that some conservationists say women of 
child-bearing age should not eat its fish. 
Even though the nation today has far more legally designated wilderness areas 
than it had two decades ago, there is far less actual wilderness. Lands that 
were spared the rush of development by government protections instead are being 
ravaged by acid rain produced by burning coal. 
"By every major environmental indicator, the Earth is worse off today than it 
was in 1970," said Lester R. Brown, president of the Worldwatch Institute, a 
Washington-based environmental organization. 
Just as many of today's environmental problems differ from those of 1970, so do 
the recipes for resolving them. There is more emphasis on preventive measures. 
Instead of focusing on saving a single bird or plant species, the conservation 
movement has turned toward saving lands that contain a diversity of wildlife. 
Instead of just asking for more smog-control equipment, conservationists are 
pushing for alternative-fuel vehicles, new strategies for getting people out of 
their cars as well as energy-efficient buildings and industry. 
Instead of requiring that contaminants be cleaned up after industry has 
disposed of them, the push now is to find alternatives in the industrial 
process. Instead of just urging people to recycle, the nation's 
conservationists want less waste to be generated in the first place. 
The fight against global environmental threats also has spawned a flood of 
proposed remedies, but they require a will to act not yet demonstrated by much 
of the world. 
If the planet is to save its tropical forests, repair the ozone layer and head 
off global warming, industrialization may have to be slowed in developing 
countries and their economies altered. Industrialized nations will have to find 
substitutes for fossil fuels and ozone-depleting chemicals and improve their 
energy efficiency. 
The challenge is mind-boggling. 
"We're looking at putting on the brakes on population growth . . . phasing out 
fossil fuels, reversing the deforestation of the Earth," said Brown of 
Worldwatch. "Any one of these things would thoroughly challenge any generation 
in history. We've got a half dozen of them. We've got to do all at once." 
Many of these global threats went unrecognized on April 22, 1970, when the 
environment first was celebrated in a kind of national teach-in called Earth 
Day and the nation awoke like a latter-day Rip van Winkle to discover that 
pollution was rampant and getting worse. For the rest of that decade, America 
saw unrivaled environmental action. 
In short order, President Richard M. Nixon opened the doors of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency. Congress passed the Clean Air Act, the Clean 
Water Act, the Endangered Species Act and the Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act, which regulates the disposal of hazardous wastes. 
Much of this occurred in a presidency not sympathetic to environmental 
concerns. William D. Ruckelshaus, whom Nixon appointed to head the new EPA, 
said in a recent interview that his former boss considered the environment 
unimportant, never seemed curious about it and traced environmental activism to 
a "softness" in Americans. 
"I had several conversations with him," said Ruckelshaus, now an executive with 
a waste management company. "He never once asked me, 'Is anything wrong here' 
(with the environment)?" 
But public pressure to take action was strong and many of the reforms launched 
under Nixon produced results. Dramatic progress was made in cleaning surface 
water. San Francisco Bay, for example, is far cleaner today than it was 20 
years ago. 
So is the Potomac River. "The Potomac stunk to high heavens in the summertime," 
recalled Brent Blackwelder, chairman of the board of the League of Conservation 
Voters, who grew up in Washington. "It was so foul you wouldn't want to get 
near it. Now it's a beautiful river." 
Air quality also improved in the densest urban settings. Although the pace of 
growth in some cities overcame the benefits rendered by smog-control 
technology, "air quality in this country would be a disaster" today without the 
Clean Air Act, said Rafe Pomerance, senior associate of the World Resources 
Institute, an environmental think tank in Washington. 
Perhaps the two most successful single strokes by policy-makers and 
conservationists were the banning of DDT and the phasing out of lead in 
gasoline in the early 1970s. DDT causes birds to lay eggs with shells so thin 
they break before hatching. Lead exposure in children can permanently impair 
their intellectual abilities. With the phasing out of those contaminants, 
endangered birds began to reproduce and lead levels in the blood of average 
Americans dropped substantially. 
"One thing we discovered was that when we did something bold, nature bounded 
back better than we had anticipated," Pope said. "When we have taken 
half-measures, the system hasn't responded." 
One of the "half-measures" cited by Pope was the Endangered Species Act, which 
protects wildlife only after it is already dangerously close to extinction. The 
bald eagle is multiplying and the once imperiled American alligator has been 
taken off the endangered list. 
Unfortunately, such success stories are rare. Many species on the federal list 
continue to decline in number, and others, such as the dusky seaside sparrow, 
already have become extinct. 
But whatever their individual failings, the environmental laws of the 1970s 
represented the traditional American impulse to preserve, to leave the land 
better than it was found. 
The 1980s showed yet another side of the American character, the fervor to push 
back the frontiers, to exploit seemingly inexhaustible resources. Some 
environmental activists now dismiss the 1980s as "the lost decade," a time of 
missed opportunity. Environmental research, from the testing of pesticides to 
the development of non-polluting energy sources, significantly slowed. 
Former President Ronald Reagan, who was not an advocate of environmental 
regulation, is largely blamed for attempts to unravel, or at least ignore, laws 
put on the books in the previous decade. Early in his first Administration, 
Reagan tended to put "marginally competent" administrators in the EPA and other 
agencies that "he didn't care that much about," said Ruckelshaus, whom Reagan 
brought in to reform the EPA after the President's first choice resigned in 
scandal. 
Reagan gave the environmental movement "the back of the hand," infuriating 
environmentalists by treating them with indifference, Ruckelshaus said. 
Even so, Reagan had a curiosity about the environment. "(Reagan actually) was 
more interested in the environment than Nixon," the former administrator said. 
"He often would ask me . . . about the science of it. He wanted to know if 
there was any substance to it." 
Despite Reagan's poor environmental record, some progress was made during his 
years. The Food Security Act of 1985 allowed for the recycling of land, the 
conversion of as many as 40 million acres of cropland -- about 11% of the 
nation's total -- into grasslands or woods. Conservationists say much of this 
land should never have been plowed and, without the law, it might have turned 
to wasteland. The law already is credited with reducing erosion by one-third. 
In areas where government failed to act, consumers did. After a report last 
year about the possible health hazards of Alar, a chemical used to improve the 
appearance and prolong the shelf life of apples, the nation's consumers began 
demanding pesticide-free produce at their markets. 
Public anxiety about the thinning ozone layer also prompted many corporations 
to phase out voluntarily their use of some ozone-destroying chemicals. Other 
companies are starting to promote their products based on their conservation 
merits. The H. J. Heinz Co., for instance, recently publicized the production 
of a new plastic ketchup bottle that can be more easily recycled than most 
plastics. 
Market forces may even make recycling a permanent fixture of the American 
lifestyle. With communities running out of places for dumping rapidly 
proliferating waste and with disposal costs escalating, more and more cities 
are launching curbside recycling programs. 
Legislatures have passed laws requiring deposits on bottle purchases and other 
recyclable goods. California will require communities to reduce garbage by 25% 
by 1995 and 50% by 2000, primarily through recycling, composting and reducing 
the sources of waste. 
Corporations may be prodded into further environmental action under a proposal 
by environmental activists to award "green seals" of approval to products that 
meet certain conservation criteria. The seals could be given for anything from 
an energy-efficient manufacturing process to packaging that can be recycled. 
Although the nation has come up with answers to some of its environmental ills, 
there are no such easy fixes for combatting global threats like overpopulation 
and deforestation. 
When Paul Ehrlich warned of an overpopulation disaster in his 1968 book, "The 
Population Bomb," there were 3.5 billion people on Earth. Today, there are 5.2 
billion and the number is growing. 
Efforts to reverse the upward trend have succeeded in some countries. Fourteen 
European countries, with about 5% of the world's population, have reached zero 
population growth and Japan, France and Finland are among others headed in that 
direction. Population growth fell by half in Japan from 1948 to 1955 and in 
China from 1970 to 1976. 
But if death rates do not rise worldwide, birth rates will have to be reduced 
62% to stabilize the planet's population, according to Brown of Worldwatch. The 
populations of India, Ethiopia, Nigeria and Mexico are expected to double or 
even triple before they flatten out late in the next century, he said. 
"The real question is whether we check population growth or nature checks 
population growth," Brown said. "If we don't, nature will." 
Population pressures have contributed to the loss of the world's forests and 
the rise in gases blamed for the greenhouse effect. Forests shield a diversity 
of wildlife and absorb gases that otherwise trap heat in the atmosphere much 
like the panes of a greenhouse. If the greenhouse effect is not checked, sea 
levels could rise, droughts and hurricanes could multiply and more forests 
could vanish. 
Progress in persuading Third World countries to conserve their forests has been 
scant, although Brazil recently responded to international pressure by removing 
tax subsidies for forest clearing. 
Attempts are being made to reforest, but South Korea remains the only Third 
World country to do it successfully. Some industrialized countries, including 
Australia and the United States, have launched tree-planting programs. 
Even if the forests are spared and more trees planted, global warming still 
could be accelerated by burning such fossil fuels as oil and coal. Most 
scientists agree that slowing down climate change will require a major shift 
from the world's dependence on fossil fuels, which emit greenhouse gases, to 
less polluting solar, geothermal and other alternatives. 
Although international discussions to curb greenhouse gases are under way, some 
conservationists concede that sweeping actions may not be embraced until there 
is a greater scientific consensus on how soon the Earth's climate may change. 
The phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, chemicals used in refrigeration 
and in a variety of industrial processes, will ease the greenhouse threat as 
well as protect the ozone layer. Although industrialized countries have pledged 
to curtail or even eliminate their use, some developing countries are planning 
to raise production on a scale that would offset the progress. 
"I think we've lost a great deal," said David Brower, a pre-eminent 
conservationist who once helped lead the Sierra Club and later founded Friends 
of the Earth and the Earth Island Institute, a nonprofit environmental group. 
"We're far worse off than we were in the '70s," Brower said. "Since 1912, we've 
used four times as many resources as in all previous history, and that can't 
continue." 
Brower and other conservationists are pushing for wholesale changes over the 
next two decades that normally would evolve over several generations. 
Recognizing that worldwide cooperation is essential, the organizers of Earth 
Day 1990 have enlisted the participation of 140 countries in this week's 
activities. 
"History would teach you to be pretty pessimistic because people don't change 
fast," the Sierra Club's Pope said. "But if you look at Eastern Europe over the 
past year -- sometimes they do." 
EARTH DAY EVENTS LIST 
 Earth Day, 1990, is being celebrated in myriad ways around Southern 
California. Here are some of the highlights. Most are free except where a 
minimal fee is noted. For information on other events, check with your local 
City Hall or college campuses. 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY 
Culver City 
* April 22, noon, West L.A. College, 4800 Freshman Drive. "Culver City Earth 
Day 1990." Festival: Bike-a-thon, workshops and speakers, booths, kickoff of 
city's recycling program. 
Long Beach 
* April 16-22, Cal State Long Beach, 1250 Bellflower Blvd. Earth Week 
activities: environmental speakers' forum, tree planting and American Indian 
earth rituals, lecture by Huntington Beach mayor on effects of the American 
Trader oil spill, and more, culminating in a campus fair April 22 from 10 a.m. 
to 7:30 p.m. Information from Student Services: (213) 985-5205. 
Los Angeles 
* April 19, noon to 1:15 p.m., Venice High School, 13000 Venice Blvd. 
Student-organized "Eco-Fair" with Ruth Galanter plus 20 other environmental 
organizations. An Earth Day quilt will be sewn. 
* April 20, 11:45 a.m. to 2 p.m., UCLA's Westwood Plaza (near Ackerman Union). 
Rally: with Earth Day founder, former Sen. Gaylord Nelson and Denis Hayes, 
Earth Day 1990 Chairman. Eco-fair with peace and justice organizations; 
exhibits and entertainment. 
* April 21, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m., UNOCAL, Wilmington. "Hazardous Waste Roundup." 
Recycling event in cooperation with the city of L.A.: Bring household hazardous 
waste (old paint, thinner, oil, batteries, insecticide, etc.) to be properly 
disposed of to: Union Oil Refinery parking lot, 1660 W. Anaheim St. 
* April 21, 8 a.m. to 12 p.m, in each of L.A.'s 15 council districts. 
"Operation Clean Sweep." Citywide cleanup event with more than 1,000 
anti-graffiti volunteers. To participate: (213) 237-1797. 
* April 21-22, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., L.A. County Museum of Natural History, 900 
Exposition Blvd. "Rainforest Weekend Biodiversity Fair and Rainforest Exhibit." 
Displays, discussion sessions, lectures, and children's programs regarding 
issues surrounding the destruction of tropical rainforests and related 
environmental problems. (Tropical Rainforests exhibit runs through May 27, 
1990.) 
* April 22, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Exposition Park, S. Park Drive and Hoover St. 
"Multi-cultural Environmental Fair." Los Angeles Earth Day 1990 hosts a mass 
gathering and rally with major entertainers, booths, exhibits, hands-on 
demonstrations and arts and crafts. 
* April 22, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Ballona Wetlands Earth Day, Playa del Rey. Fair: 
bird walks 7:30 to 9 a.m, speeches, booths, native plant and bird displays, 
music and food. Teale Street off Lincoln Boulevard., south of Jefferson 
Boulevard. 
* April 22, 9 a.m., downtown L.A. "Skid Row Tree Planting." TreePeople sponsor 
planting of 40 24-inch box trees at East 6th Street and Stanford Avenue. 
* April 22, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., Barnsdall Arts Park, 4814 Hollywood Blvd., 
Hollywood. Earth Day Art Workshop: Paper making, scarecrow workshop, dedication 
of children's garden, country music. 
Pasadena 
* April 21, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., "Arroyo Seco Earth Festival." Park at Parson's 
Parking Lot, corner of Fairoaks Avenue and Walnut Street. Shuttle buses run 
from there to exhibits among nine environmentally themed villages staged in the 
Arroyo Seco, the five-mile parkland near the Rose Bowl. Tree-planting workshop; 
trash recycling demonstrations; ecology panel discussions in Brookside Park, 
where bike rentals will be available. Biking, walking or taking shuttle buses 
is encouraged; cars are discouraged. 
Santa Monica 
* April 22, noon to 2 p.m., Santa Monica Pier. Major rally for Earth Day 1990 
on the north side of the pier with live entertainment. 
West Covina 
* April 21, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., City Hall courtyard, 1444 W. Garvey South. Info 
Fair: "Our Family, Our City, Our Earth." Booths representing the AQMD, Suburban 
Water, Heal The Bay and others plus art and essay contest awards presented to 
schoolchildren at noon. 
RIVERSIDE COUNTY 
Riverside 
* April 16-20, noon to 1 p.m. plus evening lectures, UC Riverside, 900 
University Ave. Earth Day events: rallies and lectures throughout week, 
culminating in a fair with info booths, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Friday, 4/20. 
Info: (714) 787-3215. 
* April 22, noon to 2 p.m., California Citrus State Historic Park, 1879 Jackson 
St. Celebration of March For Parks walk-a-thon and Earth Day Rally featuring 
tree planting and presentation of Environmental Leadership Awards. 
SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY 
Forest Falls 
* April 21, 8 a.m. to noon, Fallsvale School, 40600 Valley of the Falls Drive. 
Mountain cleanup: roadside and creek-bed cleanup of three mountain communities 
in San Bernardino National Forest. Also noon to 4 p.m., same location Picnic 
and Eco-Fair: bring clothes to be recycled for the homeless. 
Redlands 
* April 22, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., San Bernardino County Museum, 2024 Orangetree 
Lane. "Earth Day Celebration": exhibits, resource tables, children's art, live 
entertainment. 
SANTA BARBARA COUNTY 
Santa Barbara 
* April 20-21, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., UC Santa Barbara, Isla Vista. Earth Day 
Festival and Celebration: Art, speakers, music and meditation. 
* April 22, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., Santa Barbara City College, 721 Cliff Drive. 
Eco-Festival: "Earth Day 1990." More than 100 booths, speakers, art exhibits, 
music by Jackson Browne and Kenny Loggins, plus Native American and Mexican 
music. 
Additional listings of Earth Day events may be found in appropriate zoned 
editions. 
(San Diego County Edition) EARTH DAY EVENTS LIST 
 Earth Day, 1990, is being celebrated in myriad ways around Southern 
California. Here are some of the highlights. For more information about the 
events listed below, contact Carolyn Chase of the San Diego Earth Day 1990 
Coalition, 4901 Morena Blvd., Suite 703, San Diego, CA 92117. 488-6116 or 
488-3039. 
SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
San Diego 
* Through April 30, Mon.-Fri. 9 a.m.-5:30 p.m., Lyceum Theatre, 79 Horton 
Plaza. Natural Diversity: A Sierra Club Exhibition of Nature as Art. 
* Through April 29, San Diego Art Institute, 1449 El Prado, Balboa Park. Earth 
Art Show. Admission is free. Open Tues.-Sat. 10 a.m. to 5 p.m, and Sunday 12:30 
p.m. to 5 p.m., closed Monday, 
* April 15-22, Spanish Village, Balboa Park. Urban Forest: A forest created out 
of 6-foot stacks of newspaper, each representing a 35-foot tree. 
* April 20. Earth Day Festivals, 11 a.m.-5 p.m. UC San Diego, 10 a.m.-5 p.m. 
University of San Diego and 9 a.m.-3 p.m. San Diego State University. 
* April 21, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. Earth Day on the Bay. Organizers hope this Clean 
the Bay Boat Parade will be the largest environmental armada ever in San Diego 
Bay. Kayaks, canoes, powerboats and sailboats welcome. 
* April 21. Adopt-a-Beach, a countywide cleanup campaign at 20 sites along San 
Diego's coastline. 
* April 21, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., 1800 Cabrillo Memorial Drive. Cabrillo National 
Monument Environmental Program. Environmental issues will be explored by 
speakers and exhibits. Park entrance fee: $3 per car. 
* April 22, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Balboa Park. Earth Fair. An early morning "5-K 
Run for the Rain Forest" will be followed by a day of speakers, food, 
educational displays and entertainment. 
* April 15-22. Tree-plantings in Allied Gardens, Balboa Park, Chula Vista and 
Emerald Hills and other neighborhoods. (Contact Norma Assam, People for Trees, 
231-3713.) 
* April 22, 9 a.m.-5 p.m. Scripps Aquarium, Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography. Giant Mural at Manmade Tidepools. Anyone can add a drawing to 
this large depiction of California's rocky shore. 
LOS ANGELES COUNTY 
Culver City 
* April 22, noon, West L.A. College, 4800 Freshman Drive. "Culver City Earth 
Day 1990." Festival: Bike-a-thon, workshops and speakers, booths, kickoff of 
city's recycling program. 
Long Beach 
* April 16-22, Cal State Long Beach, 1250 Bellflower Blvd. Earth Week 
activities: environmental speakers' forum, tree planting and American Indian 
earth rituals, lecture by Huntington Beach mayor on effects of the American 
Trader oil spill, and more, culminating in a campus fair April 22 from 10 a.m. 
to 7:30 p.m. Information from Student Services: (213) 985-5205. 
Los Angeles 
* April 19, noon to 1:15 p.m., Venice High School, 13000 Venice Blvd. 
Student-organized "Eco-Fair" with Ruth Galanter, plus 20 other environmental 
organizations. An Earth Day quilt will be sewn. 
* April 20, 11:45 a.m. to 2 p.m., UCLA's Westwood Plaza (near Ackerman Union). 
Rally: with Earth Day founder, former Sen. Gaylord Nelson and Denis Hayes, 
Earth Day 1990 Chairman. Eco-fair with peace and justice organizations. 
* April 21, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m., UNOCAL, Wilmington. "Hazardous Waste Roundup." 
Recycling event in cooperation with the city of L.A.: Bring household hazardous 
waste (old paint, thinner, oil, batteries, insecticide, etc.) to be properly 
disposed of to: Union Oil Refinery parking lot, 1660 W. Anaheim St. 
* April 21, 8 a.m. to 12 p.m, in each of L.A.'s 15 council districts. 
"Operation Clean Sweep." Citywide cleanup event with more than 1,000 
anti-graffiti volunteers. To participate: (213) 237-1797. 
* April 21-22, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., L.A. County Museum of Natural History, 900 
Exposition Blvd. "Rainforest Weekend Biodiversity Fair and Rainforest Exhibit." 
Displays, discussion sessions, lectures, and children's programs regarding 
issues surrounding the destruction of tropical rainforests and related 
environmental problems. (Tropical Rainforests exhibit runs through May 27, 
1990.) 
* April 22, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Exposition Park, S. Park Drive and Hoover St. 
"Multi-cultural Environmental Fair." Los Angeles Earth Day 1990 hosts a mass 
gathering and rally with major entertainers, booths, exhibits, hands-on 
demonstrations and arts and crafts. 
* April 22, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Ballona Wetlands Earth Day, Playa del Rey. Fair: 
bird walks 7:30 a.m. to 9 a.m, speeches, booths, native plant and bird 
displays, music and food. Teale Street off Lincoln Boulevard., south of 
Jefferson Boulevard. 
* April 22, 9 a.m., downtown L.A. "Skid Row Tree Planting." TreePeople sponsor 
planting of 40 24-inch box trees at East 6th Street and Stanford Avenue. 
* April 22, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., Barnsdall Arts Park, 4814 Hollywood Blvd., 
Hollywood. Earth Day Art Workshop: Paper making, scarecrow workshop, dedication 
of children's garden, country music. 
Pasadena 
* April 21, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., "Arroyo Seco Earth Festival." Park at Parson's 
Parking Lot, corner of Fairoaks Avenue and Walnut Street. Shuttle buses run 
from there to exhibits among nine environmentally themed villages staged in the 
Arroyo Seco, the 5-mile parkland near the Rose Bowl. Tree-planting workshop; 
trash recycling demonstrations; ecology panel discussions in Brookside Park, 
where bike rentals will be available. Biking, walking or taking shuttle buses 
is encouraged; cars are discouraged. 
Santa Monica 
* April 22, noon to 2 p.m., Santa Monica Pier. Major rally for Earth Day 1990 
on the north side of the pier with live entertainment. 
West Covina 
* April 21, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., City Hall courtyard, 1444 W. Garvey South. Info 
Fair: "Our Family, Our City, Our Earth." Booths representing the AQMD, Suburban 
Water, Heal The Bay and others plus art and essay contest awards presented to 
schoolchildren at noon. 
(Orange County Edition) EARTH DAY EVENTS IN ORANGE COUNTY 
Events focusing on environmental concerns are scheduled throughout this week, 
in anticipation of the April 22 Earth Day celebration. Here are Monday's 
events. 
MONDAY, APRIL 16 Cal State Fullerton 
800 N. State College Blvd., Fullerton 
8 p.m. 
Author/biologist Barry Commoner will address environmental issues. Titan Hall, 
University Center. (Admission $1.) 
The City Shopping Center 
1 City Blvd. West, Orange 
Earth Day mall display, ongoing through April 22. 
Cypress College 
9200 Valley View St., Cypress 
11 a.m. 
Cypress College instructors will participate in a panel discussion on the 
environment. Student Center, Gym II. 
7 p.m. 
The Environment at Risk: Responding to Growing Dangers, a national issues 
forum, will be moderated by political science instructor Joe Boyle and biology 
instructor Brian Myers. Student Center, Gym II. 
Fullerton College 
321 E. Chapman Ave., Fullerton 
Earth Day display featuring books, posters and resource-saving devices. William 
T. Boyce Library, through April 20. 
Golden West College 
15744 Golden West St., Huntington Beach 
11:30 a.m. 
Debbie Cook, founder of Save Our Parks, will speak on the campaign to restrict 
the sale, lease, exchange and development of city-owned or operated parks and 
beach lands. She will also talk about her trials as an environmentally 
concerned citizen and what she did to start her grass-roots political movement. 
College Center Patio. 
City of Laguna Beach 
High Drive, Laguna Beach 
2 p.m. 
Tree-planting ceremony at Riddle Field. Contact Cynthia King, (714) 497-0716. 
Rancho Santiago College 
17th and Bristol streets, Santa Ana 
9 a.m. 
Lecture, "Radiation in Our Environment," by John Kalko, physical science 
instructor. Room R-318. 
UC Irvine 
Campus and University drives, Irvine 
10:30 a.m. 
Lecture and slide presentation, "Overpopulation and the Environmental 
Connection" by Ray Pingle, member of the Sierra Club's National Population 
Committee. Salt Creek conference rooms, UCI Student Center. 
Noon 
Lecture and slide presentation, "Saving the Earth's Endangered Plants" by Dr. 
Harold Koopowitz, director of the UCI Arboretum/Plant Gene Bank. Salt Creek 
conference rooms, UCI Student Center. 
1:30 p.m. 
Lecture and slide presentation, "American Forests -- Saving California's 
Redwoods," by Tom Pratte, member of Forests Forever. Salt Creek conference 
rooms, UCI Student Center. 
