PUSH FOR L. B. POLICE REVIEW PANEL RENEWED 
The city should create an independent investigator's office and a citizen 
review board to air complaints about police misconduct, according to 
recommendations of a special subcommittee of the Public Safety Advisory 
Commission. 
The proposals come in the wake of the January incident in which Officer Mark 
Dickey was secretly videotaped as he appeared to shove the head of black 
activist Don Jackson, a Hawthorne police sergeant on administrative leave, 
through a plate-glass window. 
The commission has previously called for a citizen review board, but the City 
Council rejected the proposal. Commissioners say the council now may have a 
change of heart in light of the Jackson incident, which was videotaped as part 
of a sting to expose purported police abuses in Long Beach. 
Commission Chairman Larry Davis said he believes the incident has softened 
opposition to reforming the complaint process. "The recommendations are 
solutions to a credibility problem," he said. "We feel we offer reasonable 
oversight. This is an important step in bringing our community together." 
Meeting on Wednesday 
The recommendations are scheduled to be presented to the 13-member commission 
at 7 p.m. Wednesday at a public meeting in the auditorium of the main city 
library in the City Hall complex. If approved by the full commission, they will 
once again go before the City Council for consideration. 
Barbara Shoag, who chaired the subcommittee on which Davis and two other 
commissioners served, said the recommendations are an attempt to instill public 
faith in the conduct of police officers. 
"Our major goal was to open up the process in order to re-establish public 
confidence in the Police Department," Shoag said. She added that "certain 
segments" of the committee feel that they are not respected by the police, a 
reference to minority organizations that have repeatedly complained about 
alleged police brutality and mistreatment. 
Complaints could be filed either with the Police Department or the independent 
investigator, but each office would make copies for the other, according to the 
subcommittee's report. A monthly complaint tally would be sent to the City 
Council and commission. 
An independent investigator would be hired by the city manager and serve under 
his direction. The citizen complaint board would consist of seven residents 
with diverse ethnicity and background, appointed by the mayor, the report 
states. 
The independent investigator's office would check into all in-custody deaths, 
excessive force complaints, false arrest complaints or any complaints with 
racist or sexist overtones. It would also consider appeals of cases rejected by 
police internal affairs officers. 
On each case of alleged police misconduct, one or two members of the board 
would be appointed to act as liaisons with the independent investigator. 
Board Would Have Subpoena Powers 
The liaisons would review all the reports, interview the independent 
investigator and preside over a public hearing during which the review board 
would sustain or dismiss allegations. The board would have subpoena powers and 
conduct fact finding, the report states. 
Shoag said the system, is modeled after a similar program in Oakland. 
She said the new system would not duplicate efforts of the Civil Service 
Commission, which only hears appeals of police officers who are disciplined, or 
the City Council, which usually refers complaints to the Police Department for 
review. 
She expressed confidence that the recommendations will be favorably received by 
the City Council. 
When informed of the proposals, Councilman Ray Grabinski said he likes the idea 
of an independent investigator's office, but remains opposed to a citizen 
review board. "Sometimes they (police officers) are belligerent, sometimes they 
are ignorant, sometimes they break the law. But for me, I don't want civilians 
deciding police tactics," he said. 
'Would Be Supportive' 
Councilman Tom Clark said he believes there is enough public interest in a 
police review board to put the issue on the ballot. As for an investigator, he 
said, "I would be supportive and I would be surprised if the council is not." 
Police Chief Lawrence L. Binkley said he will need more information before 
taking a position on the subcommittee's proposals, but that he will support the 
wishes of the City Council. He questioned whether public hearings could be 
conducted into police officer conduct without violating confidentiality laws. 
City Manager James C. Hankla said he, too, is considering the possibility of 
recommending an independent investigator. He pointed out that he has opposed a 
citizen review board in the past, but would take a fresh look if requested by 
the City Council. 
The subcommittee also recommends extending the probationary period for rookie 
officers beyond the current one year. Binkley said he has no objection. 
The report also calls for extra pay for bilingual officers, which Binkley said 
he supports. Currently, civilian employees receive an extra $10 a week for 
bilingual skills, but police officers receive no extra pay. 
Times staff writer Roxana Kopetman contributed to this story. 
