WEEKLY PAPERS: GETTING A READ ON STATE OF THE NATION 
A Texas teen-ager getting ready for the Junior Livestock Show had some thoughts 
about petulant porkers. 
"Raising a pig is good fun, but how much fun depends on the mood of the pig," 
Jenny Haley told the Anvil Herald in Hondo, Tex. 
In West Virginia, a woman egged on by a granddaughter-in-law, finally got 
around to earning a high school diploma. 
"I dreaded math the most," Dorothy Johns, 71, of Gay, W. Va., told her local 
paper, the Ravenswood News. 
When the 91-year-old founder of an egg and poultry company in Electra, Tex., 
died, his obituary in the San Saba (Texas) News matter-of-factly noted that he 
was born in Indian territory and as a child was brought across the Red River in 
a covered wagon. 
In the Bonners Ferry Herald, which has served Boundary County, Ida., since 
1891, columnist Grace Bauman offered this observation: "If you think you're 
getting too much government, just be thankful you're not getting as much as 
you're paying for." 
A Warning About Rabies 
A headline in the Meade County Messenger of Brandenburg, Ky.: "Rabies Cases 
Fewer, but Stay Alert." 
So it goes in the countryside. While Washington concerned itself with 
savings-and-loan insolvency and the social habits of John Tower, the topic of 
the Tri-State Cow-Calf Symposium at Haigler, Neb. was closer to home: 
"Producing the Cow of the Future Today." 
There are things to be learned about the state of the nation from America's 
7,500 weekly newspapers that cannot be found in the Congressional Record. 
Of course, there is also some bad news: 
The taxpayers of Clinton County, Mo., may be stuck with the $20,000 medical 
bill of a jail escapee who suffered frostbite while at large and had to have 
both legs amputated, the Lawson Review reported. 
The Osawatomie (Kansas) Graphic worries that Osawatomie's reputation as a 
railroad town may be slipping; the Union Pacific is thinking about routing 
fewer trains through town. 
Drug problems are a worry in the country, as in the big cities. Schools get 
consolidated, young people leave town and factories close. The drought of 1988 
is not over yet. There is still not enough rain in many regions, not enough 
snow cover for winter wheat crops. 
"Hunters are finding fewer rabbits and quail than usual in Kentucky this 
season," the Bath County News-Outlook of Owingsville reported. Blame the 
drought, said Jeff Sole of the Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources. 
News From Back Home 
For all that, the weeklies report news that tells you that the heart of America 
is still ticking. It is important news, because, after all, doesn't everyone 
come from a small town -- or think one did, or wish one had? 
Here is some of the news from back home: 
Wallace Wyatt Jr. promised that if he were elected probate judge of St. Clair 
County, Ala., he would eat a super-hot barbecue sandwich at Smitty's Barb-B-Que 
in Odenville. He was, and he did. "He said he wouldn't do it again for $500, 
and it wasn't something he'd wish on anyone, even a Republican," the St. Clair 
News-Aegis reported. 
While working on a master's degree, Melanie Reid of Due West, S. C., looked 
into the history of the Opera House that opened in Abbeville in 1908 and put 
the lie to some local legends. There is no evidence at all, she told the 
Abbeville Press and Banner, that Jimmy Durante, Sarah Bernhardt or the 
Ziegfield Follies ever performed there. 
In Oconomowoc, Wis., high school football player Rich Andrus was recruited by 
the University of Wisconsin. Head coach Don Morton and an assistant called on 
him on the first day home visits were permitted. Exactly when did they arrive? 
"Twelve-oh-one a.m.," Andrus told the Oconomowoc Enterprise. He said their 
tenacity was "pretty impressive." 
The Enterprise also reported that people from the Oconomowoc area drove in four 
trucks for 4 1/2 hours to deliver food, clothes and paper products to northern 
Wisconsin farmers still suffering from the effects of last summer's drought. 
The farm families need work clothes, said Mrs. Gerhart Tetzlaff of Stone Bank, 
but they especially need food. "I think they are so hungry they don't care 
about clothes." 
The Garden Club of Stamford, Tex., celebrated the state's 100th Arbor Day by 
planting two pecan trees on the west side of Post Office Square as a memorial 
to Mrs. A. C. Denson, a longtime member of the club "who, had she lived another 
month, would also have been 100 years old," the Stamford American said. 
A Deputy's Deposition 
Glenn R. and Anne Jane Eutsey of Scottdale, Pa., celebrated their 50th wedding 
anniversary with 46 relatives at a dinner given at their home by their 
children. 
Deputy Ernie Booth was assigned to parts of Millard, Juab and Beaver counties 
in Utah's western desert -- what Millard County Sheriff Ed Phillips called "the 
largest beat in the United States" an area of -- 3,000 square miles. Almost 
triple the size of Rhode Island, it has about 600 residents. Booth told the 
Millard County Chronicle Progress: "Basically, I'm pretty well qualified. I can 
ride a horse dang near anywhere. I rodeo a lot. I still ride bulls occasionally 
and I've team-roped. I know cattle." 
The Area Chamber of Commerce of Yale, Mich., decided to hold a festival in July 
to honor the town's most famous product, bologna. Among the activities will be 
a pet parade, a dog show and selection of a King and Queen of Bologna, the Yale 
Expositor reported. 
In Harrah, Okla., the Town Board discussed the number of animals that Casey 
Rychlec keeps on his property -- 48 by one count, including geese, ducks, 
chickens, guinea fowl, turkeys, pigeons and dogs. The Harrah News referred to 
the collection as a "menagerie" and said neighbors are disturbed. 
'It's Carl Rooks Day' 
From the Bowdon (Georgia) Bulletin: "At Bowdon Elementary School, teacher 
Sylvia Caldwell asked her seventh-graders why Friday was such an important day 
to all Americans. Though it was also Inauguration Day, and that was the answer 
she was looking for, student Andy Boatright quickly responded: "It's Carl Rooks 
Day." He was right. Carl Rooks had retired as police chief. In an interview 
with the Bulletin, Rooks said that in 24 years in law enforcement, he had never 
had to shoot anyone. 
The Eagle Bulletin of Fayetteville, N. Y., described one recent Friday this 
way: "That was the kind of day you could separate the feeble defrosters from 
the strong." 
The newsmaker in the resort town of Whitefish, Mont., was Police Chief Dave 
Dolson. He told the city council that Whitefish was becoming the "drug capital 
of northwest Montana." Out-of-town newspapers picked up the story and local 
business people were irked, the Whitefish Pilot said. Bar owners were 
especially angry because of Dolson's reference to "people inhaling lines of 
cocaine off the bars and card tables in our town." 
The Friend (Nebraska) Sentinel, reported on an opossum's night visit to Marie 
French's porch on Chestnut Street. She took some photographs to prove it, and 
the Sentinel published two of them. 
The Sentinel also reported that Brian Wienke of Indicott, Neb., has been 
planting turnips for fall and winter forage for the last two years. 
"The cows love the turnips once they discover them," Wienke said. "They will 
walk through milo stubble and winter wheat to get to the turnips." 
Kenny Barnes defeated Stephanie Franks for the title of the best speller in 
Itawamba County, Miss. He did so, the Itawamba County Times said, by correctly 
spelling "khaki" and "separation" and won a prize of $84. Stephanie won $25. 
In his column in the Waupun (Wis.) Leaders News, public librarian Tom Green 
noted that 6,316 borrowers checked out 108,549 items in 1988, and that fines 
totaling $3,108.80 were turned over to the city. 
Postmaster Rhonda Wallace advised residents of Hominy, Okla., to keep their 
mailboxes in good shape. "An old dented box with sharp cutting edges or a box 
that is too small should be replaced or mail delivery may be withheld," she 
said. 
Litterbugs Exposed 
The Manchester-Coffee County Beautification Assn. of Tennessee established a 
Litter Hotline so that tipsters could report the license numbers of drivers 
seen tossing trash from their vehicles. People who are informed on get a 
warning letter and a litter bag in the mail, the Tullahoma (Tennessee) News 
reported. 
In a letter to the editor of the Horton (Kansas) Headlight, Donna Hoffman 
protested a proposal, discussed by the commissioners, that stray cats be 
destroyed. She wrote that the cats help control mice and rats. "Imagine what it 
would be like with no cats to catch and kill these rodents! What's next? A rat 
ordinance?" 
The conditions of the restrooms at Duran Junior High School came up at a 
meeting of the board of education in Pell City, Ala. The problems -- 
overcrowding, a lack of privacy and urinals installed so high that boys 
couldn't use them. 
One angry father said he understood that if a boy was tardy because he had to 
wait to use the restroom he might get a paddling when he finally reached class. 
The St. Clair News-Aegis quoted the father as saying: "I'll tell you this, if 
my child comes home and says he got a paddling because he was held up in the 
bathroom, I'm going to come here and see some folks." 
