BRADLEY RETAINS ATTORNEY IN PROBE OF LINKS TO BANKS 
Mayor Tom Bradley disclosed Wednesday that he has retained a top civil attorney 
and a politically influential law firm to "protect my interest" in the city 
attorney's investigation of his ties with two financial institutions. 
Meanwhile, the prospect arose that the City Council may hire special counsel to 
look into whether Bradley violated conflict-of-interest laws when he received 
payments for serving on the board of Valley Federal Savings and Loan Assn. and 
as a member of the Board of Advisors for Far East National Bank, firms that 
have had dealings with the city. The Times learned that several City Council 
members are pressing for the hiring of a special counsel. 
City Investigation 
The mayor's immediate concern, however, was the investigation by City Atty. 
James K. Hahn, which Bradley welcomed when it was announced. 
Details of the investigation began emerging for the first time. One target of 
the Hahn staff, The Times learned, was to find out just when the mayor resigned 
as an adviser to the Far East National Bank. 
That is important because Bradley, in March, made a telephone call to the city 
treasurer asking whether city funds were about to be withdrawn from Far East 
and other banks. The mayor has said he was no longer employed by Far East when 
he made the telephone call, but said that his resignation -- last December -- 
was done orally. 
In pursuing the investigation, Hahn, in a letter to Police Chief Daryl F. 
Gates, asked for help from the Los Angeles Police Department. 
'Preliminary' Inquiry 
Assistant Police Chief Robert Vernon said two detectives from the bunco and 
forgery division will meet with Hahn next week to determine what help the city 
attorney needs. Asked whether this was a criminal investigation, Vernon said, 
"No, at this point no, nothing criminal has been alleged. At this point I would 
term it a preliminary inquiry into the facts." 
The most dramatic of the day's events came in the morning, at a City Hall press 
conference Bradley had called to announce a new commission to assist the 
disabled. 
Asked whether he had retained his own counsel, Bradley said he had asked for 
help from Daniel Fogel, a well-known Los Angeles attorney, and the firm of 
Manatt, Phelps, Rothenberg &amp; Phillips. 
"Somebody has to look carefully at every possibility discussed with the city 
attorney, to be -- in essence -- working on that matter full time to protect my 
interest, and I am busy carrying on the work of the city and certainly would 
not try to divide that attention," Bradley said. 
Asked who was paying the attorney, Bradley said "the city is not paying." 
Later, spokesman Bill Chandler said payment would be worked out "between the 
mayor and his attorneys." 
Role Is Confirmed 
Fogel confirmed he was helping the mayor. "I was retained by the mayor to 
advise him in connection with the city attorney's inquiry and the Manatt firm 
is acting as co-counsel," he said. Fogel declined further comment. 
Mickey Kantor of the Manatt firm said "I am not going to comment on anything 
except to say we have been retained as co-counsel with Dan's firm." 
Fogel is a partner in Fogel, Feldman, Ostrov, Ringler &amp; Klevens and has 
been active in local, state and national professional associations. Kantor is a 
well known Democratic Party strategist who is influential in internal party 
affairs. Most recently, he directed the unsuccessful campaign to permit oil 
drilling at the Pacific Palisades, a cause supported by Bradley. 
The idea of the special counsel to the City Council is supported by several 
council members, said Councilman Mike Woo, chairman of the Government 
Operations Committee, which is concerned with Hahn's probe. 
Council's Concerns 
Sentiment for an independent council inquiry, Woo said, comes from members who 
have expressed "some concern whether the city attorney will be able to proceed 
with a truly independent investigation. Some members of the council want an 
independent investigation" by someone other than an elected official. 
One council member said Hahn's office has a built-in conflict of interest in 
this situation because the city attorney is both a criminal prosecutor and, 
under the City Charter, counsel for the mayor. 
Council members also questioned whether Hahn's office, which handles city 
business and civil matters, has the capacity for a complex conflict-of-interest 
probe. 
Woo, however, said he personally does not "see the need for" special counsel 
now. 
Hahn's investigation is touching on several areas of the mayor's involvement 
with the savings and loan and the bank, sources said. 
One key area is to determine whether Bradley was still employed by the bank 
when he received on March 21 a telephone call from Henry Hwang, chairman of the 
bank. 
Call to Treasurer 
After Hwang asked whether the city was going to withdraw its deposits from his 
and other banks, the mayor said he called City Treasurer Leonard Rittenberg and 
inquired whether that were true. He also said he asked Rittenberg whether the 
city had any deposits in that bank. 
Rittenberg said the city had deposits in Far East Bank. At that point, Bradley 
said, he decided to return the $18,000 Far East had paid him for serving on the 
Board of Advisors. He said he decided at that moment to send Hwang a letter and 
return the funds. 
In the letter, Bradley said: "As you know, I terminated my relationship with" 
Far East in December. Thus, Bradley said he was not on the Far East payroll 
when he called Rittenberg. 
However, when The Times earlier this month asked Bradley to document his 
resignation, his aides replied that it was given orally and there was no 
documentation. 
Subsequently, The Times obtained a copy of Far East National Bank's report for 
1988. That report included an independent auditor's report signed Jan. 20, 
1989. 
That report still listed Bradley as a member of the Board of Advisors. 
Asked about that, press spokesman Chandler said he had no explanation. 
Bradley, at his press conference, reiterated his support for Hahn's 
investigation. "Let me remind you I encouraged the city attorney to start a 
full investigation, offered my cooperation and support," he said. 
Bradley called the use of the police, first disclosed by the Los Angeles Herald 
Examiner, "a routine action taken over and over again." Chief Vernon said the 
department has been called in to help in similar investigations, most recently 
in the well-publicized investigation of a former head of the General Services 
Administration and in a probe of the Housing Authority. 
