STATES PAY BIGGER SHARE FOR HIGHWAYS, BRIDGES; 
TRANSPORTATION: NEW SURVEY ALSO FINDS INCREASE IN GAS TAXES. THE FINDINGS RAISE 
DOUBTS ABOUT BUSH'S CALL FOR LEGISLATURES TO PLAY A GREATER FUNDING ROLE. 
State and local governments are bearing an increasing share of the burden of 
rebuilding the nation's highways and bridges, and states have raised their gas 
taxes 122 times since 1980, according to a survey released today. 
Although the survey was simply intended to provide statistical information, it 
raises questions about the feasibility of the Bush Administration's recent call 
for states and local governments to play an even greater role in highway 
construction and maintenance. 
The Road Information Program (TRIP), a nonprofit Washington-based 
transportation research institute, said its survey found that state and local 
governments bore 77.6% of the cost of highway improvements in 1988, compared to 
74% in 1980. That represented state expenditures of $53.53 billion in 1988, 
compared to $28.54 billion in 1980. 
The survey also found that states have already boosted their gas taxes by an 
average 84% -- from 8.6 cents a gallon in 1980 to 15.8 cents a gallon by Jan. 
1, 1990. Some states have raised their gas taxes three or more times during 
that period, including Wisconsin (five times), Minnesota and Indiana (four) and 
South Carolina and Nevada (three), the report said. 
In California, TRIP's findings were hailed by proponents of a June ballot 
initiative to double the state's 9-cent-a-gallon gas tax over five years. If 
voters approve Proposition 111, the revenues generated would be dedicated to 
highway improvements. 
Arthur Bauer, executive director of Californians for Better Transportation, a 
group that favors Proposition 111, said the report shows that California lags 
behind the nation in increasing its gas sales tax. 
"Some states already have 20-cent gas taxes," he said. "We're hoping to get to 
18 cents over the next five years. This helps illustrate the differences 
between states." 
TRIP collected the data contained in the report by surveying highway 
departments in the 50 states and the District of Columbia, as well as using 
information supplied by the Federal Highway Administration, the American Assn. 
of State Highway and Transportation Officials and other government and private 
organizations. 
"This report is a response to the Administration's saying that the states have 
to pick up more funding responsibility," said Sally Thompson, a TRIP researcher 
and the report's author. "What they've been calling for may not be possible 
since the states have been picking up the responsibility all along." 
Last month, Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner released the 
Administration's national transportation policy, which outlined the 
deteriorating status of the nation's infrastructure but offered no federal 
programs or methods to pay for needed repairs. Instead, the policy urged state 
legislatures to offset a diminished federal role by increasing state taxes, 
seeking private-sector involvement and employing innovative financial deals for 
highway projects. 
But TRIP's report said many state governments are already trying to compensate 
for less federal aid with the kind of programs called for in the 
Administration's national transportation policy. 
It added that the states are just as strapped for money as the federal 
government, and often end up using highway funds for other purposes. 
"Money collected from user charges such as motor-fuel taxes and registration 
fees is being diverted to unrelated areas, such as mass transit, education and 
law enforcement," the report said. "In fact, 18 states considered legislation 
(to allow diversions of highway funds) in 1989 and 11 passed legislation." 
TRIP researchers asked state officials to list their "top three highway" 
priorities, and 30 of the 41 responding to the question "spoke of the need for 
stronger federal support," the report said. 
The state officials' response was "in direct contrast" to the Administration's 
"call for an increased state role," Thompson said. However, the report also 
noted that "states are reluctantly accepting the fact that the federal 
government is not going to provide the regular, adequate highway funding they 
desperately need -- not now and not in future years." 
The survey also showed that state officials are strongly opposed to increasing 
the federal gas tax to reduce the deficit, as has been suggested in Washington 
recently. 
"A total of 41 respondents said such a tax would have a devastating impact on 
their highway programs," the report said. It noted that 29 states passed 
resolutions last year opposing a federal gas tax increase to reduce the budget 
deficit. 
State officials are more inclined to support the spending of federal motor fuel 
taxes already collected and held in the Highway Trust Fund, the report said. 
"We would like to see (the Administration) spend down the Highway Trust Fund," 
Art Taylor, a spokesman for the Missouri Highway and Transportation Department, 
said in an interview. "Once that money is spent down, we're not opposed to the 
federal government raising its gasoline tax." 
The fund has a surplus of about $10 billion and it grows yearly since receipts 
continue to outpace expenditures by about $2 billion a year. 
