THE 'ART MALL' BLOSSOMS IN SANTA MONICA 
When art librarian Annette Masling was in Southern California recently, her 
must-see list included a light-industrial mall in the 900 block of Colorado 
Avenue in Santa Monica. 
She didn't go there to have her car repaired, despite the plethora of body 
shops in the area. 
Masling, who directs the library at the Albright-Knox Art Gallery in Buffalo, 
N.Y. -- one of the oldest modern art museums in the country -- headed for 
Colorado Avenue to check out the latest offerings at what has become the center 
of the West Coast's contemporary art gallery scene. 
"This is the hub," said Christopher Ford, director of the Pence Gallery, one of 
six modern art venues in what many observers refer to as Santa Monica's "art 
mall." 
Ford was interviewed recently by Art &amp; Auction magazine, one of the leading 
gallery trade journals, about the contemporary art scene in Los Angeles. 
"Twenty years ago, it all started in West Hollywood," he said. "Now that's 
dying. By moving into new spaces in Santa Monica, people can reinvent 
themselves, which is really what Los Angeles is all about." 
Art dealer James Corcoran moved to 5th Street in Santa Monica in 1986 after 
more than a decade in West Hollywood, pioneering the local modern art gallery 
boom. 
But it was the decision by Irving Blum to open a gallery on Colorado Avenue 
later that year that really ignited the current explosion. Blum's BlumHelman 
Gallery (co-owned by Joseph Helman), the Pence Gallery and Fred Hoffman, all of 
which opened in December, 1986, were the original tenants of the art mall. 
"Blum coming after Corcoran was really the snowball beginning to roll 
downhill," said Henry Korn, Santa Monica's arts administrator. 
Blum is a legend among contemporary art dealers. He was one of the owners of 
Los Angeles' Ferus Gallery, which gave its imprimatur in the 1950s and '60s to 
new artists such as Andy Warhol. After the Ferus closed in 1967, Blum ran his 
own gallery in West Hollywood until he moved to Manhattan in 1973. Blum's 
decision to return to the West Coast in 1986 is seen by many as a turning point 
in Los Angeles' recent ascent to major art-city status. 
Deborah McLeod, director of the BlumHelman Gallery, said Blum originally 
scouted for gallery space on La Brea and Melrose avenues but rejected them 
because of sky-high rentals and lack of parking. 
Blum decided to look in Santa Monica because it "was the pleasantest place 
around here," McLeod said. 
While hunting, the art dealer discovered a recently built light-industrial mall 
on Colorado whose tenants included a swimwear manufacturer. Blum peered in a 
window, McLeod said, and saw a 15-foot ceiling, poured concrete floors and a 
roll-up door in the rear that facilitated unpacking goods from the alley. 
Ford remembers being tipped off early in 1986 that Blum was considering moving 
into the Colorado Avenue complex. Ford had come from New York to open a gallery 
and had already signed up for space on La Brea. He drove around until he 
finally found the unglamorous 900 block of Colorado. 
Ford couldn't believe that this was where an art dealer of Blum's stature was 
going to settle. "I looked around, and I said: 'Irving Blum has a major gallery 
on 57th Street. He's not going to open next to a Shakey's Pizza and a 
Laundromat.' Then I told myself to stop thinking like a New Yorker." 
Once Ford had chastised himself, he saw what Blum had seen -- a new building 
with interior space that could be shaped according to the tenant's needs, an 
abundance of parking and a freeway-close location. In short, he saw a great 
place for an art gallery in a city that, unlike New York, is dominated by the 
automobile. 
The opening of BlumHelman, the Pence Gallery and Fred Hoffman "was very 
propitious time-wise," Ford said. The gallery debuts coincided with the opening 
of the Museum of Contemporary Art's Grand Avenue building, the opening of the 
modern Anderson wing of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the first Los 
Angeles Art Fair. 
The art mall was an instant hit. Ford said the gallery soon had 500 visitors or 
more on a good day. 
McLeod said the key to its success was that "it's easy. You fall off the 
freeway and you're here, which makes it different from Venice." Parking is a 
cinch, especially on Saturdays, a big gallery day when most of the non-art 
businesses in the complex are closed. 
The gallery group also benefits from its relative isolation from other retail 
businesses, McLeod said. "Every person who comes to the gallery came to come to 
the gallery. They aren't someone who was next door buying an ice cream cone or 
shoelaces." 
Most of her visitors, McLeod said, are people who keep up with contemporary 
art, regulars who go from gallery to gallery and "make a half-day of it." 
The only time she recalls being inundated with what she called "non-art people" 
was during the gallery's recent show of photographs by the late, controversial 
Robert Mapplethorpe. "I found it unmanageable," she said. "Generally we have a 
highly filtered group of visitors. They are respectful of and knowledgeable 
about art and a pleasure to work with." 
Visitors can park their cars once and walk to nine different galleries, 
including four in industrial-style spaces across the street from the mall. 
Gallery owners often coordinate their openings. 
On opening nights, patrons, many wearing running shoes, wander from show to 
show, carrying bottles of Corona beer or plastic glasses of the Soave Bolla and 
Australian wine so many of the galleries serve. Some wear costumes. Some carry 
babies. 
On rare occasions, a stray homeless person wanders into one of the galleries 
from elsewhere in Santa Monica. One gallery staffer remembers being visited by 
an addled, barefoot man with a valise on his head. The man was assured that he 
was welcome to look at the show but then would have to leave or "I'll have to 
pick up Mr. Telephone." 
Dorothy Goldeen, who opened her gallery across from the mall at 9th and 
Colorado in the fall of 1987, said she moved from San Francisco to Santa Monica 
because "I thought the future for the contemporary art world on the West Coast 
would be here." 
She still does. Goldeen said the unlikely, heavy-duty look of the gallery 
neighborhood is part of its charm. "It's a wonderful world to discover -- 
you're not aware of it until you find it. That sense of discovery is part of 
the excitement." 
After four years in West Hollywood, Richard Kuhlenschmidt opened his gallery in 
February at 1634 17th St., half a block south of Colorado. A major impetus was 
the difficulty of parking in West Hollywood. "People would get tickets, and 
that was very uncomfortable for me," he said. 
Kuhlenschmidt and other gallery owners in the area are hoping the 17th Street 
complex will grow into another art mall and become a regular stop on the 
Saturday circuit. 
