NOTEBOOK: FENNEL OWNERS CONSIDERING A BRASSERIA 
There have been rumors recently that Fennel, the popular new Santa Monica 
French restaurant at which a quartet of top chef-restaurateurs from France 
share cooking chores on an alternating basis, plans to clone itself. 
That's not quite true, says Fennel proprietor Mauro Vincente (who also runs 
Pazzia on La Cienega and Rex Il Ristorante downtown). But he admits that he and 
his French associates are investigating the possibility of spinning off from 
Fennel "a kind of brasseria" -- an Italian-French brasserie. 
"The idea," he says, "would be to have a casual, less expensive place, with 
Italian chefs doing pizza and pastas and French chefs, the same ones involved 
with Fennel, doing meat and fish. We are considering several possible locations 
in Santa Monica -- but the project is probably a year or two off." 
EXPENSE ACCOUNTING: About this time four years ago, the Reagan Administration, 
as a part of its massive tax reform program, proposed to limit business meal 
deductions to $15 per person for lunch and $25 per person for dinner, plus 50% 
of the amount over that figure. The American restaurant industry was vehemently 
opposed to the measure, predicting that it would force scores if not hundreds 
of upscale eating places out of business. 
At the time, I asked half a dozen prominent L.A.-area restaurateurs with 
substantial expense-account clienteles -- Patrick Terrail of the since-closed 
original Ma Maison, Tony Bill of 72 Market Street, Jimmy Murphy of Jimmy's, 
Wolfgang Puck of Spago and Chinois on Main, Piero Selvaggio of Valentino and 
Michael McCarty of Michael's -- how they thought the measure would affect them. 
As it happens, the $15/$25 formula did not become law, but a measure limiting 
business meal deductions to 80% of the amount actually spent did, as of 1987. 
In honor of the tax season we just squeaked out of, I asked those same six 
operators how the limitation had in fact affected them. Here are excerpts from 
their comments four years ago, together with their replies today: 
Piero Selvaggio, Valentino: (THEN) I personally don't think the tax proposal 
will pass . . . but if it does, we'll get used to it. It won't have any real 
effect in the long run. (NOW) I may have been wrong about the measure passing, 
but I was right about it not having any real effect. Maybe there's a little 
more awareness of cost, a feeling of being a little bit careful about spending 
on a certain bottle of wine, but people who want to entertain still entertain 
-- and if they can get away with charging it to business somehow, they will. 
Michael McCarty, Michael's: (THEN) "Expletive deleted! Expletive deleted! I 
think the whole idea is terrible . . . It's going to hurt a whole lot of 
restaurants . . . I don't want to sound like a crybaby, but if the proposal 
passes, I'd have to seriously consider whether we could continue to do business 
as we do now. (NOW) I can't imagine anybody in the restaurant business telling 
you with a straight face that business is great today -- but whether it's the 
business-meal deductions or the Wall Street crash or new health habits or just 
the fact that a lot of our old customers are having children and staying home 
more, I don't know. I'm sure the deduction limits have had an effect, but it's 
not as drastic as I had feared. But if you ask me, food and wine should always 
be deducted, just like the mortgage! It ought to be an American right! 
Jimmy Murphy, Jimmy's: (THEN) I hope it won't go through . . . (A) lot of jobs 
are created through business meals in restaurants like ours. (But) I'm sure 
people will find ways around it if it does pass. (NOW) I don't think the 
limitation has affected us. Our business has been steady. It doesn't seem to 
have had a noticeable effect. 
Tony Bill, 72 Market Street: (THEN) The (proposed) limits seem in line with the 
average checks at my restaurant. (But the measure would) put a severe cramp in 
my style when I go to other restaurants. (NOW) I haven't noticed any effects at 
all. Life goes on, without missing much of a beat. 
 Patrick Terrail (formerly Ma Maison, now food and beverage manager for the 
recently opened Ma Maison Sofitel Hotel and director of a new version of Ma 
Maison immediately adjacent to it): (THEN) I don't feel either way about the 
proposal, really, (though) some other, more expensive restaurants . . . are 
going to get hurt. (NOW) (My restaurant is) too new at this point to be able to 
have any standards of comparison over the past few years. But I'll tell you 
something interesting: If you called half a dozen of my customers at random and 
asked them what the deduction limits were, I'll bet most of them wouldn't even 
know. I'll bet most of them have forgotten all about it. 
Wolfgang Puck, Spago; Chinois on Main: (THEN) At the beginning, I think people 
will complain a lot, but they'll adapt . . . They'll still go out. (NOW) I 
haven't noticed any effects of the limitation at all. We had the best year 
we've ever had in 1988. I think these limits are something people just learn to 
live with. You know, gas prices keep going up, and still you drive. No matter 
how expensive gas is, people don't want to car-pool. 
A SNOOTFUL OF BLUE: Forget cigarette smoke, overzealously applied perfume, and 
the odor of burnt food. There's a new old factory menace showing up in 
restaurants today -- glass cleaner. I mean that usually-blue, 
usually-ammoniated liquid that always seems to get squirted onto the 
glass-topped table next to you just about the time your swordfish arrives. The 
odor of the stuff is all-pervasive. A haze of it can sting your eyes, burn your 
throat, and leave a nasty metallic taste in your mouth. 
By definition, it doesn't show up at restaurants with tablecloths, but it can 
appear unexpectedly in some very pricey places -- as it did to me recently, for 
instance, in the middle of an otherwise superb dinner at the ultra-posh Rex Il 
Ristorante downtown, where the substance was applied not to a glass-topped 
table but to one of shiny black marble. Maybe restaurateurs don't realize just 
how unpleasant a snootful of glass cleaner can be. Well, I'm hereby telling 
them. Cut it out, you guys. Clean the glass later -- or try warm water and mild 
soap on a soft rag, or maybe a weak vinegar solution. OK? Thank you. 
RESTAURANT NEWS: Trumps in West Hollywood hosts a cooking class and 
wine-tasting event for the California State University, Northridge, extension 
program on May 7 from noon to 3:30 p.m. The recipes of Trumps' executive chef 
Michael Roberts and the sparkling wines of Scharffenberger Cellars will be 
featured. Cost is $65 per person. Call (818) 885-2644 for details. . . . 1000 
Wilshire in Santa Monica spotlights the food and wine of Chile on May 8, with a 
four-course Chilean banquet priced at $55 a head. Traditional Chilean music and 
folk dance will also be featured. . . . The El Torito restaurant chain, which 
began as a single eating place in Southern California but which now numbers 
some 177 units around the country, celebrates the 35th anniversary of its 
founding this month. . . . The legendary Sardi's in New York City has been sold 
for $15 million to the Atlantic City-based Broadway Holdings Inc. -- which 
reports that it will use the Sardi's name for a hotel and casino in Atlantic 
City itself and open spinoff Sardi's restaurants in several other cities around 
the United States. . . . And three woman wine makers and two woman wine writers 
will be the guests of honor at a special $55-a-head dinner at Chez Melange in 
Redondo Beach, beginning at 7 p.m. on May 23. 
