8 FLEE IN 3RD ESCAPE FROM JAIL IN 4 MONTHS 
Seven inmates, including two murder suspects, were being sought on Wednesday 
after the third escape in four months from the South Bay Detention Facility 
here, authorities said. 
The San Diego County Sheriff's Department said eight prisoners cut through bars 
on a jail window and climbed to freedom Tuesday night before a security guard 
hired to watch the outside of the jail could alert deputies inside. 
The break was a replay of a March 7 escape in which 13 inmates used hacksaw 
blades to cut their way out in the largest jailbreak in San Diego County 
history. 
One of the inmates who escaped Tuesday night was captured about 20 minutes 
later, but the other seven eluded a dragnet. Authorities speculated they may 
have headed for the Mexican border seven miles to the south. 
Investigators said the inmates apparently had a hacksaw or some other tool 
smuggled inside and used it to cut through the bars. 
"The inmates then forced out the plastic window and lowered themselves 35 feet 
to the ground on bedsheets tied together," said Sheriff's Sgt. Bev Creighton. 
"It's not been determined what tools were used to cut through the bars and how 
they were brought into the facility." 
Chula Vista police captured Johnny Smith, who had been awaiting transfer to 
state prison to serve a drug sentence. 
Two San Diego men charged with murder, Manuel Salmaron, 29, and Yidefonso 
Barahona, 19, were among those still at large. 
The others were identified as: Fernando Martinez, 24, San Diego, held on 
charges of drunk driving and a previous escape attempt; Jorge Renteria, 28, San 
Diego, held on a variety of charges including assaulting a police officer; 
Roberto Loza, 31, no known address, charged with 14 counts of robbery; Arturo 
Robles, 29, held for a prior escape, and Salvador Gutierrez, 25, burglary. 
The inmates were being held in a "hard felony tank" in the crowded jail. 
The jail sits below street level in downtown Chula Vista. Its location allowed 
someone outside to lower hacksaw blades on a string to the window where the 
inmates who escaped in March were able to snag them. 
Four inmates from the March 7 escape remained at large Wednesday, as did two of 
seven inmates who fled Dec. 5 by breaking a window and squeezing through a 
narrow opening after greasing themselves with hand lotion. 
The county hired private security guards to watch the outside of the jail after 
the March escape, and new steel bars were installed on outside windows to 
prevent inmates from having tools lowered to them. 
