RUDDOCK KNOCKS DOKES UNCONSCIOUS IN FOURTH; 
BOXING: FOUR-PUNCH COMBINATION PUTS FORMER WBA CHAMPION ON THE FLOOR FOR 4 1/2 
MINUTES. MIKE WEAVER ALSO LOSES, ANNOUNCES RETIREMENT. 
Michael Dokes was knocked out but not senseless. He had the sense to know his 
career may be over. 
The former World Boxing Assn. heavyweight champion was knocked out Wednesday 
night by Donovan (Razor) Ruddock in the fourth round of a scheduled 12-round 
bout and remained unconscious for two minutes. 
"I'm devastated," Dokes said. "Maybe it's time for me to start thinking about 
doing something else. "If I can't beat Ruddock, I can't beat (Buster) Douglas." 
Two other former WBA champions also appeared on the card. James (Bonecrusher) 
Smith, 35, who knocked out Mike Weaver in the first round in April 5, 1986, 
needed 12 rounds to beat the 37-year-old Weaver this time. He did it so 
convincingly that Weaver announced his retirement. 
As referee Arthur Mercante Jr. counted out Dokes, doctors and Dokes' cornermen 
rushed to the stricken fighter. The drama was heightened when a stretcher was 
taken into the ring. 
Dokes, who, according to a ringside physician, was on the canvas for 4 1/2 
minutes before being helped to his stool. He finally left the ring under his 
power. 
"I knew he was hurt," the 26-year-old Ruddock said, "but I had to do my job. If 
he was hurt, I'm sorry about it. I didn't want him to be hurt permanently." 
Dokes, 31, seemed to have an edge after the first three rounds. Then, early in 
the fourth, Ruddock crashed a left uppercut that dropped Dokes into a squatting 
position. 
Dokes straightened up and was hit with a right hand and two left hooks that 
sent him to the floor. 
Ruddock disclosed after the fight that he hurt his right hand three weeks ago 
and had not done any sparring. 
Murad Muhammad, Ruddock's promoter and co-promoter of Wednesday night's show, 
said the fighter went to a doctor just two days before the fight. 
"The doctor told him, 'It's not cracked, it's not broken,' " Muhammad said. 
"Razor asked him, 'Can I fight?' The doctor said, 'Yes, if you can stand the 
pain.' " 
Ruddock didn't throw a right hand until early in the third round when he landed 
a left lead flush to Dokes' face. He threw a couple of others before the big 
right hand in the fight-ending combination. 
Dokes' gloves were cut off and he was administered oxygen as he lay on the 
canvas. But he began talking to doctors a few minutes after the knockout. 
The ending came with explosive suddenness. Until then, the fight had been one 
of tactics. Both men had landed some hard punches but were unable to put any 
effective combinations together until Ruddock's fight-ending flurry. 
Many in the crowd of 12,624 at the first all-live boxing card in Madison Square 
Garden in a little more than three years applauded Dokes after he got up. 
The knockout at 53 seconds of the fourth round was an important win for the 
26-year-old Ruddock, a native of Jamaica who lives in Toronto. He is ranked 
second by both the WBA and World Boxing Council and fourth by the International 
Boxing Federation. 
Dokes launched a comeback in 1987 after a layoff of 33 months due to legal 
problems and rehabilitation from cocaine addiction. 
Ruddock, who weighed 230 pounds, has a 23-1-1 record with 16 knockouts. Dokes, 
240, of Miami Beach, has a 41-3-2 record with 27 knockouts. 
The loss was his second in 14 fights since the comeback began. Dokes' other 
loss since his comeback began was to top-ranked Evander Holyfield, who is 
expected to challenge champion James (Buster) Douglas in September. 
