MONEY TALK: UTILITY SURCHARGES FOR NEEDY AREN'T DEDUCTIBLE 
Q: There are some minor charges on two of my utility bills that I do not 
understand. My gas bill has a "state regulatory fee" and a "low-income fund 
surcharge." My telephone bill has various fees and surcharges, including one 
for communication devices for the deaf and disabled. Who gets the income from 
these charges? Also, are any of these fees considered "other taxes" by the 
Internal Revenue Service and therefore deductible? -- W.C.P. 
A: The funds generated by the fees you mentioned are administered in a variety 
of ways, according to Pacific Bell and Southern California Gas Co. And, to 
answer your second question, none are deductible on state and federal tax 
returns. 
California residents currently pay a 0.3% surcharge on all telephone calls made 
within the state to provide free telecommunication devices for the deaf. The 
money is administered by a trust fund that was established when the levy was 
approved. Similarly, funds generated by the 0.69% surcharge on intrastate calls 
for emergency telephone systems are funneled into a special trust fund that 
supports 911 service throughout the state. Californians also pay a 2.5% 
surcharge on all long-distance calls made within the state to help provide 
low-cost telephone service to the needy. The state regulatory fee on telephone 
bills goes toward supporting the state Public Utilities Commission, the 
government agency charged with regulating all utilities in California. 
Moving on to your gas bill, the "low-income fund surcharge" is levied by all 
gas companies throughout the state at the behest of the Legislature. Funds 
generated by the fee are used to provide subsidized gas service for needy 
families. Gas companies administer the fund and provide low-cost service to 
households meeting minimum income standards. The regulatory fee, like the one 
charged by phone company, goes toward supporting the PUC's operations. 
According to spokesmen for both utilities, these levies are not considered 
taxes deductible by the IRS. Why? The gas company said it was because the 
low-income families that it serves with its subsidized gas program are not "an 
IRS-defined charitable group." And a phone company spokesman said its fees were 
considered "sales or excise" taxes, which are no longer deductible. Our tax 
experts agree: The levies -- nickels and dimes that add up to dollars by 
year-end -- are not tax deductible. 
Determining Taxes on Stocks, Dividends 
Q: I have participated in a dividend reinvestment program since 1982 and expect 
to sell all the shares I hold in this company sometime this year. During the 
past seven years, I have paid income taxes on the dividends I received, even 
though they were reinvested in additional stock. How do I determine my tax 
obligation on the gain I received from the sale? -- J.B. 
A: If your records are complete and up to date, you should have no problem 
determining your tax bill. The price you paid for the stock you purchased with 
your reinvested dividends becomes your tax basis in these shares. To calculate 
your taxable gain, simply subtract the basis from your sales price. For 
example, an admittedly simple one, let's say you had reinvested $100 and had 
purchased four shares. Because you would have paid income tax on the $100 
during the year in which the dividend was earned, each of the shares you 
purchased would carry a taxable basis of $25. If you sell those shares for $50 
each, your taxable gain is $25 per share, or a total of $100. 
Your calculations to determine gains on stock purchased over seven years will 
be more complicated than the above example, but the process will be eased 
considerably because you intend on selling all your shares at once. If you were 
selling only a part of your holdings, the situation would be far more 
complicated. In that case, our tax experts say, you would have to specifically 
designate the shares you intended to sell, identifying them by their purchase 
date and price. 
Most dividend reinvestment programs send their investors quarterly reports 
detailing the cash value of their dividends and the number of shares -- with 
their sales price -- credited to their accounts. If you have saved these over 
the years, you should know exactly the tax basis of every share you are 
selling. If you haven't saved them (tsk, tsk), you can still retrieve the 
information you need. The investor relations department of the company should 
be able to help you unravel your account and provide you with new copies of 
your purchase records. 
By the way, this is probably a good time to remind everyone who participates in 
a dividend reinvestment program that complete and thorough record-keeping is 
more than a secretarial chore; it's an absolute necessity. If you are audited, 
the IRS can make you prove the taxable basis of the shares you are selling, 
and, if you can't, you could be forced to pay tax on your entire sales 
proceeds. 
NOTE: Last week's column contained some erroneous information inadvertently 
provided by the Social Security Administration. A reader asked if her Social 
Security or Supplemental Security Income benefits would be reduced as a result 
of her marrying a man who also receives Social Security and a private pension. 
The response was that her Social Security benefits would not be reduced, which 
is true. However, it is not true that Supplemental Security Income benefits are 
reduced, dollar for dollar, by the amount of her husband's income. Because of a 
recent change in Social Security regulations, the reduction would be far less. 
In the hypothetical example we used, where the reader is receiving $250 in 
monthly SSI benefits, her payment would be reduced by just $6 if her husband 
had a monthly income of $400. Her SSI payments would be eliminated only if her 
husband's monthly income were $787 or more. 
