SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA FILE 
The Rev. Marvin Abrams, a Seneca Indian and a United Methodist pastor, will 
begin a 200-mile walk Monday from Santa Barbara to San Diego as a way to call 
attention to his denomination's newest special offering day -- Native American 
Sunday on April 29. 
"I call it a 'Seventh Generation Walk' (because) in the Seneca nation we make 
decisions based upon what they will cause in seven generations to come," Abrams 
said. He is pastor of the Native American United Methodist Church in Norwalk. 
United Methodist Bishop Jack M. Tuell of Los Angeles said he would join Abrams 
on parts of his walk. The itinerary, mostly along Pacific Coast Highway, 
includes stops at Methodist churches at Ventura, Thousand Oaks, Northridge, 
Santa Monica and California Heights in Long Beach. Abrams will be driven from 
the coast and back in order to make speaking appearances at the inland 
churches. "I've been walking every day" to get in shape, he said. 
Details of the second leg, from Norwalk to San Diego, were not available this 
week, but Abrams said he would end the jaunt with an evening powwow April 22 at 
the Norwalk church. 
Donations received on Native American Sunday -- the last Sunday this month -- 
will support Native American ministries, scholarships for Indian seminarians 
and six urban ministries that help Indians. 
PEOPLE 
Father George Stallings, suspended as a Catholic priest last year after he 
established his independent Imani Temple in Washington, is scheduled to speak 
at two churches in Los Angeles next week. Stallings will talk Wednesday at 
Faith United Methodist Church, 1713 W. 108th St., during a 7 p.m. revival, and 
Thursday at First African Methodist Episcopal Church, 2270 S. Harvard Blvd., at 
a 7 p.m. service. At the annual conference last month in New Jersey of the 
National Assn. of Black Seminarians, Stallings said African-Americans must 
"redefine, reclaim and reconstruct our history as well as our theological 
foundations." The Rev. M.A. Robinson-Gaither, pastor of Faith United Methodist, 
said Stallings "has given fiber" to renewed desire among young black Christians 
to reassert their perspective on church life. "We might be seeing the '60s all 
over again, but with a different approach," Robinson-Gaither said. 
Father Terrance Fleming, vice chancellor of the Los Angeles Catholic 
Archdiocese and a key organizer of preparations in 1987 for the Los Angeles 
visit of Pope John Paul II, was named by Archbishop Roger M. Mahony this week 
as pastor of St. Vibiana Cathedral, effective next month. The assignment moves 
Fleming into a position often favorable for subsequent appointment to the 
Catholic hierarchy. Three former pastors who later became bishops were Alden 
Bell, William Johnson and John Steinbock. Msgr. Royale Vadakin, appointed as 
cathedral pastor six years ago by the late Cardinal Timothy Manning, will 
remain director of the archdiocese's highly praised ecumenical and interfaith 
programs. He will receive an honorary doctorate on May 12 from Loyola Marymount 
University. On May 18, Vadakin will assume new duties as pastor of St. 
Anastasia parish in Westchester. 
"Deacon" Dan Towler, a Los Angeles Rams fullback in the early 1950s, will be 
honored Thursday at a dinner at the Biltmore in Los Angeles. Towler was 
minister of the Lincoln Avenue Methodist Church in Pasadena from 1956 to 1966 
before becoming a campus minister at Cal State Los Angeles. A member for 26 
years of the Los Angeles County Board of Education, Towler also established 
four years ago the Dan Towler Educational Foundation, a trust that has awarded 
$10,000 in scholarships to students with demonstrated desires toward community 
service or church-related vocations. 
INTERFAITH 
The roots and common features of Judaism, Christianity and Islam will be 
discussed in five forums on successive Thursdays, starting next week, at All 
Saints Episcopal Church in Pasadena. The first speaker, D. Peter Burrows, an 
All Saints parishioner who holds a doctorate in rabbinic literature, is 
scheduled to discuss the 1st-Century Christian struggles to define its 
differences with Judaism despite many common beliefs. Other speakers are the 
Rev. Robert H. Iles, a priest-psychotherapist at All Saints Church; Robert 
Douglas, president of the Zwemer Institute and a former missionary in the 
Middle East; Dr. Hassam Hathout, director of the outreach program of the 
Islamic Center of Southern California, and David Julian, cantor at the Pasadena 
Jewish Temple and Center. 
DATES 
Looking ahead to Earth Day, April 22, religious philosopher David Ray Griffin, 
director of the Center for a Post-Modern World in Santa Barbara, will speak on 
"The Re-enchantment of the World" at 7:30 p.m. Monday at UC Santa Barbara. 
Singer Della Reese, who is an ordained minister, will sing her own compositions 
and traditional Easter hymns Sunday at the 7 a.m. and 9 a.m. services at 
Redondo Beach Church of Religious Science, 907 Knob Hill Ave. 
Author-radio broadcaster Charles Swindoll, senior pastor of Evangelical Free 
Church of Fullerton, will speak at Pepperdine University's Seaver College 
commencement at 2 p.m. Friday at the Eddy D. Field Baseball Stadium in Malibu. 
Ex-Jesuit John McNeill, author of "The Church and the Homosexual," will lead a 
two-day seminar on "Gay Empowerment" starting Friday at Occidental College's 
Herrick Interfaith Center. 
The 40th annual Mass and Breakfast for the Entertainment Industry next Saturday 
at the Sheraton Universal will be emceed by comedian Wil Shriner. Religious 
awards will go to MacDonald Carey, who plays in the daytime serial "Days of Our 
Lives," and to Christopher Burke for his work in ABC's "Life Goes On." 
Archbishop Roger M. Mahony will celebrate an outdoor Mass at 9:30 a.m. Proceeds 
from the ticket sales (at $30 each) will benefit Marian Homes, a center for 
physically handicapped and developmentally disabled adults. JOHN DART 
