PEOPLE'S PHARMACY: POPULAR ANTIDEPRESSANT PROZAC CARRIES SOME CAUTIONS 
The hot drug of the 1970s was Valium (diazepam). At its peak, more than 60 
million prescriptions were filled each year. People treated the little blue or 
yellow pills almost as casually as aspirin. 
In the 1980s, Xanax took over top billing for psychoactive drugs. Now a new 
contender is grabbing the spotlight. 
Unlike Valium and Xanax, the superstar drug of the 1990s does not relieve 
anxiety. It is an antidepressant, a type of medicine that's long been regarded 
by both doctors and patients as necessary but unpleasant. 
Previous antidepressants saved people from suicide and helped them shake off 
the immobility of despair, but they rarely made people feel great. 
Many antidepressants left people feeling sluggish and "spaced out." People 
often gained weight and developed a dry mouth, constipation, disturbed 
concentration and sexual dysfunction. 
Prozac (fluoxetine), the new head drug of the '90s, doesn't cause weight gain 
or sedation. And it has received far more recognition than any other 
antidepressant. With cover stories in Newsweek and New York magazine, Prozac 
has become a household name. Sales zoomed to $350 million last year, more than 
double the previous year's total. 
There's a reason for such popularity. Cheryl was overweight, depressed, tired a 
lot of the time and compulsive about neatness. Her son's messy room drove her 
wild. To keep everything in its place, she spent hours each day tidying up. It 
was a constant source of friction. 
Her doctor had tried her on amitriptyline, a tricyclic antidepressant, but it 
made her fatigue and weight problem worse. She decided she could live with the 
depression rather than gain more weight. 
Shortly after Prozac was introduced, her doctor wrote her a prescription. It 
changed Cheryl's life. She felt energetic and optimistic and stopped screaming 
at her family. 
An added bonus -- she started to lose weight for the first time in years. But 
there is a darker side to Prozac. 
Just as Valium and Xanax lost popularity as people learned about complications, 
Prozac may lose its glamour when people realize there are side effects. 
Some people develop insomnia and feel jittery and anxious. Nausea, tremors, 
sweating and sexual problems are also possible. 
More disturbing is the report that Prozac may lead a small number of people to 
consider suicide. Harvard researchers recently reported six cases in which 
patients on Prozac developed "intense, violent suicidal thoughts." 
A spokesperson for Eli Lilly said the company sees "no trend that Prozac has 
any relationship to suicide, suicide ideation, attempts or successful suicides 
any more than other therapeutic interventions in patients with depression." 
As popular as Prozac is becoming, no one yet knows the long-term safety of this 
antidepressant. 
