ISRAEL AND PLO ARE ALREADY TALKING; 
DESPITE THE LINK OF U.S. MEDIATION, PACE WILL REMAIN SLOW 
The main conclusion emerging from Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's visit to 
Washington is that indirect negotiations have in effect been initiated between 
the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel with the mediation of the 
United States. 
One has to be totally blind not to recognize this fact. The proposals the 
United States has received from Israel will now be transmitted to the PLO in 
Tunisia. The American representatives will try to sell the ideas of the Israeli 
prime minister to the PLO leadership. They will then come back from Tunisia 
with counterproposals on how to start the first stage of the peace process and 
so on, back and forth. 
Shamir may insist that Israel will never negotiate with the PLO under any 
circumstances, but both he and the rest of the Israeli Cabinet understand that 
from now on, the Americans will shuttle between them and the PLO with proposals 
and counterproposals. 
Elections in the occupied territories will only strengthen this trend. If 
Shamir's proposal is accepted, there can only be one outcome: The PLO 
representatives will win. This already happened in the 1976 municipal elections 
in the West Bank; PLO representatives were elected then. If elections are held 
in the territories, Shamir will have no choice but to accept those elected 
after he himself has proposed to start the process. Shamir will call them 
representatives of the Palestinian population, but in reality they will be PLO 
representatives, more authentic perhaps than the PLO leadership outside the 
territories but nonetheless taking their directives from PLO headquarters in 
Tunisia. 
There are conflicts of interest between the Palestinian residents of the 
territories and the PLO representatives abroad, which may deepen in the future, 
but it is a mistake to think that one can drive a wedge between the two groups. 
Both have the same objective -- get rid of the Israeli occupation and gain 
independence. Neither group wants to be weakened by being separated from the 
other. 
In other words, the Israeli leadership is outwardly clinging to a fiction, 
maintaining that the PLO does not exist and that the Palestinian residents of 
the territories do not want to be represented by it. For the moment, the Bush 
Administration is willing to let the Israeli government live with this fiction, 
provided the process is initiated. 
Likud, whose representatives are now conducting Israel's foreign policy, will 
find that just as in the case of the "Jordanian option," anyone who wishes to 
end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict will not be able to do so without the PLO. 
Hence, rather than look for substitutes, efforts should be made to change the 
PLO, see to it that the moderates in its ranks in the territories and Tunis 
control the organization and accept Israel's minimal military conditions. 
Is Shamir prepared to cooperate in this process? His talks in Washington 
indicate that, at least in the initial stage, he is willing to coordinate the 
first moves with the United States. The fact that the United States is engaged 
in a dialogue with the PLO has not deterred him. He has not brought along a 
plan, but rather a few ideas, the central one being the holding of democratic 
elections in the territories. In the past, including in the Camp David accords, 
it was agreed that such elections would only take place after the transition 
period. 
At this point Shamir is prepared to hold elections beforehand, at an earlier 
stage, provided violence in the territories is stopped. He is even willing to 
find a way that will enable the Palestinian residents of Israeli-annexed East 
Jerusalem to take part. Shamir accepts the idea, embodied in the Camp David 
accords, that the process will not stop at the interim stage and that 
negotiations on the final status of the territories are to be expected. He 
would not, however, go beyond that line. 
His talks in Washington show once again that, when it comes to the West Bank, 
he is not willing to adopt the formula of territory for peace. Shamir's 
interpretation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 242 is altogether different 
from the interpretation of the framers of the resolution, who at the time 
consulted Israel's representatives as well, and of course from the 
interpretation of Washington. 
This, in effect, eliminates any possibility of negotiations between Israel and 
Jordan. Even if King Hussein were willing to represent the Palestinians in 
negotiations with Israel, and the Palestinians themselves agreed to it, there 
would be no basis for initiating negotiations under such conditions. 
Are the ideas that Shamir brought to Washington sufficient to move along the 
peace process? They are sufficient to start the process and get over the first 
hurdle. This is why Washington could not reject Shamir's ideas outright and 
stop the process before it even began. Shamir's proposal will have no meaning 
or value if in the meantime the government of Israel keeps its promise and 
establishes new settlements in the territories. In order for the wagon to start 
rolling, the American diplomats will have to wrap the proposal in the proper 
packaging and persuade the PLO to allow the Palestinians in the territories to 
go to the polls. It is clear that the PLO will not accept the proposal before 
it knows what its place in these elections will be. 
Anyone who expected to see a quick resolution of the blood-drenched conflict is 
bound to be disappointed with the results of the Washington visits of Shamir 
and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, and the expected visit of King Hussein. 
Washington itself is planning its moves by taking tiny steps across the entire 
front, rather than looking for spectacular breakthroughs. For the moment, the 
Palestinians will have to make do with this slow pace. As for Shamir, and the 
viewpoint he represents, this means gaining time. But Israel is left with the 
difficult dilemma of a person who holds a glowing coal in his hand and cannot 
throw it away. 
