THE MUPPET MAN JOINS HIS CUDDLY CREW; 
HENSON VARIETY SHOW WILL DEBUT TONIGHT 
After more than 20 years as the man behind the Muppets, Jim Henson is 
understandably reluctant to come out from behind the curtain. 
But Henson, 52, has decided to brave the cameras as host of a series for NBC, 
"The Jim Henson Hour," a comedy-variety program that blends old Muppets, some 
new Muppets, live action and computer animation and debuts at 8 tonight. 
NBC had originally planned to introduce the series in January, but it was 
postponed due to production delays and lack of an appropriate time slot. Henson 
had hoped the show would land in the 7 p.m. Sunday time slot now occupied by 
"The Magical World of Disney." 
But in any time slot, Henson said in an interview, he was not terribly pleased 
to find himself thrust into the spotlight. 
"I always prefer to be slightly behind camera," said Henson, a professorially 
absent-minded sort with longish gray hair and a neat beard of the same hue. 
"But (appearing on camera) seemed like the logical thing for this type of a 
show." 
The type of show Henson meant is the family variety hour, a genre that has had 
few successful incarnations in recent years. By coming out for a fireside chat 
with the audience, Henson hopes to re-create the magic of Walt Disney's family 
series, which has survived in various incarnations since 1958 -- most of which 
featured the grandfatherly Walt in conversation with his audience, as well as 
his animated friends. 
Brian Frons, the NBC programming vice president overseeing the show, thinks the 
Henson hour has a chance to resuscitate variety shows. 
Today's audience has grown too sophisticated for the traditional song-and-dance 
variety shows, he said, but they remain eager to sample new varieties of 
variety. 
" 'Real People' in 1979 and 1983's 'Bloopers and Practical Jokes' were variety 
shows," he said. "And I know this is going to sound strange, but 'Unsolved 
Mysteries' (NBC's real-life crime series), while it is not a variety show in 
the traditional or any other sense of the word, is a new form, it's reinventing 
the form. I think Henson would fall into the same category." 
Although the Henson show has been in development for two years, Frons said the 
series also fits nicely into the network's plan to provide more wholesome 
family shows -- partly in response to the recent deluge of complaints about 
"trash TV" programming on the networks. 
"There is no question that, in an attempt to respond to the viewers and the 
advertisers, whom we have heard loud and clear, we are trying to show that we 
are a full-service network, and that we have things we can point to with 
pride," Frons said. 
Unconcerned with network politics, Henson only hopes he can fall into the same 
category as Kermit the Frog. Henson, who performs the voice of Kermit, believes 
his presence can be the amiable glue that holds the format-less show together 
-- much as Kermit provides the voice of sanity among the motley Muppets. Kermit 
will co-host the variety show, 12 episodes of which have been ordered. 
"I used to think that Kermit was a normal person in the middle of a bunch of 
crazies," Henson mused. "And I guess I sort of see myself in that role." 
The show's collection of oddball characters is even broader and more colorful 
than Henson's usual. "The Jim Henson Hour" rockets Muppetry into the Space Age 
by creating Muppet Central, a computer-generated control room from which Kermit 
and other regulars program the show. Among those regulars is Waldo C. Graphic, 
a colorful, hummingbird-sized, computer-generated entity who travels at high 
speed among the Muppets and human guest stars. Also new to the Muppet clan is 
Digit, an off-kilter half-human-half-robot, who helps Kermit run Muppet 
Central. 
Other new Muppets include characters of the more traditionally cuddly sort, 
including the relentlessly adorable Bean Bunny -- hired by Kermit to be cute, 
as Henson said, "so the rest of us don't have to be." Bean's aggressive side, 
however, will be revealed in a future sequence titled "Bambo." 
Henson at first did not want to get involved in the NBC project, having plenty 
of other projects to keep him busy. His New York-based company, Henson 
Associates, produces Saturday morning cartoon series, cable TV series, live 
arena shows and feature films and runs a healthy licensing business for Muppet 
products. Henson dreams of doing a Broadway show based on his characters. 
But NBC managed to land him, he said, by offering him the opportunity to do a 
show whose format can vary from week to week. The series also provides a new 
forum for Henson's "The Storyteller," an Emmy Award-winning collection of 
live-action fables hosted by John Hurt, which formerly ran on NBC as occasional 
specials. 
"Those are nice," Henson said modestly. "They won a couple of Emmys. They're 
some of the prettiest television we've ever done." 
Along with "The Storyteller," the second half-hour each week will feature 
dramatic pieces, including the animated "Snake Samba" -- which Henson says 
creates a "whole new look," with bright paint-box colors culled from African 
art -- and "Dog City," a parody of several old movie classics with a cast of 
animated canines. 
Occasionally, the entire Henson hour will be devoted to one subject; some 
upcoming specials include "Living With Dinosaurs," the story of a 9-year-old 
boy and his stuffed prehistoric pet, and "Monster Maker," about a teen-ager who 
gets a job building the creatures for fantasy films. 
Henson said the show will blend child-pleasing Muppet antics with sophisticated 
adult satire in hopes of appealing to both age groups. 
"It's a chance to do something outside of 'Sesame Street,' which is 
specifically aimed at children," he said. "We do this show at a level we 
enjoy." 
