YOUR BODY: RICE BRAN MAY GIVE OAT BRAN RUN FOR MONEY 
Dietary fads come and go. And, according to some scientists, oat bran may soon 
face stiff competition on grocery store shelves. 
Researchers from the U.S. Department of Agriculture report that rice bran -- 
found in brown rice, cereal and some breads -- lowered blood cholesterol in 
animals just as effectively as the much-touted oat bran. 
Reductions averaged 20% in rice-bran fed animals, about the same decrease found 
in the oat-bran-fed group, said Robin Saunders, a food chemist with the USDA 
Western Regional Research Center in Albany, Calif. He and other researchers 
note that human studies, expected to begin in the United States by summer, are 
needed to verify the results. 
Such human studies are already under way in other countries. In Australia, for 
example, results of a government-sponsored rice bran study, due in three 
months, appear "promising," said a spokesman for the Rice Industry of New South 
Wales. How rice bran -- the outside layer of the rice kernel -- works to lower 
cholesterol isn't understood. But scientists speculate it may have something to 
do with the oils contained in it, said John Hunnell, a food chemist with 
Riviana Foods, a rice marketer in Houston, Tex. Those oils are polyunsaturated 
and monounsaturated, not the saturated type associated with increases in 
cholesterol levels, Hunnell explained. (In oat bran, fiber is believed to lower 
cholesterol.) 
"The more sources we can find to reduce blood cholesterol, the better," said 
Peter Hoagland, a research chemist at the USDA's Eastern Regional Research 
Center in Philadelphia. "(Rice bran) gives us potential to increase variation 
in the diet." 
Robert Sayre, a food chemist at the USDA's western center, noted that rice bran 
is a good source of protein, is low in sodium and has about the same amount of 
soluble fiber as oat bran. Rice bran proponents also maintain it tastes sweeter 
than oat bran and is less likely to trigger allergies. 
Even without domestic human studies, Riviana and other food companies are 
gearing up to provide more rice bran products and recipes. Until then, 
consumers can choose from a few commercially available products: brown rice 
(about 10% rice bran), rice bran cereal, (100% rice bran and often available in 
health food stores) and some multigrain breads. 
But if your aim is to lower cholesterol, forget white rice. All bran in it, 
said Hunnell, is lost during processing. 
The Cancer Connection 
Meanwhile, in a 12-year study of more than 15,000 people from southwestern 
Scotland, low blood cholesterol levels coincided with an increased cancer risk, 
particularly in men, researchers report in the current British Medical Journal. 
As in some previous studies, an association was found between low cholesterol 
levels and cancer of the colon; in addition, the Scottish study linked low 
cholesterol with lung cancer. Some researchers speculate that low cholesterol 
may in fact be the product of undiagnosed bowel cancer, as developing tumors 
trap cholesterol and remove it from the bloodstream. 
That's not the mechanism, said Dr. Victor M. Hawthorne, professor of 
epidemiology at the University of Michigan School of Public Health in Ann Arbor 
and the principal investigator in the recent study. While the relationship 
between low cholesterol levels and cancer isn't understood, he believes the 
association could result when low cholesterol levels unfavorably alter the cell 
environment. 
Study results should not discourage those with high cholesterol levels from 
reducing them to minimize the risk of heart disease, said Hawthorne. But "those 
with satisfactory cholesterol levels should not become overly concerned about 
reducing them further," he added. 
The risk of heart disease begins to increase when cholesterol levels reach 200 
milligrams per deciliter, according to the American Heart Assn. 
Springtime for Dieters 
Southern California's recent heat wave and health club advertisements are 
reminders that swimsuit season is fast approaching. If you decide to begin a 
diet and exercise program today, what results can reasonably be expected in the 
10 weeks before summer officially begins? Here are the opinions of two experts. 
 -- Weight: With careful dieting, expect a loss of 9 to 18 pounds, suggested 
Daniel Kosich, an exercise physiologist and program director at Jane Fonda 
Workout in Beverly Hills. But Susan Johnson, director of continuing education 
for the Institute for Aerobics Research in Dallas disagreed, saying a loss of 5 
to 9 pounds is more realistic. "And it may be less if people are changing their 
body compositions (since lean tissue weighs more than fat tissue)." Both noted 
the loss depends on initial weight and other factors such as metabolic rate. 
 -- Strength: If training is done two or three times a week, expect "noticeable 
changes in physique" within four weeks, Kosich said. Gains are dependent on 
base level. "If you start from being sedentary, a 5% strength gain per week, 
particularly if you use weights, isn't unusual," Johnson noted. Those in better 
condition initially will see slower progress. 
 -- Appearance: If you are at the button-popping stage, clothes should fit 
better at the end of 10 weeks, Johnson said. But you may weigh the same, she 
added, because fat tissue has decreased and lean tissue weighs more. 
To ease the shape-up process, realize that weight loss and strength gains often 
reach a "plateau stage," said Johnson. "Often, you don't lose weight for three 
weeks and wake up the third week and three pounds are gone." Also keep in mind 
that as you increase the amount of lean tissue, more calories are burned -- 
even at rest, she added. 
Fitness and Childbirth 
Exercise during pregnancy can decrease the perception of labor pain, say 
Italian researchers reporting in the American Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. 
Scientists from the University of L'Aquila compared two groups of women: 21 who 
did no exercise during pregnancy and 15 who used a stationary bicycle three 
times a week for 30 minutes. Then, using blood samples, pain perceptions were 
evaluated and measured during labor. 
In both groups, beta-endorphins -- so-called natural painkillers secreted by 
the brain -- increased during labor. But the level was higher among the women 
who had exercised; these women also reported much less intense pain than their 
non-exercising counterparts. 
"We believe any exercise program that is prescribed during pregnancy should be 
closely monitored but believe that most normal pregnant women can benefit by 
such a program of fitness conditioning," the researchers conclude. 
The Italian findings "go along with what we've found out about exercise during 
labor," said Dr. Raul Artal, a USC professor of obstetrics and gynecology, who 
notes that additional research is needed. According to several USC studies, 
exercise during labor -- such as walking -- can be valuable, he noted. They 
indicate that "'Women who exercise during labor experience less pain than women 
who don't." 
