'91 INTELLIGENCE BUDGET STILL TARGETS EAST BLOC 
The Bush Administration's classified intelligence budget for 1991 calls for a 
record $30 billion in secret funding and, despite the recent political changes 
in the East Bloc, more than half of the funds target the Soviet Union and 
Eastern Europe, The Times has learned. 
The budget, whose contents are closely guarded, is pending before Congress and 
is expected to be approved with only a few amendments. However, sources said, 
its continued emphasis on intelligence gathering in Eastern Europe has ignited 
a behind-the-scenes debate about the direction and nature of such U.S. efforts 
in a rapidly changing world. 
"It's a Cold War budget that ignores the new realities," grumbled one U.S. 
official close to the debate. 
Even critics of Bush Administration foreign policy do not dispute the need for 
a vigorous U.S. intelligence effort. America's inability to fully anticipate 
many of the developments in the Communist world has only deepened support for 
wide-ranging intelligence gathering to monitor continuing turbulence and change 
across the globe. 
Unlike the $300-billion defense budget from which it is carved, the 
intelligence spending plan is not being scrutinized for significant reductions. 
The budget includes proposed funding for the CIA, the ultra-secret National 
Security Agency and the Pentagon's Defense Intelligence Agency. At $30 billion, 
it was described by sources as a moderate increase over this year's secret 
funding level. 
Nevertheless, a number of officials are voicing concern that the intelligence 
community should now direct greater attention -- and money -- to threats not 
rooted in the East-West rivalry, threats such as the proliferation of chemical 
and biological weapons, religious-ethnic conflicts in the Third World, Latin 
America's frail new democracies and transnational trends such as narcotics and 
terrorism. 
"One of the opportunities that arises with the demise of the Warsaw Pact is the 
opportunity to address the long-term issues of North-South concerns in Africa 
and Latin America," said Rep. Dave McCurdy (D-Okla.), a member of the House 
Intelligence Committee. "It's time to start the transition." 
Even staunch supporters of the secret budget have suggested that some shifts 
are needed, notably toward improving human intelligence-gathering and 
counterintelligence capabilities downgraded in the 1970s by the Jimmy Carter 
Administration in favor of high-priced technology such as spy satellites. 
"As we move into the twilight zone of a lessened threat of land war in Europe, 
our dangers are not less, just diffused and possibly from different areas," 
said Rep. Henry J. Hyde (R-Ill.), a member of the House Intelligence Committee. 
"We may need some reallocation to be done to avoid the gold-plated systems in 
favor of the nitty-gritty," Hyde said. "We have so much intelligence from 
satellites that we can't even read it all." 
In light of the political upheavals that caught the Bush Administration 
off-guard, others have called for reexamining the fundamental premises of 
national security priorities, the subjects of covert and overt operations, and 
the methods of intelligence collection. 
"For the past 40 years, we've been in a political war of attrition," said Roy 
Godson, a professor of government at Georgetown University and an intelligence 
specialist. "A long line was drawn, which moved a little but basically held. 
"Now there is no danger of one-power domination. And now we're in a much 
different war of maneuver where forces and factions are no longer stationery, 
they're very fluid," he added. "This requires much more sophisticated 
intelligence than we've had in the past." 
The Administration's continued preoccupation with the East Bloc has sparked 
some pointed questions among lawmakers and analysts, particularly about the 
need to spy on countries that are undergoing democratic elections and to which 
the United States has pledged or discussed economic aid. 
"What are we doing in Poland? Spying on Walesa? And in Czechoslovakia, spying 
on Havel?" CIA officials reportedly were asked at a recent hearing on the 
proposed budget. 
Director of Central Intelligence William H. Webster recently conceded that the 
Soviet KGB has become "less confrontational" and that secret police in East 
Bloc nations "are in turmoil" as former hard-line regimes have been swept from 
power. 
Even so, the CIA director said in a speech two weeks ago that espionage and 
counterintelligence are widely recognized in Eastern Europe as "necessary 
functions." 
"The apparatus for this work is likely to remain in place," he said. "The 
intelligence and counterintelligence services may be reorganized and 
resubordinated to newly elected masters instead of the party bosses, but the 
work will continue." 
Webster also noted that Warsaw Pact commitments require East European 
intelligence services to cooperate with the Soviets and that fundamental 
changes in intelligence missions are not likely while the alliance remains 
intact. 
The methods used to collect intelligence are a second source of debate. 
Although the proposed budget calls for elimination of a major satellite program 
focused primarily on the Soviet Union, critics contend that an even greater 
reallocation is necessary to improve the nation's human intelligence-gathering 
capabilities. 
"In the past, at least we knew who our enemies were, and we could use our 
technology to count their tanks and missiles," said Godson, the Georgetown 
University professor. "But now we're not even sure who our enemies are. 
"Distinguishing friend from foe will be one of the key challenges for 
intelligence in the 1990s," he said. "And intelligence by machines is not 
enough to interpret the nuances of change -- in the Soviet Union and 
elsewhere." 
Webster has conceded that human-generated intelligence needs to be enhanced. 
"While in physical numbers now, we're about where we were before the major cuts 
in the late 1970s, the needs have grown," he said in December. 
A third area under scrutiny is the CIA's covert intelligence program, 
particularly two longstanding operations that some critics charge are outdated 
in light of recent world changes. 
The first involves the Administration's request to increase aid to 
Afghanistan's moujahedeen rebels to about $315 million, 14 months after the 
Soviets withdrew their troops from the nation. The U.S. program is supplemented 
by even larger amounts of U.S.-solicited funds from Saudi Arabia. 
CIA assessments, meanwhile, indicate that the Soviets are unlikely to invade 
Afghanistan again in the near future and that various rebel groups under the 
moujahedeen umbrella are deeply divided. "We're throwing money into this 
program without even knowing what we want out of it," said a source familiar 
with the budget. 
Also in dispute is a covert operation in Angola. The budget proposes increasing 
aid to rebel leader Jonas Savimbi's National Union for the Total Independence 
of Angola (UNITA) by about $4 million to almost $50 million, despite the 
Administration's public pledge to support peace efforts. 
In recent closed-door debate, Administration officials conceded that the 50,000 
Cuban troops deployed since the mid-1970s to aid the government of Angolan 
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos are leaving on schedule. They also 
acknowledged that Secretary of State James A. Baker III had a "good and 
productive" meeting with Dos Santos in Namibia last month. 
The Bush Administration argues, however, that Savimbi needs additional military 
hardware and other aid to maintain a negotiating edge over the Marxist 
government. 
But some analysts suggest that Bush may be using the intelligence budget to 
serve his own ends, conceding to right-wing supporters on Savimbi and the 
moujahedeen in exchange for their backing on other programs. 
"I question whether we couldn't use the proposed increases (in Afghanistan and 
Angola) for intelligence in other parts of the world that may present future 
dangers. As it is, we're living in the past," said a source familiar with the 
budget debate. 
A fourth concern is the nation's counterintelligence capability, which 
re-emerged as an issue in the mid-1980s and led to the expansion last year of 
the Counterintelligence Center based at the CIA. 
Since that time, however, the United States has been embarrassed by two major 
counterintelligence failures. 
Last year, senior U.S. diplomat Felix S. Bloch was followed for months and 
later dismissed from the State Department after being suspected of providing 
intelligence to the Soviet Union for several years. And U.S. Army Sgt. Clyde 
Lee Conrad was charged last year with stealing top-secret NATO war plans for 
Hungary and Czechoslovakia dating back to 1975. 
Both critics and supporters of the budget are also calling for greater 
attention in the 1990s to a comparatively new area -- economic intelligence. 
"As the arms race is winding down, the spy race is heating up," Senate 
Intelligence Committee Chairman David L. Boren (D-Okla.) said in a National 
Press Club speech last week. 
"And where is the growth area in this espionage activity? An increasing share 
of the espionage directed against the United States comes from spying against 
private American companies, aimed at stealing commercial secrets to gain an 
economic advantage, as opposed to the theft of military secrets to build 
military strengths in other countries," Boren said. 
Last month, Webster acknowledged: "In the 1990s, as countries focus more on 
economic competitiveness, what will be sought is sensitive information that 
will give a country a competitive edge." 
Webster implied that a shift in intelligence priorities could affect 
traditional U.S. alliances. "Political and military allies are also our 
economic competitors," he said. 
Ironically, on each of the issues now being scrutinized, the CIA appears to be 
feeling less heat than the White House and State Department. 
Indeed, Webster is widely seen as the first key Administration official to 
recognize the declining Soviet threat. He has acknowledged publicly that 
because of Moscow's economic problems, a land war with the Soviets in Europe 
would remain unlikely even if President Mikhail S. Gorbachev was replaced by 
hard-liners. 
"In the midst of all this change, we don't seem to have any direction from 
either the White House or State," said an official close to the budget debate. 
"Some very important basic decisions need to be made about how intelligence 
programs support foreign policy," the official said. "Those are not for the CIA 
to make. They're up to State and the President. Opportunities are going to 
waste all over the world." 
