VENTURA COUNTY NEWS ROUNDUP: CITY VIEWS ITS PAST IN NEW LIGHT(S); 
FILLMORE 
Not content to let bygones be bygones, Fillmore residents are trying to 
recapture the past by installing old-fashioned street lights in the downtown 
business district. 
As part of an effort to restore the city's once-thriving business district to 
its original turn-of-the century splendor, 23 new lights are being installed in 
a three-block redevelopment district on Central Avenue between Sepse Avenue and 
Highway 126. 
Patterned after street lights in downtown Los Angeles in the early part of the 
century, the new lights lend a glow of nostalgia to the city, officials say. 
"I feel like I'm walking back into the time when I was a kid growing up in 
Fillmore," said City Councilman Roger Campbell of the rehabilitated downtown 
area. 
But old-fashioned style doesn't come with an old-fashioned price tag. At nearly 
double the cost of standard street lights, the new nostalgic lights are 
expected to cost the city about $50,000 in redevelopment money. 
City officials say the nostalgic lights are well worth the additional expense. 
"The new street lights make an immeasurable difference," Campbell said. 
With the help of redevelopment money, many downtown businesses have restored 
storefronts to their original condition, and the downtown theater marquee has 
been renovated, adding to the overall effect of the downtown area, he said. 
As the the first city in Southern California to buy the replicas of the first 
underground-fed, electrified street lights used in the 1920s, Fillmore is 
breaking new ground in its attempt to recapture the past, said Tom Bradley, 
planning manager of the Southern California Edison Co. 
"We think they will now come back into demand again as cities attempt to 
recreate the old Main Street look in their downtown and historic district 
areas," he said. 
Unlike the lights that shed a dim glow on city streets of old, the new lights 
use state-of-the-art technology to illuminate roadways, Bradley said. 
Manufactured in Fillmore, the nostalgic light fixtures use efficient, 
high-pressure sodium vapor and are twice as bright as many conventional street 
lights, he said. 
"It's like you're stepping into the past a little bit," Bradley said. CAROLYN 
KUSKY 
