COURT UPHOLDS PRISON TERM FOR EX-PROSECUTOR 
A former county prosecutor who was drunk when his car crashed into an auto 
driven by an Escondido school teacher, killing her, was properly sentenced to a 
six-year prison term, a state appellate court in San Diego has ruled. 
Charles A. Van Dusen, a former deputy district attorney in Vista who prosecuted 
many drunk-driving cases during his career, did not receive an overly harsh 
sentence because he was convicted of a "very serious" crime, the 4th District 
Court of Appeal ruled. 
The crash that sent Van Dusen to prison took place Sept. 2, 1988. Elementary 
school teacher Carol Benson, 45, was driving home for lunch on Cole Grade Road 
in Valley Center when Van Dusen, traveling about 90 m.p.h. in his Corvette, 
struck her car head-on. 
Benson died instantly. Van Dusen received minor injuries. His wife, Susan, a 
passenger in his car, was not hurt. 
Van Dusen's blood-alcohol level measured 0.20, double the then-legal limit. 
Van Dusen pleaded guilty in December, 1988, to vehicular manslaughter with 
gross negligence. In February, 1989, San Diego Superior Judge Jesus Rodriguez 
sentenced Van Dusen to the six-year prison term, saying Van Dusen had a 
"longstanding alcohol abuse problem" and had demonstrated an "unwillingness and 
inability" to control it. 
In an opinion issued Thursday, a three-judge panel of the 4th District Court 
rejected Van Dusen's contention that Rodriguez was arbitrary in imposing the 
six-year sentence. There was no evidence to support that claim, Judge Gilbert 
Nares said. 
The panel also denied Van Dusen's claim that the sentence was 
unconstitutionally cruel and unusual punishment. A six-year term is not unusual 
for someone convicted of gross vehicular manslaughter and does not "shock the 
conscience," Nares said. 
Judges William L. Todd Jr. and Patricia Benke concurred in the opinion. 
Last December, Benson's three children settled a wrongful-death lawsuit against 
Van Dusen they had filed a few months earlier in Vista Superior Court, 
accepting $225,000 to end the case. 
