YOUTH, 17, SLAIN IN FIGHT WITH SCHOOL POLICEMAN INVESTIGATING BURGLARY 
A 17-year-old youth was shot to death Friday by a San Diego Unified School 
District police officer responding to a burglary call at Zamorano Elementary 
School in Paradise Hills, authorities said. 
Paul Virgil Marino, of Paradise Hills, was shot once in the chest by Officer 
Ray Cook about 2:20 a.m. as Cook, 56, and another officer tried to arrest 
Marino in a dark classroom at the school, San Diego Police Sgt. Ray Sigwalt 
said. 
Police later found a knife and a crude bomb inside the kindergarten classroom 
near Marino, Sigwalt said. 
Cook's partner, David Helms, 47, was hit under the left arm by a bullet from 
Cook's .38-caliber revolver, which accidentally discharged shortly before the 
fatal shot was fired. The accidental shot was fired when Cook struck Marino 
over the head twice with the gun during the struggle, Sigwalt said. 
Officer Wore Protective Vest 
Helms was wearing a protective vest and suffered bruised ribs, Sigwalt said. 
Cook suffered cuts on his shins and a cut on his right index finger, according 
to a spokeswoman at Paradise Valley Hospital. 
Both were treated and released. 
Friday's shooting was the first by an on-duty officer in the 20-year history of 
the San Diego Unified School District, said Richard Ewens, supervisor for the 
department. 
Nearly the entire incident, which lasted about seven minutes, occurred in 
darkness after both uniformed officers dropped their flashlights to defend 
themselves, Sigwalt said. 
Answered Silent Burglar Alarm Report 
According to Sigwalt, Cook and Helms answered a report of a silent burglar 
alarm at 2:17 a.m. at the school in the 2600 block of Casey Street, Sigwalt 
said. 
The officers saw a broken window, entered the classroom through the door and 
shined their flashlights across the room, spotting Marino crouched in a corner, 
Sigwalt said. 
After at first cooperating and lying face down to let the officers handcuff 
him, Marino sprang to his feet and began to swing at the two, Sigwalt said. 
"The entire struggle took place in the dark," Sigwalt said. "They didn't have 
much time to know what was happening," he said of the officers. 
During the fight, Sigwalt said, Cook felt something on Marino he thought was a 
weapon. 
The fight escalated after Cook hit Marino over the head with his gun, firing 
the accidental shot, Sigwalt said. He then fired at Marino from close range, 
Sigwalt said. 
"After Helms was struck with the accidental shot and left the fight, it became 
apparent to Cook that he was losing the fight," Sigwalt said. 
"After the kid was down, they illuminated the area by him," Sigwalt said. "He 
had a knife by him." 
A coroner's deputy called to the scene found a crude bomb under Marino when he 
was turned over, Sigwalt said. The youth also had electrical tape wrapped 
around his waist, Sigwalt said. 
Gunpowder, Buckshot 
The San Diego Fire Department's Explosives Device Team was called in to X-ray 
the bomb, which was described as a tightly taped, 6-inch cardboard cylinder 
filled with gunpowder and buckshot, Sigwalt said. The bomb was capped with clay 
on both ends and had a slow-burning fuse, he added. 
"It's not really a pipe bomb, but could be a very effective personal grenade," 
Sigwalt said. "What he was doing in there, who knows?" 
The boy's mother, Josie Marino, told a Channel 39 television reporter: "My son 
was a beautiful boy. I worshiped my son, I idolized that boy." 
In a tearful interview, she said she had pleaded with San Diego police to help 
her with her son, who had had many run-ins with officers. 
"I told them: 'Yes, you're going to blow him away, and then you're going to 
blame me.' " 
Police Contact 
Sigwalt confirmed that police had had previous contact with the boy, but 
declined to say what the nature of that contact was. 
Students arriving for class at Zamorano at 7:50 a.m. were sent to nearby 
Bethune Elementary School for about an hour while police finished their 
investigation of the scene, said Rachel Flanagan, the school's principal. 
"The classroom is shut right now," Flanagan said Friday afternoon. "The kids 
know that we had an intruder. . . . We didn't want to make a big thing out of 
it." 
San Diego police are investigating the shooting as a burglary and a 
police-involved shooting, Sigwalt said. 
Their findings will be turned over to the district attorney's office, which 
will determine whether to press charges against either officer. 
Placed on Leave 
Both officers have been put on paid administrative leave for three days, Ewens 
said. They are part of the 34-officer force employed by the San Diego Unified 
School District, he said. 
The department also has seven non-sworn officers who mainly work days at 
elementary schools. 
Cook joined the department in 1972 after working as a California State Police 
officer in Los Angeles, and Helms joined the force in October, 1988, after 
working as a San Diego police officer, Ewens said. 
All officers in the department must be graduates of a police academy, pass a 
basic peace officer standard training -- the same used by other law enforcement 
agencies -- and have at least two years of full-time experience in California 
law enforcement, Ewens said. 
