COURT ASKED TO UPHOLD STAY OF EXECUTION 
Lawyers for convicted murderer Robert Alton Harris on Sunday urged the U.S. 
Supreme Court to allow more time for a federal appeals court in San Francisco 
to reconsider Harris' case and reject a bid by California officials to proceed 
with his execution on Tuesday. 
In a 30-page motion filed with the court late Sunday afternoon, Harris' lawyers 
said the justices should give "great deference" to the move by Judge John T. 
Noonan on Friday to indefinitely stay the execution. 
"Judge Noonan has been thoroughly familiar with the facts and history and 
record of this case," the lawyers said. 
On Saturday, lawyers for the state filed a 40-page motion with Justice Sandra 
Day O'Connor urging that Noonan's stay be lifted so the execution could proceed 
as planned at 3 a.m. Tuesday at San Quentin prison. O'Connor is likely to refer 
the Harris matter to the entire court for a decision. 
In their recent efforts to spare Harris from the gas chamber, his lawyers have 
been contending that Harris had incompetent psychiatric help at his 1979 trial. 
On Friday, Noonan agreed that this claim raised a reasonable issue that should 
be considered further by a three-judge panel of the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of 
Appeals. Therefore, he issued a stay of execution pending that hearing. 
In their filing with the U.S. Supreme Court, the lawyers said: "The stay 
ensures some semblance of order in a situation unnecessarily filled with haste 
and confusion. It . . . allows orderly review of the substantial federal 
constitutional claims raised by Mr. Harris." 
The justices will issue orders in pending cases at 10 a.m. today, but no 
further public meetings are scheduled during the day. After leaving the bench 
at 10 a.m., the justices could go behind closed doors to consider the motions 
on the Harris case and issue an order later in the day. 
While the high court could lift the stay and let Harris go to the gas chamber 
as scheduled, doing so would amount to a rebuke of a prominent appeals court 
judge. Noonan is a 1985 appointee of President Ronald Reagan. 
But state attorneys argued in their motion Saturday that Noonan fundamentally 
misstated a 1985 Supreme Court ruling on psychiatrists. In issuing his stay 
order, Noonan read the 1985 case as creating a "federal constitutional right . 
. . (to) competent psychiatric assistance." 
He also compounded the error by applying the ruling retroactively, the state 
lawyers contended. Just in the last month, the high court said Death Row 
inmates should not get the benefit of high court rulings issued after their 
convictions were upheld in the state courts. Harris' conviction and death 
sentence were upheld in 1981, four years before the 1985 ruling on psychiatric 
help. 
