BUSH SIGNALS WRONG TURN ON ROAD TO ARMS CONTROL 
George Bush, despite bipartisan advice to the contrary, seems ready to redefine 
arms control by emphasizing conventional and chemical negotiations and putting 
nuclear arms talks on the back burner. 
The premises of a changing course are beguiling: Soviet President Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev's military reforms remain an uncertain basis for "deep cuts" in 
nuclear arms, conventional force reductions could lessen U.S. nuclear leverage 
and Soviet decline allows the United States to call the arms-control tune. 
There is also the view that Ronald Reagan's arms-reduction legacy is a fluke, 
seen by liberals as product of Reagan's opportunism and Gorbachev's initiatives 
and by conservatives as a sellout, an aberration, ripe for replacement by a 
more cautious approach. 
Yet the Reagan legacy is consistent with the basic themes of American national 
strategy over the last dozen years: seeking deep cuts in nuclear forces while 
reducing the risks of inadvertent nuclear war and ensuring that arms control is 
not detached from U.S. concerns about regional conflict and human rights. 
Progress made in these areas by Reagan will be jeopardized by Bush 
Administration "bait and switch" tactics that attempt to substitute a chemical 
arms agreement for a strategic nuclear one. 
Two realities further mock a postponement of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks 
(START) in favor of progress in the Conventional Forces in Europe talks and 
negotiations for a chemical weapons pact: 
 -- Before a START agreement, the Bush Administration cannot wisely make the 
urgent budget choices called for on two expensive bomber programs (B-1B and 
B-2) and two costly and uncertain missile programs (rail-mobile MX and 
Midgetman). 
 -- Americans and West Europeans are concerned about the nuclear dilemma; 
conventional forces cuts are not likely to come soon enough or be deep enough, 
in the first instance, to ease budget problems or impress voters in North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization countries. 
The worthy efforts for a chemical-arms agreement do not respond to concerns of 
publics or security elites. Granted, chemical arms are weapons of mass 
destruction, but not of possible social or national destruction. There are no 
itchy trigger fingers capable of firing all our chemical weapons, should we 
decide the Soviets were thinking about firing theirs. Bush's vow last Oct. 21 
had a hollow ring: "If I'm remembered for anything, it would be this: A 
complete and total ban on chemical weapons. Their destruction for ever. That's 
my solemn mission." 
Such a pact would resound politically with the noise of a feather, doing 
nothing to satisfy the deep, if now muted, public desire for cuts in strategic 
nuclear weapons. Finally, Bush cannot deliver on his "solemn mission." Any 
country with a fertilizer plant can make chemical weapons, the poor nation's 
deterrent. 
Against this backdrop, the case for ignoring the Reagan agenda needs testing; 
up close, the arguments don't add up. 
Change in the Soviet Union. Soviet foreign-policy changes in the late 1980s -- 
withdrawing from Afghanistan, paying U.N. debts, freeing emigration, settling 
regional issues and initiating arms accords -- do not depend on Gorbachev. They 
stem from an elite consensus that previous policies were counterproductive and 
costly. Gorbachev is the agent of change, but the impulse for such reform 
predates his rise. Support from the military and lack of dissent from the 
Politburo indicates the trend will continue even if resistance to domestic 
economic reform ends in Gorbachev's ouster. 
The consensus is that Moscow needs relief from security burdens and pressures 
to remedy chronic deficiencies of crisis proportions. Military leaders see 
economic stagnation and decline as long-term threats to Soviet security. They 
also entertain the notion that military exertions stimulate responses adding to 
insecurity and are trying to define a strategy of "reasonable sufficiency." 
 Western Leverage. "Go slow" advice to gain concessions in the 
conventional-force talks before a START accord on nuclear arms presumes the 
United States has nuclear bargaining leverage to alter a Warsaw Pact numerical 
edge in conventional forces. This neglects evidence of Warsaw Pact 
determination to achieve conventional cuts. With Moscow's support, the Warsaw 
Pact sought new negotiations for asymmetrical European force reductions in the 
first place, a change indicating readiness for concessions. 
Further, nuclear-force cuts would not yield opportunities for resource 
transfers in the economically beleaguered Warsaw Pact nations, except the 
Soviet Union, and would not provide Moscow the industrial and manpower 
resources needed for economic reforms. Significant deactivation of conventional 
units drives Warsaw Pact interest in conventional-force reductions. 
Nuclear and conventional negotiating situations and any agreements that emerge 
must be judged by how they serve Western security -- individually and together. 
This does not mean one must wait upon the other. Rather, the Western 
conventional negotiating posture is influenced by developments in START. More 
linkage than this risks a failure to gain the security advantages of both. 
 Vulnerability/Survivability. A major plaint of START critics is that the 
treaty would not reduce and might even increase the vulnerability of U.S. 
land-based ICBMs. But although START was never intended to remedy the 
vulnerability of fixed, land-based ICBMs, it would, nonetheless, be 
complementary. 
Since the 1960s the United States compensated for the increasing vulnerability 
of ICBMs in fixed silos by dividing its nuclear forces among bombers, 
submarines and ICBMs, a hedge against increases in vulnerability of any one leg 
of the triad. (The Soviets, in contrast, have emphasized land-based ICBMs.) 
Some critics have complained that under START the ratio of Soviet warheads to 
U.S. missiles could rise by over a third (from 2.93:1 to 4.2:1). However, 
because of the rule of thumb that a prudent targeter will assign two warheads 
to every missile silo, this change would be militarily insignificant, since the 
Soviets would be able to double-team each U.S. silo with or without a START 
agreement. On the other hand, the ratio of U.S. MX missile warheads (the most 
accurate U.S. ballistic missile) to Soviet SS-18s would more than double (from 
1.6:1 to 3.25:1), making the SS-18 force actually vulnerable to the MX force. 
START would be militarily significant in two other ways. First, it would 
prevent the Soviets from building new strategic weapons targeted against Europe 
to offset the intermediate-range forces being eliminated under the INF Treaty. 
Second, START would make it feasible to reduce U.S. ICBM vulnerability. A 
consensus exists among politicians and policy analysts for START plus ICBM 
modernization, reflecting a view that modernization will be more effective if 
the Soviets are prevented by a START agreement from counterbalancing 
deployments. Those most concerned about ICBM vulnerability should be leading 
supporters of START. 
 Verification and Compliance. The Reagan Administration pioneered innovative 
and intrusive verification methods; the Soviet Union broke new ground by 
accepting them. Opponents say these techniques lack proved reliability and 
place Soviet spies in our midst (though this means both denying their previous 
charges that the U.S. was an "open book" for Soviet intelligence and renouncing 
the U.S. quest for intrusive verification). Insistence on perfect verification 
overrates the risks of a militarily significant violation going undetected and 
underrates those of nuclear uncertainty and rivalry. 
Both START and the conventional talks impose verification challenges more 
demanding than INF, which banned a whole class of weapons rather than limiting 
them. The logical next step is to pursue opportunities for verification 
measures relevant to strategic and conventional forces, capitalizing on the INF 
momentum to establish new standards for force visibility and data exchange. 
Some observers have taken a contrary step -- imagining exaggerated scenarios in 
which the Soviets suddenly "break out" of prospective START limits and spring a 
huge arsenal on an unsuspecting United States. They suppose the Soviets could 
cheat on an unprecedented scale without a hint reaching the United States. 
Given that such a revelation would galvanize U.S. opinion and restart the 
missile race (without eliminating the U.S. nuclear retaliatory capability), it 
is more plausible that risks of exposure would deter the Soviets from 
militarily significant cheating. Sensible studies -- ones that include 
assessments of the reasons why or the conditions under which the Soviets might 
attempt to break out of a treaty -- are prudent and would aid in planning 
verification to guard against realistic risks. But nightmare scenarios are 
obstructionist distractions. 
Reaping the rewards of Reagan's course in arms cuts and avoiding pitfalls 
requires a farsighted, integrated and comprehensible approach. The zigzag 
quality of much U.S. arms-control policy has made it mysterious to the public 
and open to criticism from left and right. Bush must establish realizable 
objectives and priorities among various initiatives -- strategic, conventional, 
chemical -- and show how they can mesh in U.S. security policy. He should avoid 
nuclear-balance dogmatism, specifically the idea that a reduction in or 
addition to numbers or performance in either superpower arsenal leads easily to 
nuclear blackmail or nuclear war. 
Arms accords can produce a less volatile strategic environment that enhances 
Western security by: 1) reducing specific threats and contingencies, 2) 
diminishing uncertainty in military and political planning, 3) aiding strategic 
intelligence and 4) permitting more orderly procurement. Unilateral American or 
Soviet force cuts, like those Gorbachev advanced in New York last December, 
cannot contribute to a stable nuclear setting; neither side knows where or when 
such reductions might come or how deep or lasting they may be. 
A more stable nuclear balance safeguarded by arms limitation won't yield a 
quick "peace dividend" for domestic programs or tax cuts. That could come 
later, by skillful resource planning. Agreements increase costs for 
verification capability and for hedges to cope with risks in the early years of 
significant reductions. But stable strategic planning does mean forgoing 
expenditure in nuclear-related forces and diverting funds to deficiencies in 
readiness, air-lift and sea-lift. Arms limitation assists both peace and 
strength. 
The fundamental goals of negotiation are to improve Western security through 
nuclear threat-reduction and to keep American security requirements in line 
with available resources. This latter consideration has grown in importance as 
U.S. resources have declined relative to other countries. Effective arms 
agreements also provide incentives for compliance with existing accords and 
negotiating new ones, thus helping to avoid the delay and mistrust of 
stop-and-go negotiating. 
The benefits of negotiated security are not available without a policy 
specifically designed to gain them, one that is sustainable over time in terms 
of U.S.-Soviet relations and domestic support. Reagan's deep cuts can be 
managed if they are related sensibly to conventional reductions and phased in 
with confidence-building measures to allay anxiety. 
A disjointed approach to arms control -- lacking a broad view of opportunities 
in security policy and East-West relations, failing to enunciate a clear 
picture of aims and steps to accomplish them and prizing novelty over 
continuity -- runs a high risk of eventually failing at home, whether or not it 
succeeds at the bargaining table. 
