TOROS SPLIT 2 GAMES WITH POLY POMONA; 
CCAA BASEBALL RACE REMAINS MURKY 
Cal State Dominguez Hills' standing in the California Collegiate Athletic Assn. 
baseball race remained as murky as the conference standings Saturday thanks to 
a doubleheader split with Cal Poly Pomona. 
The Toros, who lost at Pomona on Friday, will play again Tuesday at Pomona. 
Both are fighting for position in the CCAA, where the eight teams are separated 
by only a handful of games. 
The split left the Toros at 6-6 in the CCAA and 11-15-1 overall. Pomona is 8-6 
and 12-20. 
Saturday afternoon in Carson, the Toros staged a late rally to pull out the 
first game, 8-7, but dropped the second game, 5-1. 
Damon Neidlinger scored the first game's winning run in the bottom of the ninth 
on a wild pitch by reliever David Rice. Neidlinger, who stole three bases in 
the game, had worked his way to third on a walk, steal and ground out. 
Pomona played the game under protest. The Toros had taken a 4-3 lead in the 
sixth when Adrian Rodriguez doubled in Billy Keep, then scored on a dropped fly 
ball in center field. After rounding third, Rodriguez removed his batting 
helmet, then resumed running and scored. Pomona argued that the helmet removal 
was a rules violation. After checking the scorebook, the umpires let the play 
stand. 
The ruling, however, appeared to be moot as the Broncos struck for three runs 
in the seventh, helped by a run-scoring fly dropped at the wall in left field 
and a passed ball that scored another. 
The Toros got one run back in their half of the inning on Ruben Jauregui's 
double that drove in a run, but Pomona answered with a run in the eighth to 
take a 7-5 lead. 
Dominguez Hills started its rally in the bottom of the eighth with some 
unexpected help. With a man on, Fred Camarena hit a ground ball that deflected 
off the infield umpire for a single. Vic Fresca then tied the game with a 
two-run double, setting up the ninth-inning comeback. 
Sophomore right-hander Charlie Plumley, who relieved starter Ron Veazey in the 
seventh, got his first victory. Pomona starter Scott Burns, who left after 
walking Neidlinger to open the ninth, took the loss. 
Dave Haggard dueled Bret Lachemann, son of Angels coach Marcel Lachemann, in 
the seven-inning nightcap. Haggard had outstanding stuff but battled his 
control. Pomona got two runs in the first inning, helped by two walks and an 
error. Pomona scored another run in the fourth without touching the ball -- 
four walks, three strikeouts. 
Haggard finally tired in the seventh, when Pomona scored twice, and left the 
game with a six-hitter and seven strikeouts -- plus eight walks and two hit 
batters. Lachemann, who was in command after the Toros scored in the first 
inning, threw a four-hitter, two of the hits by Jauregui. 
