MILKEN'S GUILTY PLEA; 
FOR LOWELL MILKEN, MICHAEL'S BROTHER, THE CASE IS CLOSED 
Michael Milken, 43, may go to prison. Lowell Milken, 41, will go home. 
The government will drop two charges of racketeering and 11 counts of fraud 
against the unassuming family man who was indicted along with his famous older 
brother. 
The fate of Lowell apparently played a central role in the final negotiations 
between Michael Milken and federal prosecutors. Michael, reportedly incensed 
that the government was using his brother as a bargaining chip, demanded that 
any plea agreement provide that all charges be dropped against Lowell. 
Earlier this week, the government reportedly insisted that Lowell plead guilty 
to at least one misdemeanor. His brother stood firm: Lowell's record had to be 
clean. 
Friends and associates of the Milkens believe that Lowell was indicted in the 
first place only to put pressure on his brother. 
"Mike is a very loyal person and very family oriented," said one source. "He 
convinced his brother to leave a promising legal career and join him at Drexel 
(Burnham Lambert). He obviously feels somewhat responsible for what happened." 
Another investment banker who worked with the brothers said he was 
"flabbergasted" that Michael Milken would agree to such stiff penalties. 
However, some said he might have been willing to pay more in order to get his 
brother's off. 
"It is hard to know how much pain and exhaustion he and his family have 
suffered through," said another Milken friend. 
Michael and Lowell Milken are very little alike. Michael has been the grand 
thinker, the creative genius, the one who brings in the clients. Lowell has 
remained in the background, working out the details that his brother left 
behind. 
Lowell Milken, 41, graduated summa cum laude from UC Berkeley and was editor of 
the law review at UCLA law school. He went to work for the Los Angeles law firm 
of Irell &amp; Manella in the early 1970s, where he specialized in business and 
tax law. 
But in 1978, he left the law firm to join his brother at Drexel's fast growing 
Beverly Hills junk bond department. There he originally managed the investments 
that Michael had been making for himself, Lowell and other Drexel employees. He 
eventually became Michael's right-hand man, advising his better-known brother 
about the finances and the risks of potential deals. 
"He was very important to Mike because he was somebody Mike trusted 
completely," said another investment banker. 
However, Lowell never traded any securities; he wasn't licensed to do so. The 
government alleged in its indictment that Lowell was involved in racketeering 
and fraud in other ways. 
According to the indictment, Lowell engaged in securities fraud by helping to 
conceal Drexel's interest in Mattel securities when the Hawthorne-based toy 
maker was involved in a financial overhaul. 
He also participated in a "stock parking" scheme involving stock speculator 
Ivan Boesky, the government alleged. Stock parking is an illegal arrangement in 
which one party agrees to temporarily buy stock from another with the 
understanding that the seller will not only repurchase the shares, but will 
indemnify the buyer from loss on the transaction. 
The government contended that Michael Milken "parked" 4 million shares of 
Phillips Petroleum stock for Boesky in order to inflate the level of capital 
Boesky was reporting. Lowell Milken was allegedly part of a 1986 conference 
call where the illegal arrangement was discussed, according to the indictment. 
Other charges against Lowell related to the Milken brothers allegedly meeting 
with Boesky to discuss ways to reconcile their losses on the stock parking 
arrangement. The indictment also charged that Lowell later lied to cover up the 
transaction. 
