STATE FUNDS SOUGHT FOR OLYMPIC TRAINING CENTER IN CHULA VISTA 
A star-studded cast of former Olympians turned out Monday as two state senators 
unveiled legislation seeking $15 million in state funds for a U.S. Olympic 
training center planned for Chula Vista. 
The bill, sponsored by Sens. William Campbell (R-Hacienda Heights) and Wadie 
Deddeh (D-Bonita), would allocate the money to the state Commerce Department, 
which would then transfer the funds in three installments to the United States 
Olympic Training Center Foundation. 
The money would be used to augment up to $40 million that Deddeh said the 
foundation would raise from private sources. 
The center will be the third sports training center in the country, but the 
first to be available throughout the year. The two other centers are in Lake 
Placid, N.Y., and Colorado Springs, Colo. 
The facility is to be a "state-of-the-art" center designed to accommodate the 
needs of athletes in 16 sports, including track and field, volleyball, 
swimming, soccer, bobsled and luge. 
It will be located on 154 acres west of the Lower Otay Reservoir on land 
donated by the Eastlake Development Co. 
Among those attending a Capitol news conference to push for the bill were gold 
medalists Bill Toomey, Bob Seagren and Candy Burke, and silver medalists Terry 
Schroeder and Doug Burke. Also attending was Baaron Pittinger, executive 
director of the U.S. Olympic Committee, which has approved the center as an 
official Olympic training facility. 
"Construction of a world-class, state-of-the-art training center will give 
American athletes the chance to compete on an even footing with athletes from 
around the world," Deddeh said. 
A spokesman for Gov. George Deukmejian, who has supported locating the center 
in San Diego County, said the governor has no position on the Campbell bill. He 
added that any attempt to spend more state money this year would "face an extra 
hurdle" because Deukmejian is faced with a tight budget that had already led 
him to propose cutting health and social service programs for the state's 
neediest residents. 
