STAGE REVIEW; 
'LADY DAY'S' TORTURED ARTIST 
The name "Billie Holiday" sounds so carefree. 
It was a colossal misnomer, judging from Loretta Devine's anguished portrait of 
the singer in "Lady Day at Emerson's Bar &amp; Grill," at the Old Globe 
Theatre. This is a tortured artist at the end of her rope. 
Lanie Robertson's script is set rather rigidly in March, 1959, four months 
before Holiday died from heart failure, with liver and kidney complications. 
Given the time frame, it's apt that Holiday is presented in such a sad state. 
And because her greatest art was transmuted from her most agonizing pain, we 
hear some powerfully simulated samples of that art. 
As a dramatic piece, however, "Lady Day" lacks forward thrust. This is not a 
depiction of Holiday's rise and fall -- it's just a glimpse of her after she 
has fallen. The most urgent question of the evening is whether she'll collapse 
in front of our eyes. 
This Holiday does tell some funny stories from her more vigorous past. But we 
can't fully savor these stories -- or the essence of Holiday's musicianship -- 
because our attention is diverted by the necessity to diagnose her condition. 
Also, as in any show or docudrama that purports to be an accurate 
representation of a real historical figure, our attention is occasionally 
diverted by the question of how accurate it all is. Times jazz critic Leonard 
Feather, who knew Holiday well, wrote (in a generally favorable review of a Los 
Angeles production of "Lady Day" in 1987) that a few of this show's anecdotes 
"are pure fiction." 
I found myself questioning whether some of the colloquial phrases, such as "No 
way, Jose" and "my main man," were really current in 1959, and wondering why 
this Holiday recalled her father as a potential singer, instead of the 
potential trumpeter she wrote about in her autobiography, "Lady Sings the 
Blues." 
The format of the piece -- Holiday is performing in a South Philadelphia club 
but starts telling us about her life between songs -- raises a larger question 
of accuracy. In the program, one of Holiday's lifelong friends is quoted as 
saying, "She had a shyness so vast that she spoke in practically a whisper." 
Are we to believe that someone who fit that description would start blabbing 
her most intimate personal details (she was raped at 10, she says, almost as an 
aside) in front of a crowd of strangers? 
How much more intense it must have been, when the real Holiday packed all of 
her sorrow into her songs, instead of dissipating her emotions in on-stage 
talk. 
Not that Devine's performance lacks in intensity. Though she doesn't begin to 
suggest Holiday's shyness, most of the other strands of Holiday's personality 
are up there, and a couple of the songs are electrifying. When David F. Segal's 
lights go down, focusing on Devine's face at the end of "God Bless the Child," 
the atmosphere crackles. And even though Will Roberson's arena staging blocked 
my view of her face during the opening bars of "Don't Explain," Devine's voice 
was potent enough that no visual explanation was necessary. 
This was one of the moments when Devine sounded a lot like the recordings of 
Holiday. There were other moments when traces of a Broadway/gospel belting 
sound crept into the performance. But throughout, Devine took care to make it 
sound as if Holiday hadn't taken the best care of her voice. It's a courageous 
and difficult task -- to remind us not only of how great Holiday was, but also 
of how her voice was sometimes less than great. 
Even before Devine enters the bar that Robert Brill has re-created inside the 
Old Globe's Cassius Carter Centre Stage, we can tell we're not about to hear 
"Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin'." The theater is enveloped in a smoky haze 
(actually dry ice), and Holiday's pianist (Rahn Coleman) and sax player 
(Charles McPherson) are playing soulful, smoky jazz. (Can this show possibly 
work as well at a matinee as it does in the evening?) 
We hear Lady Day, offstage, balking at coming out to perform. When she does 
emerge and begin singing, nearly every song is accompanied by another drink. 
Devine wears a dress (costumer: Lewis Brown) that's none too flattering -- as 
if Holiday, who remarks that she once weighed 200 pounds, still has problems 
picking out the right clothes. 
Roberson's staging keeps Devine on the move, prowling through the arena, 
followed by Segal's lights. It helps disguise the fact that there isn't much 
movement within the script. A few theatergoers are seated on stage at 
cabaret-style tables -- and are served soft drinks; those seats are half price. 
At Simon Edison Centre for the Performing Arts, Balboa Park, San Diego, 
Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m., Sundays at 7 p.m., through June 10. 
$22.50-$30; (619) 239-2255. 
