MORE MAKING CHOICE TO CAST VOTES BY MAIL IN LONG BEACH 
Twenty years ago, there were so few absentee ballot applications that City 
Clerk Shelba Powell handled them by herself. This year she hired 22 temporary 
election workers to process the flood of absentee requests received by her 
office. 
The clerk's office sent out 13,345 absentee ballots for last week's municipal 
elections, a record number for an April election in Long Beach and 5,355 more 
than the office sent out for the last citywide municipal election in 1988. 
Voters returned 7,557 absentee ballots, representing 4.3% of the total voter 
turnout Tuesday. 
The growing numbers reflect a statewide trend in the use of absentee ballots 
that this year prompted the secretary of state's office to warn city clerks to 
be prepared for a last-minute onslaught of the ballots that would slow counting 
on Election Day. 
Indeed, bleary-eyed election workers were still tallying the last of the 
absentee ballots at 3 a.m. Wednesday morning. 
"I think they should begin to call it vote by mail," joked Sid Solomon, 
political action chairman of Long Beach Area Citizens Involved, a citywide 
political group. 
Absentee vote counts have been climbing since 1978, when state law was changed 
so that voters no longer needed an excuse such as illness or travel to request 
an absentee ballot. Now anyone who would prefer not to make the trek to the 
polls on Election Day can use an absentee ballot. 
In the Cerritos council races, one candidate, Charles J. Kim, received more 
votes by absentee balloting (1,135), than he did in the polling booth (802). 
The number of absentee ballots cast in the Cerritos elections was three times 
greater than in 1988. 
"The absentee vote continues to increase in California, I think for a couple of 
reasons," said Jeff Adler, a political consultant who is helping run Mayor 
Ernie Kell's reelection campaign. 
"Candidates are more and more turning to them as an effective campaign tool to 
spread the message and try to motivate voters," Adler said. "Secondly, voters 
like them because it makes it easy to participate." 
In last Tuesday's election, Kell received 3,416 absentee votes -- more than 
twice the number of absentee ballots cast for all the candidates running in the 
1984 council races. 
In an era of dismal voter turnout -- only 25% of Long Beach's registered voters 
bothered to vote last week -- absentee ballots are seen as a way of nudging 
people to the ballot box. 
"Well listen, they got to do something to increase the voter turnout," Solomon 
said. "I'm in favor of the whole system going by mail. They aren't going to the 
polls." 
A number of candidates in the Long Beach election sent out absentee ballot 
applications as part of their campaign mailing. In Kell's case, the 
applications came with prepaid return postage, with the name of the voter 
printed on the application. The only thing the voter had to do was sign the 
application and pop it in the mailbox. 
Absentee ballots are not only a way of encouraging a vote, but they can 
encourage a vote in favor of a particular candidate. "You're making it easier 
to vote for your candidate or your issue," Adler said. 
"It's pretty much standard in any reasonably well-organized campaign," said 
mayoral candidate and Councilman Tom Clark, who routinely woos the absentee 
vote in his campaigns. 
If the trend continues, Clark added, it will force candidates to step up their 
campaigns earlier in the election season to reach voters before they send in 
their ballots. 
It also makes more work for the clerk's office, which accepts absentee ballots 
in a given election until the polls close on Election Day. Workers must then 
process the last-minute arrivals, matching the absentee signatures with the 
voter registration records before they can be counted. 
Heavy campaign promotion of absentee applications has raised criticism in some 
races. In one recent state Assembly contest in central California, the 
Republican Party caused a stir when it hired temporary workers to walk 
precincts and collect absentee ballot applications. 
But Adler says he sees nothing wrong with getting campaign workers involved in 
absentee applications. "I don't think they're involved in the process any more 
than when a campaign goes out and registers voters." 
