SANTA ANA ELKS TOURNAMENT; 
TUSTIN COMES THROUGH IN PINCH TO SLIP PAST NO. 1 OCEAN VIEW, 4-3 
Andy Gonzales' first hit of the season gave relief pitcher Ben Strack his first 
win of the year in Tustin High School's 4-3 victory over Ocean View Monday at 
Tustin High. 
The game pitted Ocean View, the top-ranked team in the Orange County 
Sportswriters' Assn. prep baseball poll, against the second-ranked Tillers in 
the second round of the 26th Santa Ana Elks tournament. 
The teams played a quality game that didn't end until Gonzales' pinch-hit in 
the 10th inning. 
Tustin (14-1) held a 3-1 lead after five innings, but Ocean View tied the score 
with runs in the sixth and seventh innings. Tustin starter Bill Courtney 
allowed only six hits through 8 1/3 innings but left the game after he twisted 
his left ankle fielding a bunt in the ninth. 
Ocean View (13-3) had its share of early scoring opportunities, getting six 
walks in five innings. But the Seahawks failed to get a timely hit against 
Courtney until they tied the score in the late innings. 
Ocean View's Duane Page (6-1) pitched four scoreless innings in relief of 
starter Jim Gwaltney, but the right-hander gave up a single and then walked two 
to load the bases in the 10th, setting up Gonzales' winning hit. 
Gonzales squibbed a short fly ball over a drawn-in infield to drive in Ben 
Munoz. Gonzales said he hit a pitch "that sort of wiggled" for the game-winner. 
"I was trying to get Andy's confidence back in the situation," said assistant 
coach Bruce King, who was filling in for Vince Brown. Brown is visiting his 
younger brother, Gerran, who serves in the Peace Corps in Honduras. 
"Andy hurt his shoulder in the first week of the season and hasn't done 
anything for a month. He's a good contact hitter who just needs to get his 
confidence back." 
Strack (1-1) escaped a jam in the 10th when Tustin left fielder Brett Hardy 
made a fine running catch and doubled a runner off second to end the inning. 
"I thought the ball was going to fall in there, but the kid made a great play," 
said Steve Barrett, Ocean View coach. 
In other second-round games: 
Villa Park 6, Diamond Bar 0 -- Todd Wilson (3-2) pitched a three-hitter and 
struck out nine and Jason Martian drove in two with a single in the seventh for 
Villa Park (9-5-1). Mike Stephens stole home in the fourth inning for the 
Spartans. 
Los Alamitos 11, Orange 9 -- The Griffins rallied from a 9-5 deficit with three 
runs in the fifth inning and three more in the sixth. Tony Napolitano hit a 
two-run homer in the second for Los Alamitos. Jeff Peterson had three hits and 
four RBIs for Orange. 
El Toro 1, Pacifica 0 -- Greg Pearce pitched a five-hitter, striking out one, 
to lead El Toro at Santa Ana. Tim Powers had an RBI single in the third for the 
Chargers. 
In consolation games: 
Santa Ana Valley 8, Foothill 1 -- Scott Crosby had three hits, including two 
home runs, to lead Santa Ana Valley (6-8) at Tustin. Crosby also pitched six 
shutout innings, allowing three hits and striking out five, for the victory. 
Gahr 4, Santa Ana 3 (12 innings) -- Jose Betran's sacrifice fly with one out in 
the 12th inning gave Gahr the victory at Santa Ana. Bill Bergeron had three 
hits for Gahr. Jose Morales had three hits and two RBIs for Santa Ana (5-10). 
Mission Viejo 6, Saddleback 5 (12 innings) -- Don Bisbro led off the bottom of 
the seventh with a solo home run to tie the score, 5-5, and Tim Snowden's 
one-out single scored Lee Williams from second in the 12th. Snowden was four 
for seven. 
