EXXON REFUSES TO FUND MORE SPILL STUDIES, PANEL IS TOLD 
Exxon is refusing a government request for $20 million toward the cost of 
assessing damage from its massive oil spill in Alaska's Prince William Sound 
last year, a House subcommittee was told Tuesday. 
Studies of the long-term effects from the 1989 spill of 11 million gallons of 
crude oil into the pristine waters of Prince William Sound cost $35 million 
last year. Shortly after the spill by the tanker Exxon Valdez, the oil company 
put up $15 million. Last January, trustees in charge of the continuing 
assessment asked for the remaining $20 million. 
With continuing studies expected to cost another $30 million this year, the 
company is refusing the request to pay last year's balance on grounds that it 
hasn't been given results of the federal and state studies or an accounting of 
how its first $15 million was spent. 
"The process has not worked as Exxon anticipated," C. M. Harrison, its 
executive vice president, told the House subcommittee on water, power, and 
offshore energy resources. He said the interagency trustees told Exxon that 
government attorneys are "restricting the flow of information and data and are 
advising the trustees and agencies not to work cooperatively with Exxon." 
Government officials in return complain that Exxon has refused to share its 
research data with state and federal authorities. 
Heading into the second year of a cleanup that has already cost it more than $1 
billion, the company is under a federal criminal indictment that could bring 
fines totaling $700 million. 
So far more than 1,000 sea otters, 35,000 waterfowl, 150 bald eagles, and other 
animals from deer to whales are known to have died as a result of oil fouling 
the sound and hundreds of miles of its shoreline. 
But environmentalists insisted that the real impact is still unknown. 
"These carcasses represent only the most obvious impacts of the spill," Erik D. 
Olson of the National Wildlife Federation told the subcommittee. "They are only 
the tip of the iceberg. 
"The more subtle and insidious impacts are more difficult and expensive to 
measure than the collection of otter and bird carcasses. The entire food web of 
the affected areas of Prince William Sound, Kenai Peninsula, Kodiak Island, and 
many bays and estuaries along the Alaska Peninsula have been seriously 
disrupted." 
Exxon voluntarily put up the first $15 million. But Interior Secretary Manuel 
Lujan Jr. characterized that as a first step and put Exxon on notice that 
further payment would be expected. A spokesman for Lujan said Tuesday the 
Interior Department would hold the company responsible for continuing to 
finance the damage assessment and will go to court if necessary to collect 
additional payments. 
However, notes of a March meeting of the panel of trustees responsible for the 
assessment showed that the Justice Department advised the panel it "should not 
expect further money from Exxon." 
The notes also showed that Justice Department officials considered a proposed 
settlement agreed to by Exxon, but vetoed by Alaska, "a very good offer." Under 
that proposal, which was never implemented, Exxon would have paid up to $500 
million in fines to avoid criminal prosecution. 
The trustees panel is composed of Lujan, Agriculture Secretary Clayton L. 
Yeutter, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration chief John A. Knauss, 
and Alaska Fish and Game Commissioner Don W. Collingsworth. 
Compounding the problem of Exxon's refusal to provide additional payments for 
the studies is the fact that the Bush Administration included no funds for this 
year's work in its fiscal 1991 budget. Officials of the Interior and 
Agriculture departments and NOAA said they will "re-program" funds from other 
activities to support studies planned for the coming months. 
Representatives of environmental organizations testifying at the hearing 
Tuesday expressed concern that the trustees have agreed to discontinue 24 of 63 
studies initiated in the spill area last year. With Exxon balking and no 
Administration funds targeted for the continuing assessment, they urged 
Congress to step in with an appropriation to assure that investigations 
continue. 
"Congress should immediately mandate and appropriate sufficient funds to pay 
for the next two years of damage studies," Olson told the panel. "This will 
guarantee that critical data are not lost and that the spillers are held 
responsible for the full extent of damages." 
Rep. George Miller (D-Martinez), the subcommittee chairman, several times 
expressed concern that the litigation growing from the disaster has now taken 
precedence over the damage assessment and the recovery of the environment of 
the sound. He said scientific information is being withheld for use in the 
criminal and civil proceedings in court. 
"I am concerned," he said, "that litigation is beginning to overwhelm the 
public interest." 
