FOOD PHARMACY: OMEGA-3'S EFFECT ON ARTHRITIS STUDIED 
Does eating fish oils actually help people with rheumatoid arthritis? There's 
new evidence it can, says Dr. Joel Kremer, associate professor of medicine, 
Albany (N. Y.) Medical College and a leading expert in the field. 
In his study of 49 people with rheumatoid arthritis, those taking fish oil 
daily for six months showed improvement on 24 different measurements; for 
example, they had fewer tender and swollen joints and less pain and fatigue. 
Additionally, according to Kremer, three other recent studies -- from Harvard, 
Australia and the Netherlands -- confirm the arthritis-fighting activity of 
fish oils. 
Fish oil acts as an anti-inflammatory agent but it also benefits the immune 
system directly, Kremer found. 
The big question for Kremer now is to find the best dosage. In his new study, 
higher doses of five or six grams of fish oil daily were more effective than 
two or three grams. Five to six grams equal seven to nine ounces of raw 
Atlantic mackerel. 
Interestingly, in the study, olive oil also helped relieve some symptoms of 
rheumatoid arthritis for unknown reasons. But it was not as effective as fish 
oil, says Kremer. 
When you reduce cholesterol, you may get an unexpected bonus: lower blood 
pressure. 
Doctors have long suspected a physiological connection between high cholesterol 
and high blood pressure. But how it might work was a mystery. 
Now Swiss investigators have come up with a surprising new theory. On the basis 
of new studies, they claim that LDL cholesterol -- the bad type -- actually 
packs a double whammy in heart disease. 
It's already known that LDL cholesterol helps clog arteries. But Agapios 
Sachinidis, a biochemist at University Hospital, Zurich, now says LDL 
cholesterol also can act like a hormone that directly triggers rises in blood 
pressure. 
Too much salt could help destroy bones. 
That's what New Zealand researchers have found. Eating a high-sodium diet 
caused a group of nine elderly women to excrete nearly 30% more calcium. The 
calcium, therefore, was not available to be deposited in their bones. This 
could be detrimental at any age but especially to elderly women who are at high 
risk of bone fractures and the osteoporosis. 
In the study, researchers first put the women on a low-salt diet (1,600 
milligrams of sodium daily) then switched them to a high-salt diet (3,900 
milligrams daily). Although they ate the same amount of calcium on both diets, 
one-third more of it was eliminated from the body during the high-salt diet. 
In another study, researchers found that not only women but men tend to lose 
bone mass as they age and therefore are also vulnerable to osteoporosis. The 86 
men in the study at the Oregon Health Sciences University ate a large amount of 
calcium and took a calcium supplement. Yet they still lost bone at a 
substantial rate (2.3% a year), notably in their vertebrae. 
