MAN FOUND GUILTY IN DEATHS OF 2 OFFICERS 
A makeup artist was convicted Tuesday of murder in the 1986 deaths of two Los 
Angeles Police Department explosives experts killed while trying to defuse a 
pipe bomb found in his North Hollywood garage. 
A San Fernando Superior Court jury deliberated for five hours before convicting 
Donald Lee Morse, 39, of murder in the Feb. 8, 1986, deaths of Detective 
Arleigh McCree, 46, and Officer Ronald Ball, 43. Jurors said they had 
understood, but rejected, oblique hints by the defense that the officers had 
caused their own deaths by careless handling of the bomb. 
Several members of the victims' families greeted the verdict with brief cheers 
and clapping, while a murmur of anger ran through a group of Morse's family and 
friends. 
As he had throughout the four-week trial, the immaculately groomed television 
and film makeup artist remained composed, smiling weakly at one point, as the 
jury rendered its verdict of guilty on two counts of murder and one of 
possessing explosives. 
Morse did not testify at the trial but told police at the time of the explosion 
that he had never seen the two bombs found in his garage and had allowed others 
to use his garage for storage. 
Judge John H. Majors set May 3 for sentencing. Since jurors convicted Morse of 
special circumstances in addition to the murder counts, he could be sentenced 
to life in prison without possibility of parole. 
'Optimistic About Appeal' 
No evidence was introduced in the trial suggesting why Morse would build and 
store bombs in his garage. 
After the verdict, defense attorney Bernard J. Rosen said he was "very, very 
optimistic about an appeal" on grounds that the defense was hobbled by Majors' 
refusal to allow introduction of evidence suggesting that the officers, the 
first Los Angeles bomb squad members to be killed in the line of duty, had 
caused their own deaths through carelessness. 
In disallowing such evidence, Majors said that state law does not permit a 
victim's negligence to be used as a murder defense unless such errors are the 
sole cause of death. 
Since the bomb was an illegal and deadly device, its possession was at least a 
contributing cause to the officers' deaths, Majors ruled. 
Jurors said they picked up Rosen's frequent suggestions -- usually couched in 
questions that the judge promptly ruled out of order -- that the officers 
caused their own deaths, possibly by touching pliers to the positive and 
negative wires leading from the device. 
"We knew what he was hinting at, but it wasn't a factor at all," said one 
juror, a 37-year-old salesman from Sylmar, who asked that his name not be used. 
"The bomb was built to kill, and he had the bomb, so we felt that if the 
officers made a mistake, it just wasn't important." 
Edie McCree, widow of the detective, said defense suggestions that the officers 
were negligent by not exploding the bomb at a remote location were "a bit hard 
to take" for herself and other family members who attended every day of the 
trial. 
She said her husband "always tried to preserve the evidence." 
"He always thought it was most important to convict the bomb maker," especially 
in a case where the suspect denies that it is his bomb, she said. 
McCree noted that by dismantling the first bomb, her husband and Ball had 
preserved evidence that was "important in getting this conviction." 
Police Testimony 
Juror Virginia Murray said the panel was largely persuaded of Morse's guilt by 
police testimony that they found blasting powder hidden inside a coffee can in 
a kitchen cabinet and that Morse had a copy of a bomb-making manual in his 
library. 
Police experts testified that the defendant's fingerprints were on the coffee 
can and the manual. 
"Without those prints, it would have been a really tough case to decide," 
Murray said. 
Another juror noted that Morse had "the makings of a whole other bomb" 
scattered inside his house. 
Jurors said that after five hours of discussing the evidence, they took a vote 
late Monday and it was unanimous for conviction on all three counts. The 
verdict was sealed until Tuesday. 
Alvin Morse, the defendant's 37-year-old brother who lived with him at the time 
of the blast, said that he and his brother "have no idea how the bomb got in 
that garage" and never saw the bomb manual before. 
He cooked dinner the night before the blast, Alvin Morse said, "and I know 
there was no blasting powder in that kitchen cabinet." 
"The police were in that house for hours after the explosion, and they could 
have planted anything in that house," he said. 
The younger Morse, a nightclub singer, said that fingerprints, including one of 
his prints that police said they found on the bomb manual, "must have been 
transferred there." 
Alvin Morse also said that police had "been after my brother for years on 
trumped-up charges," including arrests for rape and credit card fraud that were 
dismissed. 
Police said they went to Morse's home to search for a pistol that had been used 
four days earlier to shoot an official of the Makeup Artists and Hairstylists 
Union, Local 706, of which Morse was a member. The pistol was not found and 
Morse was not charged in the shooting. 
After the verdict, Rosen argued that Majors should have granted a defense 
motion for a change of venue. The defense lawyer contended that Morse, who is 
black, could not get a fair trial from an all-white jury in the San Fernando 
Valley, "where there are values that are different from values in other areas." 
Rosen declined to be more specific. But Morse's friends and relatives have 
complained throughout the trial that the defendant was being denied justice 
because of his race. 
