AMI PLANS TO ENCOURAGE OTHER BUYOUT BIDS 
American Medical International, under pressure from key shareholders to respond 
to a bid to buy the company, said Wednesday that it will seek other offers. 
The Beverly Hills hospital management firm decided to encourage others to bid 
before taking a position on a $24-a-share buyout offer from a group led by Dr. 
M. Lee Pearce, an AMI director and major shareholder. 
Pearce and his two partners in Shamrock Investments Acquisition Corp., a Los 
Angeles group that is unrelated to Roy E. Disney's Shamrock Holdings, joined 
forces March 23 and offered to buy AMI for $1.7 billion, nearly all in cash. On 
the same date, an investment banking firm submitted a competing proposal -- a 
restructuring plan to increase share prices to $25 to $29 per share, including 
a special cash dividend. The trading range for AMI stock during the past year 
had been $14 to $18 per share. 
AMI has taken no position on the proposals. Instead, the company immediately 
created a special committee to evaluate the offers and explore other options. 
The panel, composed of seven of AMI's 15 board members, decided that the 
company should solicit other bids and examine other recapitalization plans, 
according to a company statement. 
"As part of the process," said the statement, "AMI will enter into discussions 
with third parties who express an interest in acquiring the company. Non-public 
information would be provided to qualified parties who execute an acceptable 
confidentiality agreement." 
Financial Adviser 
AMI said it has retained Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. as its financial adviser and 
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom as its legal adviser. The statement 
was released after the close of trading at the New York Stock Exchange, where 
AMI shares finished unchanged Wednesday at $21.75. 
The announcement comes five days after RTF Partners, a major AMI investor group 
led by the billionaire Bass brothers of Texas, warned AMI management that it 
may sue or attempt to take over the company if it failed to take quick action 
to boost the value of AMI stock. RTF urged AMI to solicit other offers. 
The AMI statement said there was "no assurance" that they would choose any of 
the options. However, some industry analysts said the company would accept one 
of the options. 
"In my opinion, they have to do what's right for the shareholders," said Rae 
Alperstein, an analyst at Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards in Los Angeles. "And 
that means they will restructure or sell." 
Alperstein said AMI decided to solicit other offers to get the Pearce group to 
raise its bid and to lure other potential buyers into a bidding war. 
However, Kenneth Abramowitz, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co., 
predicted that there would be no new bidders. He said the company is examining 
the recapitalization option because it may want to fend off Pearce or the RTF 
group by buying its own stock. 
