ROCK IS READY TO ROLL BACK INTO SAN DIEGO STADIUM 
Jack Murphy Stadium has not played host to a major rock concert since 1983, 
when the legendary British band, The Who, came to town. 
The Dallas Cowboys visited a few days later, and the group playing host to them 
-- the San Diego Chargers -- said the playing field was in the worst condition 
possible for a professional football game. 
So, leverage was applied, and rock left the stadium indefinitely. Its departure 
meant the loss of a lot of money for the city, while rock lost the one local 
venue capable of staging such acts as Michael Jackson, Bruce Springsteen and 
the Rolling Stones. 
Well, now it looks as though rock is back, or will be by summer. Stadium 
manager Bill Wilson confirmed last month that he is negotiating with big-time 
promoters to return rock to the 60,000-seat stadium. 
And, according to Brian Murphy, a promoter with the Los Angeles-based Avalon 
Attractions, the group most likely to mark the return is, ironically, The Who. 
A city official who asked not to be identified confirmed that Murphy is right 
-- The Who may be booked for an August concert, while talks are being held with 
the Rolling Stones for a November show. The same official called the Stones' 
1981 appearance at the stadium the biggest 1-day payoff in city history -- more 
than $250,000 net profit. 
"We think it's a wonderful idea -- big-time rock coming back to San Diego," 
said Murphy of Avalon Attractions. "And, we hope The Who will play there." 
Pressed for details, Murphy said he could "not comment further," nor would he 
confirm that he was the agent seeking to book The Who. 
"I've spoken very seriously and had heavy telephone conversations with a number 
of promoters," Wilson said. "We've made available certain dates in June and 
July, and, of course, August. We just need a window of 2 days on either end 
(before and after the concert) to get the field back in shape for baseball and 
football." 
Wilson pointed out that the Beach Boys and the KOOL Jazz Festival took place at 
the stadium during the ban on rock but with a restrictive caveat -- no one was 
allowed to sit on the field during those events. 
Wilson said rock's full-scale return is feasible only with fans being allowed 
to sit on the field and in reserved seats. He said no promoter would accept the 
restriction of no seating on the field. He said the only way fans can sit on 
the field without destroying it is through the use of a new high-tech 
"geotextile" material -- not available in 1983 -- that covers and protects the 
turf even with thousands of bodies crunched upon it. 
"Geotextile is a three-eighths-inch felt material interwoven with polyester," 
said Steve Wightman, stadium turf manager. "It allows a pocket of air between 
the feet of the people and the grass. It's not perfect, but it allows the turf 
to breathe. It's the only way to minimize detrimental effects." 
Even with such protection, Wilson said, the City Council, which oversees the 
stadium, would never again permit "festival seating" -- fans being allowed to 
camp on the field without reserved seating, "Woodstock-style," as they did for 
the Rolling Stones concert 8 years ago. From now on, he said, on-the-field 
seating will be allowed only in chairs and only on a reserved basis. 
Stadium Authority Board member Mike Gotch favors the return of rock to keep the 
stadium fiscally fit, despite the hazards it poses to the turf and to stadium 
security. 
"The unofficial ban on rock guarantees that the stadium is a money loser every 
year," Gotch said, adding that he expects the authority board and the council 
to lift the ban. "With proper security and proper conditions being imposed on 
the promoter for cleanup of the site, then I believe it's time we took another 
look." 
