DEFENSE CHIEF SAYS CITY NOT IMMUNE TO CUTS; 
MILITARY: DEFENSE SECRETARY DICK CHENEY ALSO SHOOTS DOWN ANY IDEA OF USING 
MIRAMAR NAVAL AIR STATION TO SOLVE LINDBERGH FIELD CROWDING. 
Though important to the Navy, San Diego will not be exempt from proposed budget 
cuts facing the military, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said Monday. 
Speaking at a San Diego press conference, Cheney also put the kibosh on a 
controversial plan to alter Miramar Naval Air Station for use as a civilian 
airport. 
"At this point, we have no plans to transform Miramar or to close down Miramar. 
I won't say we won't listen to proposals from the community -- obviously we 
will," Cheney said. "But I haven't seen anything yet that, as defense 
secretary, I find attractive enough in terms of saying: 'OK, we're going to 
close Miramar and take our business elsewhere.' " 
While in San Diego for the day, Cheney viewed Navy patrol boat units, a SEAL 
squad and parachute jump teams at the Naval Amphibious Base, and he addressed a 
crew of the amphibious assault ship Tarawa at the 32nd Street Naval Station. 
Cheney also sought time with enlisted personnel and officers to learn about 
their concerns. 
"It's useful to get out of Washington once in a while to find out what real 
folks are thinking about," Cheney said. Most sailors were concerned about their 
future in the Navy while relations among many countries are thawing and some 
members of Congress are pressing for significant military reductions in 
spending, he said. 
Cheney sought to allay some of those concerns, saying that he would not 
sacrifice readiness and quality of life while budgets are chopped. 
"I am committed -- so is the President -- to trying to protect the quality of 
life for military personnel," Cheney said. 
"We (are) prepared to take the force down to whatever size the American people 
will support. But, when we get it down to that level, we want it to be the best 
we can make it. That you've got the best people . . . that they've got the best 
training and equipment they need to do the job we ask them to do. We don't want 
to go back to hollow forces that we had in the late '70s after Vietnam." 
Cheney also sought to reassure city business leaders that San Diego will 
continue to play an important role as host to a significant military presence, 
though it will not be exempt from budget cuts. Although he declined to spell 
out how severely the city might be hit by force reductions, Cheney said: "San 
Diego has been, is now, and will continue to be an absolutely crucial part of 
U.S. naval posture and our military establishment. And that's not going to 
change." 
Cheney also spoke to a packed crowd at the San Diego Marriott Hotel celebrating 
the Chamber of Commerce's 120th anniversary. At the luncheon, the chamber's 
annual "Spirit of San Diego" award was given to Thomas W. Sefton, president of 
San Diego Trust &amp; Savings Bank. 
Questioned by the crowd after his speech and by reporters during a press 
conference about the Pentagon's position concerning Miramar, Cheney slapped 
down the idea of using the sprawling air station to help ease traffic at 
civilian Lindbergh Field. 
