STATE, LOCAL POLITICS NO MATCH FOR URBAN CRISIS OF CRIME AND DRUGS; 
GOVERNMENT: THE REAGAN LEGACY IS TO SHIFT THE BURDEN OF DEALING WITH THE 
COUNTRY'S MOST VEXING PROBLEMS TO THOSE LEAST CAPABLE OF MANAGING THEM. 
Fifty years ago, Franklin D. Roosevelt concluded that in order to advance his 
New Deal program he would have to purge recalcitrant Southern senators from the 
Democratic Party. South Carolina's Ellison Durant Smith, standing for his sixth 
term, was at the top of his list. 
Not surprisingly, given the South's one-party politics, "Cotton Ed" and the 
other Dixiecrats handily survived by appealing to racism, states' rights and 
economic self-interest. It is, however, unsettling, after half a century of 
sweeping economic, social and demographic changes, to see Cotton Ed's platform 
endorsed, or at least accepted, by a considerable majority of Americans in 
three successive presidential elections. 
Too many Americans, for example, believe that volunteer agencies can provide 
points of light sufficient to relieve the gloom of the inner cities. And that a 
rising tide of middle-class affluence will automatically lift a third 
generation of juvenile delinquents, socially incapacitated by the absence of 
effective family and community support. George Bush used to call that voodoo 
economics. 
Congress, confined by the fiscal straitjacket left by President Ronald Reagan's 
budget deficits and acutely aware of election returns, is in no position to 
restore curtailed social programs or devise new ones. The Supreme Court, 
meanwhile, is only a heartbeat away from the anti-affirmative-action majority 
Reagan sought and Bush is likely to achieve. 
Thus the burden of dealing with the crime-ridden urban slums has been 
transferred to state and local governments -- and every lesson to be drawn from 
history demonstrates that they have neither the will nor the capacity to handle 
social problems rooted in poverty compounded by race and class. In fact, as the 
current gubernatorial campaign in California bears witness, it is no longer 
possible even to get these pressing matters on the political agenda. 
Popular concern over the rising crime rate enabled the spin doctors who shaped 
the Republican presidential campaigns to use a largely rhetorical war on drugs 
to offset the emotional appeal the war on poverty once had. In California, the 
formula has made Gov. George Deukmejian, a natural-born apostle of law and 
order, imperviously popular. As did Bush, he accompanied his promise to beef up 
the criminal justice system with a pledge not to raise taxes. 
This has worked so well that the two leading Democratic candidates have been 
reduced to trying to outdo each other with televised pledges to send more 
prisoners to the gas chamber. 
It is hard to believe that such experienced public officials as Atty. Gen. John 
K. Van de Kamp and former San Francisco Mayor Dianne Feinstein -- or, for that 
matter, the presumptive Republican nominee, Sen. Pete Wilson -- do not 
recognize that this "off-with-their-heads" approach is no more than an 
expedient diversion from the real problems posed by crime and drugs. 
But politicians seem unable to resist taking a firm stand on issues where there 
is no visible opposition. The last vestige of popular support for drug use 
disappeared with the hippies. No one has any sympathy for the crack dealers 
whose traffic promotes violent crime. Nor does anyone doubt that effective 
policing is required to make city streets safer to walk. These are political 
givens. But so should be the evident futility of relying on the criminal 
justice system to deal with crime after the fact, while curtailing the social 
programs that constitute the only effective preventive. 
There is abundant evidence that this one-sided approach is destroying the 
effectiveness of the measures central to the purported war on crime. In 
California, after reinstatement of the death sentence and passage of laws 
requiring more severe penalties for lesser crimes, statistics compiled by the 
State Bar portray a judicial system near the verge of collapse: 
From 1981 to 1988, drug cases in Los Angeles more than doubled; last year the 
violent crime rate rose by 12%; between 1978 and 1986, statewide criminal-case 
filings rose by 114%; there are now about 90,000 inmates in California prisons, 
up from 25,000 in 1980; nearly two-thirds of the prisoners released on parole 
in 1986 were back in prison within two years. 
Newspapers, and in its scattershot fashion, television, flesh out these figures 
with reports of random violence outside the ghettoes, where juvenile street 
gangs funded by drug money have taken over neighborhoods. On the Op-Ed pages, 
judges, law-enforcement officials, sociologists, clergymen and inner-city 
activists deplore the failure to provide education, medical treatment and 
increased economic opportunity that could succor those struggling to free 
themselves from the stultifying ghetto environment. 
As the human toll from narcotics addiction increases, so does the violent crime 
associated with the lucrative drug market. This has reached the point where 
such bellwether free-market conservatives as Milton Friedman and William F. 
Buckley advocate drug legalization. Unwilling to accept government 
responsibility for dealing with the demand side of the market, they recognize 
the futility of trying to control the supply side and propose that the state 
absorb the profits -- an exercise in social Darwinism that would write off 
those who are already hooked, and those who might be if drugs became cheaper 
and even more available. 
But these voices have no political constituency. So far, no serious candidate 
has emerged in the mid-term elections of any state pledged to support effective 
alternatives to the prevailing approach to drugs and crime, and the increased 
revenues that would be required to pay for them. This points up the even more 
serious problem posed by the progressive paralysis of our vaunted political 
process. 
