WHAT IS NORTH COUNTY'S TOP ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEM? 
Jerry Harmon, 46, spent most of his 18 years on the Escondido City Council as 
the sole slow-growth advocate until two like-minded candidates were elected in 
1988. 
 I think we have two, and it's both water and air. Water from the standpoint 
that since we live in the desert, this entire region is dependent on imported 
water. As the population increases, we become even more dependent. And as a 
result, I think we are reaching a point where we need to seriously consider the 
recycling and reclaiming of water. 
Escondido is on the verge of getting into that in a very meaningful way, in 
that probably in the next few weeks we will be making decisions regarding the 
expansion of our waste water treatment plant, and we are planning to not only 
expand it, but also to go to full tertiary treatment to meet state standards, 
which is not being done any place in the county at the moment. And by doing so, 
we will be in a position to use all of the water that is currently now dumped 
into the ocean at San Elijo. We will be able to sell that for irrigation and 
agricultural purposes, thus relieving the demand on potable water that is 
imported, and at the same time, creating a new income stream from the reclaimed 
water that we will be selling. 
Every day that goes by, we throw away 16 million gallons. We could be selling 
that at two-thirds the cost of what we paid for to bring it into the region in 
the first place. 
It does take time because obviously there are health considerations involved, 
there are engineering considerations in terms of how do you distribute the 
water. Because it's one thing to reclaim it. And that's a important point when 
you talk to other people who may say that trash is an environmental problem. 
It's one thing to say that, well, we are quote, recycling our trash, and that 
that's a way to deal with trash. But if you think about it, recycling is a bit 
of a misnomer unless you have complete loop. It's one thing to collect and 
separate trash, but that's only part of the process of recycling. Unless you 
have a market to reuse that trash that has been collected and separated, you 
really haven't completed the loop as far as recycling is concerned. 
And what I'm saying is also true with water. Unless you can market the water, 
and you have to be able to distribute it in order to do that, you haven't 
completed the loop. In the case of water, you have to make sure you do the 
whole process or you can't do any of it. 
I think that other areas that have treatment facilities are going to find that 
what we do will be to their benefit as well, for the same reasons, and that 
they too, once they take a closer look at it, they will be motivated to do the 
same thing. 
 Tom Erwin, 47, holds licenses as a real estate broker and commercial aircraft 
pilot, but has been in semiretirement since the air traffic controller's strike 
in 1981. Erwin, 47, has lived in Carlsbad since 1979, and serves on its 
planning commission and oversight committee for growth management. He has been 
fighting the San Marcos trash plant almost full time for four years. 
 The control and management of growth. That's it in a nutshell. Our issues are 
peripherally tied to that. Our problems are all tied. How we in North County 
choose to manage our growth will dictate the problems that we have or the lack 
of problems that we have in the future. 
Carlsbad has a growth management plan that overall is a terrific plan. These 
are the items that have to be satisfied along with any development in our 
community. We have our community broken into zones. There has to be overall 
zone plans for each area, addressing development through build-out and how they 
will satisfy these different areas as follows, not necessarily by importance: 
City administrative facilities, libraries, waste water treatment capacity, 
parks, drainage, circulation, fire department, open space, schools, sewer 
collection, and water distribution. 
That's what we have to address, and any time that anyone comes in with any 
project, that project has to be keyed into this and they have to show how all 
of those areas will be satisfied. That way we don't all of a sudden wake up one 
morning with major problems. Every segment has to grow in concert with the 
other segments. We don't overbuild and then say, gee, we forgot to have open 
space, or gee, we forgot to have parks, or gee, we forgot to have schools. 
Another thing we're going to have to address ourselves to pretty soon, which is 
a non-growth issue, is that over 90% of our water is imported. If we lose our 
water source through some emergency, we would be in a real problem. 
Now, Carlsbad keeps a two-week supply of water. We have some communities in 
North County, I understand, that have less than two-days supply of water 
available to them. This is a major problem that we're going to have to address 
because that 90%-plus water that's imported all comes across the San Andreas 
fault. If we were to have a major shift on that fault, we could lose our water 
supply, it is projected, up to six months. As far as long-range planning, that 
is a major problem. 
Environmentally, although I have concerns, I know we have enough good people 
fighting the good fight, that I don't see any great problems happening. Because 
any time anything starts to happen, we have so many people that pounce on it. 
For example, the SDG&amp;E expansion project down here. Because of what 
happened in Alaska and what happened in Huntington Beach, there was already a 
call for a possible ordinance in the city of Carlsbad for any ship that comes 
in to refuel at the SDG&amp;E plant, that they have to be a double-hulled 
vessel. We have so many people that pounce on this stuff so fast, that I'm not 
real concerned about us missing something there. 
 Larry Aker is vice president of regulatory affairs for the Pacific Treatment 
Corp., a company that treats hazardous waste. He formerly worked with the 
toxics division of the county Health Services Department. He is a resident of 
Escondido. 
 Contaminated or abandoned sites in North County. That's my primary area of 
expertise. If we limit the discussion to contaminated or abandoned sites in the 
county, the Chatham site, in south Escondido, is clearly the most complex, the 
most polluted, the most studied site in the county. 
It is actually significant because it's a detriment to the development of the 
immediate neighbor and could be, I guess -- scratch the I guess -- could be a 
potential threat to anyone who's on the site and certainly is one that is 
continuing to pollute ground water. We need to qualify it and say that's 
there's never been any evidence to indicate that it represents a threat to any 
humans off site. But just simply because there are places where one could 
actually come into contact with the pollutants on site, it remains a threat 
actually to public health to anyone on site. 
It's of particular interest right now too, because the state and the community 
are facing a May 8 deadline, a regulatory deadline, that would mean that if the 
site has not been substantially cleaned up by May 8, then the cost of cleaning 
the site up will be much, much higher. 
The third phase of the federal regulations on hazardous waste, banning the 
landfilling of certain materials, goes into effect. What that means, is the 
cost of disposal after May 8, for the types of materials at that site, will be 
much much higher. So while the state has devoted about 1.2 million dollars and 
then they got some additional money after that, to work on the site, that money 
is going to be inadequate if they wait until after May 8. I think the state, 
when they were down at a community meeting about two weeks ago, had notified 
the community of the need to move rapidly on the site. 
There is another site in North County besides Chatham that deserves some 
mention and that's the ground water in Santa Ysabel . . . has also been 
contaminated from underground tanks. Because of the ground water contamination, 
the dependence of some of the people in the community on ground water, as their 
source for both drinking water and domestic use -- actually it's a fairly small 
contaminated plume -- is really significant in that community. 
Most of North County is not dependent on ground water for its domestic water 
use, we use imported water. But in Santa Ysabel, they are dependent, or they 
were in the past, dependent on ground water. So there are some wells there that 
have been condemned, and essentially a moratorium on new well drilling in that 
area because of the contaminated water. 
A third thing needs to be mentioned, a third area of contamination and that's 
all over North County. There are numerous, literally hundreds of sites that 
have been contaminated with gasoline or with diesel from underground fuel 
tanks. The county is going through a process right now of requiring, via state 
law, that they be cleaned up. In most cases, the only thing that's contaminated 
is soil, and so it doesn't pose any kind of a problem. In some cases, there is 
ground water contamination, but no dependency on ground water, so they don't 
really represent an acute issue. 
The perspective on all of this ought to be that North County is actually free 
from very many significant abandoned hazardous waste problems, due, in part, to 
the fact that they've been cleaned up over the past 10 years. The county has 
maintained a very active program, industry has really gotten behind the notion 
of cleaning up. 
The hundreds of sites that have been cleaned up can be documented. They really 
represent a substantial effort in North County to clean sites up. Certainly 
that doesn't say that we need to diminish our efforts to try and get the 
Chatham site, Santa Isabel, and all the rest of those hundreds of contaminated 
soil sites cleaned up, but there really are very few additional surface 
contamination sites. 
 Dwight Worden, 42, is an environmental attorney in Solana Beach, which also 
was his home from 1970 to 1981. He has lived in Del Mar for the past nine 
years. Worden served on the Coastal Commission in 1977 and was an alternate on 
the state coastal commission the same year. He represents the city of Encinitas 
in its opposition to the San Marcos trash-burning plant. 
 In general, the adverse effect of growth, primarily manifested in traffic 
congestion. The second priority is the solid waste problem, recycling, the 
probing of trash, landfills, air quality is high on the list. I guess you'd 
call it an environmental problem, but preservation of the remaining natural 
open spaces is a very high priority. 
Traffic is very gloomy. I-5 runs something like 250,000 cars a day. It is 
predicted to go to 350,000 cars a day by 2010, which means it will be gridlock. 
And that's assuming the highway goes from the current 30,000 cars a day to 
100,000 cars a day. So, that's something pretty significant. On the traffic 
front, we're looking a L.A.-style gridlock in North County. 
In 1992, there will be commuter-rail service for the first time, so people will 
be able to commute from Oceanside, Carlsbad, Del Mar, etc., down to San Diego, 
and get out of their cars. And that will help, but even the commuter-rail 
system won't really solve the problem, only make it somewhat better. 
The trash problem: We have one landfill in North County, in San Marcos, that is 
somewhat full right now. The Board of Supervisors has been trying for 10 years 
to locate a new landfill, and they can't, they haven't done it. Where's our 
trash going to go? 
On the positive side, recycling is starting to happen. Del Mar and Solana 
Beach, Carlsbad and a number of the other North County cities now have curbside 
recycling, where they give you these colored buckets and you separate your 
aluminum, your glass, your newspapers, plastics, and that can make a big 
difference. We're aggressively moving forward on composting, where you take 
lawn clippings, trees, all of that kind of stuff which takes up a lot of room 
in landfills. Through composting you can reuse it. 
And a related issue is sewage treatment. We're very controversial in the North 
County. We have a plant in Oceanside, one in Carlsbad, and one in Cardiff, all 
of which have ocean outfall, discharges, treated sewage going into the ocean. 
There's a lot of controversy about whether people are getting sick because of 
it. 
