UC IRVINE'S DANIEL ALDRICH JR. DIES 
Daniel G. Aldrich Jr., founding chancellor of UC Irvine and the only person in 
the University of California's history to head three of the system's campuses, 
died this morning at UCI Medical Center after a long battle with cancer. He was 
71. 
Aldrich, an athletic man with a strong, resonant voice, built UCI literally 
from the ground up, having picked the site for the campus in December, 1961. He 
is credited with making that new campus, which now has 16,000 students, one of 
the nation's premier research institutions by the time he retired 22 years 
later. 
In addition to heading the Irvine campus from its planning phases in 1962 to 
his retirement in 1984, Aldrich served as interim chancellor of UC Riverside in 
1984-85 and interim chancellor of UC Santa Barbara in 1986-87 when the campus 
was struggling to recover from a financial scandal. 
Aldrich's 22-year tenure as head of UC Irvine is the longest of any chancellor 
in the nine-campus University of California system. 
UC President David P. Gardner, borrowing a baseball term, had often called 
Aldrich his "utility chancellor." 
Gardner also had praised Aldrich for "unimpeachable integrity" and for the 
"courage and dignity" with which Aldrich faced his battle against intestinal 
cancer. 
The UC Board of Regents, in a formal resolution in 1985, praised Aldrich as "an 
institution in himself, a man whose values are as rock-ribbed and solid as the 
hills of his native New England." 
Funeral services have not been immediately announced. Survivors include his 
wife, Jean; three grown children, Daniel G. III, Elizabeth and Stuart, and 
seven grandchildren. 
Aldrich's death followed a 3-year fight against intestinal cancer. When the 
ailment was diagnosed in May, 1987, Aldrich, a fierce, lifelong sports 
competitor who stood 6 feet, 4 inches tall, said he did not intend to slow his 
active lifestyle. "One goes on," he said. 
When Aldrich retired in 1984, UC Irvine had emerged from being a little-known, 
fledgling campus to a nationally known institution honored for its research. 
Campus historians have said that Aldrich's task in building a new campus was 
complicated by the turbulent 1960s -- a time of national unrest on college 
campuses because of the Vietnam War. At one point in the late 1960s, some 
students occupied a building on campus. 
"My position was that as long as they were not being destructive or disrupting 
classes, so be it," Aldrich recalled later. He said he was low-key about the 
incident and sought to avoid a campus police-student confrontation. After three 
days, Aldrich sent the protesters occupying the building a note, saying they 
would soon be in the official position of being disruptive and should disband. 
With no fanfare, the protesters dispersed. 
Conservative Orange County -- and historians have noted that the county was 
considerably more strait-laced in the 1960s than today -- sometimes looked 
aghast at liberal activities on the new UCI campus. Aldrich said he was able to 
keep peace between community and campus because he had no trouble in 
identifying with Orange County. 
". . . I identified with these people," he said. "It didn't even strike me that 
I was coming into a conservative county. I fit in." 
