BEVERLY INTRODUCES BILL TO AID CARD-CLUB CITIES 
A coalition of Southland city managers seeking an overhaul of the state's 
century-old gambling law has persuaded a state lawmaker to take up their cause. 
State Sen. Robert A. Beverly (R-Manhattan Beach) said he has introduced a bill 
that was drafted over the past four months by the city managers of Gardena, 
Bell, Bell Gardens, Huntington Park, and Commerce -- where the Southland's 
seven card clubs are located. 
The bill, city officials said last week, could settle a dispute over three 
high-stakes Asian betting games. For the past four years, since pai-gow, Asian 
poker and super pan 9 were introduced in the card clubs, the games have 
generated up to 50% of the clubs' yearly revenues. 
Controversy Generated 
But they also have brought repeated disputes between card club owners and law 
enforcement officials, who contend that the games violate the 1891 gambling 
law. Sheriff's deputies closed down the games for several days early this year. 
The controversy also has generated lawsuits. 
Beverly said last week that he was willing to sponsor the city managers' bill 
because of the continued debates over the wording of the law, which sheriff's, 
city and card club officials call archaic. 
But, he conceded, it is not his most pressing issue since none of the cities he 
represents allow gambling. 
Not Priority Item 
"It's not a priority item," Beverly said. "(But), there's been a constant 
struggle over what games can be played (in card clubs)." 
Beverly said his office, which is juggling more than 30 bills, has made no 
effort to lobby for the gambling-law revision. Beverly was contacted about the 
issue last month by Joseph A. Gonsalves, a lobbyist for the cities of Commerce, 
Bell Gardens and Cudahy. 
Nevertheless, said Bell Gardens City Manager Claude Booker, coalition members 
are confident that Beverly, a 20-year veteran of state government and former 
city official, could be influential in transforming the bill into law. 
"He's a friend of city government," Booker said, who with Commerce City Manager 
Louis Shepard has been lobbying for passage of the bill. Shepard went to 
Sacramento recently to seek the support of the League of California Cities, 
which has yet to respond, Booker said. 
In Gardena, Assistant City Manager Mitchell Lansdell said he is less certain 
about the bill's prospects. 
"In the past, legislation has gotten as far as being introduced, but something 
always fell through," Lansdell said. "We certainly favor some kind of 
legislation, but whether this is the right piece or not we don't know." 
The bill is under review by the Senate Governmental Organizational Committee 
and will be ready for hearings by May 9, said Joshua Pane, a spokesman for 
Beverly. 
If passed, it would replace the existing gambling law, which consists of one 
paragraph with a detailed description of seven games that are allowed in the 
state. It also would define disputed terms, such as banking, percentage and 
house. 
The most significant aspect of the 11-page, compromise bill, supporters say, is 
that it would outlaw pai-gow, played with tiles instead of playing cards. The 
game, played at all seven of the casinos, has been the greatest source of 
controversy between law enforcement officials and card club operators. 
The bill, however, would allow super pan 9 and Asian poker, which are 
derivatives of pai-gow, but are played with cards instead of tiles. 
The other games listed in the proposed bill are: draw poker, panguingue 
(similar to super pan 9), seven-card stud poker and hold-em poker. 
The Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department and the California Police Officers 
Assn. have opposed pai-gow because it is played with a rotating dealer. The 
dealer, who also serves as a banker by controlling the betting, has an unfair 
advantage over other players, sheriff's spokesmen contend. 
But card club owners and city officials support the game, saying that since 
every player has a chance to become the "rotating dealer," or banker, the 
advantage is neutralized. The current law outlaws banking games but does not 
define what they are. 
Administrators of the five cities began drafting proposed changes in the 
gambling law after sheriff's deputies raided six of the card clubs during the 
New Year's weekend. 
The Sheriff's Department closed down tables where the Asian games were being 
played until casino and Bell Gardens attorneys persuaded Superior Court Judge 
Kurt Lewin to issue a temporary restraining order barring deputies from further 
action. 
The games are being played under an extension of that order until a lawsuit 
against the Sheriff's Department can be heard later this year. 
