'UPZONING' BLAMED FOR PRICE OF LAND; 
SANTA MONICA MOUNTAINS: CRITICS SAY COUNTY DECISIONS HAVE INFLATED THE COSTS OF 
SCENIC TRACTS, HINDERING EFFORTS TO BUY PARCELS FOR PUBLIC USE. 
Los Angeles County officials are undermining efforts to complete the Santa 
Monica Mountains National Recreation Area by relaxing zoning controls on 
mountain lands and, in effect, inflating the cost of scenic tracts the 
government wants to buy, according to key congressmen and advocates for the 
national park. 
At issue are decisions by Los Angeles County supervisors to "upzone" mountain 
lands to allow for more intensive development than land-use plans provide. 
Critics say upzoning has inflamed an already superheated market for mountain 
land and encouraged owners to demand more than the appraised value of their 
property. 
One such decision, for example, gave the owners of a piece of property the 
right to build 47 additional houses on land coveted for parklands, boosting the 
property's value by at least $5 million. 
The result of such decisions, they say, is that lands needed for the park are 
made unaffordable and are lost to development, with luxury houses for the rich 
being built where nature preserves should be. 
California lawmakers and environmentalists, who plead each year for federal 
appropriations to expand the recreation area, said upzoning has become a sore 
point with key members of Congress, causing them to question how much support 
the park has from local officials. 
Supervisors and their aides said they support the Santa Monica Mountains park 
but that they must also protect owners' rights to a fair return for their land. 
"We are living in a free country," said Supervisor Deane Dana, whose district 
includes the part of the recreation area along the Malibu coast. "We have no 
authority to freeze land values forever." 
But the upzoning decisions are troubling to a wide range of officials concerned 
about the park. 
"There is a perception among Members of Congress, who are in key positions to 
determine funding for parks, that Los Angeles County does not actively support 
setting aside open spaces for public use in the Santa Monicas," Sen. Pete 
Wilson (R-California) said in a letter to the supervisors more than a year ago. 
One such member is Rep. Ralph Regula of Ohio, the ranking Republican on the 
House Appropriations Committee's interior subcommittee, which budgets money for 
park acquisition. 
Upzoning is "driving up the cost of acquisition," Regula said. "If the county 
would like to have a national park . . . they've got to cooperate a little 
bit." 
Rep. Chester Atkins (D-Mass.), also on the panel, said members are concerned 
"that we're getting maximum value for our money -- that we're not in a 
situation where things are happening with zoning . . . which are artificially 
inflating the value of the land and increasing the burden on the taxpayer." 
The situation has infuriated Rep. Anthony C. Beilenson (D-Los Angeles), sponsor 
of the legislation that created the national recreation area in 1978. 
"I cannot understand why, when there's such strong regional support for the 
national park, and when the need for more public open space in . . . the Los 
Angeles area is so obvious to everyone else, that the Board of Supervisors 
repeatedly makes decisions that allow the destruction of what little open space 
is left," Beilenson said in a recent interview. 
"I think people would be enraged if they understood that this same supervisor 
that they cast their vote for . . . is also someone who's making it virtually 
impossible for the public to acquire parkland at a reasonable price, in order 
that some already wealthy developer can make additional millions building 
enormously high-priced houses, available only to millionaires, in areas where 
we shouldn't be building houses at all," Beilenson said. 
But supervisors and their aides said that such attacks are unfair and that they 
are on record as supporting the park. And although some beneficiaries of 
upzoning have been campaign contributors, they said their decisions had nothing 
to do with rewarding supporters. 
"The property owners do have rights," Dana said. "I would imagine we would be 
open for lawsuits if we restricted people's rights." 
Dave Vannatta, planning deputy for Supervisor Mike Antonovich, whose district 
includes the oak-robed hills and valleys of Agoura within the recreation area, 
said, "Mike is in support of the creation of the park." 
"What is the county to do?" Vannatta asked. "Is the county to unreasonably 
withhold development?" 
Extending over 155,000 acres from Griffith Park in Los Angeles to Point Mugu 
State Park in Ventura County, the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation 
Area is actually a mosaic of private lands and public preserves, owned by 
local, state and federal parks agencies. 
The National Park Service eventually is to own 37,910 acres in the area, but 
due to budget constraints it has acquired only 16,450 acres during the past 10 
years. 
Moreover, purchases to date have cost the federal government $118 million -- or 
three-fourths of the ceiling of $155 million in the legislation that created 
the recreation area. Congress eventually must raise the limit if acquisition is 
to continue. 
The controversy involves approvals of more intensive development than provided 
in the Malibu-Santa Monica Mountains Area Plan, adopted in 1981 as part of the 
county General Plan, and in the land-use element of the Malibu local coastal 
program. 
The plans control the number of homes or other developments that may be put on 
tracts of land. However, the limits can be relaxed for specific parcels, in 
response to requests from developers who present data to show that their 
proposals will not overburden roads, sewer systems and schools. 
Those requests, which are routine in all parts of the county, are, when granted 
for land in the Santa Monica Mountains, harmful to efforts to acquire parkland, 
congressmen and park advocates say. 
Critics stressed that they are not advocating "downzoning" of mountain tracts 
and that they merely want to hold the line at current building entitlements. 
They say upzoning complicates the daunting task of creating a national park at 
a time of tight federal budgets, and in a place where land prices already are 
among the nation's highest. 
Because of upzoning, they said, acquisition funds don't buy much and developers 
reject lucrative offers, based on current appraisals, because they expect the 
land to become more valuable if they seek easy-to-get upzoning. As a rule, 
parks agencies can only buy land at appraised values. 
Some conservationists see upzoning as a kind of "inverse condemnation," which 
causes blight and crowding to intrude on adjacent public preserves, thus 
denying taxpaying visitors full use and enjoyment of what their tax dollars 
have bought. 
But the main effect is to inflate land prices. And critics say it is being felt 
not only by the Park Service but also by the Santa Monica Mountains 
Conservancy, a state parks agency that is a key player in development of the 
park. 
"It used to be that the limiting factor was that we didn't have any money," 
said Joseph T. Edmiston, the conservancy's executive director. "Now the 
limiting factor . . . is the absence of willing sellers -- and we're not 
talking about willing sellers at less than market value." 
Landowners are so confident they can get upzoning that they, in effect, "laugh 
at" conservancy appraisals, Edmiston said. "There is such a history of 
upzoning," he said "that one would be a fool from just a pure business 
standpoint" not to assume he can get approval for more development from the 
county. 
But Vannatta, Antonovich's planning aide, said critics have exaggerated the 
amount of upzoning that has actually taken place. He said an analysis by county 
planners showed that since 1981, only about 450 more homes have been approved 
in the mountains within Antonovich's district than envisioned by the area plan. 
Supervisors have done "a pretty credible job of sticking to" the plan, Vannatta 
said. 
David Brown, chairman of the Sierra Club's Santa Monica Mountains Task Force 
and vice president of the Las Virgenes Homeowners Federation, questioned 
Vannatta's estimate, saying his own analysis shows about 1,000 more units have 
been approved than provided in the area plan. 
Edmiston contended that the actual number doesn't matter as much as the effect 
of upzoning on developers' expectations. 
Notwithstanding the complaints of Beilenson and others, the supervisors are on 
record in support of the Santa Monicas park. In May, 1988, they passed a 
resolution asking Congress for generous appropriations so scenic tracts would 
not "be lost to development." 
A few months later, they were reminded of this stand as they considered a 
controversial request to upzone the former Renaissance Pleasure Faire site in 
Agoura for a luxury home development, known as Paramount Ranch. 
The National Park Service and the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy had long 
coveted the 320-acre site as an addition to the national recreation area. With 
that in mind, park supporters urged supervisors to approve no more than 103 
homes -- the maximum number for which the tract was zoned, which would keep the 
property more affordable for park acquisition. 
Beilenson and Wilson, among others, warned the supervisors that they would be 
sending the wrong message to Congress if they upzoned the property while the 
government was seeking to buy it. 
But in March, 1989, the supervisors approved development of 150 homes by a 3-1 
vote, with only Supervisor Ed Edelman voting no. 
The decision increased the value of the land by millions of dollars. The 
National Park Service and conservancy had pooled their funds and were prepared 
to pay $14 million -- the amount they anticipated the land would be worth if a 
tract of 103 homes were approved. With approval of 150 homes, the appraised 
value of the land rose to $19 million, although the developers also rejected an 
offer for that amount. 
Brian Heller, a principal in the project, had said the development would be 
uneconomical if he were allowed to build only 103 homes. The supervisors said 
they also were persuaded by the developers that the 103-unit limit was wrong in 
the first place because it had assumed steeper slopes than were actually on the 
property. 
Several individuals and firms involved in the project were longtime supporters 
of the supervisors, and particularly of Antonovich, the area's representative. 
From 1985-89, they contributed $36,995 to the supervisors -- of which $29,495, 
or more than three-fourths, went to Antonovich. 
The $36,995 included $20,600 from the Engineering Technology, Inc. of Sherman 
Oaks, consultants who represented the developers before the Board of 
Supervisors. An additional $15,395 came from Art Whizin, Heller Construction 
and Raiten Development, all principals in the project. 
Vannatta said these contributions had "zippo influence" on Antonovich. He 
pointed out that before the case reached the supervisors, the Regional Planning 
Commission had decided to let the developers build 159 houses. The supervisors 
actually reduced that to 150 at Antonovich's insistence, Vannatta said. 
In another recent case, the supervisors in December approved a development in 
Corral Canyon in Malibu that was to include a golf course, country club and 
housing development. The Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy had tried to buy 
the land for about $8 million, but the developers, Sun Pacific Properties, 
spurned the offer as ridiculously low. 
The decision by the supervisors brought a firestorm of criticism, with 
opponents saying the scenic canyon, with its year-round stream, should not be 
merely a playground for the rich. 
And three lawsuits were filed in an attempt to void the decision, because it 
allowed massive grading of streamside habitat area designated for special 
protection in the Malibu coastal plan. 
The decision was rendered moot last week, when the owner of the land, 
entertainer Bob Hope, suddenly scrapped plans for the golf course and country 
club and agreed to donate 200 acres, including the habitat area, to the Santa 
Monicas park. 
Had the deal with Hope not been struck, however, a controversial land-use 
decision would have benefited political contributors. 
According to campaign records, individuals and firms involved in the Sun 
Pacific project contributed $40,845 to the supervisors over five years -- more 
than three-fourths of that to Dana and Antonovich. About half the money was 
contributed in 1989, when the project was approved. 
In March, 1989, alone, Dana received 22 separate contributions totaling $9,900 
from those associated with the development. 
He got $500 each from Sidney McClue, A. Bruce Robbs and C.B. Robbs, and $1,000 
from A. Bruce Robbs, Jr. -- officials with Sun Pacific. He also got $500 from 
the project's environmental consultants, Planning Consultants Research; $1,000 
from the project architects, Corbin, Yamafuji, &amp; Partners; $1,000 from 
project engineers, Psomas and Associates; and $1,000 from the geotechnical 
engineers, Schaefer Dixon Associates. Six of these contributions came on the 
same day, March 20. 
Then on March 22, Dana received 14 separate contributions of $100 to $1,000 
apiece from attorneys with Latham &amp; Watkins, a big law firm that works for 
Sun Pacific and many other developers. 
Dana said the contributions played no role in the decision. 
He called the golf course an "excellent use of the land." In an interview 
before the announcement of the gift from Hope, Dana described the project as 
"very beautiful" and "ecologically sound." 
Another battle arose over the Currey-Riach project, which involves 1,000 
condominiums and a commercial complex on land bought by developers from Bob 
Hope. 
Two hundred eighteen acres of the site near Malibu Creek State Park were to be 
deeded to a parks agency to be preserved as open space under an approval 
granted by the Regional Planning Commission several years ago. 
But the Currey-Riach developers appealed to the Board of Supervisors and 
persuaded it to let the 218 acres remain as privately owned open space. At a 
hearing in 1983, Antonovich, who represents the area, stunned environmentalists 
with his defense of that decision. He said he was concerned that a parks agency 
might sell rather than preserve the land. 
Then, last August, the developers told the county that they wanted to adjust 
their building plans in a way that would encroach on the open space. The 
supervisors went along, but told the developers they did not want the amount of 
open space significantly reduced. 
Environmentalists once again pleaded to have the open space given to the 
conservancy or the National Park Service. The supervisors once again refused, 
with Antonovich warning that the open space was not secure if in the hands of 
public parks agencies. 
From 1985-89, Currey-Riach Co., its officials and affiliated firms donated 
$45,805 to campaigns of the supervisors, according to a review of campaign 
reports. More than half that amount -- $24,305 -- went to Antonovich. Dana got 
$11,000 and Pete Schabarum $9,500. 
Vannatta, the Antonovich aide, said the contributions weren't a factor in the 
Currey-Riach case. Open space will not be lost, he said. It was just that the 
developer "was particularly unwilling to turn it over" to the public. 
To the north of Currey-Riach, the Park Service in 1985 paid $8 million to 
acquire lower Cheeseboro Canyon in Agoura, whose lovely hills and oak savannas 
have become a favorite of hikers, equestrians and bird-watchers. 
But it turned out that Los Angeles County had an easement across the land, 
which would allow it to bulldoze an extension of Thousand Oaks Boulevard 
through the heart of the canyon. Conservationists and parks officials since 
have asked the county to abandon the easement, but to no avail. 
Vannatta explained: "We have not said for sure that we are going to stick with 
that alignment" for the road. But "our public works department feels that it is 
clearly the best route for a new highway." 
