ARCHBISHOP MAHONY'S LETTER AND ABORTION ISSUE 
Los Angeles Archbishop Roger Mahony's diatribe (letter, April 21) against your 
pro-choice editorial ("A Major March," April 11) as being "based on three false 
premises" is itself based on false premises. 
First, anti-abortion ideas were never the "moral principle upon which our 
country was so firmly founded." "Life from conception" never occurred to the 
Founding Fathers, and was not a part of 18th-Century belief. This nation was 
not founded so the state could post policemen around fertilized eggs at the 
expense of the mother's life and needs. The United States was founded to 
establish freedom, elected government representing the majority political view 
(as every poll shows pro-choice to be), and for protection against religious 
tyranny. 
Second, no matter how many times forced-pregnancy advocates may say otherwise, 
fertilized eggs, zygotes, embryos and early-state fetuses are not "human 
beings," "babies" or "unborn children." They will become human beings later, 
when they develop, but an acorn is not a tree and an egg is not a chicken. 
Meanwhile, women are human beings, and their wombs are not the property of the 
church or the state. Absolutists would even force women to carry to birth 
pregnancies caused by rape -- thus making the rape last for nine months. Is 
such destruction of women victims somebody's idea of "pro-life?" 
Third, while the Archbishop may have his own ideas on jurisprudence, the courts 
have always considered social and public policy in deciding matters of great 
importance. What would happen if Roe vs. Wade were overruled? It would prove 
that the law is nothing but a result-oriented politicized process. Respect for 
both law and government would be destroyed as they became enemies to be hidden 
from, instruments of religious dictatorship. 
Finally, it is not because of legal abortion that "we are not taken seriously 
in the international community." Every civilized nation on earth provides safe 
abortion as an option for its people. I have talked to people from other 
countries. We are ridiculed as a backward, puritanical, silly society, with 
pious, smug moralizing constantly spewing from public figures who presume to 
tell people both here and abroad how they should live their private lives and 
conduct their most intimate affairs. 
It is easy for Archbishop Mahony to sit in his theological ivory tower and hand 
down edicts about abortion. It is a different story for people who have to live 
in the real world and deal with the tough choices that affect their lives. 
MARK LEINWAND 
Woodland Hills 
