SPARE THE ROD 
Earth Day has passed with its anticipated fanfare; citizens have been duly 
galvanized to ecological action and politicians are falling over themselves to 
be environmentally correct. What does this mean to the rod-and-reel fisherman? 
If approached with intelligence and common sense, this increased concern with 
the planet's ecology will mean cleaner water and healthier fish. If pursued 
unwisely, it may significantly disrupt your fishing pleasure. 
A major threat lies with the fact that the environmental movement is made up of 
both level-headed people and extremists. 
Should extremists decide to attack the sport of fishing, their approach might 
be subtle. For instance, no-fishing areas may be created for vague 
environmental reasons, or no-boating (read no-fishing) zones established to 
"protect swimmers and divers." Even legislation as beneficial as the Gill Net 
Initiative creates openings for anti-sportfishing interests. Section 14 of the 
initiative mandates the establishment of four new "ecological reserves" where 
all fishing will be banned. Although there are hundreds of miles of coastline 
where these reserves could be established, an effort is already under way to 
place them in California's most popular fishing areas. 
The harmful nature of these ecological reserves in populated areas is 
significant. They snug up along the coast so their effect is felt most strongly 
by surf fishermen, near-shore anglers (small boaters, kayakers, etc.), and 
those with limited financial means. 
La Jolla already has an ecological reserve, and it has proven to be overly 
restrictive and costly; local fishermen are unable to fish in their own 
neighborhood, and a person wanting to enjoy a once-popular La Jolla grunion 
hunt has to go elsewhere. Now the environmental activists are calling for even 
more reserves, some of which are to include portions of the San Diego kelp 
beds. The closing of popular fishing sites will obviously cause those that 
remain open to become more crowded. With our expanding population, we need more 
recreational fishing areas, not fewer. 
Considering the hundreds of commercial fishing boats and thousands of harbor 
seals and sea lions patrolling the coast, the individual rod-and-reel fisherman 
is not a significant ecological problem; however, he is about to be targeted as 
such. 
CARL B. LIND 
San Diego 
