COLUMN LEFT; 
MILKEN'S PLEA IS A JUNK DEAL; 
HE SHOULD BE OBLIGED TO SPILL THE BEANS TO PROSECUTORS BEFORE SENTENCING. 
I smell a rat in the Milken plea bargain. Under the deal struck for the 
billionaire junk bond king, Michael Milken pleaded guilty to half a dozen 
relatively minor counts of what originally was a megaton indictment. He has 
agreed to pay a fine and restitution of up to $600 million and faces a jail 
term of up to 28 years, but which will actually be in the range of about five 
years. That sounds like a pretty good deal for a man who has admitted that he 
willfully broke the laws designed to protect vulnerable investors. 
But there is more -- much more, I suspect -- to this deal than meets the eye. I 
have read the plea agreement between the government and Milken, and it is one 
very strange document. It seems calculated to conceal, rather than disclose, 
what is really going on here. It raises more questions than it answers. 
For example, the agreement requires Milken to "cooperate with the government" 
in a number of ways. But it expressly postpones this obligation until "after 
the imposition of sentence." And the sentencing is not now scheduled until Oct. 
1, with the possibility -- set out in the agreement -- that it might be 
postponed into 1991. I have never seen a plea bargain like this in my 25 years 
of criminal-law practice. It is bizarre for several reasons. 
First of all, the only real incentive a defendant has to cooperate fully -- to 
dig deep into his memory and files -- is to persuade the sentencing judge that 
he should receive a sentencing discount for helping the government. Yet under 
this agreement, Milken's obligation to cooperate begins only after he has been 
sentenced. Why should he cooperate fully only after he has any real incentive 
to do so? There is a partial, but unsatisfying, answer to this question. Even 
after sentencing, the judge retains some power to reduce the sentence she has 
imposed. But that power is limited to 120 days after sentencing, and judges 
rarely reduce a sentence that they have so recently imposed, except for health 
and other such reasons. 
If Milken wants to get a cooperation discount, he would be well advised to 
begin -- and indeed to complete -- his cooperation before the judge decides on 
his original sentence. And that is just what he is probably going to do, 
despite the words of the agreement. After, all the agreement doesn't prevent 
him from cooperation before the imposition of sentence. It just doesn't compel 
him to begin his cooperation until afterward. Moreover, agreement gives Milken 
an additional argument to present to the judge if he decides to cooperate 
before sentencing: 'Your honor, I had no obligation to cooperate; I decided to 
do it out of the goodness of my heart; and that deserves even more of a 
discount than obligatory cooperation.' 
I also believe that the government knows that Milken intends to cooperate 
before sentencing. If they don't, then they made a very questionable deal for 
themselves and the public. If Milken's cooperation does not begin until 1991, 
the statutes of limitations -- which are 5 years for most crimes -- will have 
run out on many of the crimes about which Milken has detailed knowledge. Milken 
himself pleaded guilty to crimes that took place between 1984 and 1986. By 
1991, much of Milken's information will be stale and useless. The government 
prosecutors obviously know this. And by agreeing to postpone Milken's 
obligation to cooperate, they are either protecting some potential targets of 
prosecution or they have a side deal with Milken under which he will secretly 
begin cooperation before he is obliged to do so. 
If he does cooperate, the public may never learn that fact, unless he 
eventually testifies at a trial. He can provide important leads, documents and 
other information without the public finding out. Such secret cooperation is 
common. We may never even know if he has received a secret sentencing discount. 
The government is allowed -- under the law and practice of the federal courts 
-- to send secret letters to the sentencing judge detailing the defendant's 
cooperation. Because such information is not public, the citizens would have no 
basis for judging whether their interests were adequately served by the deal. 
I hope that the sentencing judge in this case -- a woman with an excellent 
reputation for integrity -- will not accept any secret communications and will 
require that everything be out in the open. The public is entitled to such 
protection, especially in this, the ultimate inside case handled by the 
ultimate inside lawyers. 
Milken's entire career was premised on keeping the public in the dark about 
what really was going on in the junk bond market. His plea bargain should not 
be shrouded in the same veil of darkness. 
