BUSH: NORTH LEGAL CASE SHOULD BE 'UNFETTERED' 
Here are excerpts from President Bush's news conference Friday: 
Contra Aid 
Question: How do you reconcile your efforts to arrange third-country military 
aid for the Contras with the spirit of the ban by Congress on aid to the 
rebels? 
Answer: Look, I am not going to comment on any aspect of the North trial while 
it's in progress. If I even commented on your question, it could prejudice the 
trial that's going to be -- and that would be totally unfair. 
And I would note that of all the material that you seem to be referring to and 
that has been introduced, all the material that was introduced yesterday, 
material you're referring to, has been available to the independent counsel, 
and the Iran-Contra committee, and has been reviewed by them for any special 
significance. So I believe the legal process ought to run unfettered, without 
you or me endangering the trial process that's going on right now. 
Q: I know you don't want to talk about it, but Sen. (Edmund S.) Muskie, former 
Sen. Muskie, who was a member of the Tower Commission, says he was not aware of 
this effort to involve the Hondurans, or of your role. You have said this was 
available to the Tower Commission. Do you want to reply to that, without 
prejudicing Oliver North? 
A: No. 
Q: Mr. President -- . 
A: Because I don't want to prejudice the trial, John. It would be imprudent for 
us to do that, and we're not going to do it. And I stand by my statement about 
the Iran-Contra committee. 
Q: Will you speak after the trial? 
A: That's it. 
Q: Do your statements today mean that you won't discuss this Contra affair? 
A: Yes. It means I've said all I want to say about it! Look, we're having a 
briefing on Alaska. . . . 
Oil Spill 
Q: A number of local officials in Alaska, as well as Alaskan residents, have 
been (calling) virtually since the spill took place for a greater federal role. 
. . . Why has it taken so long to reach this conclusion, and hasn't valuable 
time been lost during your deliberations? 
A: Well, as you may recall, action started immediately. The big thing was to 
get the ship -- stop the hemorrhaging, and get that ship moved. I immediately 
asked the head of the Coast Guard, and the head of the Department of 
Transportation, and Bill Reilly to go up there. . . . There is no demand from 
reasonable people to federalize this operation, and that is not going to be 
done. 
So what have we done? The flow was stopped. . . . And now the cleanup phase 
comes and it's the time when we can step up some activity. So, something has 
gone on. I'm not about to defend the status quo, but there is no desire on our 
part to federalize. 
Q: Mr. President, you've used words like "deadly" and "tragic" and "disastrous" 
to describe this oil spill. During the campaign, you said you were an 
environmentalist. Have you had any opportunity to rescind your commitment to 
drilling in the Arctic Wildlife Refuge as a result of this disaster? 
A: . . . No, I don't think that -- I don't think that you -- that you 
compromise the genuine national security interests of this country. And I don't 
think that you can predicate a sound national energy policy on an aberration 
that seemed to have taken place in Prince William Sound. 
Arms Control 
Q: Mr. President, Mr. Gorbachev today made another arms control gesture, saying 
that he'll stop production of weapons-grade uranium and shut down two plutonium 
plants. What's your response, or reaction? 
A: . . . We'll be ready to react when we feel like reacting, and when we have 
prudently made our -- our reviews upon which to act. . . . I haven't seen it 
analyzed, Lesley, so I honestly can't tell you that I know the full 
significance. 
The Mideast 
. . . We've had two visits here now this week -- (Egyptian) President (Hosni) 
Mubarak, (Israeli) Prime Minister (Yitzhak) Shamir. We'll have a visit, a 
forthcoming visit from (Jordan's) King Hussein. 
And I'm going to give the same assurances to him I've given to Mubarak and 
Shamir, and that is that if I personally can be helpful (in the peace process), 
I want to do it. 
. . . But I would simply say it is not a time where a lot of high-visibility 
missions on the part of the President can accommodate -- can be helpful in the 
process. 
Q: Do you believe the PLO should have a role in independent elections in Israel 
-- West Bank? 
A: I think that the answer is to get on with the elections and I've -- I'd like 
to -- we haven't fully resolved exactly who's going to have a role but I think 
that's a matter to be determined by -- between the parties -- but I'd leave it 
right there. 
Eastern Europe 
Q: Can you tell me if you believe the political agreement reached in Poland 
this week could be a model for political reform throughout Eastern Europe? . . 
. 
A: . . . I would say that the round-table development there in Poland is very 
positive, and I would certainly commend the parties getting together there. I 
go back to when we were there not very many months ago, and many of you were 
with me on that trip. 
I think the situation has moved so fast since that trip that I took a year or 
two ago that it's mind-boggling. . . . 
