GARCIA MARQUEZ SKEWERS A HERO -- AND OUTRAGES A NATION 
Gabriel Garcia Marquez has broken the rule of reverence for historic heroes, 
and the faithful are up in arms. 
Roberto Belandia, secretary of the Colombian Academy of History, was 
fulminating the other day over Garcia Marquez's latest novel. 
"He uses history to darken the prestige of our institutions and heroes," said 
Belandia, a portly man with gray hair and a small bow tie. "It is an 
anti-patriotic book." 
'The Liberator' 
The book, "The General in His Labyrinth," is about Simon Bolivar, South 
America's greatest hero. It depicts "the Liberator" in his latter days as a 
feeble insomniac with bad breath and gas, feverish and often delirious, 
rejected by Colombians and dejected by the failure of his health, the loss of 
his glory and the death of his dreams. 
While such aspects of the Liberator's life are not unknown, they are not 
usually emphasized. Nor is his fickle pattern of womanizing or his bitter 
quarrel with Francisco Santander, the other great hero of Colombian 
independence. But Garcia Marquez insistently probes these and other cracks in 
the legend. 
"He unloads all his anger against the lofty Santander and against Colombia 
itself," Belandia said at the Academy of History, where a Caesar-like bust of 
Bolivar faces the entrance from a colonial courtyard. 
Belandia is not alone in his outrage. Since its publication here in March, "The 
General" has blown up a controversy echoed in hundreds of newspaper columns of 
often-blustery commentary. Enrique Santos, director of the daily El Tiempo, 
said there has been a torrent of letters to the editor, overwhelmingly 
indignant. 
"Of every 10 persons who write, eight are against the book," Santos said. 
Garcia Marquez has further enraged his critics by saying, according to an 
interview granted to the Associated Press, that the profits from the sale of 
"The General" will go toward the creation of a research foundation that will 
set out to write Colombia's true history. 
"All I know is that we know nothing about history in Colombia," Garcia Marquez 
was quoted as saying. 
The controversy has as much to do with Garcia Marquez's legend as with 
Bolivar's. South America's leading novelist and Colombia's only winner of the 
Nobel Prize, "Gabo" is also a strident leftist and close friend of Communist 
Cuba's Fidel Castro. 
For conservative historians like Belandia, writers who defend "The General" as 
"humanized" history are part of an insidious trend. 
"Writers of the left and especially historians, young historians, are intent on 
darkening the prestige of our republican and democratic institutions, attacking 
their creators and organizers," Belandia said. 
Hints of Marquez's Return 
Interestingly, while the novel has triggered a barrage of criticism against 
Garcia Marquez, it has coincided with hints that he may soon return from years 
of self-imposed exile. 
He left Colombia in the late 1970s after hearing that he was under 
investigation for alleged links to anti-government guerrillas. Authorities said 
no proof had been found, but the author's fame and political leanings made him 
a potential lightning rod in Colombia's violent political climate. 
In 1982, Garcia Marquez won the Nobel Prize for Literature, consolidating the 
international prestige that had grown steadily with the publication of "One 
Hundred Years of Solitude," "The Autumn of the Patriarch" and other books. 
After the publication of "The General in His Labyrinth," the author told 
reporters in Mexico, where he lives, that he would like to return to Colombia's 
Caribbean coast, where he was born. Gen. Jaime Guerrero Paz, the Colombian 
defense minister, told reporters here that Garcia Marquez was welcome to come 
home, and the author responded to the invitation with what he called "immense 
emotion" and "enormous gratitude." 
"I would return to Colombia at any moment," he said. He told the Spanish 
magazine Cambio 16 that his next book, also planned as a historical novel, will 
be set in Colombia's 18th-Century Caribbean port of Cartagena. 
Garcia Marquez makes no apology for the controversy over "The General." He 
accuses many Latin American historians of contributing to a Bolivarian myth and 
cult that hides the Liberator's human nature. 
In an interview with the Colombian news magazine Semana, he declared, " 'The 
General' was written, among other reasons, so that they would not keep doing 
such things to the memory of Bolivar." 
Most histories of Bolivar concentrate on his battlefield genius in leading the 
liberation of five South American countries from Spanish colonial rule, 
starting with Venezuela and finishing with Peru and Bolivia, the nation named 
for him. They describe his youth as an aristocratic and wealthy orphan in 
Caracas, his plotting as a young exile in Europe and the Caribbean and his 
crowning glory as president of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador and dictator of 
Peru. 
Bolivar's great dream was to unite the countries he freed in a huge nation that 
would rival the United States in power. The histories tell how that dream 
crumbled in regional rivalries, political differences and personal quarrels. 
But most of them have little detail on Bolivar's final journey to his death on 
the Caribbean coast after the political winds in Bogota turned against him. 
That painful journey, over craggy mountains, down the Magdalena River and 
finally to the city of Santa Marta, provides the story line for Garcia 
Marquez's novel. 
A Pathetic Figure 
In the book, the general sometimes pauses for days, unsure of where he is 
going, as he agonizes in his poverty, sickness and disgrace. He is a pathetic 
figure, sometimes deeply depressed as he lies naked and sweating in his 
hammock, sometimes poignantly nostalgic as he recalls his youth, his women and 
his victories. At one low point, a faithful servant hears him crying in his 
sleep. 
"Hearing the little whines, Jose Palacios thought they were from a stray dog 
taking shelter by the river. But they were from his master," Garcia Marquez 
writes. 
And sometimes, the general is consumed by regret. "I got lost in a dream 
looking for something that does not exist," he laments in the book. Garcia 
Marquez infuriates many readers here by depicting Bogotanos as ungrateful 
persecutors of Bolivar and Colombians as divisive and conspiratorial. 
"Every Colombian is an enemy country," the general says in exasperation. 
Some white Colombians also bridle at Garcia Marquez's notion that Bolivar had a 
strain of African blood "from a paternal great-grandfather who had a son with a 
slave." But the worst insult for many is Garcia Marquez's portrayal of 
Santander as a villain. 
"He treats him in the most contemptuous way, as if he were a liar who has 
betrayed Bolivar," said Gabriel Camargo-Perez, another member of the Colombian 
Academy of History. 
The book does have its prominent defenders. Maria Susana de Ojeda, a historian 
who administers a museum in what was once Bolivar's Bogota home, said in an 
interview that "The General" should be read not as history but as a novel that 
artfully shows the hero as a human being. 
"This is not going to lower the Liberator from the pedestal on which we have 
him," she said. 
At a publication ceremony, former President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen presented 
"The General" as a masterpiece of literature. 
But an editorial in El Tiempo said Garcia Marquez subtly plays up Bolivar's 
dictatorial personality "to create an impalpable comparison with that of Fidel 
Castro." 
'Demented Newspaper' 
Garcia Marquez counterattacked, calling El Tiempo a "demented newspaper." The 
newspaper retaliated with another salvo: "The gigantic vanity of Gabriel Garcia 
Marquez allows only praise, reverence, hand kissing, bows and adulation over 
his works." 
Felix Burgos, sales manager for Garcia Marquez's Colombian publisher, 
acknowledged that the controversy is good for sales of "The General." The first 
edition was 700,000 copies, and Burgos said 80% of it has been sold. Normally, 
a Colombian best seller reaches a maximum of 60,000 copies, he said. 
About 250,000 copies of "The General" were exported to other Andean countries 
where the publisher, Oveja Negra, has distribution rights. Burgos predicted 
that a second edition will come out in June or July. 
Rights for publication in other countries have been negotiated by Garcia 
Marquez's agent in Spain. Burgos said the English translation, to be published 
by Alfred A. Knopf of New York, will probably not be ready for the presses 
until next year. 
FROM 'THE GENERAL IN HIS LABYRINTH' 
"When he returned to the bedroom he found the general at the mercy of his 
delirium. He heard him utter fragmentary phrases that fit into a single one: 
'No one understood anything.' His body burned in a bonfire of fever. . .The 
general himself would not know the next day whether he was talking in his sleep 
or raving while awake, nor would he be able to remember it. It was what he 
called 'my crises of dementia.' " 
"It was the end. General Simon Jose Antonio de la Santisima Trinidad Bolivar y 
Palacios was leaving forever. He had seized from the Spanish dominion an empire 
five times as vast as the Europes, he had directed twenty years of war to keep 
it free and united, and he had governed it with a firm hand until the previous 
week, but at the hour of his departure. . .the only one who was lucid enough to 
know he really was leaving, and where he was going, was the English diplomat 
who wrote in an official report to his government: 'The time he has remaining 
will barley be enough to reach the tomb.' ". 
