MEDICAL DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS 
The Medical Board of California, formerly known as the Board of Medical Quality 
Assurance, licenses physicians and other medical professionals. The board also 
investigates medical complaints and issues disciplinary actions. The most 
serious penalties include license revocation, suspension and probation. 
 These are the Los Angeles County medical professionals subject to serious 
disciplinary actions, according to medical board documents. Actions taken are 
published three times a year; this list covers the period between Aug. 1 and 
Nov. 30, 1989: 
DOCTORS: 
Dante L. Haw, M.D., North Hollywood. Self-use of Demerol. License revoked. 
Effective 10/13/89. 
Joseph Marmet, M.D., Beverly Hills. Conviction for filing false Medi-Cal claims 
in 1987. Failed to comply with several requirements of prior probation under 
extenuating circumstances. Revocation of license stayed, placed on probation 
for five years. Effective 11/2/89. 
Frank Mosler, M.D., Van Nuys. Gross negligence in administering chelation 
therapy and DMSO by injection for treatment of atherosclerosis and a gangrenous 
foot. Repeatedly authorized unlicensed individuals to administer intravenous 
chelation therapy. Revocation of license stayed, placed on probation for three 
years. Effective 9/5/89. 
Geoffrey Louis Phelan, M.D., North Hollywood. Gross negligence and incompetence 
in doing home delivery, lack of usual obstetrical procedures and after-care. 
License suspended for one year but suspension was stayed; placed on probation, 
effective 9/1/87, and could not practice obstetrics for two years. 
Lawrence M. Weiswasser, M.D., Los Angeles. Conviction for murdering his ex-wife 
with a handgun; sentenced to serve 25 years to life in state prison. License 
revoked. Effective 8/11/89. 
ACUPUNCTURIST: 
Michael DiRosario, Santa Monica. Gross negligence in representing to patient 
that sex with him, using marijuana, in addition to acupuncture treatment, would 
alleviate her health problems. Sex with patient. License suspended for 90 days 
but suspension was stayed,placed on probation for 180 days. Effective 11/13/89. 
PHYSICAL THERAPIST: 
Redentor Ricafrente, Los Angeles. Involved in an auto accident insurance fraud 
ring of professionals providing phony billings, reports and claims. Conviction 
for criminal conspiracy. Sentence included jail time. Revocation of license 
stayed, license suspended for six months, placed on probation for five years. 
Effective 8/28/89. 
PODIATRIST: 
Frank J. Garofalo, Canoga Park. Assisted another podiatrist in violating 
podiatry laws by serving as his assistant surgeon in unnecessary surguries, 
providing second opinion consultations and supplying blank second opinion 
consultation forms bearing respondent's signature stamp, which were misused by 
the other podiatrist in his scheme to defraud insurance carriers. Revocation of 
license stayed, placed on probation for three years. Effective 11/24/89. 
RESPIRATORY CARE PRACTITIONERS: 
William B. Johnson, Los Angeles. Conviction for sexual battery causing 
injuries. License revoked. Effective 10/9/89. 
William J. Pennix, Los Angeles. Procured license through false application 
concealing a conviction. License revoked. Effective 8/25/89. 
Chris Savedra, Altadena. Procured license through false application concealing 
a conviction. Revocation of license stayed, placed on probation for four years. 
Effective 10/21/89. 
Patrick A. Singleton, La Puente. Procured license through false application 
concealing convictions. Revocation of license stayed, placed on probation for 
one year. Effective 11/3/89. 
Source: Medical Board of California, Sacramento. 
