ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: FULLERTON; 
GUILTY VERDICT URGED IN COUPLE'S SHOOTING 
The attorney prosecuting Richard L. Rodriguez, 22, who is accused of being 
hired by an Anaheim man to kill his parents, urged the jury to return guilty 
verdicts on all charges as they began their deliberations Tuesday. 
In his closing remarks, Assistant Dist. Atty. Ed Freeman retraced the day when 
Pauline Terry, shot four times in the upper torso, crawled past her husband, 
Owen Terry, who had been shot twice in the head, and dialed 911 for help. The 
shootings occurred Nov. 28, 1988, in their Anaheim home. 
Pauline Terry, 52, was an instructional aide at Riverdale Elementary School in 
Orange and Owen Terry, 56, was an accountant. 
The couple's only son, David John Terry, 19, is also charged with murder and 
attempted murder, and his trial is expected to begin this summer. 
"It's a very emotional case," defense attorney Michael A. Horan told the jury 
Tuesday in Orange County Superior Court. "I told you it would be." 
But Horan argued that Rodriguez was not the killer, that he never even entered 
the Terry's home. His only role, Horan argued, was to act as a middleman to 
fence property stolen from the Terrys. 
Rodriguez was found by police dogs, hiding in a bush at a riverbed near the 
home. Also found there were a handgun, jewelry and a pair of gloves, Freeman 
said. The gun and jewelry belonged to the Terrys, he said. 
Freeman reminded the jury of witnesses' testimony that Rodriguez had been given 
the gun by David Terry to enter the home, shoot the parents and rob them of all 
the jewelry he could get. 
If Rodriguez was fencing property for two of the key witnesses, as the defense 
claims, why didn't he say so when those witnesses testified, Freeman asked. 
"The only reasonable conclusion in this case is that Richard Rodriguez is the 
burglar, robber, murderer of Owen Terry and the attempted murderer of Pauline 
Terry," Freeman concluded. 
Rodriguez is charged with murder, attempted murder, robbery and burglary.LUZ 
VILLARREAL 
