NATION IN TUG-OF-WAR WITH ISLAMIC HERITAGE; 
TURKEY RESISTS RISE OF FUNDAMENTALISM 
Tuncay Gunc, who sells carpets at the Grand Bazaar here, is a thoroughly modern 
Turk. He is a businessman who looks west, and he is a Muslim. 
"I pray," Gunc said the other day, "but only on Fridays -- if I don't have a 
customer." 
Such religious pragmatism, more the rule than the exception in a Muslim nation 
that is also officially secular, is being challenged in Turkey today by small 
but growing numbers of Muslim fundamentalists, seemingly aided by Iran. 
The result is that in major cities throughout the rapidly modernizing country, 
new bouts are being fought in an old tug-of-war between a Middle Eastern 
heritage and official aspirations for a European future. 
For midday prayers Friday, the Muslim Sabbath, Gunc shuns the Beyazit Mosque, 
which is nearest his shop. Fundamentalist students from adjoining Istanbul 
University worship there, and of late they have clashed with the police 
following a court decision that forbade the use of traditional Muslim head 
scarfs by female students. 
Warning to Iran 
Last month, after small, countrywide demonstrations against the ban, Turkey 
formally warned Iran against meddling in Turkey's internal affairs. The dispute 
escalated as Turkey recalled its ambassador "for consultations." Foreign 
Ministry Undersecretary Nuzhet Kandemir charged "the state-controlled Iranian 
radio" and Iranian officials with "issuing provocative and inflammatory" 
statements against Turkey. 
On a recent Friday, a mild and smoggy spring day, prayers at Beyazit were 
uneventful. Lounging riot police officers seemed more interested in the flowing 
tresses and well-cut pants of secularly minded co-eds than in the illegal 
scarfs worn by a dowdy handful of female students making both a religious and a 
political statement. 
Indeed, although they excite great debate at home and no doubt undercut the 
modern face that Turkey likes to show its Western allies, fundamentalist 
inroads are modest in the republic founded as determinedly secular by Kemal 
Ataturk in the 1920s. 
Binnaz Toprak, an Islamic specialist at Bosporus University here, said: 
"Fundamentalism poses no overt threat to Turkey's secular foundations today, 
but the intelligentsia and the military have always seen Islam as a danger. 
Sometimes it has been overstated, as perhaps it is again." 
Still, fundamentalist growth is manifest in Turkey today, and so are the 
alarmed shivers coursing through urban, Western-oriented Turks appalled by the 
results of a decade of religious extremism in next-door Iran. 
President Kenan Evren, a former general, has proclaimed fundamentalism a 
greater threat than communism for a North Atlantic Treaty Organization country 
that has a long land frontier with the Soviet Union. 
Oktay Eksi, a columnist at Hurriyet, one of Turkey's largest newspapers, said: 
"The fundamentalists are dangerous. They are training their faithful to replace 
the secular system they oppose with sharia (Islamic law) without any separation 
of church and state." 
The current round of concern swirls in the aftermath of national municipal 
elections last month in which the fundamentalist Welfare Party, barred from 
local elections in 1984, won 10% of the vote, up from 7.5% in the general 
elections of 1987. 
More telling, in the judgment of Turkish commentators, was the impact of the 
fundamentalist issue on the ruling Motherland Party of Prime Minister Turgut 
Ozal. Motherland, an uneasy coalition of free-market liberals and Muslim 
conservatives, plummeted from 36% of the vote in 1987 to 21.5%. 
At the party's head, the 61-year-old Ozal, rotund and dynamic, is the Janus of 
modern Turkey. Ozal is a devout Muslim whose supporters voted in Parliament to 
allow head scarfs at state schools, and who now promises to secure a reversal 
of the court ban against them. 
He is also a reformer, who has overhauled a musty state-dominated economy in 
the name of liberal free enterprise, and who has formally applied for Turkish 
membership in the European Community. 
"Ozal's head is with the West but his heart is with the fundamentalists," 
columnist Eksi said in a conversation in his office. He and other Turkish 
analysts say Ozal was abandoned at the polls by liberals who reject his links 
with conservative Islam. 
Amid opposition calls for a prompt general election, the politically wounded 
Ozal recently named a new and generally more liberal Cabinet, though he 
retained Muslim conservatives in key ministries. 
Fundamentalists in the Welfare Party want no part of NATO, and they flatly 
reject Ozal's economic vision. They argue that even if a reluctant Europe could 
be persuaded to accept Turkey as a member of the Common Market, it would never 
be as a full partner. 
"Better at the head of an Islamic Common Market than at the bottom of a 
European one," said Bekir Sitki Albayrak, a bearded, 39-year-old architect who 
is deputy leader of the fundamentalist party in Istanbul. "We seek to recover 
the past glories of the days when Turkey was an imperial power." 
Creating a republic with a clear church-state separation from the shards of the 
Islamic Ottoman Empire, Ataturk warred on the symbols and the substance of 
state religion. Among other things, he banned the fez, Turkey's traditional 
Muslim hat, and scrapped the Arabic alphabet 
In addition, Ataturk, who remains Turkey's paramount national hero, borrowed 
from the Swiss civil code, the Italian penal code and the German commercial 
code to build a new legal system. It is illegal in Turkey today to call for the 
establishment of sharia, but the fundamentalists make no secret of their 
displeasure with the present system. 
"Turkey should be governed by a useful law," Albayrak said in an interview at 
his print shop in Istanbul. "Current laws borrowed from other places are not 
useful." 
A poll by an academic in Ankara found that 7% of the respondents favored 
restoration of Islamic law, even though saying so is against the law. 
What particularly alarms Turks wed to the West is the long-range potential of a 
dramatic increase in state-supported Islamic teacher training schools. In 740 
schools around the country, about 250,000 junior high and high school students 
are being trained to become Muslim imams -- religious leaders -- in a country 
with just 60,000 mosques. 
Critics note that only about a third of training school graduates actually 
become Islamic teachers. "In addition," Eksi said, "there are 70,000 youngsters 
living in fundamentalist boarding schools who are being taught that the secular 
state is wrong. The government has failed to control the fundamentalist 
movement." 
Eksi's concerns are common to commentators at all nine national secular 
newspapers in Turkey today. They are rebutted daily by three fundamentalist 
newspapers as part of a 60-year debate over the proper role of religion in 
Turkish society, a debate that shows no sign of abating. 
