$20,000 PAY HIKES QUIETLY OKD FOR COUNCIL DEPUTIES 
Constrained by law from granting themselves large pay raises, Los Angeles City 
Council members have quietly authorized new rates that could boost salaries for 
their top staff members by $20,000 a year. 
Council members said the raises are necessary to keep top aides from leaving 
city government. 
The pay rates, approved unanimously two weeks ago, were buried in the arcane 
language of a routine personnel ordinance covering 26 city departments. The 
rates apply to two categories of council deputies. 
The City Council agenda contained no hint of the raise, and the ordinance was 
passed without debate on March 30. Mayor Tom Bradley signed it into law five 
days later. 
Despite their unity on the matter, several council members interviewed Thursday 
said they are less than happy with the action, because it means their top 
deputies could earn as much as $76,463 a year -- $15,000 more than council 
members get. 
"I'm not going to pay anybody in my office more than I'm getting," said Council 
President John Ferraro. 
It is up to individual council members whether to authorize the raises for 
specific deputies. There was no immediate indication Thursday whether any 
planned to grant the raises. 
The issue is especially delicate now as City Council members are seeking voter 
approval for a June 5 ballot measure that would raise their own pay of $61,522 
by 40% to $86,157. 
The pay raise is tied to a broad ethics-in-government measure, and some council 
members have predicted that voter opposition to the raise is likely to bring 
about the defeat of the entire package. 
Voter approval is needed for council pay raises that exceed 5% a year. However, 
the council has the authority to set the pay levels of its staff members. 
Before the latest staff raise was approved, the top pay allowed for a chief 
deputy was $56,125. Clerks, secretaries and other lower-ranking aides make 
substantially less. 
The money is paid from the $667,658 office budget allocated to each of 14 City 
Council offices. The council president's office, which has extra 
responsibilities, gets $705,513. 
The council has not allocated additional money to pay for staff pay hikes 
allowed under the ordinance. 
"All this ordinance does is give them the ability, within their budgets, to pay 
their people more if they want to," said William McCarley, the council's chief 
legislative analyst. 
The origin of the staff raise proposal remained murky Thursday. McCarley, whose 
office drew up the ordinance, said he could not recall who gave the 
instructions to draft it. "It was kind of one of those things that just 
happened," he said. 
Council members said the idea has surfaced periodically and has been discussed 
informally for years. 
"It is a fact that a lot of good people leave because we don't have the 
capacity to pay them what they can earn in the private sector," said Councilman 
Hal Bernson, who says he lost a valued deputy to private industry several 
months ago. 
"We were limited by budget reasons what we could pay him," Bernson said. "We 
offered to raise him to the highest level we could, and it still wasn't 
enough." 
Bernson said he does not mind paying a subordinate more than he is paid. He 
said other council members are willing to do the same if it means keeping key 
personnel. 
"We need qualified people in order to do our jobs," Bernson said. 
Asked if his own chief deputy has requested a raise, Bernson said, "I would 
imagine he will." 
Councilwoman Joan Milke Flores said, "We want for our offices the very best 
that we can get, and it's important to have continuity as well. 
"I'd like to make more than my deputy, but I don't feel that I should hold them 
back," Flores said. "Frankly, I probably won't use it because I have such a 
large staff and I try to treat everybody fairly." 
Flores said that her staff of 18 in five offices already has overextended her 
budget. 
"I'm really stretched and many of my employees are underpaid," she said. 
Councilwoman Joy Picus said she recognizes the problem but has some difficulty 
accepting the solution. 
"The problem has been that it's hard to hire chief deputies," Picus said. 
But is she willing to pay someone on her own staff more than she makes? "I 
don't love that idea," she said. 
City Council staff members apparently have not rushed to request pay raises. 
Four top deputies interviewed Thursday said they were unaware that they are 
even eligible for the raises. 
"This is really news to me," said Greg Nelson, chief deputy to Councilman Joel 
Wachs. "I usually know just about everything that happens around here, and this 
is a surprise." 
