CALIFORNIA'S MANY CLOGGED ARTERIES; 
PROPOSITION 111 WOULD HELP CLEAN UP TRAFFIC CONGESTION IN OUR COMMUNITIES. 
Pity the morning commuter grinding his teeth at one of those cursed stretches 
where the Antelope Valley Freeway narrows from three lanes to two. And then he 
hears on the radio that the valley's population may soar from 150,000 now to 
half a million in 20 years. Gridlock hell. Only yesterday, it seems, Palmdale 
and Lancaster were hinterlands for a few aerospace workers and desert rats. 
But suddenly there is hope for the harassed freeway crawler. If California 
voters approve Proposition 111 on the June 5 primary ballot, the state will 
have for the first time a comprehensive program for managing and even reducing 
congestion. At the least, the program should absorb growth without allowing 
traffic to deteriorate. But if local governments carry out the planning process 
as they should, Proposition 111's landmark congestion-management element should 
lead to a smoother flow of cars and trucks on many streets and highways. 
The focus so far has been on the proposed doubling of the gasoline tax, raising 
$18.5 billion and getting the state's highway construction program rolling 
again. But Proposition 111 would do more. The unique congestion-management 
program would link transportation for the first time with land-use planning and 
environmental protection. 
Passage of the ballot measure would require local governments to develop their 
own congestion-management plans before they could qualify for any of the $3 
billion in local assistance provided by Proposition 111. They could use the 
money for virtually any project as long as it reduced congestion, offset the 
traffic impact of new development and met air quality standards. 
In the Antelope Valley, housing contractors and local government would have to 
mitigate the effects of dumping additional commuters onto the Antelope Valley 
Freeway headed for jobs in San Fernando or even downtown Los Angeles. This 
could be done through creation of park-and-ride lots, van pools, financing of 
public transit systems and the like. Also, local projects that reduce 
congestion from present base-line levels would get top priority for further 
billions under Proposition 111. And cities no longer could lure tax-rich 
developments while dumping traffic headaches off on their neighbors. 
For decades, local government has been seeking greater flexibility from the 
state in the spending of transportation dollars. Proposition 111 would provide 
it. 
Proposition 111 is not just another freeway program, but a sound strategy for 
giving California a truly comprehensive, workable transportation system. 
