COLUMN ONE; 
NATASHA LEARNS TO BE HERSELF; 
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN 70 YEARS, SOVIET PRESCHOOLS HAVE PUT STRESS ON 
INDIVIDUALITY INSTEAD OF CONFORMING TO THE GROUP. 
As the old turntable played a pre-revolutionary Russian folk song at Preschool 
No. 804, 5-year-old Natasha was doing something that once would have been 
strictly forbidden in a Soviet classroom. She wasn't dancing. 
Because she felt shy, Natasha was allowed to watch quietly as her classmates 
spun and twirled. Just a few years ago, her teacher would have been severely 
rebuked by Soviet school inspectors for allowing a child to sit out a communal 
activity for even a few moments during the average 12 hours per day of 
preschool. 
As the first formal contact between the child and the state, the country's 
nursery schools and kindergartens were long viewed as the place where the 
initial lessons of Communist collectivism were to be indelibly imprinted. From 
the shared playpen on, learning to be a member of a homogeneous community was 
the ideal. 
But for the first time in 70 years here, the accent in preschool is on 
individualism, which can at last be recognized -- even appreciated and 
developed -- thanks to perestroika, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's program to 
socially and economically redefine Soviet society. 
Preschool No. 804 and a second school selected by the Ministry of Education for 
a reporter to visit seem without doubt to be model examples of the new 
thinking. 
In many kindergartens in the Soviet Union, you can still find row upon row of 
identically drawn pictures of flowers or fruit taped to classroom walls -- the 
first introduction to the philosophy of Socialist Realism in art -- and some 
parents complain their children are permitted to go to the bathroom only with 
the group at scheduled times. 
The once-obligatory picture of Soviet founder V. I. Lenin still hangs at 
kindergartener-eye level in many classrooms. 
Nevertheless, the impact of perestroika on preschools is enormous and will have 
a lasting effect on Soviet society, educators here say. 
"Because of the move toward valuing individuals, our human bouquet will be 
richer, more varied. People will have a chance to reach their full potential, 
and they will be more confident in questioning authority," said Leontiva M. 
Fydorovna, director of a Moscow pedagogical college that educates the preschool 
teachers of tomorrow. 
With the new stress on individuality, she added, "a return to a dictatorship 
like the one that existed under (Josef) Stalin grows far less likely." 
Soviet preschools, which are generally combined day care, nursery schools and 
kindergartens, enroll children from the age of 6 months up to 6 years. The 
preschools play such a key role in the Soviet Union's future because they are 
widely attended in this country, where most new mothers return quickly to work. 
In Moscow, for example, about 70% of the city's children attend preschool -- 
about half a million children in 2,760 schools, according to city officials. 
The reason for the high enrollment is largely financial. Although maternity 
benefits were increased recently to two years with a token payment of 35 rubles 
per month ($56 at the official exchange rate), most families say they still 
cannot afford more than a year of maternity leave. 
So in their most highly impressionable years, Soviet children are generally a 
captive audience for the lessons the state wants to teach. 
In Natasha's music class, those lessons clearly reflect modern times here. 
The spirited tune to which the children were learning to bow and dip, for 
instance, would have been forbidden in Soviet classrooms before 1985 because it 
was a Russian song popular among nobility before the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution, 
music teacher Alla S. Avakovya said. 
Another relative innovation: to help the preschoolers settle down, Avakovya put 
a classical record on the phonograph, turned off the lights, flipped on 
blinking colored lights and asked the children to think about nature. 
The music, lights and call on imagination represent a giant step forward here, 
Avakovya said. 
"Before, we followed absolutely strict methods," she recalled after the lesson. 
"For instance, the inspector told me once that the children must always be 
seated while singing, never standing. Such a light show would have gotten me 
into big trouble. But now we even get to listen to rock 'n' roll." 
Across town in Preschool No. 1144, 5- and 6-year-olds were enjoying more 
variety in physical education class because of perestroika. Previously, the 
state suggested about 10 different exercises that the children did over and 
over all year, "no matter how bored the children and the teacher got," recalled 
Irina Y. Zvereva, the school's director. 
Now the teachers can switch exercises at will -- and even make up their own. On 
this day, the children, dressed in black body suits, were trying with varying 
degrees of success to bend and twist their bodies in time to piano 
accompaniment. They then bounced and tossed plastic balls. 
"They can use the balls every day if they want. Before, the state mandated just 
once a week," Zvereva said. 
Later the same class was instructed to make clay birds. Most of the birds had 
multicolored feathers and looked much the same. But one, made by 5-year-old 
Kostya, stood out -- it was polka-dotted. 
"Look at this, children," said the teacher, holding it aloft. "Isn't it lovely 
and original?" 
Zvereva said that five years ago, teachers at Preschool No. 1144 treated 
children "just like little soldiers. All together they went to eat, to wash 
their hands, to go to sleep." 
"The passive children were easily overlooked, all but forgotten. And the 
teachers themselves were afraid to vary even slightly from all the regulations 
we got," she said. "Now we are trying to appreciate each individual." 
Other changes: 
* Desks no longer have to be lined up neatly in straight rows. Sometimes they 
are arranged in circles or small groups. And some classrooms even have couches 
where children are allowed to lounge during story time. 
* There is less emphasis on sitting straight, keeping elbows off tables or 
standing when a teacher enters the room. "We are trying to teach our 
student-teachers the importance of being warm, and we have even introduced the 
concept of children's rights, which was greeted with great surprise," said Nina 
Volkava, a teacher at the pedagogical college for 13 years. 
* There is even very tentative, discussion of religion, once the big taboo. "We 
can talk about religion as history now, not simply in the context of atheism. 
But about the concept of God, no -- that is still off limits," said Lydia 
Solnishniya, the director of Preschool No. 804. 
Fydorovna, director of the pedagogical school, said that now the focus is on 
trying to understand a child's behavior instead of simply molding it. "It's 
harder for the teachers. It was simpler just to give a single command to 
everyone," she noted. "But in the long run, we believe, it makes the children 
calmer, easier to handle." 
Not that there are no complaints about the Gorbachev era. The primary one is 
that schools are suffering from the same shortages that have afflicted most of 
the rest of Soviet society. 
At Preschool No. 804, teachers make or collect most of the toys, which are 
primarily brightly colored paper shapes, collages, knitted objects and even 
empty soap boxes and shampoo bottles. At other schools, some parents complain 
that teachers limit the amount of time children can play with toys to cut down 
on the chance of the scarce playthings being lost or broken. 
College instructor Volkava said the shortages affect the child from an early 
age. "If you have the feeling that someone can take the only toy you have, then 
you learn to protect yourself, not to share," she said. 
Another major gripe among educators is that the pay for preschool teachers is 
so low that it fails to attract the best instructors and leads to chronic 
teacher shortages. 
Starting salary for a beginning preschool teacher who has graduated from an 
institute is 130 rubles a month ($208). The average Soviet salary is about 250 
rubles a month ($400). 
Nevertheless, the teachers seem generally happy, educators say. 
"Before perestroika, it was not only the children's creativity that was 
limited. It was also the teachers,' " said preschool director Solnishniya. "The 
work may be harder, but it is also more interesting." 
The children themselves have a sense that things are different, even if they 
aren't quite sure what. Six-year-old Andrei, a sandy-haired boy playing outside 
Preschool No. 804, had just a hint of uncertainty in his voice as he told a 
visitor what perestroika meant. 
"It is going to help us turn our bad life into a good one," he said. 
