RING SMUGGLED TONS OF ASIAN POT, U.S. ALLEGES 
Several Orange County residents, including a Tustin attorney, are among 12 
people indicted in the alleged smuggling of at least 26 tons of marijuana to 
the West Coast from Southeast Asia, U.S. Atty. Robert C. Bonner announced 
Thursday. 
Federal agents said the ring transported the drug in several shiploads between 
1984 and 1987, usually transferring their illicit cargo to smaller vessels 
before landing in San Francisco. 
The 30-count indictment, which also alleges several conspiracies to defraud the 
Internal Revenue Service and violate federal tax laws, was unsealed late 
Wednesday after the arrests of five of the defendants. 
A sixth, Tustin attorney Neil C. Pearson, 50, surrendered to federal 
authorities Thursday morning. All were arraigned Thursday afternoon before U.S. 
Magistrate Venetta Tassopulos in Los Angeles. 
At the request of Assistant U.S. Attys. Steven D. Clymer and Russell Hayman, 
Tassopulos set bail for Pearson at $1 million. Pearson's attorney, James 
Riddet, called the amount an "absolute outrage" and said his client had made 
himself available to federal prosecutors almost from the beginning of the 
18-month investigation. 
According to the indictment, former Maui resident William Uhler, 39, who in 
1986 reportedly gave a Cypress address, and Eugene LaForce, 53, of Cave 
Junction, Ore., organized and directed at least four major marijuana shipments. 
Uhler, LaForce, longtime Maui resident Walter M. Hillinger, 56, and others 
allegedly brought eight tons from Thailand aboard a ship named the Lloyd B. 
George in September, 1984, transferring it off the coast of Mendocino County to 
two smaller vessels that carried it to San Francisco. 
Another seven tons of marijuana allegedly was brought to California in 1985 
aboard the Lady Fame, an 80-foot oil supply vessel whose ownership reportedly 
was traced to a partnership that included several names from the obituary 
columns of the Orange County Register. Federal authorities said the ring went 
to great lengths to cover up ownership of the vessels. 
In 1987, the prosecutors said, Uhler, LaForce and the others smuggled 11 more 
tons of marijuana from Thailand to a point between Hawaii and Tahiti, where it 
was put aboard another vessel, the Natalie Rose, and carried to the West Coast. 
In addition to the drug charges, Uhler, Pearson, Dovie M. Briggs, 56, a Cypress 
income tax preparer who is Uhler's mother-in-law, and Terry P. Dee, 47, of Seal 
Beach, former owner of Faber Laboratories, a Fullerton business that tested 
crankcase oil, were indicted on federal income tax charges. 
Others indicted were Larry A. Doyle, 49, of Newport Beach; Charles E. Larsen, 
45, of Costa Mesa; Martin E. Levine, 49, of New York City and San Francisco; 
Michael A. Tzouanakis, 35, of Costa Mesa; Walter M. Ulrich, 39, of Sunset 
Beach, and Dennis Tobin, 33, of Morro Bay. 
Times staff writer George Smith contributed to this article. 
