MURRAY SHAKES UP GIANTS, 6-2 
A few comments from the Dodgers on a series of four earthquakes, the strongest 
measuring 5.4 on the Richter Scale, that jolted the Bay Area just before 7 a.m. 
Wednesday: 
 -- Tim Crews: "Scared the heck out of me. I called Jay Howell and said, 'Man, 
this don't cut it, it just don't cut it.' " 
 -- Tim Belcher: "Woke me up, and couldn't go back to sleep. I hated it. Just 
hated it." 
 -- Eddie Murray: "Slept right through it." 
It's easy to guess which one hit two homers against the San Francisco Giants 
Wednesday afternoon -- one left-handed and the other right-handed. 
"Hey, we get enough of those things," Murray said about earthquakes, not home 
runs, after leading the Dodgers to a 6-2 victory and a sweep of this two-game 
set at Candlestick Park. 
If he sounded calm, it was because he was forced to be. 
It was a day that began with a couple of Dodgers so frightened by the 
earthquakes that they left their downtown hotel for the ballpark four hours 
before the game. The earthquakes reportedly caused no injuries and minor 
damage. 
The day ended with relief pitcher Crews, whose third child was born Wednesday 
morning, nearly blowing it all by loading the bases in the ninth inning for 
Will Clark and Kevin Mitchell. He retired both. 
In between, three Dodger pitchers, including Crews, gave up 14 hits but were 
saved by some spectacular fielding. If not for a couple of diving stops by 
shortstop Alfredo Griffin, and throws by left-fielder Kal Daniels and second 
baseman Willie Randolph that resulted in runners being tagged out by catcher 
Mike Scioscia at home plate, well . . . 
"We don't make those plays, we are still playing," Griffin said. 
Through it all, the only one not blinking was Murray, who added a first-inning 
single and is hitting .333 in 10 games, with three homers and nine runs batted 
in. So, chalk up this victory -- one that made the Dodgers 5-3 on the road -- 
to one of the National League's newest veterans. 
"You can see the difference in Eddie this year," said Randolph, who watched 
Murray for many seasons when they were in the American League before both 
joined the Dodgers last year. "This is the Eddie I know -- very relaxed, 
waiting on pitches, not trying to do everything himself. He is used to the 
league now, and he's making the pitchers come to him. 
"And when that happens, well, I've seen Eddie do serious damage." 
Rookie Eric Gunderson and Randy O'Neal also have seen it. With two out in the 
third inning and the score tied, 1-1, Murray hit Gunderson's first pitch high 
over the left-field fence. Because Gunderson is a left-hander, the 
switch-hitting Murray was batting right-handed. 
Four innings later against O'Neal, with one out and the Dodgers protecting a 
4-2 lead, Murray skied an 0-1 pitch over the right-field fence. This time 
Murray was batting left-handed. 
It was the ninth time in his 14-year career that Murray has homered from both 
sides of the plate in the same game. That is one shy of the record of 10, held 
by Mickey Mantle. 
"That's nice, but I think other people can do that," Murray said. "You have to 
get lucky, to get your pitches on days when both a lefty and a righty are 
pitching." 
Murray thinks a more insurmountable record is one he holds as the only player 
to hit homers from both sides of the plate on consecutive days. It happened May 
8 and 9, 1987 in Chicago. "That's going to be the tough one," he said. "That's 
the one I'm proud of." 
Murray said that after spending last season seeing pitchers for the first time, 
this season every pitch is looking much clearer. 
"It's just a matter of getting comfortable seeing people," he said of his quick 
start. "Sometimes you find something you can pay attention to, sometimes you 
can't. But the more you see people, the better off you are." 
Manager Tom Lasorda agreed with those reasons. 
"Like I said before spring training, expect Eddie to do much better this year 
because he knows the pitchers better," Lasorda said. "Also, whenever a guy 
comes over in a trade, he has a tendency to try too hard, to try and show 
everybody that they made a good trade. A guy's second year is always better." 
In sealing the victory for Dodger starter Mike Morgan, who allowed two runs on 
10 hits in 6 1/3 innings, Murray also made it easier for Crews. 
Crews had just gotten off the phone with his wife, Laurie, in Orlando, Fla., 
early Wednesday morning, having just learned of the birth of son Travis Blair, 
and was sitting on his bed when it shook. 
He called Howell, and they hurriedly packed their bags and left the hotel. They 
arrived at Candlestick just after 8 a.m., even though the game was not supposed 
to start until 12:35 p.m. 
"No way was I staying in a high-rise hotel with all of that stuff going on," 
Crews said. 
Later, he found himself pitching in the eighth inning with the Dodgers leading, 
5-2. He gave up two hits to start the eighth before retiring three Giants on 
two foul balls and a strikeout. Then in the ninth, with one out, he walked 
pinch-hitter Gary Carter and allowed singles to Brett Butler and Kevin Bass, 
loading the bases for Clark. 
But he struck out Clark on five pitches and retired Mitchell on a foul out to 
end the game. The save, Crews' first, equaled his number of major league saves 
for the last two seasons. 
"When it got down to it, I wasn't thinking anything," Crews said. "I just threw 
it up there and hoped they would hit my best pitch." 
Said Clark, whose Giants are off to the worst home start in San Francisco 
history at 0-5: "We have to start playing better, pure and simple. We get teams 
down, we don't put them away. We get runners on base, we don't get clutch hits. 
End of story." 
Dodger Notes 
Shortstop Alfredo Griffin's diving stop of Terry Kennedy's ground ball in the 
fourth inning, resulting in a force out and saving a run, may eventually hurt 
the Dodgers. Griffin said his back began hurting after the game. Already this 
spring, he has suffered from back spasms. Griffin's back apparently didn't hurt 
during the game, as he made two other sprawling catches to save runs. . . . Kal 
Daniels had the Dodgers' first outfield assist at home plate in the first 
inning, throwing out Kevin Mitchell by five steps to end the inning. 
Second baseman Willie Randolph had another assist at the plate in the fourth 
inning as he took Juan Samuel's throw from center field and easily threw out 
Kennedy to end another inning. . . . Hubie Brooks finished the Dodger scoring 
with a ninth-inning home run off reliever Ernie Camacho, Brooks' first homer 
since opening day. Brooks doubled in the fifth inning but tripped while running 
toward third base. He had to crawl back to second base. "Embarrassed as hell," 
Brooks said of the play, which ended with him lying on second base, covering 
his head with his hands. 
Jeff Hamilton may attempt to return to third base today to test his sore 
shoulder. . . . Jim Gott, recovering from last year's elbow surgery, has 
advanced to the point where he could throw batting practice as soon as today. . 
. . Dave Anderson, longtime Dodger infielder who signed with the Giants as a 
free agent last winter, said he made the decision after the Dodgers would not 
change their offer of $420,000 for one season after the Giants had offered him 
$1.1 million for two seasons. 
