COMPROMISE REACHED OVER USE OF NEON SIGN; 
HOLLYWOOD: THE CHURCH OF SCIENTOLOGY AGREES TO PUT A 23-BY-8-FOOT SIGN ON A 
POLE NEXT TO THE CHATEAU ELYSEE HOTEL TO QUELL NEIGHBORS' PROTESTS. 
The Church of Scientology has reached a compromise with some of its neighbors 
over a large neon sign it wants to install on its landmark Chateau Elysee hotel 
in Hollywood. 
As a result, the 23-by-8-foot identification sign probably will be placed on a 
pole next to the hotel instead of on the roof of the 62-year-old building, as 
the church had been trying to do for at least three months. 
That original proposal had prompted opposition from some city officials and 
neighbors, who said such a big, bright sign would create a "visual blight" and 
deface one of Hollywood's most distinguished buildings. 
The Hollywood-based church uses the castle-like structure as a "celebrity 
center," a facility to house celebrities and church members from around the 
world when they visit Scientology headquarters. The sign, designed to read 
"Church of Scientology Celebrity Centre International" would be visible from 
the Hollywood Freeway and other nearby streets. 
The church agreed to the compromise at a hearing Wednesday before the city's 
Cultural Heritage Commission, after commission members said they would not 
approve the rooftop sign because of the building's status as a historic and 
cultural monument. The massive hotel at the corner of Franklin Avenue and 
Tamarind Street was built in 1928 to resemble an 18th-Century French castle. In 
its heyday it served as a home to such celebrities as Clark Gable, Cary Grant, 
Humphrey Bogart and Ginger Rogers. 
During the hearing at City Hall, Dr. Amarjit Marwah, commission president, 
noted that the church had been told at an earlier hearing to find a compromise. 
After a church planning executive, Kirk Steele, said the church still favored 
the original rooftop sign, Marwah expressed his disapproval. He said he favored 
an artist's rendition showing the sign on a pole just behind the hotel, on the 
roof of an adjacent underground garage. 
"This looks like a workable solution that would go through (the city approval 
process) very well," Marwah said. After Steele and a lawyer for the church 
balked, saying they would have to go back to the same city planners who had 
already given the sign their conditional approval, Marwah said: "I think the 
pole sign is the only one which seems feasible. I want to settle this today." 
"The commission wants to make sure the historic fabric of the building is kept 
intact," Marwah told the church officials. "Your message will still be there, 
it just won't be such a loud message." 
Rodney Punt, assistant general manager for the Cultural Heritage Commission, 
referred to the original sign as "McDonald's-like" because of its height, color 
and prominence on the building. The compromise, he said, "serves the purpose, 
but it's not so glaring." 
The church officials finally agreed. The sign needs the approval of city 
planners, transportation engineers and building and safety officials, but 
Marwah said he would write to each department and urge them to support the 
compromise. 
Shirley Young, president of the Church of Scientology's Los Angeles chapter, 
said: "It's a pleasure to bring this to a compromise that makes everybody 
happy." 
Roe Estes, zoning chairman of the Hollywood Hills Improvement Assn., which 
claims more than 200 members, was one of two people at the hearing who opposed 
the sign. "We would be happiest with no sign whatsoever," Estes said afterward. 
"But I'm delighted they are not destroying the integrity of the chateau-esque 
building." 
Other residents, as well as the 520-member Hollywoodland Homeowners Assn., also 
opposed the rooftop sign. But more than a dozen other neighbors wrote city 
officials in support of the church, saying it has spent millions to renovate 
the hotel and that they don't mind the sign. 
The Scientology Church bought the hotel about 17 years ago, after it had been 
turned into a convalescent home and had fallen into disrepair. 
