ANOTHER MISTRIAL MOTION IS DENIED IN NANCY HOOVER HUNTER FRAUD CASE 
U. S. District Judge Earl B. Gilliam on Wednesday denied another motion for a 
mistrial made by Nancy Hoover Hunter's lawyers, who complained that they had 
just received 197 pages of documents that prosecutors should have turned over 
to them by last March 15. 
Gilliam resumed Hunter's fraud trial Wednesday after recessing it for a day 
Tuesday to deal with a continuing dispute between the prosecution and defense 
over the document issue. Prosecutors said they have now given Hunter's lawyers 
all notes and memoranda regarding investigators' interviews with both scheduled 
and potential witnesses at the trial. By law, defense attorneys are entitled to 
notes pertaining to actual witnesses. 
Hunter is charged with 234 counts of fraud, income-tax invasion and conspiracy 
stemming from her role as a top executive at the once-glamorous La Jolla 
investment firm of J. David &amp; Co. The firm was headed by J. David (Jerry) 
Dominelli, who is serving a 20-year prison sentence for his part in a huge 
Ponzi scheme, in which investors were bilked out of more than $80 million. 
Hunter, the former mayor of Del Mar, was Dominelli's live-in companion during 
the firm's heyday. 
Her trial resumed with the introduction of a key prosecution document -- a note 
Hunter allegedly wrote to Dominelli, apparently warning him not to use an 
accounting practice that could result in their activities being tracked. 
Handwritten Note 
The handwritten note, which was displayed on a screen for the jury, reads: "I'm 
not eager for J.D. Securities to clear your Interbank trades. They will then be 
able to construct their own version of your track record. It could be bad." 
The note apparently refers to J. David Securities, a J. David &amp; Co. entity 
headed by Hunter. 
Keeping J. David &amp; Co.'s dismal investment track records from public 
scrutiny as well as the scrutiny of the firm's employees was a key to the 
firm's continued ability to lure investors. The prosecutors, S. Gay Hugo and 
Stephen P. Clark, have alleged that Hunter was aware of the fraud, was 
integrally involved in it and helped to create the false track records that 
duped investors and were kept from lower-level employees. 
Hunter's lawyers hope to lay the blame solely on Dominelli and convince the 
jury that she, like other employees, was unaware of his illegal activities. 
The handwritten note was identified Wednesday by Jane Sinclair, a prosecution 
witness who worked for J. David Securities from 1980 until the time of its 
collapse in 1984. Sinclair said she recognized the handwriting as Hunter's. 
Photocopying Statements 
Sinclair, who did bookkeeping for J. David Securities and was on its board of 
directors, also testified that, despite the fact that her job was to prepare 
the monthly investor account statements, she encountered Hunter one day 
photocopying a half-inch stack of statements for accounts she (Sinclair) had 
never heard of. 
Sinclair said the account statements showed returns for investors that were 
"far more favorable" than the ones she handled. She said she questioned Hunter 
about it and Hunter responded that the investors got better returns because it 
was a separate, bigger pool with lower fees. 
On cross-examination by defense attorney Robert S. Brewer, Sinclair said that, 
during the entire time she worked for J. David Securities, she thought that 
both Dominelli and Hunter were "honorable" people. 
The trial resumes today with further cross-examination of Sinclair. 
