COLUMN ONE; 
FEW VIET EXILES FIND U.S.RICHES; 
REFUGEES HAVE FORGED AN ENDURING STEREOTYPE OF ECONOMIC AND INTELLECTUAL 
OVERACHIEVEMENT. BUT MOST LIVE IN POVERTY, WITH SIGNIFICANT LANGUAGE AND 
CULTURAL HANDICAPS. 
Fifteen years after the fall of Saigon, which triggered an exodus of more than 
1 million refugees, Vietnamese in the United States are still suffering from 
the legacy of defeat and the pain of exile. 
They are a diverse people whose ranks include former generals and former 
peasants, spies and schoolteachers, physicians and re-education camp prisoners, 
fishermen and air traffic controllers. They have brought to America the 
vitality and the scars, the ambitions and the deep divisions of their homeland. 
A few have become millionaires. Many more have earned doctorates, forging a 
stereotype of economic and intellectual overachievement. Yet this image is 
largely based on those who fled South Vietnam just before or shortly after 
Saigon surrendered on April 30, 1975: the nation's Westernized, highly educated 
elite. 
In fact, most Vietnamese refugees in the United States today live in poverty. 
Most arrived after 1978 with significant language, cultural and educational 
handicaps. Many remain dependent on welfare, stuck in minimum-wage jobs or 
consigned to an exploitative underground economy. Last year, refugee 
unemployment was twice the national average. 
The gap is glaring in Orange County, home to Little Saigon, the nation's 
largest Vietnamese community. Among the 100,000 people who have flocked to the 
neighborhoods along Bolsa Avenue are such wealthy exiles as former Premier 
Nguyen Cao Ky -- and thousands of refugees on welfare. 
Tuong Duy Nguyen, executive director of Vietnamese Community of Orange County 
Inc., a social service agency, said: "Americans drive by Bolsa Avenue, and it's 
so thriving, so prosperous, that that's their image of Vietnamese refugees. 
It's not true. Most refugees are still living under the poverty line." 
After 15 years, Vietnamese-Americans of all backgrounds continue to describe 
themselves as refugees, not immigrants. And many say they are homesick. 
"Most of our people have a hidden depression," said Garden Grove businessman 
Phong Duc Tran. "We were uprooted suddenly from our country and had to come 
here. The Koreans, the Japanese, they planned for years to come here; they 
wanted to come here. 
"We didn't." 
Indeed, the collapse of Saigon, though widely predicted, came much more 
suddenly than most South Vietnamese dreamed. Of the 1975 arrivals, 61% had less 
than 24 hours to prepare to leave. 
Tales of well-connected South Vietnamese scrambling aboard U.S. helicopters in 
1975 with suitcases stuffed with gold are probably exaggerated. Though some did 
take family jewelry or gold, their only portable asset, many more fled with 
nothing but their clothes. 
What the first refugees did bring, however, was education, class and 
connections. Sociologists quickly discovered that the 130,000 refugees who fled 
in 1975 tended to be well-to-do (more than 40%, for example, had owned 
automobiles in Vietnam) and Westernized. Many had studied abroad or had U.S. 
friends who helped them get settled. 
Most important, the 1975 arrivals were far better educated than their 
countrymen. Forty-eight percent had university degrees, whereas less than 1% of 
the Vietnamese population as a whole did. And three-quarters spoke at least 
some English. 
Armed with these advantages -- and an outpouring of sympathy from the U.S. 
public, which has not been sustained -- the first Vietnamese adjusted 
relatively quickly. Though many worked painful stints as janitors and 
dishwashers, most soon landed middle-class jobs. Men and women worked day and 
night, shared housing and pooled their earnings. By the early 1980s, federal 
tax returns show, household income of the 1975 arrivals had equaled the U.S. 
average. Many of their children were valedictorians. 
But such refugees account for roughly one-third of the Vietnamese population 
now in the United States. The others have less education, less upward mobility 
and less hope -- characteristics that prompted one scholar to compare them to 
the permanent U.S. underclass. 
In California, where more than 40% of Southeast Asian refugees have settled, 
more than half were still dependent on welfare in 1989. 
"There are some tremendous successes, and tremendous failures as well," said 
Walter Barnes, chief of refugee and immigration programs for the California 
Department of Social Services. "In the middle of that lies a bunch of people 
who are trying to do their best." 
The later arrivals tended to be young, rural people who spoke little English 
and had few skills of value in the West. For example, a survey of Southeast 
Asians in San Diego County found that the average 1975 arrival was a high 
school graduate but that the average 1980 arrival had not completed sixth 
grade. 
These later "boat people" included Vietnamese who saw no reason to flee their 
Communist countrymen in 1975, then changed their minds; ethnic Chinese who were 
pushed out of Vietnam by the new regime; young Vietnamese men fleeing 
conscription into the wars against China and Cambodia; Cambodian survivors of 
the killing fields, and Laotians, including Hmong and other hill tribes. 
They had survived not only war, but often prison camp, persecution, genocide, 
rape by Thai pirates and the numbing degradation of refugee camps. Nearly half 
a million entered the United States in 1979-82. 
"They arrived en masse, overwhelming existing resettlement programs," said 
Ruben G. Rumbaut, professor of sociology at San Diego State University. "And 
they arrived at the worst possible time -- during the highest inflation in 
memory, followed by the worst recession in 50 years." 
Not surprisingly, the boat people have stayed poorer for longer than the first 
refugees. In San Diego during the recession of 1983, for example, Rumbaut found 
that 75% of all Southeast Asian refugees were living below the poverty line, 
but just 25% of the Vietnamese who arrived in 1975 were. 
Today, about 1.2 million Southeast Asians live in the United States, including 
250,000 children born here. Most statistics tend to lump them as a group, 
masking important differences. A closer look, however, shows that post-1978 
arrivals -- and in some cases their children -- are not climbing the economic 
ladder nearly as fast as their predecessors. After a decade in this country, 
some are still stuck near the bottom rung. 
For example, a 1988 federal survey found that just 35% of all Southeast Asian 
refugee households were fully self-supporting. The rest were at least partially 
dependent on welfare, according to the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement's 
1989 report to Congress. And the situation is not improving. 
"The majority of the new arrivals don't speak English very well, that's for 
sure, and they don't have marketable skills," said Tuong Duy Nguyen, who argues 
that English-language and job-training programs are inadequate and geared to 
produce only short-term results. "Nearly 100% get entry-level jobs, but they 
have no hope for promotion because they have no skills. . . . In the long run, 
these people will definitely go back to the welfare system." 
Contributing to welfare dependency is a rising divorce rate. Though statistics 
are scanty, one Vietnamese social worker estimates that divorces have tripled, 
the product of long separations, shifts in traditional sexual roles and more 
lenient divorce laws. California welfare officials have also noticed an 
increase in the number of single-parent refugee households. 
To be sure, the later arrivals are slowly improving their lot. For example, 
household income of those who arrived between 1976 and 1979 swelled 46% between 
1982 and 1986, to $12,907, IRS returns show. But they still lagged behind the 
1975 households, whose 1986 income was $17,861. 
"The point to be made . . . is these groups are improving their status at 
different rates," said Rumbaut, himself a Cuban refugee and co-author of a new 
book titled "Immigrant America: A Portrait." 
"The gap widens," Rumbaut added. "And you can see social class differences not 
only between ethnic groups, but among them." 
The gap has sparked subtle tensions within the Vietnamese community. 
Over lunch in a chic French-style restaurant in Little Saigon, a proud and 
educated man from an upper-class background complained that the latest refugees 
are lazy and abuse U.S. generosity. 
"When I left in '75, I didn't know what my future was," said the man, who now 
owns a flourishing business and drives a Mercedes-Benz. "I just wanted freedom. 
And I accepted to die at sea. But now the Vietnamese who come here, they know 
they'll have welfare, they know they'll have an easy life. . . . They are not 
prepared to work." 
The man offered an explanation that is often given by members of the fiercely 
anti-Communist exile community. The latecomers, he said, have been corrupted by 
life under the Communists. 
Others say the new arrivals have simply been worn down by more than 30 years of 
war, followed by 15 years of poverty and repression. 
Quynh N. Nguyen of Lakewood, a former South Vietnamese navy captain who fled in 
1975, blamed the Communists for what he sees as the latecomers' tendency toward 
demoralization and dependency. 
"I talk to my friends and relatives who came later," Nguyen said. "They are 
exhausted, mentally and physically, and do not have the will to live." 
Recent arrivals are aware of such attitudes and resent them. 
"The latecomers, they say, 'Those who came in '75, they stick their nose in the 
air,' " said Christine Nguyet Pham, who arrived in 1989 and is a caseworker for 
Orange County Refugee Community Resources Opportunity Project Inc. The 1975 
arrivals, however, note that they worked hard to create the cultural comforts 
that the later arrivals enjoy: Vietnamese restaurants and markets offering the 
tastes of home, cafes to relax in, books and newspapers, even 
Vietnamese-speaking job counselors. And, they note, there were no well-placed 
relatives to help them get on their feet. 
But if the 1975 arrivals seem elitist, some of the latecomers, who tend to have 
less experience of the West, often have wildly unrealistic attitudes about life 
in America, according to several recent arrivals from Vietnam. 
Many denizens of Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, read letters from rich 
relatives and dream of joining them in a life of ease, said Tien Tat Chu, a 
former re-education camp inmate who arrived in Huntington Beach in January. 
"In Saigon, they say that even the lamppost wants to go to America," he said. 
After years of war and deprivation, Pham said, some recent arrivals want only a 
chance to enjoy life. She remembered friends promising that when they got to 
America, they would take ballroom dancing lessons. 
"In Vietnam, they have the wrong vision of the lifestyle here," Pham said in 
Vietnamese. "They only see what is sent back -- money, gifts, technology, 
abundance. Those in Vietnam only see the enjoyment and not the work." 
Indeed, she said, Vietnamese accustomed to a slower, more social way of life 
are unprepared for the hustle and bustle of U.S. capitalism, which she called a 
"work, work, work machine." 
"When they get over here, their relatives work all day and don't have time to 
explain to them what it takes to survive here," Pham added. "And the life here 
is different -- as if you've been plopped down from the sky." 
A growing number of scholars argue that the myth of the miraculous Southeast 
Asian refugee has made life more difficult for the struggling majority. Steven 
J. Gold, assistant professor of sociology at Whittier College, the scholar who 
compared the plight of the newly arrived refugees to that of the U.S. 
underclass, said that stereotypes about Asian immigrants as "model minorities" 
imply that those who are not instant successes have only themselves to blame -- 
even though Vietnamese refugees tend to be highly motivated. 
"It tends to downplay the real problems facing the majority of members of the 
group," Gold said. 
Kristy Tran, a 19-year-old Golden West College student who arrived in 1979, is 
one of those struggling. When she was 5, her father was arrested by Communist 
soldiers. He never returned. At 10, her mother sent her off by boat with two 
cousins. Now she studies, works and lives in a rented room so she can save 
money to send back to Vietnam. 
"Sometimes I think I'm weak, that I cannot handle the pressure, that I just 
want to forget the people in Vietnam and my mom," she said. "But I have to 
support them. Fifty dollars here can support my mom and my brother for a month. 
I send them about $600 a year." 
Most Americans, Tran said, think Vietnamese are rich, and some are jealous. 
"Sometimes I go to the gas station, and American guy comes up to me and ask me 
for a dollar because he thinks I have money," she said. "Americans only base 
(their attitudes) on the action of one part of the community and judge all of 
them." 
To some Americans, Vietnamese refugees are living symbols of a humiliating 
military defeat. Some Orange County combat veterans interviewed recently, for 
instance, said they resent the presence and affluence of the refugees and are 
not ashamed to say so. 
Vietnamese-Americans are well aware of such sentiments and often feel wounded. 
In a 1989 Times Orange County Poll of 400 adults, 62% said there is "a lot" or 
"some" prejudice against Vietnamese people. 
A significant minority of Vietnamese said they have never suffered any form of 
discrimination in America. But those who do encounter it never forget. 
UC Irvine student Phong Cao Ta got the cold shoulder on arrival in his first 
U.S. home -- in Alaska. His father, once an education official in South 
Vietnam, escaped from a re-education camp in 1980 and fled with his son by 
boat. A U.S. official offered to let them out of refugee camp sooner if they 
agreed to settle in an area that had few refugees. 
"OK, we go (to) Alaska!" Ta remembered his excited father saying. When they 
arrived, though, the weather was an assault -- and people stared at them. 
"You are walking down the street and people are yelling names at you," he said. 
"You turn around and they laugh." 
The Tas lasted two weeks in Alaska before fleeing south. 
Rich or poor, refugees are unanimous in noting that America's welcome has grown 
cooler of late. Some say their host country has yanked the red carpet out from 
under the feet of the very refugees who have suffered the most. 
Liem Huu Nguyen, for example, a peasant boy turned successful lawyer, is the 
stuff refugee myths are made of. But he said he might not have done as well had 
he arrived in America in 1985 instead of 10 years earlier. 
Nguyen, born in a tiny village in Central Vietnam, was once a skinny boy who 
went to school hungry. "My friends discovered that I never ate lunch," he said. 
"In fact, I never ate breakfast." When he was 12, friends brought him home to 
dinner, and he asked them why the soup was so delicious. 
"They said it had meat in it," Nguyen said. 
His youth and peasant background made him atypical of the 1975 arrivals. His 
English was poor, and he was unschooled in Western ways; his first contact with 
U.S. culture had come as a teen-ager, when some passing GIs threw him 
cigarettes, chewing gum and a Playboy magazine. 
Nevertheless, an hour after Saigon surrendered, he climbed aboard one of the 
last South Vietnamese army helicopters leaving the Can Tho army base. At age 
18, he found himself in a strange land, Oklahoma. 
But, he says, Americans he met in 1975 bent over backward to help him. He was 
admitted to Oklahoma State, although his English was still inadequate. Once 
there, his grades were not good enough to join an international fraternity to 
which he longed to belong. He went begging to the dean and was invited to join. 
"These kinds of opportunities didn't happen later," he said. 
Nguyen earned a master's degree, then a degree at the University of 
California's Hastings College of the Law in San Francisco and has a private 
practice in San Jose and Oakland. Many of his clients are young Vietnamese who 
have run afoul of the law. 
These young arrivals, he says, have been given fewer opportunities and received 
less hospitality from communities that already feel burdened by large Southeast 
Asian populations. 
Nowadays, he said, "America is sick of refugees." 
Beset with budget problems, the federal government has cut back on money for 
refugees. Where once it paid for 36 months of refugee aid, it now pays for 
four. Those cutbacks will cost California $135 million in lost federal money 
this year, said Barnes of the California Department of Social Services. 
"It's becoming much more difficult to deliver full services to refugees," he 
said. 
Many Vietnamese-Americans said they are deeply grateful for the help. But they 
think they dare not ask for more. 
"The community now is strong enough to help their fellows," said Xuan Nhi Van 
Ho, executive director of the Orange County Refugee Community Resources 
Opportunity Project. "Many Vietnamese community leaders don't want the 
government to feel that refugees are a burden on them. . . . If we keep asking 
for more help, they will cut the refugee quota." 
And Vietnamese worry that they have developed a bad image. Many are mortified 
by the presence of Southeast Asian youth gangs, which have grown more violent 
and almost always prey on their own countrymen. 
Gangs and crime were cited as the single most serious community problem in the 
Times survey, named twice as often as problems with jobs or assimilation. Yet 
in recent interviews, Vietnamese-Americans expressed both shame and anger over 
what they see as overheated media coverage of the gangs, of welfare fraud, 
microchip theft and other crimes committed by Asians. And though the recent 
flood of books and films by Americans about the Vietnam War may be cathartic 
for Americans, Vietnamese find them distorted and offensive. 
"We despise these movies tremendously," said Duc Au, host of a Vietnamese radio 
program at UC Irvine. Au said the films show Vietnamese people as prostitutes, 
faceless enemies or victims of American -- never Communist -- atrocities. 
Vietnamese are never shown as soldiers fighting for their own country alongside 
the Americans, he said. 
In Vietnam, 58,258 U.S. soldiers have been listed as killed. The Vietnamese 
lost roughly 1.3 million on both sides. The country remains pockmarked with 
bomb craters and one of the poorest nations in the world. 
"If I didn't know anything about the Vietnam War at all, I would think the 
Americans did all the dirty work and the Vietnamese were back in the cities 
having fun," Au said. 
Such images are especially undermining to young Vietnamese, said Thieu Quang 
Nguyen, 27, a graduate student in computer science at UC Irvine. 
"Most of the things associated with the word Vietnam are negative: the Vietnam 
War, the cheating in Little Saigon, the gangs," Nguyen said. "And kids grow up 
hurt inside. They feel ashamed. We need to do something to change that 
attitude." 
The computer engineer who complained of U.S. racism agreed. 
"A lot of young Vietnamese . . . think of their very existence here as part of 
their defeat," he said. "And they don't have any cultural values to be proud 
of." 
It is another paradox of the Vietnamese experience that the number of 
Vietnamese dropouts and juvenile delinquents is increasing at the same time 
that many other young Vietnamese are astounding their teachers with their 
academic prowess. 
Such contradictory realities belie facile stereotypes about Asian students as 
disciplined super-achievers. 
In San Diego in 1986, Rumbaut and his colleagues found that while just 7% of 
the city's students were Vietnamese, 23% of the year's valedictorians and 
salutatorians were Vietnamese. And Vietnamese-American students had, on 
average, higher grades than whites. 
Yet Vietnamese were dropping out at slightly higher rates than white students, 
he said. 
That pattern is mirrored at Orange County's Westminster High School, where 52% 
of the straight-A students are Indochinese. But by 1987, the Vietnamese dropout 
rate had soared to nearly double the school average, prompting the district to 
start a special anti-dropout program for them. 
Rumbaut found that it was the children who came to the United States without 
one or both parents who were far more likely to drop out of school or get in 
trouble with the police. 
Likewise, Liem Huu Nguyen, who has represented many youth offenders, said most 
of his clients are recent arrivals who come from broken families and speak 
little English. 
"Most of them survived traumatic experiences," he said. "Their parents died in 
the war, or else they sank on the boats, or a family member died on the boat. 
They are very young, but they are very bitter about society. 
"The kids of the '75 wave are (doing) OK, even if they are really 
Americanized," he added. 
Rumbaut found that the best academic performers tended to be Vietnamese 
youngsters who arrived in the United States before puberty, giving them time to 
learn idiomatic English and adjust to U.S. schools before their high school 
years. 
Students performed better when their parents tried to preserve their ethnic 
heritage while adjusting to U.S. life. Furthermore, the more depressed the 
mother, the lower the grade-point average of the child. 
In Vietnam, the pace was slower, the family was larger and everybody helped 
bring up the children. But in America, refugee parents are working two jobs and 
coping with myriad problems of their own. Tony Doan, a family counselor, said 
that when children fail, it is often from neglect. 
"Vietnamese people go to work early in the morning and come home late and cook 
dinner and go to bed and do it again in the morning," Doan said. "Sometimes 
weekends. So they don't have time to take care of their children. And the kids 
feel lonely." 
Much of the Vietnamese-American experience cannot be explained by the mere 
facts of background, income or education. What drives many refugees is the 
immeasurable desire to reconstruct, from the shards of their former identities, 
lives to be proud of, families that are whole and enduring. Yet they remain in 
the grip of a deep sorrow, even a bitterness, that is the legacy of a century 
of war against the French, the Americans and each other. 
In a 1984 mental health survey of Vietnamese, almost half reported feelings of 
depression, anxiety, hopelessness or worthlessness, compared with just 
one-quarter of Americans. Acute depression was also double the U.S. average. 
Time does appear to be healing many of those wounds, the study found. Yet scars 
linger. 
Dr. Ton-That Niem -- once a secretary of health in South Vietnam, now a 
psychiatrist specializing in refugee mental health -- said he has treated many 
refugees with post-traumatic stress disorder. Many were rape victims or had 
seen relatives killed. Others, particularly middle-age women, complain of 
insomnia, anxiety, head, stomach and backaches -- and a terrible feeling of 
isolation. 
"They say, 'I came here, I cannot go out. I cannot drive. All my children or 
grandchildren are gone at work or in class. I am alone in the house. I don't 
know what to do. Sometimes by myself behind these closed doors, I feel scared.' 
"Then they break into tears and say, 'Had I known life (would be like this), I 
would not have come here.' " 
Niem said Westerners tend to underestimate the pain that Vietnamese, especially 
elders, feel because of separation from their ancestral homeland and its 
4,000-year-old culture. 
"We were forced to leave the land that appeared unlivable to us. . . . But our 
people are very attached to the land," Niem said. 
He sees the founding of many Roman Catholic churches and Buddhist temples by 
Vietnamese as an important step toward healing. "That is a consolation," he 
said. "It relieves their guilt, partially, in leaving their land and ancestors 
behind." 
There are many other hopeful signs in Little Saigon. On weekends, the shopping 
district is jammed with families pushing strollers and children who chatter 
away in English and Vietnamese. Despite their relative poverty, 
Vietnamese-Americans have the lowest infant mortality rate of any ethnic group 
in the nation. Researchers cite abstinence from smoking, alcohol and drugs. 
Business is booming. There are cultural festivals, classes in Vietnamese for 
children, more than two dozen newspapers, a $1.2-million senior citizens center 
being built, a TV station and a vibrant nightclub scene. Most of all, Little 
Saigon is a place to be Vietnamese in America, yet at ease. 
After 15 years of exile, many are also reaching back to Vietnam for solace. A 
growing number of Vietnamese say in private they support normalization of 
relations between Washington and Hanoi. Risking the wrath of devoutly 
anti-Communist fellow exiles, thousands have quietly returned to visit. 
During the Tet Festival this February, so many Californians headed for Vietnam 
that it was impossible to get a seat on a plane, according to a person who made 
the trek. 
Mai Cong, chairman of Vietnamese Community of Orange County and a tireless 
community activist, said she has not been back, but she has made peace with her 
memories of home. 
"It's the memory of your childhood, the places where you were raised, where 
your parents are, where your ancestors are buried," Cong said. "It's priceless. 
It is inside you." 
Staff writers Tony Marcano and Thuan Le contributed to this story. 
Vietnamese By The Numbers 
A Study in Diversity 
Indochinese refugees, like other Americans, are an extremely diverse group that 
includes rich and poor, former generals and former peasants, self-sufficient 
and welfare-dependent, high school dropouts and class valedictorians. 
Education 
White dropout rates among Vietnamese youths were higher than for whties, one 
study found, those who stayed in school had better grades than whites and were 
more likely to be class valedictorians. 
Academic Performance 
Percentage of Vietnamese in San Diego high schools in 1986: 7% 
Percentage of all valedictorian and salutatorians who were Vietnamese: 23% 
Drop-Out Rates by Ethnic Group 
Pacific Islander: 17.1% 
Latino: 14.1% 
Cambodian: 13.65 
Black: 12.3% 
Vietnamese: 10.7% 
White Anglo: 10.0% 
Chinese, Korean, Japanese: 6.2% 
Source: Indochinese Health and Adaptation Research Project, 1986 survey of 
4,312 graduating seniors in 11 San Diego high schools. 
Juvenile Delinquents 
Refugee youths who get into trouble with the police are usually later arrivals 
who speak little English, have trouble in school and have come to this country 
without one or both parents, a 1984 examination of San Diego police files 
showed. 
Time in U.S. 
82% arrived after 1977 
18% arrived before 1977 
Command of English 
61% had a poor command of English 
39% spoke some English 
(None had excellent command of English) 
Family Structure of Delinquents 
41% lived with both parents or step-parents 
59% lived without one or both parents 
(45% of white delinquents lived with both parents or step-parents) 
Of the 59% who lived without one or both parents: 
22% lived with a single parent (43% of whites, 44% of other minorities did) 
37% lived with other guardians or foster parents 
(28% of whites, 15% of other minorities did) 
Source: IHARP 
Working on English 
English proficiency, or lack of it, can say a lot about a refugee's chances of 
success in the work force. Only 10% of those who speak no English, for example, 
have jobs. 
Labor Force Participation 
Speaks no English: 10.2% 
A little English: 29.6% 
Speaks English well: 54.4% 
Fluent in English: 58.4% 
Unemployment 
Speaks no English: 12.1% 
A little English: 9l3% 
Speaks English well: 5.3% 
Fluent in English: 8.7% 
Average Weekly Wages 
Speaks no English: $170 
A little English: $205 
Speaks English well: $226 
Fluent in English: $248 
Note: Labor force and unemployment figures refer to all household members 16 
years of age and older; average weekly wages refer to surveyed refugees 16 
years of age and above who were empolyed. 
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988 
Labor Force Participation 
Refugees who arrived in 1975 got jobs sooner, worked at higher rates and earned 
more after five years than did later refugees. A small percentage of refugees 
appear to have withdrawn from the work force altogether. 
Percentage of Arrivals in the Work Force: 
1975 arrivals in work force in 1980: 63% 
1980 arrivals in work force in 1985: 56% 
1983 arrivals in work force in 1984: 42% 
Source: U.S. Office of Refugee Resettlement 
Welfare Dependency 
Welfare dependency is declining, but more than half of all California refugees 
remain dependent. 
Refugees on Aid: 
1986 
64% on aid 
36% Self-supporting 
1988 
54% on aid 
46% Self-supporting 
Source: California Dept. of Social Services and Demographic Research Unit, 
Dept. of Finance 
Infant Mortality 
Though pregnant Southeast Asian refugees recieve prenatal care much later than 
other women or not at all , they have a far lower infant mortality rate than 
whites. Researchers cite abstention from alcohol, cigarettes and drugs. 
Vietnamese-Americans have one of the world's lowest infant mortality rates. 
Infant Deaths Per 1,000 Live Births: 
Vietnamese: 5.5 
Cambodian: 5.8 
Japanese: 6.2 
Chinese: 6.9 
Latino: 7.3 
Anglo White: 8.0 
American Indian: 9.6 
Black: 16.3 
Percentage of Women Who Smoked: 
Vietnamese: 0% 
Americans: 33%Source: IHARP 
Legacy of War: Vietnamese in America 
The Vietnam Exodus 
1. In April, 1975, hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese flee south as coastal 
cities surrender. 
2. U.S. Marines begin evacuating remaining Americans from Saigon. However, 
enemy shelling closes Tan Son Nhut Air Base, forcing evacuation by helicopter. 
3. Gen. Duong Van Minh surrenders unconditionally on April 30 at 10:24 a.m. By 
then, more than 100,000 South Vietnamese had already fled. 
4. In 1978, Vietnam invades Cambodia, and China invades Vietnam. Vietnam then 
expels its ethnic Chinese. The exodus of "boat people" begins. 
Life in the U.S. 
Most of the refugees who arrived in 1975 hailed from Vietnam's military, 
professional and social elite. They account for fewer than one-third of all 
refugees. Later arrivals tended to be rural, with less education and fewer 
skills, and have had far more trouble achieving economic self-sufficiency. 
Average Years of Education: 
1975 arrivals: 11.9 
1980-83 arrivals: 5.2 
White Collar in Asia 
1975 arrivals: 79% 
1980-83 arrivals: 49% 
Farmers or Fishermen in Asia 
1975 arrivals: 3% 
1980-83 arrivals: 38% 
Living in Poverty in 1982 
1975 arrivals: 25% 
1980-83 arrivals: 90% 
Refugee Household Income in '86 
1975 arrivals: $17,861 
1980-83 arrivals: $12,907 
Average U.S. Household Income in 1986: $17-$18,000 
Southeast Asian Refugee Arrivals 
A total of 918,558 Southeast Asian refugees-567,600 of them Vietnamese-have 
arrived in the United States since 1975. More than 40% have settled in 
California. 
1975: 130,000 War evacuees 
1980: 167,000 Boat People 
1989: 37,000 
Source: Federal Office of Refugee Resettlement (1989), California Dept. of 
Finance (1990). 
On Being Vietnamese in America 
