UTILITY MERGER RAISES FEARS OF IMPACT OF L.A. SMOG 
San Diego city administrators and air quality officials expressed concern 
Tuesday about a state report that says if San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co. 
merges with Southern California Edison Corp., Los Angeles' pollution could have 
an immediate impact on San Diego's skies. 
The draft environmental impact report, released by the state Public Utilities 
Commission on Monday, found that the merger would significantly increase Los 
Angeles' smog. The increase in pollution, however, could be offset in part by 
using San Diego-area power plants when smog alerts forced a slowdown at plants 
in Los Angeles. 
Paul Downey, spokesman for San Diego Mayor Maureen O'Connor, bridled at the 
implied linking of San Diego and Los Angeles' fate. The use of San Diego as a 
backstop, he said, would place the city where it doesn't want to be -- squarely 
in the shadow of its larger and more polluted northern neighbor. 
"This has long been a fight for local control over our utility's future. But 
this (suggestion) takes it a step further and links us environmentally to 
what's happening in L.A.," Downey said, adding that under a merger, "basically 
San Diego would become a suburb of Los Angeles and would be subjected to the 
whims of (Edison's) bureaucrats sitting up in Rosemead. It's saying, 'If L.A. 
has a smoggy day, so will San Diego.' " 
Downey was among several politicians and air quality advocates in San Diego and 
Los Angeles who expressed renewed opposition Tuesday to the proposed 
$2.5-billion merger, which would create the nation's largest utility company 
with 4.8 million customers. 
Some agencies, including the South Coast Air Quality Management District in Los 
Angeles County, reserved comment until they could fully examine the 900-page 
report. But others said the report's highlights alone supported their worst 
fears. 
Bob Goggin, a spokesman for the San Diego County air pollution control 
district, agreed with Downey that the potential shift of electricity production 
to San Diego to avoid tougher air quality rules in Los Angeles could have 
undesirable effects. 
He pointed out that permits issued to San Diego plants in the 1970s allow them 
to burn dirtier fuel -- oil instead of natural gas. In addition, Goggin warned, 
San Diego plants currently operate at only 38% of the capacity they are 
allowed. The fear is that, if a merger took place, Edison could legally stoke 
up San Diego's plants to full capacity on smoggy Los Angeles days. 
"They have under their permits the ability to increase (use) and use less clean 
fuels," Goggin said. "If that were to take place, it would require tighter 
restriction on other industry. It lays it on everybody else." 
Edison officials deny that this could happen, arguing it is in their own 
economic interest to boost operations at Los 
Angeles plants, not at the older, less efficient San Diego plants. 
"Oil is more costly than gas, so we wouldn't use oil instead of gas if gas were 
available," said Lewis M. Phelps, a vice president at Edison, who said San 
Diego plants "would never have to run more than they do now." He repeated his 
claim that the merger would be "environmentally positive." 
Tom Soto, a spokesman for the Los Angeles-based Coalition for Clean Air, 
disagreed. He said a merger would be "a disaster" for Los Angeles. 
"It's very inconsistent with local policy and it's certainly inconsistent with 
the goals of the 20-year plan," Soto said, referring to the far-reaching 
clean-air plan that aims to bring the four-county Los Angeles Basin into 
compliance with federal standards by 2007. 
Soto noted that just last year, when Edison said it would be prohibitively 
expensive to meet certain pollution control deadlines imposed by the plan, the 
South Coast district granted the utility a seven-year extension. 
Now, however, the draft report has suggested that pollution resulting from the 
merger could be mitigated in part by speeding up schedules that require air 
pollution controls at power plants. Given Edison's prior stance, Soto called 
this prediction unlikely. 
"Not only are (Edison officials) going to not have to meet the standards that 
everyone has to meet, but now they're going to cause a possible increase in 
emissions," Soto said. 
Phelps said that Edison has not yet had time to sufficiently analyze the 
report's suggested mitigation measures. 
Auto emissions are the major source of air pollution in Southern California, 
but in their respective regions, SDG&amp;E and Edison are among the largest 
emitters of stationary pollution. 
