80% ENERGY GAIN IN FUSION TEST REPORTED; 
TEXAS RESEARCH ONLY DEEPENS MYSTERY 
Scientists at Texas A&amp;M University said Monday they are getting up to 80% 
more energy out of a nuclear fusion experiment than they are putting in, 
exciting fusion researchers but deepening a scientific mystery that has 
bedeviled experts around the world for more than two weeks. 
The Texas researchers stopped short of claiming they have achieved energy 
through fusion and they said they do not understand why they are producing more 
energy than they they are consuming. But scientists from the Georgia Institute 
of Technology announced just hours later that they were getting strong evidence 
of fusion from similar experiments. 
The back-to-back announcements were the best news yet for two scientists who 
claimed last month to have achieved fusion at room temperature with a simple 
table-top apparatus. 
Expresses Great 'Relief' 
B. Stanley Pons of the University of Utah expressed great "relief" when the 
Texas scientists told him of their results, the Texas team said during a press 
conference here. Pons and Milton Fleischmann of the University of Southhampton, 
England, have had little encouragement from the scientific community since 
announcing that their simple device could help end the world's energy woes 
because it promises a virtually inexhaustible source of fuel, which would come 
from ordinary seawater. 
Most experts greeted the Salt Lake City announcement on March 23 with profound 
skepticism, an attitude that persists today. But dozens of laboratories around 
the world set out immediately to try to duplicate the experiment. No one, 
however, has so far has been able to both produce excess energy and detect the 
signature of a fusion reaction, although there have been scattered claims of 
success with the latter. 
Charles R. Martin, an electrochemist with Texas A&amp;M, told reporters Monday 
that "we have confirmed" that more energy is produced by a simple 
"electrochemical cell than is put into the cell. 
"This is in agreement with the findings of Pons and Fleischmann," he added. "We 
have run the experiment using four different amounts of electric current and 
have found that excess energy varies between 60% and 80%." 
Martin said the experiment began running at 1 a.m. Saturday and it has been 
producing energy ever since. 
Asked if he believes the energy is produced by fusion, he said: 
"I would have more confidence if we could detect other symptoms of fusion." 
Additional efforts to determine whether fusion is causing the energy are 
continuing at the university, Martin said. 
'Still Unclear' 
"If it is nuclear, it is still unclear to us," added his colleague, Kenneth 
Marsh, a thermodynamicist whose expertise is in studying and measuring the flow 
of heat, which is the form of energy detected by Pons and Fleischmann. The 
other member of the Texas team is Bruce Gammon, also a thermodynamicist. 
While the Texas researchers have not pinpointed the cause of the excess heat, 
researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology claimed Monday to have 
detected neutrons and tritium, a radioactive form of hydrogen, from a similar 
experiment on the Atlanta campus. 
"One of the signatures of fusion is production of neutrons, so we felt that if 
we could detect neutrons coming from this apparatus, that would confirm 
fusion," said James Mahaffey, who led the five-member Georgia Tech team. "Our 
data convinced me that we are making neutrons in that vessel. There is no way 
to get neutrons unless something nuclear is going on." 
The Georgia team, however, did not attempt to measure heat. 
Particularly puzzling in the Texas A&amp;M work is the fact that researchers 
there found a net increase in energy almost immediately, despite the fact that 
Pons has said it takes many days for the apparatus to begin producing heat. 
"We were stunned" when their experiment began producing excess heat almost 
immediately, Marsh said. Martin said later the electrode they are using is very 
small, and he said it probably takes less time for a smaller unit to begin 
producing energy than a larger one. 
After they first measured the excess heat, the three men spent the next 30 
hours in the laboratory trying to analyze the surprising result. 
By late Sunday afternoon, even though they still were at a loss for an 
explanation, they decided to call a press conference and reveal their finding. 
Looking fatigued but happy, the three scientists said they are confident their 
results will hold up under scrutiny because they used a sophisticated system 
that is less prone to error than that used by the Utah scientists. 
The technique, "which eliminates many common errors," directly and continuously 
measures any temperature changes, revealing precisely how much energy is going 
into the apparatus and how much is being produced, Martin said. 
The energy output, he said, "is rock steady." 
The apparatus used by the Texas team is almost identical to the one used in 
Utah. It consists of an electrode with a palladium cylinder one millimeter in 
diameter and five centimeters long, surrounded by a fine platinum gauze. The 
electrode is immersed in "heavy water," which contains a heavy hydrogen ion 
called deuterium. 
Pons and Fleischmann say that when a small electrical charge is applied to the 
electrode, deuterium crowds into the palladium cylinder so tightly that it is 
possible for the nuclei to overcome their repulsive electrical charge and fuse, 
releasing heat. 
If that is indeed what is going on, then neutrons and other products should be 
released in detectable quantities. There have been scattered reports of some 
success, most notably from a team at Brigham Young University, but in all those 
cases there are also marked differences with the Pons-Fleischmann experiment. 
The Brigham Young and Georgia Tech scientists, for example, did not detect any 
excess heat. 
Replication Remains Elusive 
"The feedback we are getting is that nobody has succeeded" in fully replicating 
the Utah experiment, said plasma physicist Keith Thomassen of the Lawrence 
Livermore Laboratory. None of the major national laboratories, he added, has 
reported finding neutrons. 
That may be partly because details of the experiment are still not well 
understood, Thomassen said. 
Pons said additional details will be published soon in a major science journal. 
"Most labs are like us," Thomassen said. "They are still feeling not totally 
informed. We're getting bits and pieces of info, but not the kind I would have 
expected after two weeks. 
"The questions are not all answered." 
He noted that Pons and Fleischmann worked on their research for more than five 
years, so presumably they must have made many refinements over the years, and 
some subtle variations could make a lot of difference. 
For example, scientists at Livermore who were working on the experiment thought 
they had something recently when their neutron counter began registering a 
significant increase in neutrons, which should be produced by fusion. But it 
was quite warm in the area because of nearby electronic equipment, so "somebody 
brought in a fan," Thomassen said. 
Neutron Count Drops 
Shortly after the fan was turned on, the neutron count dropped back to normal. 
The warmth in the room had caused the neutron detectors to drift out of 
calibration, indicating that far more neutrons were being emitted than was the 
case. 
"It's easy to be fooled," Thomassen said. 
He added that although the heat detected by the Texas team is "intriguing . . . 
it leaves us grasping for straws." 
The Texas experts were also grasping a little Monday. 
"This is a very unusual result and we have not totally dismissed the 
possibility of some unusual chemical process which we have not accounted for," 
Martin said in the press conference. "We are currently exploring this 
possibility further." 
Pons has insisted that the heat generated by his experiment could only come 
from fusion because there is no chemical process that could have generated that 
much excess energy. At one point, he said earlier, the heat was great enough to 
vaporize the electrode, so it had to be hotter than 2829 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Martin, however, was not willing to make that leap. 
"We don't feel qualified to discuss fusion," he said. 
Perhaps the most troubling aspect of the entire episode has been the inability 
of major laboratories to duplicate the experiment in every way. Livermore's 
Thomassen noted that it should be easier to repeat the experiment than prove it 
is not true, since it is difficult to prove a negative. 
Unless someone succeeds soon, he said, the process could take months. 
"The longer it takes, the more suspicious people are going to get," he added. 
Thomas H. Maugh II reported from College Station and Lee Dye from Los Angeles. 
