HOCKEY STANLEY CUP PLAYOFFS; 
CAPITALS KEEP WINNING WITH BEAUPRE IN GOAL 
Don Beaupre began the first round of the playoffs as the backup goaltender for 
the Washington Capitals. 
The man ahead of him, Mike Liut, figured to play every game in the 
best-of-seven series against the New Jersey Devils. 
But after the Devils took a two-games-to-one series lead, Capitals' Coach Terry 
Murray decided to give Liut a night off. 
Beaupre took charge and the Capitals charged to three consecutive victories to 
earn the right to play the New York Rangers in the second round of the Stanley 
Cup playoffs. 
In his third consecutive solid game, Beaupre stopped 32 shots at Landover, Md., 
Sunday night, and the Capitals outfought New Jersey, 3-2, to win the series, 
4-2. 
Beaupre gave up just six goals in the three games. 
Sunday, he discouraged the Devils early, stopping two breakaways and making 
several saves in the first period. Then, on a power-play attempt in the second 
period, he made back-to-back saves from point-blank range. 
The Capitals beat goalie Chris Terreri in the last minute of each of the first 
two periods. Steve Leach put Washington ahead, 1-0, with 11 seconds left in the 
first period. Then, with 54 seconds remaining in the second, John Druce made it 
3-1. 
The best-of-seven division final between the Capitals and the Rangers, who beat 
the New York Islanders in five games, will begin Thursday night at New York. 
The Rangers, who won the Patrick Division, will have home-ice advantage. 
Hartford 3, Boston 2 -- Kevin Dineen scored at 12:30 of overtime at Hartford 
and the Whalers, after blowing a 2-0 lead, fought back to tie the series at 
three games apiece. 
The decisive game of the best-of-seven series will be played Tuesday night at 
Boston. The Bruins are hoping to have their two best players, playmaker Craig 
Janney and defenseman Ray Bourque, back. 
Both missed game six. Janney reinjured a bruised left shoulder in game five, 
and Bourque suffered a hip injury in the second game and hasn't played since. 
The Whalers' Scott Young opened the scoring in the first period and made it 2-0 
in the second when Ron Francis' centering pass hit the Bruins' Dave Poulin's 
skate and went in the net. 
Poulin cut the lead to a goal halfway through the period, and in the first 
minute of the last period Randy Burridge tied it. 
Montreal 5, Buffalo 2 -- The Canadiens were the third-place team in the Adams 
Division, but by beating the Sabres, 4-2, in the opening round, have advanced 
to the division final. 
Claude Lemieux and Russ Courtnall scored before the middle of the final period 
to put the Canadiens in command. 
Courtnall completed the scoring into an empty net in the final minute. 
Patrick Roy was a standout in the nets throughout the series for the Canadiens. 
Sunday, he stopped 22 shots. 
Montreal will play the winner of the Boston-Hartford series. DAN HAFNER 
