S. J. DIAMOND: THE AFTER-TAX IRRITANT: HOW TO STORE RECORDS 
Although the pain of filing tax returns passes, the need to store the records 
is a continuing irritant. One must decide what to keep, and how long to keep 
it, or, leaping over indecision, just keep it all -- usually in drawers or 
boxes already full of four, 10, even 20 years of tax records. 
Annually, tax preparers, the IRS and the media reiterate that the statute of 
limitation for an IRS challenge is three years, six years under certain 
circumstances, unlimited only in the case of fraud. Nevertheless, confused or 
fearful, we keep it all forever. 
The general rules seem straightforward: The IRS must examine income tax returns 
and assess additional taxes within three years from the due date or the date of 
filing, whichever comes later. If the taxpayer understated gross income by more 
than 25% of the amount reported, however, the IRS has another three years -- 
six in all -- to make its challenges. And if no return is filed, or the return 
is fraudulent, there's no statute of limitations on IRS action. 
All Not Frauds 
Now, all those people who keep records forever aren't necessarily frauds, 
although they may shade facts in their favor, or may be, as tax preparers say, 
"aggressive" in their claims. But they recognize that to some extent, fraud is 
in the eye of the judge, that some of the IRS's 120,000 employees are bound to 
be overzealous, and they fear a fraud charge, and a future fight. 
Indeed, it's a serious charge, with harsh penalties. Civil penalties are 75% of 
the additional tax owed, plus an additional 50% of any interest due -- these 
assessed by the IRS examiners, with Tax Court making final judgment if the 
taxpayer appeals. A case can also be referred for criminal investigation, and 
thence for prosecution by the Justice Department in federal court, with a 
possible fine or jail time added on. 
But use of the term "fraud" is not casual: It's not negligence or ignorance of 
the law. There must be intent to evade taxes, a "bad purpose," in the words of 
Manuel Godinez, a group manager in the IRS's criminal investigation division, 
Los Angeles District, and the burden of proving that intent is on the 
government. 
'Degree of Bad Purpose' 
The difference between criminal and civil cases, says Godinez, is "the degree 
of bad purpose," and relatively few become criminal cases. In 1988, when 194.3 
million tax returns were filed (107 million individual), Criminal Investigation 
sent only 3,044 cases for prosecution. "We have to be selective because we're 
the smallest (IRS) division," says Godinez, "and our cases can take 18 months. 
For every 10 to 15 referrals, we'll accept one." 
Almost half involved narcotics, money-laundering, fraudulent tax shelters or 
illegal tax protesters. The selection depends partly on the degree of bad 
purpose, partly on publicity value and current political concerns. Many cases 
are headliners, "which tell Joe Blow Taxpayer that we don't just go after the 
little guys, but will take on the big ones, too," says Rob Giannangeli, IRS 
spokesman in Los Angeles. A recent example: hotel magnates Leona and Harry 
Helmsley, accused of tax fraud after the IRS claimed they diverted millions of 
corporate dollars to the decorating of their private mansion (jade artwork, 
landscaping, marble dance floors), and deducted them as business expenditures 
from corporate taxes. 
Civil fraud penalties are somewhat more common -- 9,304 assessed in 1988 -- but 
still selective. 
Overstating the business value of some $10 lunches may simply lose a taxpayer 
the deductions; a fraud case requires, says Giannangeli, "some sort of 
definitive act, like keeping two sets of books, altering documents, claiming 
dependents that don't exist, making unex plained bank deposits, or listing 
property in relatives' names." Intent must be provable -- the difference, says 
Giannangeli, between giving a watch to charity estimated at $5,000 when it's 
later appraised at $2,500, and getting a $2,500 appraisal and then claiming 
it's a $5,000 gift. 
Indeed, Tax Court rulings demonstrate stringent standards for judging intent. 
Large understatements of income have not alone been able to prove fraud, nor 
has "gross neglect" of bookkeeping procedures, nor did the behavior of a 
taxpayer who filed no returns for given years until called in, produced no 
books or records until the trial, and then gave inconsistent testimony. 
But fraud was found in the case of a taxpayer who claimed theft losses on a 
Picasso painting that the government proved didn't exist. Similarly, the court 
ruled fraudulent a neurosurgeon's understatements of income, given the deposits 
into his personal checking account of practice fees that had not been recorded, 
and a regular $1,000 error -- 13 times in two years -- in the addition of his 
monthly receipts. 
Such judgments may reassure ordinary people who save all tax records in case 
they're ever accused of fraud. Someone trying to perpetrate a fraud will 
probably keep no records at all, since no records can prove their assertions. 
As for everyone else, says Shirley Nakagawa, IRS spokesman in the Los Angeles 
District, "If you think you might need to explain something, or you're being 
audited and haven't gotten an audit report when the three years is almost 
expired, then you'd better keep everything a while longer." 
Fraud considerations aside, one should routinely keep anything, says 
Giannangeli, that "has bearing on the future," if not current taxes. Certain 
records, in IRS words, verify "the basis of property," or what the taxpayer put 
into it. When a home, for example, is sold, and the proceeds reported, 
computation of taxable capital gains takes into account all monies put into it. 
Similarly, one should keep records of any investment not yet matured or 
liquidated -- stocks, bonds, IRAs, partnerships, art and jewelry collections -- 
and not just for the IRS. Such information can establish a later sale price, or 
back up an insurance claim. 
Then there are the tax returns themselves, generally kept for seven years by 
the IRS (given those six-year limitations), and for the rest of their lives by 
taxpayers, even those who discard the background documentation. After all, old 
returns might some day provide guidance, or curiosity value, and they take up 
little room. 
