IT'S BEST TO SAY: THE DEAL IS 'NO DEALS'; 
PRESIDENT BUSH IS PLAYING HIS HOSTAGE HAND JUST ABOUT RIGHT 
A pale and malnourished Robert Polhill had barely ended his 1,183 days as a 
captive of Lebanese Shiite militants before word came that those who had a hand 
in his release -- including Iran and Syria -- now expect some tangible gesture 
of U.S. reciprocity in exchange for what Polhill's kidnapers had the effrontery 
to call their "humanitarian" action. 
Reciprocity? For what? For finally taking the minimally decent step of freeing 
one of eight innocent Americans from prolonged, cruel and utterly inexcusable 
imprisonment? By this twisted standard of obligation, a mugger who leaves his 
bloodied victim with bus fare to the hospital has a moral right to demand 
gratitude for his kindness. 
President Bush put it bluntly and correctly on Sunday when news came that 
Polhill had been let go: The United States won't trade for hostages, period. It 
detracts nothing from this principled stance to note that it is further 
buttressed by anxious political memories of the fiasco the Reagan 
Administration committed when it naively tried to swap arms to Iran for 
hostages from Lebanon. 
"No deals" should remain the U.S. position, without apology. The White House 
insisted again yesterday that all American hostages must be released 
unconditionally, the clear message being that, until this happens, Iran can 
expect no real improvement in its relations with the United States. Already, 
some voices are being heard decrying the inflexibility of that position, 
arguing as they have before that "moderate" forces in Tehran -- remember them? 
-- need the kind of support and encouragement that only a visible U.S. payoff 
can provide. This siren song once before lured American policy onto the shoals 
of international political humiliation. Let's hope the dark and bitter lesson 
that there can be no concessions to the sponsors of terrorism has been fully 
absorbed. 
In fact, there's little if anything the United States can do to influence 
factional power struggles in Iran. Terry Anderson, who has been held prisoner 
for more than five years, and the other six American hostages will be returned 
to freedom when the Tehran regime decides to order or force its ideological 
allies and agents in Lebanon to let them go, after calculating that Iran's 
national interests require nothing less. At this point, despite much 
speculation, there's no clear evidence that such a calculation has in fact been 
made. 
In time, it will have to be. For it should be clear by now, even to the most 
fanatical and obtuse of Shiite militants, that the hostages in Lebanon have 
long since lost whatever extortion value they were once believed to have. 
Tehran, increasingly desperate for Western help to rebuild its war-shattered 
economy, can only come to see that the hostages have become not just a depleted 
asset but an impediment to improving Iran's national fortunes. Doling out 
hostages one at a time, over long intervals, won't remove that impediment. The 
Bush Administration seems determined to avoid sending any signal that would 
suggest otherwise. It's doing the right thing, and in the right way. 
