BARBED WIRE HIDES AN IRVINE CO. JEWEL; 
ENVIRONMENT: UNDISTURBED FOR MORE THAN A CENTURY, THE BREATHTAKING SCENERY OF 
LIMESTONE CANYON MAY BE OPENED TO THE PUBLIC IN A FEW YEARS. 
The red and white no-trespassing signs that warn visitors away from Limestone 
Canyon are as worn as the rusted barbed wire fence that holds them. The white 
iron gate is locked, and it creaks loudly when it opens, having been used over 
the years by only a handful of visitors and cattle ranchers. 
Behind the gate, shady glens stretch gently away from the road and over ridges 
draped in wildflowers. Groves of oak trees, some of them hundreds of years old, 
break up the fields and line the creek beds, their dark green set off by the 
lighter splashes of sycamores. 
For more than a century, passers-by have paused near the entrance to the 
canyon, straining to see around its bluffs. But they've had to do it from 
behind the fence. 
The Irvine Co. bought 5,477 acres in and around the canyon in 1868, and since 
that time, the few adventurers who wandered onto the property did so at their 
own risk, knowing that the company's security patrols could loom just over the 
next ridge, waiting to run them off the property. 
That could soon change. The company, Orange County's largest landowner, 
announced Thursday that it hopes to open up vast expanses of its private 
properties that have been set aside for future parks. 
Most of the areas, including Limestone Canyon, were not expected to become 
parks for more than a decade. But if all goes as planned, Limestone Canyon, the 
largest of the properties to be affected, could open to the public within a few 
years. 
When it does, Orange County residents will get their first look at one of the 
county's most spectacular natural areas, an expanse of fields and peaks that 
have been protected for decades by the same company that is busily building out 
the valleys dropping away on all sides. 
Behind the barbed wire, birds and small animals skitter in the fields, foraging 
for food. A dirt road dips into rolling pastureland, richly green in the 
spring. 
Most of the year, the land strains for water, but for a few months about this 
time, the mustard blooms bright yellow and the California lilacs open in 
clusters of pale purple. 
"We had rain last week, and it's greened it all up," said Mike Stockstill, the 
company's senior director for corporate communications. "The wildflowers are 
really in full bloom." 
Rick Cermak, senior director of urban planning and design, nodded from behind 
the wheel of his four-wheel drive during a tour of the land Friday. "Look at 
this little drainage," he said, pointing to a shady creek bed just off the 
road. "Look at the luxuriousness with which the oaks are chockablock." 
But if the bulk of Limestone Canyon is in its thick groves of oaks and rolling, 
almost-Irish pastures, the jewels in its crown are the sharp ridgelines with 
views across the entire county and the breathtaking limestone ravine known as 
"the Sinks." 
The Sinks sit about a mile from busy Santiago Canyon Road, but the canyon mouth 
faces south and west, cutting off any traffic noise. Limestone deposits in the 
Sinks have eroded over the centuries, leaving a sharp cliff face pocked with 
wear. The cliffs are dusty brown and drop more than 100 feet into a green 
meadow. 
"This is the only one of its kind in this area," Cermak said. "It is really 
something, isn't it?" 
Friday, hawks rode the updrafts that blow up the canyon walls, circling and 
searching for prey. Limestone Canyon, in fact, represents one of the most 
treasured homes for birds of prey, also known as raptors, left in Orange 
County, where development has destroyed the habitats for most of the avians. 
"This is one of the very finest raptor habitats that we have left," said Ginny 
Chester, a former president of the Sea and Sage Audubon Society. Chester was 
active in the effort to secure Limestone Canyon as a park in return for 
developments that the Irvine Co. was allowed to build in Orange and Irvine. 
"It has the trees that are necessary for their nesting sites. It has the fields 
where they hunt . . . and it has the updrafts they need to soar," she added. 
With the company now apparently committed to allowing public access into this 
area for the first time, the challenge before environmentalists and company 
officials is to allow people into the park without exposing it to damage. 
"On the one hand, the company has kept people out of this land for years, for 
business reasons and other reasons," Stockstill said. "But on the other hand, 
this land has been protected as a result. Now that's going to change." 
In order to protect the land at the same time that it opens it, the company has 
indicated that it plans to consult with environmental groups for advice on 
areas that should remain closed to the public. The process is supposed to begin 
within a few weeks. 
Exactly when the land will actually open is still undecided, but company 
officials hope to have a plan completed by the end of the year. 
