'ALL ABOARD' SOUNDS FOR FREE CHILDREN'S TRAIN RIDES IN TORRANCE 
The children lined the railroad tracks, waving and shouting as the scale-model 
steam train came around the bend and sounded its whistle. 
"All aboard," shouted the engineer when the train reached the cheering 
children. They scurried to find a seat, and when they were ready, the train 
started up with a puff of white steam and shouts from the smiling children. 
That was the scene last month at Charles Wilson Park in Torrance when the 
Lomita-based Southern California Live Steamers club offered free rides to 
nearly 400 children aboard the four 18-inch-high scale model trains the club 
brought to the park. 
Club members and Torrance city officials hope the enthusiasm is repeated this 
Sunday and that it cements a tradition on the first Sunday of every month when 
the trains will run along the 1,000-foot track at the eastern end of the park. 
The goal is to educate youngsters about the impact of the railroads on the 
growth of the South Bay, said club members and city officials. 
"We want to get the younger generation interested in trains," said Wolfgang 
Fengler, president of the 50-member miniature train club. "Because if we die, 
the interest dies with us." 
The trains are working scale models of old steam trains, which can carry about 
20 children while running at speeds of 10 to 15 m.p.h. 
The club had offered the free train rides on the Charles Wilson Park tracks 
before, but only on holidays or other special occasions. The tracks were laid 
in October, 1987, with 9,000 ties donated by Watt Investment Properties and 
track from Reynolds Metal Co., said Fengler. 
Beginning this weekend, the rides will be offered from noon to 4 p.m. on some 
holidays, but always on the first Sunday of the month. 
State officials last month gave approval to run the trains regularly in the 
park, which the state gave to the city, said city Parks and Recreation Director 
Gene Barnett. 
But even before the state gave final approval, Fengler, his 15-year-old son, 
Wolfgang Allen, and other members of the miniature train club spent several 
weekends pulling weeds and cleaning up trash around the tracks. 
"We just wanted to straighten things up a bit," he said. 
The club members -- many are retired residents of the area -- raise donations 
to pay for the coal-based fuel used to power the steam engines. The city 
contributed the land. 
Members of the club are considering restoring a red antique caboose, which they 
would convert into a classroom or exhibit hall to teach children about 
railroads, Fengler said. 
The club has discussed adding a replica of the historic Torrance overpass as 
well as a miniature train depot. Fengler, a retired Torrance firefighter, said 
he does not know what it would cost for the entire project, which he would like 
to complete in three years. He hopes much of the money will come from donations 
and volunteer work. 
He would like someday to extend the tracks to include a half-mile spur along 
the southern side of the park. 
"For now we'll just kind of take it a step at a time," he said. 
