DRUGS OUR SECOND CIVIL WAR; 
CUT THE CHAIN OF GREED, POVERTY, SELF-INDULGENCE; 
AMERICA'S LEADERSHIP CLASS CULTURALLY AND SOCIALLY BLESSED CASUAL USE. NOW WE 
HAVE A WAR ON OUR HANDS AND WE MUST RAISE TAXES TO WIN IT. 
"Temperance" is defined as drinking in moderation or total abstinence. Many 
would favor expanding the definition to include drug use, with the implication 
that using drugs in moderation is acceptable. Despite the misery and death that 
drugs have brought to our homes, neighborhoods and schools, some still favor 
this permissive approach. They urge the government to go ahead and bomb the 
Colombian drug plantations and clean out the ghetto crack houses, so long as 
the weekend cocaine and marijuana user is left in peace to unwind in whatever 
manner he or she pleases. This approach was proved wrong 20 years ago. It would 
compound the tragedy to let the elite, casual user off the hook again. 
America's leadership class will be remembered for the role it played in helping 
lose two wars: the war in Vietnam and, at least so far, the war on drugs. The 
leadership class is made up of highly educated and influential people in the 
arts, the media, the academic community, the government bureaucracies and even 
business. They are characterized by intellectual arrogance, obsession with 
style, fashion and class and a permissive attitude on drugs. In Vietnam, they 
felt more comfortable criticizing the United States for trying to save South 
Vietnam than criticizing the Communists for trying to conquer it. In the drug 
war, they simply went over to the other side. For years, the enemy was them. 
Now that polls show a majority of the American people fear drugs more than war, 
poverty, crime or the deteriorating environment, being against drugs is as 
fashionable as being on drugs was two decades ago. Every politician who admits 
taking a puff of dope in the '60s is talking tough on dope in the '80s. But for 
years the elite class accepted and even celebrated "recreational" drug use. 
Some still say that the casual user is not the problem. But when the casual 
user is a powerful movie director, a millionaire rock star or an influential 
columnist, he or she is more dangerous than a hundred Brooklyn dope pushers. 
Drug users in the leadership class helped create a climate of social, cultural 
and political acceptance that permitted the drug plague to take root. As it 
began to spread through our colleges and schools, attempts to contain it were 
condemned in leadership circles as paternalistic efforts by the older 
generation to suppress the creative urges of its children. Those who did not 
openly condone drug use coyly looked the other way. 
When I rejected the recommendation of a presidential commission that called for 
the decriminalization of marijuana in 1972, one liberal columnist scoffed. 
"There is no real cause for panic about drug abuse and its effect on crime," he 
wrote in the New York Times. "There is no evidence that a crackdown will be the 
answer: quite the opposite." Under the leadership of Dr. Jerome Jaffe, we did 
adopt a tough, coordinated policy, ranging from diplomatic pressure on Turkey 
to stop exporting heroin to establishing the first treatment program for 
inner-city addicts. But even more crackdown in those years might well have 
meant less crack now. 
Even today, when most of the prestige media have managed to crowd onto the 
anti-drug bandwagon, they could not help indulging in a revolting orgy of 
nostalgia during the 20th anniversary of Woodstock last year. The smarmy 
retrospectives glossed over the fact that Woodstock's only significant legacy 
was the glorification of dangerous illegal drugs. At least the seven Woodstock 
performers who eventually died from drugs got obituaries in the newspapers. 
Thousands in the audience who also became victims of drug abuse weren't even 
that lucky. 
To erase the grim legacy of Woodstock, we need a total war against drugs. Total 
war means war on all fronts against an enemy with many faces. Some, such as the 
South American drug barons, are easy and even appropriate targets. But making 
the drug war largely a foreign-policy issue is a convenient way to blame others 
for our own domestic problems. Some people do not want to admit that the enemy 
is also as near as the face they see in the mirror -- the inner-city or 
suburban father who walks out on younger children who need his influence to 
avoid drugs, the Wall Street broker buying a couple of grams of cocaine in the 
subway station, the columnist smoking marijuana or snorting coke on Saturday 
night and then going to the office Monday and writing that drugs are really 
just a problem for poor blacks. 
All are links in a steel chain of greed, poverty, neglect and self-indulgence 
that is being drawn tighter and tighter around our throats. All must be fought 
and stopped before the chain can be broken and our country finally freed of its 
chemical, economic and cultural addiction to illegal drugs. But nothing can be 
accomplished, no anti-drug initiative will be successful, if our society does 
not face the hard fact that any tolerance of any use of any illegal drug is 
wrong. 
For this reason, calls for legalization of drugs are totally misguided. Police, 
parents and teachers in the inner cities, the soldiers on the front lines in 
the drug war, know that if drugs were legalized, they would be cheaper and 
easier to get. As a result, there would be far more people on drugs. The way to 
win a war is not to give all the ammunition to the other side. 
The war also cannot be won on the cheap. If Abraham Lincoln had been worried 
about the budget in 1861, George Bush would need a passport to visit Atlanta. 
Instead, Lincoln spent what he needed to win the Civil War and ran up a 
$500-million deficit. 
The war on drugs is our second civil war. If winning it requires a tax 
increase, so be it. In that event, the Bush Administration should seriously 
consider proposing a new tax on cigarettes and alcohol, with the funds 
earmarked for drug interdiction, prosecution, treatment and education. Timid 
advisers who warn the President that the political heat will be too great if he 
proposes such a tax are wrong. The American people expect him to do what is 
necessary to win the war no matter what the cost, so long as his measures are 
bold enough to have a chance to work. The war cannot be won without strong 
leadership from the top. 
Today, 58 government agencies share responsibility for fighting drugs. Too 
often they end up spending more time fighting each other for turf than fighting 
the enemy. A drug czar who has little more than the symbolic power of a British 
king will not be able to knock heads together to end the civil war in the 
bureaucracy and make a victory possible in the civil war against drugs. 
A tough policy can also be a compassionate one. When I visited the Daytop 
Village drug rehabilitation center in Swan Lake, N.Y., in 1988, I met scores of 
young people who had fallen into the drug trap. With guidance from Msgr. 
William B. O'Brien and his dedicated colleagues, they were now on the road to 
productive, drug-free lives. Daytop offers 24-hour-a-day supervision, stiff 
punishments for patients who stray, and regular follow-up testing after they go 
home. 
Because many such programs rely solely on private donations, only a fraction of 
those who need them can get in. No matter what else President Bush does, he 
should make it a national goal to ensure that no one who really wants to beat 
drugs is ever excluded from treatment. Any American who saw the hopeful faces 
of the young people at Daytop Village would gladly open his heart and his 
checkbook if it meant saving even one more child from oblivion. 
