PRESIDENT SEEKS CLASSROOM REALITY FOR EDUCATION PLAN 
President Bush, moving to back up his campaign pledge to become the "education 
President," dispatched to Congress on Wednesday a $441-million program intended 
"to make excellence in education not just a rallying cry, but a classroom 
reality." 
The legislation would put into effect elements of the education platform that 
Bush focused on during the presidential campaign, including cash awards for 
"merit" schools and top teachers, new science scholarships, promotion of magnet 
schools and "alternative" certification to allow experts who lack training as 
teachers to work in classrooms. 
But critics immediately charged that the new measure does not make up for 
inadequate Administration support for education programs already in place. 
In his proposed budget for the 1990 fiscal year, Bush sought no increase over 
1989's level of $21.9 billion, in effect allowing a reduction because there was 
no adjustment for the anticipated inflation of 3.5%. 
"I think it's a shell game," said Bill Honig, state superintendent of public 
instruction, in a telephone interview from Sacramento. Of Bush's "education 
President" vow, he said: "The reality belies that." 
Reaction in Orange County 
Some Orange County educators said that they will welcome any extra money but 
added that they have grown cynical over federal promises that make barely a 
ripple in local classrooms. 
"You can't overlook the fact that we are still dealing with less money (for 
education)," Supt. Cynthia Grennan of the Anaheim Union High School District 
said. 
"In terms of how it's going to be implemented or what restrictions will be 
placed on that money, I guess I'm getting cynical in my 10 years as 
superintendent. . . . But having someone say he's the education president, or 
the education governor -- at least this puts the focus on education." 
But Mark Stapleton, an official with the Saddleback Valley Unified School 
District in southern Orange County, said Bush's plan to recognize good schools 
is a luxury that the U.S. education system cannot afford. 
"It sounds to me like a lot of money is being spent on beauty pageants, awards 
for schools that are doing well," Stapleton said. "We know what schools are 
good -- just give us money to help us improve the other schools." 
E.G. (Ted) Kopp, a Capistrano Unified School District board member, said 
federal funds make up less than 1% of his district's budget. "It won't put 10 
cents in every classroom," he predicted. "A great amount of it will be used for 
administrators to fill out the paper work to qualify for it." 
In a full-dress announcement ceremony, Bush and Education Secretary Lauro F. 
Cavazos unveiled the details of the education program in the White House Rose 
Garden with the 1989 National Teacher of the Year Award winner, Mary Bicouvaris 
of Hampton, Va., standing by. 
"When education is the issue and budget constraints cloud everything on the 
horizon . . . we can start by rewarding what works," Bush said. 
"We can help those most in need. We can promote choice and flexibility for 
parents and school administrators. And we can raise expectations and hold 
ourselves accountable for the results." 
Cavazos, responding to questions about how the program will be funded, said 
that the money will not be diverted from existing Department of Education 
programs. "I don't know where the money will come from, but that's another 
issue. These are new dollars." 
The Bush proposal would establish a "presidential merit schools program" to 
reward public and private elementary and secondary schools that make 
"substantial progress" in raising students' educational achievement, reduce the 
rate of dropouts and provide a drug-free environment. About $250 million would 
be authorized for the program in 1990, $350 million in 1991, $450 million in 
1992 and $500 million in 1993. No specific amounts were set for the individual 
awards. 
The program would also create $5,000 awards "to recognize first-rate teachers 
in every state, and reward them for a job well done," Bush said. 
Bush also announced a plan to award science scholarships of up to $10,000 a 
year for four years for "our best high school seniors." 
The President called for $100 million a year to help begin or expand public 
"magnet schools," which offer specialized curricula to attract students and 
offer an alternative to the traditional community public schools. 
The program would provide $25 million to the states to encourage greater 
certification flexibility for teachers and principals. The program would also 
make $25 million available in each of the next four years for grants to 
education agencies in urban areas with some of the nation's most severe drug 
problems. 
In an effort to boost the endowments of the nation's historically black 
colleges and universities, the program would make $60 million available over 
four years in "challenge grants" to match private contributions. 
Staff writer Maria Newman in Orange County contributed to this story. 
