WINE: A CAPITAL TASTE; 
A CRESTON MANOR WINE FIT FOR THE PRESIDENT IS A CANDIDATE FOR ALL 
LARRY AND Stephanie Rosenbloom, owners of Creston Manor Vineyard and Winery, 
have made great strides since buying cattle-grazing land a few miles inland 
from San Luis Obispo in 1980. 
At the Bush Inaugural in Washington in January, Creston Manor winery was among 
the select group of American wineries pouring their finest. 
The Creston Manor wine that was served was the winery's newest. The 1988 
Presidential Cuvee ($9) is a classical blending of 85% Semillon with 15% 
Sauvignon Blanc. On the label of this limited release is a portrait of 
President Bush by James-Paul Brown that was commissioned for the Inaugural. 
The Semillon is fermented in stainless steel to preserve its fresh fruitiness, 
and the Sauvignon Blanc is barrel-fermented in French oak, with nine months on 
the yeast lees. This young wine, which has refreshing hints of lemon, shows an 
inviting complexity that makes it a chilled aperitif of considerable 
distinction. 
Even more recently, the winery added to its reputation when its 1987 San Luis 
Obispo Chardonnay ($12) fared better in a blind tasting than the more 
well-known and slightly more expensive Sterling Vineyard 1987 Napa Valley 
Chardonnay. The tasting was conducted by Rod Smith of the San Francisco 
Chronicle. Of the six wines they sampled, the tasters, who included a wine 
market analyst, a wine buyer and a chef, voted Creston Manor No. 1. Its wine, 
the panel said, was "a beautifully balanced, tightly structured Chardonnay in 
the French style." 
Not bad for Larry Rosenbloom, a Beverly Hills insurance agent turned vintner in 
1982. Creston Manor received its first gold medals for its Sauvignon Blanc that 
year and has continued to win for every vintage edition that wine maker Vic 
Roberts produces. The 1987 San Luis Obispo Sauvignon Blanc ($8.25), fermented 
and aged in Nevers and Limousin oak, with "taming" additions of Semillon, is 
one of California's best, not to be missed. 
The winery's companion to its 1987 Chardonnay, which won the taste test, is its 
1985 Cabernet Sauvignon-Winemaker's Selection ($16.50). Composed of 90% 
Cabernet Sauvignon and 10% Merlot, and aged in the barrel for 27 months before 
bottling, the wine is ready to enjoy now. It has a satin smoothness and 
harmonious finish. 
Like a great number of California wineries, Creston Manor also makes Beaujolais 
Nouveau, but it became the first in the state to use the elegant Pinot Noir 
grapes instead of the traditional California variants of Gamay. The bouquet of 
the Creston Manor nouveau is almost floral, and the taste suggests that of rose 
petals. 
Roberts' stylish original, while forsaking the traditional Gamay, submitted the 
Pinot Noir grapes to the classic carbonic maceration method in which whole 
clusters are placed in open fermenters. This procedure produces a wine of 
intense jewel color, but with no tannic bitterness. 
Upon completion, the wine is cold-settled, racked, gently filtered, bottled and 
labeled. It is ready for the market within 60 days of harvest -- in time for 
the nouveau madness. Although Creston Manor 1988 Petit d'Noir ($8) is ready to 
drink right after it is bottled, it will develop gracefully for two to three 
years, unlike other nouveaus. 
