SANTA ANA BEEFS UP GANG DETAIL TO STEM BLOODSHED IN STREETS 
Police Chief Paul M. Walters launched an unprecedented attack on the city's 
gangs Friday, sending 25 officers on a weekend sweep, doubling the size of the 
department's gang detail and threatening to hold parents responsible if their 
children violate a previously unenforced 10 p.m. curfew. 
"Gang violence is increasing in Orange County," Walters said at a press 
conference. "We want to take the individuals involved in gangs off the 
streets." 
Walters' offensive comes a week after one of the city's bloodiest weekends, 
during which two teen-agers were killed by gang gunfire and another was 
seriously wounded along with an 8-year-old boy. So far this year, eight 
gang-related homicides and more than 50 gang-related shootings have occurred in 
Santa Ana. Countywide, there have already been 16 gang homicides -- the same 
number as last year's record total. 
Walters emphasized that the Santa Ana gang patrols, styled after the patrols 
that are periodically conducted by the Los Angeles Police Department, have been 
instructed not to arrest anyone without probable cause. 
Nevertheless, Rebecca Jurado, an attorney with the American Civil Liberties 
Union, said the sweeps may violate constitutional rights. In Los Angeles, 
police were similarly criticized by residents who claimed that youths were 
being arrested just because they looked like gang members. 
"It seems that the sole propose of these sweeps is not to protect the 
neighborhoods but to arrest people," Jurado said. "The police are putting 
particular neighborhoods in a situation where the residents are not allowed to 
go outside if they wear the wrong clothes color." 
The first Santa Ana gang sweep began at 7 p.m. Friday and continued into the 
night, targeting neighborhoods where gangs are considered most active. The 
special patrol had just gotten under way when the police received calls of a 
drive-by shooting and a stabbing in gang-riddled areas. 
In the drive-by shooting, one person was shot in the foot, police said. There 
were no other details. 
"This is just a typical Friday," Lt. David Salazar said. "We just have more 
officers that are able to respond." 
Two people who live in the neighborhood of the shooting at Walnut and Raitt 
streets welcomed the heavier police patrols. 
"It's about time. We need them. It's getting desperate around here," said 
29-year-old Jose Alfaro. "I just hope this will work." 
More sweeps are expected to take place tonight and Sunday night. And if found 
effective, the weekend policing could continue indefinitely, Walters said. 
The special gang suppression team, which includes traffic, canine and patrol 
units, is also being directed to strictly enforce traffic and probation laws. 
Those arrested Friday were taken to the department's substation on Bristol and 
McFadden streets, which was converted into a processing location. 
Officers were also expected to begin enforcing a 10 p.m. curfew that requires 
children under age 18 to be under adult supervision while in public places, 
Walters said. 
In addition, Walters said, police legal advisers are researching whether 
parents of children who violate the curfew can be charged with a criminal 
misdemeanor punishable by a $600 fine or a short jail term. 
Walters also announced Friday that within two months he plans to double the 
size of the Santa Ana police gang detail, from four members to eight. 
The four additional officers will be primarily in charge of patrolling gang 
territory rather than investigating specific cases, Walters said. The city is 
estimated to have 60 gangs with 7,000 gang members. 
"Thank God they're finally listening and adding more officers," said Santa Ana 
City Councilman Richards L. Norton. "But it's too bad that it took so many 
deaths for them to do this. But (even with four more officers in the gang unit) 
make no mistake about this, it's not enough." 
Walters said the decision to add the officers was not a result of the recent 
shootings, but has been in the planning for nearly a year. The Police 
Department was going to quietly add the officers onto its gang detail and its 
narcotics unit this year, but Walters said he decided to announce it publicly 
because of the media attention brought by the gang shootings. 
The new gang officers probably will be chosen from among the department's 
current 351-member roster, and four new officers will be hired to fill whatever 
vacancies occur. The cost of adding the officers is about $300,000 annually, 
officials said. 
Currently, each investigator in the four-member gang detail handles a monthly 
average of 13 high-priority cases, such as aggravated assaults or homicides, 
said police spokesman Lt. Robert Helton. Because of the large number of 
gang-related incidents in the city, gang investigators can handle only those 
cases with the best leads or most promising suspects, Helton said. 
The Police Benevolent Assn., which represents the department's rank and file, 
has long called for expanding the gang detail. In a recent interview, union 
President Don Blankenship said gang officers are overworked and have little 
time to patrol the streets to prevent crimes. 
Until now, he said city officials have refused to hire additional officers 
because of budget constraints. 
"I know elected officials are as concerned about gang violence as I am," 
Blankenship said. "It's time to stop looking at this ongoing tragedy in the 
dollar-and-cent perspective." 
Times staff writer Matt Lait contributed to this story. 
