COLUMN ONE; 
OUTLETS FOR FORGOTTEN VIEWERS; 
LOW-POWER TELEVISION SERVES THOSE BEYOND THE REACH OF EITHER CABLE OR 
CONVENTIONAL BROADCASTERS. BUT FEW STATIONS HAVE FULFILLED POPULIST GOALS. 
In small Indian communities from the Rockies to the desert Southwest, low-cost 
television "mini-stations" are broadcasting political debates, giving native 
language instruction and airing documentaries on Indian art and culture. 
Just outside of Disney World in Florida, a similar station beams a steady diet 
of commercials for local tourist attractions along the main strip of hotels and 
motels. 
And in the Bronx, in neighborhoods so poor cable operators are afraid their 
copper wires will be stripped by scavengers, at least 300,000 Haitians tune in 
to a station broadcasting in the patois that most islanders speak. 
This is low-power television -- "LPTV" for short. Transmitting signals over the 
air to areas within a radius of 15 to 30 miles, using as little as 10 watts or 
as much as 1,000 watts -- compared to the hundreds of thousands of watts 
generated by most TV transmitters, these stations serve television's 
disfranchised: viewers geographically and linguistically beyond the reach of 
conventional broadcasting and financially out of reach of cable or satellite 
dishes. And while Lilliputian in size, LPTVs put out signals that can be 
received without any special equipment or fee. For broadcasters, the benefit is 
also the cost. LPTVs can be put on the air for as little as $80,000, although 
there is ample opportunity to lose that much and more. 
The concept emerged out of the counterculture in the early 1970s, when 
technically oriented young people began to use cheap new technologies in rural 
areas that, for topographical reasons, couldn't receive traditional television 
signals. One place this happened was in Lanesville, N.Y., in a small valley 
near Woodstock. A group of people who called themselves the Video-freex set up 
a low-power station, without troubling the Federal Communications Commission 
for a license. 
"We began going around town, kind of making tapes," recalled Paul McIssac. 
Coverage included fires and car accidents, lost dogs, bar fights, weddings and 
baseball games. "They had a wonderful sense of humor and localness." 
These populist pioneers, using the slogan "low power to the people," managed to 
convince the FCC that, in addition to serving rural people "off the net" of 
existing television broadcasting, low-power technology could aim for the 
fringe, providing programming diversity and encouraging minority ownership. 
Nearly two decades later, only a few stations have fulfilled that promise. 
At schools like Dull Knife Memorial College in Lame Deer, Mont., and Navajo 
Community College in Tsaile, Ariz., student interns and volunteers learn how to 
operate cameras and cut videotape on LPTVs, thanks to grants from the U.S. 
Department of Commerce. In addition to sharing oral histories of tribal elders, 
the stations also connect viewers on the reservation with the Global Village, 
beaming "Sesame Street" from satellites to Mescalero Apaches in remote, 
mountainous areas of New Mexico and to the Blackfeet in Montana. 
Low power "works real well for rural areas," said Matthew Jones, project 
coordinator for the Native American Public Broadcasting Consortium in Lincoln, 
Neb. "It gives them an option to do local programming. It's doing for rural 
areas what the access channel is doing for cable in the cities. It gives them a 
voice for promoting cultural awareness." 
Throughout Alaska, 250 public, low-power stations built and operated by the 
state bring a single channel -- combining programming from the one public and 
three commercial networks, along with "interactive" educational programs -- to 
communities. These settlements are so remote that they have no other access to 
television, apart from costly satellite dishes. 
"For a relatively small number of people, it's a godsend," said Andrew 
Schwartzman of the Washington-based Media Access Project, a public interest 
watchdog organization. 
A Buffalo, N.Y., station owned by Ralph Nader's Citizens Television System -- a 
funky, shoestring operation -- also coincides with low power's early ideals. 
Channel 58 is overseen by longtime Nader associate Sam Simon, who notes that 
nearly half the viewing households in the country are not plugged in to cable. 
The station operates from space provided by a local college and is funded 
partly by grants and partly by revenues from ads taken out by local pizza shops 
and pet stores. Simon calls his LPTV, which features school board meetings, 
ballet performances, documentaries, City Council meetings and community 
festivals, "the functional equivalent of local C-SPAN. . . . The idea is, we're 
there, we'll cover it for you." Various groups can come in and do their own 
programming on Channel 58, but the station maintains editorial control. 
"By using this vehicle to let the community speak with itself, share ideas with 
itself, share the experience," Simon said, "it strengthens the community, as 
opposed to delivery of somebody else's ideas of programming." 
There are now approximately 800 LPTVs on the air in the nation, with an average 
viewership of 14,500. In the past year alone, said Keith Larsen, head of the 
LPTV section of the FCC, the government has licensed about 200 new stations in 
the continental 48 states, a 73% increase over the previous year. 
Nevertheless, even as the number of stations grows, the idealistic founders of 
the movement believe that their vision may have fallen victim to commercial 
forces and religious broadcasters who simply want to extend the shopping and 
promotional reach of programming that already is mushrooming on cable. 
Jury Still Out 
There is little original or locally produced programming on most commercial 
LPTVs. Despite reduced start-up costs, less government regulation and the large 
number of the estimated 4,500 new licenses available, the industry says 
minority ownership of privately operated LPTVs is less than 10% -- which still 
dwarfs minority ownership of other TV media. 
Growth also has been spotty. Many stations prove unprofitable and go under. 
Says the FCC's Larsen: "I think low power right now is beginning to get its 
fair test in the marketplace, and I think the jury is out." 
The industry's focus is rapidly shifting to stations like the Tourist Channel 
in Kissimmee, Fla., which borders on major Orlando-area attractions. The 
year-old, almost totally computerized station is located in a suite of offices 
in a bank plaza, broadcasting from its roof to the main strip of hotels and 
motels near Disney World and Sea World. Programming consists of 24 hours a day 
of commercials, weather reports, schedules, prices and "infomercial segments." 
"We're here to do one thing," said general manager Nick Ashton, "make profit 
and have fun. . . . We've taken little tourist magazines and papers and turned 
them into an electronic medium." 
Group Ownership 
Group owners, like the one that owns Ashton's station, now control about half 
of the existing LPTVs in the lower 48 states. Religious broadcasters like 
Orange County-based Trinity Broadcasting Network and the Home Shopping Network, 
taking advantage of the absence of FCC ownership limits, are snapping up 
stations. Full-power television stations are using LPTVs as inexpensive 
transmission towers or as satellite stations to extend their reach. 
In California, says the Community Broadcasters Assn., the low-power trade 
association, there are 37 LPTVs on the air. Although numerous licenses have 
been granted, there are no low-power television stations now operating in 
Southern California, for a variety of reasons including market saturation, 
topography and legal wrangles. However, Cal State Northridge has been granted a 
license and is now advertising for "a potential business partner" to operate an 
LPTV station "that will serve the affluent, 300,000 L.A. suburb of the western 
San Fernando Valley." 
Also active in buying stations and lining up affiliates are programming 
services that feature dog racing, game shows, old movies and inexpensive 
reruns. These organizations, now serving more than 80% of the nation's LPTVs, 
have been able to negotiate their way onto cable systems owned by multiple 
system operators. Channel America, for example also makes use of an 
"interactive" relationship with game show viewers, either with telephones or 
remote control switches. In Florida, if you watch Video Jukebox Network you can 
call a 976 number and, for $2, order up a music video. Other companies hope to 
utilize similar technology to sell cars and real estate and link up to 
off-track betting. 
The financial outlook for the industry remains uncertain, analysts say. 
Bruce Bishop Cheen, a senior analyst for Paul Kagan Associates, a Carmel-based 
media-consulting firm, calls low power the "slowest growing land rush the media 
has ever seen," citing early delays and bureaucratic bottlenecks at the FCC. 
The industry's future is still problematic, he said, with results "all over the 
map." 
The real key, Cheen said, is getting on a cable system. "Cable is a great 
equalizer. Mass delivery is what counts. . . . If innovative LPTV works with 
cable, then the sky's the limit. If it doesn't, the survival rate is not going 
to be impressive. " 
In Worland, Wyo., an LPTV folded after the local cable system operated by 
Denver-based Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest owner of cable 
systems, refused to carry the signal. John C. Malone, TCI's chairman, calls 
LPTV "a very special case," although TCI has carried LPTVs on systems in New 
York and Pennsylvania. There is no companywide policy against carrying 
low-power stations, Malone said, adding that the Nader affiliate in Buffalo is 
"a pretty good thing, and we've agreed to carry it." 
Industry officials acknowledge that there may be no more than two dozen such 
LPTVs operating in the black. And frequently these are in so-called "white 
areas," rural or urban areas that for one reason or another are not adequately 
served by full power stations or by cable. However, these same areas may be 
reached in the future -- perhaps as early as 1992 -- by "direct broadcast 
satellites" and received with inexpensive, window pane-sized receivers, a 
system unveiled in February by four major telecommunications companies. 
Cross-ownership and capitalization are other factors: Single-owner LPTVs seem 
to have a greater chance of survival when they also own a local newspaper, 
radio station, video store, electronic equipment company or are married to 
someone in a deep pockets profession. 
Community Identity 
Perhaps the best known independent LPTV outlet is Channel 43 in Hopkinsville, 
Ky., which has been broadcasting near the Tennessee and Indiana borders for the 
past five years. Before that time, said D.J. Everett, the station manager, "the 
only significant television that the people in our area have been able to get 
has been either Tennessee television or Indiana television. Well, you know 
there's just a normal thing that people do, they identify with their own town 
and their own state." 
Everett's LPTV, which is owned by the prosperous local newspaper, tried various 
formats and types of programming before finding a formula that worked. While 
old movies and sitcoms fill much of the daytime schedule, it is the evening and 
weekend fare that gives the station its identity and pays the bills. 
"We're strictly in the news and sports business," said Everett. "That's what 
the people in our community want. That's what we offer that nobody else offers, 
so they have a very strong reason to watch us. . . . You've got a station there 
in Los Angeles that's (doing) prime time news, which we did over two years 
ago." The emphasis on local news and sports is what got Channel 43 on area 
cable systems, Everett said, and what keeps him there. 
"Of the 15 cable systems that I'm on, the only true local voice on those cable 
systems would be gone if they took me off," he said. 
Richard Bogner, an electronic equipment manufacturer, has had less success with 
the low-power stations he operates in the New York metropolitan area. 
Bogner said he has been "doing reasonably well" with his inner-city stations, 
selling time to various ethnic groups, adding: "I could be happier. . . . I 
haven't gotten a handle on how secure my business is." 
He estimates that at least 300,000 Haitians watch one of his stations, "because 
we're the only station that broadcasts in the patois" that most islanders 
speak. "With an ethnic audience, they sometimes are willing to watch a marginal 
color picture in their language, rather than a great picture on CBS if they 
don't understand it." 
Other models for small-time entrepreneurs are for "boutique" stations, catering 
to upscale clientele in resort areas. In Park City, Utah, and Killington, Vt., 
LPTVs broadcast ski reports, ski championships and ski movies. And in Twin 
Falls, Ida., a low-power station regularly broadcasts baseball games of the 
Seattle Mariners, who own the local minor league franchise. 
Michael Couzens, a former FCC attorney who was one of the architects of low 
power, says that while the industry hasn't fulfilled all of the goals he and 
others had for the medium, he is not disappointed. There are now 500 more 
television stations on the air than there were before. 
"This was a step toward a more competitive television environment," said 
Couzens, now an industry consultant and journalist. "It's not complete, but I'm 
glad it was done. It did its little part." 
Back in Kissimmee, that little part consists of Nick Ashton directing the 
action in the Tourist Channel's tiny studio, where the marketing director for 
nearby Gatorland is on her hands and knees, piecing graphics together on the 
carpet for a camera for another 30-second spot. 
But even on an LPTV as single-mindedly devoted to profits as this one, the pull 
of community service is strong. In the past month, Ashton has added brief 
newscasts from Reuters, an 800-telephone number for tourist problems and three 
minutes per hour of Spanish language information and commercials. 
"I am doing these things as a marketing ploy -- to get people to watch our 
station," Ashton explains. "What low power is designed for is to serve the 
community, and what we have here is a tourism community. . . . We can help them 
and keep them informed." 
