OFF THE WALL; 
CHUNK OF THE BERLIN BARRIER UNVEILED AT REAGAN LIBRARY 
Folks, you may have caught the act during its long-running engagement, 28 years 
in Berlin, and now it's here, in Ventura County. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let's say "Ich bin ein Venturer," and give a big Simi 
Valley welcome to a big performer; the concrete you love to hate -- the Berlin 
Wall! 
Thursday, in a sunny outdoor ceremony that blended patriotism and razzmatazz -- 
a German oompah band direct from San Diego and Mel Torme singing the national 
anthem -- a 9 1/2-foot-high section of the Berlin Wall was unveiled at the 
Reagan Presidential Library in the Ventura County city, where the workmen wear 
caps that read "Building One for the Gipper." 
It's too big for a coffee table, and too small to restrain any freedom-loving 
person in Simi Valley, let alone East Berlin. But it will fit right into the 
archives, ephemera and landmarks of the Reagan presidency. 
Not quite three years ago, Reagan visited West Berlin and, in front of the 
Brandenburg Gate, demanded, "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall." On Thursday, 
Reagan, dwarfed by the 6,338-pound piece, said his 1987 phrasemaking "wasn't 
merely a polite suggestion." 
The donated section is one of only seven complete wall panels in the United 
States. Such intact sections sell from $60,000 for a plain one to $125,000 for 
elaborately painted or graffitied specimens. 
This one, more pristine than the much-graffitied stretches of the wall, shows 
only a red butterfly hovering above flowers on a blue-green background, artwork 
that "obviously couldn't be more than a year old," said Joseph Sciamarelli, 
president of the Berlin Wall Commemorative Group, the exclusive U.S. 
distributor for the wall. 
The Reagan library "originally contacted the government of East Germany and 
asked how they could secure a section of the wall for the library," Sciamarelli 
said. He and his group decided "we didn't want Ronald Reagan to have to make a 
purchase of the wall, with his commitment and what he had done." So with 
fast-food magnate Carl Karcher to help with the buying and shipping costs, the 
wall came west, gratis. 
"It's very positive for the President to have a section of the Berlin Wall," 
said Sciamarelli. And, from a strictly business point of view, it's "good 
public relations" to "let people know the wall is available and it is an item 
that is for sale." 
For the 1,000-plus invited locals, and old Reagan associates like MCA Chairman 
Lew Wasserman, Reagan's former agent, Thursday's unveiling afforded them not 
only a look at Reagan and the wall, but it was the first chance to see what had 
been going on at the hilltop library building site. 
After the spit-and-polish of Reagan's presidency, the dedication had the 
easygoing mood of a block party. Nancy Reagan hoisted a yellow and orange paper 
sun parasol that wouldn't stay open, and once threatened to collapse around her 
head. 
The accordionist with the Bavarian Beer Garden band wore shades with his 
lederhosen. A few folks showed up in shorts and flip-flops. The contingent from 
the UCLA marching band blared out favorites like the theme from "Hawaii 
Five-O," and a Marine in the color guard muttered, "I could use a beer right 
now." 
The 38-minute ceremony, emceed by Johnny Grant, the so-called "Mayor of 
Hollywood," began with the band playing the movie fanfare from 20th Century Fox 
to welcome Reagan, a former Warner Bros. star. Also present were officials from 
East and West Germany, and a young woman who escaped from East Germany before 
the wall was brought down. 
The former President's own remarks were classic "easy listening" Reagan, 
stirring oratory now free of the political constraints of policy-making: The 
wall "shattered dreams and crushed hopes. It made us angry . . . it seemed for 
a time to be impenetrable," but when it came down, "that night, all 
freedom-loving people in the world were Berliners." 
"We accept it with solemn remembrances of the past and the resolution of what 
happened must never happen again. . . . Let our children and grandchildren come 
here and see this wall and reflect on what it meant to history. Let them 
understand that only vigilance and strength will deter tyranny." 
Tyranny was certainly on Ray Mulokas' mind. The Lithuanian-American, his wife, 
daughter and a friend wore black crepe paper armbands to the unveiling. 
"We weren't here to demonstrate, not to take away the good done by Ronald 
Reagan," he said. But "we hope we can celebrate with the East Germans one day." 
For Simi Valley student Jason Oliver, 15, one of the designated escorts who got 
"this close" to Reagan, it was on-the-job training for when he is president, in 
2016, he figures. He has dedicated himself to that goal "since I was 6 years 
old. That's been my life, except for like going to Disneyland." 
Locals snapped one another's picture in front of the fragment of wall. Boy 
Scouts collected the discarded Pepsi cups that were blowing away. 
And German bandsman Joe Dyke loaded up his musical gear for the drive back to 
San Diego. 
Sure, he liked it, he said. "Show business is my whole life." 
