SWINTON WEATHERS ACADEMIC DIFFICULTY AT WASHINGTON STATE 
While he was making the grade on the football field last fall, Washington 
State's Rich Swinton was posting unsatisfactory grades in the classroom. But 
after a semester on academic probation, the former National Merit Scholar from 
Montclair Prep said that the crisis is over. 
"I got caught up in the college life -- partying -- and I lost sight of my 
goals," he said. "It took this big kick in the rear to wake me up. I'm awake 
now." 
Last fall, Swinton became only the sixth ballcarrier in Washington State 
history to rush for more than 1,000 yards, running for 1,018 yards and 12 
touchdowns as the Cougars posted a 9-3 record and earned an Aloha Bowl bid. But 
WSU's best performance on the field since 1930 did not carry over into the 
classroom, where the team's grade-point average dropped to 1.94. 
Five players, including Swinton and fellow 1,000-yard rusher Steve Broussard, 
did so poorly that the school's academic review board placed them on probation. 
In order to qualify for reinstatement to the university, the players had to sit 
out spring practice, which concluded with Friday's intrasquad game. 
Washington State's spring semester ends this week, but Swinton already has 
taken two finals that, he says, he "passed with flying colors." 
"I'm going to be around here whether they want me back or not," Swinton said by 
phone from Pullman, Wash. 
Swinton graduated from Montclair Prep with a 3.4 GPA and considered attending 
Harvard before joining high school teammate Tim Stallworth at Washington State. 
Stallworth was held out of Friday's game for failing to complete his football 
physical. 
Swinton, who redshirted his freshman year, will be a junior next season. He 
changed his major from business to sociology this semester after his college 
GPA dropped to "about two." 
"Last semester damaged my GPA a little bit, but when the new grades come in, it 
will be in the mid-two range," Swinton said. "I'm OK. I'm no longer in the 
red." 
Swinton, an honorable mention All-Pacific 10 selection last fall, will remain 
in Pullman to attend summer school and to get ready for the football season. 
