NEW FRONT OPENED IN OIL SPILL BATTLE; 
BOOMS RUSHED ALONG GULF OF ALASKA AS SLICK MOVES OUT 100 MILES 
As thick ribbons of oily mousse glided 100 miles into the Gulf of Alaska, 
threatening a national park, state and federal officials opened a second front 
in their battle to contain the nation's largest oil spill. 
Booms to contain the advancing menace were rushed to the towns of Seward and 
Homer and to Kodiak Island, which is nearly 300 miles from the spill site in 
Prince William Sound. Exxon and federal scientists estimate that about half the 
oil lost in the spill has exited the sound and entered the Gulf of Alaska, 
creeping south at between 15 and 20 miles a day. 
At the same time, another sea mammal rescue and recovery center was being 
opened in Seward, 100 miles southwest of Valdez on the scenic Kenai Peninsula, 
at a time when the Valdez center was being taxed beyond its capacity to care 
for growing numbers of otters and sea birds. 
Threat Heads Westward 
"We're beginning to move our resources westward to contain the potential threat 
to the Gulf of Alaska," Exxon Shipping Co. President Frank Iarossi said Friday. 
So far, efforts to protect Prince William Sound's four salmon hatcheries have 
been successful. 
Multiple booms have been stretched in front of their entrances. But officials 
and fishermen alike kept a wary eye on weather reports. 
While there are no immediate indications of a storm, they warned that should a 
"southeasterner" blow in with gale-force winds, damage in the sound could be 
doubled and the salmon hatcheries decimated. 
"If we have a southeasterner, we'll have hundreds of miles of beaches 
impacted," Alaska Environmental Conservation Commissioner Dennis D. Kelso said 
Friday. 
"Depending on the strength and longevity of the storm, it would easily double 
the area that's impacted now," he warned, and for the first time stain the 
Kenai Fjords National Park. The park, with its coastline of dramatic oceanfront 
canyons and rocky inlets, is located on the Kenai Peninsula. 
"I'm sure some of it will be hitting the park. I'm just not sure what 
quantity," Kelso said. 
Late Friday, Kelso issued an emergency order, effective immediately, imposing 
strict new rules on the Valdez oil terminal and threatening the oil industry 
with criminal and civil penalties if it fails to follow the state's new 
get-tough policy. The order calls for limited oil tanker loading at the 
terminal until a long list of spill equipment is in place. 
Meanwhile, the grim and often disheartening task of attempting to save injured 
birds and animals continued unabated here. 
Best Efforts Not Enough 
As of Friday, 85 oil-soaked sea otters have been retrieved from the 
once-pristine sound and rushed to the animal recovery center here. But half of 
those animals have died, despite the best efforts of an overworked team of 
volunteers and marine mammal experts. 
A pathologist has been brought to Valdez to conduct necropsies on the dead 
animals, trying to find a way to cut the losses. Results of tissue sample 
analyses are due within days, said Suzanne Stolpe of the rescue center. 
An additional 109 dead otters have been turned into the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, bringing the official otter death toll to 151 otters. But, scientists 
believe that an untold number of dead seals and otters have either been swept 
out to sea or sank to the bottom. 
Five of the otters were shipped by the rescue center to Sea World in San Diego, 
but only three remain alive. 
Some 166 birds have been rescued, but 60 of those died. Another 300 dead birds 
were turned over to the Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Tom Williams, a veterinarian with the Monterey Bay Aquarium, said sea otters 
often will not fight to live. 
"A cat will fight with you. But an otter will just look at you with those eyes 
and say, 'sayonara, I'm going,' " said Williams. 
For several days, the animal rescue center was unable to handle the volume of 
otters being brought in from the sound, and the Fish and Wildlife Service 
ordered a halt to the rescue. 
Otter Transfer Stopped 
And, when state officials here attempted to dispatch 12 sick otters to 
Vancouver, British Columbia, to be cared for by experts at the Vancouver 
Aquarium, the Fish and Wildlife Service prohibited the transfer because travel 
is extremely stressful for the animals. 
A day earlier, a rag-tag fleet of fishing boats and volunteers organized by 
Kelley Weaverling of Cordova was ordered to halt its otter rescues. 
"I didn't like it at all," Weaverling said. 
The Alaska Fish and Game Department said it may be "years" before Prince 
William Sound can support the levels of fish and wildlife that existed before 
the spill. 
It said some areas such as marshes may be affected for decades by the spill. 
There are between 300,000 and 400,000 birds resident in the sound now and 
another 1 million waterfowl and 10 million shore birds will pass through the 
sound within weeks on their way to interior breeding areas or elsewhere in 
coastal Alaska. 
Some May Be Safe 
Many of these birds, the state said, will safely pass over the eastern portion 
of the sound not affected by the spill. Others, however, will pass through area 
severely hit by the March 24 spill from the Exxon Valdez. 
So far, no bald eagles -- the national symbol -- have been found dead, but 
biologists believe it is only a matter of time. 
During a visit to Green Island, reporters found an oil-soiled dead duck that 
had apparently been eaten by an eagle. The duck was found below an eagle's 
nest. There is concern that as eagles and other predators ingest the oil on the 
carcasses of birds and mammals that they will begin to die. 
Takes Many Forms 
Overflights by specialists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration indicate that the slick is taking on many different forms. In 
Prince William Sound, the oil remains thick and heavy along the eastern shore 
of Knight Island and the northern fringes of Green and Smith Islands. In these 
areas, it is a frothy mousse or thick pancake. 
As it enters the sound, it dissipates somewhat, as smoke wafts from a 
cigarette. In the gulf, the goo ranges from a very thin iridescent sheen on the 
water to windrows, or ribbons, of pale brown mousse outlined in vivid violet. 
"It's looking more like a thin layer of latex paint on the water," said Hal 
Alabaster of NOAA. "Brown and orange latex paint." 
