MOVIES OF THE WEEK 
Trenchcoat (Channel 5 Sunday at 6 p.m.) is an anemic 1983 mystery-comedy from 
Disney with a caper plot involving fledgling mystery writer Margot Kidder, who 
is the sole reason for sitting through this disappointment. With that grand 
gargle of a voice, she manages to be absolutely lovable as she suffers through 
the film's absurdities with vigor and elan. 
In his sleek and scary 1981 Wolfen (Channel 13 Sunday at 6 p.m.), director 
Michael Wadleigh keeps us mystified right up to a jolting finish. Albert Finney 
stars as a veteran Manhattan cop trying to solve a series of perplexing 
killings which are so swiftly brutal nobody can figure out how they were done. 
The film's bravura special effects are so firmly held in check by a carefully 
established premise, succinct characterizations and much wry wit that the film 
is able to evolve into an allegory on the perils of man's violence against 
nature. 
Tim Matheson stars in the new TV movie The Littlest Victims (CBS Sunday at 9 
p.m.) as Dr. James Oleske, one of the first physicians to detect AIDS in 
children. 
Baywatch: Panic at Malibu Pier (NBC Sunday at 9 p.m.) stars David Hasselhoff 
and Parker Stevenson as lifeguards in what sounds like a series pilot. 
Peter Gunn (ABC Sunday at 9 p.m.) is another new TV movie, with Peter Strauss 
cast as the suave private eye created by Craig Stevens in the Blake Edwards TV 
series. 
Margaret Bourke-White (TNT Monday at 5 p.m.) is a new TV movie starring Farrah 
Fawcett as the Life magazine photographer who gained recognition for her 
pioneering work in still photography. Frederic Forrest co-stars as playwright 
and novelist Erskine Caldwell. 
Tough Guys (NBC Monday at 9 p.m.) may be less than plausible, especially at the 
finish, but this 1986 film is a rousing success as a tribute to its durably 
larger-than-life stars, Burt Lancaster and Kirk Douglas, who triumph over their 
own canonization as a pair of veteran bank robbers, released into the modern 
world after years in the slammer. 
Bruce Boxleitner stars in The Road Raiders (CBS Tuesday at 8 p.m.), a new TV 
movie about an oddball World War II military unit. 
Last Train From Gun Hill (Channel 11 Tuesday at 8 p.m.) is a solid 1959 John 
Sturges Western which stars Kirk Douglas as a steely sheriff determined to 
bring the young killer of his wife to justice. 
The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission (Channel 5 Wednesday at 8 p.m.) is the first 
(1985) of the three unfortunate TV movie sequels to the mordant Robert Aldrich 
1967 World War II adventure; Lee Marvin, Ernest Borgnine and Richard Jaeckel 
returned from the original. 
Peter Hyams' highly entertaining 1981 Outland (Channel 13 Wednesday at 8 p.m.) 
is "High Noon" cleverly transposed to outer space and affords Sean Connery one 
of his strongest portrayals as a federal marshal who's pulled a year's tour of 
duty at a mining colony on a volcanic moon of Jupiter. He's there only two 
weeks when he becomes puzzled by a series of deaths, all of them apparent 
suicides. 
Stacy Keach, Keith Carradine and Steve Railsback star in The Forgotten (USA 
Wednesday at 9 p.m.). It's a new cable movie about six Green Berets who are 
released by the Vietnamese government. 
Nighthawks (Channel 13 Thursday at 8 p.m., again on Saturday at 10 p.m.) is a 
great-looking, fast-paced 1981 terrorist thriller so stripped down that it's 
outright vague as to why -- or for whom -- professional assassin Rutger Hauer 
is on such a rampage. Pursuing him are New York undercover policemen Sylvester 
Stallone and Billy Dee Williams, with Stallone's estranged wife (Lindsay 
Wagner) eventually becoming Hauer's target. Also featured are Nigel Davenport 
as the head of Interpol and Persis Khambatta as Hauer's accomplice. 
Conan the Destroyer (Channel 13 Friday at 8 p.m.) is the amusing 1984 Richard 
Fleischer-directed sequel to "Conan the Barbarian." This time Arnold 
Schwarzenegger's Frank Frazetta-like superhero is teamed appropriately with 
Grace Jones. 
8 1/2 (Channel 28 Saturday at 10 p.m.) is Federico Fellini's dreamy, reflective 
masterpiece about a film director in crisis. As usual, Marcello Mastroianni is 
superb as Fellini's alter-ego. 
The ratings checks on movies in the TV log are provided by the Tribune TV Log 
listings service. 
