TAX BOARD SAYS NO TO AGNEW'S BID FOR REFUND 
Former Vice President Spiro T. Agnew is not entitled to California income tax 
deductions for the $142,500 he paid the state of Maryland as restitution for 
bribes he collected while in public office, a tax appeals board ruled Thursday. 
The California Board of Equalization voted unanimously to deny the former vice 
president's request for a $24,197 tax refund after one member asserted that it 
would be ridiculous to construe the repayment of bribes to be deductible 
business expenses. 
"I find it very hard to be sympathetic," said board member Conway Collis, "to 
someone who had to pay over $140,000 back to the state of Maryland as part of 
restitution for bribes taken, but now wants California to allow him a deduction 
for that payback just because he is now a California resident." 
Neither Agnew, who lives in Rancho Mirage, nor his attorney attended the brief 
hearing. 
Agnew had paid the tax under protest after the Franchise Tax Board disallowed 
the deduction in a 1986 audit of his 1982 state income tax return. He appealed 
the decision to the five-member Board of Equalization, where it automatically 
became a public matter. 
Agnew was accused by federal prosecutors in 1973 of collecting illegal cash 
kickbacks on highway contracts beginning in the early 1960s when he was 
Baltimore County executive and continuing while he was governor and vice 
president. 
Agnew resigned as vice president on Oct. 10, 1973, and pleaded no contest to a 
single charge that he had evaded federal income taxes on the bribes. He was 
ordered to pay a $10,000 fine and handed a three-year suspended prison term. 
He was subsequently directed to pay back taxes on the kickbacks, along with 
interest and penalties amounting to $148,000 to the federal government and 
$14,105 to the state of Maryland. 
Moved to California 
Later, as a result of a civil lawsuit, he was ordered to make restitution 
payments totaling $268,482 to the state of Maryland to cover the amount of the 
bribes plus interest. By the time the court issued its order, Agnew had become 
a California resident. 
Agnew could have filed for a refund on his Maryland taxes but his attorney 
maintains that by that time the statute of limitations had run out. 
In a short appeal, Agnew argued that he was entitled to deduct the restitution 
payments from his state income tax because he made them to satisfy a court 
order. He also contended that, since he had already been taxed on the bribes by 
the state of Maryland, it would be unfair for California to prevent him from 
deducting the restitution payment. 
Attorneys for the Board of Equalization recommended that his request for a 
refund be denied, arguing that the question of double taxation was something 
Agnew needed to resolve with the state of Maryland and not the state of 
California. Under California law, they said, payment of the court judgment is 
not a deductible expense. 
"It would hardly be equitable for the taxpayers of California essentially to 
foot the bill for part of (Agnew's) liability to the taxpayers of Maryland for 
bribes received while he was a resident and elected official of that state," 
they wrote. 
Despite their unanimity on the issue, the Agnew case illustrated anew the 
animosity that exists among the five Board of Equalization members, who 
regularly accuse each other of grandstanding for the press. 
"I want to thank Mr. Agnew for bringing this to our attention because . . . we 
all have political ambitions and there's nothing more delightful than this 
publicity feast upon which we can all indulge," said board member William 
Bennett with tongue in cheek. 
Retorted Chairman Paul Carpenter: "I think I've heard the pot calling the 
kettle black." 
Although he voted to deny the refund, Bennett wondered afterward whether cases 
such as Agnew's, which generate tremendous publicity, ever get a fair hearing 
from elected public officials. 
"People such as Agnew and others are in a very difficult position when it comes 
to getting a fair and objective hearing, and that's wrong," he said. 
But in Maryland, former lawyers and prosecutors involved in his court cases 
told the Associated Press they could not sympathize with Agnew for his tax 
difficulties. 
"Nothing that Mr. Agnew will try to do surprises me," said John F. Banzhaf III, 
a law professor who helped develop the civil case against the former vice 
president. "It takes a tremendous amount of chutzpah to try to take a tax 
deduction for bribe money." 
"Do I feel sorry for Agnew? Absolutely not. He is one of the luckiest men of 
his generation," said Stephen H. Sachs, who was Maryland's attorney general 
when Agnew made the restitution payment. "Agnew's plea bargain was the greatest 
deal since the Lord spared Isaac on the mountaintop." 
Agnew can now either ask the board for another hearing or appeal its ruling to 
the courts. 
