BOND BUYERS ARE JUMPY, AND YIELDS MOVE LIKEWISE; 
INVESTMENTS: CONCERNS ABOUT INFLATION HAVE MIXED WITH WORRIES ABOUT A JAPANESE 
WITHDRAWAL FROM THE TREASURY MARKET. 
The people who oversee the flow of billions through the markets earn their keep 
putting up with uncertainty. But sometimes the market's mysteries become too 
much even for them, and they head for the exits. 
That's roughly what's been happening in the bond market in recent weeks. 
Concerns about inflation have mixed with worries about a Japanese withdrawal 
from the Treasury-bond market, the unforeseen costs of the thrift bailout and 
other fears, driving some professional bond buyers from the action. 
Their pullback has caused bond yields to edge upward. Last week, the yield on 
the benchmark 30-year Treasury bonds exceeded 9% for the first time in a year. 
That's was a substantial increase of about half a percentage point in just the 
past month. 
Another sign of the bond buyers' nervousness was the full 1-percentage-point 
spread between yields on short-term and long-term Treasury bonds. The spread 
was investors' way of saying they needed to be paid more for the risk that 
inflation would erode some of their long-term investment. 
"It takes a certain amount of guts to face a market like this," said Kevin 
Logan, chief economist at the New York office of Swiss Bank Corp. "Right now, 
there aren't too many guys out there who want to be brave." 
The high rates have been greeted warmly by some individual investors, who have 
been buying bonds with a fervor not seen in some time. 
But the situation is giving the willies to institutional investors, who have 
worried that prices would slide further before they got around to selling. 
Treasury bond yields are benchmarks for a wide variety of other interest rates, 
so rising rates portend bad news for some sectors of the economy. 
The auto and housing sectors, for example, are already weak. They could suffer 
even more if rates rise further. 
The biggest blow to the traders' confidence was a recent report on the consumer 
price index, which suggested that prices were rising quickly but didn't 
entirely explain why, Logan said. 
CPI numbers that came out April 17 showed that even when volatile food and 
energy components were stripped away, inflation was 0.7% in March. That came as 
a shock to the many investors who were looking for a rise of about 0.2%. 
For the first quarter, inflation -- less food and energy components -- was 
rising at a 7.5% rate. "That just jumped out from behind a rock, and nobody 
quite knew why it was there," Logan said. 
For much of last week, bond traders were looking with apprehension toward 
Friday's release of government statistics that would show more about inflation 
and quantify the first-quarter rise of the gross national product. 
The bond market survived that report without a crisis, but perhaps only because 
it had hunkered down, expecting the worst. 
The figures showed that the quarterly GNP was up 2.1%, twice the previous 
quarter's rate but substantially short of the 2.5% to 2.7% some analysts were 
expecting. The news was somewhat comforting, since a slower growth rate 
presumably means there will be less bidding up of prices. 
The inflation figures that came with Friday's government report were less 
reassuring. By an inflation gauge called the GNP deflator, prices were up 6.7% 
for the first quarter, compared to 4.5% a year earlier. 
Many analysts believe that the rise in long-term rates, by signaling the 
market's inflation anxieties, puts additional pressure on the Federal Reserve 
Board to hike rates. 
While the central bank isn't panicked as easily as the markets, some contend 
that a failure to raise rates to brake inflation would hurt the Fed's 
credibility and lessen its ability to control inflation in the future. 
"I think they're under considerable pressure here," said Roger Craig, portfolio 
manager at Banc One Asset Management in Columbus, Ohio. He predicted that 
yields on the 30-year Treasury bond might drift up somewhat further, to as much 
as 9.25%, over the next several weeks. 
Robert Dederick, chief economist with Northern Trust Bank in Chicago, noted 
that two of the 11 members of the Fed committee that has primary responsibility 
for credit have recently spoken in favor of a tightening. 
But he pointed out that Fed members, like some economists, might interpret the 
mixed signals coming from the economy to mean that inflation may abate as the 
year goes on. 
Dederick said the GNP figures were distorted by a "series of quirks," such as 
the effects of last year's Boeing strike, which made this year's figures look 
stronger, as well as December's sharply colder weather and auto company sales 
incentives that began in December. 
The rise in bond yields has "certainly put the issue of a rate hike on the 
table (for the Fed). But I'd want to see more evidence," Dederick said. 
Many analysts expect the bond market to remain spooked over the next several 
weeks for several reasons. 
Some investors are worried by the prospect that the Japanese won't be as eager 
to participate in next month's $30-billion Treasury refinancing as they have in 
the past. There's anxiety, too, over a government report on employment due 
Friday. 
But some assert that the worries are baseless. John D. Connolly, an analyst 
with Dean Witter, says the Japanese haven't been such big buyers at the 
Treasury bond auctions after all. 
Last year, they bought a net $2.4 billion in Treasuries. The top foreign 
buyers, the British, bought a net $20.2 billion. 
Connolly maintains that the absence of huge sales of high-yield certificates of 
deposit by thrifts suggests that there aren't a lot of S&amp;Ls out there with 
dire but hidden problems. 
On inflation, Connolly is reassured by the stable growth in wages, which are 
advancing at a year-to-year rate of 4%. 
"The trouble in bond-land is exaggerated," he says. 
