MUSIC AND DANCE REVIEWS ; 
PREVIN LEADS PHILHARMONIC IN PROKOFIEV PROGRAM 
Think about Andre Previn's repertory specialties, and probably Prokofiev does 
not come immediately to mind. But he has been working consistently and 
effectively with the composer's music, as witness his recent recordings with 
the Los Angeles Philharmonic. 
Previn will also soon record the Sinfonia Concertante, with the orchestra and 
Austrian cellist Heinrich Schiff, who made his Philharmonic debut in the work 
on Thursday evening on a Prokofiev program at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion. 
That should be a disc worth getting. In what remains the most comprehensively 
challenging concerted work for cello, Schiff displayed conquering technical 
heroics in service to well-thought communication, and there was nothing mean 
about the vital contributions of Previn &amp; Co. either. 
Schiff held nothing back, whether in concentrated lyricism or tortured 
passagework. Yet all remained thoroughly under control, sensitively supported 
with taut sound. 
Previn and the Philharmonic backed Schiff's effort with clarity and 
accommodating balances. The whole was purposefully paced, with even the 
longueurs of the opening integrated in retrospect. 
The concert began with explosive readings of the March and Scherzo from "The 
Love for Three Oranges." The brisk, direct performance hit with a sonic impact 
rare in the Pavilion. 
In between came the Seventh Symphony, product of a composer broken on the rack 
of Stalinist cultural ideology in 1948. Inspired in large measure by 
Rostropovich, Prokofiev was able to overcome the effects of official censure in 
recomposing the Sinfonia from an earlier concerto, but the careful textures and 
simple charms of the Seventh reveal little of his typical bite and power. 
Previn laid it out neatly enough, without communicating anything more 
compelling than a sense of compassionate affection for what the work could have 
been. The Philharmonic responded in kind, with fluent solos and ensemble 
strength, but aloof in spirit. JOHN HENKEN 
