CHENEY'S HOLDING ACTION 
President Bush's honeymoon was short, but Defense Secretary Richard B. Cheney 
got none at all in his first few weeks at work. He was overruled by Bush on his 
first major weapons decision and he will be overtaken on his first budget. But 
he can both get even and get ahead if he can explain to the White House and to 
American taxpayers generally what the Pentagon's mission is in this changing 
world and what the mission will cost. No other defense secretary has done that. 
Few have tried. 
Cheney's first budget is a holding action. It does not cut spending by enough 
-- particularly in research on "Star Wars" -- and it does not come any closer 
than past budgets to drawing a direct connection between money the Pentagon 
proposes to spend and the reason for spending it. As in the past, it fails to 
describe in some intellectual, strategic and tactical detail the dangers that 
make the expenditure so crucial. 
Cheney submitted the budget when he did to meet a procedural deadline, one that 
happened to occur before, and perhaps long before, the Bush Administration had 
finished its exhaustive review of national goals and strategies, foreign and 
domestic, on which it says it will base decisions about national security 
policy. 
As a result, the Cheney budget would invest money in both a railroad-based 
system of MX missiles with 10 warheads each -- something that the Soviet Union 
would bend every effort to monitor -- and a single-warhead, truck-mounted 
Midgetman missile -- something that the Soviets could ignore because it could 
not be used in a surprise attack. That compelling feature of the Midgetman, 
which makes it less provocative than bigger missiles, is based on the fact that 
only 300 or so are planned, far too few to knock out enough Soviet missiles so 
that they could not fire back in retaliation. 
Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wisc.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, says 
that the partisan politics in Congress mean that the Pentagon cannot get either 
missile unless Republicans and Democrats can each vote for both. It is possible 
that the country could get along without either if it worked hard at 
negotiating away the existence of both large and small mobile missiles during 
future sessions of START arms control talks in Geneva. 
On that subject, Aspin, whose political judgments are in part molded by 
experience as a serious analyst at the Pentagon years ago, says that the Bush 
White House has been entirely too timid about the utility of arms-control 
agreements in its reappraisal of the world. 
Aspin is right about that. It does not make sense to base major Pentagon budget 
decisions on the threat posed by some nuclear weapon if the threat could be 
made negligible by stronger arms-control agreements and new procedures for 
verifying that neither superpower was secretly rearming. 
Congress should consider the Pentagon budget a rough draft and put off serious 
consideration of it until the White House review of America's long-range 
military strategy is completed. If the second draft of the Pentagon budget 
comes no closer to reality than the first, it should write its own. Our 
impression is that Richard B. Cheney is too smart to let that happen. 
