FOR WANT OF A VOTE . . . 
Fifty-seven voters forced Julie Korenstein, The Times' choice for reelection to 
the Los Angeles Board of Education, into a runoff in the general election in 
June. Although nearly 70,000 voters marked ballots on April 11, a handful of 
votes denied Korenstein the majority she needed for outright victory. The 
results ought to persuade Californians everywhere that it matters a great deal 
whether they go to the polls. 
Nearly 305,000 voters were eligible to vote in the Korenstein election, but 
something less than 25% actually did so. Maybe the non-voters didn't care about 
the quality of instruction in the public schools or how much the teachers will 
get paid, the current controversies before the board. 
Unfortunately, the low voter turnout shouldn't be all that surprising. It is 
part of a national trend. 
Last year's presidential election attracted only half of the nation's eligible 
voters, according to the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, 
based in Washington, D.C. The voter turnout dropped in 48 states last November. 
California's turnout was a dismal 44.1%; only four states and the District of 
Columbia made a poorer showing. Many voters stayed home, according to experts 
at the research group, because they disliked both candidates, but making the 
best of a poor choice is often what voting is all about. In Los Angeles, the 
recent mayoral election drew barely 23% of the registered voters as Mayor Tom 
Bradley narrowly won an unprecedented fifth term on April 11. That was the 
worst turnout in more than three decades despite pervasive concerns about 
crime, traffic, growth and other challenges facing the city. 
Voter apathy must be contagious. Municipal elections in Orange County have 
drawn similarly low percentages. The turnout hit 23.5% in the elections last 
year in Los Alamitos, 25.9% in Fountain Valley and 22% in San Juan Capistrano, 
which hold elections again next month. 
Non-voters can always come up with a reason for not going to the polls. They 
are too busy, too tired, overworked, too indifferent or too smug to mail in a 
ballot or go into the voting booth. Those who believe their vote doesn't count 
should take a hard look at Korenstein's experience. 
On the day after the election, Korenstein held -- although barely -- the 
majority she needed to keep her seat on the school board. After the absentee 
ballots were counted, Korenstein fell a few votes short. If another 57 
supporters of Korenstein had gone to the polls in April, there would be no need 
for a runoff on June 6, persuasive evidence that every vote really does matter. 
