COLLEGE BASEBALL ROUNDUP; 
CLU BUMPS OFF PEPPERDINE FOR SECOND CONSECUTIVE YEAR 
Mike Rooney relieved struggling starter Tim Wimbish in the second inning and 
allowed three runs over the next 5 2/3 innings as Cal Lutheran rallied to 
defeat Pepperdine, 11-8, in a nonconference game in Malibu. 
It marked the second time in as many seasons that Cal Lutheran (19-10) had 
defeated Pepperdine (26-15). Rooney (3-3) allowed two hits, walked three and 
struck out two. 
Cal Lutheran scored four times in the third to take a 5-4 lead, added two in 
the sixth and four in the seventh. Chris Matkin relieved Rooney with one on and 
one out in the eighth. Pepperdine cut the lead to 11-8 in the inning, but 
Matkin pitched a scoreless ninth. 
Peter Washington was two for three with a home run and three runs batted in for 
Cal Lutheran. Manny Alvarez and Leonard Matsumoto each added three hits. 
In other games: 
The Master's 8, Westmont 7 -- The Mustangs scored three runs in the sixth 
inning and two in the seventh to win the NAIA District 3 game at Reese Field. 
Trailing, 7-6, after 6 1/2 innings, Master's (19-15, 9-7 in District 3) scored 
in the seventh on consecutive singles by Sheldon Sparks, Russ Henzie, Craig 
Johnson and Andy Martin. 
Sparks, who was three for five, extended his hitting streak to a school-record 
19 games by singling in the third. 
Rick Simpson (3-5), who relieved John March, gave up a two-run home run to the 
first batter he faced in the fifth inning, Jeff Kliewer. But he settled down 
after that to pick up the win. 
Simpson gave up six hits and two earned runs in five innings, while striking 
out three and walking no one. 
He retired the last nine batters he faced after giving up a leadoff single in 
the seventh. 
Master's narrowed a 7-3 deficit to one run in the sixth. 
Martin slugged a one-out solo home run to start the rally and Jeff Preston was 
hit by a pitch. 
Mark MacArthur doubled Preston to third, and Jeff Cole doubled in MacArthur and 
Preston. 
Cole, who was three for four with a home run (his fourth) and two doubles, 
drove in four runs and scored twice. 
Rich Ebarb (2-2) took the loss for Westmont. 
Valley 9, East L.A. 8 -- Valley's Mark Cavarretta went from goat to hero in a 
nonconference game. 
First baseman Cavarretta had a two-run throwing error in the fourth as East 
L.A. built a 7-3 lead at Valley, but his two-out single in the ninth scored the 
winning run. 
Dan Carroll (3-2) pitched two innings of scoreless relief to earn the victory. 
Cavarretta had a double and two singles, and third baseman John Stephens had a 
triple and two singles to lead Valley (13-17-2). East L.A. is 14-12. 
Valley catcher Ed Aguilar tied the game at 8-8 with a two-run double in the 
eighth. 
