TWA OWNER IS SAID PONDERING EASTERN BUYOUT; 
AIRLINES: CARL C. ICAHN IS REPORTEDLY TALKING WITH CREDITORS OF THE BANKRUPT 
COMPANY, BUT AN OFFER HAS NOT YET BEEN MADE. 
As the unsecured creditors for Eastern Airlines step up pressure to sell the 
carrier, Trans World Airlines owner Carl C. Icahn has resurfaced as a possible 
buyer, sources said Wednesday. 
Icahn and his associates held informal discussions recently with 
representatives of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., financial advisers to the 
committee of Eastern's unsecured creditors, said the sources, who spoke on 
condition they not be identified. The talks have been preliminary, and the 
notion of an Icahn bid for Eastern has not yet "ripened," one of them said. 
Eastern spokesman Robin Matell declined comment on the matter. Icahn's office 
said he was unavailable for comment, and aides at Goldman Sachs did not 
immediately return phone calls. 
Goldman Sachs reportedly told the committee recently that TWA is not interested 
in bidding for Eastern, but a source close to the airline company said there is 
some interest. 
The creditors' committee, exasperated by Eastern's mounting losses, voted 
Tuesday to reject the airline's latest reorganization proposal and to seek the 
appointment of a special trustee to sell Eastern. The creditors have been 
soliciting possible buyers behind the scenes in recent weeks, sources say. 
Icahn, a corporate investor who took TWA private in October, 1988, appears to 
have emerged as the predominant potential buyer, the sources said. They 
suggested he might bid for Eastern in concert with other investors. 
Icahn's interest in Miami-based Eastern goes back at least to September, 1988, 
when members of Eastern's machinists union met with him about a possible bid. 
After Eastern's filing for bankruptcy protection on March 9, 1989, and the 
subsequent collapse of an attempted buyout led by ex-baseball Commissioner 
Peter V. Ueberroth, Icahn was the unions' favorite to buy the strike-plagued 
airline. 
Machinists, pilots and flight attendants struck Eastern on March 4, 1989. 
Icahn was TWA's white knight in 1986, buying the airline in a $440-million deal 
to thwart an attempted takeover by Frank Lorenzo, chairman of Eastern's parent 
Texas Air Corp. 
Industry analysts have noted a potential compatibility between Eastern, which 
operates mainly between the Northeast, Florida and Atlanta, and TWA, which is 
strongest in transatlantic operations. 
But Icahn backed off from Eastern last May. TWA said it needed more time to 
discuss with its unions the feasibility of integrating the TWA and Eastern work 
forces and was not prepared to submit a formal bid at that time. 
Eastern, battered by the strike, continues to report losses and is having 
difficulty attracting passengers. The rebuilt airline has sold more than $800 
million in assets with the approval of a U.S. bankruptcy court and would now be 
valued at far less than the $464 million offered by the Ueberroth group. 
TWA has problems of its own. It recently reported a net loss of $298.5 million 
in 1989. 
