OCC SWIM TEAM SEEKS RECORDS IN WATER, CLASS 
In 1982, Don Watson lost his first dual meet as coach of the Orange Coast 
College women's swimming team. He has yet to lose another one. 
Since then, the Orange Coast women have won 68 consecutive dual meets, and 
today the Pirates will try to defeat Saddleback in Mission Viejo and apparently 
establish a record for consecutive victories for a California community college 
team in any sport. 
Although such records are not kept by the state, Orange Coast officials have 
determined that three teams -- including the Pirates -- have won 68 consecutive 
community college events. Long Beach had a 12-year men's track winning streak 
ended at 68 last week when it lost to Mt. San Antonio, and between 1979 and 
1981 Golden West won 68 consecutive water polo matches. 
Eight of Orange Coast's 16 swimmers return from last season's team, which won 
the Pirates' fifth state championship in six years. 
Watson's swimming dynasty says a lot about the area and the school. All but one 
of the women's team members are from Orange County, a strong pool of swimming 
talent. More Orange Coast students transfer to four-year schools than from any 
other community college in the state, and many of the 12,500 full-time students 
are attracted by that academic record. 
But in the pool, much of the success can be attributed to Watson's training 
demands. 
Although the training program is difficult, this is no meat market. Watson 
fancies himself an educator and hopes that he can help his athletes develop as 
people as well. 
Watson's No. 1 goal is for each of his athletes to graduate from a four-year 
institution. All swimmers -- including members of the men's team, which has 
finished second in the state meet the past two seasons -- are taking courses 
that can be transferred as general education credits at four-year institutions. 
"Everybody on the team would consider it a major negative event if somebody 
failed to graduate from a four-year school," Watson said. 
The swimmers know that if a swimmer regularly misses class, Watson may hold her 
out of a meet, even the state championships. 
"If it means we are not going to win state without the person, then we are not 
going to win state," said Celina Lemke, a sophomore who finished third in the 
200-yard freestyle, fourth in the 400 free and seventh in the 100 breaststroke 
in the state meet last year. 
Because of the Pirates' success in dual meets -- Watson said they haven't come 
close to losing one since 1984 -- winning is taken for granted. 
"I didn't even know we were on a winning streak," said Karen Palitschek, who 
won the state title in the 50 and 100 butterfly last season. 
That's just fine with Watson, who says it's more important to get his swimmers 
to "do the right thing when no one is looking" than worry about winning dual 
meets. 
After the Orange Coast women finished second in the 1988 state meet after 
winning four consecutive state titles, rival coaches sought Watson out to 
console him. Palomar Coach Greg Ormsby put it in perspective. 
"Greg looked at me and asked, 'How many of your kids are going on to four-year 
schools?' " Watson said. "I said all of them, and he chuckled and said, 'The 
real streak is still intact.' " 
"I didn't lose a wink of sleep over (second place)." 
