RESTAURANT REVIEW; 
BRIGHT, INVENTIVE ENTRIES ON BELLINI'S MENU 
Things aren't always as stark as they seem. Bellini's looks like just a little 
neighborhood trattoria -- and not in the most elegant Pico Boulevard 
neighborhood, either -- and it is a bit bleak inside. Gray walls. Butcher paper 
on the tables. Pen-and-ink drawings of old men's faces. 
But the menu is full of bright spots. The food tends to be light and inventive, 
most of it in effect vegetarian, including a couple of cheeseless pizzas. There 
is a decided personal tone to it, including a mild mania for fennel. 
The fennel thing begins before the meal, in fact, with the plate of fresh bread 
studded with fennel seed. Then there is an eggplant and goat cheese calzone 
with fennel in it, and even a dish of spaghetti mixed with fennel seed and 
fennel bulb sauteed in butter, which has a subtle aromatic flavor and a 
strangely pacifying quality. 
The antipasto is mostly just prosciutto and salami, but it includes two 
radishes partly hollowed out and stuffed with spiced ricotta, and some rather 
quaint olives, ordinary black California jumbos with a shred of orange zest in 
each. The cozze alla Rudy are just mussels in lemony broth, but incredibly 
plump and fresh-tasting. 
Among the pastas, farfalle Delfi are probably the most unusual, bow-tie pastas 
with browned baby artichoke hearts and chopped walnuts. Because of the wine or 
the walnuts, the pasta has an eerie purplish-brown color, but the combination 
of mildly bitter flavors is fascinating. 
I don't mean to say everything is great. In fact, there are some basic flaws 
here, above all with the rice. The special of veal involtini steamed (steamed!) 
in spinach -- "an upscale hot dog," as someone described it -- came in a 
delicious sauce that wasn't much more than pureed porcini mushrooms and black 
pepper. But alongside this was rice (wonderfully flavored with lemon and basil) 
of a positively mushy consistency. The saffron risotto, likewise, was full of 
jolly saffron, but overdone and porridgy. 
I hasten to add that the saffron pastas, of which there are more than one, are 
very good, such as the saffron linguine with fresh tomato coulis. 
Unfortunately, since they're pastas the saffron adds more color than flavor. 
The pizzas, at least the ones I've had, are rather sharply flavored, One of the 
three made without cheese consisted simply of fresh tomatoes topped with 
reconstituted porcini. It would be hard to imagine making a main course of 
this, though it would be OK split with a couple of people as an appetizer. 
Ditto the rather sharp calzone melanzane. 
There are only about three desserts, the best of them a ricotta cheesecake with 
white and dark chocolate on a crust that tastes a little like crumbled oatmeal 
cookies. The tiramisu is an unusual model that will disappoint chocoholics, 
though it's actually pretty good: mostly a fantastically deep layer of 
mascarpone (this tiramisu is served in a bowl, not on a plate) with chocolate 
shavings on top and some ladyfingers way down at the bottom, soaked with 
anisette. 
Altogether, though, not bad for a plain little trattoria on Pico. 
Bellini's Trattoria, 12021 W. Pico Blvd., West Los Angeles; (213) 477-4057. 
Open for lunch Monday through Friday, for dinner Monday through Saturday. Full 
bar. Street parking. American Express, MasterCard and Visa accepted. Dinner for 
two, $34 to $54. 
