ANGEL PITCHERS RIPPED EARLY IN LOSS TO A'S 
The Angels and their new pitch-inside philosophy breezed into Oakland, home of 
the defending American League champions, Friday night and promptly watched 
their pitching staff get turned inside-out. 
Starter Chuck Finley couldn't last two innings, victimized by an infield error 
and an eventual five-run second inning. Reliever Dan Petry couldn't complete 
two innings, either, victimized by another error and that old Angel killer, a 
home-run pitch to Dave Henderson. 
Between the two, Finley and Petry surrendered eight runs -- too much weight for 
a four-game Angel winning streak to bear -- and the Angels lost to the 
Athletics, 10-6, before 26,903 at Oakland Coliseum. 
The streak, consisting of back-to-back shutouts sandwiched between 9-2 and 7-2 
victories, was staggered early, as the Angels fell behind, 5-0, in the second 
inning. And despite a nine-hit attack that knocked Oakland starter Bob Welch 
out of the game in the sixth inning, the Angels were never able to recover from 
their game-opening jitters. 
The second inning began, and was critically extended, by a pair of balls that 
had no business leaving the infield. 
Carney Lansford led off with a chopper over the mound which Angel shortstop 
Kent Anderson fielded behind second base, but fell before he could make a 
throw. Lansford was thrown out attempting to steal, but rookie Lance 
Blankenship negated that play by following with a drive into the left-field 
seats, his second major-league hit and his first major-league home run. 
After Mike Gallego grounded out to Finley, the Angels were an out away from 
ending the inning. And Finley appeared to have clinched the out by inducing Ron 
Hassey to hit a grounder to the right side of the infield. 
A routine play, but second baseman Mark McLemore's curious defensive slump 
continues and he misplayed the ball for an error, his fourth in 13 games. 
Five batters later, the second inning was still in progress and Finley was out 
of the game. 
Immediately following the error, Walt Weiss singled and Tony Phillips walked, 
loading the bases. Billy Beane then worked the count full before doubling into 
the left-field corner, scoring both Hassey and Weiss. 
Another walk to Dave Henderson loaded the bases again -- and another hit, this 
a single by Mark Steinbach, brought home two more runs. 
Down 5-0, Angel Manager Doug Rader put an end to Finley's start and began the 
bullpen cavalcade. Willie Fraser replaced Finley and retired Lansford, the 
inning's 10th batter, on a fly to right. 
Fraser proceeded to retire all seven batters he faced, allowing the Angel 
offense time to chip away at the deficit. 
The Angels scored twice in the top of the fifth inning when an infield grounder 
by Devon White exploded on Oakland second baseman Mike Gallego for a bad-hop 
double that brought home Jack Howell and Anderson. 
And after Henderson's home run off Dan Petry in the bottom of the inning, the 
Angels pulled to within 6-4 with two more runs in the sixth. Chili Davis 
walked, Jack Howell ended a 2-for-37 slump with a double and both scored -- 
Davis on a sacrifice fly by Anderson, Howell on a single by Brian Downing. 
Petry, however, gave the runs right back in the bottom of the sixth, with 
another defensive assist. 
Gallego opened with a single, stole second and advanced to third on catcher 
Lance Parrish's overthrow. Hassey then lofted a sacrifice fly to left and the 
A's led, 7-4. 
Weiss walked and quickly made it 8-4, stealing second and coming home on a 
single by Henderson, the last batter Petry faced. 
Greg Minton came on to close out the sixth by retiring Steinbach on a fly to 
left. 
The Angels pulled to within 8-6 with runs in the seventh and eighth innings. 
White led off the seventh with a bloop single to left and stole second base, 
his second steal of the evening and seventh of the season. He moved to third on 
an infield grounder and scored on a wild pitch by A's reliever Eric Plunk, just 
prior to Wally Joyner's inning-ending strikeout. 
Davis' home run to right field, his third of the season, accounted for the 
Angels' run in the eight. But there was room for more, with Howell and Downing 
on base with one out. 
But both runners were stranded when Oakland's second reliever, Rick Honeycutt, 
struck out McLemore and White. 
Angel Notes 
Wally Joyner's running out of hobbies. With a day off in the Bay Area Thursday, 
Joyner decided to go golfing, but never got out of the pro shop. He re-injured 
the same ankle he sprained during a spring basketball game by tripping over a 
floor mat. "I hit the corner of the mat, where you clean your shoes, and 
twisted the ankle," said Joyner, the Angels' new Mr. Klutz. "I didn't even get 
the clubs on the cart. I drove for 45 minutes, got out of the car for five and 
drove back for 45." Joyner had the ankle X-rayed, which proved negative, and he 
was back in the starting lineup Friday night. Someone suggested that Joyner 
develop some less strenuous outside interests. "I'm going to try the triathlon 
next," he quipped. "No, maybe I should try jacks. Or tiddly winks." 
It's also been a rough trip on the Angel coaching staff. Wednesday in Chicago, 
pitching coach Marcel Lachemann hurt his back while packing his suitcase and 
Friday, Manager Doug Rader had his left elbow lock up while hitting pregame 
fungoes. "I've got so much garbage in there," Rader said with a note of 
disgust. "Bone chips, spurs, hubcaps." After examining the elbow, trainer Ned 
Bergert advised the removal of the fungo bat from Rader's hands. "I prescribed 
that he go back to the sedate career he had before," Bergert said. . . . Dick 
Schofield's stint on the disabled list could be a long one, Rader fears. "It 
sure doesn't look like he'll be back anytime soon," Rader said. "Unfortunately, 
whenever you deal with soft tissue (Schofield has an injured chest muscle) it's 
hard to diagnose. You don't know if it's stretched, strained or torn. Based on 
the length of time it's taken (to heal) so far, it sounds like a tear. And 
that's no different than a hamstring tear. A tear's a tear, and it takes time 
to heal." 
