REPORT SAYS MOBIL LEAVING S. AFRICA; 
LARGEST REMAINING U.S. FIRM BELIEVED TO BE SELLING ASSETS 
Mobil Oil Co., the largest U.S. company remaining in South Africa, is selling 
its operations at bargain prices to the oil subsidiary of a South African 
mining conglomerate, newspapers reported today. 
Mobil representatives in South Africa and the United States declined to comment 
on the reports. 
Business Day of Johannesburg quoted "banking and other sources" as confirming 
the sale of about $400 million in assets for $150 million and said the Mobil 
properties would be sold in separate deals over a period of time. 
Mobil has been in South Africa for 90 years, and its four subsidiaries employ 
almost 2,800 people. The oil company has been a symbol of foreign business 
reluctance to leave the country, despite widespread condemnation of the 
white-minority government's suppression of the black majority in the system 
known as apartheid. 
Partly because of South Africa's race policies, more than 170 American 
companies have withdrawn over the last four years. Most have sold their 
operations at low prices to South African-controlled businesses. 
Since Exxon Corp., the largest U.S. oil concern, pulled out of South Africa in 
1986, Mobil had insisted it would not bow to pressure to disinvest, despite 
pressure on the company by anti-apartheid groups in the United States. 
The South African Broadcasting Corp. reported Wednesday that Mobil may have 
changed its stance on disinvestment because of a bill passed by the U.S. 
Congress in its rush to adjourn before Christmas in 1987. The bill by Rep. 
Charles B. Rangel (D-N.Y.) removed the right of U.S. taxpayers to credit taxes 
paid to South Africa against taxes owed to the U.S. government. 
At least two shareholder resolutions exhorting Mobil to vacate South Africa are 
on the agenda at the company's annual meeting, scheduled for May 11. 
The Star of Johannesburg, the nation's largest daily, reported that "industry 
sources confirmed" Mobil was selling its South African assets for an estimated 
500 million rand, roughly $125 million. 
The Citizen, another Johannesburg daily, quoted "local and overseas" sources as 
saying Mobil was considering disinvesting. The paper said Mobil is the largest 
non-South African controlled employer in the country with 1,000 gasoline 
stations, a $225-million investment in an oil refinery and a distribution 
network. 
