GRIEVING OVER JUNK BONDS: SOME FIRMS SURE MISS THEM; 
FINANCE: ALTHOUGH HIGH-YIELD DEBT CAME TO SYMBOLIZE EXCESS IN THE '80S, MANY 
SMALL AND MID-SIZED COMPANIES RELIED ON IT FOR GROWTH. NOW, THEY FACE A CREDIT 
CRUNCH. 
Michael Milken probably had companies like DEP Corp. in mind when he extolled 
the benefits of junk bonds for the American economy. 
DEP, a Los Angeles-based maker of hair- and skin-care products, added a wing to 
its plant, created more than 100 new jobs and grew from a modest $18 million in 
annual sales to more than $100 million today. This was made possible by a 
financing in 1986 that included a $16.5-million high-yield bond offering by 
Drexel Burnham Lambert. 
Now, Drexel is gone. The junk bond market remains depressed. And Robert 
Berglass, chairman and president of DEP, claims that his company and thousands 
like it are facing a credit squeeze that could ultimately hurt the national 
economy. 
Despite DEP's profitable performance, the company has found that it can no 
longer raise capital, at least not without giving up a major chunk of equity. 
As a result, DEP has had to scale back its growth plans dramatically, including 
scrapping a strategic acquisition that it had hoped to make earlier this year. 
"Making a phone call and saying we need the money used to be the easy part," 
Berglass says. Now, "It's back to the '70s, when money was very hard to come 
by." 
While defaults on junk bond debt have led to highly publicized disasters, and 
junk bonds themselves have come to be synonymous with the excesses of the 
1980s, the sudden absence of the junk bond market may also be placing a lid on 
the growth of medium-sized and smaller companies. Not only can't companies 
resort to the junk market for capital, but the demise of the junk bond trade 
and spill-over from the savings and loan crisis is also having an impact on 
commercial banks, prompting them to significantly raise standards for granting 
commercial loans. 
The head of the West Coast corporate finance office of a major Wall Street 
firm, who asked not to be identified, says the situation is dire for companies 
with less than $100 million in annual sales. "The unfortunate truth is that 
there is a horrendous squeeze right now," he says. 
The economic consequences of a true credit squeeze on smaller companies could 
be severe. In the 1980s, these firms played a major role in U.S. economic 
growth. In the past decade, as employment by Fortune 500 companies actually 
contracted, growth by smaller companies fueled the upsurge of private-sector 
job creation. 
Economists caution that the true extent of a credit crisis is far from clear. 
Robert Dederick, chief economist for Northern Trust Co. in Chicago, says there 
is lots of anecdotal evidence. But he says there aren't any hard statistics yet 
proving that companies actually are being starved of growth capital. The 
Federal Reserve is said to be looking into it. "Any quantitative numbers simply 
haven't appeared yet," he says. 
The lack of hard numbers is small comfort to companies such as North American 
Watch, another former Drexel customer, which imports and wholesales 
wristwatches. The company, based in New York, had raised $70 million through 
two junk offerings in the 1980s. Now, according to Gedalio Grinberg, the 
chairman and chief executive, the company has had to drastically scale back 
plans for expansion and acquisitions. "The best thing to do is take a very 
conservative approach now," Grinberg says. "We won't even consider further 
acquisitions while this (junk bond) market is as it is." 
Many of the biggest junk bond offerings went to finance corporate raids that 
had little apparent economic benefit. But Milken and other proponents of junk 
bonds maintained that many offerings went directly to financing the growth of 
small entrepreneurial companies. Douglas Brengel, a senior corporate finance 
official in Salomon Bros.' Los Angeles office, says the excesses of junk bonds 
-- the kind of debt that led, for example, to the bankruptcy filings by Campeau 
Corp.'s retail units -- deserve to be swept away. He says, however, "The 
casualties are the 50% of the market or more that are the kinds of companies 
you're talking about -- growth-oriented companies that use this market as an 
alternative to more costly and restrictive sources of funds." 
To be sure, there are plenty of small, entrepreneurial companies that raised 
money from junk and then promptly sank under the weight of the debt. Penril 
Corp., a small Maryland maker of data communications equipment, raised $18 
million through a Drexel junk offering in the mid-1980s. Management went on a 
buying spree and the company ended up in default. 
"Drexel told the people who were running the company then that money is 
available now; why don't you take it all now and do your expansion at once," 
says Henry David Epstein, who was brought in later as chairman and chief 
executive to turn around the company. 
But now, the company has returned to financial health. And Epstein says he 
would like nothing better than to do a junk offering himself. He can't because 
of the state of the junk market. 
"Now that the company is healthy, I'm expansion minded," he says, adding: "It 
would be great if I could issue some high-yield bonds to buy some things. But I 
can't. There really is no high-yield bond market left for a small company." 
Na-Churs Inc., an Ohio-based maker of liquid fertilizers, has had its ups and 
downs since Drexel completed a $20-million junk bond offering for it in 1981. 
In the late 1980s, the company did a leveraged buyout, mainly with internally 
generated cash. 
Now, according to company President John D. Kelly, Na-Churs is beginning to 
think about making an acquisition in 12 to 18 months. But he says the financing 
prospects are daunting. The company would have to give up a substantial amount 
of equity warrants to get the money it needs. Deals are being structured, he 
says, so that companies can buy back the warrants, regaining the ownership 
stake. But, he says, "In exchange for getting those warrants back you may be 
paying a very substantial sum." 
There is, of course, good old-fashioned internal growth -- development of new 
product lines, steadily building market share over time. But company executives 
say, in today's world, growth for smaller companies also rests on growth by 
acquisition, such as purchase of strategic product lines. In the current credit 
environment, executives at smaller companies say the giants have a distinct 
advantage. 
DEP could raise money now, but only by agreeing to give up a big ownership 
stake to an investor. DEP's stock is traded publicly, and Berglass maintains 
that diluting current stockholders' ownership stake wouldn't be fair. 
Berglass says DEP and other small companies in the personal-care industry 
lately have had to sit back and watch while giant companies such as 
Colgate-Palmolive and Procter &amp; Gamble use their huge financial resources 
to gobble up successful brand names. 
For many companies, the situation at commercial banks is even more worrying 
than the state of the junk market itself. Most commercial banks have big 
exposure to loan losses from deals involving junk bond financing -- deals now 
referred to in banking parlance as highly leveraged transactions, or HLTs. 
Bank regulators, alarmed by the impact of junk bonds on the savings and loan 
industry, have begun pressuring commercial banks to separate out their HLT 
loans in financial reports and to monitor their lending practices more closely. 
As a result, many banks seem to have become much stricter about the kinds of 
commercial loans they will make, as well as the conditions they attach to them. 
Frank Abraham, senior vice president and chief financial officer of Security 
Pacific's Middle Market Bank, which lends to medium-sized companies, maintains 
that Security Pacific has always applied stringent standards to commercial 
loans and isn't tightening up. But he says banks in general throughout the 
country seem to be raising their standards. And, significantly, he says fewer 
smaller banks and foreign institutions now are willing to take parts of 
syndicated loans. Such big syndicated loans, in which the actual lending is 
divided among a series of institutions, have been an important alternative to 
junk financing for smaller companies. 
Banks are becoming stricter, too, because they are under pressure to boost 
their capital by the end of the year to meet new requirements. 
For a small but not insignificant sector of industry, the specific impact of 
the demise of Drexel itself seems to be having a negative impact. Drexel's 
parent company went into bankruptcy proceedings in February and has begun 
liquidating the company. When Milken and Drexel were building the junk bond 
market in the late 1970s, they invented the idea of creating new junk bonds to 
provide capital to smaller companies. Previously, junk bonds were all "fallen 
angels" -- the bonds of previously investment-grade companies that had fallen 
on hard times. So Drexel became the investment banker to hundreds of companies 
in which no other Wall Street firm was interested. 
Now, Wall Street firms are engaged in a feeding frenzy, courting the Drexel 
customers that were transformed by junk bonds into giants. But, for the most 
part, they're not interested in today's smaller companies, including some that 
had obtained financing relatively recently through Drexel. Brengel of Salomon 
Bros. says with a few exceptions, investment banks are unlikely to be 
interested in companies with $100 million or less in sales. 
The general decline in the securities industry is also likely to have an 
impact. Because of falling profits at Wall Street firms, many are reducing the 
size of the corporate finance departments. And the type of deals that can get 
done now produce much slimmer commissions, making them less attractive. 
In general, the only kinds of high-yield financings that can get done these 
days are private placements of debt in which the buyer of the debt securities 
-- such as insurance companies or foreign banks -- demand warrants or some 
other sort of equity stake. For investment banks, commissions on such private 
placements tend to be about 2% of the financing, as opposed to the 5% or 6% 
that was common on public offerings of junk bonds, providing less incentive for 
the Wall Street firms to do the deals. Although in the current environment 
investment banks probably will have to get used to doing smaller deals, 
executives at smaller companies say they don't see signs of it yet. 
Smaller West Coast companies may be at a particular disadvantage, since several 
Wall Street firms have announced plans to close or reduce the size of their 
West Coast offices. 
Salomon has actually expanded its West Coast presence recently. But Brengel 
acknowledges that for smaller companies, for better or for worse, "a lot of the 
deals that did get done in the past just aren't getting done now." 
