BARRINGTON HALL, ONCE HOTBED OF UC RADICALISM, CLOSES 
Barrington Hall, UC Berkeley's oldest and most notorious student-run housing 
cooperative, which some viewed as a last bastion of student radicalism, shut 
its doors Monday after a final legal bid to keep it open failed. 
Even in a city known for its tolerance of different life styles, the residence 
became a victim of changing attitudes. Since 1985, Barrington Hall had been 
attacked by neighbors over its residents' alleged drug use, noisy parties and 
generally rowdy life style. Last fall, the 18-house University Students 
Cooperative Assn. that operated Barrington voted overwhelmingly to shut 
Barrington. 
Most of the 165 "Barringtonians" then living at the hall moved on, but 18 
students challenged the vote in court and continued staying in the building. 
They recently moved their belongings out, but have been staying in the house in 
sleeping bags while their attorney tried to postpone their eviction. 
On Monday, the students exhausted their legal options when an Alameda County 
Superior Court judge refused to reconsider a Municipal Court ruling against 
them. 
Barrington Hall most recently was in the news in March when a party at it 
erupted into a melee between police and more than 500 youths. The five-hour 
confrontation began when police sought to break up the party. More than a dozen 
people were hospitalized. 
Despite that incident, many current and former Barrington residents considered 
the house, as a sign painted above its entrance stated, "An Oasis of Madness in 
a World Gone Sane." And its passing was noted with dismay by some on Monday. 
"They are destroying the last center of Berkeley radicalism," sophomore John 
Darrah said as he watched sheriff's deputies peacefully evict the last 
residents. 
"They want to make Berkeley a safe place for wealthy, conservative students. 
They don't want them to get infected with different ideas or learn different 
life styles," said Darrah, one of those who stayed at Barrington until its 
closing. 
Added Denise Tukenmez, a three-year resident at Barrington and a biology honors 
student who dyes her hair bright green, "Barrington is a place where you 
learned to accept other ways of thinking and challenge the prevailing ideas in 
society. There's really nowhere else like it." 
The outside of the building has suffered from years of neglect. Inside, its 
walls are covered with graffiti and brightly colored murals, many dating back 
to the late 1960s. 
Leaders of the cooperative association say the murals will be painted over and 
the building, worth an estimated $3 million, repaired. The leaders say it will 
be sold or turned into housing for married graduate students. 
Barrington had a long history as a center of political activism. 
It opened in 1933 after 14 UC Berkeley freshmen banded together to seek 
low-cost, shared housing. The single house they formed grew into the 
1,400-member cooperative association, a nonprofit organization unaffiliated 
with UC Berkeley's administration. 
Unlike their counterparts in dormitories, students in the co-ops are 
responsible for all work involved in running the houses, with each resident 
required to put in five hours of work per week. The co-op's board is made up of 
representatives elected by each house and sets policy for the association. 
Ozzie Osborne, who lived at Barrington in the late 1930s, remembers its 
residents as leaders of campus support for the leftist Popular Front in the 
Spanish Civil War. "It was a radical hotbed even then," said Osborne, who 
recently retired after owning a Berkeley soda fountain for 40 years. 
During the 1960s, marches in favor of civil rights and against the Vietnam War 
were coordinated out of Barrington. In the 1980s, a new generation of the 
house's residents directed campus campaigns against South Africa's apartheid 
system. 
In recent years, however, the surrounding community grew less tolerant of 
activities at the house, especially after several incidents in which residents 
admitted using heroin and LSD. 
"I have time and time again seen all of these sweet All-American kids come 
through those doors and come out as deadbeats and anarchists," said Beverly 
Potter, a neighbor suing the co-op association for $1 million. 
She added, "I'm not against students exploring life, but I am against them 
becoming drug addicts and getting AIDS." 
Several closure attempts failed, but students in other co-op houses began to 
lose patience with Barrington after their rents were hiked in order to fight 
lawsuits by Potter and other angry neighbors. The association's vote to shut 
down the Barrington followed a September incident in which a minor allegedly 
drank LSD-laced punch at a September party at the house. 
