ENDANGERED BIRDS AT LAGOON WILL GET HELP; 
ENVIRONMENT: A BARRIER WILL BE REMOVED TO END FLOODING THAT PREVENTED NESTING 
OF SPECIES SUCH AS THE CALIFORNIA LEAST TERN AND BELDING'S SAVANNAH SPARROW. 
A coastal barrier that has kept rare birds from reproducing at Batiquitos 
Lagoon in Carlsbad soon will be removed, the state Department of Fish and Game 
announced Tuesday. 
The El Nino storms of the early 1980s created a large cobble blockage at the 
mouth of the lagoon that trapped water over areas where the California least 
tern and the Belding's savannah sparrow traditionally nest. 
The least tern is on federal and state endangered species lists, and the 
Belding sparrow is on the state list. 
Fish and Game wildlife biologist Theresa Stewart said Tuesday that crews will 
close South Carlsbad State Beach part of next week while removing the cobble 
barrier that is 15 feet high, 30 feet long and 18 feet wide. 
"There's a dam out there, basically," she said. 
Carlsbad's assistant planning director, Gary Wayne, added, "The lagoon just 
keeps filling." 
Over the years, the flooding of sensitive habitat has discouraged the rare 
species from nesting. 
Stewart said 47 pairs of Belding's savannah sparrows were reported at the 
lagoon in 1986, but that number has since dropped to fewer than 20 pairs. 
"The population is declining, I don't think we'll get back up to 47," Stewart 
said. "If we get 30, I'll be happy." 
As for the least terns, last year only three pairs tried to nest, and Stewart 
figures, "if the water level is lower, we could expect 20 to 30 pairs." 
Although the numbers seem insignificant, Stewart pointed out there are only an 
estimated 1,200 pairs of least terns in California. 
El Nino storms produced the barrier as the rough surf washed away the beach 
sand and left cobbles protruding 12 feet above sea level, enough to keep water 
from flowing out of the lagoon and opening the nesting areas. 
It is critical to remove the cobbles now because the nesting season for the 
least tern begins in May, Stewart said. 
She also believes that lowering the lagoon's water level would benefit other 
species, including the snowy plover, the American avocet, black-necked stilt 
and Forster's tern. 
However, Wayne said the flooding problem won't be solved permanently until the 
lagoon's entire tidal system is opened. 
He said that will happen under a $20-million lagoon restoration project to be 
finished next year. The project is now in the environmental review process. 
The San Diego Audubon Society has endorsed the cobble removal plan. 
