L.A. PRISON FIGHT REVIVED BY ASSEMBLY BUDGET MOVE 
The long-dormant fight over building a prison near downtown Los Angeles 
suddenly flared back to life Tuesday after the Assembly moved to eliminate 
money for the prison from the next state budget. 
The move, if successful, would also endanger a prison proposed for construction 
near Lancaster, because the two were tied together by 1987 legislation 
authorizing their construction. Under the legislation, one prison cannot be 
built without the other. 
The latest round in the long-running fight over the Los Angeles County prisons 
got under way Monday night when an Assembly budget subcommittee, led by two Los 
Angeles legislators, voted 3 to 1 to delete $315 million in construction money 
for the two prisons from the budget. 
Ground has not yet been broken on either site, but preliminary work, such as 
environmental impact reports and approval of preliminary plans, has all but 
been completed. The state has already invested $40 million in preparations for 
the two prisons. 
Deukmejian Administration officials reacted predictably when they learned of 
the action. Robert J. Gore, Deukmejian's press secretary, said the governor is 
"going to insist that the budget include" money for the prisons. 
Pressure for the downtown site grew from anger elsewhere in the state over the 
fact that Los Angeles County, which produces about 40% of the state's prison 
inmate population, does not have a state prison. 
The fight to block the money was initiated by Assemblywoman Lucille 
Roybal-Allard (D-Los Angeles), who represents the predominantly Latino Assembly 
district near downtown where the more controversial of the two prisons would be 
located. 
During the subcommittee hearing, Roybal-Allard said that even though the 
legislation was approved in 1987, the proposed prison in her Eastside district 
is still bitterly opposed by residents. 
The Eastside legislator said the proposed prison site is within five miles of 
33 schools. She also said comparisons with other counties are unfair because 
they do not take into account the major county and federal jails in the 
downtown and East Los Angeles area, including Sybil Brand Institute for Women, 
the main county jail, a federal detention center and a youth facility. 
James Rowland, director of the Department of Corrections, said the two Los 
Angeles County prisons are badly needed because all the existing state prisons 
are being severely overcrowded. Rowland said, "We feel that we not only 
desperately need prisons in Los Angeles but that these two sites are good 
ones." 
Roybal-Allard was immediately joined in the fight by Sen. Art Torres (D-Los 
Angeles), who pledged to seek the same budget action in the Senate. 
Torres said he had assurances from both Democratic candidates for governor -- 
Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp and former San Francisco Mayor Dianne Feinstein 
-- that they would support efforts to find another site for the prison. The 
Republican candidate, U.S. Sen. Pete Wilson, so far has not taken a position, 
according to his campaign. 
State Sen. Robert Presley (D-Riverside), chairman of the Senate Appropriations 
Committee and the author of the legislation authorizing the Los Angeles County 
prisons, said he believes the state is in too far to back out. "It would be 
very hard for the next governor to just walk away from it," Presley said. 
