GROUP WANTS OPEN SPACE BONDS TIED TO TAX FOR ROADS 
A group of environmentalists is threatening to fight a proposed sales tax for 
traffic improvements unless the county sponsors a bond issue designed to give 
them perhaps $2 million or more to buy land and protect it from development. 
County officials say they are seriously considering the deal, which is similar 
to a compromise struck last year in Contra Costa County. Some proponents of the 
half-cent levy, though, think the environmentalists lack the clout to force the 
issue. 
"The environmental community is saying that we've been left out of the process 
for so long that we need something on our side for us to support a sales tax," 
said Elizabeth Brown, who proposed the deal as president of Laguna Greenbelt 
Inc., an influential environmental group. 
"The roads that will be built with that (sales tax) money will only make it 
easier for new development to occur," Brown said. "Some of us are not 
interested in helping with any more transportation stuff without something on 
the other (open space preservation) side, and that's the message we're trying 
to get out . . . . There is no money to purchase the open space at the city and 
county level." 
Plans for Referendum 
The Orange County Transportation Commission, chief sponsor of the sales-tax 
proposal, is formulating plans for a Nov. 7 tax referendum intended to help 
raise $3.1 billion for a 20-year, $11.6-billion program of county traffic 
improvements. 
Brown believes her group has muscle enough to scuttle that measure. After all, 
she and other activists helped defeat a 1-cent transportation sales-tax measure 
in 1984. 
"We've been down this sales-tax road before, and we can end up with the same 
result," Brown said earlier this week. 
The deal worked out last year in Contra Costa County, involving a $2.25-million 
open-space bond act, helped secure passage of that county's half-cent 
transportation sales tax. 
Some tax proponents, however, doubt that Brown has the power she claims. They 
note that she and other environmentalists were the leaders for the under-funded 
and understaffed campaign for Measure A, the countywide slow-growth initiative 
that voters rejected (56% to 44%) last June. 
John Simon, a lawyer who led the developer-financed effort against Measure A -- 
and who said he likes the open-space idea -- said Brown does not have the 
troops or the money to be a serious political threat, except in a close 
election. 
Stanley T. Oftelie, executive director of the Orange County Transportation 
Commission, said, "We're listening with an open mind" to Brown's idea, which 
even she concedes is still in the "formative stages." 
"I guess it depends on what specifics she (Brown) comes up with," Oftelie said. 
Formal Proposal Hoped For 
Brown said the open-space issue will be discussed by a transportation committee 
next week in the hope that a formal proposal can be presented to the OCTC at 
its May 8 meeting. 
There could be at least one roadblock, however: Developers, including officials 
of the powerful Irvine Co., say they will support such a bond act only if its 
defeat does not bar collection of the proposed transportation sales tax should 
that measure pass. 
"We think that as long as it can go on the ballot and not be directly linked to 
the sales tax so that it (the environmental bond act) doesn't have to pass, we 
could support the idea," said Irvine Co. Vice President Hugh Fitzpatrick. "But 
there would have to be ground rules." 
Among other things, Fitzpatrick said, developers will probably want assurance 
that the open space bond act would be general and not specify which land would 
be purchased. 
Brown said she would use some of the money to buy Irvine Co. land in Laguna 
Canyon -- land that the firm has targeted for development. She said she would 
like the bond issue to raise a sum at least as high as the one 
environmentalists in Contra Costa County obtained. 
'This Is a Quid Pro' Quo 
Norm Grossman, a member of both Laguna Greenbelt and the advisory panel that 
recently wrote the Board of Supervisors' new growth management regulations, 
said, "This is a quid pro (quo) -- the same as it was in Contra Costa -- based 
on a realization that growth management involves other things, such as 
preservation of natural resources, and that means open space." 
Grossman added that if a sales tax election is held in November, it is unlikely 
that an open-space bond act could be drafted in time to be placed on the ballot 
as a companion measure. Instead, he said, there would have to be some agreement 
with sales-tax sponsors that they would support the open-space bond act in the 
June, 1990, election. 
Brown and Grossman have been active members of the Citizens Advisory Committee, 
a group appointed by county officials to review the Transportation Commission's 
20-year traffic improvement plan. The improvement plan is a document required 
by state law before the proposed half-cent sales tax can be placed on a 
countywide ballot. 
In addition, Brown recently joined the executive committee of a new group led 
by Pacific Bell Vice President Reed Royalty called the Orange County Foundation 
for Consensus in Transportation. That group is researching transportation 
matters in anticipation of the sales tax election. 
Opinions Solicited 
"The objective is to bring a lot of potentially divergent viewpoints around the 
table," said Todd Nicholson of the Industrial League of Orange County, a 
diversified group of business and civic leaders. "If there are large blocks of 
people out there who do not have some ownership in the plan (the county's 
traffic improvement program), then we're going to have some difficulty at the 
polls." 
Added Brown: "The only reason I'm involved in these (transportation) meetings 
is the open space issue. If it dies, then I don't see how I can campaign for 
the sales tax." 
Lawyer Simon is leading a group that has paid for a public opinion poll on the 
sales tax issue -- Simon declined last week to release the results -- and is 
paying $7,000 to Sacramento political consultant D.J. Smith as reimbursement 
for extra work done after Smith's consulting contract with the county 
Transportation Commission expired in February. 
Smith, who has advocated tying an open space measure to the proposed sales tax, 
was a consultant to the proponents of the tax measure approved in Contra Costa 
County. 
