CAL STATE L.A. ENDS CSUN JINX; 
FRUSTRATION OF FOUR NARROW LOSSES FADES IN 5-2 CONFERENCE WIN 
John Herbold was just about at the end of his rope. Four times this season his 
Cal State Los Angeles baseball team had been on the verge of beating Cal State 
Northridge, only to see the Matadors pull out a victory. 
Los Angeles had been beaten three times by one run -- including once in the 
ninth inning and once in the 10th -- and had also lost a two-run decision to 
Northridge. It was getting so frustrating for Herbold that he was thrown out of 
Friday's 10-inning loss to the Matadors. 
But the Matador magic finally disappeared Saturday as the Golden Eagles 
defeated Northridge, 5-2, in a California Collegiate Athletic Assn. game at Los 
Angeles. 
"I was wondering if it was ever going to end with those guys," Herbold said. 
It did Saturday, in the regular-season finale between the clubs. 
Freshman left-hander Paul Spere (4-1), making only his second conference start, 
scattered eight hits to pick up the complete-game victory. Spere, who threw 
just 94 pitches, struck out two and walked one. 
"I was just trying to change speeds and keep the ball down," said Spere, who is 
2-0 and has allowed just three runs in conference play . 
Northridge Coach Bill Kernen summed up the defeat simply: "If we hit, we win. 
If we don't, we lose. We got no production from the middle or top of the 
lineup." 
But Los Angeles did. 
The Golden Eagles (18-22 overall, 8-9 in conference play) erased a 1-0 deficit 
in the third inning. William Silvan singled under third baseman Denny Vigo's 
glove, Frank James followed with a double and Rex De La Nuez, batting third in 
the lineup, cleared the bases with a three-run home run to left field off 
Matador starter Vale Lopez (4-6). 
"I think Denny should have made the play," Kernen said. "It's a reaction thing. 
You either get it or you don't." 
CSUN (20-12, 9-8-1) got one run back in the fourth when Chae-Ho Chong was hit 
by a pitch, took second on a wild pitch and scored on Vigo's single to left. 
But the Golden Eagles touched Lopez for another run in the seventh and added a 
fifth run, in the eighth, off reliever Dan Cory. 
Lopez went 6 1/3 innings, allowing five hits and four earned runs before 
leaving with a sore shoulder. 
