HOWARD ROSENBERG: MAKING HISTORY BEFORE IT HAPPENS 
Television is history's microwave. 
CBS is about to present "Guts &amp; Glory: The Rise and Fall of Oliver North," 
even though the extent of North's fall -- or even whether he has fallen -- has 
not been determined. 
North's trial in connection with the Iran-Contra scandal has just ended. But 
the jury is not expected to have reached a verdict when this two-part docudrama 
airs at 9 p.m. Sunday and Tuesday on Channels 2 and 8, starring David Keith as 
the charismatic Marine lieutenant colonel who gained celebrity from the 
Iran-Contra hearings and emerged a national hero or national disgrace, 
depending on your point of view. 
Four hours of "Guts and Glory" surely won't decide the issue for anyone, and 
it's difficult finding a rationale for television -- a supposedly definitive 
account of a work in progress -- with such a built-in contradiction. 
Based on a book by Ben Bradlee Jr., "Guts and Glory" was completed before the 
North trial and thus excludes, for example, recently renewed suspicions about 
then-Vice President George Bush's role in the Iran-Contra affair. Hence, it 
also omits conflicts between the trial testimonies of North and former National 
Security Council adviser Robert C. McFarlane, a key clash of Iran-Contra 
accounts on which the North verdict may partially rest. 
When last seen in "Guts and Glory," McFarlane (Paul Dooley) is leaving his 
National Security Council post while lauding North for bringing "integrity" to 
government. What a difference five years make. 
Moreover, "Guts and Glory" also ends before the start of those 1987 televised 
congressional hearings that introduced then-anonymous North to America and 
helped build the Iran-Contra scandal into a melodrama every bit as mesmerizing 
as "Dallas" or "Dynasty." 
Polarized public reaction to those hearings and its diverse cast of characters 
said as much about America and its values as Iran-Contra did about North. 
Although ably acted and nicely staged, "Guts and Glory" is instant, short-order 
history, a truncated perspective made minus the benefit of time and rushed on 
the air by CBS for the May ratings sweeps. 
The Oliver L. North at the center of director-writer-executive producer Mike 
Robe's story is an ambitious, calculating political player and 
ultraconservative ideologue. There are no shadings in North's character or 
universe. He is guided by rigid views of patriotism and of right and wrong, and 
also by an unswerving allegiance to his career that puts recurring severe 
strains on his marriage. 
As a character study of North, "Guts and Glory" is rather flat. It works best 
as a generic study of power and its impact on those positioned to exert it. 
"Arrogance of power" is a cliche that perfectly fits this shadowy milieu in 
which the self-righteous appoint themselves to make American foreign policy. 
As CIA Director William Casey (Barnard Hughes) tells his protege North here, 
there are "no rules but one: Do what's right." Their version of "right." 
We meet North as a Commie-bashing, flag-waving midshipman at the Naval Academy 
with a strong personal code of honor and a meticulously detailed life plan that 
includes switching to the Marines and finding "the right wife" to advance his 
career. He chooses Betsy (Annette O'Toole). 
A tour in Vietnam feeds North's contempt for anti-war protesters at home and 
"the politicians" who won't let the U.S. fight to "win." In 1981, showing a 
talent for ingratiating himself to those in a position to help him advance, 
he's named a military aide with the NSC in the Administration of new President 
Ronald Reagan (Bryan Clark). There he hires Fawn Hall (Amy Stock-Poynton) to 
join him on "the cutting edge of history," passionately endorses Reagan's 
support of the Contras fighting Nicaragua's Sandinista government and begins 
viewing CIA chief Casey as his mentor. 
Later, North will help Casey circumvent the Boland Amendment that prohibited 
U.S. intelligence agencies from providing money or military help to the 
Contras. Plus we see the seeds of the alleged "missiles for hostages" deal with 
Iran that went awry and evolved into a scheme to secretly divert Iran arms 
sales profits to the Contras without the approval of Congress. We see the plan 
endorsed by Casey, approved by then NSC chief John Poindexter (Peter Boyle) and 
executed by North, all of them ends-justifies-the-means people. 
Poindexter tells North that even Reagan didn't know about "the diversion." But 
is Poindexter being truthful or merely protecting the President? 
As for Bush, more than merely out of the "loop" here, he's out of the story. 
Meanwhile, we get the cover-up, the damage control, the shredding and the 
alleged scapegoating of North, all building toward those congressional hearings 
that you won't see. 
Bearing the crushing burden of playing a real-life character who has been 
burned into the consciousness of America, Keith conveys the crusading passion 
and commitment, but in no way the personal magnetism that has been attributed 
to North. 
You can envision strangers being swayed by the real North's sales pitches to 
fund the Contras. You can envision legions of disciples following him, but not 
Keith over the hill. 
O'Toole is more convincing as the lesser-known Betsy North, whose outsider 
status in her husband's life makes her a casualty in this scenario, along with 
the North children. 
Although a head shorter, Hughes is especially effective as the late Casey, who 
wears the label of main malefactor here along with North, a label that will 
stick at least for the time being. Dead men don't refute charges. 
Ironically, the single character as central to this story as North, is not even 
a real character. He's Aaron Sykes (Terry O'Quinn), identified as one of 
North's NSC colleagues. 
Although viewers have no way of knowing it, there is no Sykes. He's a 
composite, Robe's interjection of a moral voice to rebut and repeatedly 
question North's ethics, actions and priorities. 
"What you guys tried to pull was nothing short of a secret government," Sykes 
lectures North. 
"A Marine does what it takes...," North responds. 
TV docudrama, too, it seems. 
