PETE ROSE MAY FACE PRISON; 
BASEBALL: ALL-TIME HIT LEADER WILL PLEAD GUILTY TODAY TO FILING FALSE TAX 
RETURNS. HE COULD BE SENTENCED TO SIX YEARS AND FINED UP TO $500,000. 
Pete Rose, the former Cincinnati Red manager who was banned from baseball for 
life last year because of alleged gambling violations, will plead guilty today 
to filing false tax returns and could be sentenced to six years in prison and 
fined $500,000. 
Documents unsealed Thursday in U.S. District Court in Cincinnati showed that 
Rose has agreed to plead guilty to two counts of filing false tax returns by 
failing to report income from memorabilia sales, autograph signings and 
personal appearances. 
The agreement with federal prosecutors, culminating a lengthy investigation by 
a Cincinnati grand jury, bars the government from pressing additional tax 
charges but carries no restrictions on sentencing. 
Rose is scheduled to appear before U.S. District Judge S. Arthur Spiegel in 
Cincinnati this morning. 
Spiegel could sentence Rose to a maximum of three years in jail on each count 
and a maximum fine of $500,000. 
Rose acknowledges in the documents that he under-reported his income by 
$354,968 from 1984 through 1987 and owes taxes of $162,703. 
According to the documents, Rose's tax returns for that period showed taxable 
income of $4.6 million, on which he paid $2 million in taxes. 
Prosecutors declined Thursday to comment on the agreement, as did Rose's 
attorneys. 
"All I can tell you is the IRS did a lengthy investigation on me, and we 
cooperated in every way that we possibly could," Rose said during his weekly 
Thursday night talk show in Cincinnati. "And now we're trying to get everything 
behind me. 
"This is just another thing that happened because of the gambling problems I 
had. And hopefully the people understand and we'll get this thing taken care 
of." 
Spiegel, who can either accept or reject the plea bargain, is the judge who 
presided over the recent drug and tax-evasion trial of Rose's former friend and 
housemate, Tommy Gioiosa, who was sentenced to five years in jail after being 
convicted of transporting cocaine and conspiracy to defraud the Internal 
Revenue Service by claiming Rose's race-track winnings on his own tax reports. 
The most noteworthy incident occurred at Turfway Park in Northern Kentucky on 
Jan. 16, 1987, when Rose was part of a group that won $47,646 in the Pik Six. 
All of that income was reported by Gioiosa, though Rose has since admitted that 
he shared in it but did not realize his name had to be included on the tax form 
filed at the track. 
Neither that, nor any of Rose's other race-track winnings, are mentioned in the 
plea agreement. Rose has said that he never claimed gambling income on his 
taxes, maintaining that he lost more than he won. 
Rose was banned from baseball on Aug. 23, and, although he denied ever betting 
on baseball or on his team, Rose accepted a lifetime term -- the punishment for 
such an offense -- in an agreement with the late commissioner, Bart Giamatti. 
The agreement culminated an investigation by special counsel John Dowd, who was 
primarily examining Rose's gambling habits and associations. However, Dowd 
wrote in his 225-page report that Rose, through memorabilia sales and personal 
appearances, received large amounts of cash that were difficult to trace. 
Rose, who is baseball's all-time leader in base hits, has said that he 
generally asked for cash payments because he feared promoters' checks might 
bounce. 
At that time, a federal grand jury was in the midst of an investigation into 
whether Rose reported his income from those activities. 
The jury concluded its investigation earlier this year, and Rose's lawyers 
reached the plea agreement before an indictment was issued. Rose signed the 
agreement Monday, according to the court documents. 
