MAN TESTIFIES HE WAS PAID TO BEAT WAYNE, BOYFRIEND 
One of the men accused of beating John Wayne's daughter and her boyfriend 
testified Tuesday that he was hired by a private investigator who told him that 
a doctor client involved in a child custody battle wanted to "teach his wife a 
lesson." 
Jeffrey Kendall Bouey, 35, of Simi Valley, said the investigator never 
mentioned by name Aissa Wayne's ex-husband, Pomona surgeon Thomas A. Gionis, 
who is charged with masterminding the Oct. 3 attack against Wayne, 32, and 
Roger W. Luby, 53, at Luby's Newport Beach estate. 
Gionis has denied the charge. 
But Bouey said the investigator showed him and an accomplice photos of Wayne 
and Luby, described the client's car as a black stretch limousine and provided 
them with a floor plan of Wayne's Corona del Mar home, where the attack was 
originally intended to take place. 
Gionis, 35, has a black stretch limousine and visited the homes of Wayne and 
Luby in order to pick up an infant daughter by his former marriage to Wayne, 
according to testimony in his preliminary hearing this week in Harbor Municipal 
Court. 
The couple were in the midst of a custody battle over 2-year-old Anastasia when 
the incident occurred. Gionis was awarded custody of the child in February, but 
Wayne won temporary custody last week pending the outcome of the criminal 
proceedings against her ex-husband. Gionis is being held in the Orange County 
Jail without bail. 
Bouey, being held in lieu of $1 million bail on charges of assault with a 
deadly weapon in the attack, testified Tuesday that he did not know the 
identity of the two victims until two days after the attack, when the 
investigator, O. Daniel Gal of Beverly Hills, mentioned that the woman was the 
daughter of the late actor. 
During five hours on the stand -- much of it under grueling cross-examination 
by Gionis' lead attorney, F. Lee Bailey -- Bouey portrayed himself as a 
reticent participant in the crime, while casting blame for all the violence 
that took place on his partner and longtime friend, Jerrel L. Hintergardt, 37, 
an unemployed apartment manager from Burbank. 
Hintergardt, described in police reports as a neo-Nazi, is also jailed in lieu 
of $1-million bail, charged with assault with a deadly weapon. 
