A TAXING SEASON; 
ATTORNEY HELPS THOSE WHO DREAD THE IRS 
Few look forward to April 15, but Joyce Rebhun's clients dread it. 
Rebhun, who calls herself a tax therapist, is a Westside tax attorney, CPA and 
historian of taxation whose specialty is nonfilers. With extensions or without, 
the majority of us manage to get our tax returns in, even if it means racing to 
the post office as midnight approaches. But the tormented, tax-wise, who seek 
out Rebhun have let the deadline pass once, twice, even 20 or 30 times. 
Many of the more than 7,000 clients Rebhun has counseled in four years of tax 
therapy are all but phobic about the IRS, she says. And the longer they wait to 
straighten out their tax problem, the more fearful they become. 
"They miss one year for a legitimate reason, say, they have a divorce, and 
they're afraid they're going to jail," she says. Some, including a stockbroker 
she worked with, compound the problem by refusing to open any mail they receive 
from the IRS. A few hard cases go underground to avoid discovery by the IRS, 
giving up a permanent address to move in with friends or family, quitting 
employers who report their earnings to the IRS to take jobs that pay them under 
the table in cash, living little better than fugitives. 
"They are lost causes," she says, "unless someone brings them back." 
Rebhun, 46, won't accept clients she suspects of trying to defraud the IRS. "No 
one comes here who is a tax evader or a cheat," she says. 
Her clients, who owe an average of $100,000 to the federal government, are 
typically people with personal problems that have left them too paralyzed or 
preoccupied to deal with their tax obligation. According to Rebhun, more than 
10% have been referred by a psychiatrist or other therapist. On a bad week, 
half a dozen clients tell her that they want to kill themselves. 
Their tax mess is often the least of their problems. "Often we don't realize 
the terrific crosses people are living under," Rebhun observes. Her files, 
which include client's sworn statements to the IRS explaining why they didn't 
file in a timely fashion, are filled with anguish as well as tax forms. 
Flowers come to her Ladera Heights office every week from a gay man who stopped 
filing returns after he discovered he was HIV-positive and was dumped by his 
lover. Rebhun says she was so moved she now volunteers her services to AIDS 
patients, many of whom can't get medical benefits until they straighten out 
their tax problems. 
Almost a third of her clients are recovering from alcohol or drug abuse. They 
often send Rebhun the pins they receive in Alcoholics Anonymous and other 
recovery programs to mark 90 days of sobriety. Other clients let tax deadlines 
slip by while suffering from depression, cancer or some other serious illness, 
the delayed impact of child abuse, the aftermath of a divorce or a bankruptcy, 
the death of a child. 
Like other tax experts, Rebhun advises her clients on tax law and leads them 
through the maze of IRS paper work. But unlike most other tax preparers, she 
also offers them emotional support. Rebhun says that it wasn't until she 
developed and overcame her own drinking problem that she realized the fragility 
-- and heroism -- of people dealing with addiction and other personal crises. 
"The normal CPA, the normal attorney will not nurture you," she says. "Often 
people in trouble need to be nurtured, at least to get the process started." 
She is constantly reminding her clients "they don't have to be paranoid. There 
is hope." 
At times, she says, she thinks of herself, not as a tax therapist, but as a tax 
minister. "It's almost become a mission," she says of her practice. "It's 
Lourdes West. You're here for a miracle." 
The miracle is often worked in mundane ways. Her clients' lives may be in 
disarray, but they typically have kept the documentation they need to file 
complete returns for past years. As she reminds, these are people who, whatever 
their problems, want to do the right thing. 
Rebhun often sits down with the client over a cup of coffee as the client 
details the reasons for not filing. She doesn't probe, but she helps them word 
their explanatory affidavits as persuasively as possible, trying to read them 
over from an IRS point of view and recommending changes. She makes sure that 
death certificates and other documents that support a client's often woeful 
account are attached. 
Rebhun charges $400 for an initial consultation, which is often enough to solve 
the client's problem, she says. 
Formerly an attorney with the IRS in her native Pittsburgh, Pa., Rebhun does 
not believe the IRS is a huge, uncaring monolith. "I realize their kindness, 
their compassion," she says. Rebhun claims that 90% of her clients are relieved 
of the penalty part of their tax bill, which can amount to 40% of the total. 
Even for those whose lives are tranquil, the tax process is complicated, the 
tax therapist acknowledges. Rebhun has personally heard the interior siren that 
whispers "Why bother?" at tax time. 
Resist it, she advises. 
"We think if we hide in the closet, it will go away," she says. "It doesn't. In 
the words of my mother, 'The jails aren't big enough for people who don't pay 
their taxes.' You just have to file." 
