CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS 78TH ASSEMBLY DISTRICT; 
PARTISANS 'SPIN' ANALYSES OF UPSET PRIMARY VOTE RESULT 
The day after Republican Jeff Marston's upset first-place finish in the special 
78th Assembly District primary, his backers and those of his Democratic rival 
quickly turned their attention to June's runoff, casting one more subjective 
glance backward to chart their path. 
If Tuesday was the day for voters to speak in the race for the Assembly seat 
vacated by Democrat Lucy Killea's election to the state Senate last December, 
then Wednesday clearly belonged to the candidates' "spin" experts, who sought 
to sell dramatically different interpretations of the primary -- analyses that, 
in each case, reflect most favorably on their chances in June. 
That task was admittedly more difficult for Democrat Mike Gotch, the former San 
Diego city councilman who was forced to try to put the best possible face on 
his second-place finish in a campaign that many of his closest backers thought 
he could win outright in the primary. 
Noting that the Democratic vote was divided among four candidates Tuesday, 
while Marston was the only active Republican in the primary, Gotch partisans -- 
offering their preferred "spin" on the story -- confidently predict that they 
will reverse the finish order June 5. 
"I wouldn't call it an upset," Evonne Schulze, Gotch's campaign coordinator, 
said of the primary result. "We did very well, considering that there were four 
Democrats running, while the Republicans pulled behind one candidate. If all 
the Democrats had united behind Mike, there wouldn't even be a June runoff." 
Dismissing such arguments as mere what-if speculation, Marston preferred to 
bill his finish in the six-candidate race as a major upset that significantly 
shifts momentum in his direction as the runoff campaign begins. 
"I look upon it as a victory for me and, at the same time, something of a 
repudiation of Mike," said Marston, a former aide to San Diego City 
Councilwoman Gloria McColl and Sen. S.I. Hayakawa (R-Calif.). "Most of the 
people in this district know Mike's name and had a chance to vote for him 
Tuesday. The fact that so many didn't do that is significant." 
Unofficial vote totals showed that Marston, who benefited from the withdrawal 
of his only two GOP rivals late in the campaign, received 13,073 votes (35.9%), 
far short of the 50%-plus victory needed for outright victory in the primary. 
Gotch, who began the race as a prohibitive favorite, qualified for the runoff 
by finishing second with 10,781 votes (29.6%), comfortably ahead of the 15.5% 
total of his nearest Democratic rival, lawyer Howard Wayne. About 1,000 votes, 
most of them absentee ballots turned in at the polls, will not be counted until 
today. 
By virtue of the unorthodox rules governing special elections, Peace and 
Freedom Party member Jane Rocio Evans also will be on the June runoff ballot, 
despite drawing only 809 votes (2.2%) Tuesday. However, Evans -- who qualified 
for the June ballot simply because she was her party's only primary candidate 
-- is expected to be little more than a political footnote in the runoff. 
As Marston and Gotch shifted their perspective to June, the two competing 
campaigns devoted much of Wednesday to the kind of point-counterpoint debate -- 
one that blends detached analysis with wishful thinking -- that frequently 
occurs the day after elections. Indeed, for virtually every theory that one 
side offered about either the primary's outcome or the prospects for the 
runoff, the other campaign was ready with a counter-argument. 
For example, if Marston wanted to savor his first-place finish as a possible 
harbinger of the June runoff, Gotch's aides were quick to note that, overall, 
Democratic candidates received nearly 55% of the primary vote -- more than 1 
1/2 times Marston's total. 
"If we had finished second, and more Republicans than Democrats had voted, then 
I'd be worried," said Gotch consultant Bob Glaser. "But this was a strong 
Democratic turnout, and that's an encouraging sign for June." 
Similarly, although Gotch is counting on partisan loyalties to attract that 
Democratic support in June, Marston contends that many of the other Democrats' 
votes stemmed from an anti-Gotch sentiment that he can tap into in the runoff. 
"We certainly aren't conceding those or any other votes," said Marston 
consultant Sara Katz. "This is a district where voters are more issue-driven 
than driven by whether there's an 'R' or a 'D' after the name. Besides, a lot 
of those votes were cast by Democrats who obviously didn't think much of Mike 
Gotch." 
Though Democrats have held the 78th District seat since 1972, the party holds 
only a slim 45%-41% registration edge there -- making it the most heavily 
Republican Assembly district in the state represented by a Democrat during 
Killea's four terms. Combined with Marston's showing Tuesday, the Mid-City 
district's demographics create the potential for perhaps the most competitive 
election there since Democrat Larry Kapiloff, now a Superior Court judge, upset 
Republican Assemblyman E. Richard Barnes 18 years ago. 
While their predictions differ, for obvious reasons, the two sides agree that 
the runoff hinges largely on where the supporters of Wayne and the other 
also-rans turn in June. 
Wayne, who endorsed Gotch Wednesday, said he believes the two Democrats' 
partisan and ideological similarities will give Gotch an advantage over Marston 
in going after Wayne's supporters. 
"Mike stands for most of the things I stand for, and I'm going to do everything 
I can to make sure my supporters know that," Wayne said. "I suppose some of my 
votes may have been a protest against Mike. But those anti-votes had so many 
places to go, I'm not sure it counted for much of mine." 
Throughout the primary, Wayne sharply criticized Gotch, particularly over the 
former two-term councilman's vote for the controversial Belmont Park 
development in Mission Beach. Seeking to put those disagreements behind, Wayne 
added: "On most of the big things, Mike's vision is closer to my own. What it 
comes down to is, I think the district would be better served with him in the 
Legislature." 
Gotch's strategists also are heartened by the fact that dramatically different 
dynamics will be at work in June than were evident in Tuesday's special 
primary. With the Assembly race being the only issue on the 78th District 
ballot Tuesday, voter turnout was only about 21.8% -- much lower than is 
expected in the normal statewide June primary. 
In addition, the contested Democratic gubernatorial primary between former San 
Francisco Mayor Diane Feinstein and Atty. Gen. John Van de Kamp could enhance 
Gotch's candidacy by boosting Democratic turnout in June. In contrast, former 
San Diego Mayor Pete Wilson is the presumptive GOP gubernatorial nominee, 
lessening Republicans' incentive to go to the polls. 
"That's a factor we'll have to deal with," Marston conceded. "The only way to 
do that is to work harder to get out Republicans and to appeal to Democrats. 
Obviously, we're not going to win without Democratic votes." 
Tuesday's inconclusive primary set the stage for a potentially confusing 
"double election" in June -- a political rarity as intriguing as it is 
perplexing. 
On the same June ballot on which Gotch and Marston will compete in the special 
runoff for the six months remaining in Killea's unexpired term, they also will 
be seeking their respective parties' primary nominations for the two-year term 
at stake in November. Moreover, the losers from Tuesday's special primary also 
will appear on the normal June primary ballots -- because, election officials 
say, it is too late for their names to be removed. 
"We'd love to get (the losers) off the ballot, because it's silly and confusing 
to have the names of people not really running on it," San Diego County 
Registrar of Voters Conny McCormack said. "But there's nothing we can do about 
it." 
As a result, there is a remote chance that the victor of the special runoff 
could simultaneously lose his party's normal primary. Expressing a common 
concern, Gotch aide Schulze suggested that confused voters might inaccurately 
conclude that they must vote for different candidates in the two separate 
races. 
Though such a split decision seems doubtful, a more realistic possibility is 
that the winner of June's special runoff could be unseated in November -- by 
the candidate whom he defeated five months earlier. 
"Nobody wants to be the assemblyman for only six months," Marston said. "But 
the reality is that that's all you really win in June. It's only round one. 
It's a very important first round. But there's another big one waiting in 
November." 
