COURT LETS JEWISH SETTLERS STAY IN CHRISTIAN QUARTER 
Israel's Supreme Court today allowed 150 Jewish settlers to remain in a 
compound in the city's Christian Quarter until the high court hears more 
arguments in the case. 
The high court ruled in response to an order by Atty. Gen. Yosef Harish on 
Thursday that the settlers immediately leave the 72-room, four-building complex 
inside Jerusalem's walled Old City. 
The settlers created a furor and ignited demonstrations by both Christians and 
Muslims when they moved into the building owned by the Greek Orthodox Church on 
April 11. The church claims that a former tenant illegally sold his user rights 
to the building to the settlers. 
Harish, backed by two lower court decisions, on Thursday ordered the settlers 
to leave because their presence had harmed Christian-Jewish relations in 
Jerusalem. 
But the three-judge Supreme Court panel issued a restraining order against the 
eviction today and asked Harish to show at a hearing next Thursday why his 
order should not be annulled. 
"The settlers will be allowed to stay until there is a final decision by the 
high court," said attorney Dan Avi-Yitzhak, who represents a Panama-based 
company that bought the rights to use the complex. 
Yohanan Altbauer, an attorney representing the church, said the judges offered 
a compromise under which the settlers would have left the building, but a few 
company representatives would have remained until lower courts decided on 
tenancy rights. 
"Both sides rejected the compromise," Altbauer said. 
Tensions rose because the settlement upset the traditional division of the 
religious communities in the Old City. There are about 50,000 Muslims, 7,000 
Christians and 4,000 Jews in the old, walled city. 
The settlement also has political implications, since the Old City is part of 
the area captured by Israel from Jordan in the 1967 Middle East war. Israel 
annexed the area into its capital, but most countries, including the United 
States, do not recognize Israel's claim to sovereignty. Palestinians have 
demanded that Jerusalem become the capital of their would-be independent state. 
