PENTAGON PANEL BACKS CONTROVERSIAL PLAN TO BASE MX MISSILES ON MOVING RAIL CARS 
Only a month after a compromise appeared near on the best way to modernize 
America's land-based nuclear missile force, a Pentagon advisory panel has 
revived a controversial plan to keep some missiles moving on rail lines at all 
times. 
The still-secret draft recommendation by the prestigious Defense Science Board 
endorses deployment of 50 MX missiles on rail cars, most of which would be 
housed inside garrisons at 11 military bases across the country. 
But in a move that could sink the program when it reaches Capitol Hill, the 
panel will recommend that a portion of the missile force should be dispersed on 
the nation's rail lines around the clock, according to two members of the 
panel. 
Odds for Bush OK Increase 
Because the panel's recommendations carry considerable weight, defense experts 
said that the proposal increases the odds that the Bush Administration will 
embrace a rail-garrison basing plan for its force of MX missiles, which 
currently are housed in missile silos. 
At the same time, the proposal is sure to rekindle congressional concerns about 
the safety of ferrying multiple-warhead nuclear missiles along some 150,000 
miles of commercial rail lines in peacetime. 
The panel's findings, to be presented soon to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, 
come just as the Bush Administration nears a final decision on modernization of 
America's arsenal of long-range, land-based missiles. 
In March, Air Force officials and key lawmakers were close to an agreement to 
keep all of the nation's MX missiles housed in railside garrisons except during 
periods of international crisis, at which time they would be dispersed on rail 
lines. 
The tentative agreement also called for building a force of smaller, 
single-warhead Midgetman missiles that would be transported by trucks within 
large military reservations. The Midgetman plan has been favored by many 
members of Congress. 
But if the Administration adopts the Defense Science Board proposal to keep 
some MX missiles in motion at all times, Congress is likely to reject the 
scheme, knowledgeable congressional aides said. 
The Pentagon and Congress have scuttled two previous rail-based missile 
programs, one for the Minuteman missile in the early 1960s and one for the MX 
during the Jimmy Carter Administration, because they called for the constant 
presence of nuclear weapons on commercial byways. 
Since proposing its own rail-garrison scheme in December, 1986, the Air Force 
has taken pains to reassure communities on railroad lines that loaded weapons 
would leave their garrisons only in times of international crisis. 
By raising the specter that such weapons would be a constant presence on 
railroads, MX proponents fear that the panel's recommendation could further 
erode public support for the rail-garrison scheme. 
The panel's recommendations also appear to bolster the principal argument used 
by opponents of the rail-garrison concept -- that it could not survive a 
surprise Soviet nuclear strike. 
Critics fear that in an unexpected attack, the missile force would be destroyed 
while still in its rail-side garrisons because U.S. leaders either would not 
have advance warning or would delay putting the trains in motion. Unless most 
of the missile trains are dispersed on rail lines, Air Force officials 
acknowledge that much of the MX force could be destroyed in a surprise strike. 
In concluding that some part of the missile force should be on the tracks at 
all times, the Defense Science Board tacitly acknowledged that even during 
periods of international crisis, U.S. leaders would be hesitant to disperse the 
trains for fear that doing so would further escalate tensions. 
"The essential thing is to get people to believe that you haven't locked the 
missile trains up and thrown the key away," said one panel member who asked not 
to be identified. "If some have been out on the rails all along, that erodes 
any hurdle you might imagine" to dispersing the entire force during a crisis. 
Members of the panel argued also that a commitment to place some missile trains 
on round-the-clock patrol would make safety precautions adopted by the Air 
Force to protect the public "more serious-minded." 
"Putting (MX missiles) on a train and leaving them in their garrisons is no 
better than putting them in Minuteman silos," where they currently are based, 
said Gen. Russell E. Dougherty, a member of the panel. 
Respected Panel 
The Defense Science Board, which is composed of respected scientists, engineers 
and former defense officials, is considered one of the Defense Department's 
most authoritative advisory panels. Its recommendations often are adopted as 
department policy. 
The panel is chaired by Dr. James R. Burnett, an executive at TRW's Space and 
Defense Sector in Redondo Beach, Calif. 
In endorsing the rail-garrison concept, the Defense Science Board echoed the 
Air Force view that the system would provide the greatest deterrent effect for 
the least amount of money. The Air Force estimates that it would cost $5.4 
billion to place the 50 existing MX missiles on 25 trains and keep them in 
garrisons. 
