PREP BASEBALL ROUNDUP; 
MATER DEI'S CORLISS CONTINUES TO IMPRESS, STRIKES OUT 10 IN 9-4 VICTORY 
Tony Pena, generally regarded as the best pitcher in Orange County, might have 
some competition from a member of his own team at Mater Dei High School before 
the season is over. 
Scott Corliss continued an impressive senior season Saturday at Anaheim, 
striking out 10 and allowing only four hits in five innings in a 9-4 victory 
over Servite. 
Corliss (4-1) was the team's fifth starter last season when Pena (5-0 this 
season) fashioned a 10-1 record in leading Mater Dei to the Angelus League 
title. This year, Corliss has emerged as a college prospect with a lively 
fastball. 
"Scott throws as well as Tony, he just doesn't have the game experience," said 
Bob Ickes, Mater Dei coach. "He's getting better and better with each outing." 
Corliss was in trouble only once, yielding three hits in the third inning. He 
escaped without giving up a run, however, when Servite's Ed Crippen was ruled 
out at the plate for aggressive contact with catcher Rob Ickes while attempting 
to score on a single by Rob Walker. 
Corliss struck out five consecutive batters in the fourth and fifth innings 
before retiring at the end of the fifth after throwing 90 pitches in 90-degree 
heat. 
Mater Dei (12-3, 3-1) scored three runs in the third inning and added four more 
in the fifth in coasting to its seventh consecutive victory. 
The Monarchs used two hits with two walks to score three times in the third, 
and Jason Kirrer's two-run double was the big blow in the fifth. Every starter 
had at least one hit except for Ickes and left fielder Juan Zarate. 
Losing pitcher Chad Troxel (3-3) struggled with his control, walking seven 
before leaving in the fifth inning. Servite (9-6-1, 2-2) played without 
starters Tom Jacobs and Mark Tacconelli, who were suspended for two games for 
breaking a team rule. 
"Tom is our best hitter and leads the team in RBIs and home runs, but I don't 
know if the suspensions really affected us that much today," said Mike McNary, 
Servite coach. "Corliss took the wind out of our sails. We were pretty laid 
back but finally came alive a little in the last inning." 
Walker, Servite's designated hitter, drove a three-run homer over the 
center-field fence off reliever Brian Franklin in the seventh inning, giving 
him two hits for the day. Greg Carl, Mater Dei's leadoff hitter, had two hits, 
a walk, stole a base and scored a run. 
"If you can stop Greg, you can stop our offense," Ickes said. "He came into the 
game hitting .559 and has now stolen successfully on 15 of 16 attempts. He's 
played a big part in our success." 
Mater Dei lost its league opener to Bishop Montgomery for the second 
consecutive season, but the Monarchs have now established themselves as the 
favorite in the Angelus League, at least according to McNary. 
"They were tough with Pena throwing, but now that Corliss has come on, they're 
twice as tough," McNary said. "Whoever wins the league, is going to have to 
beat Mater Dei to claim the title." 
In the Sunset League: 
Edison 6, Westminster 2 -- Jason Serafin drove in four runs with a home run and 
a single and Jim Futami held Westminster to four hits to lift the Chargers (3-2 
in the league). Center fielder Serafin hit a three-run home run in the top of 
the first, added a run-scoring single in the seventh inning, and also threw a 
runner out at the plate in the second inning. Futami (2-0) struck out eight 
batters and walked one. Westminster is 1-4 in league play. 
Ocean View 2, Marina 1 -- Brent Woken went five innings, giving up four hits 
and striking out four to earn the victory. Mike Karpel picked up the save with 
two scoreless innings. Mike Burns, who was two for three, drove in both runs 
for Ocean View (12-4, 4-1) with a single in the third inning. Marina is 9-6 
overall and 2-3 in league. 
Fountain Valley 4, Huntington Beach 0 -- Jeff Hale pitched his second 
consecutive shutout, allowing six hits, striking out one and walking one. John 
Orcher provided the offensive punch for Fountain Valley (9-4, 4-1) with a 
two-run triple in the second inning. 
In nonleague play: 
Katella 9-6, Los Amigos 4-1, Right-hander Steve Ramey carried Katella (10-5, 
4-1) with pitching and hitting in the first game of the doubleheader, and did 
more hitting damage in the second game at Glover Stadium. Ramey hit three-run 
homers in both games to knock in seven runs. He also picked up his first 
victory without a loss in the opening game. Eric Boyd (1-1) got the victory in 
the second game. First baseman Danny Kiker hit a two-run homer in the second 
game for Los Amigos (5-11, 2-2). 
