SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
EGGSHELLS MAY HELP CRACK MYSTERIES OF HISTORY; 
ARCHEOLOGY: A NEW TECHNIQUE USING SHELLS CAN DETERMINE THE AGE OF A SITE UNDER 
STUDY. THE METHOD HAS ALREADY DETERMINED MODERN HUMANS EXISTED IN AFRICA FAR 
EARLIER THAN PREVIOUSLY BELIEVED. 
Ostrich eggshells are among the most commonly found objects at archeological 
sites in Africa. Primitive humans used the eggs as food and the shells for 
water containers, bowls and beads. 
Now, archeologists may find them even more valuable for understanding the 
history of early humans. 
A team of researchers headed by paleoanthropologist Allison S. Brooks of George 
Washington University and geophysicist P. Edward Hare of the Carnegie 
Institution of Washington reported recently in the journal Science that the 
slow decomposition of proteins in the eggshells can be used to date 
archeological sites, particularly in the range of 40,000 to 100,000 years ago 
-- a period for which there are few usable dating techniques. 
Preliminary studies with ostrich-eggshell dating at two African sites indicate 
that modern humans were present earlier than had previously been believed. 
One particular advantage of the new technique is that it is inexpensive, so 
that a large number of objects at a site can be dated to determine if artifacts 
from different time periods have been jumbled together by weather, flooding or 
excavations -- a problem that occurs frequently. "That is one of the things I 
am most excited about," Brooks said. 
Eggshell dating relies on a physical process called amino acid racemization. 
Amino acids are the individual molecules from which proteins are formed. In 
nature, virtually all amino acids are present in only one of two possible 
spatial configurations, called D and L, that have a three-dimensional 
relationship to each other, similar to the relationship of the right hand to 
the left. 
After an animal's death, the L amino acids will slowly undergo a chemical 
change to the D-form until a 50-50 mixture of the two forms is present. The 
rate of this change is constant at any temperature, so by measuring the ratio 
of D and L amino acids, researchers can determine how long ago the organism 
died. 
Researchers such as Jeffrey Bada of the Scripps Oceanographic Institution in La 
Jolla originally tried to use this technique to date human and animal bones, 
but they encountered great difficulties. Indigenous amino acids are readily 
leached out of the bones by water, and the bones are easily contaminated by 
amino acids from other sources. Hence, the technique produces unreliable dates 
and it has been largely discredited. 
The Science paper thus represents a rebirth of sorts for the technique. 
The chief advantage of the eggshells is that the protein they contained is 
locked into position by the mineral portion of the shell, so it does not easily 
leach out and contaminants do not easily get in. 
Hare and his colleagues have done a series of tests with contemporary ostrich 
eggshells, heating them in the absence of water and determining the rate at 
which one amino acid, called L-isoleucine, is converted into its D analog. They 
found that this racemization reaction proceeds at a steady, predictable rate 
that can be used for dating as long as it is compared to materials of known age 
at a given site. 
In the tropics, Brooks and Hare report, the technique can be used to date 
objects as old as 200,000 years. In cooler climates, such as China, it can be 
used on objects 1 million years old. 
The team has already been using the technique at African sites. At Ashango in 
Zaire, for example, researchers have excavated skeletal fragments "which are 
essentially similar to skeletons of modern East Africans, so they were thought 
to be fairly recent," Brooks said. Dating of eggshells found with them, 
however, shows that the bones are at least 25,000 years old. 
Anthropologist Gifford H. Miller of the University of Colorado in Boulder, who 
is also a member of the team, has been studying the remains of unquestionably 
modern humans taken from the Border Cave on the east coast of South Africa. He 
found that the eggshells from the site were about 77,000 years old, providing 
strong additional evidence that modern humans originated in Africa, not on some 
other continent as some researchers believe. 
Although ostriches are most common in Africa, ostrich eggs have also been found 
in China and Mongolia and would be useful for dating there. Moreover, the 
research team has found that every other type of bird egg they have studied 
gives similar results, so those types of shells can be used as well. They are 
now beginning to study owl eggs, which are found at many archeological sites in 
Northern Europe. 
Other archeologists are beginning to recognize the importance of the eggshells, 
Miller said. "When I started talking to archeologists, I learned that the 
damned stuff's everywhere," but that people were in the habit of tossing it 
aside as uninteresting. Now, he said, "they are getting keyed in and saving 
it." 
DATING TECHNIQUES FOR ARTIFACTS 
Carbon-14 dating is good for assesing the age of items from the present to 
40,000 years ago. Another commonly used technique, potassium-argon dating, is 
good for artifacts 300,000 years old or older. Dating of ostrich eggshells can 
fill the gap between and is important because that is a period when modern 
humans were first emerging. It is particularly useful in the range of 40,000 to 
100,000 years ago -- a period for which there are few usable dating techniques. 
In tropic climates, it can be used to date objects as old as 200,000 years. In 
cooler climates, it can be used on objects 1 million years old. 
