'STAR WARS' R&amp;D CREATES ULTRA-FAST, TINY COMPUTER 
Researchers at Rockwell International and Texas Instruments working on the 
"Star Wars" defense program have developed ultra-high-speed computers the size 
of a deck of cards that they say could have far-reaching commercial 
applications. 
Besides representing an important advance in Star Wars research, the small 
machines -- about 500 times faster than the average personal computer -- could 
spark a new generation of small but powerful computers for consumers, industry 
watchers said Wednesday. 
Star Wars critics, however, said the breakthrough does not justify the 
multibillion-dollar program, formally known as the Strategic Defense 
Initiative, and the potential commercial applications are not justification 
enough for continuing spending on the program. 
Administration funding requests for the controversial SDI program have grown 
from $1 billion in fiscal 1984 to $4.6 billion in 1990, but Congress has shown 
an increasing willingness to shave the SDI budget and divert funds to more 
popular programs. 
Rockwell's Autonetics Sensors &amp; Aircraft Systems division in Anaheim and 
Texas Instruments, based in Dallas, designed different versions of the computer 
under an Air Force contract. A commercial version could be available to 
consumers in several years, Air Force officials said. 
"These designs will one day make every home computer in the country outdated," 
said John Provine, chief of the guided interceptor technology branch of the Air 
Force Armament Laboratory at Eglin Air Force Base, Fla. "I can see a day when, 
if a person buys a home computer, it will be either very compact or have 
nothing but an empty box for looks." 
The so-called floating-point computers were designed for a Star Wars program 
with the aim of developing a processor to track flying objects against the 
Earth's background and identifying them either as decoys or enemy missiles. 
To fulfill its mission, the computers must be small enough to fit inside a 
space-based satellite and fast enough to track thousands of missiles 
simultaneously and direct a weapon to destroy them. 
"This is the heart of the SDI system," said Provine. "It's clear evidence the 
space-based interceptor isn't just pie-in-the sky." 
The Rockwell and TI computers are part of a proposed $17.7-billion strategic 
defense system known as a space-based interceptor, which would house 
missile-killers in 200 satellite platforms, said Baker Spring, a defense 
analyst at the Heritage Foundation, a Washington-based think tank known for its 
pro-Star Wars stance. Rockwell and Martin Marietta Corp. are the prime 
contractors on the project. 
Gary Chapman, an SDI critic and executive director of Computer Professionals 
for Social Responsibility in Palo Alto, said the Rockwell-Texas Instruments 
computer is by no means a major technical breakthrough toward developing a 
space defense system. 
"The basic problem of SDI is developing trustworthy software, not building a 
fast computer," he said. "There's not enough information to write adequate 
software specifications for a nuclear war, and you can't test the system." 
Dave Bernstein, assistant director of the Stanford Center for International 
Security and Arms Control, said the computers would likely have commercial 
applications, but that is no reason to continue developing the Star Wars 
system. 
The Air Force's Provine said development of the computers cost about $5 
million. The project incorporates little in the way of new technology but 
rather takes existing technology and greatly shrinks it in size. 
Provine said the computers developed by Rockwell and Texas Instruments could 
have vast commercial applications, but he noted that they may never be used in 
a Star Wars system, even if the costly anti-missile program is eventually 
built. 
In February, the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization gave 
priority to a competing system, known as "Brilliant Pebbles," which is cheaper 
at $12 billion and would deploy thousands of small missile interceptors more 
effectively, Spring said. 
Meanwhile, Texas Instruments said it is looking into commercial applications 
for the computer, though the company declines to discuss potential uses. "Much 
of the development is out of the way," said Leland Langston, a Texas 
Instruments project manager, "and we think the first commercial applications 
could appear within two years." 
Chris Willard, an analyst with Dataquest, a San Jose market research firm, said 
that because of the computer's speed and small size, it could find applications 
in specialized areas such as robotics. He said he doubts the computers would 
find a use as general-purpose machines. 
"It depends a lot on the price and the ultimate system," he said. "The memory 
would have to be more developed in commercial applications. It could have 
applications in industrial controls, robotics and sensors, but for 
general-computing purposes it would require modifications." 
Provine said he envisioned the computers being used in applications such as 
Star Trek-style communicators or in robots. 
The Rockwell unit, which employs 1,100 people, designed one version of the 
computer as part of a 30-month SDI contract awarded in November, 1988, said 
Tony Longo, spokesman for Rockwell. Longo declined to comment on Rockwell's 
participation in the computer's development. 
Each computer weighs 75 grams, or about 2.5 ounces, is 10 centimeters by 1 
centimeter and is capable of up to 500 million instructions per second. 
"This is the fastest computer ever built in this small a package," Langston 
said. 
Current state-of-the-art computers in some missiles weigh 500 grams, or 17.5 
ounces, with a capacity of 4.5 million instructions per second. 
