HEART ASSN. TO DISCONTINUE FOOD LABELING PROGRAM 
The American Heart Assn., under pressure from the federal government, has 
decided to discontinue a food labeling program designed to help consumers 
quickly identify products considered best for the prevention of heart disease, 
a spokesman said today. 
The HeartGuide program, an attempt by the heart association to identify and 
label low-fat, low-cholesterol, low-sodium foods, came under attack by the 
federal Food and Drug Administration, which opposes endorsements by 
non-government groups. 
"The FDA has made it clear it is against third-party endorsements," Howard 
Lewis, director of health and science news for the heart association, said 
today. "The government's only concern was that they did not like third-party 
organizations entering into an area where they had legal responsibility." 
Lewis emphasized that only the labeling program will end. Nutrition education 
and other aspects of the program will continue. 
The program was launched in January. 
HeartGuide was proposed in 1987 as an attempt to uniformly identify foods with 
certain levels of cholesterol, fat and sodium. 
The foods were to be identified with a HeartGuide seal of approval -- a heart 
with a check mark -- on the package. 
Consumer groups, such as the Center for Science in the Public Interest, 
expressed concern that consumers would be lulled by the label into believing 
that HeartGuide-approved foods were actually health foods. Those groups also 
complained about the fairness of the ratings. 
The heart association planned to charge between $15,000 and $600,000 a year to 
companies participating in the program. The fees were to be used for a 
toll-free hot line and nutrition awareness programs, the association said. 
Lewis said independent labs performed the food analyses after companies 
submitted applications to have foods considered. 
He said the heart association is encouraged that the FDA plans to overhaul the 
government's labeling program. 
"The FDA has stated a commitment now to completely change the way food labeling 
is done in the country and to challenge and get rid of and set standards for 
such claims as low cholesterol, high fiber, 'lite,' things like that," Lewis 
said. "We're very happy that after 17 years, the government will move ahead -- 
17 years after promises to do something about food labeling." 
