BUSINESS SPIES FLOURISH, ALLEGEDLY WITH ETHICS; 
ESPIONAGE: NOWADAYS THEY'RE 'COMPETITOR INTELLIGENCE PROFESSIONALS,' AND THEY 
CLAIM TO WORK ABOVE BOARD. MANY HAVE GRADUATE DEGREES. 
Corporate spies these days say they've come a long way from Mata Hari and 
midnight break-ins to swipe a competitor's secrets. Now it helps to have an 
advanced degree and the know-how to sniff out information with a computer. 
Jan P. Herring, a CIA analyst for 20 years until 1983, is part of the new breed 
of corporate spies who have banded together to form the Society of Competitor 
Intelligence Professionals. 
"It's clearly a profession whose time has come," Herring said Thursday at the 
4-year-old, 1,400-member society's annual meeting. "What has caused it to 
happen is competition, particularly among American companies that for the first 
time are experiencing both international and corporate competition." 
As recently as a few years ago, most American corporations were satisfied to 
concentrate on researching their own markets and customers. But many are now 
finding that knowing the competition thoroughly can help a company capitalize 
on its own strengths, shore up weaknesses, exploit opportunities and counter 
threats. 
In Japan, corporate spying is an old custom. 
"The Japanese are the professionals," Herring said. "They're the ones who 
started it. They do it almost as second nature. It's just part of their 
companies." 
Bob Margulies, competitive assessment manager for McDonnell Douglas Corp. in 
Long Beach and new president of the society, said the Japanese "have honed 
their techniques for gathering and analyzing information to the point where 
they play it like an instrument, like a professional musician." 
Margulies insisted that corporate spying, unlike industrial espionage, is an 
honorable trade with a written code of ethics. 
Corporate spies don't try to ferret out confidential information or bug 
meetings in their rivals' offices. Rather, they rely on public information and 
interviews with experts. 
"It is not glamorous work," said Margulies. "It is pure, unadulterated 
research: collecting data, interpreting that data and communicating to your 
management or customer." 
The information explosion of the past decade, fueled by more powerful computers 
and a proliferation of data banks and specialized publications, helps corporate 
spies find out almost anything they want about competitors. 
"You'd be very foolish to accept inside, confidential information," Margulies 
said. "It's unethical, and it's illegal to use that information to gain 
competitive advantage. It not only puts you in jeopardy, it puts your company 
in jeopardy and puts your profession in jeopardy. 
"Ninety-five percent of what you need is readily accessible. That additional 5% 
that you can't get legally is not going to help you that much. So why throw 
your career down the drain?" 
Competitor-intelligence professionals need the skills of detectives, reporters 
and writers. They travel, if necessary, to competitors' product introductions 
and hobnob with analysts and clients. 
"A good intelligence analyst . . . pulls together the pieces of the puzzle," 
said Herring. "You'll never get all the pieces. You may sometimes get 70%." 
Herring is vice president of Futures Group in Glastonbury, Conn., a consulting 
company that helps corporations develop and operate their own intelligence 
organizations. 
"Many companies have started these things and they've died because they haven't 
done it well or to the extent that it was able to make a difference," he said. 
Only a handful of universities, including Michigan State, Pittsburgh, Boston, 
Stanford and Harvard, offer courses in competitor intelligence, and none in the 
United States offers a degree in the field. 
Yet it is a burgeoning profession with opportunities for young people. 
Margulies estimated that more than 10,000 people work in competitor 
intelligence for hundreds of companies, many of them in marketing or financial 
departments. Starting salaries for those with degrees and a few years of 
business experience are at least $30,000, he said, with the opportunity of 
making much more as they rise in the corporation. 
A study by John E. Prescott and Craig Fleisher of the University of Pittsburgh 
shows that 59% of the Society of Competitor Intelligence Professionals members 
have master's degrees, 29% have bachelor's degrees and 6% have doctorates. 
Fifty-six percent of them earn more than $50,000 a year, and most work for 
companies with more than $1 billion in annual sales. 
Michael Porter, an industry expert at Harvard, has said that managers should 
spend a tour of duty in competitor intelligence in order to better understand 
the competition and how to find out about it. 
Margulies said his own work helped McDonnell Douglas avoid a very expensive 
mistake early in the 1980s when the airplane industry was worried about 
skyrocketing jet fuel prices in the years ahead. 
Rival Boeing Co. in Seattle had launched an extensive effort within the airline 
industry to see if there was a market for a fuel-efficient plane combining the 
advantages of propellers and jet engines, Margulies said. 
Margulies said Boeing found the industry unwilling to commit to ordering the 
expensive planes, and that his reading of this finding led McDonnell Douglas to 
halt its own similar project. 
"In our business, when you launch a new design, they're so expensive that 
you're really betting the farm," he said. "So if you make a mistake, you don't 
have a second chance." 
