THE SYMBOLISM WAS ALL WRONG; 
WHY THE ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER MUST BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR THE OCCUPATION OF 
THE HOSPICE. 
Israel's supreme court has upheld a lower court order evicting the 150 Jewish 
religious zealots who moved into St. John's Hospice in the Christian Quarter of 
Jerusalem during Easter Week. Now it's up to a lower court to decide on the 
validity of the lease under which the settlers had occupied the four-building 
complex. Whatever that ruling, the damage done to Israel by this provocative 
act, ranging from freshly embittered relations between Jews and non-Jews in 
Jerusalem to the very credibility of its top leaders, is far-reaching. 
On April 11, just before Good Friday, 20 Jewish families moved into the 
hospice, a 72-room complex owned by the Greek Orthodox Church. The settlers 
said they had paid $4 million to sublease the Old City facility, dealing with 
its Armenian Christian tenant through a Panama-based front company. They 
further claimed that their action was simply meant to assert the right of Jews 
to live anywhere in Israel, even, presumably, within the walls of a structure 
historically and unequivocally associated with a major Christian denomination. 
In fact, their takeover was a demonstration of disregard for the religious 
sensitivities of others. Predictably, noisy and violent protests followed. 
Mayor Teddy Kollek, who for decades has labored to ease religious tensions in 
Jerusalem, was among the first to deplore the settlers' action. 
The settlers clearly intended to make a political statement as much as a 
religious one. In time it emerged that they had been encouraged by Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Shamir's caretaker government. After first denying any 
involvement with the settlers, the government finally conceded that the Finance 
Ministry -- which is now under Shamir's control -- had contributed $1.8 million 
toward the lease. The Shamir regime was thus caught lying to the Israeli 
public. It also sought to mislead the United States, whose Congress is now 
pondering a $400-million loan guarantee to settle Soviet immigrants in Israel. 
To their considerable credit, the leaders of many major American Jewish 
organizations that have usually been reluctant to openly criticize Israeli 
government actions this time have done so with unambiguous condemnation. But 
the damage already done goes unrepaired. Shamir could have prevented it. The 
responsibility for what has happened is his, above all, to bear. 
