DERBY STEP FOR SUMMER SQUALL; 
HORSE RACING: HE RUNS A MUDDY 1 1/8 MILES IN A FAST 1:49 2/5 UNDER DAY. BLUE 
GRASS STAKES IS THE COLT'S NEXT SCHEDULED RACE. 
Jockey Jerry Bailey stepped out of a shower at Turfway Park and walked over to 
a television monitor to watch a rerun of Saturday's $500,000 Jim Beam Stakes. 
"Hey," Bailey said, "are they going to call this the Pat Day race next year?" 
Day, making his fourth appearance in the stake, had won the Kentucky Derby prep 
for the fourth time. Day abandoned his first three winners -- At the Threshold, 
J.T.'s Pet and Western Playboy -- to ride other horses in the Derby but 
probably won't this time. Summer Squall's 2 1/2-length victory on a muddy track 
stamped the $300,000 Storm Bird yearling as one of the strong favorites when 
the Triple Crown chase begins at Churchill Downs on May 5. 
Although Day has ridden another Derby contender, Florida Derby winner 
Unbridled, Cot Campbell, the manager of the syndicate that owns Summer Squall, 
is confident that Day will also be his jockey for the first Saturday in May. 
"I can't speak for Pat," Campbell said, "but I'd bet money that he'll take our 
horse." 
Campbell said that Day would contact him today or Monday with his decision. 
Both Summer Squall and Unbridled are scheduled to run in the Blue Grass Stakes 
at Keeneland on April 14. 
In what was the most impressive victory by a Kentucky Derby candidate this 
year, Summer Squall edged ahead of the pace-setting Bright Again inside the 
eighth pole and coasted to the wire with Day never resorting to his whip. The 
early fractions were good -- 1:11 2/5 for six furlongs and 1:37 2/5 for a mile 
-- and the winning time for 1 1/8 miles was 1:49 2/5, only two-fifths of a 
second off the track record. 
Bright Again, ridden by Craig Perret, finished second, eight lengths in front 
of Yonder under Bailey, and it was six lengths farther back to Power Lunch in 
fourth place. Southland-based Tight Spot finished fifth after being close to 
the pace until the top of the stretch, and he was followed by Private School, 
Top Snob, Fighting Fantasy, Sluki and Seven Spades. 
Favored by the crowd of 16,872, Summer Squall paid $3.80, $3.60 and $2.80. 
Bright Again paid $5.60 and $4.20, and Yonder returned $3.60. A $2 exacta on 
the first two finishers was worth $20.40. 
Two of the runner-up trainers thought Summer Squall's race thrust him into the 
forefront of Derby picture. 
"I thought this horse was the best 2-year-old last year, and I think he's the 
best 3-year-old right now," said Rusty Arnold, who handles Bright Again. "His 
time was tremendous. My horse ran big, but the other horse was just a little 
better." 
Bright Again needs another race before the Kentucky Derby, but Arnold plans to 
avoid Summer Squall at Keeneland. Bright Again will run in the Lexington Stakes 
there April 24. 
"The winner was much the best," said Ron McAnally, Tight Spot's trainer. "He 
took mud in his face down in there all the way and still had a lot left. But 
this race isn't as much of a barometer as it might seem, because we had to run 
on an off track." 
Summer Squall thrives on mud. Undefeated as a 2-year-old, two of his five 
victories -- at Churchill Downs and at Saratoga -- came on off tracks. 
"We had an edge going into this race, because we knew the horse could handle 
the mud and we had a jockey like Pat Day," said Neil Howard, Summer Squall's 
trainer. "This horse has won all over the country, so he's proved that he 
doesn't have to carry his track around with him in a suitcase. That's an 
attribute you need with a good horse, because you know you're going to be 
traveling with him." 
Summer Squall earned $300,000 with his sixth victory in seven starts. His debut 
as a 3-year-old was delayed because he bled during a workout at Gulfstream 
Park, and he went 15 days without a workout. Finally, on March 17, Summer 
Squall was treated with an anti-bleeding medication, and he made his first 
start in 6 1/2 months. He finished within a length of Housebuster, one of the 
country's premier sprinters, at seven furlongs. 
Still, Summer Squall hadn't been around two turns until Saturday, and now the 
fidgety Howard has less of a reason to fidget. "You're never ahead of schedule 
when you're trying to get a horse ready for the Kentucky Derby," Howard said. 
"But at least I think we're on schedule with this horse now." 
Day has won many big races, but never a Kentucky Derby. 
"I'd like to win it eight or 10 more times," Day said of the Beam. "All of them 
are sweet, but this was the shortest-priced horse of the four, and he really 
has a great future. He was practically pulling me out of the bridle. The 
distance has never been a question in my mind, but you don't know until you put 
them to the test, and he passed it." 
Breaking from the inside post, Summer Squall dropped into third place while 
Bright Again and Tight Spot ran ahead of him. Arnold thought that Bright 
Again's chances were hurt because Tight Spot kept the pressure on his colt. 
The Blue Grass, which has fallen out of favor with trainers in recent years, 
was moved to an early date last year and could be this year's strongest, 
top-to-bottom Derby prep. Just having Summer Squall and Unbridled there makes 
it a formidable race. 
"Those two horses are very close together right now," Bailey said. "I'd love to 
have the chance to pick either one of them." 
Horse Racing Notes 
After the race, Summer Squall was kicked in the rear left leg by the outrider's 
pony as he was being escorted to the winner's circle. Trainer Neil Howard said 
that Summer Squall was nicked in two spots in the upper part of the leg and 
there was a small amount of bleeding. "He's got two spots on him," Howard said. 
"One little scrape and a little place above it. The upper spot called for two 
little stitches. It was a superficial cut." 
There were surprises in two other Kentucky Derby preps Saturday. At Oaklawn 
Park, Nuits St. Georges, a colt who hadn't won a race until he beat maidens at 
Santa Anita March 4, won the Rebel while the favorite, Tarascon, finished 
third. Nuits St. George, who paid $63.80,was ridden by Jamie Bruin and is 
trained by Doug Peterson. . . . At Garden State Park, Dr. Bobby A ($15.20) won 
the Cherry Hill Mile by 6 1/2 lengths as the favorite, Smelly, finished second 
on a sloppy track. 
