HEALTH &amp; FITNESS: EXPERTS OFFER SOME FACTS ON COCAINE ABUSE, HOW TO DETOUR 
AROUND IT 
Under normal circumstances, cells in the area of the brain that deal with 
feelings of pleasure fire electrical impulses at about three times a second. 
Compare that to one of life's most thrilling moments, such as sky diving, when 
those impulses are being fired at up to 40 times a second. 
But even that barely approaches the effects of cocaine, which can cause brain 
cells to fire impulses from 40 to 200 times a second, until the cells sending 
out those signals have used up all their reserves of neurotransmitters, leaving 
the recipient cells crying out desperately for more. 
"It's very, very difficult to 'just say no' when the brain is saying, 'More! 
More! More!' " says Dr. Jeffrey Fortuna, director of Drug Education Consultants 
in Orange and staff consultant for the Chemical Recovery Services unit at 
Healthcare Medical Center in Tustin. "There is no drug that depletes the brain 
of chemicals faster than cocaine. 
"We can't save everyone, but there are a lot of kids we can reach with 
education that is scientifically accurate, not moralistic," he told a group of 
more than 400 doctors, nurses and other health care professionals last week at 
a daylong conference on cocaine dependency sponsored by Healthcare. 
Cocaine abuse is a serious problem in Orange County, Fortuna said, although not 
so much the kind that shows up so often on television. Instead of crack, the 
cheap, readily available form of the drug that has caused so much havoc in the 
inner cities and generated intense media interest, Orange County cocaine users 
are more likely to use freebase, the most potent form of the drug. 
In freebasing, cocaine is heated in a pipe and reduced to its purest form, 
instead of being combined with other chemicals as it is in crack (cocaine 
bicarbonate) and cocaine powder (cocaine hydrochloride). "It's 100% pure, and 
then it's absorbed through the lungs, so it takes effect in a matter of about 
eight seconds," he said. 
Injected cocaine starts working in about 13 seconds, according to Dr. David E. 
Smith, founder and director of the Haight-Ashbury Free Clinic in San Francisco, 
who also spoke at the conference. "Snorted cocaine takes about three minutes, 
and when it's ingested (swallowed), it takes about 25 minutes." 
"And it's everywhere, absolutely everywhere in Orange County," Fortuna said. 
"No community is immune. "The only thing that fluctuates is the price. In Santa 
Ana, it's about one-fifth the price in Corona del Mar." 
The more than 900 addicts that Fortuna has dealt with range in age from 14 to 
45, but he calls 18- to 35-year-olds "the real high-risk group in terms of 
hard-core use." 
Fortuna said cocaine "is indeed the most addictive substance on the planet, if 
you exclude sugar." 
Most of what is known about cocaine dependency and other addictions is so 
recent that health-care professionals are racing to keep up with new 
developments by reading scientific literature and attending continuing 
education conferences such as this one. "There has been more learned about 
brain chemistry and addiction in the last 25 years than in the entire history 
of society," said Smith, who founded the Haight-Ashbury Free Clinic during the 
legendary "Summer of Love" in 1967 and has been treating drug addicts ever 
since. 
The most common reason that people use cocaine, Fortuna said, is "to produce a 
competitive edge. They want to be brighter, faster, quicker and wittier than 
anyone around them. It's sort of a defensive reason, 'so that people do not see 
me as I really am.' " 
The second reason on the list: to elevate mood. Only 5% to 8% of the adult 
population in general suffers from clinical depression, Fortuna said, compared 
with 58% to 64% of those who take drugs. And cocaine will work for a while 
until the brain's chemical reserves are depleted. "Then the individual will 
become even more impressed. The most severe depressions I've ever seen in my 
life are in cocaine addicts," he said. 
Appetite suppression is the third most common reason, Fortuna said, and some 
people take cocaine to increase pleasure. "These are the true hedonists," 
Fortuna said. But perhaps, surprisingly, "these people are very rare. Most 
hedonists are also addicted to other drugs," he said. The fifth reason: To 
shelve anger and fear, Fortuna said. 
After cocaine has used up the brain's supply of neurotransmitters, abstinence 
and good nutrition are "the only two factors that will bring them back," he 
explained. 
"I truly believe that life should be a pursuit of goose bumps," he said. "And 
there are plenty of goose bumps to be had without the assistance of chemicals." 
