BUSH'S THIRD-WORLD DEBT PLAN FACES HURDLES 
Despite a series of recent endorsements, the Bush Administration is facing an 
uphill fight in its efforts to launch its new plan to solve the Third World's 
debt problem. 
Leaders of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank threw their 
support behind the plan Tuesday, two days after finance ministers of the seven 
major industrial nations signed on. But their support was lukewarm. 
"They've got some serious problems ahead," Alan J. Stoga, a debt analyst at 
Kissinger Associates, said of the Administration's effort. 
Japan, which some officials had hoped would contribute $10 billion to the 
effort, announced that it would allocate only $4.5 billion. West Germany, which 
harbors major doubts about some provisions of the U.S. plan, has declined to 
ante up any new money. 
Skeptical European finance ministers limited the amount that the IMF and World 
Bank can divert for Third World debt relief. And the United States is under 
serious budget constraints of its own. 
Pressure Big Banks 
The Bush Administration will also need to pressure the big U.S. banks to step 
up -- or at least maintain -- their current levels of lending to Latin American 
debtor nations. But U.S. bankers have served notice that they are not eager to 
increase their lending to Latin American countries and do not want to write 
down the value of their existing loans without attractive sweeteners from 
governments. 
Moreover, the Administration faces opposition within the Federal Reserve Board 
to easing bank regulations and accounting rules to make it easier for 
commercial banks to discount their Third World loans. The Fed has already 
rejected suggestions that it penalize banks that do not go along with the 
Administration plan. 
The debt plan, written by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, is still in 
outline form, and the Administration must work out enough details by July to 
win endorsement from the heads of government at the annual seven-nation 
economic summit conference in Paris. 
To make its plan credible, the United States must also move quickly to apply it 
to some specific "test" cases. Mexico, Venezuela and the Philippines are the 
primary candidates. 
The Brady plan marks a major turning point in management of the Third World 
debt problem. 
In previous years, the United States sought to spur more bank lending to help 
Third World debtors pay their bills, an approach that helped debtor nations 
stave off default but also inevitably resulted in increasing their debt 
burdens. The Brady plan seeks to reduce their debts. 
Essentially, the proposal would provide new ways to encourage banks to discount 
a portion of their Third World loans and to exchange them for new long-term 
bonds that debtor countries would provide with guarantees by the World Bank. 
The Administration had also hoped for more from Japan and a significant 
contribution from West Germany to supplement the World Bank funds. 
Despite the formal endorsement by the World Bank and the IMF earlier this week, 
the plan has received something of a lukewarm reception from individual 
creditor and debtor countries. 
The Group of Seven major industrial nations -- the United States, Japan, West 
Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada -- approved the proposal in 
principle but expressed reservations about several key specifics. 
Political Unrest 
Both British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson and West German Finance 
Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg were publicly critical of the plan. 
Reaction from the Latin debtor countries was mixed. Although Brazilian Finance 
Minister Mailson Nobrega called the Brady proposal "a major conceptual 
breakthrough," he warned that "the question remains: Where will the necessary 
resources come from?" 
And some Latin American officials have privately expressed chagrin that the 
Brady plan would offer debt reduction to do-nothing governments as well as 
those that have made sacrifices to restructure their economies. Brady offers 
debtor countries no incentives, these critics say, to adopt necessary but 
unpopular austerity measures such as tighter budget and monetary policies. 
What worries critics most is that, for all of Brady's efforts, the proposal may 
not provide enough relief to help Latin American countries back on their feet. 
Instead, they fear, it could tighten the economic squeeze in the region and 
exacerbate the political unrest already developing there. 
"These ideas raise new hopes. They should be translated into immediate action," 
Brazil's Nobrega told the IMF delegates earlier this week. 
Brady told reporters Wednesday that the Administration was not troubled by the 
criticism. "Now's the time to light a candle rather than curse the darkness," 
he said. 
Brady said Wednesday that Treasury officials have already "been talking to a 
number of countries" about qualifying for the new debt-reduction plan and were 
hoping to move quickly to negotiate agreements with specific countries and to 
iron out the program's details. 
Mexico has already submitted its own proposal, combining Brady's debt-reduction 
scheme with a request for a major new lending package from commercial banks. 
And Venezuela is drafting a plan of its own. 
But as Brady concedes, time is of the essence. Several major Latin American 
governments are facing elections this year in which leftists or populists have 
early leads, and a series of victories there could lead to reversals of 
economic restructuring programs. 
"It is crucial," Nobrega said this week, "that such new hopes do not give place 
to new frustrations." 
MOST INDEBTED NATIONS 
The 17 countries classified as highly indebted by the International Monetary 
Fund owed more than a half-trillion dollars at the end of 1988. Five of them 
account for two-thirds of the total debt. 
Top 5 debtors: 
Brazil: $120.1 
Mexcio: $107.4 
Argentina: $59.6 
Venezuela: $35.0 
Nigeria: $30.5 
$32,6 billion 
Other Latin American debtor nations: $83.0 billion 
Other debtor nations: $93.0 billion 
Total: $528.6 billion 
Other Latin American debtors: Chile, Colombia, Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, Uruguay, 
Costa Rica. Other debtor nations: Philippines, Yugoslavia, Morocco, Ivory 
Coast, Jamaica. 
Source: International Monetary Fund via Associated Press 
