JUDGE WILL NOT FORCE 'LOWER COST' DEVELOPMENT; 
HIDDEN HILLS: THE BUILDER COULD STILL SUE THE CITY OVER THE PROJECT, WHICH 
WOULD HAVE INCLUDED LOW-INCOME HOUSING. 
Saying he was reluctant to involve himself in the details of running the city 
government of Hidden Hills, a Los Angeles Superior Court judge Thursday 
declined to order the wealthy city to build a controversial development that 
would include lower-cost housing. 
But Judge R. William Schoettler, Jr. said his ruling should not deter the 
proposed project's developer from pursuing a lawsuit that the judge said could 
"potentially" cost the city $1 million or more. 
Schoettler's decision appeared to open the way for the unraveling of a 1989 
court-approved settlement in which Hidden Hills agreed to "advance and develop, 
and if appropriate construct" lower-cost housing for senior citizens. It also 
cast doubt over the future of the city's redevelopment agency and a 
$5.9-million flood-control project that Los Angeles County was to fund as part 
of the same settlement. 
Noting that the newly elected Hidden Hills City Council has "a sincere desire" 
to "undo everything" regarding the settlement, Schoettler said: "I have no 
particular desire to force down the city of Hidden Hills' throat a 
redevelopment program of any sort. . . . I am reluctant to intervene in the 
government process of Hidden Hills." 
Schoettler's decision Thursday contrasted sharply with remarks he made last 
month, when he said in court that he was prepared to order city officials into 
his court to see that the redevelopment suit settlement was carried out as 
agreed on. 
The settlement was reached in a lawsuit filed in 1984 by the county and a 
private attorney over the formation of the Hidden Hills redevelopment agency to 
fund the storm drain. Part of the lawsuit by the county dealt with state 
requirements that 20% of redevelopment funds be spent on "affordable" housing. 
To settle the suit, Hidden Hills agreed to annex and zone land where Tarzana 
builder Danny Howard was proposing to construct nine single-family homes, an 
office building and -- at the city's suggestion -- a lower-cost housing 
project. The county in turn agreed to pay for most of the storm drain. 
But public disclosure of the deal caused an uproar in Hidden Hills, a gated 
community of private streets where the average home price recently was 
estimated at more than $800,000. This month, voters overwhelmingly installed a 
new council majority that had campaigned against Howard's project and said 
redevelopment was not needed. The new council took office this week and 
immediately set out to contest the settlement. 
Howard filed his own lawsuit last year, alleging that the council was trying to 
back out of the deal. On Thursday he asked Schoettler to order the city to 
approve his project by May 6, when he said his option to purchase the land will 
expire. 
Although the judge turned down Howard's request, he spoke several times of 
"potential" damages the city could face if Howard takes his suit before a jury. 
When Michael Jenkins, an attorney for the city, argued that the settlement is 
invalid, the judge said: "You will lose on the issue of whether or not those 
acts were valid. . . . I think it's a lousy position." 
"We are talking about at least a seven-figure judgment potential," Schoettler 
said. 
Benjamin M. Reznik, Howard's attorney, said he would seek "eight figures." 
Howard, he said, was "dragged" in by the city's promises of a development 
agreement and its annexation of the site, only to have his project dashed by 
the political firestorm later. 
The city operates on a budget of about $300,000 and has a cash reserve of about 
$900,000, said Chris K. Van Peski, a former councilman defeated this month. 
Also appearing at the hearing was former Hidden Hills City Atty. Wayne K. 
Lemieux, who had been fired by the new council at a special meeting only hours 
before. Lemieux said he was still the attorney for the city redevelopment 
agency. 
New council members David G. Stanley and Howard Klein said the agency's future 
will be the subject of public hearings. But Klein and Councilwoman Susan Norris 
Porcaro had made criticism of the agency a focus of their campaigns. 
A theme of the new council's campaigns was that residents opposed taking 
redevelopment funds from county tax rolls for affluent Hidden Hills, and that 
they did not necessarily oppose lower-cost housing. Jenkins made the same 
argument Thursday to the judge. 
Lemieux countered that the 6-year-old agency was not opposed until lower-cost 
housing entered the picture. 
The judge said: "I suspect that's probably a little closer to the true facts." 
