CUTS IN AIRCRAFT COULD IMPACT OTHER SECTORS 
The Southern California aircraft industry is heading for tough times -- and the 
rest of the region's economy is likely to suffer because of it. 
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's proposal Thursday for massive cutbacks in four 
major military aircraft programs will slash employment in the sprawling defense 
sector and reverberate throughout Southern California's business community. 
Deepening the gloom in the aerospace sector, McDonnell Douglas disclosed 
Thursday that it would cut 3,000 white-collar jobs in commercial and military 
programs at its Douglas Aircraft operation in Long Beach. The company 
attributed the layoffs to continuing problems in the production of commercial 
and military aircraft. 
The slowdown in the military programs proposed by Cheney will bring home to 
Southern California the harsh reality of the cost of peace: fewer jobs and 
greater economic uncertainty. Three of the four aircraft marked for cuts 
Thursday are to be produced in Los Angeles County. 
Although Cheney's proposal is far less severe than outright program 
cancellations might have been, there is more slashing to come. The layoffs that 
have occurred so far reflect congressional spending reductions enacted one to 
three years ago, not any immediate effect from the ebb of the Cold War. 
"These cutbacks in defense have just begun, and they raise some troubling 
questions about the future," said David Hensley, an economist with the UCLA 
business forecasting project. "Deep cuts could push us into an outright 
recession, but in any case we will experience significant pain." 
The cutbacks unveiled by Cheney amount to $34.835 billion, including $16.835 
billion from 1991 through 1994 and an estimated $18 billion from 1995 through 
1997. 
Although Cheney did not address the job impact of his decision, the cuts could 
affect as many as 35,000 jobs nationwide over the four years starting in 1991, 
an estimate based on ratios for the average sales per employee in the industry. 
California would bear the brunt of those losses. 
The job cutbacks will not come immediately, and the prime contractors may feel 
them last. The first firms to be affected will be small vendors and 
subcontractors that populate aerospace industrial parks in communities like 
Torrance, El Segundo and Anaheim. An estimated 80,482 of these small firms 
already have failed or left the industry, owing to Defense Department policies 
and overcapacity in the industry. 
The two largest aircraft programs targeted by Cheney, the Northrop B-2 bomber 
and the McDonnell Douglas C-17 cargo jet, face cuts of nearly half of their 
total production quantities. 
The two programs account for 20,000 direct jobs in Los Angles County and 
thousands more at subcontractors. Northrop, for example, subcontracts 70% of 
B-2 work. Although Cheney set out annual production schedules for each program, 
it remained uncertain how much the work forces will be slashed. 
Cheney would cut total B-2 production from 132 aircraft to 75 and reduce the 
peak production rate from 24 per year to 12 per year. Northrop officials said 
they could not assess how those rate reductions would affect their 12,000 
employees on the program. Northrop announced earlier this month that it was 
laying off 500 B-2 workers. 
Under the original plan to produce B-2s at a rate of 24 per year, the Northrop 
work force would have grown to 13,000 by the mid-1990s, a Northrop spokesman 
said. 
Now, the total work force is likely to shrink, though probably not as severely 
as might be expected. The 50% cutback in the production rate will not mean a 
50% cutback in employment, Northrop officials said. 
The implications for the C-17 program are less clear. It now employs 8,000 
workers, who will not be affected immediately, a Douglas spokesman said. Still, 
any future buildup would be reduced or eliminated. 
Under the Cheney plan, the total procurement of C-17 planes will be cut from 
210 to 120 and the peak production rate would fall from 29 aircraft per year to 
24. Thus, the program will end much earlier under Cheney's plan. 
Cheney also announced a delay in production of the Air Force's advanced 
tactical fighter, pushing back the start of production from 1994 to 1996. The 
program is in competition between teams led by Northrop and Lockheed, which 
have invested hundreds of millions of dollars of their own funds on the 
money-losing design phase in the hope of recovering profits during production. 
The delay in ATF production raises serious doubts that those companies will 
ever earn back their investments, not to mention whether the delay will make 
the technology obsolete by the time the fighter gets into operation. 
In addition to the delay, production of the Navy version of ATF was decreased 
from 618 to 546 aircraft. And the Navy A-12, which is being produced by 
McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics in Tulsa, Okla., will be cut, along with 
an Air Force version. These cuts will also hurt the the subcontractor industry 
in Southern California. 
Meanwhile, Douglas Aircraft attributed its cutback of 3,000 jobs to "poor 
financial performance," a reference to major losses posted through last year in 
commercial aircraft programs and production problems on military programs. The 
firm is losing money on each MD-80 jetliner it builds and is investing 
massively in its new MD-11 jetliner, which has yet to begin deliveries. 
A Douglas spokeswoman said the jobs to be eliminated are in the support and 
administrative areas. Those losses could be partly offset, the company said, by 
possible growth in production jobs during 1990. Douglas employment has grown 
from 13,000 in 1984 to 50,000, including operations in Salt Lake City, Utah; 
Columbus, Ohio; Macon, Ga., and Canada. Local employment includes about 37,000 
in Long Beach and 5,000 in Torrance. 
The spokeswoman said a majority of the job reductions will occur locally, as 
will the majority of any job growth. Employees who will lose their jobs are to 
be notified by June and the jobs eliminated by August. 
Douglas has failed in its wide-ranging efforts during the past year to restore 
its financial health. A company announcement said cuts in such areas as 
utilities, supplies, and facilities have failed to cut costs enough, forcing 
the job terminations. 
Some employees, who have long complained that Douglas was operating 
inefficiently, were not convinced that the new cutbacks would help. "They 
probably have another 3,000 they could get rid of if they really sharpened 
their pencils," one veteran worker said. "The productivity just isn't there." 
Kathleen Cooper, chief economist for Security Pacific Bank, took a more upbeat 
view of the disclosures Thursday, saying that California should weather the 
cutbacks much better than in past downturns. 
"We are only half as dependent on defense as we were 20 years ago and that 
helps us," she said. "There is no state in the country that has as diverse an 
economy as California. I am sure these events will affect Southern California, 
but it is going to be less severe than it was in the late 1960s. The cutbacks 
will be a good deal less than they were after the Vietnam War, and we are more 
diversified." 
She said the state might even attract additional defense work in the downturn. 
"We have a work force that is highly technically oriented that does not exist 
in other parts of the country. I would not be surprised to see greater 
concentration in jobs and research in Southern California." 
But Hensley, the UCLA economist, takes a more guarded view of the future. He 
believes that defense is "one of the state's biggest vulnerabilities." If 
Pentagon budgets drop annually by 10% in 1991 and 1992, Hensley said, the state 
could lose 150,000 jobs, which includes secondary effects outside the defense 
industry. Such cutbacks would go much further than just the aircraft programs 
affected by Cheney's announcement Thursday. 
Robert D. Paulson, director for aerospace activities at the consulting firm 
McKinsey &amp; Co., agrees that the industry could face an uncertain future. 
"The industry has lost backlog," he said. "We are again lowering the expected 
utilization of the industrial base. So now, every program will be more 
expensive." 
Overall, the cutbacks "will certainly drive more people out of the industry. It 
is going to hurt efficiency and, to the extent that new programs are where new 
technology is developed, it is going to age the technology of the industry." 
