SOLDIER'S DESCENDANT FIGHTING FOR A CAUSE; 
CIVIL WAR: A RETIRED ATTORNEY SAYS HIS GREAT-GREAT-GRANDFATHER, A MEMBER OF ONE 
OF NATION'S FIRST ALL-BLACK REGIMENTS, WAS DENIED HIS PAY. 
Charles Johnson is looking for glory. Not for himself, but for the 
great-great-grandfather who was killed while serving as an unpaid Civil War 
soldier in one of America's first all-black Army regiments. 
One such regiment was portrayed in "Glory," the Oscar-winning movie about black 
Union troops who rejected their monthly wages because they were less than the 
$14 paid to white soldiers. The "Glory" troops who survived the battle of Ft. 
Morgan eventually got paid. 
Johnson says his great-great-grandfather -- who died Nov. 30, 1864, in the 
Battle of Honey Hill, South Carolina -- did not. 
So Johnson has written the President and two congressmen seeking the $237 that 
he says was earned by his ancestor -- plus interest. 
With compounded interest figured at 6% annually, the 125-year-old debt could 
reach as high as $345,000, a Bank of America official said. 
But Johnson, 68, a retired Pasadena attorney, said he is driven by principle 
and doubts that he will see any money. 
"This man died for his country," Johnson said of Emory Allen, his forefather 
slain at the age of 40. "He was a free black man with a farm and a tinsmith 
business. He left behind a family and a wife carrying a child he would never 
see. He had to really want to fight for something he loved. And I want that to 
be known." 
In his request to President Bush, Johnson mailed his proof: copies of Allen's 
enlistment and death notifications that indicate he received only $14 worth of 
clothing, and a letter signed by 74 black soldiers, including Allen, and sent 
to President Lincoln, demanding the same $14 monthly pay as white soldiers. 
Obtained from the National Archives in Washington, the letter was written from 
Folly Island, South Carolina, and dated July 16, 1864. 
"We the members of company D of the 55th Massachusetts Volunteers call the 
attention of your excellency to our case," it begins. 
". . . We have been in the field now 13 months, and a great many yet longer. We 
have received no pay and have been offered only $7 per month, which the 
paymaster has said was all he had been authorized to pay colored troops. This 
was not according to our enlistment. Consequently we refused the money." 
At a later date, according to the letter, Congress passed a law equalizing the 
pay but a bureaucratic mixup continued to prevent the troops' payment. 
" . . . Sir . . . to us, money is not the object," the soldiers wrote. "We came 
to fight for liberty, justice and equality. These are gifts we prize more 
highly than gold. For these we left our homes, our families, friends and 
relatives." 
The letter concluded with the soldiers saying they had risked their lives "to 
do battle for God and liberty," but they sought immediate discharge if not 
paid. 
So far there has been no presidential response to Johnson's letter, dated March 
12. A White House spokeswoman said there would be no comment on the letter 
because "correspondence to the President is considered private." 
Johnson also wrote to U.S. Sen. Alan Cranston, whose Los Angeles office has 
asked the U.S. Army to investigate the claim. The Army has no comment on 
Cranston's request because "correspondence, even from a senator, is considered 
private in nature," said Maj. Joe Padilla, an Army spokesman in Washington. 
It is unclear which government agency would handle Johnson's request. It also 
is unclear whether such a request is subject to a statute of limitations -- and 
if payment is due, the interest. 
"Would inflation be factored in? Would the dollar's present-day value or the 
Confederate value be used? There are so many variables," said Dave Reed, vice 
president and manager of the Bank of America's South Pasadena branch, who 
consulted several bankers before trying to figure out what Johnson might be 
owed. 
"If you figured it at 6% . . . it could be up to $345,000," said Reed, who was 
contacted by The Times. "It's kind of mind-boggling." 
Johnson said he does not know what the interest rate would be, but the statute 
of limitations issue rankles him. 
"If we can pay the Japanese reparation for the offenses we committed against 
them by putting them in camps during World War II," he said, "I think the 
government can pay my grandfather's heirs. He fought for this country. I'm 
fighting for what I think is right. This (claim) may not fall into a statute of 
limitations, but it would be the just thing to do to pay it." 
In his lawyering days, Johnson handled plenty of civil rights cases. He was 
among several attorneys who won decisions in the 1970s to desegregate Pasadena 
public schools. In the 1970s, he worked to help preserve affirmative-action 
programs for minority contractors. 
Johnson has been active in local chapters of the NAACP and is still involved 
with private community mentor programs for black students. He has, in the words 
of Pasadena Mayor William Thomson, been "a prominent and respected member of 
the community for years." 
His interest in Emory Allen began as a child in Michigan, where his family had 
"begats" at the breakfast table. "Begats are like in the Bible, so-and-so begat 
so-and-so. My family's history and a sense of identity were kept alive this 
way," Johnson said. 
The most fascinating ancestor of all, Johnson said, was Emory Allen. His mother 
had his wallet and his sword, which was hidden behind the living room couch. 
She regaled her children with family folklore about Allen and other relatives. 
About 20 years ago, Johnson decided to find his roots and went in search of 
documents about him. 
But the Lincoln letter was actually discovered by another relative earlier this 
year after "Glory" opened at movie theaters. 
"I thought these soldiers were portrayed as heroes when they were really stupid 
fools, and victims sent to slaughter," Johnson said. "But I felt it would be a 
timely claim to file seeking the back wages for my grandfather." 
