YOU ARE WHERE YOU LIVE; 
NEIGHBORHOODS BY THE NUMBERS: HOW ZIP CODES CAN PIGEONHOLE PEOPLE LIKE WIDGETS 
IN A DIGIT FACTORY 
And you thought you were unique. 
You may mention tangibles like your fingerprints. You've never seen any others 
like them. 
Or perhaps your identity rests with the psyche. Who else could have dreamed 
what you did last night? 
Well, wake up, America. It's time you knew. 
For years now, the federal government has had your number. Fact is, the 
government actually assigned you your number. 
The secret to your soul? Contemplate your ZIP code. 
Did you know, for example, that residents of 91108, otherwise known as San 
Marino, are four times more likely than the average American to use an American 
Express card, buy a new convertible and spend lots of money on custom-made 
draperies? 
Or that those who live in 92629, a.k.a. Dana Point, are not into bowling, 
menthol cigarettes and clipping coupons? 
OK, so maybe the system isn't fail-proof. Even those living in the same 
household, let alone the same ZIP code, have been known to disagree about a few 
things. 
But geo-demographics, the blending of geography and demography, has 
revolutionized the way thousands of organizations -- advertisers, political 
groups, media and financial institutions among them -- look at the nation. 
That's why residents of one ZIP code are offered a pre-approved credit card and 
others are not, why your neighbor just down the block -- but in a different ZIP 
code -- may pay more than you for the same automobile insurance policy and why 
your mailbox is stuffed with coupons for pizza and your friend's with offers to 
subscribe to Smithsonian magazine. 
Mass Market Myth 
In other words, the mass market is a myth. Instead, think of a nation of 40 
"clusters" -- with catchy names like Furs &amp; Stationwagons, Shotguns &amp; 
Pickups, Young Influentials and Bohemian Mix -- and then connect them to the 
nation's 42,396 ZIP codes. 
That's what social scientist-turned-entrepreneur Jonathan Robbin did back in 
1974 with his Claritas Cluster System, feeding esoteric data from the U.S. 
Census and other sources into a computer and then pigeonholing Americans into 
"life style segments" ranked according to a "ZIP Quality" scale of affluence. 
ZIP codes classified as Blue Blood Estates, for example, have a ZIP Quality 
rank of 1, while Public Assistance is at the bottom with 40. But income isn't 
all that the constantly updated Claritas system -- and others that have sprung 
up since -- is concerned with. 
Working from the assumption that people tend to live near others who are like 
them, a ZIP code, the theory goes, can classify people according to their 
tastes in everything from politics, to religion to mustard. 
"If you tell me your ZIP code," Robbin said from his office in Alexandria, Va., 
"I can predict what you eat, drink, drive -- even think." 
Journalist Michael J. Weiss, author of "The Clustering of America," an 
exhaustive look at the Claritas system and its implications, believes 
clustering is the most insightful way to categorize American diversity. 
"People in the same cluster have similar habits, backgrounds and values. It is 
my contention that in America, we really speak 40 different languages in terms 
of what we buy, what we read and what we think about." 
Not that this bit of news always goes over big with the clusterees. 
"I like to think of myself as atypical," said one indignant matron outside her 
Tudor style residence in ZIP code 90077, which you may know as Bel-Air, but 
which the Claritas computer software calls 100% Blue Blood Estates. "What makes 
me atypical? I'm better." 
But yes, she conceded, she fits the profile. She played tennis more than 10 
times last year, she travels abroad, she's health-conscious, she charges big on 
her American Express Card, drinks imported wine and has more than two phone 
lines to connect her to the outside world. 
Likewise, according to her ZIP profile, she is not very likely to buy a car 
battery at a car parts store, to be a fan of professional wrestling or to drink 
inordinate amounts of cola drinks. 
And surely, she is asked, she doesn't own a pickup truck? 
"Um, well, at the vineyard we do." 
But putting that little glitch aside, a tour through 90077 -- and even an 
occasional chat with its elusive residents -- reveals it to be quintessential 
Blue Blood Estates, a cluster to which only 0.59% of U.S. households belong. 
Residents here do not hang out by the fence together, nor organize many block 
parties. At the end of a dead end street, instead of empty beer cans a visitor 
found a drained bottle of vintage Pouilly Fuisse that had yet to be cleared 
away by a cleaning crew. 
"This place is about as unneighborly as it gets," said another 90077 resident 
caught off guard in his driveway. 
"I could stand here and be killed and the guy up there wouldn't care," he said 
with a sweep of his arm toward a neighboring manicured estate. "People here 
have no interest in each other. They are too important for that, or they think 
they are." 
Not too many surprises here, either. This retired businessman says he likes 
classical music, subscribes to two newspapers and three business publications, 
watches public television and always votes Republican. He's fired up about 
taxes -- there are too many of them -- and government interference in general. 
"I'm sick of giving money away," he said, "and of all these bleeding hearts." 
Of course, Bel-Air is just one of several Blue Blood Estates nationwide (others 
can be found in Lake Forest, Ill., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Scarsdale, 
N.Y., to name a few) and that label describes 2.5% of all the households in Los 
Angeles County, in various ZIP codes. 
In Orange County, 1.3% of the households are Blue Blood (most of ZIP code 92705 
in North Tustin fits that description) and in San Diego County, the Blue Blood 
percentage is 0.42, including all of Rancho Santa Fe. 
The key to the Claritas ("clarity" in Latin) system is that residents of any 
given cluster -- whether they happen to live in Idaho, or Maine, or wherever -- 
will have more in common with other members of that cluster than with anyone 
else. 
Advocates of the system contend, for example, that a Californian might more 
accurately describe himself vis-a-vis his cluster than his state. 
"There is no such thing as the California life style," Weiss said. "That's 
baloney. Tell me how the California life style explains Watts and Beverly Hills 
within a few miles of each other?" 
So instead of just asking "Where are you from?" a cluster analysis might ask, 
"What do you buy? What do you eat? And what do you read?" Claritas believes 
that the answers to these and a slew of other questions better define the 
essence of who we are. 
"You can go to sleep in Palo Alto and wake up in Princeton, N.J., and except 
for the palm trees, the life styles are identical," said Weiss, speaking of two 
communities that fit into the Money &amp; Brains cluster, also the dominant 
cluster in ZIPs 91604 in Studio City, 90290 in Topanga, 92625 in Corona del Mar 
and 92663 in Newport Beach. 
Moderate Republicans 
Live in a Money &amp; Brains cluster -- 4% of the households in Los Angeles 
County, 8% in Orange County and 2.9% in San Diego -- and you are likely to be a 
moderate Republican, read magazines like Forbes and Gourmet, drive an expensive 
foreign car like a Jaguar or a Mercedes and turn up your nose at canned meat 
spreads and presweetened cold cereal. 
Nationwide, the largest percentage of Americans -- still only 6.26% of all U.S. 
households -- live in a New Homesteaders cluster. But in Southern California, 
it's New Beginnings -- one of eight new clusters that evolved after the 1980 
census -- that's dominant. 
(In Los Angeles County, 13.5% of households fall into this group, while in 
Orange and San Diego, the percentages are 19.3 and 21.) 
Bobby Harris, a 47-year-old machinist and father of seven, doesn't fit too 
neatly into this cluster-known for sheltering a high percentage of divorced 
Americans -- but then again, he is not altogether atypical. 
Walking down the street of his Hawthorne neighborhood, ZIP 90250, he explained 
that his move three weeks ago from South-Central Los Angeles into a four 
bedroom, two bath apartment represents a whole new life for him and his family. 
"The area is better," he said, "I haven't seen any gang violence yet. My kids 
go to better schools here. . . . I want my family to have the best. I want my 
kids to have a college education." 
Home Renters 
Residents of New Beginnings, according to Claritas, are 1.6 times more likely 
than the average American to have rented a home in the past year, almost twice 
as likely to have bought New Wave music, 1.5 times as likely to belong to a 
health club and 1.3 times more likely to use a gas credit card. Not too many of 
them own gas chain saws, eat at ice cream restaurants or belong to religious 
clubs. 
Harris, for the record, rents his apartment, has been married for 22 years, 
lifts weights and jogs. He votes Democratic -- while most New Beginners 
nationwide voted for Ronald Reagan -- and watches the Bill Cosby and Oprah 
Winfrey shows. 
And talking cluster profiles here, Harris' Hawthorne neighborhood is as 
eclectic as he is. Although 64.7% of ZIP 90250 is New Beginnings, another 12.7% 
comes up as Pools &amp; Patios, with single digit percentages for Rank &amp; 
File, New Melting Pot, Single City Blues, Smalltown Downtown, Heavy Industry, 
Hispanic Mix and Levittown, U.S.A. 
Said Harris' neighbor Lucilia Baron, in Spanish: "Everything I do is in 
Spanish, and our neighbors are Asians, who speak their own language, so we 
don't talk to them." 
And walking on the next street over, 90250 resident Julia Aghazaden, an 
immigrant from the Dominican Republic married to an Iranian immigrant, had this 
reflection on her neighborhood, "What I like about it is you can go outside and 
nobody comes to pick on you." 
Taken by themselves, such opinions and observations might be mildly interesting 
to, say, a social anthropologist, but once they are fed into a computer they 
can become grist for everything from political campaign strategies to a 
multimillion dollar advertising blitz. 
Cluster Analysis 
Armed with a cluster analysis of a ZIP code (nationwide roughly 2,320 
households each), or even more exact, a cluster analysis at the Census block 
level (roughly 340 households each), an advertiser can determine if there is a 
market for almost anything. Some companies, Claritas not among them, even 
profile individual homes. 
"It is meaningful for advertisers to know as much about the customer as they 
can," said Freedman Gosden Jr., chairman of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/Direct 
Marketing Worldwide. "That way they can only spend money to mail to the same 
profile (of people) as the ones who are already responding." 
Some of this, to be sure, is just common sense. Gosden recalls that several 
years ago, a fund-raising drive for a major Los Angeles museum met with great 
success by using a mailing list of Brooks Brothers customers to solicit 
donations. 
Such targeting "always seems logical after the fact," he said, "but it is 
almost never logical before the fact." 
Author Weiss gives this example: "There's a company called Adam and Eve, which 
has an erotic novelty catalogue. They wanted to find out what neighborhood type 
was buying their products. Well, common sense would tell you that the people 
who would buy were Bohemian Mix, singles, funky urban neighborhoods. 
"But lo and behold, they did a cluster analysis of who had bought their 
products in the past, and the highest percentage came from Money &amp; Brains. 
. . . It turns out that the people who live in Money &amp; Brains are not only 
buying Jaguars, sailboats and compact disc players, but they are also buying 
strawberry love oil." 
But while such tools as cluster analysis have been a boon to direct mail 
marketers -- on the average increasing their return from the 1%-2% range to the 
3%-5% -- that still means that the other 95% of us aren't jumping at the bait. 
"What we have found is that we can make people jump and flinch, but we can't 
make them buy things that they don't want to buy," said Ben Enis, a marketing 
professor at the University of Southern California. 
'No Magic Answer' 
"There is no magic answer that is going to pop out," he said. "The ZIP code 
thing is one part of the puzzle at best." 
So what is it that makes us tick? 
Philosophers, sociologists, psychologists, anthropologists, politicians and 
just about everybody else has their own answer to that one. And predictably 
enough, debate rages among marketers as well. 
Edward J. Flesch, director of the Values and Lifestyles Program at SRI 
International, an independent research organization in Menlo Park, says that 
while demographics are valuable in market research, a better approach would be 
grounded in psychology. VALS-2, SRI International's marketing system, puts 
consumers into one of eight psychological categories. 
According to the VALS-2 system, an action-oriented person might be more likely 
to buy coffee if it were shown being sipped at the ski lodge, whereas others 
might respond better to an authority figure like Mrs. Olson or Marcus Welby 
telling them which brew is 
best. 
"In an ideal world, you would use both geo-demographics and psycho-graphics," 
Flesch said. 
In fact, the Claritas system, while heavily weighted by Census data, also uses 
behavioral studies to help gauge the pulse of America. And although the 1990 
Census is expected to register demographic changes in 20% of the nation's 
neighborhoods -- which Claritas says could mean eight new clusters and the 
demise of others -- Robbin, the system's founder, says that geo-demography 
remains a very stable system. 
He notes that neighborhoods, by and large, maintain themselves through a 
political infrastructure and are slow to change. 
Telltale Data 
But when that does happen -- say, when farmland is subdivided and young 
suburbanites begin arriving to stake swing sets in their back yards -- telltale 
data start leaking out. 
"Like the R. L. Polk data base of auto registration," Robbin said. "We suddenly 
see all these expensive cars in the area. So now we see that the place has gone 
from farmland to Topanga Canyon. 
"We look for (such) exceptions, and then we investigate," he added, suddenly 
recalling an "oddball ZIP code" that recently caught his attention. 
Turns out that Plainsboro, N.J., ZIP code 08536, is what Robbin calls the 
"richest, youngest and most single ZIP code in the country." 
"These people are really technocrats, young executives, who have banded 
together. This is the quintessential yuppie town. Almost half of its people are 
aged 25 to 34, which is almost double the national average, and it's not small. 
There are some 10,000 people, 6,000 households, yet half of the people live in 
single person households and the median income is $40,000." 
Robbin, a Bethesda, Md., Blue Blood Estates resident, who, incidentally, is 
leaving Claritas to consult, "develop some products, take some risks and spend 
time doing some outlandish things," describes himself as a social science data 
manipulator. 
Give him a Census survey, laden with such nuggets as a person's age, sex, race, 
income, marital status, etc., and he can construct an equation that will 
predict how that person will act. 
"I have never come across anything that wasn't predictable by one or more of 
these variables," he said. "The idea (behind the Claritas system) is that the 
fundamental variables described by the Census really relate to behavior in a 
fundamental way." 
So could that really mean that Furs &amp; Stationwagons are the raison d'etre 
of those who live within the boundaries of Northridge ZIP code 91311? 
Well, sort of. 
Here's what Kathy Radaich, 39, mother of three and stepmother of another three, 
had to say: "My responsibility is to bring up the best kids that I can." 
Drives a Jaguar 
And, in the meantime, she said from her elegantly furnished living room, she 
goes to the grocery store every day, reads scads of magazines, drives a Jaguar 
(she just sold her station wagon), exercises regularly, vacations in the 
Caribbean, votes Republican and watches television with the kids. 
Fact is, she conceded, about the only glaring mismatch with her ZIP's cluster 
profile is her failure to drive a car leased by her or her husband's employer, 
or that she did not spend more than $25 at Best last month. 
But in Inglewood's Morningside Park, which Claritas describes as 76.68% Black 
Enterprise, 16.6% Emergent Minorities and 6.71% New Melting Pot, Dorothy 
Stallings seems to be in conflict with her cluster. 
True, she said while standing next to her red Mercedes, she is on the way up. 
She is 41 years old, a flight attendant, a single parent, and a health club 
devotee. But, no, she says, she doesn't drink Scotch, or malt liquor or eat at 
too many theme restaurants. 
And just like that matron in Bel-Air, Stallings said the idea that she is 
classified by her ZIP code, in this case 90305, annoys and dismays her. 
"I'm just fed up," she said. "Just because I live here, I pay higher car 
insurance. . . . It's like you are penalized for being successful." 
And what of those Southern Californians known for being young, upwardly mobile, 
urban professionals? Try Hermosa Beach, ZIP 90254, where 93.16% of the 
residents fall into the Young Influentials cluster, another 5.39% in Bohemian 
Mix and 1.45% in Money &amp; Brains. 
A Downhill Skier 
Yes, said one Young Influential, in this case, Steve Mangiagli, the 37-year-old 
owner of Becker Surfboards, he is a downhill skier, owner of two European cars 
and a drinker of imported wines. 
And, coincidentally, added another, actress Sharyn Ober, 25, she and boyfriend 
have just started "Body by Jake," and even in their one-bedroom apartment, they 
have two phone lines. 
"This place is very yuppish," Ober said, "but with some Bohemian thrown in." 
Not a bad analysis, for someone who had never heard of a cluster. 
TOP 10 'LIFE STYLE CLUSTERS' IN L.A. COUNTY 
1. NEW BEGINNINGS (13.52% of households): Includes many divorced Americans 
looking for new jobs and life styles. Predominant age is 18-34, pre-child, 
lower-level white-collar and clerical occupations. 
2. YOUNG INFLUENTIALS (9.93%): Young, metropolitan sophisticates, with 
exceptional high-tech, white-collar employment levels. Predominately 
high-spending singles, childless couples, unrelated adults in expensive one and 
two-person homes, apartments and condos. 
3. HISPANIC MIX (8.89%): Hispanic barrios featuring dense, row-house areas 
containing large families, many single-parent, with small children. Essentially 
bilingual neighborhoods. 
4. POOLS &amp; PATIOS (8.64%): Once like Furs &amp; Stationwagons, being 
upscale greenbelt suburbs in late child-rearing mode. Today, children have 
grown, leaving aging couples in empty nests. Good educations, high white-collar 
employment, double incomes assure "the good life." 
5. BLUE CHIP BLUES (8.6%): Similar to Young Suburbia in most respects except 
social rank. High school educations, blue-collar occupations are reflected in 
fewer high-end incomes and lower home values. 
6. NEW MELTING POT (7.26%): New immigrant populations -- often with Hispanic, 
Asian and Middle-Eastern origins -- mixing in traditional urban melting pot 
areas and new immigrant neighborhoods. 
7. SINGLE CITY BLUES (5.36%): Densely urban, downscale singles areas, many 
located near city colleges. With few children, odd mixture of races, classes, 
transients and night trades, could be aptly described as the poor man's 
Bohemia. 
8. EMERGENT MINORITIES (4.62%): Almost 80% black, with above average 
concentrations of children, almost half in single-parent homes, below average 
education, white-collar employment. The struggle for emergence from poverty is 
evident here. 
9. PUBLIC ASSISTANCE (4.54%): The nation's poorest neighborhoods, with twice 
its unemployment level, and nine times its share of public assistance incomes. 
Large, single-parent families, 70% black, in rented or public high-rise 
buildings interspersed with aging tenement rows. 
10. MONEY &amp; BRAINS (4.04%): Dominated by childless couples and a mix of 
upscale singles, it's the nation's second highest socio-economic rank, typified 
by swank, shipshape townhouses, apartments and condos. Sophisticated consumers 
of adult luxuries -- apparel, restaurants, travel. 
Source: Claritas Corp., Alexandria, Va. Figures compiled in 1988. Descriptions 
summarized from Claritas 1986/87 Diskette Database. 1988 
TOP 10 LIFE-STYLE CLUSTERS IN ORANGE COUNTY 
1. NEW BEGINNINGS (19.28% of county households): Includes many divorced 
Americans looking for new jobs and life styles. Predominant age is 18 to 34, 
pre-child, lower-level white-collar and clerical occupations. 
2. YOUNG SUBURBIA (15.49%): Runs to large, young families and ranks second in 
married couples with children. Distinguished by relative affluence and high 
white-collar employment levels. 
3. FURS &amp; STATION WAGONS (14.02%): Third in socio-economic rank, living in 
expensive new neighborhoods in the greenbelt suburbs of nation's major 
metropolitan areas. Well-educated, mobile professionals and managers with 
nation's highest incidence of teen-age children. 
4. YOUNG INFLUENTIALS (12.31%): Young, metropolitan sophisticates, with 
exceptional high-tech, white-collar employment levels. Predominately 
high-spending singles, childless couples, unrelated adults in expensive one- 
and two-person homes, apartments and condos. 
5. BLUE-CHIP BLUES (8.97%): Similar to Young Suburbia in most respects except 
social rank. High school educations, blue-collar occupations are reflected in 
fewer high-end incomes and lower home values. 
6. POOLS &amp; PATIOS (8.74%): Once like Furs &amp; Station Wagons, being 
upscale greenbelt suburbs in late child-rearing mode. Today, children have 
grown, leaving aging couples in empty nests. Good educations, high white-collar 
employment, double incomes assure "the good life." 
7. MONEY &amp; BRAINS (8%): Dominated by childless couples and a mix of upscale 
singles, it's the nation's second-highest socio-economic rank, typified by 
swank, shipshape townhouses, apartments and condos. Sophisticated consumers of 
adult luxuries: apparel, restaurants, travel. 
8. GRAY POWER (4.68%): The nation's most affluent elderly, retired, and widowed 
neighborhoods, with highest concentration of childless married couples, living 
in mixed multiunits, condos and mobile homes on non-salaried incomes. 
9. GOD'S COUNTRY (2.35%): The highest socio-economic, white-collar 
neighborhoods, primarily located outside major metropolitan areas. 
Well-educated frontier types, highly mobile. Among the nation's fastest-growing 
neighborhoods. 
10. SINGLE CITY BLUES (1.86%): Densely urban, downscale singles areas, many 
located near city colleges. With few children, odd mixture of races, classes, 
transients and night trades, could be aptly described as the poor man's 
Bohemia. 
Source: Claritas Corp., Alexandria, Va. Figures compiled in 1988. Descriptions 
summarized from Claritas 1986/87 Diskette Database. 1988 
TOP 10 'CLUSTERS' IN SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
1. NEW BEGINNINGS (20.96% of county households): Includes many divorced 
Americans looking for new jobs and lifestyles. Predominant age is 18-34, 
pre-child, lower-level white-collar and clerical occupations. 
2. NEW HOMESTEADERS (13.41%): Much like God's Country in mobility, housing and 
family characteristics, but nine rungs down the socio-economic scale. All 
measures of education and affluence significantly lower. Peak concentrations of 
military personnel. 
3. BLUE-CHIP BLUES (11.14%): Similar to Young Suburbia in most respects except 
social rank. High school educations, blue-collar occupations are reflected in 
fewer high-end incomes and lower home values. 
4. YOUNG INFLUENTIALS (7.17%): Young, metropolitan sophisticates, with 
exceptional high-tech, white-collar employment levels. Predominately 
high-spending singles, childless couples, unrelated adults in expensive one and 
two-person homes, apartments and condos. 
5. SINGLE CITY BLUES (7.05%): Densely urban, downscale singles areas, many 
located near city colleges. With few children, odd mixture of races, classes, 
transients and night trades, could be aptly described as the poor man's 
Bohemia. 
6. GOD'S COUNTRY (5.9%): The highest socio-economic, white-collar neighborhoods 
primarily located outside major metros. Well-educated frontier types, highly 
mobile. Among the nation's fastest growing neighborhoods. 
7. POOLS &amp; PATIOS (4.96%): Once like Furs &amp; Stationwagons, being 
upscale greenbelt suburbs in late child-rearing mode. Today, children have 
grown, leaving aging couples in empty nests. Good educations, high white-collar 
employment, double incomes assure "the good life." 
8. YOUNG SUBURBIA (4.81%) Runs to large, young families, and ranks second 
(behind Blue Collar Nursey) in married couples with children. Distinguished by 
relative affluence and high white-collar employment levels. 
9. HISPANIC MIX (3.56%): Hispanic barrios featuring dense, row-house areas 
containing large families, many single-parent, with small children. Essentially 
bilingual neighborhoods. 
10. SMALLTOWN DOWNTOWN (3.15%): Remnants of factory towns that sprang up along 
downtown railroads, working class row house neighborhoods mixed with the aging, 
downtown portions of minor cities and towns. 
Source: Claritas Corp., Alexandria, Va. Figures compiled in 1988. Descriptions 
summarized from Claritas 1986/87 Diskette Database. 1988 
