JUSTICES UPHOLD DRUG TESTING OF TRANSPORT STAFF 
The Supreme Court today approved another controversial government drug-testing 
program, allowing mandatory random urinalysis for 30,000 air traffic 
controllers, railroad inspectors and other Transportation Department workers. 
It was the latest ruling in which the nation's high court sided with the 
government since its landmark decision last year upholding drug and alcohol 
tests for U.S. Customs agents and railroad employees involved in accidents or 
safety violations. 
In January, the Supreme Court allowed drug tests for Justice Department workers 
with top-secret clearance and for Army civilian drug counselors. 
Of the nine high court members, only Justice Thurgood Marshall voted to review 
the case. 
Appealing to the Supreme Court were labor groups representing government 
workers, which argued that the random tests violate the constitutional Fourth 
Amendment protection against unreasonable searches and seizures of evidence. 
Transportation Department officials approved a drug-testing program in 1987. 
Nearly two-thirds of the workers who must undergo the random, periodic 
urinalysis tests are air traffic controllers. 
In another case, the justices today refused to revive a lawsuit that sought to 
strip the Roman Catholic Church of its tax-exempt status because of its 
anti-abortion activities. 
The court, without comment, left intact a ruling that abortion rights advocates 
lack the legal standing to sue the federal government for revocation of the 
church's tax exemption. 
Among those challenging the church's exemption were Abortion Rights 
Mobilization Inc., the National Women's Health Network Inc. and the Long Island 
National Organization for Women in New York. 
The suit said the Catholic Church violated Internal Revenue Service rules by 
lobbying against abortion rights and contributing to political candidates who 
oppose abortion. The IRS generally bars tax-exempt groups from engaging in such 
political activities. 
The U.S. 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals, voting 2 to 1, threw out the suit last 
September. 
The appeals court said the lawsuit accuses the IRS of creating "an uneven 
playing field tilted to favor the Catholic Church." But the appeals court said 
the abortion rights groups lack standing to make that argument because they are 
not engaged in lobbying or making political contributions. 
