HIGH LIFE: A WEEKLY FORUM FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS; 
TAKE A HIKE; 
RANDY ROBERTS IS WALKING THE NATION, MILE BY MILE BY MILE, WITH 10,000 
STRANGERS 
It's hard to say exactly what I expected. My religion teacher at Connelly High 
School in Anaheim, Tom Cendejas, had told me about a man who was walking across 
the United States -- each mile with different people (10,000 in all) from all 
walks of life. 
The organizer of the "American Journey" and the man who has been walking since 
last December is Randy Roberts. Cendejas likened Roberts' walk to "Hands Across 
America" -- the 1986 effort that joined people in a nationwide effort to 
publicize and alleviate the problems of hunger and homelessness in America. 
This time around, the beneficiary of any donations will be the Homeless Task 
Force. 
When Cendejas explained to the class that Roberts' American Journey was to 
partially raise awareness of social justice issues in our country, I half 
expected someone to be walking with and enlightening his fellow travelers on 
the evils of contemporary society. 
But my apprehension could not have been further from the truth, as I found out 
on a Saturday in March when I joined Roberts in walking that mile. 
I arrived at Pearson Park in Anaheim shortly after 3 p.m., and there, sitting 
at a picnic table under a modest banner marked by the logo of the American 
Journey was a mustached man who, as I approached, stood up and stuck out his 
hand to greet me. 
Introducing himself as Randy Roberts, he put a friendly hand on my shoulder as 
he explained that as we walked he would be recording our conversation for 
future use and reference. Roberts, 40, a Santa Ana architect who is also a 
seminar speaker and self-development instructor/trainer, said he plans a 
speaking tour of the country once his journey is complete, which he figures 
won't be for another 2 1/2 years. 
As we began our walk, I was surprised to discover that our conversation was 
primarily aimed toward me and my life. 
The American Journey, Roberts later told me, "is about people -- people who 
have something to say. It is an honest, open diary of who we as Americans are . 
. . that even though we are different, we are all the same. 
"And in the end, part of the American Journey is to show us that our 
differences don't mean a hill of beans, and that what we have in common is most 
important." 
Roberts began our conversation by asking me such simple questions as where I 
was born and where I lived. 
Roberts was born in Ft. Worth, Tex., in 1948 -- the elder of two children. 
He then proceeded to ask me about what he referred to as "the two subjects you 
never discuss with a stranger" -- religion and politics. I had no trouble with 
the question about religion, having attended Catholic schools for the past 11 
years, but I did have some trouble when Roberts wanted me to describe my 
political affiliation. 
At 17, I explained to him, it's really hard to say, yes, I'm a left-wing 
liberal or a right-wing conservative and fully understand the implications of 
what I'm saying. An understanding smile made its way across Roberts' sunburned 
face. He had already walked 13 miles in 80-degree weather that day. 
Roberts was also interested in my family, my heroes and what was important to 
me. I was able to answer most of his questions with surprising ease and 
confidence. 
I described my heroes, who, aside from my parents -- are mostly teachers at 
Connelly who possess qualities and traits I'd like to develop. I spoke candidly 
about what was important to me -- my family and friends. 
He said he has several heroes, including his father, a few teachers, John F. 
Kennedy, R. Buckminster Fuller and Walter Cronkite -- "people who risk, people 
who care about others who are less fortunate, and people who ignore cynics and 
make decisions, yet can admit when they are wrong." 
All of a sudden, he was no longer a stranger. 
"The American Journey will bring people from all walks of life together to 
share a common base," Roberts told me. 
"You now have something in common with all the others I have walked with, and 
they have something in common with you -- yet, you've never met each other." 
Roberts wanted to know what I would ask President Bush if I had 5 minutes alone 
with him. 
I told him of a Calvin &amp; Hobbes comic strip that showed Calvin explaining 
to Hobbes that whoever got shot with a suction-cup dart was dead and that the 
other side would win. In the end, they shoot each other simultaneously and 
Calvin says, "Kind of a stupid game, isn't it?" I would like to tell the 
President of the strip and then ask him why we keep spending so much on the 
nuclear arms race. 
"Part of the effect I hope the American Journey will have," Roberts said, "is 
to help others express themselves to George Bush and other Americans." 
As we returned to the picnic table, I realized just how quickly the time and 
mile had passed. 
But he was already off again, this time with my religion teacher, on another 
mile's journey. 
I sat down and wrote my page in the "American Journal" -- a log book that 
Roberts will ask all 10,000 Americans who will eventually participate with him 
on his journey to write in. He hopes to publish the journal. 
Among the things I wrote: 
 "Today, I have been touched, both by the hand of a man I've never met before, 
and even more importantly, by his heart . . . a heart that no doubt has touched 
others as he has walked his mile with them." 
