BAGFUL OF EXTRA CHARGES, SPECIAL REGULATIONS; 
WITH NO DUMP, TRASH IS A STICKY ISSUE 
Sanitation workers tore into a plastic garbage bag, searching for clues. The 
giveaway could have been a receipt, a letter. 
In the end, an unopened envelope from a mail-order publishing contest was the 
telltale evidence needed to trace the smelly bag to its source. 
A police officer who follows the local garbage truck as part of the new detail 
tracked down the culprit -- one of the many people who, since January, have had 
to be told they were mishandling their garbage. About 20 have been arrested and 
fined for violating city codes on trash disposal. 
Garbage -- and how to throw it away -- has taken on a whole new meaning for the 
7,900 residents of Hudson since last fall, when the county landfill was closed 
for pollution violations. 
Disposal Requires Effort 
People in Columbia County do not simply drag the week's trash to the curb 
anymore. Disposal takes thought, time and money. 
City residents must place $2 stickers on their garbage bags or they will not be 
picked up. That is because the county has to come up with an estimated $6 
million to pay for shipping the trash elsewhere. 
Hudson residents who consistently refuse to use the stickers can be assessed a 
$15 service charge, plus a $5 charge per bag, which is placed on their 
quarterly water and sewer bills. 
But even the sticker system is not foolproof. 
When the program began in December, there were some complaints of sticker 
stealing. Then, the stickers did not adhere well in cold weather, and more than 
one resident has been seen chasing after one on a cold and windy day. Now the 
county is considering giving up the stickers and selling garbage bags instead. 
"It's difficult. It really is," Paulette Riegel said from behind the counter in 
her furniture and crafts store. "You never knew garbage was worth so much." 
Sections for Recycling 
"My animals love it, because they are getting more scraps from the table than 
ever," says Riegel, who seems to be taking the new regulations in stride. At 
least one customer had already ordered a special wooden bin divided into 
sections for recycling, which soon will be mandatory. 
Down the main street, another store owner said she called the county to ask how 
best to dispose of hundreds of cardboard boxes from shipments to her store. 
Because cardboard recycling had not yet begun, she was told to cut the boxes 
into little pieces, place them in garbage bags and put them at the curb -- with 
the mandatory sticker on the bag. 
The boxes remained at the store until she gave them to a community group. 
Other people have not been that conscientious. 
Early resistance to the new rules prompted the special police garbage team. 
"People who reside outside the city were bringing their garbage into the city 
and dumping it in the alleys," Police Chief James Dolan Jr. said. On the 
upside, he said, compliance is improving. 
Response Mixed 
Reaction from residents has been "a very mixed bag," county Board of 
Supervisors Chairman Francis Blake says. 
Liquor store owner Julie Goldweitz says the recycling and sticker program is "a 
pain in the neck, but other than that, it makes perfect sense to me. We're 
doing what we should have been doing for years. If that's the real cost of us 
living here on this planet, then we have to pay for it." 
The rest of New York state -- and the nation -- might do well to learn from the 
misfortune of Columbia County, if they are not already in the throes of garbage 
disposal problems, government and industry officials say. 
"It is not unusual in these times for counties or municipalities -- in the 
East, especially -- to find themselves with no disposal alternative," Joe 
Salimondo, editor of Waste Age magazine in Washington, said. 
Some big cities have already run out of landfill space and now export their 
garbage at very high cost, he said. 
The notorious Long Island barge that spent eight weeks at sea in 1987 and was 
rejected by several states and three countries, was a prime example of garbage 
with no place to go. 
14,000 Tons of Ash 
Philadelphia had a similar experience with a freighter that was laden with 
14,000 tons of ash and was at sea for two years. It was rejected by at least 11 
countries and eventually turned up empty in Singapore, under a different name 
and ownership. 
"The worst situation for waste disposal is in the northeastern part of the 
United States, because of the population density and the lack of availability 
of disposal sites," says Ross Patten, vice president of Browning-Ferris 
Industries, a nationwide waste hauler based in Houston. "Other parts of the 
country are not as acutely affected, other than California." 
"Columbia County should serve as a warning to a lot of other communities who 
haven't taken affirmative action toward resolving their solid waste problems," 
says R. W. Groneman of the state Department of Environmental Conservation. 
In New York, where 20 million tons of garbage are produced annually, the state 
has implemented tough new standards on landfills and has a set a goal of 
reducing or recycling 50% of the waste by the mid-1990s. 
New Landfills 
A number of New York communities are opening landfills, composting leaves, 
instituting recycling and requiring use of special garbage bags to raise 
revenue for increased disposal costs. 
Unfortunately, Columbia County's problem was a political football and nothing 
was done until the issue reached crisis proportions. 
"The landfills that we as a nation have built over the years are filling up," 
Salimondo says. "But the public reaction to landfills -- thanks to the whole 
earth movement of the last 18 years -- have made people aware that they don't 
want a landfill in their back yard." 
