JACK SMITH: GIRDING UP TO LOIN TO TALK NEW YORKESE 
My recent essay on New York talk, as derived from "How to Speak New Yorkese," 
by Judy Levine and Nancy Jackson, has got some New Yorkers (or former New 
Yorkers) talking back. 
"When will the odious comparisons between Angelenos and New Yorkers by local 
journalists cease?" asks Joseph Di Gianni. "As a native New Yorker residing in 
this town (Los Angeles) I find being subjected to constant statements and petty 
remarks about my former home an indication of how provincial Los Angeles 
remains in spite of its burgeoning growth. If Los Angeles is truly poised to 
overtake the preeminence of New York (alluded to in Mr. Smith's article) its 
citizenry should try to eschew the xenophobic attitudes which are 
embarrassingly prevalent even in the most sophisticated quarters." 
Surely anyone sophisticated enough to use words like xenophobic and eschew is 
sophisticated enough to take a little innocent ribbing about his birthplace. 
After all, no city on Earth has inspired so much literary abuse over the 
decades as Los Angeles, and much of it originated in New York. 
It began back in 1913 when the sophisticated Willard Huntington Wright 
described Los Angeles in Smart Set magazine as being settled by yokels from the 
Midwest -- "yokels who were nourished by rural pieties and superstitions and 
had a righteous abhorrence of shapely legs, late dinners, malt liquors, grand 
opera and hussies." 
To quote from a previous essay of mine: "Ever since those words were published 
Mr. Wright's rococo and sardonic style has been echoed, imitated and 
plagiarized by almost every journalist who has come this way. Oddly, though, 
the coin has been turned. We no longer are accused of piety, abstinence and 
righteousness, but of their opposites. No matter, the indictment is still 
delivered in the same tone of moral and intellectual superiority." 
The syndicated columnist Westbrook Pegler flailed away in his own hyperbolic 
style: "It is hereby earnestly proposed that the U.S.A. would be much better 
off if that big, sprawling, incoherent, shapeless, slobbering civic idiot, the 
city of Los Angeles, could be declared incompetent and placed in charge of a 
guardian." 
I am not angered by such verbal assaults. To have inspired such vilification is 
one of the charms of living here. I have never responded in kind; and a little 
innocent merriment of the kind provided by Levine and Jackson's amiable little 
book is hardly "xenophobia." 
Obviously all New Yorkers don't say "don't ax" for "don't ask," or call that 
island southeast of Manhattan "Lawn Guyland," or say "boat" for "both." 
But anyone who has ever visited New York could hear some echoes of New York 
street talk in Levine and Jackson's book. 
Rene Elfer of Whittier notes that Angelenos have their own speech 
idiosyncrasies. "There are many other speech patterns which add color and help 
prevent the homogenization of America. And most of all, the sun doesn't rise 
and set on L.A. alone. Adam and Eve were not natives here." 
If they were still living, though, I'll bet they'd be retired here. They would 
probably have loved hot tubs. 
Specifically, Troxey Kemper complained that I said New Yorkers say "close 
horse" instead of "clotheshorse." "He seems to be saying 'close' as in 'close 
the door.' New Yorkers say 'close horse' as in 'close encounters of the third 
kind.' " 
Another former New Yorker, Sherry Terzian, was more amused than annoyed, though 
she scolded me for doubting that there are any former New Yorkers. 
"About our lingo," she says, "when I was a graduate student at Columbia 
University, I found myself in the unexpected role of interpreter for my 
classmates. 'Whaddidhesay? Whaddidhesay?' someone from the hinterland would ask 
me while confronted with the twists and twangs of a New Englander." 
Dr. Marvin H. Leaf notes that I overlooked "one salient characteristic of Big 
Apple jargon (shared, interestingly enough, by the late J.F.K. and such 
cultured Britons as ubiquitous radio commentator Michael Jackson): the 
consistent insertion of an extraneous r between a word ending in a vowel and 
another beginning with same, such as 'Californiarindustry' or 'TulsarOklahoma.' 
" 
Another New York native, Fred Hillegas, of Scottsdale, Ariz., recalls a 
Syracuse (N.Y.) lawyer who studied law at Brooklyn Law College. 
"His name is Earl Boyle, and he'd chuckle as he told how fellow students at 
Brooklyn always pronounced his name 'Oil Berl." 
But it's a great place to visit. 
