ENTREPRENEUR HOPES TURBINE WILL SPARK MOVE TO ELECTRIC CARS; 
TECHNOLOGY: INVENTOR SAYS ONE U.S. AUTO MAKER IS PAYING HIM TO TEST HIS 
PATENTED IDEA, AND THAT HE'S NEGOTIATING WITH ANOTHER COMPANY. 
Daniel W. McGee says he's found the way to make electric-powered cars 
commonplace in America. He claims to have invented a hybrid method of merging 
an electric turbine with an existing internal-combustion engine and a computer 
that could power a full-size car cheaper and with less pollution but with just 
as much pep as conventional cars. 
McGee is chairman of a tiny company called American Motion Systems Inc. that is 
based in Iowa but is moving to Camarillo, where it has an office. McGee said 
he's sharing his invention first with U.S. auto makers, not the Japanese or 
Europeans. 
He says one U.S. auto maker is paying him under contract to test his invention 
and that he's in talks with another auto maker, but he has agreed not to 
identify the companies. He also said the invention is patented and that he is 
negotiating with the auto makers on development fees and royalties on future 
sales. 
"I'm not a zealot, but I personally would like to see the American 
manufacturers back on top," he said. 
But McGee's idea hasn't gotten out of the garage yet. He's never put his new 
engine into a car and driven it to prove it works. 
In addition, there are hundreds of other designs for electric cars, which make 
the odds very long that McGee's invention will become standard equipment in 
mass-produced cars. 
Car makers, researchers and garage inventors have been tinkering with electric 
cars for decades, yet the vehicles are still experimental. Auto makers are 
under growing federal and local pressure to build cars in the 1990s that spew 
out fewer smog-creating emissions, and experts agree some type of electric car 
likely will be one of the alternative designs. 
General Motors Corp., with resources in the billions of dollars, has been 
working for months with AeroVironment Inc. in Monrovia to build an electric car 
that could be mass produced. Last week, GM said it was proceeding with 
development of the car, named the Impact, but it would not say when or how the 
car would be built for sale. 
Even if GM or another auto maker considers his invention, McGee has lots of 
competition. "There are probably several hundred hybrid inventions and 
developments going on around the world" related to electric cars, said Paul 
MacCready, president of AeroVironment. 
GM spokesman David Sloan said McGee contacted the company late last year, but 
that GM does not have a contract with him. That leaves Ford and Chrysler. David 
Makowiec, a Ford spokesman in the area of inventions and developments brought 
to Ford, said he has nothing in his files regarding McGee or AMS. 
McGee, 42, said that for the first time, the companies face regulatory orders 
to produce cars with significantly lower emissions. Some versions of the 
pending federal clean-air bill, for instance, would require auto makers 
starting in the mid-1990s to build cars that run on alternative fuels. 
McGee said the car makers want that timetable pushed back because they don't 
have the technology to comply, and he is publicizing his invention "to 
basically cry, 'Bull! Here is the technology, let's see you guys hunker down, 
roll up your sleeves and give it to the American public.' " 
Recently developed electric cars -- those powered by electricity only -- suffer 
from several flaws. They are sluggish and have a range usually limited to less 
than 100 miles before the batteries need recharging. Recharging can take 
several hours. GM's Impact can accelerate much like conventional cars, but it 
has a range of only 120 miles. 
By contrast, McGee's plan is to power a car with a conventional motorcycle 
engine connected to an electric turbine he has developed. There also would be a 
turbine in each wheel, 200 pounds of batteries in the trunk and a computer near 
the dashboard. 
According to McGee's blueprint, the 25-pound steel turbine draws electricity 
from the batteries and starts the motorcycle engine. The engine then drives the 
turbine, which sends electrical power to the smaller turbines that drive each 
wheel. 
The computer governs the whole process and diverts excess electricity from the 
turbine back to the batteries, so they are constantly being recharged. That 
gives the car a range of 500 to 600 miles, he said. 
The combination of the engine and turbines also gives the car the equivalent of 
about 150 in peak horsepower, even though the motorcycle engine consumes less 
fuel than conventional auto engines, he said. Because the computer-turbine 
system applies power directly to the wheels, it also eliminates the need for a 
conventional transmission, brakes, differential and power-steering system, he 
said. 
The upshot of the system is that the engine uses less fuel, emits one-third of 
the smog-producing hydrocarbons of a typical six-cylinder engine and weighs 
one-third less than conventional cars, he said. The turbine system also easily 
adapts to an internal combustion engine using alternative fuels, such as 
ethanol, or grain-alcohol, which would further cut the car's emissions, he 
said. 
Peter B. Bos, president of Polydyne Inc., a San Mateo research firm, said that 
even though he does not know the specifics of McGee's plan, McGee has the right 
approach in developing a hybrid turbine-combustion-engine format. 
"There is no technology I know of anywhere in which an all-electric vehicle can 
achieve the range of a conventional vehicle," mainly because "there is no 
battery right now that I know of that will be able to store sufficient energy 
for a 300- to 400-mile range," Bos said. 
"A hybrid can do that; an all-electric vehicle cannot," he said. 
McGee said his idea for a turbine-assisted car engine goes back a decade. In 
1982, he started his own firm, Magna Motive Industries, and moved to Fairfield, 
Iowa, because the state provided $150,000 in seed money. He started two other 
companies, Magnetics Research International and AMS, to raise funds for 
specific projects, and now plans to merge the three and move his operation to 
Camarillo. 
The three firms, which only do research and development work, will have about 
$1 million in revenue this year, said McGee, adding that he has about $500,000 
personally invested in his businesses. He's also working on similar turbines 
that can make motors in washing machines, generators and refrigerators more 
efficient. 
But what's to stop the U.S. auto makers from simply ignoring his technology? 
"Nothing," he said. "But if, in fact, that's how it goes, we'll use the 
revenues from these other market areas and become an auto manufacturer." 
Of course, since Walter P. Chrysler started his own company in 1925, which is 
the most recent successful, mass-production car company, Henry J. Kaiser, 
Preston Tucker, Malcolm Bricklin and John DeLorean have tried and failed to 
sustain their own car companies. 
But McGee said, "If you have a commanding technological lead, . . . I think 
it's quite feasible to get into the automobile business." 
