THE UPROAR IN BEIJING 
The death a week ago of Hu Yaobang, who was forced to step down as the 
reform-minded leader of China's Communist Party in 1987 in the wake of 
nationwide demonstrations for greater democracy, has provided the occasion for 
Beijing's biggest public protests since 1976. The precipitating event 13 years 
ago was almost identical, as tens of thousands of Chinese took to the streets 
to mourn the death of Prime Minister Zhou Enlai and condemn the radicals who 
had been responsible for the destructive Cultural Revolution. Then as now, to 
mourn was to make a political statement. This week's student-led protests, 
which have continued despite occasional police stong-arm tactics and repeated 
orders to disperse, have been marked by demands for greater democracy, 
denunciations of ruling officials and questioning of the regime's political 
legitimacy. 
It has been a remarkable demonstration of defiance and courage, very much in a 
Chinese tradition that dates back to the last century, and surprising not just 
for its intensity but also for the relative tolerance the authorities have 
shown by letting things run on. The regime, of course, retains the power to 
quash the protests and arrest those participating in them. It has not hesitated 
to do so before, most recently in 1987. But even if steps are taken to punish 
the protesters, their message must still be taken seriously. The resentment 
that has been manifested against authoritarianism, lack of intellectual 
freedoms, and -- increasingly explicit -- alleged corruption among the party's 
leaders won't disappear when the protests are suppressed or abate. 
The students and intellectuals expressing these views represent only a tiny 
fraction of China's 1.1 billion people. But it is this fraction, the educated 
elite, on whom China's hopes for future modernization and increased prosperity 
largely depend. The demonstrators demand more democracy. They aren't likely to 
get it, at least now, but neither are they likely to abandon their claims and 
retreat into political passivity. They know that, and so does the regime. 
