SOCIALIZED MEDICINE CUTS CANADA'S COSTS -- AND CARE 
Billboards on the riverfront drive in Windsor demand to know "how many more" 
will die under Canada's vaunted health care system. Ads in the newspapers have 
been urging citizens to rally for reforms. 
And rally they did on a recent bone-chilling morning, calling for changes in a 
national health plan under scrutiny as a possible model for the United States. 
"We don't want our people dying anymore," said protester Vicki Bondy, a 
volunteer with Heartbeat Windsor, a group that helps Canadians find hospital 
beds in the United States when they cannot get them at home. 
The rally was organized to protest the death of Bondy's nephew, 2-year-old Joel 
Bondy, who needed heart surgery but never got it. Joel's death in February 
offers a window on Canadian health care at its worst: Compared to the United 
States, there is a relative paucity of high-tech health centers here -- and, as 
a result, hundreds of Canadians who need complex treatment ranging from heart 
surgery to organ transplants spend months on waiting lists. Each year, some 
Canadians die while they wait. 
But the rally that marked Joel Bondy's death underscored another aspect of the 
Canadian system, something that should be of interest to Americans seeking 
models for change: Even as the marchers deplored the Canadian system's 
downfalls, they were quick to say that it was better than the American way. 
"I wouldn't trade our system for anything in the world," said Andrew Williams, 
a 32-year-old Windsor resident who needed a triple-bypass operation last year, 
waited in vain for 3 1/2 months, then finally gave up and left Ontario province 
for nearby Detroit. "But changing demographics have put strains on this 
system." 
Canada established universal health insurance coverage in 1971, although some 
provinces had set up narrower programs of their own even earlier. In designing 
its brand of socialized medicine, Canada did not go nearly as far as Britain, 
which nationalized hospitals and made doctors government employees. It merely 
outlawed private health insurance for virtually all forms of care and enrolled 
citizens in government plans administered by the 10 provinces. 
Every Canadian citizen is thus guaranteed access to a doctor at no direct cost. 
He can see any practitioner he pleases. He goes in and out of the hospital, in 
most cases, without ever touching his wallet. 
"It doesn't matter how rich or poor you are, what color you are or what side of 
town you live on," said Williams, marching with his sisters just across the 
Detroit River from Detroit. "If your child is sick, you can walk into a 
doctor's office anywhere in Ontario, with no money in your pocket." 
Over the years, universal health insurance has evolved into Canada's most 
popular social program. Data compiled by the Families USA Foundation in 
Washington show that 7 out of 10 Canadians think their system gives them good 
or excellent care; 9 out of 10 say the health care system here is "one of the 
things that makes Canada the best country in the world in which to live." 
When asked in casual conversation to tick off the differences between their 
country and the United States, Canadians almost invariably mention universal 
health insurance as evidence that Canada is the more civilized place. 
Since primary care is available at no cost, Canadians do not hesitate to see 
their doctors. Indeed, this is probably one reason Canadians are so healthy. 
Canadian infant mortality, a key measure of a nation's public health, was 9.6 
per 1,000 births in 1981, compared to the American rate of 12.6 per 1,000. 
And not only that: At the same time that Canada provides no-charge treatment 
for all, it has managed to hold down costs. Before Canada had established its 
universal health insurance system, it spent about as much as the United States 
did on health care (7.4% of its gross national product, compared to 7.6% in the 
United States). 
Since 1971, however, the two countries' rates of spending have diverged, so 
that Canada now spends less than 9% while America spends nearly 12% of its 
gross national product on health. 
It is this aspect of Canada's system that has caught the eye of U.S. lawmakers, 
corporate executives and union leaders. For the last 10 years in America, 
health care costs have been rising faster than inflation; now, they are rising 
faster than any other part of the U.S. economy. 
Corporate America foots most of the bill, but insurance premiums have been 
shooting up so fast that a major cost of doing business today has become the 
cost of employee health insurance. Worker health care now adds about $700 to 
the cost of an American car; in Canada, it is believed to add only $223. 
When U.S. employers have tried to cut back on coverage, labor unrest has 
resulted. 
"In most of the strikes that have occurred in the last few years, health care 
has been the major issue," said Rod Rogers, a spokesman for the Oil, Chemical 
and Atomic Workers Union. 
At non-union businesses, meanwhile, some employers have simply dropped coverage 
altogether. An estimated 37 million Americans are without health insurance 
today, including a growing number of middle-income people. Philip Shandler, a 
spokesman for the U.S. Bipartisan Commission on Comprehensive Health Care, says 
the population of uninsured Americans is growing by 1 million a year. 
The commission spent two years studying ways of reforming the American health 
care system and in early March issued a number of recommendations. One was for 
a "public-private partnership" that would offer some new government health 
insurance assistance but at the same time call on more private businesses to 
cover their workers. Lawmakers are now considering ways to write the 
recommendations into law. 
Shandler said the commission considered handing over full responsibility to the 
government, Canadian-style, but decided that it would be too hard to legislate 
such a shift because of "opposition from health care providers, doctors in 
particular." 
Canadian doctors bitterly fought enactment of their universal health care 
system, but today they seem happy that they lost the battle. 
"It's much more comfortable for doctors" in Canada, said Allan Detsky, a doctor 
and economist who studied in the United States and who now heads the internal 
medicine department at Toronto General Hospital. 
In Canada, he pointed out, doctors may not be able to charge as much as they 
could in the United States -- but they don't have to worry about collecting 
bills or arguing with increasingly hard-nosed insurance companies over 
reimbursement. 
It turns out that by eliminating all the paper work and dickering, Canada has 
not only pleased its doctors but also helped hold down costs. Because paper 
work is dramatically simplified -- all bills go straight to the government -- 
it is estimated that Canadians spend less than $20 per capita each year on the 
flow of forms. 
Americans, by contrast, spend $95 each on insurance overhead. It has been 
estimated that if the United States were to cut out the paper work the way 
Canada has, the system could save $21.4 billion a year. 
But there is another way Canada holds down its health care costs, and it is a 
lot less attractive: It deliberately limits the spread of the newest, most 
advanced health care technology. Canada may go in for primary medicine in a big 
way -- its medical schools turn out far more general practitioners and 
pediatricians than their U.S. counterparts -- but it scrimps on the 
specializations. 
When hospitals here want magnetic resonance imaging equipment, lithotriptors to 
treat kidney stones and other big-ticket innovations, they must include the 
purchase cost in their annual budget proposals to the provincial government. If 
the province rejects the budget, the hospital cannot buy the equipment. 
Admirers of the Canadian approach say it saves money by encouraging basic 
health care, cutting out duplicative technology and, most likely, reducing 
unnecessary surgery. 
Still, detractors of the Canadian system say it was the restrained approach to 
high technology that brought the Bondy family to grief. The Bondys' hometown, 
Windsor, has a population of about 300,000 but it has no specialized cardiac 
surgery unit. Detroit, meanwhile, has nine. In all of Canada, it turns out, 
there are only 11 heart surgery units; the United States has 793. 
Joel Bondy's aunt Vicki, who has become a spokeswoman for the family, said the 
child was born with arteries too small to supply oxygen to his body. He had 
surgery when he was 3 months old, but it was not effective, and his parents 
were told that he needed another operation. Because Windsor does not have the 
facilities, Joel's parents put him on a waiting list for surgery in London, 
Ontario, a two-hour drive away. 
There are no clear statistics available on average waiting times for high-tech 
treatments in Canada, but doctors say it is commonplace for a patient to 
languish for three to six months before a heart operation, a bed in a cancer 
center, a hip replacement or some other highly specialized treatment. 
While the patients wait, their doctors act as their intermediaries with the 
specialized units. In Joel's case, surgery was first scheduled for late 
February, but as the date approached, more urgent patients were moved ahead of 
him. He was bumped back to mid-March. 
Joel's anguished parents complained to the local news media, and Heartbeat 
Windsor took up the case. 
The group's director, Michael Billett, who is known locally as "the Detroit 
connection," arranged for the child to have surgery across the river in the 
United States. But before Joel could make it over the bridge, Canadian 
officials, deeply embarrassed by the affair, announced that they had found a 
bed for him after all. They urged the Bondys to have the surgery done in 
Toronto, and the Bondys relented. They made the trip to Toronto, but it was too 
late. 
"They finally got him in, and he died four hours before surgery was to have 
been performed," his aunt said. 
Word of the toddler's death shocked Windsor, where seemingly everybody knew 
about Joel and was rooting for him. Then word leaked out that the Ontario 
government had already forked over about $5 million to the hospitals of Detroit 
to pay the hospital bills of other sick Canadians. 
Why, citizens wondered, hadn't those tax dollars been spent building a heart 
unit in Windsor? 
"It's the first time I've ever seen an entire city mourn," said Vicki Bondy as 
she surveyed the crowds who came to the march the first weekend in April. 
