COLLEGE ROUNDUP; 
BARDENS PACES UCI PAST PACIFIC, 3-1 
Billy Bardens doubled in a run and scored another to lead UC Irvine to a 3-1 
victory over University of the Pacific in a Big West Conference baseball game 
Friday at Irvine. 
The Anteaters managed only one hit in four innings off starter Jim Yanko, who 
faced the minimum when Chris Gallego was caught stealing after his first-inning 
single. 
But Fred Combs led off the fifth with a single, and one out later, Bardens 
lined his RBI double to the wall in left-center field. 
"I haven't hit too many long balls," Bardens said. "I was hoping that it just 
would fall (in for a hit). I guess I was hoping it would go out, too." 
One out later, Bardens scored to give Irvine a 2-1 lead on John Skaggs' triple 
up the alley in right. But Ed Luna flied deep to center to end the inning. 
Pacific (13-25, 0-5 in conference) scored in the third inning on Doug Welpot's 
two-out solo homer to center. The home run served as a wake-up call for the 
Anteaters, who still seemed sluggish after being swept in a three-game series 
at Fresno State last weekend. 
David Bladow (5-3) finished with a four-hitter, striking out nine and walking 
one, for Irvine (25-17, 3-5). 
"I didn't have any stuff," Bladow said. "My split (finger fastball) wasn't 
working at first. But right after the home run, I started to feel more in 
control." 
Irvine scored another run in the eighth. Dan Roberson singled, stole second and 
took third when catcher Curt Wright's throw went into the outfield. Roberson 
scored on Luna's sacrifice fly to center. 
In California Collegiate Athletic Assn. baseball: 
UC Riverside 11, Chapman 9 (11 innings) -- Chad Townsend hit a two-run home run 
in the 11th for first-place Riverside (29-10, 13-6) at Hart Park in Orange. 
Rod Klopfer had four hits and two RBIs, Jason Rolish had two hits and two RBIs, 
and Tom Allison had three hits and scored twice for second-place Chapman 
(23-14, 13-6). 
In Big West Conference softball: 
University of the Pacific 1-0, Cal State Fullerton 0-8 -- Shireen Campbell 
pitched a four-hitter for Fullerton (37-10, 15-4) in the second game. Pacific 
is 22-16, 7-11. 
