CARVEL COLLINS; WILLIAM FAULKNER EXPERT 
Carvel Collins, considered the world's foremost authority on the complex and 
controversial author William Faulkner, has died in an Oceanside hospital after 
a massive cerebral hemorrhage. He was 77. 
Collins, who had lived in Vista in San Diego County since his 1978 retirement, 
died Tuesday. 
First intrigued by Faulkner in 1929 as a student at Miami University, Collins 
was the first professor in the world to offer a course solely devoted to 
Faulkner. He did that at Harvard in 1942 -- seven years before Faulkner won the 
Nobel Prize and with it worldwide critical acclaim. 
Collins spent more than five decades researching Faulkner, but, to the 
disappointment of many scholars, never wrote a planned biography. 
"I've never tired of knowing Faulkner," he told a Los Angeles Times interviewer 
in 1986. "My joy in this search is inexhaustible. Never been dull. The more you 
know, the more you realize how divine he really was." 
He had personally promised Faulkner never to write his biography until after 
his death, which occurred in 1962, Collins said in that interview. His plans 
were further delayed, he said, when Faulkner's widow authorized another writer 
to do a two-volume biography published in 1974 and 1984. 
Collins did write scores of articles on Faulkner and introductions to books of 
Faulkner collections he edited, including "New Orleans Sketches" and "The 
Unvanquished." 
He had arranged for his prodigious research files, which filled his workroom 
behind the garage of the Vista house, to go to the University of Texas 
Humanities Research Center. 
Born June 14, 1912, in West Union, Ohio, Collins earned his bachelor's degree 
at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, and his master's and doctorate at the 
University of Chicago. 
He taught English at Colorado State College, Stephens College, Harvard 
University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Notre Dame. 
Collins' first marriage, to Mary Brewster, ended in divorce. He is survived by 
his second wife, Ann Greene Collins; his daughter from his first marriage, Lucy 
Emerson Collins of New York City, and a brother, Charles, of Phoenix. 
