3 EUROPEANS RELEASED BY ARAB CAPTORS; 
HOSTAGES: FRENCH WOMAN, DAUGHTER AND BELGIAN BOYFRIEND ARE FREED IN BEIRUT. 
THEY HAD BEEN HELD FOR 29 MONTHS BY ABU NIDAL'S FORCES. 
Three European hostages -- a French woman, her Belgian boyfriend and their 
2-year-old daughter -- were freed Tuesday in Beirut by their radical 
Palestinian captors. 
They had been held for 29 months by guerrillas of the Revolutionary Council of 
Fatah, headed by the shadowy terrorist Abu Nidal. The group is believed to 
still be holding four other Belgians captured with them. 
The release of Jacqueline Valente, 32, Fernand Houtekins, 42, and their 
daughter, Sophie, on Tuesday followed an appeal for compassion last week by 
Libya's leader, Col. Moammar Kadafi. 
France appeared to have paved the way for the release in November, when it 
approved the long-delayed delivery of three Mirage jet airplanes to the Libyan 
armed forces. The aircraft were delivered last month, news agencies reported. 
Embassy spokesman Francois Abi Saab told reporters that the freed hostages 
"were smiling and appeared to be in good health." 
"I embrace all my family. I am well, and the little one also," AP quoted 
Valente as telling French reporters who were given exclusive access to the 
three at the embassy. 
A chartered jet flew the three from Beirut to Villacoublay military airport 
near Paris. There, after arriving at 10:12 p.m., they got into a car and were 
driven away to an unspecified destination without making any public statement. 
Relatives and supporters of eight American hostages and other Westerners held 
in Lebanon drew little solace from Tuesday's release. 
The kidnaping of Valente, Houtekins and their companions off a vessel in 
Mediterranean waters south of Israel has never been directly connected with the 
Beirut hostage situation, in which the captors are Shiite Muslim militants. The 
longest-held hostage, American Terry A. Anderson, chief Middle East 
correspondent for the Associated Press, last month marked his fifth year as a 
captive. 
Despite indications of activity over the last two months, the observers said, 
there is no sign that there will be any sudden release for any of these 
hostages. 
President Bush, in Canada for talks with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, said he 
does not know whether the release "has any implications at all" for the U.S. 
hostages in Lebanon. 
"A few weeks ago, there was a flurry of understandable excitement about the 
release of these people," Bush said. "And I had difficulty understanding where 
was all this coming from? What's driving this news flurry? 
"And I still don't know the answer to that." 
But he added, "I would just repeat that goodwill begets goodwill. And a 
manifestation of goodwill would be the release of these American hostages." 
Chris Pearson, president of the group Friends of John McCarthy, a television 
cameraman who is one of three British hostages, said of the Valente party's 
release: "Given the nature of their kidnaping -- that they were taken by the 
Abu Nidal group . . . I don't think it means the Western hostages in Beirut are 
any nearer release." 
"The release of hostages of any nationality by any group is always very welcome 
news," said a spokesman for Anglican Archbishop Robert A. K. Runcie, for whom 
British hostage Terry Waite worked. "But the captors in this case are quite 
different to those holding the British hostages in Lebanon, so their release 
brings little direct comfort . . . beyond the hope that it might loosen up the 
situation of hostages in Lebanon generally." 
Deliverance for Valente, Houtekins and their daughter came in typical Beirut 
fashion: 
According to an Associated Press report from the Lebanese capital, a convoy of 
three cars, curtains drawn, rolled up to the main gate of the French Embassy in 
the Muslim-populated western sector of the city. 
Waiting just inside were Ambassador Rene Ala and other French officials, 
apparently forewarned that the three hostages were being released. Nearby, two 
other cars filled with gunmen kept watch as the European couple and the child, 
who was born in captivity, were turned over. 
Valente, Houtekins, four other Belgians and two daughters of Valente by her 
divorced husband were seized by Abu Nidal's guerrillas aboard the Silco, a 
converted trawler, off the Gaza Strip coast on Nov. 8, 1987. 
The Palestinian captors said that Valente and the other passengers aboard the 
Silco were Jews and Israeli spies. Their families in Europe insisted they were 
Roman Catholics and simply adventurers and that the French woman had hoped to 
work her way to Australia and begin a new life there after her divorce. 
Those captured along with Valente and Houtekins, and apparently still in 
captivity, are Houtekins' brother Emmanuel, 44, his wife, Godelieve Kets, 39, 
and their children, Laurent, 19, and Valerie, 18. Houtekins told French 
reporters that his relatives were well. 
"They have morale. They are holding firm," he said. 
Jan Hollants Van Loocke, a Belgian Foreign Ministry official, told reporters in 
Beirut on Monday that he was seeking their release. Walid Khaled, a Fatah 
Revolutionary Council spokesman, linked their freedom to an Arab sentenced to 
life imprisonment in Belgium for a 1980 grenade assault on some Jewish youths. 
A 15-year-old was killed and 20 people injured in the attack in Antwerp. 
The fate of Valente's second hostage-born child, another daughter, born last 
year, was uncertain. Wire service reports, quoting unidentified French sources, 
said the child died in captivity of a digestive illness. 
The location of the Silco captives has never been known, and the release of 
Valente in Beirut was a mild surprise, since the Abu Nidal faction is 
reportedly now based in Libya. 
Kadafi took an early hand in the fate of the captives. In response to appeals 
by Valente's ex-husband, Pascal Betille, and direct French-Libyan negotiations, 
the Libyan leader personally -- and with fanfare -- arranged the release of the 
couple's daughters, Virginie, then 5, and Marie-Laure, then 6. They were freed 
in Tripoli in December, 1988. Details of those negotiations have never been 
revealed. 
The two girls were returned to their father. 
Last week, Kadafi, who for the past two years has been trying to bury his image 
as an Arab radical and promoter of terrorism, called on Valente's captors to 
free her and "her family" as a humanitarian gesture during the Muslim holy 
month of Ramadan. In less than a week, his suggestion was carried out. 
Libya's official news agency Jana quoted Kadafi as saying that Abu Nidal's 
group was "distancing" itself from its terrorist reputation by releasing the 
hostages. 
French officials in Paris were quick to praise Kadafi on Tuesday for his role 
in releasing the hostages. A spokesman for President Francois Mitterrand said 
the French leader personally thanked Kadafi for his "key role in this happy 
development." 
France approved the delivery of three Mirage warplanes and radar equipment to 
the Libyan military last November. Weapons deliveries to Libya were banned 
under a 1986 embargo established by the 12-nation European Community. But 
French officials said that the weapons sales had been made before the ban and 
therefore did not fall under the embargo. 
"Their release is part of the warplane deal," a Palestinian source in Beirut 
said of Valente, Houtekins and their child. 
A spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry denied Tuesday night that the 
release was linked to the supply of fighter planes. 
"The Mirage jets that we supplied to Libya already belonged to them before the 
embargo," the spokesman said. 
The three planes -- a Mirage F-1 and a two Mirage 5 aircraft -- were delivered 
to Libya last month. Kadafi himself indicated at the beginning of March that 
relations between France and Libya had been "normalized" and that the 
"differences between the two countries are over." In addition, France recently 
announced the resumption of grain sales to Libya and restored shipping and 
telecommunications links. 
Times staff writer Rone Tempest, in Paris, contributed to this report. 
BACKGROUND 
Abu Nidal, whose real name is Sabri Banna, heads the Revolutionary Council of 
Fatah, one of the deadliest terrorist groups in the world. His faction broke 
with Yasser Arafat's mainstream Fatah faction of the Palestine Liberation 
Organization in 1974 after a PLO court convicted him of embezzling funds, 
sedition and murder and sentenced him to death. Over the years, Abu Nidal's 
(his nom de guerre means Father of Struggle) group has been blamed for more 
than 100 terrorist raids including the December, 1985, attacks on airports in 
Rome and Vienna in which 20 people, including five Americans, died. His group, 
thought to be backed primarily by Libya, is believed to have as many as 500 
members. 
