LAW'S USE HELD OUT OF CONTROL; 
THE LONG ARM OF RICO -- IS IT REACHING TOO FAR? 
He was an engineer who did not date much after a failed marriage. She was a 
former Miss Orange County. Within two months of the day they met, they decided 
to marry. 
But when he put up a $50,000 promissory note to buy into her family's garment 
company and she decided she wanted a divorce, he went one step further than 
divorce court: He filed a federal racketeering suit, alleging that she and her 
parents had enmeshed him in a criminal enterprise. 
"Man meets beauty queen, is seduced by the beauty and body, eagerly is swept 
off his feet and taken for a ride into the land of enchantment, greed and 
crime," Richard Millan said in his court papers. 
The lawsuit also contained allegations of bankruptcy fraud, wire fraud and mail 
fraud, but divorce was hardly what Congress must have had in mind when it 
passed the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), a statute 
that allows the government to prosecute criminal enterprises and permits 
private parties to bring lawsuits against them for treble damages. 
Most of Millan's suit was thrown out of court last December, but not before 
months of court hearings and thousands of dollars in legal fees. Similar civil 
disputes in the guise of racketeering cases are likely to populate the court 
calendars for years to come. 
Though the 19-year-old RICO statute has become a prosecutorial staple in major 
organized-crime cases, sending top Mafia bosses across the country to prison 
for decades under its stiff penalty provisions, only in the last few years has 
it been widely wielded against white-collar crime and in ordinary business 
disputes. 
Justice Department lawyers, who in recent months have unsheathed the powerful 
statute against such diverse targets as junk bond whiz Michael Milken, the 
Teamsters Union, former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos and a failed 
Orange County savings and loan, say RICO's powerful forfeiture provisions allow 
them to go after criminals where it hurts most, by freezing and ultimately 
seizing the economic fruits of criminal activity. 
Nowhere has the litigation been as bountiful as in Los Angeles, which has the 
highest volume of civil RICO filings in the country. A total of 144 new cases 
were filed last year. 
But an increasing array of critics -- an odd coalition that runs from Wall 
Street to civil libertarians to the mob -- say use of the statute has escalated 
out of control, branding ordinary businessmen as racketeers and subjecting 
their life savings to forfeiture for conduct that may have only skirted the 
fringes of the law. 
Fraud Charges 
Defense lawyers, often citing Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s recent agreement to 
plead guilty to securities fraud charges that carry a $650-million fine, rather 
than face the possibility of a RICO indictment, say the mere threat of RICO 
inspires enough dread to prompt potential defendants to cooperate with the 
government or, in a civil case, settle quickly. As the Drexel case has shown, 
they say, billions of dollars in personal and corporate assets -- and the 
future of entire companies -- may be at stake. 
"Any statute that could, in effect, become an offer you can't refuse makes the 
people making those offers, in effect, gangsters. If it's either 'You're 
destroyed and you're broke and you go to jail for 40 years' or 'You cooperate 
with us and you're free and clear,' that's no different than what Marlon Brando 
said in 'The Godfather,' " New York lawyer Gerald Lefcourt said. He is 
representing one of the defendants in the Milken case and in a related case 
against Princeton-Newport Partners, a New Jersey money management firm that did 
considerable business with Drexel. 
Princeton-Newport went out of business last year after five of its principals 
were indicted on RICO charges. The indictment alleged that they acted with a 
former Drexel bond trader to generate $13 million in phony tax losses, and the 
partners were required to post a $14-million bond against forfeitures that 
might be assessed in the event of a conviction. The company claimed it could 
not survive under the cloud of the RICO indictment and the threat of new 
charges that might require additional forfeitures. 
Personal Assets 
Milken and two others, accused in a 98-count RICO indictment of scheming with 
former speculator Ivan Boesky and others to defraud Drexel clients and 
investors, was ordered Friday to post the equivalent of a $700-million bond 
against the $1.8 billion in personal assets the government claims should be 
forfeited in the case. 
Until recently, some state RICO laws allowed prosecutors to freeze assets even 
before a trial. In Ft. Wayne, Ind., the owners of a chain of adult bookstores 
accused of selling obscene material found their three businesses immediately 
padlocked after they were named in a state RICO complaint. 
The Supreme Court last month found such pre-conviction freezes to be 
unconstitutional. But the court declined to act on a similar case under the 
federal RICO law in Virginia, where the owners of a chain of adult book and 
video stores had to forfeit the businesses, their inventories and the property 
on which the stores were located for selling six magazines and four videotapes 
that were determined to be obscene. 
In one Los Angeles case, a man convicted on RICO charges for running a 
$35-million boiler room operation was required to forfeit a $1-million Malibu 
home, a $500,000 Westlake Village house and another $500,000 condominium. The 
money was used to pay restitution to more than 100 victims of the fraud. 
More Alluring 
For prosecutors, RICO's forfeiture provisions are even more alluring than its 
20-year maximum prison term. 
"It's like a double whammy," explained Terree Bowers, head of the U.S. 
attorney's major frauds section in Los Angeles. "Some of these people are 
willing to sit out the jail time, as long as they can come out and enjoy the 
fruits of their criminal enterprise." 
Exactly what Congress had in mind in 1970 when it adopted the RICO statute -- 
reputedly named in honor of Edward G. Robinson's character in the movie "Little 
Caesar" -- is still subject to debate. Critics of its use in corporate fraud 
cases say it was intended to attack classic organized crime. 
But the man who was largely responsible for drafting the statute, G. Robert 
Blakey, a former Senate committee staffer who is now a law professor at the 
University of Notre Dame, said the debate at the time made it clear that 
Congress was very much interested in organized crime's infiltration of 
legitimate business -- and organized crime committed by people who had nothing 
whatever to do with the Mafia. 
"It's clear it was not mobsters only; absolutely it was not," he said. 
The Justice Department has vigorously resisted any efforts to narrow the reach 
of the statute, arguing that not all dangerous criminals are members of 
organized crime. 
Intent Told 
"The whole purpose of RICO was to give the government a vehicle for dealing 
with that side of organized-crime activity that ended up in the 
quasi-legitimate financial fields," said Paul E. Coffey, who as deputy chief of 
the department's organized crime and racketeering section oversees all RICO 
prosecutions. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has subsequently noted that the statute itself calls for 
a broad interpretation. The court held that legitimate businesses "enjoy 
neither an inherent incapacity for criminal activity nor immunity from its 
consequences." 
As drafted, RICO is targeted at "enterprises" that engage in a "pattern of 
racketeering activity." More than two dozen individual crimes, ranging from 
such state offenses as murder and arson to federal crimes such as mail fraud, 
securities fraud or union funds embezzlement -- any two in a 10-year period -- 
are included among the acts that can make up a RICO violation. 
RICO law remains in substantial disarray, however, because of continuing 
confusion over just what constitutes an "enterprise" or a "pattern" of 
racketeering activity. Few questioned, for example, the Justice Department's 
characterization last year of the Los Angeles Mafia family as a racketeering 
enterprise that had engaged in a pattern of activity that included extortion, 
loan-sharking and murder plots. 
Single Act 
But what of an indictment last week that alleged that the now-defunct North 
America Savings &amp; Loan of Santa Ana was operated by its deceased president 
and a former consultant as a racketeering enterprise? What of a group of 
individuals who commit a variety of unrelated frauds over a period of several 
years? Can a single act of fraud, if accompanied by a mailing, or a telephone 
call, be enough to sustain a racketeering case? 
While the Justice Department has guidelines that limit the instances in which 
criminal RICO cases can be brought, the water has been muddied in recent years 
by civil litigants, who can obtain treble damages and attorney fees if they can 
establish a similar pattern of racketeering activity by way of a civil suit. 
The U.S. Supreme Court, in a landmark 1985 case that opened the way for much 
broader use of the RICO statute, held that prior criminal convictions are not 
required to sustain a civil RICO action. 
In the wake of that ruling, civil RICO suits have explored the outer fringes of 
the legal frontier. Alleged "racketeers" have since included the Democratic 
National Committee, Iran-Contra figures Richard Secord and Adolfo Calero 
Portocarrero, countless businessmen locked in financial disputes -- even the 
FBI. In a recent, highly publicized ruling, a federal appeals court upheld a 
civil RICO case against 27 anti-abortion activists who protested against a 
Philadelphia abortion clinic. 
Auto Accidents 
One of the largest civil RICO cases in the country is pending now in Los 
Angeles, where the Automobile Club of Southern California is seeking $200 
million in damages from a group of doctors, attorneys and others who are 
accused of running a staged auto accident ring. The case, which one defense 
lawyer estimated has already generated 1 million pages of documents, is 
expected to go to trial next year. 
Most judges who have spoken publicly on the issue, including Chief Justice 
William Rehnquist, have expressed concern that RICO, if allowed to proceed 
unabated, could jam the federal courts' dockets with cases that more properly 
belong as simple contract disputes in state court. 
"In a broad sense, I doubt that Congress had any idea that it would be used as 
creatively as it has been used, to get at common-law fraud, and I think that's 
the thing that most judges get upset about," said U.S. District Judge Pamela 
Ann Rymer, considered the leading authority on the statute on the Los Angeles 
federal bench. 
"I don't think we'd even bat an eyelash if they came in and said the defendant 
did this act of extortion and then went out and killed somebody. That's real 
RICO. It's when they come in and say somebody tried to defraud me and called up 
(on the telephone) two or three times, that's what gets a lot of judges upset." 
The Supreme Court is expected to revisit this year the question of what 
constitutes a "pattern" of racketeering activity, clarifying many of the 
questions that remain in civil cases. Legislation now before Congress, 
introduced earlier this year by Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.) and Rep. 
Frederick Boucher (D-Va.), would clarify some of the remaining points of 
controversy. 
Single Damages 
Among other things, it would permit most plaintiffs to recover only single 
damages, except where the defendant has been convicted of a related felony or 
in insider trading cases, in which punitive damages would be permitted. 
The Justice Department, in the meantime, says it has developed sufficient 
guidelines to ensure that only those cases that truly encompass a broad pattern 
of criminal activity -- and which cannot be covered by any other statute -- are 
filed as RICO cases. 
"We've authorized over 800 RICO prosecutions since 1980. That's a lot," Coffey 
said. "In hindsight, some of them were great, some of them we probably should 
have rethought and prosecuted under other statutes and the great majority were 
somewhere in the middle. Basically, RICO worked." 
