ROSE REPORTEDLY WILL CONTEND BLACKMAIL THREAT SPURRED PROBE 
Pete Rose will contend that a former friend, angered when the Cincinnati Reds 
manager refused to lend him $40,000, falsely accused Rose of betting on Red 
games and triggered baseball's investigation, according to a newspaper report. 
The Cincinnati Post quoted unnamed sources Friday as saying that Rose will tell 
the investigators the accusations were made up after a blackmail attempt by 
Paul Janszen. 
Janszen is serving time in a Cincinnati halfway house on federal charges of 
evading taxes derived from the sale of steroids. Federal court documents 
indicate that Janszen has alleged he placed bets with a bookmaker on baseball 
games, including Reds' games, on behalf of an unidentified Cincinnati resident. 
Published reports have identified the resident as Rose. 
Rose could be suspended for life if he has bet on Red games and for a year if 
he has bet on other baseball games. 
Rose has tried to disassociate himself from Janszen and several other 
acquaintances from a gym in suburban Cincinnati, where Rose worked out. Several 
of the gym operators have been charged or sentenced as being part of a 
cocaine-smuggling operation. 
Rose, in Philadelphia for a game against the Phillies, declined comment. 
"If it's an anonymous source, I don't want to see it," Rose said. "If no one 
signs their name to it, I don't want to read it." 
When a reporter attempted to read the story to Rose, he said: "I don't want to 
hear about it, either." 
The newspaper said that Rose has not yet been asked to give his version of the 
allegations to Commissioner Bart Giamatti and John Dowd, baseball's special 
investigator. 
Rich Levin, a spokesman in Giamatti's office, declined to comment on the 
matter. Rose's attorney, Reuven Katz, did not return a phone call. 
The commissioner's office has confirmed that it is investigating "serious 
allegations" about Rose, concerning his gambling. A federal grand jury in 
Cincinnati also is investigating Rose, reportedly for possible tax evasion 
regarding gambling earnings. 
One of Rose's business partners, Mike Bertolini, has confirmed that he received 
a subpoena to appear next week before the grand jury. 
One of the bookmakers Janszen allegedly dealt with was Ronald Peters of 
Franklin, Ohio, who has pleaded guilty to cocaine distribution and tax evasion 
related to bookmaking. He awaits sentencing in U.S. District Court in 
Cincinnati. 
A federal prosecutor has confirmed publicly that Peters claims he took as much 
as $1 million in bets from Rose over a two-year period. Peters has been 
described as Rose's principal bookmaker, a charge Rose has denied. 
The Post said Friday that Rose will contend that he lent Janszen $10,000 late 
last summer, but turned him down when Janszen came back in late September or 
early October asking to borrow another $40,000. At that time, according to the 
newspaper, Janszen claimed to Katz that Rose owed him the $40,000, but wouldn't 
say for what. 
Janszen told Katz late last year that unless he got more money from Rose, he 
would tell baseball officials that Rose had bet on games, the newspaper said. 
Katz reportedly turned Janszen away. 
