THE PREPS: ST. ANTHONY TURNS AROUND SEASON 
Early last week, there was not a high school baseball team in Southern 
California more dominant than El Segundo. In earning the top Southern Section 
2-A Division ranking, the Eagles had outscored their first four Camino Real 
League opponents, 108-4. 
And in scoring 194 runs in 13 games overall, El Segundo's offense had appeared 
unstoppable. 
Then, on Thursday, the Eagles traveled to Long Beach and faced pitcher Eric 
Mooney and a rejuvenated league rival, St. Anthony. 
The left-handed Mooney and his St. Anthony teammates beat the Eagles, 4-3, 
creating a three-way tie for first with St. Anthony, El Segundo and Playa del 
Rey St. Bernard. 
"(Defeating El Segundo) is by far our biggest win," said St. Anthony Coach Ron 
Tostenson. "They have way more talent than we do but somehow we kept ourselves 
in position to win. They had runners on second and third with two outs before 
Mooney struck out the last batter to win the game." 
The Saints have won their last six games but are only 7-7, mostly because of 
defensive problems early in the season. The main victim has been Mooney, who 
has a 0.857 earned-run average but only a 4-3 record to show for it. 
"His record is a little misleading when you consider how well he has pitched 
this season," Tostenson said. "He's had an outstanding year." 
In 49 innings, Mooney, a 6-foot-3, 210-pound senior, has struck out 71 and has 
given up only six earned runs. In one early game, he pitched a two-hitter and 
struck out 13 but still lost, 5-1. 
"I was really frustrated at first because we just were not winning," Mooney 
said. "However, I just kept pitching my game and things have started to come 
around. Having a ground ball hit now is not like flipping a coin anymore. I 
have a lot a lot more confidence in my defense than I used to." 
Hawthorne, the perennial boys' track power, has had problems this season with 
injuries, which caused Coach Kye Courtney to withdraw his team from Saturday's 
Arcadia Invitational and contributed to ending the Cougars' nine-year dual meet 
winning streak on Thursday against Beverly Hills. 
With sprinters Dave Smith, Erik Allen and Chris Alexander out with injuries, 
Beverly Hills defeated Hawthorne, 70-51. 
"We got them when they were down," Beverly Hills Coach Howard Edelman said. "In 
all fairness to (Hawthorne), their top two sprinters were out. However, you 
have to do what you can on the day of the meet and the bottom line is that we 
won. 
"We also had our top sprinter and long jumper (Darrin Smith) out with an injury 
for the meet so it ended up being our No. 2 sprinter against their No. 3. We 
did not know that we'd win the meet until Danny Edwards came through to win the 
100 (meters) for us. But I feel kind of bad because I would have liked to see 
both teams at 100%." 
Based on his record-breaking performances last week, it might be only a matter 
of time until Brent Noon of Fallbrook breaks the national high school shot put 
mark of 77 feet set by Michael Carter, the San Francisco 49ers' nose tackle, 
when he attended Dallas Jefferson in 1979. 
On Thursday, Noon broke his own state mark of 73-3, which he set March 22, with 
a throw of 73-5 3/4, reinforcing his hold as the No. 3 all-time performer in 
prep history. Then in the Arcadia Invitational on Saturday night, Noon 
obliterated the meet record of 66-10 1/4, set in 1975 by Dave Kurrasch of 
Newport Harbor, with a throw of 71-4 1/4 inches. 
Noon, who is California's first prep 70-foot thrower, has been over 70 feet in 
four meets. 
"My goal is 77 feet and I think that I can get it every time I compete," said 
Noon, who also won the discus at Arcadia with a throw of 192-11. "I know I'm 
capable of throwing that far . . . it is only a matter of time. For me to get 
the record, I do not need more strength, I just have to have everything else 
right from my technique to the throwing conditions." 
Felice Lipscomb of Santa Monica is an another athlete chasing records. 
Lipscomb, who won the state title in the 100-meter low hurdles last season and 
is the top returning hurdler in the nation, blew away last season's state 
runner-up, Kwani Stewart of Yuba City, in a time of 13.88 Saturday night at 
Arcadia. 
She did not come close to the state record of 13.34, set by Janeene Vicker of 
Pomona, but running against a wind blowing at 1.87 meters a second, Lipscomb 
appeared stronger than a year ago. 
"This season I am running the 300 (low hurdles), which I did not run last 
season," said Lipscomb, who finished third in that event at Arcadia behind 
Lompoc's Twila Sims and Christine Gray of Houston Sterling. "I feel that 
running them will make me a better and stronger runner. I didn't feel like I 
was pulling away from (Stewart), but I guess I was." 
Some of Southern California's top boys' and girls' senior basketball players 
will be showcased in the sixth College Prep Basketball Classic at the Forum 
Friday, when all-star teams from the City and Southern sections meet. The 
doubleheader will begin at noon with the girls' game, followed by the boys' 
matchup at 2 p.m. 
Manual Arts Coach Randolph Simpson, whose Toilers won the City 4-A Division 
title, will coach the City boys' team and will be assisted by Kevin Crider of 
Los Angeles. 
Players expected to represent the City, which has won four of the five meetings 
against the Southern Section, are: Dana Jones of North Hollywood, Aaron 
Atkinson of Lincoln, James Bacon of Dorsey, Damian Wilson of Westchester, John 
Woolery of Fairfax, DeWayne Lewis of Hamilton, Greg Vernon of University, 
Lionel Pandy of Fremont, Bobby McRae of Reseda Cleveland, Ijumaa Armstrong of 
Palisades, Bobby Kelly of Carson and William Celestine and Marcell Capers of 
Manual Arts. 
Santa Ana Mater Dei Coach Gary McKnight, whose Monarchs won the boys' Division 
I state title, will coach the Southern Section team, assisted by Lou 
Cvijanovich of Oxnard Santa Clara and Jim Harris of Huntington Beach Ocean 
View. 
Expected Southern Section players include Willie McGinest and Roderick Hannibal 
of Long Beach Poly, Ryan Jamison of Loyola, James Williams of Compton, Jeffery 
Rogers of Compton Dominguez, Fred Haygood of Fontana, Tyrone Paul of Inglewood 
Morningside, Earnest Killum of Lynwood, Shon Tarver of Santa Clara, Greg Evans 
of Ocean View, Travis Boyd of Huntington Beach Edison, Terrence O'Kelley of 
Lakewood and Andy Karich and David Boyle of Mater Dei. 
The City girls' team will be coached by Phil Chase of Washington, whose 
Generals won their second consecutive City 4-A Division title in March. 
Heading the 13-player team will be Detra Lockhart and Remitha (Missa) Houston 
of Washington, Sherlett Hendy of Dorsey, Laura Oki of Marshall, Lupe Cota of 
South Gate and Stacie Toon of Van Nuys. 
The Southern Section girls' team will be coached by Frank Scott of Morningside, 
whose Monarchs won their second consecutive State Division I championship a 
month ago. 
Playing on the Southern Section team, which has won four of the five meetings, 
will be All-American center Lisa Leslie of Morningside, Linda Watson of 
Lynwood, Sara Wilson of Newhall Hart, Amy Jalewalia of Westminster La Quinta 
and Aimee McDaniel and Tammy Blackburn of Brea-Olinda. 
Prep Notes 
The first day for high school basketball seniors to sign national letters of 
intent is Wednesday. Shon Tarver of Oxnard Santa Clara and Aaron Atkinson of 
Lincoln have already made unwritten commitments to Nevada Las Vegas and 
Colorado State, respectively, but All-American Ed O'Bannon of Artesia is not 
expected to announce his decision until the end of the month. O'Bannon, who 
scored 16 points and was voted most valuable player for the West team in last 
week's Dapper Dan prep all-star game in Pittsburgh, still has a scheduled visit 
to USC later this month. 
ESPN will televise the Dapper Dan game April 14 and O'Bannon will also play in 
the McDonald's All-Star game in Indianapolis Sunday, which will be on televised 
live on Channel 7. . . . ESPN will feature the Arcadia Invitational April 30 
and May 2 on its Scholastic Sports America program. 
