MOSCOW EXTENDS LITHUANIA EMBARGO TO FOOD, METALS; 
SOVIET UNION: THE LEADER OF THE LOCAL COMMUNIST PARTY APPEALED FOR COMPROMISE, 
SAYING THAT THE PRICE OF INDEPENDENCE "MUST HAVE LIMITS." EARLIER, SOLDIERS 
STORMED A PRINTING PLANT AND BEAT CIVILIAN GUARDS. 
Moscow on Friday expanded its energy embargo on Lithuania to include certain 
shipments of food, metal and industrial parts in its continuing effort to crush 
the republic's independence drive, Lithuanians said. 
Dozens of Soviet soldiers also stormed a printing plant and beat civilian 
guards and a local legislator Friday, witnesses said. 
The Kremlin "is seeking to stop the plants, put the workers on the streets, and 
encourage social unrest," Lithuanian President Vytautas Landsbergis charged at 
a news conference Friday night. 
Thus far in the 5-week-old standoff, no such unrest has occurred. 
Despite military and economic pressure, Lithuanians have refused to back off 
their March 11 declaration of independence from the Soviet Union, as demanded 
by Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and have solicited Western material 
and political support. 
In Birmingham, Ala., where President Bush gave a political speech at a rally, 
spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Friday the White House is "increasingly 
concerned" by reports of the Soviet economic crackdown on Lithuania and that 
Bush will be ready to brief Congress early this week on possible retaliation. 
Lithuania was forcibly annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940. 
Two ships from Cuba carrying raw sugar were diverted from the Lithuanian port 
of Klaipeda and a shipment of fish due from Latvia was sent elsewhere, 
Lithuania Deputy Prime Minister Romualdas Ozolas told reporters Friday night. 
Lithuania produces more meat and milk than it consumes and is in no danger of 
starving. 
But Lithuania's Communist Party chief, Algirdas Brazauskas, said Friday this 
Baltic republic of 3.8 million people must compromise on its pro-independence 
decisions or face critical shortages of oil and natural gas in two weeks, after 
Soviet cutoffs and reductions the previous two days. 
Brazauskas said Moscow also has cut off the supply of rubber tires, 
polyesterol, cables, bearings and caustic soda. Large scheduled shipments of 
metal and wood failed to appear, he said. 
Most factories here are expected to close if Lithuania cannot solve either the 
embargo-induced shortages or the confrontation with Moscow. 
"In two weeks we will have a critical situation," Brazauskas told the 
Lithuanian parliament. "The price for independence must have limits." 
Algimantas Cekuolis, a newspaper editor and former Lithuanian representative in 
the Soviet parliament, told reporters Lithuanians may offer to freeze their new 
laws backing up independence, "if Moscow gives us guarantees of something." 
Gorbachev has refused to negotiate unless Lithuania rescinds its declaration of 
independence. 
Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene was in Norway on Friday learning about 
buying oil for hard currency at world-market prices instead of low-cost oil for 
Soviet rubles. She offered to trade Lithuanian dairy products and said she will 
seek financial aid from the West. 
But even if she succeeds, she said Lithuania does not have the facilities to 
transport imported crude oil to the republic's single refinery. Apparently, a 
pipeline would have to be altered. 
A senior Western diplomat in Moscow noted that the Soviet Union would have to 
agree to Lithuanian imports because it controls the coastline. 
Despite all this, Foreign Minister Lennart Meri of neighboring Estonia said in 
Finland on Friday his republic rejects Soviet threats and inducements and 
refuses to rescind a March 30 declaration proclaiming itself an occupied, 
independent state. 
Armed soldiers stormed a Communist Party printing plant in the center of 
Vilnius on Friday afternoon, beating at least 12 civilian guards and a local 
legislator, witnesses said. 
Soviet soldiers previously occupied more than a half-dozen party and public 
buildings, but without violence. 
Lithuanian legislator Zigmas Vaisvilas told reporters the civilian guards 
arrived Friday at the plant, which already was occupied by a few Interior 
Ministry troops without weapons. 
The Soviet news agency Tass said the colonel in charge asked the 27 civilians 
to leave and called in reinforcements when they did not. 
Helmeted Soviet soldiers carrying automatic weapons and truncheons arrived in 
two trucks, surged into the building and beat some of the civilians, said 
witness Angele Guobiene, who works for the trade union journal Darbas Ir 
Poilsis, which is printed at the plant. 
Newspaper editor Algimantas Cekuolis said the civilians, including legislator 
Vaisvilas, were hurt when they tried to bar the soldiers. Two or three people 
were hospitalized, Cekuolis said. 
Tass said the civilians were hurt when soldiers shoved them bodily out the 
door. 
Police kept reporters out of the building. Soldiers were visible behind a gate 
in the building's courtyard. Some workers barricaded themselves near printing 
presses and looked out of open second- and third-floor windows. 
About 500 people gathered outside. They sang nationalist songs and carried the 
hammer and sickle of the Soviet Union merged with the Nazi swastika. 
Soldiers began occupying buildings in Vilnius a month ago, among them a plant 
that prints the republic's newspapers. The plant occupied Friday prints 
non-political magazines. 
Lithuania on Friday limited gasoline to about eight gallons a month for private 
cars and some large factories were to give workers a day off Saturday -- the 
only conservation steps reported to deal with the cutoff of oil and loss of 80% 
of its supply of natural gas. 
The energy embargo left Lithuania with only 15% to 17% of the 18 million cubic 
meters of natural gas it uses daily for homes and industry. 
Parliamentary spokeswoman Daina Kalendra said that as of Thursday the republic 
has suffered no electricity shortage. 
Brazauskas, an economic manager by training and chairman of parliament's 
emergency energy committee, led the government until the pro-secession Sajudis 
movement won control in February elections and declared independence in March. 
Last December he split his party from Moscow and won approval of many 
Lithuanian nationalists. Some see him as a pragmatist who best could deal with 
the Kremlin. 
But deputies of the Supreme Council, Lithuania's parliament, accused him Friday 
of trying to slow Lithuania's independence drive. 
"You're raising a white flag," charged Kazis Saya, a writer. 
Gorbachev has demanded repeal of new republic laws that halt conscription of 
Lithuanians into the Soviet army and introduce identity cards for all citizens. 
He also complained about alleged seizure of Communist Party property. 
Brazauskas said the March 11 declaration should not be reconsidered, but urged 
lawmakers to compromise on Gorbachev's other demands "to take us out of this 
dead end." 
