DISTRICT MAY TAKE OVER JOB AT GARDNER ELEMENTARY; 
SCHOOL CONTRACTOR GIVEN 'LAST' DEADLINE 
Los Angeles Unified School District officials have vowed to use district 
workers to complete the long-delayed construction project at Gardner Elementary 
School if the contractor hired to do the job fails to finish by the end of 
June. 
The officials made the promise to a group of parents last week as the $700,000 
project to add air conditioning, an elevator and other improvements to 
Gardner's 66-year-old main building stretched more than a year and a half 
behind schedule. 
The school has remained open during the construction, and teachers, parents and 
students have been complaining about the conditions for months. 
"It's just more of the same thing," said Judith Drury, a parent. "They make 
promises and never deliver. It's been one delay after another." 
During the construction, there have been shortages of toilets, drinking 
fountains and wash basins for the nearly 500 students at the school. Books and 
supplies were distributed late because they were packed away because of 
construction work over the summer. During the winter, students were assigned to 
bungalows where the heating systems worked only sporadically. The school 
library has been shut down, and there is no computer lab. 
The project, which was supposed to be completed in late 1987, was delayed 
because of asbestos removal, squabbles between the contractor and architect and 
equipment failures. 
Most recently, the contractor signed a work schedule indicating that the job 
would be completed by April 25. But parents were told last week that the job 
was only 80% finished, and a new completion date was slated for the end of 
June. 
"If the job is not completed by then, then the district will either hire 
additional contractors or subcontractors to finish it, or we'll bring in our 
own crews to do it," said Mel Ross, an official in the district's building 
services division. 
Ross said the contractor needs to finish work on the painting, air 
conditioning, electrical system, elevators, ceilings and some paving and clean 
up. 
A spokesman for the contractor, Levin Construction Co. of North Hollywood, did 
not return calls seeking comment. 
The contract with the construction firm called for a $500-a-day fine for 
unnecessary delays beyond the 271 days allotted in the contract to complete the 
job. However, school officials said a determination of whether the contractor 
has violated the agreement will not be made until after the job is completed, 
in keeping with standard practice. 
Los Angeles school board member Alan Gershman, whose district includes the 
school, described the project as a "disaster where rules and regulations have 
been stretched to the limit by the contractor. He has taken every legal 
loophole, and we don't have a solid foundation to go after him on." 
Gershman, who faces a June runoff for reelection, said he supports the call for 
tough action against the contractor. However, Gershman has been criticized by 
parents who say he has not done enough to force completion of the project. 
"He came to the meeting, but it was like he didn't know what was going on. He 
had no answers. It was like it was all new to him," said Angie Ranslem, a 
parent. 
The project continues to be a source of frustration for many. The controversy 
forced the principal to take a leave earlier this year, and since then, the 
school has had two interim principals. 
"It's a bad situation," said Jeff Sweeney, the school's current principal. "But 
the teachers are professionals, and I don't believe the children are losing 
anything." 
Laureen Mitchell, a kindergarten teacher and a union spokeswoman, said everyone 
has been under a strain. "We have had three administrators since September. 
That has caused problems," she said. "It's hard having to adapt to different 
management styles, different expectations." 
