MONTOYA GETS 6 1/2 YEARS IN PRISON FOR SELLING HIS VOTE 
Taking a strong stand against corruption in the state Capitol, a federal judge 
Thursday sentenced former Sen. Joseph B. Montoya to 6 1/2 years in prison for 
selling his vote to special-interest groups. 
U.S. District Judge Milton L. Schwartz, delivering a stern lecture, told 
Montoya that his crimes had undermined representative government in California 
and ordered him to pay $40,000 in fines and restitution. 
"The system can live with people who are not terribly competent," Schwartz 
said. "It can live with legislators who may be lazy. But it cannot survive 
legislators who say, 'My vote is for sale. I am here to vote the way I am 
paid.' " 
Montoya, a Democrat from Whittier, remained impassive as Schwartz imposed the 
prison sentence. But the former lawmaker's wife, Pilar, broke into tears in the 
first row of the spectators' section. 
In a brief statement to the judge moments before the sentencing, Montoya said 
he accepted his conviction on seven counts of racketeering, extortion and money 
laundering. "I believe in the (legal) system," Montoya told the judge. "The 
system has found me guilty. I will live with the consequences and so will my 
family." 
But he lashed out at the media, charging that it had "tried and convicted me 
before I came to trial." 
The sentencing of Montoya brings to a close the most important case so far in a 
five-year federal investigation of corruption in the Legislature. U.S. Atty. 
David F. Levi, who personally helped prosecute Montoya, said the stiff prison 
term sends a clear message to other lawmakers not to use their positions for 
their personal benefit. 
"This is an appropriate and powerful sentence," Levi said. "The message I hope 
it sends is one of deterrence to all public officials in all walks of 
government life who would contemplate trading the power of their postion for 
some kind of financial gain." 
Under federal sentencing rules, Montoya will spend at least 5 1/2 years behind 
bars, Levi said. Because of a recent change in federal law, he will be eligible 
for a sentence reduction of no more than 54 days a year for good behavior, 
beginning only after the first year. 
An angry Montoya made a dramatic entrance into the courthouse Thursday morning, 
reaching out and shoving a camera into the face of a news photographer who 
received a cut just above an eye. 
The altercation with United Press International photographer Dan Groschong 
began when the Montoyas and several friends attempted to push their way through 
a throng of news people gathered in the courthouse lobby. During the shoving, 
Groschong said Pilar Montoya grabbed a flash attachment cable attached to one 
of two cameras he was carrying. When he tried to take a picture with the second 
camera, Groschong said, Montoya struck it with an open hand. 
"I think they're just real upset," Groschong said afterward. "I would be." 
Attorneys for Montoya, who was convicted in February, argued that as a 
first-time offender who had used his elected office for the good of many 
constituents, he should serve little or no jail time. 
But in calculating the sentence, Schwartz agreed with prosecutors who had urged 
a stiffer penalty for the former senator on the grounds that he had engaged in 
obstruction of justice during the trial. 
Schwartz ruled that Montoya lied on the witness stand and withheld key 
documents that had been subpoenaed by federal authorities. As a result, the 
judge tacked on 15 months more than Montoya might otherwise have received. 
The judge, who presided over Montoya's trial, expressed sympathy for the former 
senator's family and said he received 65 letters from supporters urging 
leniency. "I recognize he has done a lot of very fine things for a lot of 
people," Schwartz said. 
But evidence at the trial showed that Montoya repeatedly used his position to 
extort money from special-interest groups, Schwartz said, citing "a number of 
situations extending over a period of more than seven years in which his vote 
was for sale." 
Among the victims of Montoya's attempted extortion were representatives of the 
National Football League Players' Assn., former sports agent Michael Trope, a 
Florida insurance executive, representatives of foreign medical universities 
and an undercover FBI agent posing as a businessman, the jury found. The most 
dramatic evidence against the senator was a videotape of Montoya accepting a 
$3,000 payment from the FBI agent at a breakfast meeting near the Capitol. 
"This is the most serious kind of white-collar crime because it attacks every 
person and because it attacks the ability to have representative government," 
Schwartz said. 
Defense attorney Michael S. Sands said afterward that the sentence was "totally 
devastating" for Montoya. 
But several members of the jury that convicted Montoya, who were on hand for 
the sentencing, said they thought the penalty was too light. "To me, that seems 
like a slap on the wrist," said Ed Reece as he left the courtroom. 
Juror Greg Coumis said he believed the judge should have ordered Montoya to pay 
a much larger fine because it was the former legislator's avarice that prompted 
his illegal activities. "The whole trial was based on money," Coumis said. 
Schwartz gave the former legislator two months to file any legal appeals and 
get his personal affairs in order before turning himself in to federal 
authorities on June 29. 
The judge said he would recommend that Montoya serve his time at the Lompoc 
Federal Penitentiary, a minimum-security prison with a reputation as one of the 
softest in the federal system. 
Before pronouncing the sentence, Schwartz rejected a motion by Sands for a new 
trial. The attorney argued that the verdict was tainted because a potential 
witness on one of the counts refused to testify at the trial, citing his Fifth 
Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
Montoya's attorneys said they hoped the former senator, who resigned his post 
after his conviction, would remain free pending his appeal. But Levi said that 
unless a court finds that a reversal of the verdict is likely, Montoya will 
have to begin serving his sentence while his case is under review. 
