85% IN CSUN POLL OPPOSE OFF-CAMPUS GRADUATION 
Eighty-five percent of graduating students polled last week at Cal State 
Northridge oppose plans for this year's graduation at the Hollywood Bowl, 
organizers of the student-run survey said Monday. 
A majority of the 922 students who responded to the survey also said they want 
to take from four to nine guests, instead of the three guests tentatively 
allowed by the university, said poll organizer Anthony Ashhurst, an Associated 
Students graduate senator. 
The university decided to hold the graduation in the bowl because the campus 
area normally used for the ceremony has been closed for construction. 
Administrators said they had to limit the number of guests to prevent 
overcrowding at the bowl, which holds 17,960 people and has parking for 3,500 
cars. 
In past ceremonies, about 65% of the eligible graduates have attended 
ceremonies, administrators said. About 4,650 degrees will be awarded at the May 
26 graduation, university spokeswoman Ann Salisbury said. 
The survey, which consisted of six questions about students' graduation 
preferences, was conducted Wednesday and Thursday by a committee of students 
opposed to the university's graduation plans. The group was formed March 29 
after a campus protest against the plans, which were announced Feb. 22. 
Other survey findings include: 
Fifty-nine percent of the students polled said they favor having two campus 
ceremonies -- one in the morning and one in the afternoon -- as a way to 
overcome the shortage of space on campus. Other votes were split evenly between 
having three ceremonies at the same time in different campus locations and 
holding a series of ceremonies over several days. 
Seventy-one percent said they would buy tickets to help pay for campus 
ceremonies, with a majority of those students favoring ticket prices between $1 
and $4. 
Ashhurst said those who responded to the student-run survey at two campus 
polling stations represent more than 15% of the 5,942 students eligible to 
graduate this spring. 
To ensure that only graduating students voted, names of voters were matched 
against a list of students eligible to graduate, vote organizer Beth Lawrence 
said. Votes were taken at two centrally located campus polling stations, she 
said. 
"We just really wanted to see how seniors felt about it and to show the 
administration" what students thought of the graduation plans, Lawrence said. 
"As far as we know, we were right. They don't want it at the Hollywood Bowl, 
and they want to bring more family members and friends, and they want 
individual recognition." 
Seventy-seven percent of the voters said it was important to them to receive 
individual recognition, which in the past has been in the form of a handshake 
from CSUN President James W. Cleary. This year, however, individual recognition 
may not be possible because the bowl's design prevents graduates from marching 
on stage to receive diplomas and shake Cleary's hand, administrators said. 
Plans Unchanged 
Dean of Students Edmund T. Peckham, who met with several of the vote organizers 
Monday, said the survey will not change this year's graduation plans. 
"The survey is a very helpful document, and I particularly appreciated the 
concern and care that some of our graduates have for our program, but the 
arrangements for the bowl have been made . . .," Peckham said. 
He said the survey will help administrators plan next year's graduation. 
The university on Monday sent out a survey of its own to all graduating 
students, Peckham said. Results of the survey will help determine how many 
students plan to attend the ceremony and how many guests students want to take. 
The questionnaires are to be returned by April 21. It also asks whether 
students and their families plan to drive to the bowl or take buses provided by 
the university, Peckham said. 
If some students request fewer than three guest tickets, others could obtain 
more than three, Peckham said. 
