LOPEZ THROWS 2-HITTER TO SPARK NEWBURY PARK TO SOFTBALL WIN 
Senior right-hander Lea Lopez allowed only two hits, struck out eight and 
walked none to lead visiting Newbury Park High to a 3-0 victory over Thousand 
Oaks in a Marmonte League softball game Thursday. 
The victory kept Newbury Park (13-7, 6-1 in league play) in a first-place tie 
with Simi Valley. 
Newbury Park took a 1-0 lead in the second inning when Traci Samuels scored 
from first on a two-base throwing error by sophomore third baseman Angie Nau. 
The Panthers capitalized on another two-base throwing error to score two more 
runs in the sixth inning. 
With Newbury Park runners at first and second, Thousand Oaks first baseman Amy 
Chellevold made a brilliant over-the-shoulder catch of a bunt by Cami Ferris. 
Chellevold, however, overthrew second base in an attempt to double off Melody 
Bolger. By the time the ball could be returned to the infield, both Bolger and 
Marcie James, who was on first, came around to score. 
"They didn't play the game we're normally used to seeing from them," Newbury 
Park Coach Doug Gove said. "They're a good team, they were just off today." 
Thousand Oaks finished with six errors. 
"It was the worst we've ever played," Thousand Oaks Coach Chuck Brown said. 
"It's tough to play over six errors." 
The closest Thousand Oaks came to scoring was in the fifth inning. With one 
out, Nicole Ochoa hit a 2-1 pitch over the head of left fielder Laree Reynolds 
for the game's only double. But Lopez retired the next two batters. 
Suzie Klusyk singled in the sixth inning for the Lancers' only other 
baserunner. 
Lopez, headed for University of the Pacific on a softball scholarship, and 
Bolger led Newbury Park's seven-hit offense with two singles each. 
Alicia Zinner (15-5) took the loss for the Lancers (15-6, 4-4), who have been 
beset by injuries and eligibility problems. 
"(The loss of players) has been really unsettling," Brown said. "We've played 
over it until now, but we couldn't do it today." 
