ON VIEW: ZOO GALA TO PREVIEW ADVENTURE ISLAND 
Tom Tellefsen, chairman of the Greater Los Angeles Zoo Assn., and his band of 
trustees brought in $500,000 this week toward their goal to raise $8.3 million 
for Adventure Island, the Los Angeles Zoo's soon-to-debut attraction. That 
leaves $1 million before the public grand opening May 5. 
With confidence, GLAZA is putting invitations into the mail to about 1,000 for 
the Preview Gala for both children and adults April 30. Betty White Ludden, Jim 
and Gloria Stewart and Mayor Tom Bradley are among those receiving them, along 
with corporate leaders and their kids and grandkids. Adventure Island, totally 
funded by individual and corporate/foundation donors, will showcase the wonders 
of Southwest animals. 
For the party, Someone's in the Kitchen Catering will pour out genuine Western 
cuisine and the Reinsmen will blast the rustic songs. Zoorific Theater will be 
there to tell tall tales about sea lions, sidewinders, scorpions, prairie dogs, 
cougars (the mascots of Adventure Island). The kids there on the first night 
will get the inaugural opportunities to use the interactive teaching devices as 
well as see the animal nursery and the theater for daily animal shows. 
YOU'RE THE STARS: Oscars, Emmys, Tonys and Grammys aside, United Way calls 
givers their stars, and George F. Moody, general campaign chairman, and the 
United Way Campaign Cabinet say "You Are the Stars" when they host what is 
anticipated to be a victory celebration April 13 at the University Sheraton. 
Clarence Brown, director of media affairs, notes, "We expect to reach our 
$89-million goal this year, so we expect a big turnout -- 1,000." 
It's expected to be the largest amount ever raised by United Way. 
CELEBRATE: Doheny Mansion in Chester Place will be the place April 14 for a 
gala "Celebrate" for Sister Magdalen Coughlin, retiring president of Mount St. 
Mary's College. Caroline W. Nahas and David L. McIntyre co-chair the black-tie 
affair. It's intended to salute Sister Magdalen's community contributions. 
She'll continue her task of fund raising for the college, but relinquish the 
day-by-day running of the institution. 
EASTER MONDAY: Easter Monday came and went without the traditional Presentation 
Ball presented by Social Service Auxiliary. That's because the prominent 
affair, long held on Easter Monday, moves to June 5 this year when 31 young 
women from communities throughout Southern California will be presented to 
Archbishop Roger M. Mahony at the Beverly Hilton. 
Jayne Sullivan is ball chairman, and with her husband, Roger Sullivan, will be 
presenting their fifth daughter. The ball committee meets April 12 to finalize 
plans, and among those involved will be June Ganey, Evelyn Vodhanel, Anne 
Porteous, Marge Hegener, Marjorie Pings, Nancy Gibbs, Mary Lou Workman, Helen 
Webster, Sally Conn, Lee Harnett, Marie Thorpe, Patty Weber, Patty Burschinger, 
Gretchen Wayne, Mary Loftus, Jeanne Jennett, Diane Downey, Camilly Lynch and 
Gerry Nigg, who is president of the auxiliary. 
IN FLIGHT: A flock of Smithsonian Angels takes off from LAX this week for a 
Washington reception marking the formal opening of the new Ceremonial Court at 
the National Museum of American History. The Ceremonial Court, according to 
Smithsonian Pacific Coast representative Wanda Henderson, is designed to 
re-create the entrance hall of the White House and present visitors with the 
same sight that greets the President as he steps through his own front door. 
Among the invited are some of those who came forward to establish the Friends 
of the First Ladies at the Silver Kite ball at the Beverly Wilshire last year 
-- Harriet Luckman, Dr. Alex and Sue Villicana, Francine Maroney. 
RED LETTER DATES: Jules Haimovitz, president and chief operating officer of 
Spelling Entertainment, will be honored by the National Center for Hyperactive 
Children at its eighth annual Gift of Love Dinner on Tuesday at the Regent 
Beverly Wilshire . . . . 
Diana Jonsson has arranged for Performing Tree supporters to view part of the 
Armand Hammer Collections in the Occidental Petroleum Center, dine on Regency 
Club Chef Patrick Jamon's artistic cuisine and create artistic dance 
arrangements on the dance floor Saturday at the Regency Club. The goal is to 
raise funds for the National Endowment for the Arts Challenge Grant, which 
Performing Tree holds . . . . 
Producer David L. Wolper, actress Susan Dey and community leader Midge Costanza 
will be featured at the People Assisting the Homeless (PATH) second spring 
luncheon Wednesday at the Beverly Hills Hotel. Mrs. David Orgell is 
underwriting the luncheon for 450. . . . 
Ma Maison Bistro at Ma Maison Sofitel Hotel is the setting Friday when 
Bullock's honors designer Patrick Kelly. 
AGENDA: The Fantasticks!, premier support group for the Los Angeles Theatre 
Center, launches the spring season with a preview of "Joe Turner's Come and 
Gone" Thursday at the Theatre Center. Earlier, members will be at the Biltmore 
Gold Room, supping over hors d'oeuvres and hearing blues songstress J'ai, then 
they'll shuttle to the show. . . . 
Dolores Hope, founding president of Holy Family Services, is honored for her 40 
years of service to the welfare of children at the Adoption Guild of Los 
Angeles' 40th year party Saturday at MGM Filmland Center in Culver City. . . . 
Communications Bridge Institute (training underprivileged youth and women in 
video technology) benefits from a special black-tie preview of the Pulitzer 
Prize winning comedy "Driving Miss Daisy" starring Julie Harris and Brock 
Peters on Wednesday at the Henry Fonda Theatre. A champagne reception with the 
cast follows at the Hollywood Roosevelt. 
ABOUT TOWN: Marie-Claude Lalique, designer and president of Cristal Lalique, 
France, and granddaughter of company founder Rene Lalique, comes for a rather 
rare personal appearance Monday at Geary's Beverly Hills . . . . 
Hotel designer Howard Hirsch receives the third annual Designers West/Ray 
Bradbury Creativity Award at a gala Monday at Ma Maison Sofitel. It happens to 
fall on his birthday and will be held in the Opus One Ballroom, which he 
designed. 
PLAUDITS: To Ralph and Goldy Lewis, being honored at a dinner Tuesday at USC 
Town and Gown by university President James and Marilyn Zumberge. Their gift of 
$5 million will be used for the construction of the Ralph and Goldy Lewis Hall 
of Planning and Development at the USC School of Urban and Regional Planning. 
