MISTER FRISKY'S GENE POOL MAY BE A LITTLE TOO SHALLOW 
In the Frisky family photo, only Mister Frisky is gainfully employed. 
Mom is named Frisky Flyer. She started at the bottom and stayed there. After 20 
races, she had earned only $18,955 and was retired for breeding in Florida. 
Since then, all but one of the kids have followed in her hoofprints. 
First, she was bred to Fire Dancer, but that worked poorly. No one so much as 
bothered to name that colt. Charming Flyer was only a little better. At least 
he showed up for 24 races, but he managed to earn only $3,715. Miss Frisky 
never earned a dime, and Miss Frisky Lady scraped together $12,658 in the one 
year she raced. 
Frisky Flyer was bred to Marsayas twice, in 1985 and '86, which says a good 
deal about the low esteem in which he was held. Marsayas' fee was $1,500 with 
few takers. First, she foaled Miss Frisky Lady, then Mister Frisky, who was 
named for his mother, not, as some believe, after a brand of Puerto Rican cat 
food. Mister Frisky was better-looking than most of his relatives. 
Had he not been an outstanding physical specimen, despite his small size, he 
would likely have sold for about $2,500 as a yearling, a typical price for a 
Marsayas colt. But Mister Frisky brought a final bid of $15,000 -- big money 
for a Marsayas -- from Puerto Rican interests. At the time, $15,000 was 
probably enough to buy Marsayas himself. 
But is the undefeated Mister Frisky genuine -- really? 
He is a heroic figure in Puerto Rico, where he won 13 races last year before 
being sent to Miami for the Florida Stallion Stakes, which he missed after 
suffering a minor injury while training at Calder. Since his training was 
assigned to Laz Barrera, a heroic figure in Puerto Rico himself since he won 
the Kentucky Derby and Belmont Stakes with Bold Forbes in 1976, Mister Frisky 
is three for three in Southern California. 
The colt is also on top of most polls of Kentucky Derby contenders, even after 
Summer Squall's very impressive victory Saturday in the Blue Grass Stakes. 
There are many so-called experts, apparently, who like Mister Frisky's chances 
two weeks from Saturday at Churchill Downs. And then there are those convinced 
that when the product of a union between Marsayas and Frisky Flyer who stands 
only 60 inches at the withers is tested for class, he will disintegrate -- the 
dust-to-dust theory. 
While Mister Frisky has won 16 races, the 26 other sons and daughters of 
Marsayas have won only 22 among them. Mister Frisky's earnings, $402,625, 
easily surpass the total of all other Marsayas offspring, which is $118,918, 
$29,000 of that earned by the former-best Marsayas, Expert Eyes, who started 49 
times. 
Those applying the dust-to-dust theory to Mister Frisky contend he simply is 
genetically incapable of becoming a top-class horse. 
