2 SURVIVORS THANK POLE FOR AN ACT OF COURAGE; 
HOLOCAUST: IN AUSCHWITZ IN 1944, A MAN RISKED EVERYTHING TO DEFY THE NAZIS AND 
SAVE A PAIR OF PRISONERS FROM ANNIHILATION. SUNDAY HE WAS INCLUDED AMONG THE 
RIGHTEOUS. 
The two Jews were young and daring but they had nothing to lose. One of them 
had already stood at the gas chamber's door, only to be spared by the wife of a 
Nazi commandant who took pity on him when he helped free her skirt from an iron 
gate. 
The Pole, on the other hand, had everything to lose. He knew, having overhead 
the conversation of two SS officers, that the Germans were preparing to 
annihilate the remaining Jews at the extermination camp known as Auschwitz III. 
He knew as well that under Nazi law, to collaborate with a Jew could mean death 
for not only himself, but his entire family. But he also knew there was a 
higher law, the law of a man's own morals. 
And so it was that in September, 1944, Jozef Wrona offered to help Max Drimmer 
and Herman Shine escape from Auschwitz, a feat Holocaust scholars say was often 
tried, but rarely with success. 
Last week, after 46 years, the three men were reunited in San Francisco, where 
Shine and Drimmer now make their homes. And on Sunday, they came to the Simon 
Wiesenthal Center in West Los Angeles, where an official of Yad Vashem, 
Israel's national Holocaust museum, bestowed Wrona with its highest honor, the 
title of "Righteous Among the Nations." 
In a simple speech in Polish, Wrona -- a thinning, bespectacled man of 68 -- 
marveled that he would be singled out "for feeling just a human obligation." 
Through a translator, he said he was "deeply touched" by the ceremony, which 
coincided with the center's annual Yom Hashoah -- Day of Remembrance -- 
celebration, in which Jews worldwide recall the horrors of the Holocaust. 
Theirs was not the only such historical recollection that took place Sunday. At 
the Glendale High School football stadium, about 2,000 Armenian-Americans 
gathered to mark the 75th anniversary of the slaying of 1.5 million Armenians, 
allegedly by the orders of Ottoman Turks. 
And about 350 people attended solemn mass at our Lady of the Bright Mountain 
Polish Roman Catholic Church in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the 
Katyn Forest massacre, in which some 4,400 Polish prisoners-of-war were 
executed by Russian soldiers during their 1939 invasion of Poland. 
At the Wiesenthal Center, speakers exhorted the crowd to remember not only Nazi 
atrocities, but also -- in the words of Mordechai Paldiel, who presented 
Wrona's award -- "those who held the torch of humanity aloft during history's 
darkest period." 
Wrona, for his part, seemed reluctant to recount his remarkable tale of 
heroism. But Shine and Drimmer were eager to do it for him. 
"We want our story to be told to as many people as possible," Shine said. "We 
are the last of the survivors and our story, we know, is so extremely unusual . 
. . Jozef not only risked his life -- our lives were worth nothing anyway -- 
but he risked the lives of his entire family and his entire village." 
Shine and Drimmer, boyhood friends who grew up in Berlin, were arrested by the 
Nazis in 1939. They eventually wound up together at Auschwitz III, a part of 
the Auschwitz complex for prisoners who were healthy enough to work. Shine was 
put to work as a roofer. Drimmer was forced to work at a nearby factory owned 
by I. G. Farben, a company that manufactured the infamous Zyklon B gas that was 
used in the Nazi gas chambers. 
Wrona worked in the factory as a civilian employee. The young Polish Catholic 
had witnessed the extermination of his village's Jewish ghetto -- 800 people 
died. And his father had been arrested by the Nazis for helping Jews. 
Wrona and Drimmer soon became friends, engaging in furtive conversation. When 
he could, Wrona slipped Drimmer a cigarette or a slice of bread. And when he 
knew death was imminent for the Jews at Auschwitz, he offered to plot this 
escape: 
He would dig a hole in a warehouse shed on the Farben factory property. Drimmer 
and Shine would hide in the hole and he would cover them with fiberglass 
insulation material. At night -- they picked a night when they knew the moon 
would not shine -- they would slip away from the factory and meet resistance 
leaders, who would take them to their freedom. 
It worked almost according to plan, except the resistance fighters never 
showed. Instead, Shine and Drimmer went into hiding in the barn behind Wrona's 
home in the small village of Nowa Wies, 18 kilometers from Auschwitz. 
There they remained for four months, during which Drimmer wrote a letter to a 
girl named Herta whom he had known in Berlin. The correspondence almost proved 
to be their undoing; Herta was arrested by the Nazis, who found the letter and 
stormed Wrona's home, demanding to know where the Jews were hidden. 
But the Wrona family stood fast; they denied Drimmer and Shine were there. The 
two Jews, however, knew they would have to flee and sought refuge in the home 
of a young woman named Marianne, whom Shine had met on a road near Auschwitz. 
The two found shelter in her family's apartment. At the war's end, in a joyous 
double marriage ceremony in Berlin, Max married Herta and Herman married 
Marianne. 
The two couples soon emigrated to the United States. Shine made his career as a 
roofer; Drimmer became a plumbing contractor. Over the years, they said, they 
often thought about the man who saved their lives. 
In 1989, they set out for Poland to find him. Although unsuccessful, their plea 
reached a newspaper reporter who tracked down Wrona. Soon afterward, they 
nominated him for the righteous conduct award. 
Wrona expects to stay with Shine and Drimmer for at least a month, but is 
looking forward to returing to Kenty, his village in Poland. The village, he 
said, has a schoolhouse with a room dedicated to the Holocaust. He intends to 
give the school the certificate and the medal he received at Sunday's ceremony. 
"After I die," he explained, "this will be hanging there. Maybe my example 
would help some other person in life to make a right decision." 
Staff writer Linda Chong contributed to this article. 
