ERTE; VERSATILE ARTIST AND DESIGNER 
Erte, the versatile and prolific artist whose Folies Bergere costumes and 
Harper's Bazaar magazine covers set a lavish tone for the 1920s and whose art 
deco prints continued to sell well into the 1980s, died Saturday in Paris. He 
was 97. 
Spokesmen for Cochin Hospital refused to state a cause of death. Friends said 
he had been hospitalized three weeks ago after returning from a vacation trip 
to the island of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean. 
During his productive life, Erte designed costumes for the street, stage and 
screen, painted, made lithographs, sculpted in wood and metal, crafted jewelry 
and designed sets for opera, ballet, nightclub shows and films. 
He became famous for his fine-lined, elongated sketches of slender women in 
luxurious gowns and cocoons of fur, often accompanied in their glamorous 
high-tech settings by stylized greyhounds, leopards and panthers. 
The artworks became familiar fare in American art galleries -- in Los Angeles, 
they were often shown at the Circle Gallery and the Richard Mann Gallery. 
Lithographs from his famous alphabet series featuring the elaborately adorned 
"Erte woman" accent the walls of the Westwood Marquis Hotel, where Erte 
celebrated his 90th birthday. 
His graphics, paintings or sculptures are also prominent in the homes of Barbra 
Streisand and Cher and lesser-known celebrity admirers. And his continuing 
popularity won him nicknames as the "Father of Art Deco" and "Mr. Art Deco" -- 
titles that he disdained. 
"I do not like to be called 'Mr. Art Deco,"' he once told the Los Angeles 
Times. "I contributed to that movement. But I also contributed to surrealism. I 
do not understand it." 
Born to an aristocratic family Nov. 23, 1892, in St. Petersburg (now 
Leningrad), Russia, young Romain de Tirtoff designed his first dress -- an 
evening gown for his mother -- at the age of five. He emigrated to Paris in 
1912 to work for fashion houses and adopted as his professional name the French 
pronunciation of his initials, Erte (Air-tay). 
His Harper's Bazaar covers from 1915-37 made him a favorite in the United 
States, and he was lured to Hollywood in 1925 by a contract with 
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to design costumes and sets for movies and to "Paris-up" 
studio actresses. 
"I came to this country," he said then, "because I realize that from Los 
Angeles the films may do more toward establishing fashions than any other 
influence in the world. It is because they speak the international language of 
the eye and reach the masses." 
He stayed seven months, then left in a huff. 
While he was in town, Erte informed California women that their skirts were too 
short and men that their clothes were too drab, complained about actress 
Constance Bennett's prominent shoulder blades, and threw Lillian Gish out of 
his workroom when she demanded that her costumes for a role as a poor girl be 
fashioned out of silk. 
"Hollywoodland is a terrible place," he said on his way back to Paris. "Stupid 
and dull. I met some charming people, but on the whole it is terribly dead. If 
they have wild parties they have them in the houses with the window shades 
drawn." 
Erte broke his contract, he told reporters, because MGM kept rewriting a 
script, forcing him to design new sets and costumes for each version, then 
demanding he start over -- 50 costumes plus sets in three weeks. 
Over the years, Erte designed costumes for George White's "Scandals" as well as 
the Folies, Dutch-born actress Mata Hari, who was better known as a German spy, 
American-in-Paris Josephine Baker, Sarah Bernhardt, Isadora Duncan, Joan 
Crawford and Anna Pavlova. 
Erte's personal fashion choices leaned toward lavender and mauve. When he first 
appeared in Los Angeles in 1925, he wore a "boudoir costume" of gray crepe de 
Chine pajamas with rose borders and a gray and fuchsia crepe dressing gown. For 
his first day at MGM, he chose lilac shoes. 
At a gallery opening here in 1979, he wore a lilac shirt and tie, a mauve-toned 
suit and white snakeskin shoes and belt. "I want to be an individual always," 
he said. 
His vigorous good health and longevity were almost as celebrated as his 
legendary productivity. 
"I have been very fortunate," he summed up his career and life in a Times 
interview during a series of parties for his 90th birthday, which included a 
retrospective exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution. 
As a nonagenarian, he continued to work daily in his Paris apartment with its 
view of the Eiffel Tower, surrounded by a bevy of Burmese cats and turtledoves 
and the strains of Beethoven and Schubert. He concentrated in his later years 
on jewelry, clothes and sculptures. Retirement, he said, would kill him. 
"So many artists have to wait until they are dead before they can enjoy the 
fruits of their labors," he told The Times seven years ago. "I have been so 
fortunate all my life, and I am so grateful to the people who have appreciated 
my work." 
