ISRAEL'S PRESIDENT HERZOG RETURNS TO AIRWAVES; 
BROADCASTING: HIS RADIO REPORTS DURING THE 1967 WAR MADE HIM A HERO. A RECENT 
ADDRESS ABOUT CURRENT SECULAR-RELIGIOUS STRIFE CAUSED A SENSATION. 
Israeli President Chaim Herzog, whose radio reports during the 1967 Middle East 
War gripped his countrymen, has returned to his hobby of broadcasting to 
enliven his largely ceremonial duties. 
On the last Thursday of each month Herzog sits at his desk in his official 
residence in Jerusalem and tapes an address to the nation, an Israeli version 
of the fireside chats popularized by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 
1930s. 
"I am completely at home with the microphone," said Herzog, 71, a former 
British and Israeli military officer, U.N. ambassador, Labor Party legislator, 
lawyer and historian. 
His radio reports in 1967 made him a civilian war hero in Israel's six-day 
victory over Egypt, Syria and Jordan. 
"I didn't realize it at the time, but I had a listener rating of over 90%," the 
Irish-born Herzog, president since 1983, said after taping an address last 
month. 
 The 20-minute speech, broadcast the next day, caused a minor sensation. 
Descending from the perch of presidential neutrality, Herzog fueled a raging 
debate between Israel's secular majority and the religious minority that holds 
the balance of power in a fractured Parliament. 
He hailed the contribution to Israel of kibbutzniks -- members of collective 
settlements and international symbols of the country's pioneer spirit -- and 
blasted those who dare to defame them. 
A few days earlier, politically influential Rabbi Eliezer Schach had questioned 
the Jewishness of the non-observant kibbutzniks, a pillar of support for 
Herzog's Labor Party. 
"Does the nation know how much it owes this group of people?" Herzog asked 
listeners in Hebrew that still lilts with an Irish accent. "Do (they) not 
deserve that we stand by their graves and ask their forgiveness?" 
He complained about the besmirching of secular leaders by "those (who) have 
never heard the din of battle," a dig at Orthodox Jews exempted from army 
service to pursue religious studies. 
The Israeli media played excerpts of the broadcast for days, prompting the 
president's office to deny that Herzog -- whose father was the first chief 
rabbi both of Ireland and of Israel -- had explicitly or implicitly criticized 
Schach. 
But the message in the radio address was unmistakable. 
Two religious parliamentarians accused him of abusing his neutral post and 
called on him to resign. But the overwhelming public response was positive, 
presidential aides and Israel Radio director Amnon Nadav said. 
Herzog's career is crammed with achievement, but he is seen at times as 
patrician and remote from the concerns of the common Israeli. 
His office, graced with portraits of Britain's Queen Elizabeth and Prince 
Philip and pictures of him meeting world leaders, may reinforce this image in a 
down-to-earth country. 
While Israel's liberal Establishment rallied behind his broadcast and backed 
his pleas for electoral reform to reduce the power of minor parties, it has at 
times been disenchanted with Herzog, who was elected by Parliament. 
His fondness for broadcasting does not stretch to affection for the news media, 
which he says have tarnished Israel's image. 
Succeeding the popular Yitzhak Navon, who turned the presidency into a 
"national conscience," Herzog urged Israelis to preserve democracy and fight 
racism between Arabs and Jews. 
But critics say the president, a former head of army intelligence and military 
governor of the occupied West Bank, has been soft on civil rights. 
In 1986 he pardoned the head of the Shin Bet security service and three aides 
involved in killing two captured Arab bus hijackers and a subsequent cover-up. 
He also made three controversial decisions to commute prison sentences of 
far-right Jewish gunmen convicted of killing Palestinians. The third such 
gesture of clemency was announced last year at the height of Jewish vigilante 
attacks on Arabs. 
Before becoming president, Herzog hosted a number of shows for Israeli radio 
stations and was a frequent contributor to the British Broadcasting Corp. in 
the late 1970s with a quarterly "Letter from Israel." 
Israel Radio asked him more than a year ago to start broadcasting again, but he 
said he was reluctant at first because he did not want to intervene in politics 
during an election period. 
