BUCS' ANDERSON OFFER TOO LITTLE FOR CHARGERS 
The Chargers received and rejected a trade offer from the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 
for running back Gary Anderson Tuesday, Charger General Manager Bobby Beathard 
said. 
"They made an offer to show they were sincerely interested," Beathard said. 
Beathard would not say what it included but did say Tampa Bay did not offer its 
second-round pick in this year's NFL draft, the 30th overall. Beathard said the 
team is asking for a second-round choice this year as a minimum part of a deal 
for Anderson. 
"We've given Tampa an idea of what we need, and so far they have not come back 
and offered that," Beathard said. "It might just be a waiting game, or whether 
they're serious we don't know." 
Beathard said Dallas and Seattle had also talked to him about Anderson. 
Beathard said the Cowboys' interest might be heightened because Anderson played 
at Arkansas, the same school at which Cowboy owner Jerry Jones and Coach Jimmy 
Johnson were teammates. 
The Cowboys also have picks available to trade, five choices in the first three 
rounds. 
But John Wooten, Dallas director of pro personnel, said this week that he did 
not think the Cowboys would want to trade for Anderson. 
"We're going with younger players," Wooten said. "I don't think we'd be 
interested in a player of his age (Anderson turns 29 today)." 
And so far, Beathard said, Tampa Bay is the only team to make an offer. 
"We're trying to make it a reasonable offer," Beathard said. "We're not going 
to ask for something where a deal can't be made. We don't want to do that. The 
best interest of the Chargers is that Gary Anderson plays football, and we get 
what's fair. 
"I don't think that any team that has talked to us so far has felt our request 
has been unreasonable." 
Anderson, the team's most valuable player in 1988, sat out last season in a 
contract dispute. The Chargers would have to sign him before trading him. 
Beathard said that the contract would have to be negotiated with the other team 
in conjunction with Anderson's agent, Peter Johnson of Cleveland. 
Beathard said the Chargers would like to trade Anderson before the first round 
of the draft Sunday but said a trade could still be sought after the draft. 
Beathard said the chances of Anderson playing for the Chargers in 1990 were 
"slim" but that it was not impossible. 
