CHATSWORTH GROUP AIMS TO BLOCK NEW COURTHOUSE 
At age 75, Harry Godley easily gets breathless when he walks, but he went 
door-to-door in his Chatsworth neighborhood Saturday gathering signatures of 
people who, like him, want to block construction of a proposed county 
courthouse. 
Godley and about 20 other opponents wanted people living in the area to sign 
1,000 copies of a letter to be sent to county Supervisor Mike Antonovich, 
asking him to vote against building the courthouse at the corner of Plummer 
Street and Winnetka Avenue. The group will be gathering signatures through 
Monday in a 1-mile-square area near the site. 
The county plans to build a municipal courthouse to serve the West Valley and 
has been looking at about four sites, including a 9-acre lot at Plummer Street 
and Winnetka Avenue. 
The proposed Chatsworth location has raised the ire of some residents. They say 
they don't object to the courthouse but believe it should not be built close to 
a residential area. They fear a courthouse will increase noise and traffic in 
their quiet neighborhood. 
Residents living on Oakdale Avenue near the proposed site said they are 
disappointed that Antonovich has not announced his stand on the issue but hope 
the deluge of letters will swing the supervisor to their side. 
"I think he ought to come out and make some sort of statement," said Godley, 
chairman of the Chatsworth Homeowners Committee, which represents an area that 
includes 2,000 homes. 
Jeff Dorsey, justice deputy for Antonovich, said the supervisor cannot announce 
his position until Los Angeles Municipal Court officials select a site. Even if 
Antonovich opposed the site, Dorsey said, opponents of it would have to win 
over a majority of the five supervisors. 
The deputy said the county views the Chatsworth lot as an "excellent site" and 
said residents have pictured the worst. 
"They have this mythology in their heads that it's going to bring the hardened 
criminals to the area," he said. Dorsey said the courthouse would be a 
convenience to West Valley residents. "It's for your benefit," he said. 
"Instead of going miles away to pay a traffic ticket" at courthouses in Van 
Nuys or San Fernando, tickets could be paid nearby. 
The proposed municipal courthouse would have 18 courtrooms where traffic and 
small claims cases would be heard, and preliminary hearings and arraignments 
would be held for felonies ranging from drug possession to murder. 
The volunteers gathering signatures were also asking people to sign a petition 
that would only be submitted to Antonovich if the Plummer Avenue site is 
formally selected and Antonovich comes out in favor of it. 
Most of the homeowners Godley approached Saturday signed a letter. 
Residents said they fear court visitors will park on their streets rather than 
paying to park near the courthouse. They also anticipate a decline in the value 
of their homes and dread the possibility of those accused of crimes escaping 
the courthouse. 
In addition, they fear the courthouse will be expanded beyond 18 courtrooms, 
although county officials have assured them no expansion is planned. 
One resident who has had to pay parking tickets at other courthouses said he 
would be glad to have a courthouse built closer to home. 
"If you get a ticket out here, it's a big hassle going to San Fernando," said 
Matt McLincha, who said he has waited as long as seven hours for a case to be 
heard. 
