NONFICTION IN BRIEF 
THE WANT MAKERS The World of Advertising: How They Make You Buy by Eric Clark 
(Viking: $19.95; 416 pp.) 
 We can believe British journalist Eric Clark when he claims to be 
"pro-advertising"; his interest in the trade, after all, was sparked when he 
helped launch a magazine for the industry. Like so many authors who have 
tackled this subject before, however, Clark ends up assuming a highly critical 
tone. This is, no doubt, unavoidable, for the basic premise of advertising -- 
evading our intellect (which might remind us that all soap is the same) in 
order to play upon subconscious desires (thus convincing us that the right kind 
of soap will purify us like an Irish spring) -- seems to offend our self-image 
as rational thinkers. 
In public, of course, advertisers insist that spots simply provide consumers 
with information. Clark's absorbing investigation, however, reveals that the 
reality is fundamentally different. American ad expenditures, for one, have 
soared so dramatically in the past two decades (General Motors and Ford spent 
nearly $1.4 billion each in their 1985 campaigns) that only the very largest 
corporations can afford to "inform." Thus our "free" market is often governed 
less by the survival of the fittest products than by the strategies of the 
richest companies. 
Straightforward information is also becoming harder to find as social 
scientists, Madison Avenue's new cognoscenti, probe "the inner world of 
imagination, private language and play" in order to wage increasingly 
sophisticated subliminal campaigns. In a play-acting research experiment, for 
example, one housewife approaches another, who is seated, only to be met with 
protests. "Go away, you rotter. You'll scratch me, upset me . . . Oooo! Ugh! 
It's like rape!" When a third housewife approaches, however, the seated woman 
says, "I want you. Mmm, lovely. Smooth me. Caress me." The seated woman, we 
learn, is playing a kitchen sink; the object of her lust is a new brand of 
kitchen cleaner. 
All of this is certainly as disturbing as it is amusing, of course, especially 
when one ponders the fact that these subliminal appeals are increasingly being 
used to sell presidents as well as soap. Unfortunately, though, Clark's 
account, while engaging, fails to break new ground. He sounds familiar 
warnings, but doesn't grapple with the more difficult issues of industry reform 
(Should we require independent consumers' unions to conduct the product 
comparisons quoted on TV?) or study advertising's changing role in culture. 
Many younger Americans, for example, have come to see TV's new, avant-garde 
spots as dramas in themselves, leading some ad directors to claim that their 
work is more expressive than older, now-floundering styles of visual art. 
