INS CHIEF SEEKS BETTER VERIFICATION METHODS; 
IMMIGRATION: A MUCH-DEBATED PHONE SYSTEM IN WHICH EMPLOYERS WOULD CHECK 
DOCUMENTS LIKE THEY DO CREDIT CARDS IS ONE IDEA BEING CONSIDERED. 
U. S. Immigration and Naturalization Service Commissioner Gene McNary said 
Wednesday that he favors reforms -- perhaps even a telephone verification 
system -- to close documentation loopholes that have allowed illegal immigrants 
to continue to find jobs in the United States by using phony paper work. 
Such new procedures, McNary said, could provide prospective employers with an 
efficient means of verifying documents demonstrating a person's eligibility to 
work in the United States, thus achieving two goals: reducing the job market 
for illegal immigrants and cutting down on discrimination against 
foreign-looking job-seekers. 
"What we'd like to do is improve the verification system," he said during his 
first official visit to the U. S.-Mexico border zone in San Diego. 
However, McNary, speaking from atop the southern levee of the Tijuana River, a 
major crossing area for the undocumented, said he is categorically opposed to 
any effort to create a national identification card -- a document that is 
anathema to civil libertarians and others who see it as an Orwellian intrusion 
into individual privacy. 
"I don't and never have" supported a national ID card, said McNary, apparently 
reflecting the official position of the Bush Administration. 
Asked about alternate proposals, McNary said, "It might just take a phone 
call." 
He was referring to a projected telephone verification system -- similar to 
that used for credit cards -- that would allow employers to dial a number and 
quickly assess whether the paper work presented by a job applicant is forged or 
authentic. It is among the most popular of the ideas for improving the methods 
to root out the phony documents that are now in wide circulation. 
McNary did not fully back the telephone verification procedure, but he 
indicated that it is one alternative being seriously studied by authorities 
seeking to reduce the job market for the undocumented. It was the only 
alternative he mentioned during a news conference at the border, aside from a 
$1-million advertising campaign aimed at encouraging employers not to hire 
illegal aliens. 
McNary's comments were the strongest to date on the telephone verification 
concept, said Verne Jervis, the commissioner's chief spokesman. 
However, a phone verification system is far from becoming reality, and many 
questions remain about how it would be put in place and how effective it would 
be. A central issue is whether such verifications would be mandatory for all 
employers -- something that many consider unlikely because of the burden to the 
employers and the expense of setting up such a system -- or whether employers 
could simply use the system as an option. 
Many observers have already said that such a system is doomed to failure, 
particularly if it is a voluntary process dependent on the good faith of 
employers who benefit from undocumented labor. 
"It doesn't sound like a cure-all to me," said Kitty Calavita, assistant 
professor of social ecology at University of California, Irvine, who has 
conducted extensive studies on the relationship between employers and 
immigrants. "For a vast number of employers in this area, it's just not in 
their interest to check." 
The document verification issue has been among the thorniest facing lawmakers 
since Congress began debating the reform of immigration laws early in the 
1980s. The debate intensified in 1986 with the passage of the Immigration 
Reform and Control Act, which, for the first time, made it a federal crime for 
employers to hire undocumented workers. However, the law established what many 
consider an inadequate, cumbersome and loophole-ridden verification system that 
officials concede has supercharged what was already a booming market for false 
documents. 
Several studies have shown that undocumented immigrants have managed to easily 
bypass the requirements by showing forged identification documents to 
prospective employers. 
Most employers must now review a range of up to 17 documents -- from driver's 
licenses to passports to visas -- to verify eligibility for jobs in the United 
States. But there is a major loophole: Employers are not required to check the 
authenticity of the submitted paper work, beyond a cursory inspection for 
obvious forgery or other irregularities. 
Last month, the General Accounting Office, Congress' investigative arm, charged 
that the process has led to "widespread discrimination" against legal 
residents, particularly those who look foreign. Many employers are afraid to 
hire such applicants, the study found. 
A phone verification system, proponents say, would resolve matters quickly by 
allowing employers to dial a toll-free number, punch in identification codes 
and receive a timely answer about whether the documents submitted by the 
applicant were real and current. 
McNary, who has been the nation's top immigration officer since October, said 
the technology should not be a problem, but others have questioned the 
effectiveness of such a system. For one thing, a prospective employee may 
present a document that is indeed a valid one, but that could belong to someone 
else. Many undocumented job-seekers borrow legitimate documents or purchase 
them on the black market, studies have shown. 
