CHRYSLER TOPS RIVALS WITH INTEREST-FREE LOANS 
Chrysler Corp. on Monday began offering interest-free, two-year loans on all of 
its cars and some light trucks, in an escalation of the latest round of buyer 
incentives from the auto makers. 
The move came after Ford Motor Co. dropped its interest rate for 24-month loans 
to 2.9% last Wednesday. General Motors Corp. followed that lead a day later. 
"Let's put an end to one-upmanship right now," said Bennett Bidwell, chairman 
of Chrysler Motors Corp., the company's car-making arm. 
Interest-free automobile financing was last offered in September, 1986, by 
American Motors Corp., which Chrysler bought less than a year later. 
In addition to interest-free financing on two-year notes, Chrysler matched Ford 
and GM programs offering 5.9% for three-year loans and 6.9% for four-year 
terms. Chrysler's 10.9% interest for five-year loans is 1 percentage point more 
than Ford's and GM's deals. 
The auto makers also increased their cash rebates, which vary from vehicle to 
vehicle. 
Chrysler's program runs indefinitely. Ford's expires May 31 and GM's runs out 
June 5. 
Chrysler's plan includes all the car lines it sells, and all but one of its 
pickup trucks, a full-size diesel-powered vehicle. About half of the Jeep 
models qualify, but some of the most popular models don't. 
The incentive war comes on the heels of unexpectedly low early 1989 sales and 
inventories that have been causing some worry, but no panic, among auto makers. 
Each of the Big Three auto makers set ambitious production schedules for the 
first few months of this year, and there are no large-scale moves to curtail 
them yet. 
On Monday, Bidwell said a driving force in slashing financing rates and 
increasing rebates was to help the No. 3 auto maker avoid cutting production. 
Other reasons included pressure by the Ford and GM moves and, Bidwell said, "We 
believe Americans want to buy cars and buy cars right now." 
Car and light truck sales through the first 80 days of 1989 have been running 
5.4% behind the same period last year, the second-best in the industry's 
history. Typically, March and April are strong sales months as Americans look 
forward to summer vacations and weekend driving trips. 
Sales figures for the first quarter of the year are due out today. 
Incentives, whether rebates or low-interest financing, cut directly into auto 
makers' profits. On Wednesday, Bidwell acknowledged that the corporation 
expected its earnings for the first half of the year to be lower than last 
year, reflecting higher incentive costs. 
Incentives were less costly than cutting production, he said. 
"In the last half of the year, I think (earnings) will start going up," Bidwell 
said. 
Interest-free financing affects only two-year loans, which in the past have 
made up about 12% of Chrysler Credit Corp.'s business. Jerry Farrell, president 
of the loan-making company, said he expected that percentage to double with the 
new program. 
He also said the 6.9% interest rate for 48-month loans, down from 8.9% in 
Chrysler's previous incentive program, will attract buyers who may have been 
considering five-year notes. 
Chrysler, unlike Ford and GM, has not seen a growing number of repossessions 
and loan defaults in the five-year loan category, which makes up about 60% of 
the company's vehicle-loan business. 
The interest-free loan deal was well received by dealers the corporation talked 
with during the weekend, said Tom Pappert, vice president for sales at Chrysler 
Motors. 
The program is likely to face criticism from Ron Tonkin, president of the 
National Automobile Dealers Assn. Late last week, after Ford and GM announced 
their new incentive programs, Tonkin called the incentive war a "circus." 
