OFFICIALS WILL SEEK TO ALLAY FEARS OF RESIDENTS NEAR ESCAPE-PRONE JAIL; 
SECURITY: TWENTY-EIGHT INMATES HAVE BROKEN OUT OF COUNTY FACILITY IN CHULA 
VISTA SINCE DECEMBER. 
County Supervisor Brian Bilbray and Asst. County Sheriff Ken Wigginton will 
meet Monday with Chula Vista residents to explain how planned security 
improvements will reduce breakouts from the escape-prone county jail in Chula 
Vista. 
Since December, 28 inmates have escaped in three separate breakouts. The most 
recent occurred shortly before 9 p.m. Tuesday, when eight prisoners used a 
hacksaw to cut through the steel bars that cover jail windows. The inmates used 
a string of bedsheets to lower themselves 35 feet to the ground. Seven of the 
eight prisoners remained at large Thursday, a Sheriff's Department spokesman 
said. 
The latest escape came just a month after 13 prisoners used similar tools to 
force their way out of the jail at 500 3rd Avenue. After that breakout, the 
county spent $103,000 to bolster security. In all, $251,000 in security-related 
improvements are being implemented. 
Monday's meeting is aimed at calming angry Chula Vista residents who are 
demanding explanations. The jail is in a mixed commercial and residential 
neighborhood. 
The Chula Vista City Council will meet Monday night to discuss whether it 
should act to protect its residents from escapes, Mayor Greg Cox said Thursday. 
Although two armed private security guards are now patrolling the jail's 
perimeter, Cox said he would feel "more comfortable if, in fact, there were 
deputy sheriffs or Chula Vista police" on patrol instead. 
"The county has a credibility problem," acknowledged John Woodard, Bilbray's 
chief of staff. "We definitely have a problem right now." He said residents 
"have a right to hear what the county is going to do to improve the situation." 
At Monday's 7 p.m. meeting at Chula Vista City Hall, Bilbray and Wigginton will 
be joined by Sheriff's Capt. Chuck Wood, commander of the Chula Vista jail, and 
Robert Griego, the county's deputy chief administrative officer. 
In a memo delivered to county officials Thursday, Wood was quoted as describing 
the recent escape as "no one's fault. . . . The design of the building is 
poor." Griego said Thursday that Wood was referring to severe crowding at the 
jail. 
"The problem is that there are too many inmates," Griego said. "The facility is 
rated for a lower capacity, and, with the sheriff's staffing levels, it's 
difficult to keep an eye on all parts." More than 750 inmates were being held 
Monday at the jail that was designed to hold fewer than 200. 
"Clearly we've got a situation that is just deplorable," Cox said. "We've got a 
facility with (room) for 192 inmates and, on the night of the breakout, I was 
told there were more than 725 people" incarcerated. 
Griego, who toured the facility on Wednesday, said that the $251,000 in 
security improvements laid out last month by county inspectors and the 
Sheriff's Department will "harden" the jail's security. 
The first of those improvements, including motion sensors and bars on some 
windows, have been completed, Griego said. During coming weeks, crews will 
build a fence at the top of a moat that surrounds the building and install more 
motion detectors, closed-circuit television cameras and other electronic gear 
designed to alert guards to escape attempts. 
However, some security measures might not be completed until November "because, 
legally, some of them have to go out for bidding," Woodward said. But he said 
other improvements are being speeded up. 
Griego, who will need supervisorial approval to continue with the improvements, 
said his office will authorize improvements before the supervisors meet April 
17. 
"I'm ordering the designs, which would normally have to go to board for 
approval," Griego said. "In a public emergency, we have that authority." 
In March, the county authorized the jail to hire a private security guard, who 
has patrolled the building's perimeter. That guard detail was doubled after the 
recent escape, and both guards are now authorized to carry pistols, Griego 
said. 
County authorities believe the inmates who escaped Tuesday used a smuggled 
hacksaw blade to cut through bars on the jail's windows. But the contraband did 
not pass through day-room windows at the jail, as has occurred in the past, 
because the county has installed bars on those window, Griego said. 
Motion detectors, which are now in place on first floor windows, are being 
added to all windows, Griego said. The electronics are supposed to sound an 
alarm when "there's any movement in the window," Griego said. "It will pick up 
sawing, movement, any vibration." 
The external security devices are needed because, if inmates are "going to get 
that kind of equipment in there, and they're given enough time, they're going 
to be able to saw through any kind of metal," Griego said. "All we can do is 
get the technology outside to help fill in personnel" gaps inside. 
