EXCERPTS FROM DEBATE BETWEEN 2 DEMOCRATS 
Following are excerpts from Sunday's Democratic gubernatorial debate between 
former San Francisco Mayor Dianne Feinstein and Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp: 
Malathion spraying 
Feinstein: "There are no circumstances under which I would resume urban 
(aerial) spraying. . . . When you had a reported Medfly, you'd go into an area, 
you'd ground strip, you'd remove the fruit. If the fruit is contaminated, you'd 
spray in that immediate area. . . . "You would do it by ground with the 
knowledge and permission of the property owner rather than through this massive 
invasion of spraying like 'Apocalypse Now,' which I think is very bothersome to 
people." 
Van de Kamp: "I'm against malathion spraying. I think we should stop it and if 
I'm elected it will be stopped. But I was very interested in something Mrs. 
Feinstein said the other day, and it gets to snooping. She suggested we inspect 
first-class mail for Medflies. Tell me that you're against that." 
Reducing auto insurance rates 
Van de Kamp: "My opponent and I disagree with respect as to how to go about 
that. She's in favor of no-fault. She's in favor of giving the insurance 
industry antitrust exemptions which would be expanded. . . . I want to see the 
new insurance commissioner get off to a good start, I want to see rate 
rollbacks, I want to see affordable insurance in California, I want to see the 
insurance companies brought to bear in a decent regulatory structure." 
Feinstein: ". . . I am not wed to no-fault. What I am wed to is a rate 
rollback, what I am wed to is providing insurance for Californians, one-third 
of whom in this basin have no insurance and are driving criminally." 
Their family wealth 
Van de Kamp: "Our family's been lucky, in fact our family in some ways in the 
last number of years has been representative of the American dream. . . . And 
I've stayed in public service all my life, one of the reasons because I have a 
deep dedication to the people of this state. . . . My family has a trust fund 
that's been set up for my mother. I've never drawn a dime out of that trust 
fund." 
Feinstein: "My husband, incidentally, is totally self-made, he inherited no 
funds, he made what he had himself and that in a sense is the American dream 
and I'm proud of it." 
Abortion counseling 
Van de Kamp: "For my own daughter? I'm sure I'd have a heart-to-heart with her 
and talk about the future of that potential life. . . . I'd counsel her to 
carry the child. . . . If another person who was distant from me came to me . . 
. I feel less comfortable making the kinds of arguments that I would to my own 
child." 
Feinstein: "Not too long ago I went to watch an Operation Rescue operation at a 
health clinic. And I watched women absolutely humiliated who couldn't get 
through the line to get into a doctor's office." 
State budget 
Van de Kamp: "The one thing that's clear tonight is Mrs. Feinstein would put 
the cost-of-living adjustments on the table for the needy, blind and the 
disabled. . . . I will not. And I will balance the budget through a series of 
cuts and revenue enhancements, taxes if you will, in some areas that will make 
sure we have a balanced budget." 
Feinstein: " . . . As I said before, I think everything goes on the table. I 
think you protect the poor, the needy, the disabled in the negotiations once 
everything is on the table. . . . We have to look at the traditional ways, 
freezing things like travel, new cars, looking to see what can be eliminated." 
Death penalty 
Feinstein: "I don't ever see you being vigorous in terms of carrying out that 
law. . . . I think the thing that I have a problem with is if you don't believe 
in (the death penalty) and the governor has broad clemency powers, why wouldn't 
you just commute every single case?" 
Van de Kamp: "With respect to the question of clemency, I've said repeatedly 
that the death penalty is a settled issue. . . . The death penalty, I believe, 
is here to stay for maybe upwards of the next 10 years." 
Opponent's weaknesses 
Van de Kamp: " . . . Managerial skill, understanding of the state budget 
situation, obviously even tonight we've found that she is still pretty weak, 
she doesn't have a program but she speaks in some generalities and some numbers 
that frankly are pretty far off base. . . ." 
Feinstein: " . . . John, you demean your opponent and puff yourself up. The 
fact is you've never really put together a budget, you've never really grappled 
with a shortfall. I have -- nine years in a row. . . . Yet you're so willing to 
sit back and criticize me. You know, John Van de Kamp, the D word is for 
distortion." 
Closing lines 
Feinstein: "I think in this election you have a choice between a lawyer and 
someone who wants to be a leader. I want to represent women. I want to open the 
door. I want to see that minorities take their place in this society in a 
meaningful way." 
Van de Kamp: "I'm not the style candidate in this race. In endorsing me, the 
Sacramento Bee called me flagrantly unexciting. But if I'm governor, I pledge 
to you the most exciting period in California history." 
