JUDGE SLAPS GABOR WITH EXTRA HOURS OF SERVICE 
An angry Beverly Hills Municipal Court judge ordered Zsa Zsa Gabor to perform 
60 extra hours of community service Tuesday, saying fund raising at her Bel-Air 
mansion was not the way to serve time for slapping a policeman. 
"If there is any violation of probation, County Jail will be the sanction," 
Municipal Judge Charles Rubin warned. 
He asked Gabor if she accepted his decision. 
"Yes, what can I do?" Gabor said. 
"You could go to jail. Do you want that?" the judge shot back. 
"It's outrageous," the former Hungarian beauty queen later told about 80 
reporters. 
Gabor, 72, was sentenced last year to 120 hours of community service on her 
conviction of slapping a Beverly Hills motorcycle policeman who stopped her 
Rolls-Royce last June for expired registration tags. 
Rubin originally ordered her to do the service at the Lower Income Elderly 
United Community Assistance Program in Venice, with the time to be completed by 
March 30. 
Rubin ordered Tuesday's hearing after he received a sparse account from the 
shelter's executive director, Vera Davis, about how Gabor spent her time. 
Davis said Gabor spent about 50 hours at the shelter and the rest of the time 
working from her Bel-Air mansion, organiz ing a June 8 fund-raiser for the 
shelter. 
"It's clear to me the defendant had a rather lax attitude about it," Rubin 
said. 
"(It) means nothing to Miss Gabor, buying community service hours. She is a 
wealthy person," Rubin said after meeting with Gabor and her attorney, Harrison 
Bull, for 3 1/2 hours. "The primary motive was Miss Gabor's promotion, and not 
fund raising. 
"I repeated numerous times (at the original sentencing) that she perform 
community service at the center." 
Gabor later told reporters: "I served food. Why do I have to promote myself? 
I'm so damned famous it's sickening." 
Rubin gave Gabor credit for 34 1/2 hours of community service time from her 
120-hour sentence. He ordered her to serve the remaining 85 1/2 hours, plus 60 
penalty hours. 
"Miss Gabor must now document her community service time and there will be 
random, in-person verification," the judge said. 
The remaining 145 1/2 hours must be completed by Sept. 28 and the hours will be 
served at several agencies. 
"You may not do any fund raising" as a part of the community service, the judge 
ordered. 
"I don't have any qualms with Miss Gabor's assistance and fund raising," said 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Elden Fox, but "there is an aspect of humility that goes 
along with this." 
He said community service usually includes handling telephones or serving food. 
