DIAPERS DON'T BAR THE DOOR TO DIPLOMAS; 
DROPOUTS: TEEN-AGE MOTHERS BRING THEIR BABIES TO CLASS WHILE THEY FINISH HIGH 
SCHOOL AND STUDY PARENTHOOD. YOUTHFUL FATHERS ARE WELCOME TOO. 
The subjects were diaper rash and American geography. 
The setting: Room 9 at Bassett Adult School, where baby bottles and health 
posters get equal billing with textbooks and maps. 
The program, called Genesis, was started in September to provide a transitional 
classroom setting where pregnant girls and adolescent mothers and fathers could 
finish high school. The state Department of Education pays the school $6,000 a 
year for each student. The 18 students bring their babies with them to morning 
classes in "parenting and life skills" and independent study of standard high 
school subjects in the afternoon. No one has dropped out, and five of the 
students are to get diplomas next month. 
"I want to go to college and support myself," said Shirley Miranda, 17, who 
will graduate in June. 
"With programs like this, there is just no excuse not to continue school," 
added Miranda, who has a 2-year-old son. 
Genesis is one of five such programs in the San Gabriel Valley, which had an 
estimated 18,000 teen-age mothers at the time of a 1986 survey conducted by 
Planned Parenthood. 
"Since that study, there has probably been an increase of 20% or 30%," said Pam 
Garcia, education director of the Pasadena branch of Planned Parenthood. 
About 20% of girls who get pregnant drop out of high school, Garcia said. 
"Usually, students who find out they're pregnant, or after they start showing, 
drop out of school because they feel awkward," said Vicky Rossier, one of the 
teachers in the Genesis program. "While the students in the regular school 
worry about parties and football games, these girls have to worry about diapers 
and midnight feedings. It's nice to have others who share these same 
responsibilities." 
Most of the Genesis students attended Bassett High School. A few had gone to 
West Covina High, which does not offer a program for mothers, or to Covina 
High, whose program is for mothers-to-be only. 
For the moment, the Genesis program has only female participants. "We really 
didn't target teen fathers this year," Rossier said, "but that's definitely 
something for the future. A coeducational type of program would be great. It 
would balance the responsibility between the father and the mother." 
The adult school had previously offered a "Parent Links" program, in which 
teen-age mothers could take a one-hour parenthood class in an otherwise 
standard high school curriculum. 
The Genesis program, which includes child care next to the classroom, is more 
practical, students and administrators said. 
"This program is a lot better," Miranda said. "It allows you to be with your 
child more." 
Rita Laroux, Bassett Adult School principal, added: "With this program, the 
students can bond with their children, get a lot of support from each other and 
have a curriculum that is tailored to their particular needs." 
One of the main issues discussed in class is sexual responsibility. 
"There are students here who wanted to get pregnant," said Susan Briscoe, who 
teaches the morning sessions. "They were in unhappy situations and thought that 
a baby would give them unconditional love. What they didn't think about was the 
24-hour responsibility that comes with having a baby." 
Antoinette Ballesteros, 16, said she and her boyfriend decided to have a baby 
in order to cement their relationship. 
"He was going to move away with his parents, so we thought a baby would bring 
us closer and keep us together," Ballesteros said. "We were supposed to move in 
with his parents and everything was going to work out fine, but all our plans 
backfired." 
Her boyfriend moved away after all, she said. Her daughter, Ashley, is a year 
old. 
Ballesteros said that she loves Ashley and doesn't regret having her but that 
she now believes she should have waited until after high school graduation to 
become a mother. 
Chris Ballesteros, Antoinette's mother, said she wishes she had been more 
candid with her daughter about sex and relationships. "Things have been real 
hard for her," she said. "She had to grow up so fast and take on a lot of 
responsibility. . . . You just can't help but blame yourself and think of all 
the things you should have done. 
"I am a lot more open with my other daughter now," she continued. "What we all 
have to realize is that things are so different now. When I was growing up, you 
waited until you were married . . . but we are living in a whole new world." 
Rossier said another problem among students is ignorance about contraception. 
"We have girls here who have had babies, but they don't fully understand how a 
baby is conceived. There are still girls out there with the mentality that 'It 
won't happen to me' or that you can't get pregnant your first time," she said. 
Garcia of Planned Parenthood said parents and teachers need to do more to 
inform teen-agers about sex. "We have to educate parents and schools to talk 
openly about sex," Garcia said. "We have to teach these kids that sex isn't 
free, that there is a price to be paid. 
"The biggest problem is that we still don't feel comfortable talking to our 
kids about sex." 
Garcia said that mothers in their teens are in danger of becoming pregnant 
again but that programs such as Genesis can help prevent this. 
Rossier agreed. "We see the changes in the students. They have more 
self-confidence, they have more hope for the future, they are more 
goal-oriented. They are much more responsible." 
Some of the students have spoken to classes at local junior high schools about 
the realities of pregnancy and parenthood. 
"I wouldn't want my daughter to have a baby when she is a teen-ager," 
Antoinette Ballesteros said. "I am going to be very open with her. I don't want 
her to be afraid to talk to me about sex or anything else." 
