CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS PROPOSITIONS 118, 119; 
VOTERS COULD RADICALLY ALTER POLITICAL REMAPPING 
Imagine baseball with five bases instead of four. Football with a field only 50 
yards long. Basketball with an extra hoop at center court. 
Changes no less fundamental could be in store for the rules that help determine 
who represents California voters in the Legislature and Congress. 
Two initiatives on the June 5 ballot -- Propositions 118 and 119 -- would 
transform the way district lines are drawn for elections to the state Assembly 
and Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives. If approved by voters, either 
measure could lead to a new balance of power in the Legislature and the 
California delegation in Washington. 
Both initiatives take aim at redistricting, a process now the private province 
of state lawmakers. Under current law, their power to redraw district lines 
every 10 years is checked only by a brief set of general guidelines in the 
state Constitution and the potential veto of the governor. 
Armed with high-powered computers and sophisticated analyses of voting 
patterns, a party that controls the Legislature and the governor's office, as 
the Democrats did in 1981, can draw lines that solidify its power far into the 
next decade. The process often produces odd-looking, serpentine districts as 
the line-drawers scoop in desired neighborhoods to corral clusters of 
like-minded voters. 
But Propositions 118 and 119 would change all that, and the thought has 
Democrats in a tizzy. They charge that both initiatives are thinly veiled 
Republican power grabs. What's more, Democratic leaders claim, the measures 
would unseat minority and women legislators, who only recently have begun to 
make gains after decades of being shut out of office. 
"It is an insidious plan designed to move . . . power, and it is disguised as 
good government," Democratic Assembly Speaker Willie Brown of San Francisco 
said of the campaign for the two initiatives. 
Republicans and some nonpartisan groups tell a different story. They say 
Democrats have rigged the electoral process to keep incumbents in office; as 
proof, they note that only nine incumbents have been defeated in California's 
580 legislative and congressional elections since 1982. A fairer system, they 
maintain, would probably result not only in more Republican officeholders, but 
more women and minorities as well. 
"Our legislators are holding us hostage," said Ellen Elliott, a leader of the 
League of Women Voters, which supports Proposition 119. "We have legislators 
who are less responsive to voters and less focused on resolving major issues, 
because they know they have a very good chance of being reelected, regardless 
of how ineffective they may be." 
Both initiatives would place detailed new restrictions on the way district 
lines are drawn. For instance, they would prohibit districts from jumping 
certain county boundaries and limit the number of times that cities and 
counties could be divided. Both measures also include provisions designed to 
make districts more compact and competitive. 
From there, the two proposals diverge. 
Proposition 118 leaves redistricting in the hands of legislative negotiators, 
but requires that any plan receive two-thirds of the votes in each house, the 
governor's signature and the approval of state voters. The measure also sets a 
deadline for the plans to be in place -- July 15 in the year after the census 
-- and requires that the proposals and maps be made public before they are 
approved. If the deadline for approval is missed, the state Supreme Court would 
handle redistricting. 
Proposition 119 is more sweeping. It would create an independent 12-member 
commission to choose new districts from proposals submitted by registered 
voters. Ultimately, the commission, whose members would be appointed by a panel 
of retired appellate court judges, could amend the plans it received and thus 
draw the lines itself. The Legislature would have no say in the matter. 
If both measures pass, the one that garners the most votes would take effect. 
Proposition 118 was written by top Republican activists and has strong support 
from GOP incumbents. Proposition 119 is more of a grass-roots product, 
sponsored by Republican San Mateo County Supervisor Tom Huening, the League of 
Women Voters and a handful of Democrats who do not hold state office. 
Most Democratic politicians oppose both measures. California Common Cause, the 
National Organization for Women and the Mexican American Legal Defense and 
Educational Fund also oppose them. 
Proposition 118 supporters argue that their measure would ensure fairer plans 
by giving the party not in power -- in this case, the Republicans -- a chance 
to participate in redistricting. Allowing the voters to pass judgment on the 
plan would further check creative line-drawing. And the ballot measure includes 
restrictions on speech fees and gifts that lawmakers can accept from groups 
with lobbyists in Sacramento. 
"This measure guarantees that the views of the minority party will be taken 
into account, which should result in some fairness," said Assembly Republican 
leader Ross Johnson of La Habra. "The name of the game in the past has been for 
the majority party to artificially maintain and extend its majority by the 
drawing of the lines." 
Opponents, however, charge that Proposition 118 would lead to the creation of 
district lines that protect incumbents of both major parties. By requiring a 
two-thirds vote in the Legislature, the measure ensures that at least that many 
seats would be safe from challenge, they say. 
"If you require a simple majority vote, then a majority will vote for the plan 
that gives them safe seats," said Brenda Robinson, an analyst for Common Cause. 
"If you require a super-majority, then a super-majority will vote yes if they 
have safe seats. It guarantees incumbent protection." 
Other critics contend that the measure's deadline and the automatic referendum 
it calls for would make it more likely that the redistricting job would be 
given to the Supreme Court. The court is dominated by appointees of Republican 
Gov. George Deukmejian. 
The Democrats so far have focused more of their venom on Proposition 119, which 
would remove elected lawmakers from the process. Assembly Speaker Brown has led 
an attack on the initiative's backers, and Democratic lawmakers have pressured 
nonpartisan groups to oppose it. 
A consistent theme of Brown's public statements has been that the measure would 
cost women and minorities their legislative seats. He contends the proposed 
guidelines regulating how districts would be drawn would cause such disruption 
that three Los Angeles seats now held by black women and two Bay Area seats 
also held by women could change hands. 
But at least four of the five seats Brown has identified -- those held by 
Maxine Waters and Teresa Hughes of Los Angeles, Jackie Speier of South San 
Francisco and Delaine Eastin of Union City -- appear to be compact enough to 
meet the standards of the initiative. The four districts also follow city 
limits closely -- another requirement of the initiative, although Speier and 
Eastin have districts that cross county lines. 
The other district Brown mentions, which is held by Gwen Moore of Los Angeles, 
follows city boundaries but probably does not meet the compactness test. But, 
with only minor changes, it could meet both standards. 
The problem for the Democrats is that many of those districts already are in 
jeopardy, because the state's population has shifted away from older urban 
areas and into the suburbs. The situation facing Speaker Brown and 
Assemblywoman Speier illustrates the potential consequences of this trend. 
Brown's central San Francisco district has lost population relative to the rest 
of the state. Since every district must contain roughly the same number of 
people after redistricting, the boundaries for Brown's district probably will 
be forced to move south or west to pick up the population it needs. But that 
change could threaten Speier, whose district would be pushed down the San 
Francisco peninsula, lose Democratic voters and thus confront her with a 
tougher fight for reelection. 
Although Brown insists that both measures would hurt minorities, the backers of 
Proposition 119 point out that their initiative requires the redistricting 
plans to meet the standards of the federal Voting Rights Act before they are 
considered by the commission. The measure also requires that minority 
communities be neither diluted nor concentrated in a way that diminishes their 
representation. 
With the Democrats in control of redistricting, minority representation has 
improved little in 15 years, even as the state's ethnic populations have 
increased dramatically. In 1975, there were seven blacks, six Latinos and two 
Asians in the Legislature. Today, there are nine blacks, six Latinos and no 
Asians. 
"The intent of Proposition 119 is to help minorities and women; the way you do 
that is you provide opportunities for challengers," said San Mateo County's 
Supervisor Huening, the initiative's sponsor. 
Huening and others say that partisanship is the real motivation behind Brown's 
opposition. Proposition 119 might threaten the Democrats' hold on the Assembly, 
where they control 47 of 80 seats, and in the Senate, where they have 25 of 40 
seats. 
Indeed, one of the more controversial provisions contained in both initiatives 
is a requirement that as many districts as possible be "competitive" -- defined 
as containing Democrats and Republicans in proportions that are within 2% of 
the parties' statewide share of registered voters. 
Since Democrats currently have the edge -- 50% to 39% -- this requirement might 
appear harmless. But Republicans historically have been able to win almost any 
district in which Democrats account for fewer than 50% of the registered 
voters. This is because Democrats tend to be poorer, and they move more often 
than Republicans, and so each district actually has fewer Democratic voters 
than the registration rolls suggest. 
"If you want to penalize the Democrats for representing poor people, this is 
the way to do it," Bruce Cain, a University of California professor and 
Democratic consultant, said of the criteria in Proposition 119. 
So far, public opinion polls show that neither Republican nor Democratic voters 
know much about the redistricting initiatives. In a Los Angeles Times Poll 
published in early May, 85% of voters surveyed did not know enough about 
Proposition 118 to have an opinion, and 88% had no position on Proposition 119. 
