NATIONAL SALUTE EMBRACES PANAMA DEAD; 
HOLIDAY: MEMORIAL DAY TRIBUTES REMEMBER AMERICANS WHO FELL IN WAR. ALSO HONORED 
IS RYAN WHITE'S COURAGEOUS BATTLE WITH FATAL AIDS. 
Americans flew the flag proudly and shed unashamed tears for their war dead 
Monday, the first Memorial Day since 23 fresh graves were dug for soldiers and 
sailors killed in the invasion of Panama. 
"They never knew whether their overall mission was successful . . . . " Navy 
Capt. Ron Pearson said at a service at Ft. Sam Houston in San Antonio, Tex. 
"Freedom is ours because others paid a price for our lives." 
President Bush, at a Memorial Day ceremony in his summer hometown of 
Kennebunkport, Me., also paid tribute to servicemen who died in the December 
invasion that ousted Panamanian dictator Manuel A. Noriega. 
Vice President Dan Quayle laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknowns at 
Arlington National Cemetery outside Washington where 214,000 servicemen and 
women are interred. 
Veterans and others streamed to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, 
adding more flowers, written messages and mementos to those already left at the 
polished black granite wall. Later Monday, an estimated 2,000 people gathered 
for a ceremony and wreath-laying at the wall. 
In Cicero, Ind., a headstone was placed on the grave of Ryan White, who died of 
complications of AIDS nearly two months ago after spending five years educating 
the public about the disease he contracted through blood products. 
The stone bears the epitaph "Kid Of Courage," written by his mother, plus 
tributes from Gov. Evan Bayh, singers Elton John and Michael Jackson and other 
relatives and friends. 
In Baton Rouge, the Louisiana House marked the day by narrowly approving 
legislation to dramatically lessen penalties for a person convicted of 
assaulting someone who desecrates Old Glory. 
In Houston, members of a crowd of about 10,000 people at a free rap concert 
turned unruly over delays and started hurling bottles. Shots reportedly were 
fired and the rest of the event was canceled. Authorities said about six people 
were arrested and at least 11 were injured, none seriously. 
