CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS BALLOT MEASURES; 
CAMPAIGN FOR GAS TAX GETS INTO HIGH GEAR 
For the next two weeks, residents of California's major cities will flip on 
their television sets for the evening news only to be greeted with a graphic 
reminder of one of their daily frustrations -- traffic congestion. 
The image flickering on the television screen will be reminiscent of the scene 
and sounds most will have left not long before. Cars bumper to bumper on the 
freeway. Horns honking. Gears grinding as giant trailer-trucks slow to a crawl. 
Then, just as the viewer begins to tense up again, a voice will suggest softly, 
"Experts warn us traffic will double in the next 10 years. We need to do 
something now to handle that traffic." 
That something, it turns out, is the passage of Propositions 111 and 108, the 
ballot measures that would raise $18.5 billion over the next decade largely by 
increasing the gasoline tax by 9 cents a gallon and authorizing a $1-billion 
bond issue for mass transit. 
The new television spot is part of a two-week advertising campaign to win votes 
for the two propositions, which were designed by Gov. George Deukmejian and 
legislative leaders of both parties to improve California's transportation 
system, ease congestion and expand mass transit. 
"The polls show the more the public knows about these issues, the better are 
our chances," said Don Schrack, a spokesman for Woodward-McDowell, a 
Burlingame-based consulting firm that is spearheading the campaign to pass the 
two measures. "Those who seem to have a pretty good grasp of (Proposition 111) 
are favoring it 2 to 1." 
A second television spot to be aired at the same time attempts to rekindle the 
memories and fears that accompanied last October's Bay Area earthquake. The 
camera moves to scenes of damaged bridges and freeways as an announcer solemnly 
proclaims, "Earthquakes are a fact of life in California and we've all seen 
what they can do." 
The scene shifts to shots of other freeways and bridges undergoing repairs. 
This time the voice is more insistent: "When it happens again -- and it will -- 
we need to be ready." 
The two 30-second spots have two messages. The first suggests that traffic 
congestion will only get worse unless voters provide the money through the 
passage of Propositions 111 and 108. The second is more ominous, implying that 
the state will not have enough money to make its bridges and freeways 
earthquake-safe unless the two propositions are approved. 
Schrack said the campaign hopes the emphasis on the earthquake will draw more 
support for the gasoline tax increase. He said that immediately following the 
quake, polls showed strong voter interest in the gas tax increase but that, as 
memories of the event faded, so did support for the tax hike. 
Television advertising for the campaign has been limited by a shortage of 
funds. Deukmejian, who is heading the campaign, had hoped to raise $5 million 
for it but so far has fallen far short of that goal. 
