JUDGE THREATENS TO JAIL ZSA ZSA, SLAPS HER WITH 60 MORE HOURS OF DUTY 
Just when you thought it was safe to return to Beverly Hills Municipal Court, a 
simple hearing Tuesday over whether celebrity cop-slapper Zsa Zsa Gabor had 
indeed given 120 hours of community service escalated into a four-hour judicial 
extravaganza -- broadcast live and in color. 
And when it was over, the man Gabor calls "that nasty judge" had branded her an 
opportunist, slapped her with 60 additional hours of community service for 
probation violation and threatened to send her to jail if she didn't cooperate. 
As always, however, the loquacious Hungarian actress had the last word. 
"I'm so damn famous it's sickening," she said, sweeping out of the courtroom on 
the arm of her husband, the Prince von Anhalt, in a waft of Van Cleef &amp; 
Arpels perfume. Her remark was in response to the judge calling her a publicity 
hound. 
Gabor, who would prefer to see herself as a wronged heroine, vowed to press on 
with her work for the homeless. 
"I don't need his telling me what to do," she said of Municipal Judge Charles 
Rubin. 
Rubin had sentenced Gabor last October to three days in jail and a psychiatric 
evaluation -- as well as nearly $13,000 in fines and fees and 120 days of 
community service -- after a jury convicted her of striking a police officer 
who had stopped her Rolls-Royce for having expired tags. Her attorney, Harrison 
Bull, has filed an appeal. 
Meanwhile, Gabor donated time to the Low Income Elderly United Community 
Assistance Program (LIEU-CAP), a Westside shelter for homeless women for which 
she is scheduled to hold a celebrity fund-raiser next month. 
She found an unlikely ally in the program's feisty founder, Vera Davis 
McClendon, who testified Tuesday that Gabor had actually served 138 hours of 
community service -- answering telephones, visiting with the women and 
children, serving food, making public appearances to benefit the center, 
planning the fund-raiser and even personally arranging shelter for a mother and 
child. 
Saying that the publicity garnered by Gabor greatly benefited the center 
economically, Davis (who prefers that designation) described her as "not an 
ordinary person" but "the most high-caliber person we've ever had." 
"Are you referring to her notoriety?" asked Deputy Dist. Atty. Elden Fox. 
"To her status as a celebrity," answered Davis. 
Davis could only document 34 1/2 hours actually spent by Gabor at the shelter, 
but said she credited the talk-show star with "preparation time" spent on 
travel or makeup. 
Gabor's attorney called several other witnesses who testified about her efforts 
to help the financially strapped center. 
The hearing attracted a large audience of Gabor followers, the idly curious, 
paparazzi and reporters. An all-news network televised portions of the event 
live. At times, it took on the appearance of theater, with the audience 
applauding testimony favorable to Gabor. 
Gabor kept quiet through most of the hearing. She sat with her back to the 
judge. She wore gold eye shadow, false eyelashes, and a suede riding jacket 
over a leopard-print Dior blouse and an Anne Klein sarong. Her silver-blonde 
hair was tied back with a bow and accented by large diamond earrings. 
The judge called witnesses of his own to assess Gabor's performance. In 
addition to Davis, the judge called two employees of the Volunteer Center of 
West Los Angeles, which placed her at the shelter. One of them testified that 
she had explained to Davis that Gabor was to do office work and "specifically 
no fund raising." 
In the end, Judge Rubin found that the former Miss Hungary had violated 
conditions of her probation. He said that Davis had been blinded by her dazzle. 
"Miss Gabor led her down the primrose path and that's unfortunate," he said. 
Instead of sanctions, however, he said he would credit Gabor with 34 1/2 hours 
of community service -- "some of which I have gross doubts about" -- require 
her to serve the remaining 85 1/2 hours, and add another 60 hours. She must 
serve all remaining 145 1/2 hours before Sept. 28. 
This time, Davis ordered, Gabor must be monitored by the volunteer agency 
responsible for placing her to ensure that she is physically present at her 
community service assignment. No fund raising will be permitted, he said, 
although it is unclear whether she will have to cancel her scheduled benefit 
for the homeless shelter. 
Any violations will result in her going to county jail, he warned. 
Outside the courtroom, asked about her readiness to go to the women's facility, 
Sybil Brand Institute for Women, Gabor flashed a smile. 
"Sybil Brand (the still-active philanthropist for whom the jail is named) is a 
good friend of mine," she said, not missing a beat. "I'm having dinner with her 
tomorrow night." 
