MEXICO MASSACRE; 
POTENT MIX OF RITUAL AND CHARISMA 
Other members of the cult called her their witch, a high priestess in a world 
of evil. 
Her name is Sara Aldrete Villareal, and she, like the others still alive, is 
accused of murder. 
She is a tall, athletic woman who, in one half of her life, was an honors 
student at a Texas college. But in the other, the one few people saw, she was a 
lover and follower of Adolfo de Jesus Constanzo, whose legacy is a trail of 
grotesque violence almost beyond imagination. 
She said this man, through the sheer force of his personality, held her in his 
grip, just as he did the others who killed for him. 
Force of Personality 
"If he tells you to do something right now, if he orders you, you will do it," 
she said last week. "I don't even know why, but you will do it." 
Ultimately, it would be Aldrete who ran screaming from a besieged Mexico City 
apartment, telling the police that Constanzo was dead, that he had ordered his 
own execution. 
It was a lurid ending to a yearlong saga of death precipitated by Constanzo, 
who had convinced his followers that killing was the key to protection from 
being caught smuggling drugs. 
U.S. and Mexican police believe that members of the cult killed 15 people in 
Matamoros, just across from the Texas border city of Brownsville. Among them 
was Mark Kilroy, a college student on spring break whose disappearance began a 
manhunt that eventually led to the discovery of the cult and of the bodies. 
On Monday, Aldrete, Alvaro de Leon and three other cult members were indicted 
in Mexico City on charges of homicide and related counts in connection with the 
slayings. 
Grisly Trademark 
Police believe that Constanzo and his sect may also be responsible for nine 
Mexico City deaths that bore what has become a sect trademark: the removal of 
spinal columns to make good-luck necklaces. 
In one sense, the horror resembles the Tate-La Bianca murders by Charles 
Manson's followers 20 years ago and the mass suicide by the followers of the 
Rev. Jim Jones in Guyana in 1978. In both those cases, one man mesmerized 
others into believing that evil is good and into committing diabolical acts as 
a result. 
But this case goes further. Constanzo practiced his magic in Mexican high 
society, winning adherents with his ceremonies to drain away evil. And he took 
a religion born in the Congo and changed it to meet his own needs, including 
offering its protective spell to drug dealers. 
The religion, called Palo Mayombe, embraces animal sacrifice. Constanzo 
convinced his followers that human sacrifice was even more powerful. 
From the moment he saw the grisly scene at an isolated ranch outside Matamoros, 
Rafael Martinez knew he was looking at Palo Mayombe. The cauldron, the human 
remains and the bow and arrow were all part of the rituals of the religion that 
was brought to the Caribbean during the slave trading days. 
At first, police used the terms "voodoo killings" and "satanic murders" after 
discovering the mass graves early last month. But it fell to Martinez, a 
cultural anthropologist from Miami, to tell officials that they had encountered 
Palo Mayombe, to which human sacrifice was added. 
With Palo Mayombe in the background, Constanzo must have been used to 
sacrificing goats, chickens and pigs, said Martinez. "To him, sacrificing 
humans was the next logical step," he added. 
By Martinez's estimate, there are roughly 40,000 Palo Mayombe followers in the 
United States. Most practice the religion in their homes, where it will not be 
seen by others. And, Martinez said, it is also the religion of choice for many 
drug dealers, who use it to protect themselves and to put curses on their 
enemies. 
"Palo Mayombe is mostly malevolent and evil," he said. 
As Martinez walked through the murder site, he saw all the things associated 
with Palo Mayombe: the iron cauldron, called a nganga; the cigars and cheap 
liquor called "firewater"; the candles. Then, too, there was Constanzo's diary, 
in which notations were made in both Spanish and Bantu, the language of the 
Congo tribes that originated the religion. 
"He really knew his Palo Mayombe," said Martinez. 
Constanzo grew up in the Miami suburb of Hialeah, where neighbors said there 
was always something eerie about his family's home. The back yard was filled 
with animals, the yard was often knee-high in weeds and decapitated animals 
were sometimes found on neighbors' front steps after an argument with one of 
the Constanzos. 
His mother was once arrested when police found her living in a tiny apartment 
with several children and 27 animals. The floor was covered with blood, urine 
and feces. 
Constanzo grew up handsome, with reddish hair and light skin and found 
occasional work as a model. In 1984, he moved from Miami to Mexico City, 
beginning a portion of his life that changed him from an ambitious, 
good-looking young man to an immensely wealthy drug dealer who drove an $80,000 
Mercedes-Benz and bought cars for friends on a whim. 
Not much is known about Constanzo during those early years in Mexico City. But 
he is remembered as someone who swiftly developed a reputation as a sorcerer 
skilled at ridding the body of evil. 
An Egg and Fragrant Water 
Constanzo performed limpias, or "cleansings," an ancient rite from Mexico's 
Indian and Spanish cultures that is still in use today, even among some members 
of the well-educated Mexican middle class. In one form, the sorcerer passes an 
egg over the client's body, sometimes accompanied by fragrant water or the 
leaves of a plant. Then the egg is cracked into a glass of water, and the 
sorcerer claims to read the patterns of evil that are being absorbed from the 
client's body. 
As his fame grew, Mexican movie stars, musicians and other notables turned to 
him for cleansings. Florentino Ventura, the former Mexican head of Interpol, 
the international police agency, has been identified as one of Constanzo's 
clients. Ventura committed suicide last year. 
At the other end of the spectrum, drug smugglers would pay him $50,000 to 
provide them mystical protection from the law. And then, at some point, 
Constanzo himself moved into the world of drug smuggling. 
He joined up with a smuggler named Elio Hernandez from Matamoros, then slowly 
became a larger player in the operation, police on both sides of the border 
said. He initiated Hernandez into his bizarre sect of animal sacrifice. By this 
time, Aldrete was already a part of the cult, and she acted as the godmother in 
Hernandez's initiation ceremony. 
Cult members, in their confessions, have said that the first two murders had 
nothing to do with religion but were acts of revenge for drug deals gone bad. 
Lt. George Cavito of the sheriff's department in Cameron County, Tex., said 
that until 10 months ago, Constanzo was merely a drug dealer with a propensity 
for cheating and killing. 
He was also someone who demanded strict obedience. Oran Neck, a U.S. Customs 
agent who worked on the case, described an incident in which one of Constanzo's 
followers disobeyed orders by snorting cocaine. "They wasted him right there," 
Neck said. 
The ritual killings began early last year. In all, five people were murdered 
and mutilated in cult sacrifices; the other 10 found in the Matamoros graves 
were drug-related murder victims. 
"When they needed someone for human sacrifice, they would just go get him," 
said Cavito. 
Mark Kilroy and his pals were out late, drinking and carousing in the Zona Rosa 
section of Matamoros. It was spring break, and revelry on the Mexican side of 
the border was something of a rite of passage for Texas college students 
vacationing on nearby South Padre Island. 
The group was making its way back to the International Bridge when Kilroy, a 
junior at the University of Texas, fell behind. Mark Huddleston, one of the 
other students, watched from nearby as a pickup truck approached and the men 
inside offered Kilroy a ride. 
As the truck sped off, Kilroy jumped out, trying to escape, but was immediately 
run to ground by men in another car that was following the truck. 
According to cult members, Kilroy was brought to the Santa Elena Ranch outside 
Matamoros, where caretaker Domingo Reyes gave him a drink of water while one of 
the cult members called Constanzo at the Holiday Inn in Brownsville. He was 
told that his orders had been carried out, that a gringo had been captured. 
Kilroy was killed with a machete blow to the back of the head. Later, Constanzo 
ordered cult member De Leon to cut off one of Kilroy's legs. 
"He told me that each time you do this, you lose a little of your fear until 
you aren't afraid of anything anymore," De Leon said later. 
Kilroy was buried, along with the rest of the drug and cult victims, in a 
shallow grave outside the shanty that was the cultists' "temple." 
Before Mark Kilroy's murder, the disappearance of the other victims had raised 
hardly a ripple. But this one was different. Kilroy came from a white, 
middle-class family that lived in the tiny community of Santa Fe, Tex. James 
Kilroy, Mark's father, was not willing to sit home and wait for the Mexican 
police to turn up news of his son. 
He want to Brownsville and stayed there, first offering a $5,000 reward, then 
raising it to $15,000. U.S. officials joined the search, with U.S. Customs 
doing so, in part, because young Kilroy's uncle was an agent in the Los Angeles 
office. 
As is often the case in investigations, luck played a major role in uncovering 
the cult murders. On the night of April 1, Mexican police saw a late-model 
pickup pull off the road to avoid a police checkpoint. They followed the truck 
to Elio Hernandez's Santa Elena Ranch. 
Tracking Phone Records 
The police began tracking cellular phone records and interviewed the ranch's 
caretaker. On April 9, the police made four arrests. Confronted with a picture 
of Kilroy, the cult members confessed to his murder, saying they had been 
ordered to do so by Constanzo. 
The grim task of digging up the bodies began. Constanzo and Aldrete and three 
others went into hiding. The police in Mexico City also began working the case. 
Juan Armando Ponce, one of the capital police officers assigned to the case, 
noticed similarities between the Matamoros murders and another killing he had 
investigated in Mexico City in 1987. A young house servant had disappeared, and 
pieces of her clothing were later found in front of an altar similar to the one 
at the ranch. Later still, her tortured body was found along with seven others 
in the Zumpango River. 
World of Witchcraft 
Ponce returned to the world of witchcraft and sorcerers that he had 
investigated in 1987. There, he got his tips. Someone had seen Constanzo in the 
nearby Cuauhtemoc neighborhood. Someone else had an address in the adjacent 
Anzures neighborhood. 
Assistant Police Chief Rodrigo Martinez Ramirez put 16 officers on the case to 
comb the area. They turned up a shoemaker who had seen a woman matching 
Aldrete's description. Then, at a supermarket, the police spotted a man trying 
to buy large quantities of groceries with American dollars. 
They followed him to an apartment on Rio Sena Street. By the end of the week, 
they knew that De Leon had been the man buying groceries and that Constanzo was 
inside. They surrounded the building and waited for the traffic to thin out 
before making a move. 
Tossed Gold Coins 
Again, fate played a role. A black Chrysler New Yorker pulled up to the 
apartment building. When police walked over to investigate, Constanzo saw them 
from his apartment window. He opened fire. During the gun battle that followed, 
Constanzo heaved gold coins out the window, while inside, huge sums of paper 
money burned on the stove. 
The shoot-out lasted 45 minutes before Constanzo ordered his own execution and 
that of his lover, Martin Quintana. 
"He said he wanted to be killed, that everything was finished," said Aldrete. 
"He said, 'Let's all die.' But I didn't want to die." 
While police mounted the stairs toward the smoke-filled apartment, De Leon did 
as he had always done: He obeyed Constanzo. He shot both men. And Aldrete ran 
from the apartment. 
"Sara ran out the door screaming," Ponce said. "She screamed: 'He's dead! They 
killed him! He's dead!' " 
