REPEATED THEME OF RESCUERS WHO BRAVED FIRE: 'WE'D DO IT AGAIN' 
Todd Barbey was on his way to play tennis last November when he rounded a bend 
in Pacific Beach and came upon flames leaping skyward. In a burning car he saw 
the silhouette of the driver trying to escape. 
The driver had been going about 70 m.p.h. when she missed a curve on Soledad 
Mountain Road and crashed into a motor home, setting off a chain-reaction crash 
and fire. 
Barbey, a 41-year-old Pacific Beach resident, didn't hesitate. He stopped his 
van and ran across the street. He said his only thought as he went to the 
woman's aid was, "God help me." 
The driver got out of the car, but left behind was an unconscious and bleeding 
passenger. Barbey broke a window and pulled the 17-year-old girl to safety. 
On Tuesday night, Barbey and 21 other heroes were honored at the San Diego Burn 
Institute's 16th annual Spirit of Courage award banquet. The awards are given 
to people who risk their lives attempting to save others from fiery deaths, 
said Judith Copeland, executive director of the Burn Institute. 
Barbey, who is studying to become a minister, said his attempt to save the girl 
was instinctual. 
"I was thinking about once every three seconds that something was going to 
explode or burn us up, and I knew I had to go as fast as possible. . . . I was 
totally geared on getting her out, and I'm glad God put me together to do it," 
Barbey said. 
Copeland said that Barbey's response to danger is typical of the more than 180 
heroes the institute has honored in the past. Barbey "was surrounded by fire on 
three sides. It was truly heroic. But they always say to us, 'We'd do it again 
in a moment, I'm not a hero. I did a job that had to be done.' That's been a 
common thread. They're always so humble . . . . I think Todd Barbey's (story) 
is pretty incredible." 
Copeland added that a special honor, the Exceptional Service Award, will be 
given to Victor Gonzalez, Mark Grow, David Lones, Forrest Kuhn and Andrew Parr 
of the Lakeside Fire Department. The five were almost killed June 10, 1988, 
when a burning house began to collapse as they were trying to rescue a man and 
woman trapped inside, Copeland said. 
They got the woman out and "stayed inside an absolute inferno to get a man 
out," Copeland said. 
