ISRAELI SHOTS AT KING HUSSEIN'S YACHT TOLD; 
MONARCH ON DECK AS NAVY BOAT OPENS FIRE, NEWSPAPER SAYS 
An Israeli navy boat fired at the yacht of Jordan's King Hussein as the monarch 
was standing on deck, an Israeli newspaper reported today. 
A military spokesman confirmed that a navy vessel was carrying out a "routine 
weapons check" in the vicinity of Hussein's yacht, but said no shots were fired 
directly at it. Spokesmen for Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and the Defense 
Ministry could not be reached for comment. 
The liberal daily Haaretz said the incident occurred last Saturday in the Gulf 
of Aqaba. There were no reports of damage or injuries. 
Jordan protested sharply to Israel and the United States. Israeli officials 
refused to apologize but assured Jordan that it will not happen again, the 
newspaper said. 
President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III expressed anger when 
informed about the incident, the newspaper said. 
Haaretz said Hussein's yacht was sailing in international waters, accompanied 
by a Jordanian navy vessel, when the Israeli patrol boat opened fire. 
"Nobody could have had any doubt that the king was on the boat," the newspaper 
quoted one of the sources as saying. "He was standing on the deck, and it was 
possible to identify him easily." 
After the first shots were fired, the king took over command of the yacht and 
ordered the vessel to turn around and head toward Saudi Arabian waters, the 
report said. 
The Israeli vessel accelerated and continued to fire as it followed the king's 
yacht. Only when the royal yacht reached Saudi waters did the Israeli patrol 
boat hold its fire, the report said. 
It said neither the king's bodyguards nor the Jordanian navy vessel 
accompanying the yacht returned fire during the chase. 
Israel's military command released a statement today denying the report and 
said "no shots were fired by the Israeli navy at King Hussein's yacht and no 
chase was conducted." 
The statement said a naval vessel did conduct routine firing of a few bullets 
in order to check its guns, but they were aimed toward empty waters to the 
south. 
