WAR RAGES OVER RED SQUIRREL HOME; 
ENVIRONMENT: A PLAN TO BUILD TELESCOPES ON THE RODENT'S MOUNTAIN HAS INVOLVED 
SPECIAL LEGISLATION, PLEAS FROM THE POPE AND ECO-SABOTAGE. 
Looming 10,700 feet above the Arizona sands, this mountain is an ecological 
island, a place where an exotic array of plants and wildlife -- cut off from 
other mountain ranges by miles of bone-dry desert -- have evolved in isolation 
since the last Ice Age. 
Now the mountain's wooded summit is the subject of a ferocious tug-of-war 
between backers of a construction project and biologists who fear that the work 
will push an endangered red squirrel to extinction. 
This is no classic stop-the-bulldozers battle. The alleged plunderers are 
astronomers who want to use Mt. Graham as a perch from which to peer at the 
darkest corners of the universe. And they have as an ally Interior Secretary 
Manuel Lujan Jr., the man responsible for enforcing the Endangered Species Act. 
"Nobody's told me the difference between a red squirrel, a black one or a brown 
one," Lujan told a National Park Foundation banquet in Colorado on Thursday. 
"Do we have to save every subspecies?" 
Led by the University of Arizona, a partnership involving such heavyweights as 
the Smithsonian Institution and the Vatican plans to build a $200-million 
observatory atop Mt. Graham. The international venture would include the 
world's most powerful and sophisticated land-based telescopes -- a new 
generation of instruments that boosters say will help launch the next era in 
astronomy. 
The mountain's height and location far from city lights make it a perfect place 
for stargazing. But astronomers want to plunk their seven scopes in a dense 
forest that harbors the last living Mt. Graham red squirrels, a subspecies of 
small, quiet rodents that may number as few as 100. 
The result is one of the nastiest environmental battles in Arizona's history, a 
fight that has involved Congress, pleas for intervention from the Pope, 
sabotage by self-described "scope-busters" -- even a death threat to a 
university professor. 
"Our opponents have declared jihad on us -- holy war -- and their goal is to 
delay this thing so long that it dies," said astronomer Roger Angel, director 
of the university laboratory that is creating mirrors for the project's 
telescopes. "It's like international terrorism." 
"Mt. Graham's fate is not just an Arizona issue," countered Phoenix lawyer 
Charles Babbitt, president of the Maricopa County Audubon Society. "The 
university has thrown science and biology overboard and used money, lobbying 
and politics to try to ram this project through. If they can do that on this 
mountaintop, it can happen anywhere." 
Recently, the fight took a surprising new turn when two biologists who work for 
the Interior Department's Fish and Wildlife Service said in court depositions 
that they were ordered by superiors to prepare reports concluding that 
telescopes and squirrels could coexist on Mt. Graham. 
The testimony has triggered an investigation by the General Accounting Office 
and prompted a federal judge in Tuscon to grant a temporary injunction barring 
further work on the project. 
Because Congress relied on the biologists' reports in granting the university 
special permission to build in squirrel habitat before environmental reviews 
were complete, the GAO's findings could force a reconsideration of the issue. 
The injunction was a crushing blow for university astronomers, who were hoping 
to break ground this spring. Plans for the observatory date to 1980, when the 
university began work on a breed of new mega-scopes, which use giant mirrors 
that enable astronomers to see in detail celestial objects that today's 
telescopes display as mere pinpricks of light. 
These instruments work in concert with the Hubble Space Telescope launched last 
month: The Hubble can detect objects so small they have never been spotted, but 
the huge mirrors on the ground-based scopes provide the illumination needed to 
carefully study the discoveries. 
Among the partners enlisted by the university were the Smithsonian, the Max 
Planck Institute of West Germany and the Vatican Observatory. Pope Leo XIII 
founded the observatory in 1891, in part to answer critics who recall the Holy 
See's persecution of Galileo for his insistence that Earth revolved around the 
sun. 
Other allies include three small farming communities near the mountain -- 
Safford, Thatcher and Pima. The city councils have endorsed the observatory and 
spent $500,000 on welcoming gestures like the installation of low-sodium 
lighting, help with construction of a road to the summit and plans for an 
airport expansion. 
Critics, however, argue that neither an economic boost for Graham County nor a 
prestigious astronomical observatory for Arizona are important enough reasons 
to jeopardize the mountain's red squirrel. 
Discovered in the 1890s, the animal is one of 25 subspecies of red squirrels 
and is smaller and less chatty than its fellow rodents. The Mt. Graham critter 
also has a distinctive chromosome and may, some biologists suspect, have been 
the source population for all the red squirrels in the Rocky Mountains. 
Through the years, the Mt. Graham squirrel has declined, mostly through 
piecemeal losses of habitat to logging and construction of roads and summer 
cabins. The last three years have been particularly grim, because a lack of 
rainfall has cut the crop of cones upon which squirrels rely for food. 
In 1987, the squirrel was placed on the nation's list of endangered species. 
Although university officials fought the listing, they now concede the animal's 
situation is precarious. 
But they also maintain their seven-scope project poses no threat to the 
squirrel. Indeed, one pro-telescope biology professor argues that the 
university could in fact become the squirrel's saviour because of the 
tree-planting and other mitigating measures the school must take in order to 
build on the mountain. 
"I predict a positive effect," said Conrad Istock, chairman of the Ecology and 
Evolutionary Biology Department. "We've removed the threat of logging from the 
mountain and are going to be reforesting 80 acres that will, in the long-term, 
be beneficial to the squirrel. That's a lot of trees." 
Critics -- who include Earth First! activists, Apache Indians who view the 
mountain as sacred, and even hunting and sportfishing groups -- call such logic 
nonsense. 
"That's like telling a dying patient on a hospital gurney that you'll give him 
a pint of blood next week but first you're going to have to take a gallon," 
said biologist Tom Waddell, Mt. Graham wildlife manager for the Arizona Game 
and Fish Department. "Well, what we've got here is a patient who may not make 
it to next week." 
While only 26 acres of forest would be cleared to make room for the seven 
telescopes, Waddell said the university has picked the flat, dense spruce fir 
thickets historically most favored by the squirrel. And, in addition to the 26 
acres, Waddell said some surrounding habitat will be degraded because a hole in 
the forest canopy exposes the squirrels' food caches to sunlight. Light and 
warmth can dry up the seeds on which the rodents feed. 
"No one knows the squirrel's extinction threshhold, but we do know that 
anything below 500 is bad news," biologist Warshall said. "When you have a 
situation like that, you don't start cutting down trees." 
The controversy escalated dramatically when the university did what critics 
bitterly describe as an "end run" around the nation's two primary environmental 
protection laws -- the Endangered Species Act and the National Environmental 
Policy Act. 
In 1988, Congress attached an unusual rider to a conservation bill that allowed 
the university to proceed with construction of three telescopes without 
finalizing environmental reviews. Arizona's entire congressional delegation -- 
including environmental champion Rep. Morris K. Udall -- supported the 
legislation. 
Conservationists viewed the legislative move as a dangerous precedent, and soon 
national environmental groups such as Defenders of Wildlife and the Audubon 
Society had joined the fight. 
"When the nation's two most sacred environmental laws get flushed down the 
tubes in the state of Arizona, that gets people's attention," said Bob 
Witzeman, a Phoenix conservationist and Audubon Society leader. "It galvanized 
everybody." 
Last year, the Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund sued the U.S. Forest Service on 
behalf of 10 organizations, and since then, the battle has heated up. 
Earth First! activists have chained themselves to grading equipment in protest 
of the university's construction of a road to the observatory site. A dead 
squirrel was sent to the home of the observatory project's director, and 
Istock, the pro-scope biologist, was even mailed a death threat. 
Still, until last month, the university's optimism about the project was on the 
rise. Then U.S. District Judge Alfredo C. Marquez granted a 120-day injunction, 
ruling that the federal biologists' startling depositions raise "some question" 
about the credibility of their reports. 
In the depositions, biologists Sam Spiller and Lesley Ann Fitzpatrick say they 
were directed by supervisors to reverse an earlier opinion and conclude that 
telescopes would not jeopardize the squirrel's continued existence. 
"We needed much more information on the squirrel and its habitat before a 
decision to site the project should have been made," Fitzpatrick said in the 
deposition. Her orders, she said, were to prepare a report "allowing 
development in accordance with the project proposed." 
University officials have appealed the injunction to the 9th Circuit Court of 
Appeals, and a ruling is expected soon. Meanwhile, some members of the Arizona 
congressional delegation say they may reopen the issue if the GAO's report 
reveals any impropriety. 
While they await a verdict, the combatants continue their angry sparring. There 
is no talk of compromise. 
"There is so much at stake here for scientific research . . . and all we want 
are eight acres (for the first three telescopes) out of the entire mountain," 
Angel said. 
Such statements, the university's detractors respond, reflect the astronomers' 
hubris. 
"They can put those telescopes anywhere," said Waddell of the Game and Fish 
Department. "But we can't move the squirrels. We can't move the forest. So 
we're not gonna' give up." 
