THE GALLERIES : SANTA MONICA 
Allan McCollum is one of 30 young artists included in the current MOCA 
blockbuster, "Forest of Signs." In a concurrent one-man show titled "Perfect 
Vehicles," McCollum presents a suite of work based on an idea he has been 
developing since 1979. With roots in Conceptualism and Minimalism, McCollum is 
more a theoretician than an object maker, and "Perfect Vehicles" -- six solid 
concrete ginger jars, 6 1/2-feet tall and identical but for the fact that each 
is painted a different color -- offers plenty of food for thought for those of 
rarefied appetites. Stripped of historical reference, mute and inscrutable, 
these profoundly empty vessels are designed to receive the needs and desires 
that govern one's involvement with art. In other words, this is art as a blank 
screen; the viewer invests it with whatever meaning he chooses. 
Exploring ideas of surrogation, authenticity, and art's capacity to generate 
power and prestige, these mass-produced vases have the look of generic objects 
but as in work by Jeff Koons, they're actually distortions on a theme. McCollum 
intends that his perfect vehicles function as caricatures rather than symbols 
of vases, and there is something unseemly about their exaggerated size; like 
overdeveloped body builders, they have a bullying presence. Fashioning familiar 
looking forms that in fact are unlike anything else in existence (they don't 
resemble what we know as art), devoid of narrative, and completely without 
function, McCollum thwarts the impulse to invest "Perfect Vehicles" with 
superficial meaning. They remain utterly pure, three-dimensional vacuums 
waiting to be filled with that holiest of nectars, the avant garde party line. 
Also on view is an installation by Nayland Blake that centers on a short story 
titled "Bernice." Neatly printed on five green chalkboards, "Bernice" recounts 
the sorry tale of a young man smitten with his cousin, and obsessed with her 
teeth in particular. The fair maiden dies, he exhumes the corpse and extracts 
the marvelous teeth. Written in florid language evocative of Edgar Allan Poe, 
the story of "Bernice" is accompanied by four oddly kinky sculptural tableaux 
rooted in the themes of obsession and perfection. (Richard Kuhlenschmidt 
Gallery, 1634 17th St., to June 3). KRISTINE McKENNA 
