BLOODY SUNDAY 
When is a mystery not exactly a mystery? The question arises with K. C. 
Constantine's fine, slim new novel, Sunshine Enemies (Mysterious Press: $18.95; 
167 pp.). 
There is a crime, certainly. A man has been found stabbed to death outside the 
porn shop at the edge of town, the same shop the new Lutheran minister has been 
bugging Police Chief Mario Balzic to shut down. But the murder, and the 
perspiring minister, are only the backdrop to Balzic's struggle with his grief 
over the death (from old age and a failing heart) of his mother. 
This is the ninth of the Balzic stories by the pseudonymous Constantine, whose 
real identity remains a well-guarded secret. He has been described as a 
newspaper writer in a small Pennsylvania city much like the one he describes as 
Rocksburg. 
The pleasure of the series is that Constantine knows his turf and its people as 
well as Tony Hillerman knows the Navajo-Hopi Southwest or Raymond Chandler knew 
Southern California. Balzic, half-Italian, half-Slavic, blue collar turning 
white, always has felt like a very autobiographical character: direct, profane, 
street smart, hard-drinking, emotional, and never more so than when he falls 
apart after his mother dies. It's hard not to believe that Constantine is 
remembering battles with a grief of his own. 
Balzic drinks himself silly, is rude to the kindly mourners, his wife and 
daughters among them. He is the perfect portrait of a man suddenly confronting 
his own mortality and assessing his own achievements, which considered under 
the guise of eternity he finds inadequate. Having outfoxed a pompous new mayor 
and most of the State Police muckymucks in previous novels, Balzic discovers 
the one situation his street smarts can't handle. He is funny, sad and quite 
believable. 
Almost as afterthoughts, he uncovers the real story on the protesting minister 
and deals sympathetically with the distraught mother who guesses her uptight 
son may have done the stabbing. 
Constantine's publisher, Otto Penzler, remarked recently that the writer may be 
on the verge of winding up the Balzic series and coming out from beneath the 
pseudonym. It would be too bad to lose the chief, but nice to acknowledge the 
real man who has created him so vividly. 
Santa Barbara's Sue Grafton continues to work her imaginative way through the 
alphabet. Her private eye, Kinsey Milhone, has now achieved G Is for Gumshoe 
(Henry Holt: $16.95; 261 pp.). She is 33, 5-feet-6, 118 pounds, and her 
apartment, gutted by a bomb blast during a previous caper, has been 
redecorated. 
Yet all is not wonderful, naturally. She's the subject of a contract written by 
a thug she helped send to prison, and the hit guy or guys come nastily close. 
Her new case is to find and return an eccentric old woman living in a no-rent 
compound deep in the desert. The trail, as usual, leads not only from the 
desert back to Santa Teresa (as Grafton calls Santa Barbara, to protect the 
innocent) but into a family past and the madness born of greed. 
Milhone, tough and resourceful but less abrasive than Sara Paretsky's V. I. 
Warshawski, is a sympathetic figure whose character grows richer and rounder 
with each outing -- and with 19 letters left to go. 
A widening and deepening regionalism is one of the characteristics of present 
American crime fiction, and hardly a locale from Vermont to Puget Sound has not 
been found fraught with murder and other deadly sins. 
Frederick D. Huebner is a Seattle lawyer who writes about a Seattle lawyer 
named Matt Riordan. Picture Postcard (Fawcett/Columbine: $16.95; 281 pp.) is 
the fourth Riordan caper, this one involving the newly valuable work of an 
artist who presumably died in a suicidal car crash into deep waters nearly a 
half-century before. 
The artist's granddaughter, launching an art gallery featuring some of his 
work, receives a freshly painted post card that is an uncannily good forgery 
(if it is a forgery) of his style. She suspects some paintings in a rival show 
of her grandfather's work may be fakes, and she is unpleasantly warned to shut 
up. 
Riordan's investigations on her behalf lead back to a art-colony houseboat 
party at which a young model was murdered 50 years ago, not long before the 
suicide. There are survivors, among them the artist who did time for the 
killing and the lawyer who tried to defend him. 
The plot is solid if unspectacular, but Huebner's comfortable familiarity with 
the Northwest and its art scene give the book its fresh, brisk charm. 
One of the newest of the print detectives to find his way onto television is 
Colin Dexter's Inspector Morse, who first appeared in "Last Bus to Woodstock." 
He is British, resident in Oxford (Dexter is a Cambridge man) and is irascible 
where P. D. James' Dalgleish is dour. 
The ingenious The Wench Is Dead (St. Martin's: $15.95, 200 pp.) is clearly a 
homage to Josephine Tey's "The Daughter of Time." Tey's man, marooned in a 
hospital bed, rethought the character of Richard III and found him innocent. 
Dexter's Morse, hospitalized for an ulcer brought on by a mixture of 
irascibility and strong drink, and maddened with inactivity, finds a book in 
the hospital library about a murder case more than a century old. 
A girl was found murdered, her body floating in a canal near Oxford. Two men 
were hanged, but Morse is persuaded they were innocent. Time would have taken 
care of the guilty as well and it is as cold a trail as they ever get. But 
Morse, using his bed as command post, gets a young librarian and his long- 
suffering sergeant to do his researches for him. 
In the end he does leave his bed, finding by flashlight some ancient markings 
beneath layers of peeling wallpaper that make everything clear. Puzzle 
mysteries are really not much done these days, but this is one -- an author 
challenging himself to do something fiendishly clever, and succeeding. 
Keating's The Bedside Companion to Crime (Mysterious Press: $19.95; 191 pp.) is 
just that, a delightful compendium of essays and oddments about crime fiction. 
There are brief, biographical tributes to Agatha Christie, Margery Allingham, 
Ellery Queen, Emma Lathen and several others; a long and thoughtful 
appreciation of P.D. James' "A Taste for Death"; an essay on the great villains 
of crime fiction; notes on pseudonyms and on the baffling title changes when 
British tales hit the American market; a summary of all the send-ups of 
Sherlock Holmes, and so on into the night. 
The Writer's Complete Crime Reference Book by Martin Roth (Writer's Digest 
Books: $19.95; 308 pp.) is not exactly engrossing bedtime reading, but for the 
novice eager to try writing crime fiction, what better place to find several 
pages worth of lethal instruments, smuggling techniques, criminal slang, police 
codes and other police procedures, chapters on criminal law and court 
procedures, the forensic lab, organized crime and secrets of surveillance. All 
you need is the odd motive or two and you're in business. Sue Grafton 
