SMALL BUSINESSES GAIN NEW CLOUT IN WASHINGTON 
A year ago, when San Antonio truck parts dealer Mike Manuppelli went calling on 
Congress, the best he could manage was some meetings with a couple of 
legislative aides who only half-listened to what he said. 
But when he returned to Washington a few days ago, he got the personal 
attention of two Texas senators and three representatives. 
Manuppelli is still the same fellow who owns Automotive Truck Parts Co. in San 
Antonio and belongs to Texas Small Business United, a grass-roots lobbying 
group. 
What's different is that small business has learned how to flex its political 
muscle, and Congress has gotten the message. In fact, the red carpet has been 
out all this week for small-business owners and their families being honored 
during the Small Business Administration's Small Business Week. 
Business owners from 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam and Puerto Rico 
descended on the city for a frenzy of awards ceremonies, speeches and events. 
"There is a tremendous difference just in a 12-month period," said Manuppelli. 
"The people we visited with this time were not only much more receptive, but 
they really wanted to know the pulse of the small-business owners." 
And, on Monday, while scores of small-business owners swarmed in and out of 
offices on Capitol Hill, President Bush's chief of staff, John H. Sununu, 
personally assured representatives of several business groups that the 
President would veto any bill requiring businesses to provide unpaid maternity 
or family leaves. 
Virtually every small-business organization has been loudly opposing mandated 
leave, so Bush's promise was the latest victory for their lobbying efforts. 
The leaders of the congressional small business committees say the winds have 
shifted in favor of the little guy since last fall's repeal of Section 89, a 
tax law that outraged the small-business community. 
For more than a year, business owners protested against Section 89, a 
regulation riddled with eye-crossing formulas that would have required business 
owners to provide the same kinds of benefits to entry level employees as they 
provided executives. 
"I think small-business organizations feel prouder of themselves now and are 
aware that they have more clout," said Rep. John J. LaFalce (D-N.Y.), who 
serves as chairman of the Committee on Small Business. "I do think there is 
strength in numbers." 
In recent months, small-business groups have rallied to oppose mandated health 
care, portions of the Americans with Disabilities Act and an inheritance tax 
law that imposes a burden on family-owned firms trying to pass the company 
along to the next generation. 
Legislators and Bush are seeking out small-business support for their favorite 
issues by being more accessible, according to veteran small-business advocates. 
"I've seen an incredible recognition of small business on the Hill," said 
Christine Russell, chief House lobbyist for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 
Russell, who until recently served as director of the chamber's Small Business 
Center, said legislators are listening more closely to small-business owners 
because their companies are the ones creating most of America's new jobs. 
"It's satisfying to have people calling us rather than us going to camp out on 
their doorsteps," said John Satagaj, president of the Small Business 
Legislative Council, which represents 103 trade associations. 
Mel Boldt, chairman and chief executive of BMI Inc., a Palatine, Ill., maker of 
clips and clamps, said he has been lobbying in Washington since 1980. 
"In 1980, it was 'what is small business and why is it different from big 
business?' " said Boldt, who attended a recent joint meeting of National Small 
Business United and the National Assn. of Women Business Owners in Washington. 
"Now they realize there is a position between the unions and big business." 
Art Sweet, president of Certified Business Funding, a North Hollywood 
small-business lender, agreed that legislators are taking what he has to say 
more seriously than in the past. 
"They really want to find out what's right for small business," said Sweet. "I 
do feel we are getting our message across." 
The small-business owners also feel a strong comradeship with Bush. 
Karl Krieger, president of the 50,000 member National Small Business United, 
called Bush "a small-business President" who is "right with us on 90% of the 
issues." 
Bush, who owned his own small oil drilling company in Texas feels, a kinship 
with the small-business community, according to Jeff Vogt, a business liaison 
for the White House. Bush also hopes his small-business friends will get behind 
his move to reduce the capital gains tax and reduce the budget deficit without 
raising taxes. 
"The President feels they will roll up their sleeves and get to work for him on 
Capitol Hill," said Vogt. 
After the visiting small-business owners have returned home, representatives of 
the National Federation of Independent Business, which has 500,000 members, and 
National Small Business United, will remain behind to look out for their 
members' interests. 
"Small-business owners can do for politics in the 1990s what labor unions did 
in the 1950s," said John Sloan, president of the National Federation of 
Independent Business. "I think we are just gaining momentum, and there are 
still very exciting times ahead of us in what we can accomplish." 
John Galles, executive vice president of National Small Business United, said 
the 1990s are going to be very tough on small business because of uncertainty 
about the economy and the threat interference by government in business 
affairs. "Small-business owners need to do battle to protect their interests," 
he said. 
Back in California, the California Chamber of Commerce is forming a coalition 
of small-business groups to strengthen any positions taken, according to Maxine 
Weinman, the politically active owner of Maxine's Seafood Cafe in Hollywood. 
"In California, there still needs to be more unification between the 
small-business groups," said Weinman, who serves as legislative chair for the 
Los Angeles chapter of the National Assn. of Women Business Owners. 
But, Weinman said small business' political clout does not yet match its 
economic clout in the state. 
"Almost every week I get a letter from a legislator asking for input on issues 
affecting small business," said Devon Blaine, president of the California 
chapter of National Small Business United. 
