POP BEAT: WEIR, WASSERMAN PAIR UP IN ACT FILLED WITH ENOUGH INTENSITY TO RAISE 
THE DEAD; 
THE GRATEFUL DEAD GUITARIST AND SINGER JOINED THE BAY AREA BASSIST AT THE COACH 
HOUSE. THE SETS OFTEN LACKED THE GRACE AND INTERACTION NEEDED TO ROUND OUT THE 
MUSIC. 
Usually, when a band member moonlights from a major rock group, it's to kick 
back, take it easy and do some musical meandering. 
With the Grateful Dead, though, laid-back meandering is the gist of the 
everyday agenda. So it was fitting that Bob Weir tried something different 
Tuesday night at the Coach House in his duo show with Bay Area bassist Rob 
Wasserman -- namely, near-constant focus and intensity. 
As singer and guitarist for the Dead, the Ol' Man River of rock bands, Weir is 
part of a slowly unfolding musical ebb and flow. The Big Muddy approach may be 
just the thing for arena evenings or sunbaked stadium afternoons when the Dead 
provide the soundtrack for their followers' gentle communitarianism. But slow 
and mellow isn't the ticket when the music is pared down to bare basics -- a 
singer with an acoustic guitar, joined by an accompanist shuttling between a 
traditional acoustic stand-up bass and an upright electric version that looked 
like an Art Deco reconstruction of the old-fashioned design. 
Weir and Wasserman were anything but mellow, playing two sets that emphasized 
forceful rhythms and, for just a bassist and guitarist, a fair amount of 
hard-edged noise. 
Still, the 90-minute concert (two 45-minute sets divided by a half-hour 
intermission) had some of the trappings of a Dead show in miniature. The 
audience consisted overwhelmingly of new-generation Deadheads, listeners in 
their teens and early 20s who hadn't even been born in 1965 when the Grateful 
Dead began. 
The packed Coach House featured the usual uniforms and comportment: tie-dyed 
shirts and peasant dresses, bandannas and serapes, incense burning, ritualistic 
free-form dancing in the wings and the characteristically pleasant mood that 
makes the Deadheads' hippie-throwback antiquarianism a little easier to stomach 
than if they were hippies in fashion only. 
The repertoire also followed the Dead's rootsy eclecticism. Most of the show 
was devoted to originals Weir has recorded with the Dead or on his own albums, 
but there was also a liberal heaping of standards ranging from Robert Johnson's 
"Walking Blues" to the Beatles' "Blackbird" and Bob Dylan's "When I Paint My 
Masterpiece" to a crooned encore of "Misty." 
Weir sang with immediacy and conviction, even on the good-timey numbers early 
in the show. The energy of his performance helped compensate for a voice that 
was as texturally flat and featureless as America's midsection. (Still, despite 
an earnest effort, Weir is not a singer you want to hear attempt "Misty.") 
Looking athletic in shorts and a polo shirt, Weir was the lean-and-intense 
antithesis of his partner in the Dead, Jerry Garcia, rock's answer to Santa 
Claus. As Weir strummed his hard, percussive rhythm parts, and Wasserman 
followed his lead with hammering bass lines, one wished that Garcia were there 
to provide some of his sweet, airy guitar melodies. Especially in the first 
set, the music lacked the melodic grace notes and interactive playing that 
would have made it fuller and more rounded. A harsh sound mix didn't help. 
The second set was less blunt, and more reflective, as Weir explored serious 
themes. "Artificial Flowers," an old Broadway show tune once popularized by 
Bobby Darin, juxtaposed sprightly, ragtime-influenced music with a bleak story 
about an abandoned child forced to scrape for pennies by making "artificial 
flowers, flowers for ladies of fashion to wear." 
Weir was able to make his bitter point about the exploited poor and the 
exploiting rich with some subtlety (at least more so than on "Throwing Stones," 
the soapbox anthem that closed the set). Delicacy also was a virtue on "Easy to 
Fall," a warm, gently philosophical number. 
Weir and Wasserman also took time in the second set to stretch out with more 
responsive playing that finally enabled Wasserman -- best known for recording 
an album of bass-and-voice duets with the likes of Rickie Lee Jones, Aaron 
Neville and Lou Reed -- to show more than the unremarkable accompaniments he 
had played through most of the show. Wasserman's big solo ranged from the 
obvious (blues rock riffs and "Satisfaction") to the enchanting (a passage that 
sounded like twin Celtic or country fiddles, created by bowing a drone with his 
right hand while simultaneously tapping out a lead with his left hand). 
While the show offered the Deadheads something different -- concentrated 
intensity in a small club -- Weir and Wasserman didn't try to reach out and 
lend the show an extra personal dimension. The Dead rarely speak to their 
audiences from the stage. Besides a mumbled excuse for some early sound 
problems, and a directive to the audience to "clap in time" when it was 
clapping chaotically during one of the more rocking numbers, Weir more or less 
remained mum, too. 
Deadheads might say that talk from the pulpit isn't necessary when communion 
through music is complete. As it was, they remained in a rapture from start to 
finish, applauding each number with religious zeal. 
Perhaps if they were a less faithful flock, a more demanding audience, Weir 
would have reached out in a way that most audiences find important. But in 
matters of faith -- and that's what's involved with the world's only 
stadium-sized cult band -- the normal standards don't apply. 
Kris McKay, a newcomer from Austin, Tex., had the unenviable job of playing an 
acoustic opening set for a cult that wasn't hers (she told the audience that 
she is on the same record label as the Dead, as if that was going to earn her 
points). While the crowd kept up a steady hum of chatter through McKay's set, 
it also displayed its bonhomie by cheering each song lustily as it ended. Such 
unconsidered applause is about as meaningful as a have-a-nice-day button. 
McKay's more intimate, folk-based (and therefore least heeded) songs sounded 
best. Her attempts at husky blues belting rang gratingly false as she abandoned 
control and decorum and raised her voice in a raspy, unflattering growl that 
did little but bid for attention. 
