GYMNASTICS; 
LAKES' TIME OFF SHOWS AS HE FINISHES 11TH IN REGIONAL 
After competing in the 1988 Summer Olympics, Charles Lakes decided to take some 
time off from gymnastics. He took a job working for various sponsors of the 
Goodwill Games, and traveled around the country promoting the event. 
Then in March, Lakes decided he would make his comeback this weekend, in the 
U.S. Gymnastics Federation Western Regional Championships at UCLA's John Wooden 
Center. 
The only problem with that decision is that Lakes, no longer a college student 
or a national team member, still had to work. That left him little time to work 
out. 
"This is a classic example of the plight of the amateur in this country who is 
no longer being supported by the university system," Lakes said Sunday after 
completing the optional competition. 
"I wanted to start training in March, but I had to make a living. Trying to 
make a comeback while supporting yourself is difficult." 
Lakes is one of 36 gymnasts who spent Saturday and Sunday at UCLA attempting to 
qualify for the U.S. National Championships in Denver, Colo., June 8-10. The 
regional was one of three held this weekend, and only the top 72 scorers will 
advance. 
The score from Saturday's compulsory competition will count 40% and the 
optional score 60%. The U.S. Gymnastics Federation will compute the scores and 
announce the qualifiers later. 
Lakes, a former University of Illinois gymnast, finished 11th overall, with a 
point total of 105.15. 
Seemingly, the truth of Lakes' remarks were demonstrated in Sunday's optional 
competition -- the top five finishers are either college students or national 
team members. UCLA senior Chris Waller finished first with 56.90 points, 
followed by University of Nebraska freshman Trent Dimas at 56.65. 
U.S. national team member and former UCLA gymnast David St. Pierre finished 
third at 56.35; Stanford's Conrad Voorsanger and Jair Lynch at fourth and fifth 
place, respectively. 
The top scorers from both days are Dimas at 113.50, Waller at 113.45, and St. 
Pierre at 113.15. 
Waller, who won the horizontal bar at the 1990 NCAA championships, drew cheers 
from the crowd of 250 when he scored a 9.8 in that event. But Dimas, who placed 
second to Waller in the high bar at the NCAA championships, got his revenge 
Sunday by scoring a 9.9. 
Gymnastics Notes 
Kurt Thomas, 34, withdrew from the USGF's qualifying regional at Ohio State 
because of a shoulder injury. Thomas was planning on making his comeback this 
weekend. . . . The Los Angeles Turners, the oldest gymnastics organization in 
California that dates to 1879, awarded $2,000 each to the gymnastic programs at 
UC Santa Barbara, California, San Jose State, Cal State Fullerton and 
Washington. 
