TWO HOSTAGES OUT, AND HUNDREDS TO GO; 
THE UPFRONT ISSUE NOW IS GETTING EVERYONE'S PRISONERS EXCHANGED. THE HEAT IS ON 
TO PLAY THE ISRAEL CONNECTION. 
The best that can be said about the release of American hostages Robert Polhill 
and Frank Reed is that their return marked only the beginning of the beginning 
for the others still in captivity, not the beginning of the end. 
What appears to be happening is a kind of cautious groping for a process of 
politically "safe" accommodation, a kind of face-saving "uncompromising" 
compromise that all parties will be able to claim never happened. 
The result of the Polhill/Reed stage-one release process was a significant 
tactical draw. Although it was no-win for everyone (except the Polhill and Reed 
families), it nevertheless was no-loss too. When lives are in peril, this can 
be considered -- if not progress -- at least a gain. 
The beginning of the next stage in the release process appears to be a further 
testing of each party's current intentions and attitudes in relation to one of 
the core issues of the long hostage ordeal -- exchanging prisoners. 
Iranian President Hashemi Rafsanjani's complaint that Washington's lukewarm 
thanks for Tehran's role in the release of Polhill and Reed was "inadequate and 
unwise" drew a tactful response from President Bush. He implied a parallel 
between our national pain and Iran's by expressing some empathy for Iran's 
periodic expressions of concern about the fate of three Iranian diplomats and 
their driver who disappeared in Christian East Beirut on July 4, 1982, and its 
additional oft-expressed concern for the fate of 400 to 500 Lebanese and 
Palestinians being held hostage by Israel. 
By continuing to dwell on their own missing officials and Israel's hostages, 
Iran has been sending a message for quite some time that Westerners are not the 
only kidnap victims in Lebanon, and that justice requires that Muslim 
sensibilities in this respect need also to be taken into account. 
President Bush pledged that the United States would try to be of assistance to 
Iran, so long as this was not "perceived as negotiating for the release of 
hostages." His comment was similar to those he voiced nearly a year ago in 
response to Israel's kidnaping of Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid, the south Lebanese 
Shiite leader linked to Hezbollah. At that time, the President appealed to "all 
who hold hostages in the Middle East to release them forthwith." And after 
Reed's release, the White House -- its no-deal policy for American hostages 
notwithstanding -- said that it would not object to Israel trading its Lebanese 
and Palestinian hostages for three Israeli servicemen captured in Lebanon in 
1986. 
Other rewards for "helping out" -- speeding up the return of Iranian frozen 
assets, compensating Iran for undelivered military equipment and normalizing 
diplomatic and trade relations with both Iran and Syria -- will undoubtedly 
take place in time, but not until all our hostages have come home and probably 
not until both Iran and Syria get themselves off the State Department's list of 
nations involved with terrorism. The nation's bitter Iran-Contra experience 
with foolhardy upfront rewards without ironclad guarantees that the hostages 
would be freed will prevent that from happening again. 
Iran's upbeat announcement Wednesday that progress had been made at the 
Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal in The Hague is an indication that upfront material 
compensation and rewards are no longer the major issues they once seemed to be. 
Iran seems to be satisfied that both can be expected in an appropriate period 
of time after all the hostages come home. So now, the upfront issue is getting 
everyone's hostages and prisoners exchanged. 
The most consistent demand of the Lebanese captors has been for the return of 
Arab prisoners and hostages. If no more American hostages are taken to replace 
Polhill and Reed, we can take this as a signal that the captors are watching to 
see if Washington will pressure Israel to free the hostages it seized in 
Lebanon, and if Kuwait will find a way to release 15 Shiite Muslims convicted 
of terrorism in December, 1983. 
It should not really be surprising that the fate of the American and perhaps 
other Western hostages now seems to be depending on what Israel and its 
Lebanese adversaries are ready and willing to do about their hostage situation. 
There always has been a direct Israeli connection to the plight of the American 
hostages. 
It was Washington's essentially uncritical support of Israel's invasion of 
Lebanon (and then our eventual violent intrusion into Lebanon's civil war, 
mostly on Israel's behalf) that turned a fairly high Lebanese regard for 
Americans into deadly hatred. Now there is a growing insistence in the United 
States that because the Israelis played a major role in getting us into this 
mess, they'd better help get us out -- with the lives of our six remaining 
hostage citizens intact. 
