BUSH WARNED BY GOP LEAVE-BILL BACKERS; 
BENEFITS: THE PRESIDENT IS TOLD THAT A VETO WOULD BE IN CONFLICT WITH THE 
REPUBLICANS' PAST PLEDGES TO PROTECT 'FAMILY VALUES.' 
Responding to a White House veto threat, Republican supporters of a family and 
medical leave bill Tuesday warned President Bush that a veto of the legislation 
would hurt their party because of its past pledges to protect "family values." 
The legislation, which is strongly backed by the House Democratic leadership 
and a group of GOP moderates, is expected to pass the House easily today or 
Thursday but fall short of a veto-proof two-thirds majority. It then will be 
sent to the Senate, where approval appears likely. 
White House Chief of Staff John H. Sununu said Monday that Bush would veto the 
bill, which is strongly opposed by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and other 
business groups, on grounds that it would mandate a fringe benefit -- unpaid 
leaves to deal with family emergencies, personal illness or the birth of a 
child -- that should be left to employers' discretion. 
Rep. Marge Roukema (R-N.J.), however, urged the President to sign the 
legislation that she said would establish minimum standards of decency in the 
workplace. 
"This bill is about family values," Roukema said. "As a mother who cared for my 
own son when he was terminally ill with leukemia, I know the importance of this 
legislation. 
"This is a defining issue for the Republican Party," she added. "The organized 
business lobby is out of step with the real world. . . . For two-thirds of 
Americans workers, this is an economic necessity." 
Her views were echoed by Rep. Curt Weldon (R-Pa.), who said the bipartisan 
compromise was designed to protect legitimate business concerns while extending 
family and medical leave to millions of American workers who need it. 
"This is right for America -- right for the Republican and Democratic parties," 
Weldon said. "This legislation is necessary in a world where so often both 
parents must work, when parents cannot afford to take off full-time to care for 
a child . . . they need to know their jobs will be waiting for them when they 
return." 
Rep. Bill Green (R-N.Y.) even read from the GOP platform adopted in 1988 about 
the importance of parents in raising children in urging that Bush sign the 
bill. 
The legislation, originally introduced five years ago, has been bottled up in 
committee because of strong business opposition. Republican backers of the 
measure, however, said changes were made to overcome many business objections. 
The co-sponsor of the compromise, Rep. Bart Gordon (D-Tenn.), is a conservative 
Southerner who has business support. 
Meanwhile, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater contributed to the debate 
with some advice for workers who cannot persuade their employers to grant them 
time off to deal with family medical crises or newborn children: "Look for 
other jobs." 
Fitzwater's remark was retracted quickly. Before his briefing ended, he said: 
"I did not intend to suggest that individuals seek other employment if they 
don't have adequate parent leave. . . . Compromise means give and take, and we 
urge all employers to find sensitive and flexible leave policies, but the 
government should not dictate it." 
The top three Democrats in the House -- including Speaker Thomas S. Foley, 
Majority Leader Richard A. Gephardt and Whip William H. Gray III -- also urged 
Bush to sign the bill, which Foley termed one of the most significant pieces of 
legislation in the 101st Congress. 
Under the bipartisan compromise, companies or government agencies with more 
than 50 employes would be required to grant unpaid medical or family leave for 
up to 12 weeks a year. During a leave, employers would have to continue health 
benefits and provide a job when the worker returned. 
"We're asking the President to sign this bill and stand up with the working 
families of America," said Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat. 
"After the legislation has been passed . . . and the President has a chance to 
reflect on its importance to families and preserving the family as an 
institution . . . the President will sign the bill," added Foley, making a rare 
public statement on a bill before it came to a vote in the House. 
