PRESIDENT'S TEXT: 'TRANSFORMING THE MILITARY MAP OF EUROPE' 
The following are excerpts from President Bush's speech delivered Monday at a 
closed-door meeting of North Atlantic Treaty Organization's North Atlantic 
Council: 
The fact of change in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe is unmistakeable. In 
fact, the change is revolutionary. We want to see it continue. We want it to 
succeed. 
While the outside world cannot determine the ultimate success of (the Soviet 
reform movement known as) perestroika, we can and must be creative in 
encouraging positive trends toward greater reform and more freedom. We can look 
for ways to promote the institutionalization of change in human rights, in the 
economy, in the military. . . . 
Conventional forces alone have not guaranteed peace in Europe, and nuclear 
weapons continue to play a key role in demonstrating to any aggressor that war 
in Europe is unthinkable. 
The proof that this alliance has followed a wise course is that the Soviet 
Union is now rethinking its pursuit of a clear military superiority that has so 
long compelled us to devote our valuable resources toward a necessary defense. 
. . . 
We may be on the verge of a revolutionary and more ambitious arms control 
agreement than anyone considered possible. Thus, I believe the alliance should 
now act decisively and creatively. 
Therefore, I am proposing that NATO countries consider the following 
initiatives: 
First, we should lock in the Eastern agreement to Western-proposed ceilings on 
tanks and armored troop carriers. We should also seek agreement on a common 
numerical ceiling for artillery in the range between NATO's and the (Warsaw) 
Pact's numbers, provided definitional problems can be solved. All reduced 
equipment should be destroyed. 
Second, we should expand our current proposal to include all land-based combat 
aircraft and helicopters, by proposing that both sides reduce in these 
categories to a level 15% below the current NATO totals. Given the Warsaw 
Pact's advantage in numbers, the Pact would have to make far deeper reductions 
than NATO to establish parity at these lower levels. As with the other 
reductions, the equipment should be destroyed. 
Third, we should propose a 20% cut in combat manpower in U.S. "stationed 
forces," and a resulting ceiling on U.S. and Soviet ground and air forces 
stationed outside of national territory in the Atlantic-to-Urals zone at 
approximately 275,000 each. This reduction to parity, a fair and balanced level 
of strength, would compel the Soviets to reduce their 600,000-strong Red Army 
in Eastern Europe by 325,000. These reduced forces would be demobilized. 
Finally, but very important, we want to accelerate the timetable for reaching 
and implementing such an agreement. Given Warsaw Pact movement toward the 
Western approach, there is no reason why a five- to six-year timetable as 
suggested by General Secretary (Mikhail S.) Gorbachev is necessary. I believe 
that it should be possible to reach such an agreement in six months to a year 
and to accomplish the reductions by 1991 or 1992. 
And so, I call on General Secretary Gorbachev to join us in accelerating the 
timetable for agreement and implementation of these proposals. With these 
ambitious new initiatives, NATO can create a further opportunity for the 
Soviets to demonstrate their new thinking and reduce their military burden. 
Indeed, if Moscow accepts this fair offer, the results could dramatically 
increase stability on the Continent and transform the military map of Europe. 
