RUHLMANN AFTER ANOTHER BIG STAKES WIN 
Ruhlmann is named for an interior designer in Germany who did exquisite work 
for the horse's owners, Mr. and Mrs. Jerry Moss, and he does exquisite work on 
the race track when he is at his best. 
"When he runs a big race," trainer Charles Whittingham said, "it is very, very 
big. When he puts in a bad one, it is bad." 
Coming off two huge stakes victories at Santa Anita, Ruhlmann is the 5-2 
favorite in the $1-million Pimlico Special Saturday. 
In a 10-horse field where With Approval, the Canadian Triple Crown winner, is 
sixth choice at 10-1, Ruhlmann is eligible to be beaten. But that is never 
really easy. 
Calumet's Criminal Type (8-1 Saturday) ran Ruhlmann down in the 9-furlong San 
Antonio the last time he was beaten, but he had to shadow him through a 
half-mile in :45 2/5 and three-quarters in 1:09 4/5. 
Whittingham was asked which of the field he thought might "go with" Ruhlmann's 
speed. "If there is any (early speed)," the 77-year-old trainer said, "they 
won't go with him for very long." 
Ruhlmann, by Mr. Leader, was a relative bargain for the Mosses (he founded 
A&amp;M records and the A is for Alpert). Trainer Bobby Frankel picked him, 
sight unseen, out of the Keeneland yearling sale for $40,000 and he has won 
$1,564,353. But it wasn't simple. 
As a 3-year-old, Ruhlmann was scary, and Whittingham thinks he might have 
scared himself as well as his owners, trainer and the competition. 
Ruhlmann made everybody nervous when Frankel brought him to the 1988 Florida 
Derby. In his only race that year he had run away in the El Camino Real at Bay 
Meadows. Made the 9-5 favorite, he bled and ran eighth. 
Given the appropriate medication, Ruhlmann went in the California Derby at 
Golden Gate in April. He was on the lead in the stretch when a horse clipped 
heels from behind. A third horse joined the collision and the winner, All Thee 
Power, was fatally injured when he went down after the wire. 
Ruhlmann's injuries weren't serious but the accident aggravated a bone chip in 
his knee. After arthroscopic surgery he came back to the track in August. On 
Oct. 2 he won the Jamaica Handicap in New York, where medication is not 
permitted. 
"He's still hyper sometimes," Whittingham said. "That was a bad crash he had, 
and horses don't forget things like that. 
