IS COMPETITION AT BALLOT BOX WORTH LOSS OF CHOICE AND EXPERIENCE IN OFFICE?; 
POLITICS: LIMITING THE TERMS OF OFFICEHOLDERS AND PUBLIC FINANCING OFFER 
CHALLENGERS A BETTER CHANCE AT DISLODGING ENTRENCHED INCUMBENTS. 
It is safe to predict that not many voters will bother to cast ballots June 5. 
The consequences are worrisome, because it means winners stay in office too 
long, blocking the rise of new leadership and, perhaps, society's forward 
movement. In Congress, for example, 99% of House incumbents were reelected in 
1988; in the Senate, 85% held onto their seats. At the state and local levels, 
the reign of incumbents is similar. 
One explanation is that the lower you go on the political ladder -- the less 
visible the office -- the less voters know about challengers. At best, choice 
is little more than recognizing a familiar name. 
There are two solutions to non-competitive elections now widely discussed in 
public-policy circles: public financing of campaigns and limiting the terms of 
officeholders. It is not always clear, however, that these are solutions to the 
same problem. 
Public-financing advocates contend that unless challengers gain access to more 
funds, they have virtually no chance at the polls. With the additional money, 
the candidates can improve their name recognition among voters, thereby 
enhancing their competitiveness. 
For that reason, incumbents tend to be wary of public financing, especially 
when it comes to their own campaigns. They are less reluctant to tap taxpayer 
funds for campaigns in which others politicians are running. Congress, for 
example, made public financing the law in presidential campaigns. As for 
itself, it still prefers private campaign money. 
When some form of public financing is instituted, incumbents want to keep 
spending limits low to prevent their opponents from spending enough to gain 
name recognition. 
The other solution to incumbency stalemate is limiting the terms of 
officeholders. There is a federal proposal for senators and representatives. 
Come November, Californians can choose to limit the terms of Assembly members 
and senators. And Angelenos can sign a petition to be able to restrict the 
tenure of council members and certain elected officials. (The Los Angeles 
version is especially anti-incumbent, because it would retroactively impose a 
two-term limit.) Most of the proposals would impose a 12-year limit. 
The President, of course, is restricted to two terms. Governors in 29 states 
also can't spend the rest of their lives running their states. But thus far, 
few cities and no state have set term limits for legislators. 
It is quite possible that if the term-limit clock began ticking for the 
"permanent Congress," as it is known in Washington these days, the consequences 
would ripple throughout the electoral system. The idea that public-service 
careers should start in the school committee or city council, advance to the 
state legislature, to Congress and then on to the presidency loses it appeal 
when you consider the average tenure of the respective officeholders. 
Typically, a Los Angeles council member has been in office 13 years, a 
supervisor 18. In Sacramento, an Assembly member, on average, has been in 
office for 15 years, a state senator for 12. The average tenure of the 
California delegation to the House of Representatives is 11 years. At that 
rate, it would take 69 years just to run for the U.S. Senate. 
Reapportionment, old age, changing ambitions, the need to make more money and 
new opportunities, however, help to maintain the turnover in most of these 
governmental bodies. Sixty percent of the California delegation to Washington 
has been elected since 1980; likewise, 54% of the state senators and 65% of the 
Assembly members. 
The average tenure of local officeholders is greater. Two of the five 
supervisors were elected in 1980; the remaining three were already supervisors. 
Six City Council members were elected in the 1980s; five have been on the 
council for 20 years or more. 
Talent, hard work and experience are needed to become a good politician. It 
usually takes years to develop the skills to rise to positions of leadership in 
legislatures. For example, the name of Sen. Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) is invariably 
preceded by "well-respected," in large part because his judgment on military 
matters is the result of long study and service on the Armed Services 
Committee. He was first elected to the Senate in 1972. Advocates of term limits 
would eliminate the Nunns. 
On the other hand, if terms were restricted, the time it takes to advance might 
shrink proportionately. Seniority could be achieved in six or eight years, not 
10 or 20. Since political issues tend to recycle themselves several times 
during a 10-year period, maybe the country would be better served by new 
leaders the second or third time around. 
A more serious drawback to term limits is that they are anti-democratic because 
they eliminate choice. We rely on voters to hold elected officeholders 
accountable. If a politician's constituents wish to reelect him or her year 
after year, they should be able to do so. 
The problem, in the end, is that we really don't have a choice because we don't 
know enough about the candidates. Sometimes, we pick candidates because we know 
something about them, are able to discern their positions by virtue of their 
party affiliation or because the issues have been widely discussed during the 
campaign. Most of the time, however, the choice is between a vaguely familiar 
name and one that is totally unknown. 
Public financing, where available, has proved to be effective in increasing 
political competitiveness. Limiting the terms of officeholders on the top rungs 
of the political ladder assures open seats, but when were these offices ever 
non-competitive? The two-term limit for President and one- or two-term limit 
for governors more likely reduces bossism and corruption than promote 
competitiveness. What medicine you take depends on what disease you want to 
cure. 
