NRC ALLOWS START-UP OF DAMAGED REACTOR AT SAN ONOFRE 
Federal regulators gave the green light Monday for operators of the San Onofre 
nuclear power plant to fire up the Unit 1 reactor, despite damage to bolts 
holding an important thermal shield. 
The decision by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission came amid complaints from a 
San Diego-area congressman that the reactor is "an accident waiting to happen." 
Officials with Southern California Edison Co., the utility that operates the 
plant just down the coast from San Clemente, said the problem with the bolts 
does not threaten safe operation of the plant. The bolts are to be fixed in 
about a year. 
The thermal shield, a 2 1/2-inch-thick cylinder, surrounds the reactor core and 
protects the pressure vessel from radiation that, over time, makes the vessel 
more brittle. The shield rests on six supporting blocks and is tied to the 
reactor floor by 30 bolts. Three bolts have come partly unscrewed, and others 
appear to be in a degraded condition. 
Critics worry that problems with the bolts could cause the shield to come 
loose, fall to the reactor floor and block the flow of coolant. But Edison 
officials contend that such a scenario is highly unlikely. 
Gene Morgan, station manager at the plant, likened the damage to the bolts to 
the loss of a single screw from a door hinge that continues to work properly 
for years. 
"It's satisfactorily sound," Morgan said. "There's more than sufficient support 
for the thermal shield . . . And we're not planning to operate in this 
condition for what would be considered an extended period of time." 
Despite such assurances, Rep. Jim Bates (D-San Diego) continued Monday to blast 
the NRC and Edison for the decision to start up the plant. 
"It's an accident waiting to happen," Bates said. "They may be lucky and it 
might get through, but I think it's irresponsible, unconscionable. It's playing 
hard, fast and loose with the public safety." 
Bates said he would urge "the interested parties," such as lawmakers with the 
cities of San Diego and Oceanside who have expressed concern over the situation 
at Unit 1, to seek a court order blocking start-up of the reactor. 
He argued that plant operators are eager to fire up Unit 1 because further 
delays would only cost more money, weakening the utility's efforts to assume 
control of San Diego Gas &amp; Electric Co. Bates also maintained that putting 
off the repairs will save about $15 million for the takeover effort. 
"It's a production-driven system based on money," Bates said. "But I think they 
should err on the side of the public, not on the side of money." 
Officials at San Onofre refused to comment on Bates' remarks. 
San Onofre officials said they expect the plant, which has been out of service 
for refueling since the beginning of the year, to begin producing electricity 
again Thursday or Friday. Each day the reactor is out of service it costs the 
utility $85,000. 
Aside from a feeling that the repairs are not a pressing need, Morgan said 
operators wanted to delay the job to allow sufficient time for design work and 
to invite bids, thus reducing its cost. 
If the repairs had been started after the problem was first discovered in 
January by a remote-operated camera inserted into the reactor vessel, it 
probably would have taken 6 months to finish the work, Morgan said. 
With adequate time now to determine the best procedure for accomplishing the 
job, the repairs should take only about 3 months when the work is begun, 
probably in mid-1990, he said. 
