JERRY HULSE'S TRAVEL TIPS 
The word for welcome in Japanese is yosoko, which is the greeting travelers are 
hearing these days from Tokyo to Kyoto and beyond. It was inevitable, I 
suppose. The B&amp;B network has finally reached the land of the rising sun. 
Sayonara to the old life. Groups led by George Cebra and his Japanese wife 
Fumiko of Palm Springs are being hosted in private homes by Japanese anxious to 
earn the extra yen. Inexpensive food and lodging. Departures from LAX 
throughout the summer. Cebra, a musician, began guiding tours after teaming 
with Fumiko, whom he met not in Japan but in an antique store in Pasadena. 
Round-trip air fare, lodging, sightseeing figures out to $2,800 for 10 days. 
For Japan that's cheap. Visits to Tokyo, Nikko, Kamakura, Lake Hakone, Nara 
(extensions offered to other destinations). 
Cebra and his wife plan to turn their Palm Springs home into a Japanese-style 
inn, with guests sleeping on futons and with sliding shoji screens for privacy. 
The cost for living like an emperor (or empress) will range from $55 single to 
$75 double, with a choice of Japanese or American-style breakfast. 
Write to the Cebras c/o Heart of Japan, Box 9403, Palm Springs 92263, or call 
(619) 327-0705. 
Gypsy Caravan: For a new experience in Ireland, consider joining a Gypsy 
caravan. You're in the driver's seat. Each caravan wagon sleeps up to five 
vacationers. Blankets, cooking utensils, a gas stove. Spend the night in a 
meadow or beside a country road. Plenty of peace. And the Irish will love you 
for joining them on their own turf. The season got underway last month 
(continues through October). A week is recommended. Rates: $150/$450. 
Instructions, maps included. For brochures, write to Slattery's Travel, 1 
Russell St., County Kerry, Ireland. 
Saddling Up: Wolfgang and Peggy Hallauer have been arranging tours by horseback 
since 1982. Europe, the United States, Canada, Africa, Australia/New Zealand, 
Russia, South/Central America. A choice of 27 countries. Trips average one to 
three weeks. Lots of leisure time. Riders are accompanied by a guide. Shelter 
is provided in hotels, inns, castles (tents in some cases). Luggage follows by 
car. Most European countries are on the schedule. You'll ride from four to six 
hours a day. Average price is $120 per day (based on double occupancy). 
Everything included except air fare. 
Wolfgang and Peggy Hallauer, FITS Equestrian, 2011 Alamo Pintado Road, Solvang, 
Calif. 93463. Telephone (805) 688-9494. 
On Foot: Ray Cross of Irvine asks for information about a walking tour in New 
Zealand. Choices vary. There's one trek that takes in the Greenstone Valley on 
the South Island. Follows a Maori trail across the Alps. Miles of spectacular 
scenery. The same company does a guided tour that starts/finishes in 
Queenstown. Features the Southern Alps, with breathtaking views of lakes, 
rivers, streams. Hikers do about eight miles per day. No age limit, although 
hikers should be in good physical condition. Nights are spent in cabins 
equipped with all the necessities. Only light backpacks are necessary. Cost: 
about $620 New Zealand, including taxes, meals, shelter, land transport. 
Contact Mt. Cook Line, 1960 Grand Ave., El Segundo, Calif. 90245. Call 
toll-free (800) 468-2665. Other details from Guided Walk Information, P.O. Box 
568, Queenstown, New Zealand. 
Adventure for Hire: GEO Expeditions of Sonora, Calif., is doing a series of 
trips aimed at both the professional and amateur adventurer. In Africa, groups 
check out the Masai Mara (Kenya) and the Serengeti plain of Tanzania. Others 
track gorillas in Rwanda and Zaire and follow game on foot in Zambia's Luangwa 
Valley. GEO's trips feature South America (the Galapagos, Machu Picchu, Amazon 
River forest), India, Malaysia, Thailand, Burma, Nepal, Pakistan, China. In the 
South Pacific, GEO focuses on Milford Sound (New Zealand) and the highlands of 
Papua New Guinea. Brochures on request. 
Contact GEO Expeditions, P.O. Box 3656-L7, Sonora, Calif. 95370. Telephone 
toll-free (800) 351-5041. 
See U.S.A.: For the traveler who intends to see the U.S.A. and Canada this 
summer, start making plans now. This is the advice of George C. Guenther, 
president of the 3,700-member National Tour Foundation that concluded its 
spring convention several days ago in Palm Springs. The NTF focuses on the 
mature traveler, who the amiable Guenther predicts will be out in force across 
the nation this summer. "The mature market is getting younger," he said, 
explaining that more travelers in their early 50s are appearing on the scene 
and that the trend will continue for at least the next 30 years. 
NTA's motor-coach tours take in the major national parks as well as historic 
settings. Popular destinations: Yellowstone, the Grand Canyon, Bryce and Zion 
national parks, San Francisco and the Napa Valley, the Great Smokies and the 
New England states, both during summer and the fall foliage season. Guenther 
brought up one negative point: Hawaii is pricing itself out of the mature 
traveler market due to high prices. 
For a free consumer's guide, call the National Tour Foundation toll-free at 
(800) 242-1520. 
Hawaii Hideaway: If you've vacationed at Kona Village on the Big Island of 
Hawaii, no doubt you will recall Barbara Campbell, who used to arrange sunset 
weddings by the sea. A born romantic. Now Campbell has said aloha to Kona 
Village and is operating a B&amp;B at Kamuela near the Parker Ranch. Calls it 
Waimea Gardens Cottage (antique furnishings, lace curtains, French doors). 
Campbell works with five other B&amp;Bs in the Waimea area. One is a converted 
barn (two bedrooms, a living room with fireplace). Another faces a stream with 
views of Mauna Kea, Mauna Loa and the Pacific Ocean. If you're tired of crowds, 
Campbell promises sweet peace. 
Write to Upcountry Hideaways, P.O. Box 563, Kamuela, Hawaii, 96743. Or call 
(808) 885-4550. Rates: $75/$95 (double occupancy) plus sales tax. 
One-Call Reservations: Central Resort Reservations of Colorado does it all 
"with one call." Customized sports vacation packages at resorts/cities 
throughout the West plus Hawaii/Mexico. Golf, tennis, white-water rafting, 
deep-sea fishing, sailing, scuba diving, biking. Dozens of options. CRS does 
the homework for thousands of sports vacationers. Accommodations include resort 
hotels, inns, condos, guest ranches. 
Central Resort Vacations, P.O. Box 1086, Aspen, Colo. 81612, toll-free (800) 
635-4156. 
Biking: Backroads Bicycle Touring continues to expand its operation. 
Territories now include all Western states, Vermont, Virginia, Maine, North 
Carolina, Louisiana, Canada, Mexico (Baja), New Zealand/Australia, Bali, China, 
France, Italy, Ireland. More than 50 cycling trips. Van and trailer support for 
luggage/repairs. Both inn and camping opportunities. Take your own bike or 
Backroads will rent you one. Helmets provided. 
For a 64-page catalogue, write to Backroads, 1516 5th St., Suite 1C3, Berkeley, 
Calif. 94710-1713, or call toll-free in California: (800) 533-2573. 
Reader Recommendations 
California -- Mrs. Suzanne Andre, Seal Beach: "Rivendell Inn, P.O. Box 3338, 
Mammoth Lakes, Calif. 93546. "Paid $75 a day for three persons midweek, 
including breakfast, wine/cheese each afternoon. Phone (619) 934-2873." 
England -- Mrs. Dorothy Jackson, San Bernardino: "Central London B&amp;B 
operated by Mrs. June Jackman, 10 Abbotts House, Aylesford Street, Pimlico, 
London SW1V 3RN. Rate: about $24 per person." 
England -- Mrs. Paul Miller, Beverly Hills: "Francis Horneck's Wellmeadow 
Guesthouse, Wellmeadow Road, Ealing W7 2AL. Rate: about $48 U.S. per couple." 
