FISHING INDUSTRY TRIES TO REVIVE TAX EXEMPTION; 
LEGISLATION: ASSEMBLYMAN GERALD N. FELANDO'S BILL WOULD EXEMPT COMMERCIAL 
DEEP-SEA AND CHARTER FISHING BOATS FROM THE SALES AND USE TAX FOR DIESEL FUEL. 
California's commercial fishing industry, reeling from hard times, is 
attempting to resurrect a tax break worth at least $1.1 million a year. 
With fishing industry support, Assemblyman Gerald N. Felando (R-San Pedro) is 
seeking passage of legislation to exempt commercial deep-sea and charter 
fishing operations from the sales and use tax for diesel fuel. 
Twice in the past six years, the Legislature has approved temporary diesel fuel 
tax breaks for the state's commercial fishing vessels. The most recent tax 
break lapsed on Jan. 1, 1989, but Felando now is pushing for a permanent 
exemption. 
"We're just trying to save an industry," said Felando, 55, who as a youth 
worked aboard his father's fishing boat. "Every little bit helps." 
Fishermen also say they should be treated the same as farmers, who since the 
1930s have enjoyed a similar diesel tax exemption for farm vehicles. Felando's 
bill is opposed by the state Department of Finance, which says the measure 
singles out one business class for special treatment. 
Lenny Goldberg, lobbyist for the California Tax Reform Assn., a public interest 
tax group, has criticized the proposal as "the tax exemption that won't die." 
Goldberg complained that there has never been a determination of who benefits 
from the tax break. "There are no hard numbers that it makes a difference." 
But fisherman John Vilicich estimated that when the exemption was in place he 
saved from $7,000 to $14,000 a year on diesel fuel for a large tuna boat. He 
said owners of smaller boats could save several thousand dollars a year. 
"Regardless of whether you catch the fish or not, you still burn fuel," 
Vilicich said. The San Pedro fisherman said he used the savings for boat 
maintenance. 
Officials of several commercial fishing groups said they have been persistent 
about reviving the legislation because their members are facing economic rough 
seas. The fishermen complain they are plagued by increasing foreign 
competition, rising costs and dwindling numbers of fish. 
Fishermen trace their troubles to 1984, when they experienced serious drops in 
income because of El Nino, a warm ocean current that disrupted worldwide 
weather patterns. 
Mindful of those adverse conditions, the Legislature approved a two-year diesel 
fuel tax exemption. But in 1986, Gov. George Deukmejian vetoed an extension of 
the exemption, saying: "Other industries experiencing similar hardships are not 
afforded similar tax exemptions." 
Later, the industry persuaded the governor to sign a one-year exemption for 
1988. It was designed to cushion commercial fishing boat operators from 
economic disruptions caused by the closure of canneries, increased insurance 
costs and rising ship-repair costs, according to an Assembly analysis of the 
latest Felando proposal. Two other efforts to revive the exemption died in the 
Legislature. The latest legislative initiative -- the Felando bill -- is 
pending in the Assembly Ways and Means Committee. 
Supporters say Felando's bill should be enacted, in part, because boat 
operators continue to face tough times. 
Looking back to 1980, 800 million pounds of fish, valued at $316 million, were 
brought into California's ports, according to the state Department of Fish and 
Game. 
In 1985, with fishermen feeling the brunt of El Nino, the figures dropped to 
357 million pounds caught off California, valued at almost $127 million. But, 
by 1988 -- the latest year for which figures are available -- the picture 
brightened with 496 million pounds of fish worth $201 million coming into the 
ports. Still, the amount was below the 1980 level. 
Tom Crehan, general manager of the San Pedro-based Fishermen's Cooperative 
Assn., said low catches are continuing, describing April as a poor month for 
his members. In the past five years, he said, the membership of his fish 
marketing cooperative has dropped by a third -- from 24 to 16. 
But even without the bad times for the fishing industry, the tax exemption 
should be reinstated, say other supporters of the bill. They note that farm 
equipment and off-road logging trucks that use diesel fuel are already exempted 
from the sales tax. 
Crehan argued that marine fishermen should get the same break as farmers 
"because both of them are producing food." 
Robert Fletcher, president of the San Diego-based Sportfishing Assn. of 
California, voiced a similar argument, saying that fishing enthusiasts aboard 
his group's party boats are fishing for food. "We believe that most of our 
passengers are from lower-income levels and supplement their protein by eating 
fish," Fletcher said. 
The opponents, however, regard the legislation as unfair. 
If the fishing industry requires help, said Goldberg of the Tax Reform Assn., 
the state should target the economic aid to those fishing boat owners who need 
it the most. Goldberg added that the state has failed to study the impact of 
previous exemptions. "It's unclear whether (they have) made much difference," 
he said. 
In its review of the bill, the Finance Department noted that the fishing 
industry already receives preferential treatment because, under existing law, 
ships and their component parts are exempt from sales tax. 
Moreover, according to the department's analysis, the original exemption was 
"intended to provide temporary, not permanent" relief. 
