A FLAWED VIEW OF FUTURE EUROPE; 
CLASSIC EXCLUSION OF SOVIETS WEAKENS SECURITY OF OUR 'HOME' 
Henry A. Kissinger has begun to vigorously push a concept of a Europe extending 
from the Soviet-Polish border to the Atlantic. He is fuzzy in his public 
statements about the place of Germany in this Europe, but virtually everything 
he says implies that the division of that country would remain. 
Kissinger's notions need the deepest scrutiny and debate. The former head of 
Kissinger Associates, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, is now the top specialist on 
East-West relations in the State Department. The former head of the Washington 
office of Kissinger Associates, Brent Scowcroft, is President Bush's national 
security adviser. Their general approach has been heavily influenced by 
Kissinger, and if the Bush Administration is guided by this vision, the result 
will be disaster. 
The Kissinger view of the future stems from a clear perception of an obvious 
truth: The postwar period has been very good for the United States. The Great 
Depression of the 1930s was not repeated, and the Soviets were successfully 
contained during the virulent period of their history. 
Most important, the divisions between England, France and Germany that produced 
two world wars in this century were ended. The Atlantic community, including 
the United States, ended 400 years of war and created a "common home" of 600 
million Europeans from the Elbe to Los Angeles. 
Obviously, the United States does have an interest in the preservation of this 
status quo -- perhaps, if necessary, with a controlled increase in East 
European autonomy. The problem is that the Soviet Union has benefited far less 
from the postwar era. It is now determined to change things. Like it or not, we 
have to adjust. 
Kissinger has always had a keen sense of 20th-Century geostrategy and a very 
weak sense of economics. He correctly understands that the Soviet Union today 
has a geostrategic interest in the continuation of European stability, even if 
this does require a North Atlantic Treaty Organization with a strong American 
military presence. 
There are, however, two problems with his analysis. First, the 21st Century 
will be much different geostrategically. In 30 to 40 years, both China and 
India will be superpowers on the Soviet border with a billion people each. The 
Soviets have every interest to join with the other Europeans and create a 
"common European home" all the way from Vladivostok to Los Angeles as the 
nature of the potential threat changes. 
Second, the division of Europe and the economic isolation of the Soviet Union 
has meant total protectionism for Soviet manufacturers -- and protectionism has 
meant economic disaster. Moscow must have an export strategy, large foreign 
investment in the Soviet Union, large Soviet investment abroad and the 
international exchange of components found in the modern transnational 
corporation. This is incompatible with the foreign perception of Soviet threat 
-- or the level of Soviet military spending found in the past. Mikhail S. 
Gorbachev will be ruthless in reducing both. 
The Kissinger talk about a free Europe from the Polish-Soviet border to the 
Atlantic, but including a divided Germany, is not only hopelessly utopian; it 
also would lead directly to the instability he fears. 
The Soviet Union is determined to integrate into Europe and will never accept 
its border with Poland as the dividing line for Europe. It will not be left 
isolated to face China and India alone. 
An American policy designed to promote freedom for Poles, Hungarians and 
Czechs, but to preserve slavery for East Germans, will have disastrous 
propaganda consequences in West Germany. 
The strong reluctance to have troop reductions demands that German youth 
continue to serve through a military draft even as Gorbachev seems to be ending 
the threat of East-West confrontration. That is simply unrealistic. Meanwhile, 
Americans have every interest in reducing military spending to reduce the 
deficit. 
What must we do? First, we must insist that we (and Latin America) speak a 
European language and have a European culture. We must preserve the European 
home we have created over the last 40 years. Europe cannot end at the Atlantic, 
but at the Pacific. 
We also must accept that Russians are Europeans. The Russian Orthodox religion 
comes out of the Judeo-Christian and Greek traditions. Their literary and 
artistic achievements in the tradition of Tolstoy and Tchaikovsky are part of 
modern European culture. We cannot make them deny their tradition, and we 
should not. 
Our policy should be of one Europe, from Vladisvostok to Los Angeles. It will 
be good to add the 350 million Russians and East Europeans to our 600 million 
and have a billion Europeans in a world in which the other superpowers have a 
billion people as well. Indeed, we should be struggling to get the Japanese in 
our common home, too. 
The achievements of the postwar era were real accomplishments. The statesmen of 
that era, including Henry Kissinger, were very skilled. A new generation needs 
comparable skill to solve new problems, but the one recipe for disaster is 
simply to follow the old rules that worked in an era that has now passed into 
history. 
