ORANGE COUNTY FOCUS: HUNTINGTON BEACH; 
RACIAL IMBALANCE AT SCHOOL STUDIED 
Faced with a disproportionately soaring Latino enrollment at one of its 
elementary schools, the Ocean View School District board is studying ways to 
end the school's segregation. 
Between December, 1987, and October, 1989, the Latino student population at Oak 
View School jumped from 47% to more than 70%, a racial anomaly in a district 
composed chiefly of Anglo students. 
During an emergency meeting called Thursday to address the issue, school board 
members agreed to set up an advisory committee to suggest alternatives for 
desegregating the school. A staff attorney from the County Department of 
Education has been called in to guide district officials through the 
complicated legal maze of leveling Oak View's unbalanced ethnic makeup. 
The school, located in a predominantly Latino neighborhood northwest of Beach 
Boulevard and Slater Avenue, also includes 14% Asian and 14% Anglo students, 
according to 1989 figures. Two years earlier, Asian students composed 30% of 
Oak View's enrollment and Anglos made up 22%. 
The segregation issue arose during an advisory committee's discussions about 
restructuring the schools in the district, which may include closing three 
schools and realigning boundaries of many others. 
Options under study for ending the racial disparity include redrawing Oak 
View's boundaries, changing its grades to something other than kindergarten 
through sixth, or closing the school and sending its students to neighboring 
schools, district officials said Thursday. 
Board members said they hope to incorporate a desegregation clause into the 
districtwide restructuring plan that the committee is scheduled to present May 
22. 
Some efforts must be made toward resolving the dilemma before next year, when 
state officials are scheduled to review the ethnic balance at the district's 
schools, Supt. Monte McMurray said. 
The state Department of Education conducts demographic analyses for each 
district every four years. During its last review of Ocean View in December, 
1987, it concluded that Oak View was "in danger of racial isolation" but agreed 
with the district's assertion that the only solutions available were not 
economically feasible at the time, said Geraldine Jaffe, the county attorney 
studying the issue for the district. 
The state also concluded, however, that the standard of education offered at 
Oak View was equal to that of the district's other 16 schools. 
If the district does nothing about Oak View's ethnic imbalance by 1991, the 
state probably would recommend a specific course of action for the district to 
take, which could be imposed upon the district by a court order, Jaffe said. 
JOHN PENNER 
