VA'S RULES ON AGENT ORANGE EFFECTS VOIDED 
A federal judge has thrown out the Veterans Administration's rules on health 
damage attributed to the herbicide Agent Orange and has ordered the VA to 
reconsider the claims of more than 31,000 Vietnam veterans. 
In denying most claims for health benefits related to Agent Orange, the VA 
wrongly required proof that the herbicide causes various diseases, U. S. 
District Judge Thelton Henderson said in a decision made public Monday. 
Statistical evidence showing a significant correlation between Agent Orange and 
the diseases would be sufficient, the judge said. 
"These errors, especially sharply compounded with one another, sharply tipped 
the scales against veteran claimants," Henderson said. 
In a nationwide suit on behalf of Agent Orange claimants, Henderson struck down 
VA regulations that deny Agent Orange service-connected health benefits for 
cancers and all other diseases except one non-fatal skin condition, chloracne. 
He also ordered the VA to reopen all claims denied under those rules. 
"This is a major victory with far-reaching implications," Mary Stout, president 
of Vietnam Veterans of America, said. 
"The ruling validates what Vietnam veterans have been saying for years, that 
the VA has failed to give Agent Orange victims a fair hearing. . . . I am 
optimistic that Congress will now act quickly to resolve this most painful 
legacy of the Vietnam War." 
Barry Kasinitz, spokesman for the 35,000-member group, said it will again 
sponsor legislation to require Agent Orange benefits for two types of cancer -- 
soft-tissue sarcoma and non-Hodgkins lymphoma -- and establish a new scientific 
panel, independent of the VA, to study the herbicide's health effects. A 
similar bill was passed by the Senate last year but died in the House, he said. 
Although Henderson's ruling does not require the government to add any diseases 
to the service-connected list for Agent Orange, Kasinitz said the performance 
so far of the secretary of the new Cabinet-level Department of Veterans 
Affairs, Edward Derwinski, provides some grounds for optimism. 
"We think that we probably stand a better chance of getting a fair review under 
the current Administration than we did under the past one," Kasinitz said. 
The VA was represented by the Justice Department, whose spokeswoman, Amy Brown, 
declined comment on the ruling, saying department lawyers had not seen it. 
Agent Orange, whose toxic ingredient is dioxin, was used as a defoliant by the 
United States in Vietnam. Its health effects are sharply disputed. 
The VA, relying on a review by an 11-member scientific committee, ruled in 1985 
that only one condition, chloracne, could be considered a service-connected 
effect of exposure to Agent Orange. 
Henderson rejected a challenge by the veterans' group to the scientific 
committee's review of studies on the effects of Agent Orange. But the judge 
said the standards the VA used in making its rules violated a 1984 federal law 
that was supposed to help Vietnam veterans get the health benefits they were 
due. 
Henderson said the VA improperly required proof of a cause-and-effect 
relationship between the herbicide and a disease for which benefits would be 
granted. Instead, he said, the agency should have required only that statistics 
show a significant correlation between dioxin exposure and a disease, or an 
"increased risk of incidence." 
The federal law does not spell out the proper standard, but comments by members 
of Congress involved in passing the law showed that they opposed an overly 
stringent standard and felt that cause-and-effect proof was unnecessary, 
Henderson said. 
He also said the VA had relied on statistical relationships, without requiring 
proof of causation, in granting benefits to veterans who were amputees and 
developed heart disease. Congress did the same thing in granting benefits to 
former prisoners of war who suffered various diseases, relying on a VA 
statistical study, Henderson said. 
The judge also found an error in the VA's refusal to apply to its Agent Orange 
regulations the same "benefit of the doubt" policy it uses for review of 
individual benefit cases -- a policy that favors the veteran in close 
questions. 
Although the language of the law is unclear, the "remedial purpose" of the law 
favors a lenient standard, Henderson said. Noting that veterans would be 
entitled to a favorable standard if they made individual claims, he said 
Congress would not have intended to put them in a worse position through a 
collective regulation. 
