SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA FILE 
Forty years ago, Timothy Manning, then a 39-year-old Los Angeles auxiliary 
bishop, addressed nearly 65,000 people in the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum for 
a suddenly popular "Mary's Hour." There had been a turn-away crowd the previous 
year when the Roman Catholic devotional event was inaugurated in the Hollywood 
Bowl. 
Attendance rose to more than 100,000 in 1954, then slipped annually to a low of 
29,000 in 1969 when it was held in Dodger Stadium. It was not resumed the next 
year. 
But "Mary's Hour" was revived last year in the Hollywood Bowl and attracted 
nearly 8,000 people. 
In this year's renewal from 2:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. Sunday in the Bowl, 
archdiocesan organizers hope to draw more than 10,000 parishioners from Los 
Angeles, Ventura and Santa Barbara counties. 
Cardinal Manning, who retired as Los Angeles archbishop in 1985, will preside 
at the para-liturgical service and deliver the homily. 
Although the archdiocese disclosed Thursday that Manning is undergoing 
radiation treatments for cancer, his physician, Dr. Brian E. Henderson, 
director of the Kenneth Norris Jr. Cancer Center at USC, said Friday that the 
cardinal is in "good spirits and trying to live out his life as productively 
and peacefully as he can." Manning was first reported to have cancer in his 
spine, but Henderson added that about two to three months ago, the cardinal was 
found to have lung cancer that spread to his spine. 
ACTION 
What started with sermons and prayer vigils last Sunday will continue in Los 
Angeles with an invitation-only prayer breakfast Friday in West Hollywood for 
as many as 300 clergy. It is part of a national campaign to heighten pressure 
on Congress to pass a bill extending existing U.S. economic sanctions against 
South Africa because of that country's apartheid policies. The Revs. James 
Lawson, Dumas Harshaw, William Hornaday, George Regas and Carl A. Bryant; Rabbi 
Allen Freehling, and Archbishops Vatche Hovsepian and Roger M. Mahony are among 
the clergy who will speak briefly at the breakfast. A spokesman said it is 
hoped that clergy will urge churchgoers to wear a red ribbon to symbolize their 
support for increased sanctions. 
PEOPLE 
Mata Amritanandamayi, 34, one of several Hindu women from India who in recent 
years have been seen by devotees as sources for blessings of the "Divine 
Mother," will appear in Los Angeles for the first time Tuesday through 
Wednesday at the Presbyterian Conference Center in Pacific Palisades. "Just 
being in her presence invokes deep feelings of love, peace and forgiveness," 
spokeswoman Nancy J. Murray said. Last Wednesday night, Gurumayi 
Chidvilasananda, the female successor to Swami Muktananda, held forth before 
5,500 people at the Shrine Auditorium. JOHN DART 
