NEWS AND BRIEFS; 
SYMBOL OF DENMARK AGAIN IS VANDALIZED 
One of the world's most popular statues, the bronze figure of the Little 
Mermaid that looks out over Copenhagen harbor, has been vandalized again. 
The 76-year-old statue, created by Erik Eriksen in tribute to Danish 
storyteller Hans Christian Andersen, depicts a winsome mermaid gazing pensively 
over the water from her perch atop a rock. 
Last week a seven-inch cut, apparently made with a hacksaw, was discovered in 
the back of the statue's neck. No motive for the vandalism was known and no 
suspects were in custody. 
The statue, which is easily accessible on Langelinie Quay, is visited by about 
500,000 tourists a year and has become a Danish national symbol. 
The Little Mermaid has been the target of vandals before. The original head was 
stolen in 1964 and was replaced by a new one cast from the original mold. In 
1984 an arm was taken, but it was found and reattached. The mermaid has also 
been marred by graffiti and paint, and one prankster painted a pink brassiere 
on her. 
The damage will not be permanent. Repair work, which could involve temporary 
removal of the statue and its rock base or building scaffolding around the 
statue, is being planned. 
Although Copenhagen is in charge of its maintenance, commercial rights to the 
Little Mermaid statue are owned by Eriksen's descendants, who earn royalties of 
about $750,000 a year from the work. 
The Litter of the Law: If you plan on visiting Spain this summer and find 
yourself on the Costa Brava, don't even think of tossing aside those empty soft 
drink cans or simply dropping that ice cream wrapper on the street or sidewalk. 
In an effort to reduce the litter problem caused largely by tourists, Spanish 
police have been given authority to fine violators $75, payable right on the 
spot. 
Rials and Dinars: Those are the monetary units in Iran, and if you didn't know 
that, you probably aren't concerned that Tehran has been judged to be the most 
expensive city in the world. 
According to the latest of those international surveys that compare cities by 
the cost of goods and services, the Iranian capital came in first for the 
second year in a row, largely because of an overvalued currency. 
Tehran is followed by Tokyo and Libreville, the capital of Gabon in West 
Africa, according to a survey by Corporate Resources Group, a private 
consulting firm. Oslo remained Europe's most expensive city for the third 
straight year, followed closely by Helsinki, Zurich, Geneva and Copenhagen. 
Because of a continuous decline in currencies that tended to neutralize soaring 
inflation, Latin American cities rank among the least expensive. 
About a decade ago Buenos Aires was the world's most expensive city. Today it 
ranks among the cheapest, only slightly above Quito, Ecuador, which the survey 
said is the world's least expensive city. 
Japanese Jungle: Tired of the big-city hustle and bustle when visiting Tokyo? 
Escape is easy. Just half an hour's drive from the city center is an oasis 
where visitors can lose themselves amid 4,280 tropical and subtropical plants. 
The Yumenoshima Tropical Plant Dome is built on 5,400 square feet of reclaimed 
land built on waste in Tokyo. High tropical temperatures are maintained by heat 
piped in from a nearby trash processing plant. 
The attraction, which opened last year, was built over a two-year period and 
cost $18 million. 
Airport Security: Two thermal neutron analysis bomb detectors are expected to 
be fully operational in time for the peak tourist season, according to the 
Federal Aviation Administration. 
Before the end of June one is to be installed at the concourse at London's 
Gatwick Airport (a security area serving several U.S. carriers), and the other 
at the United Airlines area at Washington's Dulles Airport. 
The detectors are the third and fourth devices in a series of six. The first 
two were installed at the TWA terminal at New York's Kennedy International 
Airport and Pan Am's terminal in Miami. The devices are said to detect all 
non-commercial explosives, including plastic explosives. 
