ELECTIONS ASSEMBLY; 
A GUIDE TO DISTRICT 40'S CANDIDATES AND ISSUES 
Overview 
Environmentalist Glenn Bailey is attempting to wrest control of the heavily 
Democratic 40th State Assembly District from Assemblyman Tom Bane, a powerful 
player in the state Legislature. Bailey has raised less than $1,000, stressing 
his fresh outlook and environmental qualifications in a grass-roots campaign. 
Bane has a huge campaign finance reserve, estimated at close to $1 million, and 
solid name recognition among voters built up over eight consecutive terms. 
However, Bane may suffer repercussions from recent controversies surrounding 
grants made to one of his contributors by Bane's wife, as chairwoman of the 
state Lupus Appropriations Board. 
Contenders 
Glenn Bailey, 34, of Encino, has been a regional coordinator for statewide 
wildlife and environmental ballot initiatives for the past three years. He also 
works as an administrative assistant for summer school programs and reading 
clinics at Cal State Northridge. Raised in the San Fernando Valley, he received 
an associate degree in life and earth sciences from Pierce College, and 
attended CSUN, majoring in political science. He previously was elected to the 
Northwestern Los Angeles Resource Conservancy District board, and in 1988 ran 
unsuccessfully for the Board of Supervisors seat held by Mike Antonovich. 
Tom Bane, 76, of Tarzana is in his 10th term in the Assembly, where, as a close 
ally of Speaker Willie Brown, he serves as chairman of the influential Rules 
Committee. He was first elected in 1958, ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 
1962 and returned to the Assembly in 1974. Bane graduated from Burbank High 
School, and attended Los Angeles Community College for two years. He also 
attended night school at Southwestern Law School and USC. A former national 
trade association manager, Bane served as a commissioner on the Los Angeles 
City Employees Retirement Board and the L.A. City-County Government 
Consolidation Study committee. His wife's name is Marlene, and he has one son 
and two grandchildren. 
Helen R. Gabriel, a Republican, and John Vernon, a Libertarian, are unopposed 
in their primaries. Their names will appear on the general election ballot in 
November. 
Questionnaire 
Questionnaires were distributed to candidates and were returned this month. 
Answers have been edited to fit the available space. 
Q. Under recently introduced legislation, state sales taxes would be raised by 
a quarter-cent for 10 years to help finance school construction. Do you favor 
an increase in sales taxes to underwrite new school construction? 
Bailey: No. Sales taxes disproportionately burden working people. We should 
continue using bond financing for school construction. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. A measure on the June ballot would raise taxes on gasoline sales by 9 cents 
a gallon to finance highway projects. Do you support the concept of higher gas 
taxes to underwrite road construction? 
Bailey: No. I support higher gasoline taxes to promote fuel conservation and 
rapid transit, but not to build new highways. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. Do you support a woman's unrestricted right to an abortion within the first 
three months of pregnancy? 
Bailey: Yes. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. Do you support capital punishment? 
Bailey: Yes. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. Do you support the idea of breaking up the Los Angeles Unified School 
District into smaller districts? 
Bailey: Yes. 
Bane: Left unanswered. Said this still requires further study and cost 
projections. 
Q. Under current law, the state Legislature is responsible for redrawing state 
legislative and congressional district boundaries. Do you believe this system 
should be changed? 
Bailey: No. But districts should be compact, should not divide communities, and 
should not be gerrymandered. 
Bane: Yes. Although I would agree to a nonpartisan alternate method of 
redistricting, I do not believe Propositions 118 and 119 are viable solutions. 
Q. Do you support the so-called "Big Green" ballot initiative, which would 
eliminate ozone-depleting chemicals by the year 2000, phase out pesticides 
known to cause cancer and require that trees be planted in all new 
developments? 
Bailey: Yes. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. Do you think the state should require private employers to subsidize 
day-care services for employees who request them? 
Bailey: Yes. Day-care centers should be required in all new large commercial 
and industrial projects. 
Bane: Yes. The state should not mandate. However, employers of large numbers of 
employees would probably have access to higher caliber employees and greater 
productivity by offering day care. Every other country provides such service. 
Q. Do you support the state's efforts to build prisons in Lancaster and East 
Los Angeles? 
Bailey: No. Neither prisons nor dumps belong in residential areas. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. Proposition 112 on the June ballot would ban speaking fees and limit gifts 
to state legislators while creating a commission that could pave the way for 
higher legislative salaries. Do you support this ballot initiative? 
Bailey: No. Ethics reform should not be tied to salary increases. Proposition 
112, placed on the ballot by the legislators, would financially reward them for 
being corrupt. 
Bane: Yes. I support the ban on honoraria and a limit on gifts. I would have 
preferred a ceiling on salaries. I support a citizens commission to determine 
salaries. 
Q. Do you support Gov. Deukmejian's proposed constitutional changes that would 
require state prison inmates to work in privately sponsored industries to pay 
for their incarceration? 
Bailey: Yes, provided that prevailing wages are paid, and these monies go to 
the state. 
Bane: No. I do support prisoners working within the prisons to feed, clothe and 
support themselves. 
Q. Do you believe our present system of criminal prosecution, interdiction of 
supplies and imprisonment of users and dealers will ever significantly reduce 
the level of drug use in the United States? 
If no, what should be done? 
Bailey: No. Take the profit out of the drug business by reducing demand through 
peer pressure and significant economic investment in depressed areas. 
Bane: No. Tougher penalties for providers. Federal government should give a 
higher priority to border protection and prosecution. 
Q. Would you consider the possibility of decriminalizing the use of drugs? 
Bailey: Yes, but not the sale of drugs. 
Bane: No. 
Q. Do you support raising sales or other taxes to finance anti-drug law 
enforcement efforts and/or anti-drug education programs? 
If yes, by how much? 
Bailey: Yes. Raise taxes on legalized drugs -- tobacco and alcohol -- as is 
necessary. 
Bane: No. 
Q. Do you support full or partial public funding of political campaigns? 
Bailey: Yes. The Legislature is a puppet of the special interests that finance 
their campaigns. Corporate and PAC monies should be outlawed. Since the last 
election, the incumbent in this race has received $1 million in special 
interest campaign contributions, almost none of which was from this district. 
Bane: No. No explanation given. 
Q. A ballot initiative now in circulation would prohibit foreign individuals 
and corporations from owning land in California. Do you support this? 
Bailey: No answer checked. Said he would support a 49% foreign ownership limit 
of any property in California. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. Rising property values in the Santa Monica Mountains have made it more 
difficult for state and federal parks agencies to buy land for public use. Land 
prices have escalated in part because local officials have allowed developers 
to build more houses than provided for under zoning laws. To keep property 
prices more affordable to parks agencies, should governments in Los Angeles and 
Ventura counties refuse such so-called "upzoning"? 
Bailey: Yes. Another example of the influence of campaign contributions from 
developers. The general plan should be the maximum density allowed, rather than 
the base. 
Bane: Yes. No explanation given. 
Q. Are you willing to publicly release your tax returns and those of your 
spouse before the election? 
Bailey: Yes. 
Bane: Yes. 
Q. A development project called Porter Ranch would create 3,395 residential 
units and nearly 6 million square feet of commercial office space in the 
Chatsworth hills. Opponents say it is too big. Proponents say it represents 
orderly growth. Do you support the project at this size? 
Bailey: No. Century City North does not belong in our foothills. 
Bane: No. 
Q. Do you support limits on the number of terms state legislators can serve? 
If yes, how long should they be? 
Bailey: Yes. Eight years: two terms for senators, four terms for assembly 
members. 
Bane: No. 
Q. A ballot initiative now in circulation would prohibit the spraying of 
pesticides on private property without the written consent of the owner. Do you 
support this measure? 
Bailey: Yes. I am circulating the petition. 
Bane: Yes. 
