SACRAMENTO FILE 
State agencies would have to remain open to serve the public during the lunch 
hour under a bill (AB 3167) by Assemblyman Jackie Speier (D-South San 
Francisco) that swept through the lower house on a 67-0 vote. 
Speier charged that scores of state offices from San Diego to Crescent City now 
shut down at high noon Monday through Friday. 
"Answering machines are activated, doors are locked and public service takes a 
break," she said. "But the lunch hour is often the only time when working men 
and women are able to do business with the state. AB 3167 will put public 
service back into the state lunch hour." 
The legislation now advances to the Senate. 
GOVERNOR 
Will attend a luncheon with President Bush in Los Angeles on Monday to help 
raise money for measures on the June 5 ballot that would change the way the 
state draws legislative and congressional district lines. 
ASSEMBLY 
Floor Action 
Small Claims Court: Passed and sent to the Senate on a 58-0 vote a bill (AB 
3916) by Assemblyman Ted Lempert (D-San Mateo) to increase the maximum amount 
from $2,000 to $5,000 for small claims court actions. 
Jailhouse Snitches: Rejected on a 20-19 vote a bill (AB 3344) by Assemblyman 
Richard Floyd (D-Carson) to require public records of money paid to so-called 
"jailhouse snitches." 
SENATE 
Floor Action 
Earthquake Insurance: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 38-0 vote a bill (SB 
2596) by Sen. Alan Robbins (D-Tarzana) to require insurance companies to 
annually offer homeowners earthquake coverage and have adjusters in the field 
within 48 hours after a temblor. 
Rapid Transit: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 36-0 vote a bill (SB 1402) 
by Sen. Robert Presley (D-Riverside) to encourage transportation commissions of 
Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino counties to jointly develop a 
coordinated rail and bus transportation system to help ease traffic problems. 
Sales Tax: Passed and returned to the Assembly for concurrence in amendments on 
a 37-0 vote a bill (AB 520) by Assemblyman Johan Klehs (D-Castro Valley) to 
grant nonprofit youth groups an exemption from paying state sales tax for 
fund-raising events. 
Capital Fact 
Los Angeles County has 5.6 million of the state's more than 19.5 million 
licensed drivers -- the most of any of the 58 counties -- and tiny Alpine 
County has the fewest motorists of any county, with only 800 people licensed to 
drive, according to the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
