DRIVER GETS 10 YEARS FOR DEATH CAPTURED ON TAPE 
After hearing two hours of emotional testimony, a judge Tuesday sentenced Danny 
David Ornelas, 19, to 10 years in prison for running down and killing a Newport 
Beach mother of three while a passenger inadvertently videotaped the incident. 
"It is with a heavy heart that I do this, Mr. Ornelas, but I must do what I 
must do," said Orange County Superior Court Judge Luis A. Cardenas. 
Ornelas was convicted by a jury March 20 of gross vehicular manslaughter in the 
death of Debbie Killelea, 37, in an alley behind her Balboa Peninsula home. Two 
young sons, who were with her, narrowly escaped injury. 
Ornelas was found to have a blood alcohol content of .18 at the time of the 
Sept. 1 incident, almost twice the level at which a person is considered to be 
intoxicated. 
The crime drew wide interest, largely because of an eerie videotape made by a 
passenger in the speeding car. The videotape showed Killelea trying to run out 
of the car's way as it bore down on her. 
Ornelas, who did not testify at his trial, told the judge Tuesday that he was 
sorry for the incident, which he described as "tragic." Ornelas, who appeared 
to be weeping, said he would do everything he could to try to make up for the 
offense. 
The victim's husband, Brian Killelea, 40, testified that his family had been 
"devastated" by the tragedy. 
"I am not a vindictive person; however, I represent the American family, and 
all I want is justice served," Killelea said. He broke into tears on the 
witness stand as he spoke about his wife's death. 
Ornelas, of Huntington Park, was charged with second-degree murder in 
Killelea's death, based on the allegation that he did not brake the speeding 
car, despite seeing Debbie Killelea and her two sons walking in the narrow 
roadway. 
After five days of deliberation, the jury convicted Ornelas of gross vehicular 
manslaughter while intoxicated. Had Ornelas been convicted of second-degree 
murder, he could have been sentenced to up to life in prison. 
Ornelas will be eligible for parole in about five years. 
