WATER COMPANY CLAIMS MORATORIUM IS IMPOSSIBLE 
A new fight over water is brewing in the Ojai Valley, where a local water 
company says it cannot comply with a moratorium on water hookups which were 
imposed because of a continuing shortage. 
Southern California Water Co., which supplies 2,688 customers in the Ojai area, 
said it cannot adopt a moratorium being required by the Casitas Municipal Water 
District, which supplies a third of the company's water from Lake Casitas. The 
Casitas District has announced that it will fine or cut off water to companies 
that do not comply with its one-year moratorium. 
Donald L. Twomley, Southern California Water Co.'s vice president of water 
resources, said it does not have the authority to adopt the moratorium without 
approval from the California Public Utilities Commission. 
"This is a very expensive and time-consuming procedure," Twomley said, noting 
that the company is still legally bound to serve 28 additional customers in 
Ojai who were promised water before the moratorium was imposed on April 11. All 
Casitas customers also are being asked to cut water use back 20%. 
Twomley also said Ojai's growth control law "basically accomplishes the 
intended curtailment." Ojai's ordinance allows only 16 new homes in the city 
each year, but that is still more than the moratorium limit of no new hookups. 
He said his company's proposal to trade water on a seasonal basis with Casitas 
"would prove far more beneficial to all concerned parties than would a total 
service moratorium." 
By sending ground water to Lake Casitas in the winter, Twomley said Southern 
California Water Co. could reduce its summer demands on the lake 50% to 100%. 
Casitas officials, however, have been lukewarm to the proposal since it was 
first presented last November, complaining that the ground water it would 
receive from Southern California would not be as high quality as lake water. 
Now, City Manager Andy Belknap is asking the City Council to wade into the 
fray. 
Still steaming over Southern California's proposed 35.5% rate hike in March, 
Belknap is asking the council to object today to the utility's position that it 
does not need to comply with the moratorium. 
Belknap wants the city to go on record opposing the company, so that any fines 
imposed on Southern California would not be passed on to the rate payers. 
Belknap also is questioning the water trade proposal, saying the city should be 
part of any exchanges that might affect Ojai's water supply. 
The Ojai City Council meets at 7:30 p.m. in Ojai City Hall, 401 S. Ventura St., 
Ojai. 
The City Council previously backed Belknap's objection to the three-year rate 
hike, complaining it penalized the thriftiest customers and provided no 
incentive to others to conserve. 
In response, Southern California Water officials offered March 26 to revise the 
entire rate structure. But Belknap said Monday he is still waiting for details 
on the new proposal. 
The Public Utilities Commission will hold two hearings on the water company's 
eventual rate hike request and Ojai service program on June 25 at 3 p.m. in 
Ojai City Hall. 
