FRIGHT NIGHTS; 
BATS SWOOPING DOWN IN TOWN HALL DRIVE EVERYONE, WELL, YOU KNOW . . . 
For almost a century, the bats have provided a creepy footnote to the history 
of the Olivenhain town hall, a sturdy redwood meeting place built in 1895 by 
the German farmers who settled this north San Diego County community. 
Old-timers say the migratory creatures moved into the rafters of the rustic 
hall not long after the last nails were pounded in. Soon, they became part of 
the folklore -- on some nights diving down by the scores, herky-jerky, to 
startle square-dancers or disrupt meetings held by the eerie light of a 
kerosene lamp. 
"They were always part of the local color -- the trick was to keep the bats out 
of your hair while the meeting went on," said Dave McCollom, assistant manager 
of the Olivenhain Water District, which met in the hall until 1962. 
"Sometimes, when the bat guano would start dropping to the floor, you knew it 
was time to call a quit to things." 
Recently, after several bats were found to have rabies, officials decided that 
the furtive, furry animals would have to go. 
Last week, they placed green mesh screening around the bottom of the roof of 
the hall -- protection that officials hope will have the opposite effect of a 
roach motel: The bats check out, but they can't check back in. 
"We've also built four bat houses in the surrounding trees that hold 100 bats 
each," Olivenhain Town Council President Bob McAndrews said. "We're not trying 
to kill them off, just move them someplace nearby. These creatures really don't 
hurt anything, they actually help man by eating a lot of bad bugs." 
The relocation of the colony of Mexican free-tailed bats, which measure about 6 
inches from head to tail, is part of a project to refurbish the town hall with 
a $136,000 grant from the state Department of Parks and Recreation's Office of 
Historic Preservation. 
But some veteran users of the venerable building say the bats are too vital a 
part of the hall's history and should be left undisturbed. 
"I say, 'Leave them alone,' " said 79-year-old Howard Golem, an ex-cattle 
rancher who sits on the water district board. "Thousands of people have been 
exposed to those bats over the years, and nothing has happened to them. 
"They stay to themselves during the day. And they won't bother anyone if you 
don't bother them. So what's the point?" 
Local bat advocates say the nocturnal creatures have been given a bad rap -- 
not only on the possible spread of rabies but also because they have 
illogically been associated with Dracula and the devil just because they are 
usually seen at night. 
Harley Denk, 68, says he recalls seeing the bats in the hall as far back as the 
1930s. He says he can understand the concern over the creatures. 
"Back in the Depression, we used to have a bat party now and then," he said. 
"We'd get up in the rafters with clubs and tennis rackets and kill hundreds of 
them to keep the population down." 
Officials eventually installed a dropped ceiling to stop the bat droppings from 
bombarding people who gathered in the A-frame hall for 4-H Club get-togethers, 
weddings and Halloween and Christmas parties. 
"But these days," Denk said, "with people getting more conscious of diseases 
and sprays and lawsuits, they just feel uncomfortable with the bats flying 
around." 
The most recent bat attack began last summer when several dead and injured bats 
were found on the building's floor. A dozen of the 97 bats tested were found to 
have rabies, so a Berkeley bat expert was called in. He suggested using the 
nets as a way to move the bats without harming them. 
The bat houses, placed near the top of four nearby trees, are about the size of 
a back-yard birdhouse but have three compartments in which the creatures can 
cluster. 
"It's going real well," McAndrews said of the project. "Sometimes, bats will 
ignore these types of bat houses for a year before they decide to move in. But 
it looks like they're moving in faster than that." 
Some bats have stubbornly stuck to their crevices inside the building, which 
has been declared a California landmark. Bat guano still litters the floor and 
has stained the walls. 
And, 95 years after they first moved in, the bats of the Olivenhain town hall 
are still startling people -- as if they were the ones who deserved squatter's 
rights. 
"When we first came in here, they scared the daylight out of us," said 
20-year-old Eric Barton, a worker on the refurbishment project. "One day, we 
lifted one of the shutters from the window and about five bats flew out at us. 
"It's kind of funny to think now. We took off running around the room, the bats 
were flying around overhead. Back then, we'd never seen a bat before. But we're 
kind of getting used to them now." 
