HOWARD ROSENBERG: ANDY ROONEY, BACK ON TOP, HERO IN DEMAND 
Applause thundered through the hotel ballroom. 
The speaker at the podium was Andy Rooney. The Andy Rooney. Remember? Accused 
of slurring blacks -- denied it. Accused of slurring gays -- acknowledged it. 
Suspended by CBS for three months and deleted from "60 Minutes." Reinstated by 
CBS after three weeks and returned to "60 Minutes." 
Andy Rooney, landing on his feet. 
It's impossible to assess merely from watching "60 Minutes" how America regards 
the post-Rooneygate Rooney. So you look for evidence elsewhere, perhaps finding 
it at the Century Plaza Hotel. 
The enthusiastic reception given him Monday night at a dinner sponsored by the 
Constitutional Rights Foundation (Rooney was keynote speaker) affirmed his 
status as another of America's prominent yo-yos. 
You just can't keep a good celebrity down, no matter his or her offense. 
Consider that on the very night Rooney was addressing an audience of about 
1,000 in Century City (he would speak to the Hollywood Television and Radio 
Society the next day), Richard Nixon, the Richard Nixon, was on CNN's "Larry 
King Live" speaking to millions. The latter was one of those mutual back 
scratchings peculiar to the way media, especially TV, do business, with King 
using Nixon to entertain his audience and Nixon using King to advertise his new 
book. 
Consider also, meanwhile, that Ollie North continues to hit the speakers' 
circuit masquerading as a hero despite his Iran-Contra-related conviction, that 
arrogant Zsa Zsa Gabor's talk-show clout was enhanced by her cop-slapping 
incident and that even Jimmy Swaggart -- after disclosure of his alleged visits 
to a prostitute -- continues to star in his own TV show, voice still cracking, 
lip still quivering. 
This is not necessarily to lump Rooney with any of these people or to equate 
his infractions with theirs, only to note that like them, he appears to have 
rebounded from self-inflicted adversity, flicking it away like a piece of lint 
on his lapel. 
Unlike Nixon, Rooney did not betray America and feed growing cynicism about 
government and national leaders. And unlike North, Gabor and Swaggart, he is 
not a one-message billboard. 
What makes Rooney so intriguing, in fact, is that in many matters he makes 
wonderful sense. You have to admire his message to the Constitutional Rights 
Foundation, whose goal is to teach youth a "deeper understanding of citizenship 
through values expressed in the Constitution and its Bill of Rights." 
He preached speaking out for one's beliefs, regardless of the cost: "If you say 
what you think, you're always going to make someone mad." He wondered why 
America has "become a nation that doesn't say what it thinks about so many 
things." Why, indeed? 
Moreover, let's hope Rooney's audience was listening when he declared: "There's 
no sense having free speech if no one speaks freely." Put that on Mt. Rushmore. 
As an advocate of the First Amendment, Rooney can't be faulted. Yet it's sort 
of amazing the way all of this shifts the onus of guilt to CBS for ignoring 
Rooney's freedom-of-speech rights by yanking him from "60 Minutes," possibly 
because of those alleged statements about blacks he denied making and others 
about gays that he acknowledged making. That CBS was wrong on the First 
Amendment issue doesn't make Rooney right on the gay issue. 
Rooney said some rather demeaning things about gays in his infamous letter to a 
gay publication called The Advocate. And the some-of-my-best-friends-are-gay 
defense that he expressed recently to Times columnist Rick Du Brow included a 
warning that they "be more careful about their sex habits." Either Rooney was 
being careless with his thoughts or he was implying that only gay sex, and not 
heterosexual sex, can transmit AIDS. 
Based on some of his past statements, Rooney is a bigot when it comes to gays. 
The label applies regardless of how many others share his views. Everyone is a 
hero to someone. 
Because he is also cute and funny ("If I anger you, don't think you're anybody 
special," he said Monday, getting a big laugh), Rooney is perfectly suited to 
be America's lovable homophobe, a sort of Archie Bunker for gays. 
The disturbing thought is not that he has been welcomed back by a forgiving 
public, but that the public welcoming him back never thought he'd done anything 
that needed forgiving in the first place. 
