AT 3 P. M., WORKING PARENTS WORRY 
When school dismissal bells ring, working parents hear the sound miles away. 
No matter that these adults are in stores, offices and factories, waiting on 
customers, answering telephones, assembling automobiles. 
Working parents begin to let their minds wander, taking mental note of their 
children's whereabouts, tracing their routes home or to after-school 
activities, gauging the time it should take them, checking the clock, waiting 
for the phone to ring. 
And when it doesn't, calling home. 
"It's 3 p.m. Do you know where your children are?" is the question that tenses 
America's working parents -- and slows down workplaces -- in the afternoons. 
When the answer is yes, workers relax; business picks up again. 
It's been called the Three O'Clock Syndrome and the Angst Hour -- a time when 
worker productivity dips and business phone lines jam and parents come face to 
face with balancing their work and family lives. 
Although hard data on the Three O'Clock Syndrome is difficult to come by, 
parents, child-care advocates and even employers agree that it happens. 
"The 'Hi, Mom, I'm home' phone calls start hitting office switchboards as 
school lets out across the country," John Fernandez wrote in his 1986 book, 
"Child Care and Corporate Productivity: Resolving Work-Family Conflicts." 
"The Three O'Clock Syndrome sets in, with employees hunched over phones, 
whispering admonitions about homework and directions about making dinner," he 
continued. 
"Employers can hear what goes on at 3 o'clock, the phone calls coming in and 
going out," says Susan Ginsberg, associate dean of the Bank Street College of 
Education in New York. 
"It's an accepted phenomenon," says Dr. Patricia Fossarelli, a pediatrician at 
the Johns Hopkins Hospital Children's Center, who has studied and counseled 
latchkey children. 
It's also a pressure cutter. "Being able to reach your kids at The Angst Hour 
may function as a safety valve," said Ellen Galinsky of the Families and Work 
Institute in New York City. "Fathers who did not think it was cool for them to 
call their kids had fantasies" about what evils were befalling them, she added. 
"I just need to know they are home," said Jean Page of her 11- and 12-year-old 
youngsters. "I just look at the clock; by 3:10 I start calling and getting real 
nervous," said the Baltimore County mother whose problems finding care for her 
children when they were younger led her to establish the Open Door, an 
after-school program that operates at 16 sites around the county. 
The child, too, often needs to hear a parent's voice. Jay Belsky, an expert on 
child development and professor at Pennsylvania State University, told the 
Chicago Tribune in 1988: "The issue is not so much if someone is there when a 
child gets home from school as whether someone is there psychologically for the 
child. Does he have someone to call and ask if he needs something? . . . The 
psychological connection is more important than the physical one," he said. 
The Three O'Clock Syndrome is an outgrowth of the increasing number of 
"children in self care," a relatively new term that is replacing "latchkey" to 
describe children who go home alone or with siblings. National surveys last 
year indicated that from 2 million to 6 million children under 13 cared for 
themselves after school or on weekends. And in its "Resource Guide on 
School-Age Child Care," the National Assn. for the Education of Young Children 
says that 18 million to 20 million children will spend "part of their day alone 
or with school-age siblings" this year. 
In a 1989 study, Fernandez found that 59% of the management and non-management 
employees surveyed said they had a problem handling before- and after-school 
care and vacation time. Those arrangements have consistently been the third 
most frequent child-care concern (after day care for sick children and finding 
time for school conferences) among working parents in three major studies 
Fernandez has conducted over the last six years. 
A single father "all of my life," Fernandez did some of the studies during his 
15 years as an employee of American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Co. He continues 
to write books on work and family relations and is president of Advanced 
Research Management, a Philadelphia consulting firm. 
Fernandez considers the Three O'Clock Syndrome "absolutely detrimental" to 
employers. "If you are worried about your child . . . you are not going to 
concentrate on your work; you're liable to make mistakes . . . and you could 
develop health problems" related to stress, he says. 
There are ways to ease the Three O'Clock Syndrome, Ginsberg and other 
child-care experts say. 
Employers who limit phone access can relax their policies to allow workers to 
receive and make necessary calls freely. 
Employers should be sympathetic to the needs of their parent workers, 
scheduling overtime in advance and avoiding meetings late in the day, Ginsberg 
says. 
Companies should support after-school programs, such as YMCAs and Boys' and 
Girls' clubs, so they can expand their services, Ginsberg says. 
Companies might also spend money to provide transportation to and from 
after-school activities. 
And, Ginsberg says, after-school hours should be looked upon as a time for 
enrichment, not just baby-sitting. "There are all kinds of wonderful things 
that kids can learn," she says. 
