ONLY IN L.A. / PEOPLE AND EVENTS 
A March of the Homeless on Malibu? 
Rush Limbaugh, a New York-based radio talk show host, has decreed Saturday as 
the day to challenge Honorary Mayor Martin Sheen's declaration of Malibu as a 
sanctuary for the dispossessed. 
Limbaugh, whose show is heard on 125 stations, including KFI in Los Angeles, 
said he has 15 buses available. He's offering free transportation to the "left 
coast," as he calls it, but hasn't figured out where the vehicles would park. 
When he asked a spokeswoman for the Malibu Chamber of Commerce, she said, 
"There's no place for them here," and then hung up. 
Sheen, who is in Canada directing a movie, has condemned "irresponsible media 
personalities who have abused their power to gain ratings by treading on misery 
and suffering." 
Limbaugh, who said he embraces programs aimed at making the homeless 
self-reliant rather than giving them handouts, said his intention is not to 
embarrass Malibu or the homeless but to "discredit Sheen." 
One place that definitely hasn't opened its arms to the homeless is a 
convenience store in Hollywood, which has posted the following sign: 
"7-Eleven and its neighbors would appreciate it if you would refrain from 
giving to panhandlers and solicitors in front of stores or in the parking lot." 
However, a controversy involving a different group appears to have ended. 
Venice is welcoming back skateboarders and roller-skaters. 
A bill that would legalize the two activities on Ocean Front Walk was 
introduced Tuesday by City Councilwoman Ruth Galanter, a few days after the 
city Department of Transportation caused an uproar by posting signs that banned 
the wheeled performers. The signs -- since removed -- cited a city ordinance 
that was passed in 1980 and promptly forgotten. 
Venice activist Jerry Rubin said that when the council debates the issue next 
Tuesday, he will be present along with such local celebrities as 65-year-old 
Liv Bevington, better known as Skateboard Mama, and Harry Perry, who plans to 
skate into the chamber while playing his guitar. 
Here, in Hypeville, one must be careful about certain claims. . . . 
But Melissa Miller has a copy of the police report to prove that she's serious 
when she says that someone filched a fiberglass figure of Batman in his 
Batmobile from the front of her Westside collectibles store, Made in America. 
Miller isn't sure whether the theft of the 6-foot-long sculpture was the work 
of a joker. Or, perhaps, the Joker. 
Speaking of jokers. . . . 
After the county Board of Supervisors approved the construction of an office 
tower across the street from Times Mirror Square, conservative Supervisor Pete 
Schabarum, who has been criticized on occasion by this newspaper, said: 
"Maybe we can bury the Times editorial staff in the footing." 
