STOCK WATCH: BECKMAN SPINOFF, NEW PRODUCT GET A HO-HUM 
Beckman Instruments in Fullerton has spent $50 million in research over the 
past 3 years for a single new product line called a clinical chemistry 
analyzer, President Louis Rosso said last week. 
For that kind of money, some investors may be expecting a breakthrough that 
will shake the clinical laboratory industry. 
But even though analysts expect the new product line to be successful, they 
said it is unlikely to have more than a moderate impact on future business of 
the Orange County maker of diagnostics equipment and analytical instruments. 
And that attitude also typifies the reaction on Wall Street to the pending 
spinoff of Beckman Instruments this summer by parent company SmithKline Beckman 
Corp., a Philadelphia pharmaceutical giant. 
Beckman, analysts note, tends to be a steady but unspectacular performer. In 
1988, for example, its earnings grew a respectable 9.3% to $42.5 million, while 
revenue increased 11.4% to $770.3 million. 
This year, analysts expect revenue to grow about 10%, with earnings growth a 
little higher. 
That kind of predictable growth will make Beckman a stable but not dynamic 
investment after the total spinoff by SmithKline, which is merging with a 
British drug company, analysts said. 
SmithKline spun off about 15% of Beckman's shares to outside investors last 
November. But the company is not yet considered by analysts as a "true 
investment play" because SmithKline still owns the lion's share of its stock. 
Beckman stock closed Friday at $19.625 per share, down 25 cents for the week on 
the New York Stock Exchange. 
"To me, it's an interesting company. But to most people, it won't impress them 
as exciting," said Linda Miller, an analyst with the New York brokerage firm of 
PaineWebber. 
One reason Beckman won't grow at a torrid pace is that it already has a large 
and established position in markets in the United States and dozens of foreign 
countries. 
Also, thousands of different products are used by medical instruments buyers, 
which means that a new product might be highly advanced, but its sales won't 
necessarily shoot through the roof. 
Analysts said they consider a new biological research instrument developed by 
Beckman to be superior to other products on the market, but it will account for 
only about $15 million, or 2%, of Beckman's sales for next year. 
