20 CUSTOMERS FLEE SALVATION ARMY OUTLET AS 4-ALARM FIRE DOES $400,000 DAMAGE 
A four-alarm fire Saturday morning at the Salvation Army Thrift Store at 6875 
El Cajon Blvd. caused $400,000 worth of damage but no injuries, authorities 
said. 
The fire broke out in the clothing section of the store about 11 a.m. when the 
store was busy with about 20 shoppers, but people were able to escape safely, a 
Salvation Army spokeswoman said. 
"The fire seemed to burst out and everybody saw it in time to get out," said 
Louise McKorn, stores supervisor for the Salvation Army. "There were quite a 
few shoppers . . . but no injuries." 
Firefighters responding to the call made an initial attack on the flames but 
were forced back because of the intensity of heat and smoke, a department 
spokesman said. Firefighters cut holes into the building's roof with chain saws 
to ventilate the heat and smoke but had to evacuate as flames began to burn 
through the roof. 
The fire -- which was spread by combustible material and upgraded to a 
four-alarm blaze when additional firefighters were called in -- was 
extinguished in about an hour. The blaze was blamed on discarded smoking 
material, firefighters said. 
"As I understand it, the Fire Department has condemned the building," said Ken 
Berquist, Salvation Army assistant residence manager. "The contents are a total 
loss, and very little of anything was saved." 
Berquist said revenue from the thrift store funded the Salvation Army's drug- 
and alcohol-rehabilitation service. 
Damage to the 5,000-square-foot building was estimated at $300,000 and damage 
to the contents was about $100,000. 
Heat Was Intense 
"The inside of the building really looks terrible. Even in an area where it was 
apparent the fire did not reach, the plastic hangers melted," McKorn said. 
"It's a tremendous loss to us because it's material that donors have been kind 
enough to donate to us." 
McKorn said that it will probably take several months before the store is 
reopened. Because the merchandise had been donated, it is not covered by 
insurance, she said. The nearest Salvation Army store is 10 miles away, on 
University Avenue. 
"It was one of our nicest stores." 
