ECCLESIA FOUR GUILTY IN FATAL BEATING OF GIRL 
Four members of the Los Angeles-based Ecclesia Athletic Assn., a 
quasi-religious group formed to shepherd children away from inner-city strife, 
were found guilty Friday of manslaughter in the beating death of the 8-year-old 
daughter of the group's founder and spiritual leader. 
After 11 hours of deliberation, the jury voted 10 to 2 to deliver the harshest 
verdict possible in the case, which has been a source of fascination in this 
small Oregon mill town for several months. Unlike California, Oregon does not 
require unanimous verdicts in criminal cases. 
The defendants -- Willie Chambers, 35; Constance Jackson, 39; Frederick 
Doolittle, 28, and Brian Brinson, 31 -- face maximum prison terms of 20 years 
each. 
They had been accused of beating Danya Broussard to death seven month ago at a 
farmhouse maintained by Ecclesia. Evidence showed that the beating had been 
conducted in front of other children in the group after consultation by 
telephone with the child's father. Testimony indicated that Eldridge Broussard 
Jr. thought his daughter should be punished after she stole a vegetable from 
another child's plate and then bit Jackson. 
"I was convinced that basically they were good people, good people who went 
wrong," said juror Marilyn Simonsen, a retired nurse who voted with the 
majority. 
Clackamas County Circuit Judge John Lowe read the verdict without comment. 
As the verdict was read, Jackson began to sob. Afterward, Brinson and Chambers 
shook the prosecutor's hand, and the four were led away in handcuffs. Their 
attorneys said the decision will be appealed. 
"It's a very emotional case involving the beating death of a child," said 
defense attorney Tim Lyons. "It's hard to be objective." 
Wanted Lesser Charge 
The two jurors who voted in the minority wanted to convict on a lesser charge 
that would have required only five-year sentences, one of them said. 
The decision marks a climactic chapter in a story that has captivated this 
largely white, rural county for seven months, ever since members of the mostly 
black group from South-Central Los Angeles arrived at a fire station here with 
Dayna's battered body. 
The verdicts do not, however, end Ecclesia's legal morass in Oregon. Jackson 
and three other women in the group still face charges of criminal mistreatment 
in the alleged beatings of other Ecclesia children. 
And juvenile proceedings are continuing in the cases of 53 Ecclesia children 
who were placed in foster care in the wake of Dayna's death. Oregon authorities 
are seeking long-term, although not permanent, custody of those children, whose 
parents are, for the most part, sticking by Broussard. 
Before coming to Oregon, the children, along with their parents, had lived for 
more than a decade in a converted bakery on Avalon Boulevard in South-Central 
Los Angeles. Their life style was communal -- they call themselves an extended 
family -- with shared finances, meals and child-rearing duties. 
Ecclesia's dream of helping black children out of the ghetto through a strict 
regimen of religion, discipline and athletics was a persistent theme throughout 
the manslaughter trial, in which nine children, aged 6 to 14, were the state's 
star witnesses. 
In voices so tiny that prosecutor Alfred French repeatedly asked them to speak 
up, the children described how they gathered in the garage of their farmhouse 
to watch the defendants discipline Dayna -- who was described as a 
strong-willed, stubborn child -- for stealing a piece of zucchini from another 
child's plate and then biting Jackson, who had tried to punish her. 
The prosecution charged that Dayna was struck more than 500 times with a 
variety of instuments -- among them a rubber hose, a braided electrical cord, a 
bamboo stick, a weight belt and a PVC pipe -- and then draped over a window 
when she complained she could not breathe. 
"She tried to tell Willie (Chambers) how she couldn't breathe," 14-year-old Joe 
Williams testified, "but Brian (Brinson) wouldn't let her tell, and he kept 
holding her arms and her head down to the floor. . . . She said she couldn't 
breathe real softly. She kept on saying it, and then Willie grabbed her and 
just put her out the window." 
Put Her on Floor 
After the child was removed from the window, the Williams boy told the jury, 
the defendants placed her on the floor directly in front of him. 
"She just took two last breaths, two last breaths, and her eyes rolled back, 
and after that, I guess Brian noticed it because he rushed over there, and he 
picked her up, and I just seen -- I just seen them take Dayna out of the room, 
and that was it." 
During closing arguments and throughout the trial, defense lawyers -- and 
Chambers and Brinson, both of whom testified -- maintained that the children's 
statements were exaggerated and that much of the discipline was actually 
theatrics, with Chambers striking the floor rather than Dayna in an attempt to 
frighten the other children into behaving. 
The four criminal lawyers also argued that the defendants made several attempts 
to help Dayna, including checking her breathing and taking her to the fire 
station. 
During the trial, the defense lawyers also introduced an independent autopsy in 
an effort to persuade the jury that Dayna died, not from the beating, but from 
being draped over the window -- an act they said was intended to help the child 
by giving her some air. 
Dismisses Theory 
But in his closing and rebuttal arguments before the jury Thursday, prosecutor 
French dismissed that theory. "Hanging that child out the window was not an act 
of compassion. . . ," French said. "Ladies and gentlemen, that's what you do 
with a carpet. That's not what you do with a badly injured little child." 
As to the cause of Dayna's death, French told the jury: "Your own common sense 
tells you that she was beaten to death. She walked into that room of her own 
ability and she was carried out dead. She didn't die of any strange disease or 
unknown causes. She was beat to death, and that's all there is to it." 
Although Broussard was in Los Angeles at the time of his daughter's death, 
there was testimony during the trial that he gave the defendants permission to 
discipline Dayna. In an unusual twist for the father of a victim, he has 
remained in the defendants' camp. 
