NEW AND USEFUL: LIGHTWAVES AID PEOPLE IN THE DARK 
Lightwaves are new, wearable reflective bands that will make you highly visible 
at night if you're walking, jogging or riding a bike or motorcycle. 
They are available in adult and children's sizes for wrist, ankle, legs or 
head. 
"They're made of the same kind of material that goes on road signs," said 
Lightwave developer Jerry Vitera of Grinnell, Iowa. "We developed a process so 
that material will adhere to cloth and it's washable, too." 
The strips have an absorbent underside and attach with hook and loop fasteners. 
Wrist/ankle bands cost $2.95; headbands, $4; leg bands, $5. Specify adult or 
children's sizes. To order, contact Walk for Life, P.O. Box 92, Grinnell, Iowa 
50112, phone (515) 236-6209. 
Fog-Free Mirror 
ShowerTek is a fog-free shaving mirror designed by Dick Christianson of Napa, 
Calif., who came up with the product because he likes to shave in the shower 
and couldn't find a mirror that didn't cloud up. 
The acrylic mirror attaches to the shower head and allows hot water to 
circulate onto the mirror's back, raising it to shower temperature and 
eliminating condensation. It can be easily installed on standard shower heads, 
Christianson said. 
"It's uniquely designed to attach securely to the shower arm, not the wall," 
Christianson said. "The mirrors won't slip, fall down or break. Best of all, it 
saves time shaving in the morning." 
Suggested retail for ShowerTek is $29. It is available through Sharper Image 
stores and catalogue (800) 344-4444 or in the Los Angeles area at May Co., 
Longs Drugs, and Thrifty Drug. For stores in other areas, call (800) 776-6364. 
Dough Detective 
Because bogus money seems to be on the increase nationwide -- the Secret 
Service estimates that more than $1 billion a year is fraudulently printed in 
the U.S. -- merchants may be interested in Vistatector, a new pen-sized 
counterfeit currency detector. 
The device reveals magnetic particles embedded on the front of all U.S. paper 
currency, an easy way to determine a bill's authenticity. 
To use the device, place the bill on a soft, padded surface -- or on the 
optional Vistatector Security Pad -- and hold it down firmly. To activate the 
Vistatector, push the thumb button near the unit's top. A red light and 
chirping sound signify it is working properly. 
There are two steps to the test: first, rub the Vistatector rapidly from side 
to side over the bill where the dollar amount is printed under the portrait; 
second, rub it over the black Federal Reserve seal to the portrait's left. A 
tone and lights, red or green, atop the unit will indicate whether the bill is 
genuine. 
Suggested retail for Vistatector is $99.95. The optional security pad, with a 
flexible steel cord that hooks it to the device, is $19.95. To order, contact 
Security Products Division, Vistatech Enterprises Ltd., 935 Broadway, New York, 
N.Y. 10010, phone (212) 254-9851. 
Bulb Life Extender 
Power Mizer, a small disc that fits between a light bulb and the center contact 
of the socket, can extend the life of bulbs considerably while also saving 
energy, its Connecticut manufacturers report. 
"Gauged on tests of 100-watt bulbs, Power Mizer extends bulb life up to 38,000 
hours and saves 28% in energy consumption," said co-inventor Anthony Tremaglio 
of Watertown, Conn. "It limits the voltage to the bulb and there is only has a 
5 to 10% illumination decrease." 
Noting that light bulbs wear out "primarily because of the initial surge when 
you turn them on and because they operate at very high temperatures, which 
weaken the tungsten filament so it breaks," Tremaglio said the Power Mizer 
eliminates both problems so light bulbs last longer. 
Power Mizer can be used only with standard incandescent bulbs with a maximum 
capacity of 200 watts. They don't work with three-way bulbs. 
Suggested retail for a package of two Power Mizers is $3.99-$4.99. In Southern 
California, they are sold at most Ace and True Value hardware stores and 
Thrifty Drug. 
For information about stores in other areas that carry the device, write to 
Miracle Products, 182 Commercial St., Watertown, Conn. 06795, phone (203) 
274-7566 or 7567. LYNN SIMROSS 
