SACRAMENTO FILE: GOVERNOR 
Issued a proclamation declaring this Sunday to be "Peace Day" in California, 
and urging all citizens "to engage in activities to bring about the conditions 
necessary for a true and meaningful peace between all nations." 
Assembly 
Floor Action: 
Kidnapers: Passed and returned to the Senate for concurrence in amendments on a 
77-0 vote a bill (SB 117) by Sen. Bill Lockyer (D-Hayward) to authorize the 
governor to offer up to a $50,000 reward for information leading to the arrest 
and conviction of a kidnaper. 
Committee Action: 
Campaign Contributions: The Elections Committee approved a bill (AB 1884) by 
Assemblyman John Vasconcellos (D-Santa Clara) to ask the voters to decide if 
there should be campaign expenditure limits and partial public financing of 
legislative campaigns. A 7-1 vote sent the bill to the Ways and Means 
Committee. 
Slate Mailers: The Elections Committee also approved a bill (AB 1027) by 
Assemblyman Byron Sher (D-Palo Alto) to require deceptive slate mailers 
endorsing candidates and/or ballot propositions to contain disclaimers if they 
are not approved by the official political party. A 6-3 vote sent the bill to 
the Ways and Means Committee. 
Senate 
Floor Action: 
Lottery: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 29-3 vote a bill (SB 740) by Sen. 
Ralph Dills (D-Gardena) that would gradually increase from 34% to 38% the 
amount of revenue from the state lottery that goes to schools. Fifty percent of 
the lottery funds go for prizes. 
Sex: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 39-0 vote a bill (SB 1004) by Sen. 
Daniel E. Boatwright (D-Concord) to make it a crime for a marriage counselor or 
other psychotherapist to have sex with a patient. 
Firearms: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 23-7 vote a bill (SB 861) by 
Sen. Quentin Kopp (I-San Francisco) to require all firearms sold or made in 
California to have trigger-locking devices if the weapon is capable of being so 
equipped. 
False Reports: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 38-0 vote a bill (SB 1628) 
by President Pro Tem David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles) to increase the potential 
punishment for making false reports to law enforcement officials from six 
months to one year in jail. 
Water Pollution: Passed and sent to the Assembly on a 38-0 vote a bill (SB 601) 
by Sen. Gary Hart (D-Santa Barbara) to require regional water quality boards to 
levy minimum fines for violations of water pollution laws. 
Committee Action: 
Gasoline Tax: The Transportation Committee approved a constitutional amendment 
(SCA 7) by Sen. William Campbell (R-Hacienda Heights) to ask the voters to 
decide if the state's 9-cents-per-gallon gasoline tax should be doubled over 
the next five years. A 7-5 vote sent the bill to the Revenue and Taxation 
Committee. 
Miscellany 
Legislative Reform: Assemblyman Ross Johnson (R-La Habra) has launched a 
legislative reform initiative campaign, including requiring open meetings for 
all legislative business except discussions of personnel matters and state 
Capitol security. Another section would require a two-thirds vote for 
legislative expenditures. The Orange County lawmaker asked the attorney general 
for a title and summary of the proposed ballot measure. It would appear on the 
June primary ballot next year. "The California Legislature is, in many ways, a 
failed institution," Johnson charged, "It is arrogant, unresponsive and riddled 
with secret deals. Millions and millions of dollars of taxpayers' money are 
spent secretly with no vote ever taken. There are no open meetings and no 
discussion." 
