PHYSICIAN ACQUITTED IN TRAFFIC DEATH OF MOTORCYCLE OFFICER 
A jury on Friday acquitted Diamond Bar physician Steven Earl Davis of vehicular 
manslaughter in last year's traffic death of an Anaheim motorcycle officer near 
Anaheim Stadium. 
Municipal Court jurors in Fullerton, who spent 2 weeks listening to what one 
attorney described as "very emotional testimony," took only 7 hours before 
finding Davis not guilty of causing the Oct. 16, 1988, collision that killed 
Officer Robert T. Roulston, 38. 
Roulston had been traveling east on his motorcycle on Katella Avenue when 
Davis' car made a left turn in front of him into a parking lot at Anaheim 
Stadium. 
Davis, 29, who works part time as a staff physician at the stadium, began 
administering cardiopulmonary resuscitation "almost immediately" after the 
collision, said his attorney, Paul Meyer. 
Davis was turning into the lot at the time fans were arriving for a Los Angeles 
Rams football game. 
"For 30 minutes Dr. Davis tried to save his life, which made this a very 
emotional trial because the doctor was not only involved in the collision but 
also tried to save the officer's life," Meyer said. 
Meyer said the case focused on whether Davis improperly turned in front of the 
officer's motorcycle or whether the officer failed to yield to Davis' car. 
Also, part of the evidence showed that Roulston was traveling 50 m.p.h., in 
excess of a safe speed on Katella, Meyer said. 
"One witness described the officer as 'accelerating,' " Meyer said, "just 
before the collision." 
Davis, reached at his office, declined to comment on the jury's decision. 
The California Highway Patrol investigated the accident and referred its report 
to the Orange County district attorney's office, which decided to file a charge 
against Davis. 
Anaheim police officials declined to comment on the acquittal until the trial 
is reviewed with the prosecutor. 
Deputy Dist. Atty. Robin Park could not be reached for comment. 
Roulston's widow, Deborah, an Anaheim police dispatcher, was on duty the day 
her husband died and did not know that her husband was involved when she sent 
paramedics and an ambulance to the scene of the accident. 
This week, she attended a ceremony honoring her husband, one of three police 
officers killed in the line of duty last year in Orange County. 
