ICHIBAN; 
NUMBER ONE . . . THAT'S WHAT MASAAKI YAMASHITA, AN EXCHANGE STUDENT FROM JAPAN, 
HAS BECOME IN HIS THIRD YEAR ON THE BASEBALL TEAM AT VERDUGO HILLS HIGH 
Curt Yarrington remembers having his eyes locked on uniform No. 1 for some 
time. That particular jersey, he reasoned, might signify many things, 
especially the fact that he was numero uno as baseball coach at Verdugo Hills 
High. And, what the heck, it was also his first year. 
A few days before the 1987 season, players began to place their requests for 
jerseys. All the popular numbers went fast, those commonly tied to major league 
stars or ones that older brothers might have worn. Yarrington held fast to No. 
1, until an earnest foreign-exchange student named Masaaki (Mo) Yamashita 
walked through his door. 
Yamashita, a sophomore infielder from Japan who spoke English in carefully 
measured sentences, had prepared a tersely worded statement. 
"I asked Mo what number he wanted and he says, 'Num-ber one,' " Yarrington 
recalls, enunciating each syllable of Yamashita's request in the same cadence 
used by the player. 
This exchange followed, more or less: 
Yarrington: "No. 1? Oh, yeah?" 
Yamashita: "Exactly." 
"I ask him why he wanted it and all he says is, 'Sadaharu Oh,' " Yarrington 
said. 
Oh, of course, was Japan's big-league answer to Hank Aaron, a national hero who 
clubbed a world-record 868 home runs in a 21-year career. 
Once Yarrington realized Yamashita's reverential reasons, he quickly agreed to 
surrender the jersey. Besides, in the back of Yarrington's mind, he knew that 
in a few short months Yamashita would be back in his homeland. Then Yarrington 
would reclaim the jersey faster than he could say trade deficit. 
"I had really started to get pumped up about wearing it, but then I got to 
thinking, 'Why not let him?' " Yarrington said. "I thought, 'He can have it 
this year and I'll still get it back next year.' " 
Soon thereafter, teammates started kiddingly calling Yamashita "Ichiban," which 
in Japanese means "Number One." 
Three years later -- yes, he is still here and wearing the same numeral -- the 
nickname has proven prophetic: Yamashita is now the team's best player. 
The most established youth baseball program in Japan is called Little League, 
too, and it's not a wisecrack about height. Yamashita played before coming to 
the United States, where at 5-foot-11 and 185 pounds he is one of the biggest 
players on the Verdugo Hills team. 
Seconds into his first Verdugo Hills practice, he found that the differences in 
regimen alone are pronounced (and here, it's pronounced laid back). Yamashita 
spent a few weeks trying out for his high school team before he was shipped off 
to the United States and was startled by the lack of intensity here. 
"They practice much harder there. There is no talking. Some coaches come up to 
you with a bat and slam you in the back," he says, pointing to his rear end to 
indicate that a shot to the hindquarter is indeed an effective way to get one's 
attention. "We run more and work harder (in Japan)." 
The time-honored, All-American rite of umpire baiting is a no-no in Japan, 
where batters customarily bow to the plate umpire before taking their cuts. 
"We can't say anything to the umpire," he says. "We aren't allowed to." 
Yet, in the United States, Yamashita has found that the umpires often wish to 
speak to him, especially about the bat he uses, a huge-barreled, golden 
aluminum Rawlings model he brought from home. 
The bat, which unlike those manufactured here has no plastic cap at the barrel 
end, makes a piercing ring when it strikes the ball. On the barrel, there are 
Japanese characters. When the bat is inspected, umpires act as though they have 
just looked under the hood of a foreign car -- everything is metric and in a 
foreign language. 
"All the umps have looked at it," Yamashita says. "They all have a strange 
look, like, 'What kind of bat is this?' I say, 'I brought it from Japan. 
Everyone uses these there.' " 
Yamashita, who is second on the team with a .368 batting average, carries the 
bat in its own padded case and does likewise with his spikes. This punctilious 
practice still draws curious looks from Yarrington, who admittedly is used to 
the tobacco-spewing, unkempt Don Zimmer-types. 
"One of the first things I noticed about him was that he was very meticulous, 
very neat and orderly," Yarrington says. "Must be a cultural thing." 
Yamashita has assimilated nicely in dozens of other ways, though. He has 
developed a taste for American food, preferring meat loaf, pasta and 
hamburgers, as well as American pop music. Yamashita sometimes goes to L. A. 
dance clubs and has collected more than 100 cassette tapes. 
"Everything from metal to KROQ dance music," says senior Ryan Paskwietz, whose 
family is boarding Yamashita this year and consequently is subjected to the 
auditory assault. "He's gone nuts since we got him that tape player for 
Christmas." 
Yamashita's Western ways extend to the moussed hair that juts from under the 
bill of his baseball cap. He has attended numerous Dodger and Laker games, 
traveled to Nevada and Arizona, and through the school, helped produce a 
videotape that was broadcast on local public-access cable TV. 
"Oh, yeah, we've Americanized him," Yarrington says. "If his name were, say, 
Mike Yamashita, people would think he was a Japanese-American who happened to 
be on this team." 
Mo, as it turns out, is short for Masaaki, which was difficult for some 
teammates to pronounce. Masaaki (pronounced, MOS-uh-kee) also answers to 
'Saaki, the latter half of his first name. 
Baseball, Yamashita says, has helped him tie all of his experiences together. 
"I actually came over here to learn English, but I felt that playing a sport, 
any sport, that's the best way to make friends," he says. "And I'd been playing 
baseball for a long time, so that seemed like the best way to go." 
Yamashita's objective upon graduating from a Japanese college is to use his 
language skills to travel internationally as a businessman. Playing baseball at 
a racially mixed school like Verdugo Hills has helped him expand his vocabulary 
well beyond English. 
"I even learned the dirty words from Spanish, too," he says, grinning. 
And what education would be complete without a lineup of choice baseball 
cliches? When asked what his baseball goals were for the season, he included: 
"To do whatever it takes to help the team." 
Yamashita was in junior high when he realized that he could turn his knack for 
languages into a trip to the United States. After faring well on a nationally 
standardized English test in his hometown of Kyoto -- English is part of the 
standard curriculum in grade school -- he signed up for the school's 
foreign-exchange program. After taking yet another English exam and batting 
about .333 ("I got about 20 out of 60 questions right, but I guess that was 
good enough," he says), Yamashita was sent to Verdugo Hills for his sophomore 
year. 
However, administrators at Verdugo Hills, he says, misinterpreted his class 
standing and placed him in an 11th-grade curriculum. After concluding the 
1986-87 school year, Yamashita said he was led to believe he could graduate the 
following year if he returned. 
As it turned out, he was still several units short of graduating at the end of 
1987-88 and was forced to return for his senior year. By then, Japanese 
universities he contacted had made it clear that if he had designs on a college 
education back home, he had to finish what he started abroad. 
But at least Yamashita was ahead of most Verdugo Hills students. Despite the 
language barrier, he is a solid B student. 
"School is harder there," he says of Japan. "I was ahead in math and stuff, but 
in government and English, I was behind. I was just trying to show up every day 
and pick up what I could." 
On the baseball field, he has picked up the team in a multitude of ways. 
Yamashita has been the team stopgap, the player Yarrington goes to when there 
is a hole to plug or a fire to extinguish. 
This year alone, Yamashita has played third base, shortstop, second base, right 
field and pitcher. Once Yarrington finally rid Mo of his Oh-style batting 
stance -- the left-handed slugger habitually raised his right leg as the pitch 
approached, similar to the style used by Hall of Famer Mel Ott -- Yamashita's 
offense improved, too. 
Besides being second on the team in batting average, Yamashita is second in 
runs scored (18) and leads the team in runs batted in (20). 
"I usually put my best hitter in the No. 3 position," Yarrington said. "He's 
earned that spot." 
He has been the team's most consistent pitcher, compiling a 7-4 record. 
Yamashita pitched a four-hit shutout over Eagle Rock on Tuesday and threw a 
three-hitter and struck out a career-high 13 in a 3-1 win over Belmont on April 
25. 
He is hardly overpowering -- in fact, Slow Mo has allowed 72 hits in 52 2/3 
innings -- but has nonetheless fanned 57 batters, mainly through guile alone. 
"He has good baseball sense," Yarrington says. "He does the things that the 
good players have to do to be successful. On the mound, his mechanics are 
better than anyone on the staff." 
It should be noted that, in terms of fundamentals, some of Yamashita's 
teammates are as raw as sushi. Verdugo Hills is having a so-so season, and is 
12-10 overall and third in the Northern League at 9-6. 
Yarrington insists that without Yamashita, well, he'd rather not even think 
about it. The coach is just happy Yamashita came back for more. Twice. 
"You never know what can happen in the off-season, but when school started, 
there he was," Yarrington said. "At the time, I didn't think it was a real big 
deal if he made it or not. But looking back now and seeing what he's 
contributed, whew, I don't know where we'd be without him." 
Shy or not, Yamashita knows he is having the best year of any of the Dons' 
players, although he admits he thought it would be tougher here. 
"I figured they'd be a little better than this, but I found out that I could do 
as well as these guys," he said. 
And while this has been his breakthrough season offensively, he has previously 
won acclaim for other reasons. As a sophomore, Yamashita was given the Coach's 
Award. 
"It goes to the exemplary player," Yarrington said. "The kid who gives 100%, 
never talks back, plays any position, all that stuff. 
"There was another kid who was a senior who I could have just as easily given 
it to, but I thought Mo wasn't going to be back. But then he shows up again the 
next year, and I give it to him again. 
"But, heck, he deserves it. And this year, he'll probably get it again." 
