A SAD EXCUSE FOR AN EMPIRE; 
IN OUR IMAGE; 
AMERICA'S EMPIRE IN THE PHILIPPINES BY STANLEY KARNOW (RANDOM HOUSE: $24.95; 
494 PP., ILLUSTRATED; 0-394-54975-9) 
In 1899, as American troops fought to conquer the Philippines, President 
William McKinley told a friend: "If old Dewey had just sailed away when he 
smashed that Spanish fleet, what a lot of trouble he would have saved us." 
Ninety years later, as Stanley Karnow makes abundantly clear in this compelling 
account, America is still hostage to the place where its imperial adventure 
began. "History is often a series of expedients that grow into dogmas -- 
today's pragmatism becoming tomorrow's doctrines; thus the American presence in 
Asia evolved," from the Philippines to China to Korea to Vietnam. 
Karnow, a veteran reporter on Asia (his admirable "Vietnam: A History," was 
companion to a PBS television series, as was "In Our Image," starting May 8 on 
KCET and other stations), traces foreign involvement in the Philippines from 
the time of Ferdinand Magellan's ill-fated 16th-Century journey to the islands 
to Ferdinand Marcos' U.S.-aided escape from them three years ago, and the rise 
of Corazon Aquino. On the whole, it is a well-told but not encouraging tale. 
America's efforts to instill its values and institutions in a disparate place 
was "spurred by a belief still ingrained in Americans," Karnow observes. But 
the idea that the United States can remold other lands in its own image "proved 
in later years to be largely an exercise in self-deception." 
The first U.S. civilian governor of the Philippines, William Howard Taft (all 
325 pounds of him -- among the book's plates is a classic shot of the massive 
Taft astride a carabao), talked about "little brown brothers" in his hopes of 
Americanizing the natives. This was just after a brutal war in which U.S. 
troops killed more than 20,000 Filipinos while losing 4,234 of their own (more 
than 200,000 civilians may have perished from the war and its effects) as Spain 
was relieved of its colonial possession. 
Taft was the first in a string of benevolent American administrators, and the 
United States was indeed an uncommon colonial master, moving quickly to bring 
Filipinos into governing ranks and promising, in 1916, sovereignty and eventual 
independence. U.S. troops spread through the islands, opening the first public 
schools; the soldiers were followed by waves of American civilian teachers. 
But while the Filipinos proved adept at learning English and adopting American 
fashions, they retained their cultural roots, with basic loyalties to kith and 
kin, not people and nation. Taft in private railed against Filipinos' "Oriental 
duplicity," failing to see what is true to this day: that authority in America, 
as Karnow observes, reposes on impersonal institutions, while power in the 
Philippines revolves around the complex kinship networks of the compradrazgo 
(from compadre, or ritual relative) system. 
Benigno (Ninoy) Aquino Jr. once called the Philippine social structure "an 
entrenched plutocracy." Karnow makes clear that throughout the history of U.S. 
involvement with the Philippines, Americans have reinforced oligarchic rule. In 
the early years, ilustrados, or rich intelligentsia, were vested in power. 
After World War II took a terrible toll on the Philippines, Gen. Douglas 
MacArthur had a chance to do there what he later did in Japan by promoting 
liberal programs, including land reform and dismantling of monopolies. But he 
reinstalled his prewar friends of the old Philippine dynasties, "whose primary 
aim was to protect their vested interests." 
As for the war itself, Karnow's view concurs with others who trace the 
country's moral malaise to those desperate days: "The endemic venality and 
corruption that nags the Philippines today is largely a legacy of the ethical 
degradation of that period." 
When Karnow gets to the depredations of the Marcos years, his account is less 
full than Raymond Bonner's 1987 book, "Waltzing With a Dictator," but it is 
also more firsthand, drawing on his years of experience as an Asia 
correspondent and his friendship with Ninoy Aquino. Karnow speculates on what a 
Ninoy Aquino presidency might have been like (pointing out that Aquino and 
Marcos shared similar concepts), then addresses Filipino critics of his widow's 
performance in the job as showing "an Asian reverance for authority and a Latin 
penchant for hypercriticism." 
The bottom line to Karnow's engaging, well-researched and amply documented 
work, however, is a feeling of pessimism about the future of this island 
nation, so appealing in many ways, in others so appalling. 
As counterpoint, Amando Doronila, former editor of the Manila Chronicle, wrote 
recently that "the standards of judgment are harsher on the Philippines. . . . 
Corruption is endemic in Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam and China, and yet the 
governments there are not in danger of being overthrown. . . . What is being 
ignored about the Philippines is that, despite the failure of the Aquino 
government to live up to extravagant expectations for change and reform . . . 
it has survived the elemental tests of political stability." 
