HOPE'S SON NAMED TO NEW INDIAN COMMISSION; 
GAMING: PRESIDENT BUSH'S NOMINEE IS EXPECTED TO WIN CONFIRMATION TO THE PANEL. 
President Bush has nominated Tony Hope, a former Ventura County congressional 
candidate and the son of entertainer Bob Hope, to the sensitive post of 
chairman of the new National Indian Gaming Commission. 
The commission will regulate and monitor the multimillion-dollar industry of 
bingo and other gambling on Indian reservations. 
"It's a great challenge to try to put something like this in place," said Tony 
Hope, who faces a confirmation hearing for the $83,600-a-year post before the 
Senate Select Committee on Indian Affairs on Thursday. He said he already has 
scheduled meetings with Indian leaders in anticipation of his confirmation. 
Most Indian tribes opposed the controversial 1988 law establishing the 
commission, claiming it was a violation of tribal sovereignty. But supporters 
of the legislation contended that without outside monitoring and control, the 
high-stakes gaming was a potential haven for money laundering and other 
organized crime activities. 
Indian tribes, facing cutbacks in federal money and limited tax bases, have 
instituted gambling, predominantly bingo, to raise revenues. About 120 of the 
257 recognized tribes in the United States have some form of organized gaming. 
The legislation that created the commission provides for joint tribal and 
federal government regulation of bingo, lotto and certain card games. The 
commission will have the authority to conduct background investigations of 
employees, monitor all Indian gaming activity, enforce the collection of fines 
and close illegal games. 
The legislation also permits casinos and wagering on horse and dog racing on 
reservations, but only if a tribe enters into a contract with the state 
government. It requires Indian-run poker, slot machines and other games to 
conform to state laws on hours of play and betting limits. 
The commission will consist of five members, including three from federally 
recognized tribes. Congress authorized spending $2 million a year for its 
operation and empowered it to collect another $1.5 million in fees from tribal 
gambling. 
Hope, 49, said the White House approached him about the appointment in 
September. An aide to the Senate Select Committee on Indian Affairs said 
Tuesday that Hope's appointment to the three-year term faces no apparent 
opposition. 
A graduate of Harvard Law School, Hope worked for Bush in the New Hampshire 
Republican primary in 1980 and 1988. He was also a member of the Grace 
Commission appointed by former President Ronald Reagan to pinpoint waste and 
fraud in the federal government. In addition, Hope served as vice president of 
the Overseas Investment Corp. under former President Gerald Ford. He is a 
senior vice president of Mutual of Omaha and United of Omaha insurance 
companies. 
Hope ran unsuccessfully for the 21st District congressional seat vacated by 
Bobbi Fiedler (R-Northridge) in 1986. Despite heavy fund-raising support from 
many prominent entertainers and ex-Presidents Ford and Richard M. Nixon, he was 
upset by Rep. Elton Gallegly (R-Simi Valley), who was then the mayor of Simi 
Valley. The district includes eastern Ventura County and parts of the western 
and northern San Fernando Valley. 
Hope and his family reside primarily in Washington, although he travels to 
California frequently on business and remains registered to vote in North 
Hollywood, near where his father lives. Hope reiterated that, even if 
confirmed, he still hopes to run for Congress again in Southern California. 
"It'll cause my plans to slip by one term, but, at this point, it doesn't make 
that much difference," Hope said. "I'd run in 1994 instead of 1992." 
