CHATSWORTH'S WALLACE HURLS NO-HITTER, 6-0; 
CHANCELLOR PITCHER OVERCOMES WILD STREAK TO SHUT DOWN KENNEDY 
Funny game, baseball. 
Consider Tuesday's performance by Derek Wallace, a senior right-hander at 
Chatsworth High. 
Wallace walked five batters, hit three others with fastballs -- one smack 
between the shoulder blades -- and shaved the chins of several others with a 
slider that often seemed to be slip-sliding away. 
"One just slipped out of my hand," Wallace said, explaining one beaning. 
But he didn't give up a hit. 
Still, Wallace considered the effort a "lousy" performance. Even Chatsworth 
Coach Bob Lofrano remarked afterward, "That's as bad a control as he's ever 
exhibited in two years." 
But what's so funny? Manny Alvarado and the Kennedy Golden Cougars are not 
laughing. 
"He no-hit us," Alvarado said, seemingly at a loss for words. "He pitched a 
great game." 
Well, yes, Wallace did pitch a no-hitter. But let's leave it at that. 
Chatsworth (18-4, 11-2 in league play) blanked Kennedy, 6-0, in a Northwest 
Valley Conference game at Chatsworth. Wallace (9-1), who struck out five, 
survived control problems to become the first Chatsworth player to throw a 
no-hitter in seven years. 
Said a perplexed Lofrano: "There are no answers to this game." 
Wallace, his own worst critic, described his performance in a word: 
"Brutal" he said. 
"I'm kinda disappointed in my mechanics, just the way I'm throwing the ball." 
It didn't matter how Wallace was throwing, the Golden Cougars weren't hitting. 
Kennedy (16-6, 10-3) had runners on base in five of the seven innings, loading 
the bases in the first and putting two runners on in three other innings. 
Wallace, however, slammed the door each time. 
He escaped the first inning by retiring Danny Gugler on a soft bouncer to third 
baseman Rich Aude. With one out in the third and runners at the corners, Aude 
gloved a hard grounder by Travis Bourne to begin an around-the-horn double 
play. 
Wallace struck out Gino Tagliaferri swinging with the bases empty to end the 
fifth inning, and second baseman Vince Simili and center fielder Kevin Chong 
each snared ropes to keep the Golden Cougars hitless in the sixth. 
"We hit the ball sharply a few times," Alvarado said, "but we couldn't find any 
holes. One timely hit, one timely break . . . we couldn't get it." 
In the seventh, things became so quiet you could hear a foul ball drop -- which 
one did, off the bat of Kennedy's Mike Murray. The ball fell just four feet 
from the right-field line and a certain bloop double. Murray fouled away three 
full-count pitches before drawing a walk to place runners at first and second. 
"I thought to myself, 'Just throw hard,' " Wallace said. "I think I just threw 
fastballs that last inning." 
Wallace then got Pat DeBoer, striking him out on three pitches to end the game. 
Lofrano, ordinarily reserved in victory, charged onto the field and embraced 
Wallace, who joined Brian Wood in the Chatsworth record books. Wood hurled a 
rain-shortened, five-inning no-hitter against Reseda in 1982. 
"Of course you want to see him get it," said Lofrano, who paced the dugout and 
barked encouragement in the final inning. "But the game's the important thing." 
The win snapped a two-game losing skid for the Chancellors, who remained two 
games ahead of Taft in the West Valley League race with four games to play. 
"We try to look at this thing in the overall scheme and not get all bent out of 
shape," Lofrano said. "But we obviously needed something after struggling a 
little. We put the bat on the ball." 
The Chancellors collected 11 hits off senior Mitch Cizek (7-3), whose personal 
seven-game winning streak was snapped. Aude, who was two for three, lofted a 
sacrifice fly to cap Chatsworth's two-run first. He also had a run-scoring 
double in the third and a run-scoring single in the sixth. 
Aude, who entered the game batting a team-high .443, finished the game with 31 
runs batted in, tops in the Valley. 
Chatsworth scored three times in the third to take a 5-0 lead. After Aude drove 
in Simili, Eric Johnson, Wallace and Reed McMackin followed with singles. 
