FAA DRAWS CRITICISM IN AIRLINER NEAR-MISS; 
AGENCY FAILED TO FIX TRAFFIC CONTROL PROBLEMS THAT CONTRIBUTED TO O.C. 
INCIDENT, NTSB SAYS 
Government safety officials said Wednesday that the Federal Aviation 
Administration's "failure to address and correct" air traffic control 
deficiencies and problems contributed to a narrow miss between two airliners 
over Orange County last February. 
The National Transportation Safety Board said an investigation of the Coast 
Terminal Radar Approach Control, or TRACON, facility at the El Toro Marine 
Corps Air station showed that FAA management personnel had verified and 
documented these problems over the last 3 years, but had taken no remedial 
action. 
"The FAA's quality assurance and safety oversight of the (air traffic control) 
system . . . is inadequate and ineffective," the NTSB concluded. 
The NTSB also noted that an El Toro air controller's failure to alert Los 
Angeles air traffic controllers of an approaching airliner led to the narrow 
miss of the two aircraft over Westminster in February. 
While not responding specifically to most of these criticisms, the FAA stated 
Wednesday that it has already undertaken a series of projects designed to 
correct any problems at Coast TRACON. 
The Orange County facility helps direct traffic to and from Los Angeles 
International, Ontario, John Wayne and Long Beach airports through some of the 
most heavily traveled air corridors in the world. 
The NTSB investigation was launched in response to the incident over 
Westminster about 7:10 p.m. on Feb. 13. Radar data showed that a British 
Airways Boeing 747 jetliner with 286 passengers on board was climbing out of 
LAX, en route to London, when it passed within 2 miles of an American Airlines 
BAe-146B jet flying to Ontario at the same altitude with 70 people aboard. FAA 
rules require 3 miles of horizontal separation and 1,000 feet of vertical 
separation. 
A controller at Los Angeles TRACON, which had been tracking the 747, warned the 
British pilot that there was other traffic in the area and the pilot made a 
quick turn to avoid the other plane. Both aircraft continued on to their 
destinations without incident. 
The NTSB concluded that the near-miss occurred "because of incomplete and 
misunderstood coordination between controllers at LAX Center and Coast TRACON 
and because . . . controllers at coast TRACON failed to comply with provisions 
of letters of agreement between Coast TRACON and adjacent facilities." 
The board singled out the Los Angeles controller for praise, commending his 
"immediate and decisive actions" to warn the 747 pilot. 
In contrast, the board noted that the Coast TRACON controller cleared the 
American Airlines plane to fly into airspace delegated to the Los Angeles 
facility without properly notifying Los Angeles controllers that he had done 
so. 
The unnamed controller was temporarily removed from his or her post, retrained, 
retested and then returned to the same position, where the controller was 
closely monitored for 30 days, according to the FAA. 
Among the "numerous deficiencies and problems" cited by the board were 
"inadequate controller staffing, excessive use of overtime . . . and inadequate 
size and poor physical condition of the operational quarters" at El Toro. 
"Specifically, the facility is run down, noise from military jets is a problem, 
rotary phone equipment is out of date and inadequate and the facility manager 
questions the health hazards of the environmental control system," the NTSB 
said. "Controllers have been working scheduled overtime since 1985 (and) 6-day 
workweeks are required 66% of the time." 
Error Rates Compared 
During 1988, seven controller errors were committed by Coast TRACON personnel, 
which worked out to 1.31 errors for every 100,000 flight operations. By 
comparison, the NTSB said, error rates during the same period at other 
facilities included 0.56 at Seattle TRACON, 0.56 at Ontario TRACON and 0.17 at 
Sacramento TRACON. 
The board concluded that these safety problems warrant "immediate action and 
corrective actions by the FAA to prevent a diminished level of safety in the 
high traffic density of the Southern California Basin area." 
Fred Ferrar, an FAA spokesman in Washington, said Wednesday that his agency 
already has begun a long-range program, "planned and developed over the past 
several years," to renovate and modernize the Coast TRACON facility. 
Admitting a "significant staffing problem," which he said was largely due to 
the high cost of living in the Orange County area, Ferrar said the FAA has 
begun a concerted recruitment program to attract more controllers. 
Randy Moore, president of the National Air Traffic Controllers Assn. local at 
Coast TRACON, was in Washington on Wednesday preparing his testimony for a 
congressional panel investigating air safety. 
Moore agreed that part of Coast TRACON's inability to attract more controllers 
is the high cost of living in Orange County, and he said he supports an FAA 
plan to pay a 20% salary bonus to controllers at 11 FAA facilities around the 
country, including Coast TRACON. 
Moore added that "it's no coincidence" that the FAA has announced a delay in 
two air safety projects involving Coast TRACON due to a lack of controllers at 
the same time the NTSB findings were made public. 
Moore said that the two air safety projects -- one creating a radar control 
zone around John Wayne Airport and the other rerouting air traffic throughout 
the region -- would increase the workload at Coast TRACON from 530,448 flight 
operations in 1988 to more than 1 million a year by mid-1990. 
"The NTSB did not exaggerate the problem," Moore said. "We are understaffed. 
The manager at Coast TRACON recently picked 10 new controllers from 25 
applicants, and I know that eight of the 10 won't take the job unless they get 
the extra 20% pay incentive." 
Moore said the FAA remodeled the employee lounge at the facility 2 years ago, 
but the NTSB still found it intolerably small. 
Now, said Moore, the FAA is planning to install a 24-by-60-foot trailer next to 
the existing facility, to be used as an employee lounge and for two small 
offices. 
Said Moore: "It's better than nothing." 
Mandatory overtime remains a problem, although it is not as bad as it was a 
year ago, Moore said. 
"Don't get me wrong. Overtime is great for the paycheck," he said. "But it's 
rough on family life." 
SAFETY ZONE DELAYED -- Change at John Wayne Airport hinges on hiring more air 
traffic controllers. Page 3. 
