CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS: THE TV CAMPAIGN 
The ballot measures: Propositions 108 and 111. The proposals would modify the 
state's spending limit, trigger a 9-cents-per-gallon increase in the gasoline 
tax phased in over five years and authorize a $1-billion bond issue for mass 
transit. 
Whose ad?: Yes on Propositions 111 and 108, a campaign headed by Gov. George 
Deukmejian and supported by business, labor and professional groups. 
Two 30-second spots featuring traffic congestion and the Bay Area earthquake 
are scheduled to run for the next two weeks. They began appearing Monday night 
in San Diego, Los Angeles, San Francisco-San Jose and Sacramento television 
markets. Although there is no well-financed opposition to the two ballot 
measures, the television campaign is considered critical to overcoming a 
general voter distrust and dislike of tax increases. 
Neither advertisement mentions that the passage of Proposition 111 would 
trigger a gasoline tax increase. Neither do the TV ads mention that Proposition 
111 would raise the state spending limit to allow expenditure of revenue from 
the increased gasoline taxes. 
 Elements of the ads, with an analysis by Times staff writer Virginia Ellis. 
 Ad: "Experts warn us traffic will double in the next 10 years." 
Analysis: Actually, the ad is referring to studies showing that in specific 
areas within urban regions, particularly San Diego and Los Angeles, traffic is 
expected to double and triple over the next decade. A report by The Road 
Information Program (TRIP) released in January found that on a statewide basis 
traffic congestion is expected to increase 33% over the next decade. 
Ad: "Propositions 111 and 108 raise money for specific projects. . . ." 
Analysis: Legislation accompanying the two measures does require the completion 
of highway projects already scheduled but unable to be completed because of 
lack of funds. However, it still gives the California Transportation Commission 
latitude to approve additional highway and mass transit projects within certain 
guidelines. 
Ad: " . . . Like fixing potholes . . . improving freeways . . . and providing 
other ways of getting around." 
Analysis: Recents polls show that voters prefer seeing their transportation 
dollars spent for highway maintenance and repair rather than new construction. 
And a recent Los Angeles Times poll indicated voters were more inclined to 
support tax increases for public transit than highways. 
Ad: "We have the technology to protect these structures from earthquakes like 
the one that hit San Francisco in October. We just don't have the money." 
Analysis: Actually, the California Department of Transportation has the 
technology to retrofit single-column bridges for earthquake safety, but 
officials are still working on the technology to retrofit some multi-column 
bridges. 
