JOBLESS RATE LEAPS TO 5.3%, SIGNALS COOLING ECONOMY; 
DOW RALLIES ON NEWS BUT FIZZLES 
Unemployment, rising at the fastest clip in more then three years, jumped to 
5.3% last month, the strongest evidence yet of an economic slowdown, the 
government said today in a report greeted with mixed reactions in financial 
markets. 
Wall Street stocks initially staged a powerful rally, than sank abruptly in the 
final hour on futures-related trading and uncertainty over the unemployment 
figures. 
The Dow Jones industrial average ended down 2.94 points at 2,381.96,after being 
up by as much as 25 points. Rises led falls by about 4-3 on moderate New York 
Stock Exchange volume of 180.812 million shares. 
Propelling the 0.3 percentage point gain in the jobless rate was the smallest 
rise in new jobs since June, 1986, the Labor Department said. 
The unemployment increase was the biggest one-month gain since February, 1986. 
Mixed Reaction 
Economists and financial markets, concerned for months that the persistently 
heady economy was moving into a period of spiraling price hikes, initially 
found mostly good news in the report. 
But some analysts wondered whether the dramatic increase in joblessness was 
signaling that the danger now is one not of inflation but of recession. 
Roger Brinner of DRI-McGraw-Hill said the data was "about perfect" for 
prospects of generating a soft landing for the soaring economy -- slowing 
growth just enough to rein in inflation without triggering a recession. 
"There's no question the economy is weakening," said Washington economist 
Michael Evans. "But there's nothing in this report to suggest we are heading 
into a recession." 
Allen Sinai of Boston Co. Economic Advisers Inc. was more cautious. 
He predicted a mild recession later this year and said the economy was 
"downshifting to slower growth. This is part and parcel of the bloom being off 
the rose of what has been a booming economy." 
Economists concurred that today's surprising jump in the unemployment rate will 
likely be enough to keep the Federal Reserve Board from further tightening 
credit when it next reevaluates monetary policy in two weeks. 
White House Optimistic 
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater played down the significance of the 
first rise in unemployment of George Bush's brief tenure as President, noting 
that the percentage of working-age Americans with jobs "remains at al all-time 
high of 63.3%." 
April's rise in the jobless rate was felt most heavily by men. The unemployment 
rate among white men rose from 3.6% to 4.0%; for Hispanic men, from 6.5% to 
8.3%; for black men, from 9.8% to 10.0%. 
Joblessness among white women rose from 3.8% to 4.1%, but dropped for black 
women from 9.1% to 8.8%. 
As for job growth last month, a separate department survey of businesses found 
that only 117,000 non-farm payroll jobs were created. 
At the same time, the Labor Department revised payroll growth for March 
downward from 180,000 to 171,000. Over the 12-month period that ended in 
February, an average of 300,000 jobs had been created each month. 
