JAPANESE GROUP BUYS HOTEL BEL-AIR FOR $1 MILLION A ROOM; 
GATHERING SPOT OF STARS, EXECUTIVES 
The prestigious Hotel Bel-Air -- gathering place for some of Hollywood's top 
stars and motion picture executives -- is being sold to a Japanese investment 
group for more than $100 million, the hotel's current owners announced this 
morning. 
The per-room purchase price of more than $1 million shatters the old record of 
more than $750,000 per room, established when the Sultan of Brunei bought the 
nearby 260-room Beverly Hills Hotel for about $185 million in 1957. 
Laurie Farmer, a spokeswoman for the Caroline Rose Hunt Trust, which purchased 
the 11-acre property in the exclusive Stone Canyon residential neighborhood 
near UCLA in 1982 for $22.1 million, said the sale should be completed sometime 
later this month. 
The purchaser, Sekitei Kaihatsu, is a 95-year-old firm based in Tokyo that 
operates luxury hotels, resorts and restaurants in Japan. 
$20 Million for Renovation 
Farmer said the Hunt Trust's Rosewood Property Co. of Dallas will continue to 
operate the 92-room hotel for the Japanese investors. Rosewood has already 
spent more than $20 million renovating the Bel-Air. 
The rambling, Mission-style complex of bungalows and larger buildings was 
allowed amid the mansions and estates of Stone Canyon because several of the 
original structures had served as business offices and stables for the original 
1920s Bel-Air subdivision. Since these structures failed to conform to local 
residential zoning codes anyway, their transformation into a luxury hotel in 
the 1940s met with relatively little opposition. 
The Bel-Air has won Travel and Leisure Magazine's inclusion among the "Ten 
Great Hotels in the World." 
The hotel has some of the highest occupancy rates in the Los Angeles area, with 
rooms starting about $195 per night and some suites going for as much as $1,300 
a night. 
"The hotel has sort of an understated elegance," Farmer said. "That's why so 
many celebrities flock there. Because it's not a showplace, they can be left 
alone there." 
A Place to Be Seen 
Left alone, perhaps, but still observed. 
Among Hollywood's cognoscenti, the Hotel Bel-Air Restaurant is just as 
important a place to be seen at table as the perhaps more familiar Polo Lounge 
at the Beverly Hills Hotel. 
Those seen engaging in power breakfasts at the Bel-Air of late have included 
actors Mel Gibson, Kathleen Turner, Sylvester Stallone and William Hurt, 
television executive Bud Grant of CBS and film studio chiefs David Puttnam of 
Columbia, Michael Eisner of Disney and Barry Diller of 20th Century Fox. 
One longtime resident has been actor Tony Curtis, who lovingly described the 
hotel as "the best wife he'd ever had." 
"If I could, I would marry the Bel-Air tomorrow," he told an interviewer in 
1987. "She doesn't ask me where I've been all night. She doesn't mind if I 
bring a girl home. She makes my bed every day, feeds me regularly, takes my 
messages faithfully and puts my laundry in those little boxes tied up with 
ribbon." 
