6 S. KOREA RIOT POLICE KILLED IN RESCUE RAID 
Six South Korean police officers were killed early today when protesting 
students set fire to a campus building as riot police stormed it to free 
captured colleagues, a police spokesman said. 
Reports from the scene at Dongui University in Pusan, the major port about 200 
miles southeast of Seoul, said the death toll could rise. The police spokesman 
said 15 officers and at least one student were in a hospital. 
The police spokesman said most of the victims died from smoke inhalation. Some 
of the injured suffered burns or hurt themselves leaping from the nine-story 
building. 
The drama began when radical students captured five plainclothes officers 
Tuesday evening during an off-campus demonstration called to protest the action 
of police in firing more than 20 warning shots the previous night to beat back 
a radical student attack on a police post. 
Police officials negotiated unsuccessfully through the night for the hostages' 
release, and authorities then ordered a raid. 
About 700 police launched the campus assault shortly before dawn today to free 
their colleagues, who were being held blindfolded on the seventh floor of the 
library building. 
As they rushed up the stairs, students splashed gasoline over barricades they 
had set up earlier to block doorways and fled to the roof with the hostages. 
When police reached the seventh floor, students set the barricades alight with 
gasoline bombs. 
The domestic Yonhap News Agency said that several officers, after suffering 
burns, dropped to their deaths after hanging briefly from a window ledge. Other 
reports said the victims leaped from the windows. 
A total of 88 students were arrested at the school, a police spokesman said. 
The university administration immediately canceled classes and barred students 
from entering the campus. All of the hostages were later freed when professors 
intervened and persuaded the students to let them go, officials said. 
It was by far the deadliest incident in recent years in a country that has 
become used to almost daily violence on campuses and in strike-bound factories. 
National police headquarters in Seoul said it was the worst loss of police life 
in years. 
South Korea has been hit by a wave of violent protests in recent weeks by 
radical students and dissidents demanding the overthrow of President Roh Tae 
Woo's government. But protests rarely result in deaths in South Korea despite 
the fury of street clashes in which protesters battle riot police with 
firebombs and rocks. Riot police are normally armed only with tear gas and 
batons. 
Today's heavy toll on a police force already stretched nearly to the breaking 
point by continuous riot duty seemed certain to strengthen the hand of 
rightists in President Roh's administration who have been calling for all-out 
war on leftists. 
