TAFT HIGH TEAM WINS U.S. TITLE IN ACADEMIC DECATHLON COMPETITION 
A team of seniors from Los Angeles' Taft High School, after matching wits for 
two days with some of the nation's brightest high school students on subjects 
ranging from physics to fine arts, on Monday were declared winners of the U.S. 
Academic Decathlon. 
It was the second time in three years that a Los Angeles school has won the 
coveted national title. In 1987, a team from Marshall High School in Silver 
Lake became the first Los Angeles Unified School District team to win the 
decathlon. Taft, in Woodland Hills, placed second in last year's competition. 
Taft team members leaped, screamed and hugged each other and their parents 
after the announcement at the awards banquet Monday for the nearly 400 students 
who were entered in the 10-subject academic contest. 
"We are so high right now, I don't know when we're going to come down," said 
Taft team member Shawn Canter. 
Since August, the nine Taft students had studied together in class, after 
school and on weekends, poring over study outlines and preparing for tests in 
geography, mathematics, economics and literature. Students were also required 
to deliver speeches, write essays and be interviewed by judges during the 
competition. 
"After nine months, this is the baby," Canter said. 
The Taft team scored 45,857 out of a possible 60,000 points to defeat teams 
representing 36 states, as well as Northern Ireland and Brazil. Taft 
represented California in the national competition after winning the state 
title in March for the second year in a row. 
"This shows the kind of education that is possible in our district," said Dan 
Isaacs, superintendent of the Los Angeles Unified School District's High School 
Division. The Taft team captured the district title in November. 
The Taft victory over second-place Deer Park High School in Deer Park, Tex., 
was particularly sweet, team members said. The team from J.J. Pearce High 
School of Richardson, Tex., narrowly defeated the Taft contingent in the 1988 
national academic decathlon. There were no returning members from last year's 
Taft team, all of whom were seniors. 
"I suppose it was just California's turn," said Ronny Harris, Deer Park High 
School decathlon coach. "When we fell behind in the Super Quiz, I started to 
get concerned." 
The national finals appeared to be shaping up as a showdown between Texas and 
California long before the event started Friday. The Texas team had scored more 
points than any other winning team in the state championships, except for Taft. 
The only clue of a California victory was Taft's first-place finish in the 
Super Quiz, the only event of the academic decathlon that is held before an 
audience. In the seven years of the contest, winners of the Super Quiz, which 
this year was on the U.S. presidency, have usually gone on to win the national 
title. 
High Scores 
The Taft team scored particularly high in essay writing and interviews, as well 
as in fine arts, geography and mathematics. 
Under contest rules, the teams were divided evenly among students with A, B and 
C grade averages. Taft senior Michael Pocrass scored the highest number of 
points among all C students in the competition, earning $6,000 in scholarship 
prize money. 
Marc Sarti earned the fourth-highest point total among all A students, and Andy 
Rosenthal also placed fourth among all B students. 
Pocrass said he was surprised by his showing because he, as well as teammates, 
believed that the tests in the national Academic Decathlon were more difficult 
than those in the state finals. 
Coach Surprised 
"I was totally surprised," said Arthur Berchin, the Taft English teacher who 
coaches the academic decathlon team. Both the Texas and California teams were 
called to stand in front of the assembled students before the judges announced 
the overall winner. 
"They took so long I was going into cardiac arrest," Taft team member Rosenthal 
said. 
But Taft's Rodney Crump, who won four individual medals and followed Pocrass 
with the second-highest number of points among all C students, said all day "I 
had a positive feeling that it was our time to win." 
Berchin, who quit an administrative post at UCLA to teach the Taft group, said 
he is relieved that the competition is over. 
"I don't want to be their teacher, and I don't want to be their coach anymore," 
Berchin said. "I just want to enjoy them." 
On the Taft campus Monday, there was joy and pride at news of the victory. 
"They're much more socially well-rounded than people think," student body 
President Josh Stenger said. 
He noted that the team includes a varsity basketball player, a drama student 
and a student government leader. 
"You can't just call them nerds, because they aren't," said Stenger, a friend 
of many of the decathlon members, as he arranged the letters in a 
congratulatory message on the marquee in front of the school. "They all have 
other things to offer." 
Junior Chris Allen said, "It's kind of cool to come to a school where they're 
into studying that much." 
