FIRST WAVE OF TROOPS LANDS IN PANAMA; 
U.S. CONTINUES TO PUT DIPLOMATIC PRESSURE ON NORIEGA TO LEAVE 
Combat troops began arriving today in Panama from U.S. air bases, part of 
President Bush's order to protect American lives as the United States mobilizes 
diplomatic pressure to force the ouster of military leader Manuel Antonio 
Noriega. 
The first wave of Marine reinforcements from Camp Lejeune, N.C., and Army 
troops from the 7th Light Infantry Division at Ft. Ord, Calif., flew to Panama 
as part of the Defense Department's operation, dubbed "Nimrod Dancer." 
Bush, reacting to postelection violence, announced the deployment Thursday of 
2,000 combat troops to Panama to augment the 10,000 American service personnel 
stationed there. 
The President also said he was ready to explore ways to entice Noriega to step 
down. 
Diplomatic moves included a meeting today in Washington of the Organization of 
American States, where members of the permanent council unanimously approved a 
Venezuelan resolution calling for a special meeting Wednesday to discuss the 
Panama crisis. 
'We Will Not Be Intimidated' 
"I will do what is necessary to protect the lives of American citizens, and we 
will not be intimidated by the bullying tactics, brutal though they may be, of 
the dictator, Noriega," Bush said. 
At the same time, Bush's national security adviser questioned both the 
likelihood of a real confrontation with Noriega and the efficacy of the 
President's action to try to force Panama's de facto ruler from power. 
"(Noriega) is a thug, but he clearly operates with some prudence when he has 
to," said National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft. He called the troop 
buildup "precautionary as much as anything else," although Bush had said in his 
news conference, "I'm worried about the lives of American citizens." 
Scowcroft all but acknowledged that Bush's action would do little to force 
Noriega from power. 
"We can always hope he will see the error of his ways, and we are looking at 
ways to help convince him to recognize the will of the Panamanian people," 
Scowcroft said. 
Deployment Could Take Week 
Asked if it would be acceptable for Noriega to still be in power a month from 
now, Scowcroft said, "I don't see why not." 
The deployment of two Army battalions, one Marine company and dozens of armored 
personnel carriers began late Thursday, and the Pentagon said it probably will 
take a week or more to complete. 
For 15 months, the United States has been frustrated in its efforts to force 
Noriega from power after his indictment in Florida on drug-trafficking charges. 
