FAMILY SEARCH; 
ADULT ADOPTEES SEEK ROOTS 
The drive from her Anaheim home to Santee in San Diego County was only two 
hours, but Robin Gryvnak, 26, had been dreaming about this moment for years. 
She had fussed all week over what she would say to him, what she should wear to 
impress him, even how to arrange her hair so she would look more like him. 
"I wanted everything to be just right. It had to be perfect, right down to 
every detail," she had said nervously the night before. 
But this Saturday morning four weeks ago as she drove into the Santee 
neighborhood, parked by the white-framed house with the neat front lawn, and 
saw Richard Campbell on the front lawn, grinning and waving -- she simply 
melted. 
She walked toward him shyly and awkwardly, suddenly like a little girl, 
clutching the mementos she had brought just for him -- a bouquet of daisies and 
a balloon that bannered the words, "It's a Girl!" 
Then Robin Gryvnak fell into Campbell's embrace. An adopted child who found her 
long-unknown birth father. A personal journey that now seemed headed for a 
happy ending. 
There was a time when reunions of adopted persons and their birth parents were 
a true novelty, a rarely publicized lost-and-found phenomenon in America. 
But not anymore. In the past decade, these tearful happenings have become 
increasingly familiar. The parties in these long-abandoned relationships not 
only are more eager to reunite, but also more willing to tell their 
irresistibly dramatic and sentimental stories to the media. 
All such tales are full of sure-fire plot elements -- first, secrecy and shame; 
then, rediscovery and elation. Some relate such extraordinary ordeals and 
bizarre twists that they border on the melodramatic. 
And this is no passing fad. The American Adoption Congress, an umbrella 
organization for search-support groups and reunion registries, believes there 
are now at least 250,000 "active searchers" nationwide. While most still are 
adult adoptees, the numbers of birth parents and those searchers under 30 are 
markedly increasing. 
But search advocates said the traditional stigmatic secrecy over adoptions 
remains massive, despite the growing acceptance of the full "open adoption" 
concept -- where birth parents are identified and remain in open contact with 
the child and the adoptive parents. 
California, like most states, keeps original birth certificates and other key 
adoption-related records sealed, opened generally only by court order, which is 
rarely given, activists said. 
And many defenders of traditional "closed" adoptions still denounce searchers 
as militant malcontents who break the original pact of confidentiality, engage 
in extralegal search tactics and cruelly harass those who are contacted. 
"Ridiculous!" countered Florence Fisher, founder of the national Adoptees' 
Liberty Movement Assn. "That 'malcontent' accusation is just one more myth." 
Fisher and other advocates conceded the potential does exist for "extreme 
traumatic reactions" from the persons contacted. But, they noted, searchers 
themselves could also face shocking discoveries, such as finding people who are 
criminals or drug addicts. 
"Of course, we worry about both these possibilities, but they happen very 
rarely," said Cindy Shacklett, Orange County coordinator for the national 
Concerned United Birthparents search-support organization. 
Shacklett led a small group of protesters May 1 at the Orange County Courthouse 
as part of a nationwide "Open My Records Day." In California, the advocates are 
backing an Assembly bill, now in committee, that would make the most vital 
adoption-case records -- such as original birth certificates -- available 
without court order to adult adoptees, birth parents and adoptive parents. 
People search for different reasons, advocates said: For adoptees, it is to 
find their full identity; for birth parents, to heal emotional wounds from 
giving up their children; and for all of them, to exercise a new form of civil 
rights. 
"People don't go searching for a 'Mommy' or a 'Daddy' at age 18 or 40," Fisher 
said. "They're looking for other answers." 
Sheridan O'Brien, now 39, was raised lovingly by her adoptive parents, her 
adoption status openly acknowledged. 
After all, she was told, "adopted children were chosen, were picked out, are 
very special. There's nothing to be ashamed of." 
But "when you're older, you begin to feel there's something askew -- the flip 
side of those usual explanations," recalled O'Brien, a graphic designer who 
lives in Laguna Hills and belongs to the Orange County branch of Concerned 
United Birthparents, whose members include adoptees. 
"I began to feel a sense of void about my whole identity. It's feeling lost and 
that certain pieces of our puzzle are still missing." 
Her adoptive parents, she said, never went into depth about her adoption. 
"They never said it was a forbidden topic, but you could sense it was too 
hurtful to bring up. And you don't, because you love them," O'Brien said. 
But by the mid-1970s -- after she had married and her own daughter, Jennifer, 
was born -- O'Brien began searching on her own sporadically. Her adoptive 
parents knew her full birth name and had told O'Brien. So she often spent whole 
evenings, pouring over phone books of areas throughout California and other 
states, looking for people with that unusual last name. 
Still, the random calls -- and her own attempts to obtain identifying 
information from public records -- proved to be a dead end. In 1988, however, 
after turning her search over to a professional consultant, O'Brien located the 
birth mother -- now 67, divorced, living in Los Angeles County. 
O'Brien placed the first call in February, 1989. 
"Oh, I was shaking, and I wasn't sure I could even speak," she said. "Sure, 
you're worried about absolute rejection. Sure, you wonder how upsetting this 
might be to the other person." 
"But (support groups and consultants) tell you to take it easy, to be up front 
and tell them you're not out to intrude in their lives, but only want to meet, 
learn about their lives and tell of yours." 
The call went well, she said. 
"She was polite," O'Brien said. "She never acknowledged the birth date or the 
adoption. But she did say we might meet, but not right away -- she wasn't 
feeling well." 
The explanation devastated O'Brien. "She said she had cancer; she was 
undergoing chemotherapy." 
Two months later, just before Mother's Day, 1989, they met. 
"I saw this woman, very ill, but who looked so much like me. It stuns you, no 
matter how prepared you think you are. I hugged her. I cried a lot. We sat on 
the couch, touching each other -- our faces, our hands, comparing 
similarities." 
"She swore me to secrecy," O'Brien said. "Her two daughters (from a later 
marriage) didn't know about me. She asked me not to tell them or contact them 
-- until after her death." 
At the funeral 10 months later, O'Brien walked up to the half-sisters, offered 
her condolences but introduced herself only as "a close friend of the family." 
Later, when all the others had left, she returned alone to the grave site and 
-- for the first time that day -- allowed herself to cry. 
She has since phoned the half-sisters, who are both in their mid-30s. 
"It's been like instant empathy, like we've known each other all our lives," 
O'Brien said. 
Their first formal gathering will be this Memorial Day -- at their mother's 
grave. 
But O'Brien's memories of her birth mother are poignantly mixed. 
"I saw her many times. But, no, I can't say it was perfect. There were strained 
moments. I couldn't get real close to her. She stayed distant, and I realize 
now she was a very private person." 
Yet, O'Brien added, "I had this feeling that she was glad to see me and to know 
that I was doing all right and had a wonderful daughter of my own. And that, 
yes, overall, everything was OK." 
The last visit took place in the hospital two months ago. 
"I saw her alone and hugged her, like I always did," O'Brien said. "She 
couldn't speak. But she moved her hand toward mine, and I held hers -- as 
tightly, and as long, as I could." 
Her mother died the next day. 
Trish McAleer, now 40, remembers the feelings of guilt, secrecy and isolation 
when she gave birth to her daughter out of wedlock 22 years ago. 
But eight years ago, McAleer, who is married and has no other children, decided 
to take matters into her own hands. 
The San Clemente resident became a dedicated activist in the search movement, 
inspired by a Phil Donahue talk show about the reuniting of birth parents and 
adoptees, and driven by her own need to find her daughter. 
And six years ago, after "piecing together bits of information" from public 
records and sympathetic relatives, she located her daughter, who was born in 
Ohio and still lives there. 
After the daughter turned 18 in 1986, McAleer took the plunge. She went back to 
Ohio and attended the daughter's commencement -- but staying incognito and 
accompanied only by a trusted relative. 
"I had to see her, even if from afar," McAleer said. "I had to be there. I 
cried the whole time." 
The next evening, while still in town, McAleer decided to take the next obvious 
step. She phoned the daughter's home. 
Luckily, said McAleer, the daughter answered and was alone. "She was guarded 
and startled, but she took it very well. She seemed positive about talking 
again and exchanging letters and pictures." 
But the next day, McAleer said, the mood had changed abruptly. "She told me we 
shouldn't meet and that if we did, it would hurt her parents." 
Nevertheless, when McAleer returned to San Clemente, she mailed off a packet of 
photographs with an explanatory letter to the adoptive parents. 
"I told them," McAleer said, "I wasn't out to disrupt things, but only to make 
contact -- and, if it works out, become friends." 
The packet came back, the photographs and letter still in it, and with this 
tersely formal note from the daughter: 
 Patricia: I want no further contact with you. If I wanted contact with you, I 
would have done so years ago. 
 The most theatrical twist in this story came 18 months later when McAleer -- 
in Ohio to visit relatives -- decided to seize the moment. 
Urged by relatives who knew where the daughter worked, McAleer went straight to 
the store, intending to make face-to-face contact. But the daughter wasn't 
there. "They told me she was in a car accident, that she was in the hospital 
with serious injuries." 
Once again, she took the plunge. That evening at the hospital, after the 
adoptive parents had left and the daughter was alone, McAleer -- feeling both 
terrified and driven by this one chance -- entered the room and introduced 
herself. 
According to McAleer, the daughter reacted at first with anger, then curiosity 
and "we eventually had a nice talk." But basically, said McAleer, the daughter 
shut the door on her, indicating the adoptive parents strongly opposed any kind 
of contact. 
That was 2 1/2 years ago. McAleer has not seen -- or heard from -- the daughter 
since. 
"I have no regrets about what I did. I would do it again, a thousand times 
over, because you get only so many chances, if at all," said McAleer, a 
Concerned United Birthparents national official and now a search consultant 
herself. 
"What people like me have done may be audacious, perhaps. Certainly, 
persistent. But harassment? That's absurd! Since I last saw her, I have sent 
her little cards on birthdays and holidays. Nothing more." 
"I think of her constantly," she added. "And all I want her to know is that I 
care, that I am here, and that my door is always open to her." 
Trish McAleer is still sending the cards. Still wishing. Still waiting. 
For Robin Gryvnak of Anaheim, who met her birth father in the Santee reunion, 
the wait is finally over. 
Last fall, through a consultant with the Fullerton-based Severed Strings search 
program, she found her birth mother, now 42 and still living in San Diego 
County. They have met only once and their relationship is "a slowly evolving 
but difficult one," Robin said. 
And that embracing reception last April 28 from the family of Richard Campbell, 
the birth father, has touched her deeply -- "just like a real family," she 
said. 
Indeed, Campbell is now the very image of the solid family man. He and his 
wife, Roberta, have two sons, Rick, 24, and Shawn, 22. And Campbell, who saw 
Army combat duty in Vietnam in 1966, is a longtime employee -- an electrician 
-- with a regional utility company. 
"I thought it (Robin's first call April 22) might be some kind of hoax," said 
the 47-year-old Campbell, who admits he was "something of a hell-raiser" at the 
time he knew Robin's birth mother. "I never knew about the baby. I never saw or 
heard about (Robin's birth mother) all these years. But I'm convinced I'm 
Robin's father." 
And now, said Campbell, pointing to a snapshot of Robin and her children, 
Joshua, 4 1/2, and Amanda, 3, "we find ourselves suddenly with both a daughter 
and grandkids!" 
At their April 28 meeting in Santee, an obviously elated Robin presented 
Campbell, a railroad model buff, with a miniature classic Rio Grande caboose 
car -- and this note: 
 To you, this may be the end of a train. 
To me, it's a symbol of the end of a long search. 
 -- Love, Robin. 
Mary Gryvnak, one of her staunchest supporters throughout the six-year search. 
Last Oct. 16, the day after Robin met her birth mother, she sent Mary a huge 
bunch of roses. "I knew she would be feeling kind of hurt, and I didn't want 
that to happen. I wanted to tell her something from the heart." 
So with the roses came a tiny card -- one that made the 53-year-old Mary 
Gryvnak, as she recalled later, "cry every time I read it." 
 To my one and only MOM!!!!! 
 -- Love, always, Robin. 
