AN URGE TO BURN; 
MADAGASCAR: RARE ISLAND UP IN SMOKE 
Madagascar is burning. 
The evidence is everywhere: in the haze of smoke that drapes itself into the 
steep dales of the capital, Antananarivo, in the evening; in acres of hillside 
blackened with fire that line the road on the three-hour drive from there to 
this forest glen near the east coast, leaving nothing but a stubble of tree 
stumps. 
It is visible in the appearance from the air of the great island's central 
highlands, its once-deep forests burned away, leaving only a threadbare 
coverlet of green, as thin as the felt of an old billiard table, through which 
the rich red of Madagascar's soil bleeds. 
Blessed with a bounty of plant and animal life almost unique on Earth, thanks 
to 165 million years of geographical isolation from the African mainland, 
Madagascar is cursed with a human population of pyromaniacs. 
Centuries-Old Habit 
The result of their fires is that this fourth-largest island in the world is 
also the most heavily eroded. Compounded by a population explosion, the 
residents' centuries-old habit of slash-and-burn agriculture today menaces the 
island's future. 
The story is told here of a visiting Soviet cosmonaut who told his hosts that 
their island is the only land mass he could never fail to identify from space. 
It is always surrounded by a halo of bright red sea, he explained, the color of 
the soil relentlessly scrubbed off its denuded surface by the wind and rain. 
Madagascar's prized lemurs, the squirrel-tailed, dog-muzzled, monkey-like 
primates of which 23 species are unique to the island, have been pushed out of 
their accustomed habitats into progressively smaller strips of forest. 
Its precious rice fields, which feed the world's heaviest per capita consumers 
of rice, are fouled by soil eroded off the bare hills. Its best west coast port 
is all but useless today, so full is it of silt carried off the hills by its 
river. 
Spreading Malnutrition 
As the forests dwindle and the soil is degraded, charcoal and rice alike become 
more expensive, and malnutrition spreads among Madagascar's children. 
Martin Nicoll, a World Wildlife Fund official here, observed: "Virtually 
everyone in Madagascar is dependent on an endangered ecosystem." 
That ecosystem is one of the world's wonders. The island may not have lions, 
elephants or giraffes, but not one of its more than 400 species of primates, 
rodents, carnivores and insects is seen anywhere else on the globe. About 95% 
of its reptile species and 46% of its birds are also unique. 
Its outstanding diversity and sheer strangeness often have naturalists talking 
of Madagascar as if it were the product of a fabulist's imagination. 
"Butterflies as big as birds, and birds as colorful as the rainbow" were among 
the wonders listed by British environmentalists Gerald and Lee Durrell in their 
keynote address to a 1985 scientific conference marking the start of worldwide 
concern over the island's environment. 
Mammals here have retained traits that their mainland cousins lost in 
prehistoric times, such as the ultrasonic alarms and signals that tenrecs -- 
small, burrowing insectivores -- produce by vibrating their quills. 
Unusual Ecological Niches 
Others have filled ecological niches left vacant by the vagaries of evolution. 
For instance, the nocturnal aye-aye, perhaps the strangest of Madagascar's 
lemurs, fills the role of the rest of the world's woodpeckers by digging under 
tree bark for grubs with its spindly, "E.T"-like middle finger. 
But the Malagasy love affair with fire is increasingly at odds with this 
otherworldly population of animals and plants. 
The Malagasy burn for many reasons. They burn the hillsides to clear land for a 
form of rice culture known as tavy. They burn the flatlands to bring up new 
shoots of grass for their cattle to graze. They burn irreplaceable forest to 
make charcoal. 
"And sometimes," said Voara Randriamasolo, director of the national zoo in 
Antananarivo, "when they're unhappy with the government, they burn." 
The fires set in pastureland eat away at the edges of the rain forest, drying 
them up until they flake away like the pages of a yellowing book. "The fires 
get out of hand because the people set them and let them burn until they just 
die out," said Sheila O'Connor, a Cambridge University biologist working in the 
south of the country. 
Unprotected by forest, the rolling hills of the highlands are scarred by 
crescent-shaped earthslides and eroded gullies, so common that the Malagasy 
have a word for them in their quasi-Polynesian language: lavaka. 
Conservation Effort 
Yet for all that, Madagascar has today become the focus of one of the world's 
most ambitious conservation programs. Development agencies, including the U.N. 
Development Program and the U.S. Agency for International Development, have 
over the last three years made the environment their prime focus. 
In the same period, the government has awakened to the threat. After an 
international conference in 1985, the government approved a program to improve 
management of its 22 preserves and to add 14 sites to protect such delicate 
ecosystems as coral reefs and mangrove swamps. 
"Today, there's often no staff in some preserves, or sometimes one nominal 
guide, with no transport, no training," said Nicoll. 
With foreign help, the government is prepared to spend as much as $200,000 per 
year to train and equip wardens for each of 14 particularly important reserves 
selected for intensive management. The programs will include rural development 
schemes aimed at providing local farmers with alternatives to the ancient 
destructive practices. 
In some ways, Madagascar is a test of environmental preservation programs in 
the Third World. Where environmentalism is no luxury, such programs must have 
their own justification. Farmers cannot simply be instructed not to burn; they 
must be told how to find alternatives. 
'Why Should We Stop?' 
"The difficulty," said Randriamasolo, "is the chiefs say, 'We've been burning 
for 100 years. . . . Why should we stop now?' " 
Complicating the process here has been a history of political, not just 
geographical, isolation. For 10 years beginning in 1975, the Malagasy 
government barred all foreign researchers from the island. When they were 
permitted to return, the government itself was just beginning to realize the 
seriousness of the decline. 
Even today, some Malagasy, just like many other Africans, bristle at the 
suggestion that foreign help is crucial to preservation of the island's 
ecosystem. 
"It must be the Malagasy themselves who take matters in hand," said Bartholom 
Voahita, chairman of the World Wildlife Fund's local office. "The British or 
Americans wouldn't allow their patrimony to be taken over by Tanzanians, would 
they? So, why should we let ours be taken over by them?" 
Yet, the pace of destruction is so great, and the rate of discovery so slow, 
that scientists are convinced that countless species are going extinct without 
ever having been known. 
"Since the arrival of man on the island (1,500 years ago), two species of 
tortoise, three of birds and 11 of lemurs have disappeared," the Durrells told 
the 1985 conference. At least 238 others are endangered. 
"I think you'd have to conclude that there have been extinctions here in the 
last 20 years," said George Schatz, a botanist from the Missouri Botanical 
Gardens in St. Louis who has been helping the government chart a proposed 
reserve. "Sometimes a species is localized to just the side of a hill. When the 
hill goes, the species goes." 
At the same time, new species are constantly being discovered in the island's 
newly explored areas. 
Not too long ago, botanists discovered a new palm -- not just a new species, 
but a new genus. It wasn't that the palm was so inconspicuous that no one 
noticed it before. Rather, it is a majestic tree, 100 feet high and crowned 
with a red crest that proclaims its presence from half a mile away. 
"It was in a place where people had never gotten to," said Schatz. 
"I know that one of every 20 plants I collect here is probably a new species," 
he added. "In my preserve, there might be 500 new species altogether." 
The decline of Madagascar's ecosystem began, if at a leisurely pace, with man's 
arrival from the South Pacific about 1,500 years ago. At that time, much of the 
island was covered with virgin rain forest. 
Since then, the forest has receded to a thin strip along the island's eastern 
coast and clumps in the isolated northern and southern tips, and the Malagasy 
have perfected their slash-and-burn methods of cultivation. 
Population Explosion 
Destructive as they are, the impact of these techniques was limited when 
Madagascar was relatively thinly populated and the land plentiful. But in the 
last 20 years, the population has nearly doubled, to about 11 million from 6.2 
million in 1966. The pace of destruction has grown proportionately. 
"The farmers might get 400 to 500 kilograms of rice per hectare the first year 
(of slash-and-burn cultivation)," said the World Wildlife Fund's Nicoll. "The 
second year, they only get half as much. The third year, they get a tremendous 
infestation of pests and weeds because the soil is dying. So, it's abandoned. 
They pull out and leave it fallow for 11 to 15 years." 
That's long enough for the land to recover. But the population explosion has 
forced the Malagasy to telescope this cycle. 
"There is so little land now that the cycle is three to five years," said 
Nicoll. "That's not enough time for anything but grass and bamboo, so the cycle 
spirals downhill. They go into more difficult areas -- steeper hills, poorer 
climates." The destruction builds geometrically. 
Conservationists say the government's emphasis on preservation has borne some 
fruit in recent times, particularly by halting the commercial exploitation of 
endangered forest land for timber and by controlling the poaching of lemurs. 
Some local people have discovered that conservation pays more directly, too, in 
guide fees and jobs in tourist lodges. 
Perhaps one of the greater successes is a small reserve known as Perinet, about 
50 miles east of the capital and just outside the railroad stop of Andasibe. 
Tree cutting and lemur hunting have all but ceased in the reserve, said Maurice 
Bedo, a young guide who explained that he grew up inside the forest of Perinet. 
"I spent all my childhood hours in here because I love nature," he said. Being 
a guide is so lucrative here that Maurice's brother, Joseph, recently gave up 
on his college preparation because no job he could aspire to with a college 
education would pay more than he gets now. 
In his patched blue jogging suit, Maurice leads a troop of researchers deep 
into the woods. Tree roots interlock in a sort of ladder up the steep 
hillsides. He stops frequently to point out the peculiar characteristics of the 
plants lining the path. This one is an anodyne for a scorpion bite, he 
explains, showing how one crumples the leaf and rubs the moisture on the skin. 
Perinet is dedicated to the preservation of Madagascar's largest lemur, the 
indri, a tailless brown-and-white teddy bear of a primate. 
The indri's most appreciated feature is its call. "A Callas among the lemurs," 
is the description of one naturalist, "who composes and performs its own 
operas." 
Presently, Maurice's brother, Joseph, emerges from a thicket with the news he 
has tracked down an indri family of five. Suddenly, they are spotted flinging 
themselves, limbs outstretched, across the wedge of sunlight coming through the 
treetops. Two can be seen folded together in the crook of a tree. 
Silence. 
Then with the abruptness of a foghorn comes a symphony of pentatonic sound, a 
song of greeting, alarm or awakening in five harmonizing pitches. The calls 
continue for perhaps five minutes. Then they end as suddenly as they began. 
All over Madagasgar, the Malagasy and foreign visitors alike have been 
discovering those hitherto-hidden qualities of the island's wildlife. But 
resistance to changing the old ways still thrives. 
Cambridge University's O'Connor was confronted by resistance just last year, 
after she and some colleagues emerged in their Land Rover from the depths of a 
forest preserve they were helping to chart. 
"We came across a huge plot on fire," she recalled. "Later, one of the 
villagers told us they had done it to display annoyance at our not having made 
contact with them before going into the forest. It may or may not have been 
true, but they never did cultivate it." 
