HIGH COURT REFUSES TO BAR L.A. CITY HALL DISPLAY OF MENORAH 
The state Supreme Court on Thursday refused to bar the display of a Jewish 
menorah at Los Angeles City Hall, rejecting claims that the exhibit violated 
the constitutional separation of church and state. 
The justices, without dissent, declined to hear a challenge by lawyers for the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California to a ruling last January 
by a state appeal court upholding the display. 
The high court's refusal to review the issue came in a brief order signed by 
Chief Justice Malcolm M. Lucas. Justice Joyce L. Kennard, who as an appellate 
judge at the time had joined in the January decision, did not participate in 
Thursday's action. 
'Frankly Surprised' 
Carol A. Sobel, an attorney for the ACLU, said she was "frankly surprised" by 
the action and that the case may be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. "We're 
disappointed but we certainly will continue to press this important issue," she 
said. 
Sobel noted that the federal high court is set to rule by this summer in a 
similar case involving the display of a menorah at a government building in 
Pennsylvania. A ruling invalidating that exhibit could provide new grounds to 
challenge the display in Los Angeles, she said. 
Attorneys for the city, which had defended the display as constitutional, were 
not immediately available for comment. 
The case arose in December, 1985, when Chabad, an Orthodox Jewish organization, 
obtained permission to display the menorah -- a Hanukkah candelabrum crafted in 
the 19th Century and kept for decades in a synagogue in Poland -- near a 
Christmas tree erected in the City Hall rotunda. 
The ACLU sued to block the display, but both a Los Angeles Superior Court judge 
and the state Court of Appeal held that the exhibit did not promote religion 
and thus was constitutional. 
The appeal court, in an opinion by Appellate Justice Roger W. Boren, found that 
the display had a valid secular purpose, did not advance or inhibit religion 
and did not represent "excessive entanglement" of church and state. 
While the display had religious significance, it also served the "valid public 
purpose" of educating the public because it was once saved from destruction 
during the Nazi Holocaust, Boren pointed out. 
This display showed no more preference for Judaism than the Christmas tree 
showed for Christianity, the justice said. Further, Boren noted, its unimposing 
presence -- remaining unlit and in the corner of the rotunda -- was far less 
visible to the public than the lighted cross formed by City Hall windows that 
was barred by the state Supreme Court in a 1978 ruling. 
The ACLU, appealing the decision to the state high court, argued that the 
menorah should be banned under both federal and state constitutions. The state, 
in particular, mandates "absolute" separation of government and religion and 
prohibits both the "fact and appearance" of any official endorsement of 
religion, the ACLU said. 
Significance Explained 
Lawyers for the city denied that the display promoted religion and noted that a 
sign had been placed near the exhibit, explaining the significance of the 
menorah and pointing out it had been rescued from the Holocaust. 
While the case has been in the courts, two political groups have been denied 
requests to erect displays in City Hall. Last month, city officials also 
refused to allow another organization to set up an exhibit celebrating atheism. 
In another action Thursday, the justices let stand a state appeal court ruling 
limiting the ability of authorities to confiscate deadly weapons in the 
possession of people who have been detained for mental examinations. 
An appellate panel in San Diego last February struck down a law that required 
such people, upon release, to obtain court approval before they could regain 
weapons taken away by police. The panel found that the requirement of going to 
court posed an unfair burden on property owners who were neither placed under 
arrest nor subject to civil commitment as dangerous to themselves or others. 
The ruling was widely criticized by law enforcement officers as a threat to 
public safety. 
