CRIMINAL LINKS TO IOWA A POSSIBILITY, NAVY SAYS; 
SERVICE CONTENDS SAILORS' RUPTURED FRIENDSHIP MAY HAVE LED TO THOUGHTS OF 
MURDER OR SUICIDE 
The investigation into the April 19 explosion that killed 47 sailors on the 
battleship Iowa has "a criminal aspect to it," the Pentagon disclosed Thursday 
in confirming reports that a ruptured friendship between two members of the gun 
turret crew may have led one or both of them to ponder murder or suicide. 
Meanwhile, the Navy announced that the surviving member of the friendship, 
Gunner's Mate 3rd Class Kendall L. Truitt, 21, has been transferred off the 
Iowa before it was to depart on a six-month deployment June 6. Citing the 
"extensive publicity surrounding the Iowa explosion," the service reassigned 
Truitt "in the best interests of Petty Officer Truitt, the Iowa and the Navy," 
a Navy spokesman said. 
Truitt was one of only 11 men in the ill-fated second gun turret to survive the 
blast. The other subject of the current investigation -- 24-year-old Gunner's 
Mate 2nd Class Clayton Michael Hartwig -- died in the explosion, leaving Truitt 
as the beneficiary of a $100,000 life insurance policy, Navy officials said. 
Hartwig, as a gun captain in Turret 2, would have been one of the last men to 
handle the 550-pound bag of explosive powder that ignited to trigger the blast. 
Kathleen Kubicina, Hartwig's sister, told The Times from her home in Cleveland 
that federal and Navy investigators had questioned her and her family at length 
about Hartwig's relationship with Truitt. Kubicina, who is contesting Truitt's 
claim to the insurance money, was among the first to alert naval investigators 
to the insurance policy, Navy officials said. 
Asked whether she believes that either Hartwig or Truitt had engineered the 
fatal blast, Kubicina said: "I absolutely do not believe that." 
In the wake of widespread reports that investigators found explosive devices 
among the possessions of Truitt and Hartwig, officials said that the inquiry 
has proved inconclusive so far. 
"We have no evidence to prove homicide or suicide here," said Deborah Johnson, 
an agent with the Naval Investigative Service in Norfolk, Va., where the Iowa 
is based. She described theories of homicide or suicide as "possibilities among 
many possibilities." 
But investigators so far have failed to find any evidence to suggest that the 
crew of Turret 2 accidentally misloaded the gun or mishandled the explosive 
powder that powers projectiles to distances of 23 miles. In the absence of 
other strong clues to the cause of the explosion, the inquiry increasingly has 
focused on the Hartwig-Truitt connection. 
"There's nothing else," said a knowledgeable Navy source. "There's a lot of 
confusion" among investigators, the source added. 
Knowledgeable sources said that Navy criminal investigators on the West Coast 
were questioning Truitt's friends about his relationship with Hartwig, 
including the possibility that one or both men were homosexual. The 
investigators also sought information from Truitt's former crew mates now based 
in San Diego about the insurance policy that Hartwig purchased and what Truitt 
knew about it. 
Gay rights groups protested the Navy's focus on the relationship between 
Hartwig and Truitt. 
"It's not surprising that the Navy would blame the Iowa disaster on personal 
emotions rather than on military negligence, particularly when they could also 
then claim support for their ridiculous argument that gays are unfit for 
military service," said Craig Davidson, executive director of the New 
York-based Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation. 
Staff writer Carla Lazzareschi contributed to this story from Los Angeles. 
