LOS ALAMITOS; 
BLURR FORSURE TO RISK CLEAN SLATE SATURDAY 
BCR A Blurr ForSure puts her undefeated record on the line Saturday night at 
Los Alamitos Race Course when the speedy quarter-horse filly faces nine of the 
nation's top sophomore sprinters in the $111,300 Los Alamitos Derby. 
The Grade I Los Alamitos Derby highlights a 12-race program with opening post 
set for 7:25 p.m. 
After stepping off the fastest qualifying time for the 37th running of the Los 
Alamitos Derby, BCR A Blurr ForSure is the strong favorite to walk off with the 
$58,000 winner's share. The Blane Schvaneveldt trainee came out on top of 21 
hopefuls who faced off in three quarter-mile trial divisions May 2. With Roman 
Figueroa in the saddle, BCR A Blurr ForSure drew off to a three-quarter-length 
victory in 21.73 seconds. 
It was the third consecutive win this year for the daughter of thoroughbred 
Murrtheblurr. 
Come Azure Are, a daughter of Azure Request trained by Bob Baffert, is the 
likely choice to pull off an upset. The Oklahoma-bred miss won her trial 
division with the second-fastest clocking of the 10 finalists. Kip Didericksen, 
Los Al's leading rider, loads into the No. 7 post aboard Come Azure Are. 
Dashin Dee Dee breaks next door in the eight hole under veteran reinsman Danny 
Cardoza. The chestnut filly will be seeking to avenge her loss as the 
even-money favorite in the West Texas Derby at Sunland Park this spring. She 
finished second in that stake after being bumped around considerably in the 
early going. 
Merriette deserves mention after winning four of her five starts this year for 
trainer Bob Baffert, including the Redwood City and Debutante Handicaps at Bay 
Meadows. 
The field for the 440-yard Los Alamitos Derby (in post-position order with 
jockey assignments): Dadburn Swift, Steve Treasure; Middock, John Creager; 
Special Elan, Henry Garcia; Here Comes The Band, Ralph Seville; Newmont, Jesse 
Godinez; Come Azure Are, Kip Didericksen; Dashin Dee Dee, Danny Cardoza; 
Merriette, Bruce Pilkenton; and Hugo Streakin, James Lackey. Dadburn Swift and 
Middock race as an Ed and Collette Lisenby-owned entry. 
