NIECE OF MISSOURI'S SEN. DANFORTH ARRESTED ON NARCOTICS CHARGE 
A niece of U.S. Sen. John C. Danforth (R-Mo.) has been arrested and charged 
with possessing narcotics following the interception of cocaine in a Federal 
Express package being sent to her Missouri residence from Los Angeles 
International Airport. 
The woman, Elizabeth G. Danforth, 26, was arrested at her St. Louis, Mo., home 
by an undercover St. Louis County detective on May 11 when she accepted the 
package, a Los Angeles law enforcement source said Friday. 
Danforth is the daughter of William H. Danforth, chancellor of Washington 
University of St. Louis. Her family founded Ralston Purina, the world's largest 
producer of commercial feeds for livestock and poultry. 
Dog Detects Narcotics 
The assistant chief trial attorney for the St. Louis County prosecutor's 
office, James Baker, said the woman was charged with two felony counts of 
possession of cocaine and one misdemeanor count of possession of marijuana. He 
said she posted $15,000 bail and that no arraignment date has been set. 
The Federal Express package was stopped at LAX on May 10 by a member of a 
local-federal drug task force, who believed that the woman mailing it fit a 
drug profile, said the source, who declined to be identified. 
A specially trained dog then sniffed the package, addressed to an "Emily 
Daniels," and indicated that it contained narcotics. Approximately 14 grams of 
cocaine was found in the package, the source said. 
Additional cocaine and marijuana was found in her residence, the St. Louis 
County prosecutor said. 
The wealthy and socially well-connected Danforth family established in 1927 the 
Danforth Foundation, a national educational philanthropic group. 
The suspect's uncle, Sen. Danforth, is the ranking Republican on the Senate 
Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee and one of the wealthiest 
members of the Senate. He has been a sponsor of legislation to combat drug and 
alcohol abuse among transportation employees. 
