COLANGELO FINDS ANOTHER WAY TO REBUILD SUNS QUICKLY 
Two years ago, a simple curse would have been welcomed -- perhaps something 
like a bad call on a coin flip. The Suns encountered such misfortune in 1969 
when General Manager Jerry Colangelo said "heads" instead of "tails," and later 
had little choice except to say "Neal Walk" instead of "Lew Alcindor" in the 
college draft. 
Colangelo later recalled that after the flip, he was "stunned. I got in my car 
and drove around Phoenix for about three hours. After that, I came back to my 
office and said, 'Well, I've got to do it another way."' 
Seventeen years later, after the glory days had come and gone, Colangelo and 
the Suns again had to do it another way. This time, however, their task 
required more than mere luck. The 1986-87 season was the darkest in Suns 
history. Catastrophic events became the norm as the Suns were pummeled by 
defeats, drugs, death and disenchanted fans. 
In February, 1987, Colangelo fired John MacLeod, who had coached the Suns 13 
1/2 seasons. During a six-year stretch that ended in 1983, the Suns had 
averaged 52 victories under MacLeod, who also once led the team to the NBA 
finals. But when they were in the midst of their third consecutive losing 
season, Colangelo decided a change was needed. 
In April, 1987, James Edwards, Jay Humphries and Grant Gondrezick, who were on 
the Suns roster, and former Suns Garfield Heard and Mike Bratz were indicted on 
felony charges to possess and transfer narcotics. All had been implicated by 
then-Suns guard Walter Davis, who testified against them before a Maricopa 
County grand jury. 
And in August, 1987, Nick Vanos, a 24-year-old Suns center, was killed in a 
plane crash in Detroit. 
"We hit rock bottom," Colangelo said. "We had to start all over again." 
The starting-over process took another year. In the 1987-88 season, the Suns 
had a 28-54 record, their worst since 16-66 in 1968-69, their first season as 
an expansion franchise. But after the 1987-88 season ended, the Suns completed 
the demolition and reconstruction of the franchise. Only guard Jeff Hornacek 
remained from the 14-man 1986-87 team. 
That wasn't all. Another coach, John Wetzel, also went. Cotton Fitzsimmons, who 
was a coach for five franchises in his 15-year career and whose record was 46 
games under .500, was hired. But only for an unspecified period. Paul Westphal, 
who had played for the Suns for five years, was hired as an assistant and named 
the "coach in waiting." And free-agent forward Tom Chambers, who had developed 
a reputation as a prolific but selfish offensive player, was given a five-year, 
$9-million contract and the designation as team leader. 
The Suns, indeed, had done it another way. 
"We had a plan," Fitzsimmons said with a straight face. "This thing was by 
design. It wasn't a hodgepodge. It wasn't pin the tail on the donkey. And it 
also wasn't by accident." 
Fitzsimmons will admit, however, that he was surprised the plan worked so 
quickly. The Suns became the eighth team in NBA history to improve by more than 
20 games in a season. They had a 55-27 record and finished only two games 
behind the Los Angeles Lakers. They have advanced to the conference finals, 
where they have lost the first two games. But Friday night and Sunday, they 
play Games 3 and 4 before Suns fanatics, who established franchise records for 
attendance: more than 500,000 total for the first time and 18 sellouts. 
Fitzsimmons was named Coach of the Year. Eddie Johnson won the Sixth Man Award. 
Kevin Johnson was named the Most Improved Player. Chambers made the All-Star 
team. Two years ago, the Suns were dirty. Now they are brilliant. 
"We have surprised a lot of people," Chambers said. 
And they have done it in a different way. Usually when a team improves 
dramatically, it is because of one player and usually that player is obtained 
in the draft. When the Celtics drafted Larry Bird in 1979, they improved 32 
games, from 29-53 to 61-21. When the Bucks drafted Alcindor, they improved 29 
games, from 27-55 to 56-26. 
But the Suns' 27-game improvement, third best in NBA history, was a combined 
effort, and it was not without luck. Part of the luck, however, was the result 
of hard work. The Suns were lucky that Gary Fitzsimmons had learned so much 
about basketball from his father. It was Gary Fitzsimmons, the Cavs' player 
personnel director who had worked as an assistant coach under Cotton with the 
Kings and Spurs, who drafted Kevin Johnson for the Cavs (Johnson can best be 
described as a younger Isiah Thomas with an afterburner). And it was Gary and 
Cotton who agreed in February, 1988, to do something to help each other, thus 
the huge trade of Johnson, Tyrone Corbin and Mark West for Larry Nance and Mike 
Sanders. 
The Suns also were lucky that unrestricted free agency occurred at precisely 
the right time. They were able to sign Chambers without giving up any draft 
picks or young players. But the Suns also were bold. They made Chambers an 
offer and gave him 15 minutes to take it or leave it. Chambers preferred to 
sign with Utah, Dallas, Houston or San Antonio. But he was so impressed that 
the Suns wanted him so badly that he signed. 
No one knew it at the time, but Chambers completed the rebuilding project. 
