SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA FILE 
Sex on television can provide the "opportunity for dialogue" on a subject that 
most parents find uncomfortable initiating with their children, suggests Sister 
Elizabeth Thoman, Media &amp; Values editor. 
While recognizing that tasteless or demeaning use of sexual images may call for 
objections to networks and advertisers and monitoring of TV viewing in the 
home, Thoman's quarterly magazine, published in Los Angeles with both religious 
and secular financing, recommended in its spring issue on sex what it called a 
"creative and positive response." 
What is sexy and suggestive to an adult is not necessarily so to youngsters, 
Thoman said. "Adults come to the viewing experience with more life experience 
and thus can 'read' more into media plots and scenarios than children can," she 
wrote. 
The magazine's pragmatic approach comes at a time when debate has increased on 
whether a new skittishness about offending viewers evident at TV networks has 
arisen from efforts of religious boycotts, the wariness of cautious advertisers 
or a pullback from excess by TV executives. 
Thoman discounted the impact of boycotts by "thousands" when viewers are 
counted in the millions. She also wrote in the magazine that it is 
"unrealistic" for parents to severely restrict television time for children. 
Suggestions on "teachable moments," written for possible use by church and 
synagogue groups, were included in the magazine, published by the Media Action 
Research Center. "In the end, what the media communicate to our kids about sex 
is less influential than what we communicate to them," Thoman said, citing 
studies summarized in the magazine. 
MOTHER-SON 
A mother and son in Boston who are both Episcopal priests were described as 
possibly the first such combination in that denomination by a Religious News 
Service story last Saturday. However, according to the Center for Christian 
Spirituality-West, that distinction was reached in Los Angeles at least 10 
years ago with the ordination of the Rev. Emily Stevens Hall. Daughter of a 
former Los Angeles Episcopal bishop, she was ordained Jan. 20, 1979, by the 
late Bishop Robert C. Rusack. Her son, Mark Hall, was ordained three years 
earlier by the Diocese of Maine and currently serves the Diocese of San 
Joaquin. Emily Hall, now living in Santa Paula, is president of the center's 
board. 
PEOPLE 
The First Baptist Church of Los Angeles will add a second full-time clergywoman 
to its five-person ministerial staff on June 1 -- Mary Jane (Janey) Smith, a 
widowed former missionary to Zaire and a Fuller Theological Seminary graduate. 
Admitting that the 760-member congregation was "making an important symbolic 
statement to our denomination," Senior Pastor John H. Townsend said only a few 
women clergy serve American Baptist Churches in Southwestern states. The 
churches "have been slow to recognize the gifts of women whom God has called 
into the ministry," he said. Already on staff is the Rev. Ruth S. Morales, who 
is preaching Sunday, which happens to be Mother's Day on the secular calendar 
and Pentecost Sunday on the Christian calendar. 
DATES 
Archeologist Carol Meyers of Duke University, co-director of the research team 
that uncovered a mosaic dating to the 3rd Century AD at ancient Sepphoris in 
Galilee, will be a featured speaker at the Shabbat weekend, starting Friday, 
for young adults at the Brandeis-Bardin Institute in Simi Valley. JOHN DART 
