KENTUCKY DERBY; 
TRYING TO SAVE BEST FOR LAZ; 
BARRERA HAS DERBY SPOTLIGHT A YEAR AFTER BEING VINDICATED BUT HURT BY DRUG 
CONTROVERSY 
Lazaro Barrera, keeper of the unbeaten flame known as Mister Frisky, has been 
through two heart surgeries, three countries and nearly every peak and valley 
in almost 50 years as a thoroughbred trainer. 
But nothing prepared the ebullient Barrera for the emotional roller-coaster 
ride of the last 15 months. From the depths of a physically debilitating 
depression to the giddy heights of national acclaim, the 65-year-old native of 
Cuba has survived the worst-case scenario of racing's arcane regulations to 
emerge on the threshold of a possible third Kentucky Derby victory. 
Barrera has been holding court at Churchill Downs for the past week, putting 
the finishing touches on Mister Frisky's Derby preparation. The chestnut colt 
with the 16-for-16 record won the Santa Anita Derby on April 7 to place himself 
alongside Summer Squall as co-favorite to win the 116th Derby in Louisville, 
Ky. But it has been Barrera, one of the best-known trainers of the modern era, 
who commands just as much of the spotlight. 
A son of a Havana quarter-horse jockey, Barrera has won the Derby twice, with 
Bold Forbes in 1976 and with Triple Crown winner Affirmed in 1978. He has 
trained nearly 150 stakes winners, statistical territory occupied only by the 
likes of Charlie Whittingham, Wayne Lukas and Woody Stephens. He led North 
American trainers from 1977 through '80, and in 1979 he became the first Latino 
to be elected to racing's Hall of Fame. 
Inevitably, though, Barrera's pre-Derby interviews this time around have turned 
to the events of early 1989, when his name was linked to the alleged discovery 
of cocaine in the post-race urine samples of six Southern California 
thoroughbreds. Barrera was eventually cleared of any wrongdoing, but the 
process was traumatic -- not only for the trainer, but for the entire racing 
industry. 
As a result of the cocaine controversies, the California Horse Racing Board was 
criticized by the Legislature, which funds its annual budget of about $8 
million. The seven CHRB commissioners have taken several steps to bring order 
out of the chaos, but the fact remains that Barrera and the other accused 
trainers have gone through public torment. 
"I certainly don't think what Laz went through was positive in any respect," 
said Dr. Rick Arthur, a race track veterinarian who has been an activist in 
reforming the state's post-race testing procedures. 
"And I don't think we necessarily had to go through that to get where we are 
today. I think what happened to him was a reaction by the CHRB staff that they 
felt they had to show they were doing something. Unfortunately, it showed 
exactly what we'd contended all along -- that they didn't know what they were 
doing. 
"What happened to Laz was the point of no return. After that, the commissioners 
could no longer drag their feet about the problems in the drug-testing 
procedure. There was no confidence in their negative tests, just as there was 
no confidence in their positive tests." 
In the wake of the botched cocaine accusations, the racing board reduced the 
power of its executive staff and added an equine medical director to the 
process of evaluating all post-race test results. 
In addition, a second laboratory was contracted to run parallel tests on 
post-race samples, using advanced technology. At the same time, procedures in 
the collection of post-race samples have been tightened, and referee samples 
are being split off to give trainers a separate specimen to conduct independent 
tests if an illegal substance is discovered by the official lab. 
Barrera said he welcomes the changes, especially if they protect the innocent. 
But nothing will erase the memory of Feb. 10, 1989, when the trainer was told 
by the Santa Anita Board of Stewards that one of his horses, a colt named 
Endow, tested positive for a small amount of cocaine after a retest of a frozen 
urine sample taken more than five months earlier. 
At the time, Barrera still was reeling from the announcement just two days 
earlier that his son, Albert, had a filly that allegedly tested positive for 
cocaine after a race on Feb. 2. Two other trainers -- Anthony Hemmerick and 
Bryan Webb -- were similarly implicated. On Feb. 10, it also was revealed that 
Wayne Lukas' colt, Crown Collection, was flagged for what the lab called a 
cocaine positive, based on a retest of a frozen specimen. 
Three weeks later, Leonard Foote, executive secretary of the CHRB, brought 
formal charges against Barrera and the others, based on a racing rule that 
holds trainers ultimately responsible for everything involving their horses. 
They all faced the same six-month suspension and $2,000 fine that was levied 
against trainer Roger Stein in October, 1988, when his horse, Emperor's Turn, 
was alleged to have tested positive for cocaine. At the time of the new 
incidents, Stein received a stay of his penalties and was in the midst of an 
appeal. 
The announcements triggered a firestorm of protests and recriminations. Foote, 
the board's spokesman and chief investigative officer, was accused of acting 
precipitously. Truesdail Laboratories, the official testing firm, was accused 
of shabby procedures. Paranoia spread among trainers, who feared either 
sabotage or contamination of post-race samples. And the cynics in the media and 
on the backstretch had a field day. 
"No wonder Barrera and Lukas win so many races," went the wise guy line. "Their 
horses are flying." 
Three months later, the charges were dropped. 
Responding to pressure from the state attorney general's office, which 
essentially saw the cases as unwinnable if challenged in court, Foote took the 
trainers and the board off the hook by citing a lack of evidence based on "the 
accepted standard for the identification of cocaine." In other words, the rules 
were changed after the game was well under way. 
Truesdail, now bidding for a renewal of its testing contract, continues to 
stand by its original findings. Dr. Norman Hester, Truesdail's technical 
director, has repeatedly stated that their analysis was based on existing 
guidelines and their results were confirmed by the equine drug-testing facility 
at Ohio State University. 
However, Barrera and his attorney, Donald Calabria, maintain that the only way 
cocaine could have been found in a urine sample taken from the trainer's horse 
was through outside contamination. According to Calabria, extensive independent 
tests conducted at the University of Utah revealed no cocaine in the specimen 
taken from Endow. The same negative result, the attorney said, was obtained for 
the Lukas horse. 
As a result, Barrera has sued Truesdail for $25 million in damages, although 
the lab reportedly carries barely $500,000 in liability protection. 
"I don't care about the money," Barrera said earlier this year as he 
contemplated the suit. "If a lab can do this to me, they can do it to anybody. 
Let them go out of business. Let them use their building for the homeless 
people to sleep in." 
Barrera, known for his ready sense of humor and an endless round of tall tales 
from his colorful past, was serious. During his period in limbo -- between the 
Feb. 10 announcement and the May 30 dismissals -- he became alarmingly morose, 
and his health deteriorated drastically. 
A robust 6-footer, Barrera dropped as much as 30 pounds. His diabetic condition 
became aggravated, threatening his vision. His doctor warned him that the 
combination of stress, depression and exhaustion was taking its toll on a heart 
that had gone through bypass surgery in 1979 and a bypass replacement in '84. 
"He took it too hard," recalled Carmen Barrera, Lazaro's wife of 40 years. "It 
was like watching him die a little bit at a time." 
Hal King, a fellow trainer who first met Barrera in Mexico City 36 years ago, 
was not surprised that the cocaine allegations weighed so heavily on his 
friend. 
"He's a very prideful man, and for his entire life the only important things to 
him have been his horses and his family," said King, who retired from training 
earlier this year. 
"He had trained for 46 years in three different countries without so much as a 
single ruling against him . . . and considered himself a role model for Latin 
American people everywhere. 
"So when this (cocaine) thing came out, it just about destroyed him. The most 
difficult thing to do is prove your innocence. And on top of that, he became 
paranoid about even the people he knew. If somebody didn't talk to him, he 
would think, 'Do they think I really gave my horse cocaine?' " 
Said Barrera, whose daughter, Blanchita, is married to a Mexico City attorney: 
"In Mexico, there was even an article accusing me of using cocaine. Kids were 
asking my grandchildren about their grandfather and cocaine. Can you imagine 
how that made me feel? I was so embarrassed, I wanted to die." 
On the professional side, Barrera's stable was already struggling when the 
cocaine allegations surfaced. He lost his major client in December, 1988, when 
Oregon lumberman Aaron Jones decided to hire a private trainer. The 
once-flourishing Barrera barn was down to about 20 horses, very few of them 
stakes-class and many owned all or in part by Barrera himself. 
Joe Garcia, Barrera's assistant at the time, attempted to keep the staff 
running smoothly while the boss coped with the CHRB accusations and their 
aftermath, but morale around the barn clearly suffered. At year's end, the 
Barrera horses had won only 31 races and earned just $1,562,562, his lowest 
total since 1973, when he first made the North American top 10. 
Then, Mister Frisky came into Barrera's life. The Florida-bred colt won his 
first 13 races for owners Jose and Marta Fernandez in San Juan, Puerto Rico, 
then was shipped to Barrera at Santa Anita in January. For Barrera, Mister 
Frisky was a four-legged miracle tonic. 
"I'm alive again," said Barrera, who never dodges a chance to be dramatic. "And 
I don't hold anything against the racing board. But you know something? Nobody 
has ever come up to me and said, 'I'm sorry we did this to you.' Nobody." 
Foote, who retired in February, sympathizes with Barrera. 
"But the one thing that can't be done, because there are lawsuits all over the 
place, is to say, 'I'm sorry,' " Foote said this week from his Sacramento home. 
"That's an expression that would imply there was some negligence involved. And 
actually, there was not. The one basic error made throughout was that no one 
had ever established a standard for what constitutes a positive. And California 
is not alone in this." 
Veterinarian Arthur, on the other hand, said the reason for the cocaine 
controversy is not that simple. He and several colleagues in the Horsemen's 
Benevolent and Protective Assn. maintain that there was and is an ongoing 
threat of cocaine entering the system of racehorses and that the racing board 
of 15 months ago was not equipped to respond to the problem. 
"Trainers do have to be very afraid of cocaine positives, because it is a drug 
of abuse," Arthur said. "There's always the potential of personnel in the barn 
getting involved with something like that. When Laz said, 'If I've ever touched 
cocaine, you can cut off my hand,' undoubtedly he meant it. The investigations 
should have been looking elsewhere all the time, but because of the trainer 
insurer (responsibility) rule, the trainer was the focal point." 
Arthur is confident that the system has been changed to prevent a recurrence of 
the incidents. 
"The program is now being overseen by someone in an independent scientific 
manner," he said. "The entire process is under constant review. Procedures have 
been implemented that would prevent someone being accused publicly before all 
the facts are in. These are things that the HBPA was recommending for a long 
time, and I think it will end up positive in the long run. 
"I certainly don't think Laz had to be embarrassed the way he was," Arthur 
concluded. "I think the whole thing demonstrated exactly what we had been 
talking about -- that the California Horse Racing Board drug-testing program 
was a disaster waiting to happen. And it happened." 
Horse Racing Notes 
Mister Frisky, ridden by Gary Stevens, worked five furlongs Tuesday in 1:01 
4/5. The Santa Anita Derby winner, who will be ridden by Stevens in the 
Kentucky Derby, finished especially strong, covering the last eighth of a mile 
in :11 2/5. "That's the way you win the race," trainer Laz Barrera said. . . . 
Unbridled, the Florida Derby winner, worked in the same time. . . . The track 
was fast before heavy rain made it sloppy for the races in the afternoon. . . . 
More rain is possible through Friday. The forecast Saturday is for clearing, 
with no rain and temperatures in the 60s. 
Staff writer Bill Christine contributed to this story. 
