DOCTOR BLAMES JOHNSON FOR FAILING DRUG TEST; 
TRACK STAR TOOK STEROIDS IN ADDITION TO THOSE PRESCRIBED FOR HIM, CANADIAN 
INQUIRY TOLD 
Ben Johnson was probably to blame for failing his drug test at last year's 
Seoul Olympics by taking steroids in addition to those prescribed for him, his 
doctor testified today. 
Dr. Jamie Astaphan told a government inquiry into the use of drugs in sport 
that he did not believe Johnson was honest with his handlers after he was told 
he had failed a drug test and would be stripped of his 100 meters gold medal. 
Verifying testimony given by other witnesses earlier in the hearing, Astaphan 
said he repeatedly asked Johnson whether he had taken any banned substances 
other than those given to several Canadian athletes. 
"I said, 'Did you take any pink tablets from anyone?' " Astaphan said. 
"From the look on Ben's face, I knew he was lying," said Astaphan, who has 
admitted providing anabolic steroids to Johnson since 1984. "He had a sheepish 
look . . . as though he had done something." 
The doctor said he asked about pink tablets because that is what stanozolol 
would look like, not from any other suspicion. 
Astaphan told the inquiry that he injected Johnson with the steroid furazabol 
as late as Aug. 28. But he denied that diuretics, a honey and vinegar beverage 
and mechanical treatments ordered afterward were to speed the cleansing of the 
steroid from Johnson's system. 
"I know about anabolic steroids and the way to beat any test," Astaphan said. 
"I can do it quite legally." 
He said seven prescription drugs available in Canada could have been used to 
mask the steroid if that had been necessary. 
Astaphan also said he did not believe Johnson's coach, Charlie Francis, when he 
called with the news of a positive test. 
"I thought Charlie was just up to some high jinks," Astaphan said. "He said he 
wasn't kidding. . . . I told him that's impossible." 
Astaphan was staying at the Hilton in Seoul, several rooms away from Johnson's. 
Rigorous Summer Schedule 
Earlier, Astaphan said Johnson and other Canadian track and field stars went on 
a crash program of banned substances to build them up for the Seoul Games. 
Astaphan, in his second day of testimony, said Johnson, sprinters Angella 
Issajenko and Desai Williams and hurdler Mark McKoy needed steroids and human 
growth hormone, both banned, to regain their strength after a rigorous summer 
schedule. 
