DIGEST: CITY POSTPONES RULING ON ELIGIBILITY OF BRISON 
A decision on the athletic eligibility of San Fernando High's Brian Brison has 
been postponed at least a month, according to City Section Commissioner Hal 
Harkness. 
Brison, 16, attended a hearing Thursday of the rules committee of the City 
Section's Interscholastic Athletics Committee, but a decision was postponed 
until all parties could be interviewed. 
Brison, a football and track standout, was suspended from San Fernando earlier 
this month after he was arrested on suspicion of punching Birmingham track 
Coach Scott King on April 30. His case has been referred to juvenile 
authorities of the Los Angeles Police Department. 
Brison, a sophomore, has yet to return to San Fernando High and might be 
expelled. He is attending Jane Addams, a continuation high school in Granada 
Hills, pending an expulsion hearing Thursday. 
Kim White, a Cal Lutheran junior, was chosen second-team softball All-American 
by the National Assn. of Intercollegiate Athletics Coaches' Assn. 
White, who graduated from Burbank High, played center field, third base and 
second base and led the Regals (32-12-2) with a .410 batting average. 
A teammate, shortstop Danielle Piotrowski, was named an NAIA scholar-athlete 
for the second consecutive year. Piotrowski, a senior liberal-arts major, 
carries a 3.84 grade-point average. 
The Master's College announced the signing of three baseball players, including 
Chad Hankinson, son of Master's basketball Coach Mel Hankinson. 
Chad Hankinson, a third baseman from Saugus High, batted .328 during the 
regular season with a team-high 10 doubles. The other two players to commit 
were brothers Mike and Steve Smith. 
Mike Smith is a right-handed pitcher who was 8-4 with 86 strikeouts in 113 
innings for San Diego City College. Steve Smith, a center fielder, batted .566 
for Midway Baptist High in National City. 
Dave Klatt of the Oxnard-based Anacapa Yacht Club won Class A in the yacht 
Galena during the Ventura County Offshore Racing Circuit last Saturday. Bob 
Reaume, also of AYC, won Class B in the yacht Hawk, and Wes Golemon of Channel 
Islands Yacht Club won Class C in El Tigre. 
Tickets remain for the eighth Ventura County Hall of Fame dinner May 26 at the 
Radisson Hotel in Oxnard. 
Information: 805-482-0764. 
Angie Leonard, 12, of Sepulveda, won the balance beam and placed second in the 
all-around in the U.S. Gymnastics Federation Region I championships in San 
Diego. 
Leonard qualified for the Western Nationals in Seattle as one of six members of 
the Region I team. 
Region I includes California, Arizona, Nevada and Utah. The Western Nationals 
will include gymnasts from 17 states. 
Leonard competes for Van Nuys-based Gymnastics Olympica. 
The Simi Valley Soccer Foundation, a new umbrella organization for various 
soccer groups in the community, is holding its inaugural "Celebration of 
Excellence" dinner at Royal High on June 9. 
The group's current focus is making existing fields safer and adding new and 
better fields. 
Information: 805-378-6751. 
Gary Anglin and his Ventura College baseball staff will be conducting baseball 
camps for boys and girls aged 7 through 15 throughout the summer. 
The camp includes instruction in various fundamentals as well as games. Week 1 
runs from June 18-22; Week 2 from June 25-29; Week 3 from July 9-13; and Week 4 
from July 16-20. 
Information: 805-654-6459. 
Former all-pro football player Dick Butkus and actors Tom Hallick and Lucinda 
Crosby will join 33 other celebrities competing in the Make-A-Wish Foundation 
celebrity golf tournament June 3 at River Ridge Golf Club in Oxnard. 
Funds raised by the tournament will benefit the local tri-county Make-A-Wish 
Foundation, which helps grant wishes to terminally ill children. 
Information: 805-983-GOLF, 805-988-9951 or 805-647-1817. 
