ELECTRONIC MAIL STIRS DEBATE ON THE PRIVACY ISSUE 
The proliferation of electronic communications -- from telephone voicemail to 
facsimile machines to computer messages -- is raising new questions of privacy 
that are leading to a growing number of legal disputes. 
Earlier this year, the mayor of Colorado Springs, Colo., acknowledged that he 
routinely read electronic messages that city council members sent one another 
on city-bought computer terminals installed in their homes. 
A lawsuit by a former employee of Torrance-based Epson America is the latest 
action to focus on the privacy rights of employees who send electronic messages 
-- so-called E-mail -- to one another over the company's computer system. 
Alana Shoars filed a pair of lawsuits, one in March and another in April, 
charging Epson America and two managers with invasion of privacy under the 
California Penal Code. She alleges in the suits, filed in Superior Court in 
Torrance, that a manager eavesdropped on her private E-mail and that of a 
number of the company's other 700 employees. Shoars contends that she was fired 
after discovering the manager monitoring messages that she assumed were 
confidential. The company denies the allegations. 
These and other incidents have raised thorny legal issues dealing with what is 
public and what is private, experts say. They also may undermine public 
confidence in computer technology, which is constantly creating new 
communications services, some fear. 
In the case of voicemail -- the sending of voice messages by telephone -- 
computer "hackers" have managed to penetrate some corporate systems and plant 
messages aimed at frightening employees. There have been cases, too, of people 
overhearing their neighbors' supposedly private cellular telephone 
conversations. 
Responding to previous incidents and concerns, Congress in 1986 enacted 
legislation to protect the privacy of users of electronic mail, paging devices, 
cellular mobile telephones and computer transmissions. The ground-breaking 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act gives users of these new forms of 
communications generally the same privacy rights as those granted to those 
using first-class mail. But it focuses mainly on public systems, such as that 
in Colorado Springs. 
Colorado Springs is one of a number of cities, including Santa Monica, that 
have set up computer-messaging systems. These systems are designed, in part, to 
enable residents to look up public documents and comment on public-policy 
issues from terminals at home or in such public places as municipal libraries 
or city hall. 
Colorado Springs also provided terminals to city council members for use in 
their homes. Many of them routinely communicated back and forth through the 
city hall computer -- messages that Mayor Robert Isaac admitted that he 
routinely monitored. 
Isaac said he was concerned that some members might be using the system in 
violation of Colorado open-meeting laws. 
In the Epson case, Noel Shipman, Shoars' attorney, said his client was employed 
as an electronic mail administrator at the U.S. headquarters of the 
Japanese-owned maker of computer printers. Epson's plants used MCI Mail, one of 
a number of long-distance messaging networks linking millions of computer 
terminals around the world, as its E-Mail system. The confidentiality of MCI 
Mail messages is maintained through use of passwords. 
Shipman said Shoars' supervisor at Epson "read and printed thousands of 
confidential messages" sent by the "nearly 700 employees" signed on to the 
system. She said she was fired after she discovered the supervisor monitoring 
messages and, as she put it, "refused to cooperate . . . in his violation of . 
. . privacy." 
Shoars was fired Jan. 25 for "gross misconduct and insubordination," according 
to her suits. 
Epson, in a statement issued Tuesday, called Shoars' allegations "completely 
without merit" and denied that "the privacy of electronic mail had anything to 
do with Ms. Shoars' termination." Epson filed a motion to dismiss the case, 
which is pending. 
Shoars' lawsuit seeks unspecified financial damages. Shipman said a similar 
class-action lawsuit may be filed on behalf of Epson employees. 
