'LIKE CHRISTMAS'; 
PHOENIX HOUSE'S DECISION ELATES NEIGHBORHOOD 
To Janet Jackson, whose home backs up to the defunct Lake View Medical Center, 
the Saturday before Memorial Day seemed more like Christmas. 
Jackson and her Lake View Terrace neighbors fought for more than a year to 
block the proposed 210-bed Nancy Reagan Center for drug-abuse treatment and 
just when the battle seemed lost, the former First Lady on Friday backed away 
from the fight, citing the neighborhood opposition. 
And Phoenix House, the drug treatment organization that had proposed operating 
the center, quickly announced that it was pulling out of the project. 
"There's a feeling of lightness," said Jackson, 37, whose Luanda Street home 
overlooks the 14-acre former hospital property. "It's almost like 
Christmastime." 
Community Amenity 
Telephones rang repeatedly Saturday as neighbors shared their elation. They 
talked excitedly about how the three-story building and its grounds might be 
transformed from a white elephant into a community amenity, such as a library, 
a senior citizens center or a theater. Others relived the battle, repeating 
arguments that the center's drug-addicted residents would have posed security 
risks to the area. 
"It's just incredible," Jackson said. "We don't know what happened, but we know 
it was a miracle here." 
The neighborhood's battle had often seemed lopsided during the 13 months since 
the politically connected Phoenix House announced plans to buy and renovate the 
hospital, which had gone bankrupt in 1986. 
Phoenix House had Nancy Reagan, who as First Lady had become the nation's most 
well-known drug fighter, on its side. But it also had the money and prestige of 
Hollywood, with such personages as Merv Griffin and Grant Tinker supporting the 
center. 
The racially integrated community around the hospital site -- a mixture of 
aging tract homes with barred windows and almost-new homes with good views -- 
seemed an impossibly mismatched underdog. But residents from a variety of races 
and income groups joined to fight back by lobbying Los Angeles city officials, 
community leaders said. 
Beyond the immediate vicinity of the site, Phoenix House had vocal supporters, 
including City Council candidate Lyle Hall. But Lynne Cooper said opposition 
was nearly 100% in her neighborhood. 
Now that the battle with Phoenix House has been won, Cooper, president of the 
Lake View Terrace Improvement Assn., one of two groups of organized homeowners 
in the community, talked about the new challenges. 
"We've got some momentum going now, and I think that will help us get a 
community center," said Cooper, 28, whose three-bedroom home overlooks the back 
of the hospital building. 
"We felt we were fighting a losing battle," said Brian Cooper, 29. "But we kept 
going." 
The homes in the Coopers' neighborhood were built between 1984 and 1986. 
Landscaping is maturing. Pools are going in. And home values have gone up 
substantially, to between $170,000 and $200,000, real estate agents and 
residents say. 
But several residents said the escalation in value nearly halted last year when 
it appeared that Phoenix House would win city approval of its plans. Although 
some residents were ready to move away anyway, Cooper said, the proposed 
drug-abuse treatment center caused them to accelerate their plans. In some 
cases, residents said, houses sold for less than they were worth as residents 
fled. 
Values Increase 
Shirley Russell, a real estate agent active in the neighborhood, said homes 
immediately next to the former hospital probably went up in value between 
Friday afternoon and Saturday. 
Phoenix House "was a barrier to getting the price that the houses were really 
worth," she said. 
Those not ready to pick up and move began taking precautions as well. Bob and 
Joycelin Furgunson moved into their Luanda Street home three weeks before 
Phoenix House officials confirmed plans to buy and renovate the property just 
beyond their back fence. 
They considered leaving, but feared that they would be unable to sell the house 
for a high enough price. So they decided to erect tall trellises, plant rose 
bushes and install an alarm system, something they had thought unnecessary in 
what appears to be a serene suburban neighborhood. 
"We were planning on fortifying the back yard," said Bob Furgunson, 38, a 
sculptor and artist. He said he wanted to discourage Phoenix House residents 
from coming on his property. 
The Furgunsons said they would not have opposed a center for voluntary drug 
treatment. But Phoenix House residents would have been assigned to the center 
by courts and might have tried to escape, they said. 
The Furgunsons and others insisted that their fight against Phoenix House was 
not just another case of a neighborhood resisting an idea from outside. They 
said they supported the program until they learned more about it. 
The unity formed during the fight, the residents said, will be important in 
continuing to battle drugs in the neighborhood and in fighting expansion of the 
nearby Lopez Canyon landfill. They also want to make sure that whatever is 
proposed for the former hospital site meets with the community's approval. 
Now, however, the community is planning a huge block party. 
"We've been promising ourselves this party for a year and a half," Lynne Cooper 
said. "We deserve it." 
