RECORD INDUSTRY UNVEILS WARNING LABEL; 
ADVISORY: LOGO WARNS CONSUMERS, PARENTS OF POTENTIALLY OFFENSIVE LYRICS. 
A standardized warning sticker identifying albums that contain potentially 
offensive lyrics is expected to begin appearing on compact discs, cassettes and 
vinyl records by early July. 
The small, black and white sticker, which was developed over the last six weeks 
in meetings with representatives of the nation's leading record companies, was 
unveiled at a press conference Wednesday in Washington. 
The recording industry hopes that the sticker, which reads "Parental Advisory 
-- Explicit Lyrics," will help consumers and parents identify potentially 
offensive recordings prior to sale. The industry also hopes that the sticker 
will help to head off a variety of legal challenges that the record business 
has been facing in more than a dozen states. 
"We believe the uniform logo will enhance the existing voluntary system and 
better respond to the legitimate concerns of parents," said Jay Berman, 
president of the Recording Industry Assn., which represents the nation's major 
record labels. 
Speaking at the press conference, he added, "Now that we have agreed on this 
new logo, it will be up to parents to use it as they see fit." 
John Mitchell, attorney for the National Assn. of Recording Merchandisers, said 
the nation's record retailers also support the new sticker. 
"It is a very user-friendly parental advisory," he said in a phone interview 
from his Washington office. "I think retailers will respond favorably." 
The logo was developed in response to parents' complaints over allegedly 
offensive lyrics and numerous state legislative proposals to mandate warning 
stickers. The new sticker will be permanently attached underneath the 
cellophane shrink rap in the the lower right hand corner of compact discs, 
cassettes or albums. 
State proposals are still pending in Delaware, Missouri, New York, Pennsylvania 
and Louisiana, but in light of the organized industry agreement to voluntarily 
standardize stickering of explicit records, lawmakers in 14 states have 
withdrawn their warning sticker bills. 
Refering to the new logo, Florida Rep. Joseph Arnall, who withdrew his bill on 
May 2, said by phone: "I am pleased that we have been able to work together to 
come to an agreement. I think we have a much stronger agreement than the one 
reached in 1985." 
However, Louisiana Rep. Ted Haik, who introduced a trio of "offensive" record 
labeling bills in April, told The Times on Wednesday that he has his doubts 
about whether the record industry intends to live up to the new agreement. 
"This is one legislator who is not going to withdraw his bill until I see some 
positive action," Haik said. "My proposal stays put until the record industry 
proves to me that it is serious about regulating such material." 
The Washington-based Parents Music Resource Center, which engineered the 
original agreement to voluntarily sticker explicit albums in 1985, also 
supports the new standardized logo. 
"It is a very favorable outcome," center executive director Jennifer Norwood 
said Tuesday in anticipation of Wednesday's press conference. "This 
standardized label is a fabulous development." 
No independent monitoring agency has been created to establish guidelines as to 
what is or what is not considered "explicit." Each record company, in 
consultation with its artists will determine which recordings will display the 
logo. 
Although most record companies have committed to enforce the implementation of 
the industry-wide stickering program, few believe it will increase the amount 
of records being stickered. 
Bob Merlis, vice president of publicity at Warner Brothers Records, said his 
company will use the new stickers instead of the stickers previously employed 
by Warner Bros., but doesn't expect any change in the policy that determines 
which records get stickered. 
"In the past, the text of certain warning stickers has been criticized as an 
enticement for consumers to buy suggestive material," Merlis said. "But this 
new RIAA logo can not possibly be viewed as a marketing ploy. For those who 
feel it is necessary, the new logo will truly provide a parental advisory." 
Still, some record companies maintain that placing warning labels on records is 
a violation of artistic freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. According 
to company spokespersons at I.R.S. and Virgin Records, neither company has ever 
stickered any album, nor intends to start. 
Jeff Ayeroff, managing director of Virgin Records, was unavailable for comment 
Wednesday, but he is quoted in the current issue of Rolling Stone as saying, "I 
find it repugnant that the record industry in general is knuckling under to 
right wing extremists." 
Some industry observers fear that voluntarily imposed warning labels may cause 
many of the same problems as government-mandated stickers. Standardized warning 
labels, they say, could stigmatize controversial recordings, making such albums 
an easy target for boycotts. 
"While I believe the RIAA logo makes the best of a bad situation, I'm fearful 
that the logo could be used like a tattoo on the forearm of the artistic 
community," Michael Greene, president of National Academy of Recording Arts and 
Sciences, said. "It certainly does create a visible target, in the sense that 
labeled product could easily be singled out and removed by nervous retailers." 
NARM attorney Mitchell agreed: "The logo will not alleviate the problem with 
specific instances in various states regarding violation of local obscenity 
statutes. When prosecutors or judges deem a record obscene, the cheapest 
solution for a retailer is to stop selling the record. But I don't perceive 
this type of activity as a trend." 
Explicit albums have been banned in a number of communities around the country. 
"As Nasty as They Wanna Be," a sexually explicit album by the Miami-based rap 
group 2 Live Crew, has been deemed obscene in four judicial districts in 
Florida and also in some counties in Ohio, Indiana, Tennessee, Wisconsin and 
Pennsylvania. 
Fearing prosecution under local obscenity ordinances, many record store owners 
have removed questionable "offensive" product from their shelves and 
discontinued selling records with warning labels to anyone under 18. The 
450-store Albany, N.Y.-based Trans World Corp., and the 119-store Owensbury, 
Ky.-based Wax Works/Disc Jockey chain have enacted such policies. 
The 752-store Musicland group, the nation's largest record store operator that 
includes Musicland and Sam Goody outlets in Southern California, recently 
instituted a similar rule. And according to Mitch Perlis, director of 
purchasing at Show Industries, the 73-store Los Angeles-based Music Plus chain 
will soon follow suit. 
"I think the RIAA logo is a very positive move," Perlis said. "It's what we, as 
retailers, have been asking for. The standardized sticker will make our job 
infinitely easier because it will give our salespeople an opportunity to know 
what they're selling. Still, Music Plus is in the process of developing an 
18-and-over policy for purchases of stickered product." 
Priority Records, a company that has been voluntarily stickering since 1985, is 
well aware of the political controversy surrounding provocative pop music. Last 
year, the Los Angeles-based record label received a "policy" letter from the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation charging that a song by N.W.A, a rap group on 
Priority's roster, encouraged violence against law enforcement officers. 
"Hopefully this sticker will short circuit some of the state legislative 
proposals calling for government-mandated labels. But I don't think the battle 
is over. It's going to get worse," Priority Records president Bryan Turner said 
Wednesday. "If nothing else, the new logo will give the creative community a 
chance to regroup and figure out how we're going to combat the next wave of 
fundamentalists who want to change our Constitution." 
