$166-MILLION PLAN ALSO INCLUDES NEW STATION; 
SANTA MONICA BUDGET ADDS POLICE 
Santa Monica officials, in an effort to beef up law enforcement, want to build 
a $12-million police station and add a dozen officers to the city's 150-member 
police force. 
The proposals are part of a $166-million budget being delivered to members of 
the Santa Monica City Council this week. Under the budget, spending for the 
1989-90 fiscal year is expected to rise by 5.8% -- or $8.5 million -- over the 
previous year. 
Members of the City Council will review the proposed budget in study sessions 
on May 31 and June 1, with a public hearing scheduled for June 27. The final 
budget would be voted on after that hearing. 
Projected income for the year is estimated at $149.9 million, and expenditures 
are put at $154.5 million, plus an additional $12 million for the police 
station that will be part of a supplemental budget added later. 
City Manager John Jalili said the city has a healthy balance in its general 
fund that will more than cover the difference between projected income and 
expenses. 
Jalili estimated that general fund reserves by the end of 1990 will be left at 
$4.5 million, which he said was the "minimum prudent" balance. 
Most of the $12 million allocated for the new police station would be financed 
with bond proceeds, Jalili said. 
The station would be built on what is now a parking lot, just east of the wing 
of City Hall where the Santa Monica Police Department is housed. The project 
will include subterranean parking to make up for the spaces lost when the 
station is built, Jalili said. 
The budget also includes about $1 million for 12 additional officers -- 
including a sergeant and one community service officer. Police officials have 
been lobbying for added staff in anticipation of increased crime as the city 
grows. Police have reported new crime outbreaks at the Santa Monica Pier and 
among the city's homeless population. 
Other big-ticket items on the budget include a half-million-dollar traffic 
management plan and a $300,000-environmental program that includes stepped-up 
monitoring of hazardous-waste collection. 
The city also plans to spend $230,000 on child care, $100,000 to keep the 
public library open on Sunday, and $50,000 on removal of graffiti and trash 
from city alleys. 
The city is also allocating $60,000 for its new Public Electronic Network, an 
innovative computer system that allows Santa Monica residents to sign on to 
their personal computers and retrieve public documents, information on city 
events and City Council agendas. 
Most of the city's income comes from property, sales and business license 
taxes. Additional revenue will come from increased parking meter rates and 
increases in the city's utility-users tax. 
