PERSONAL HEALTH; 
A CRUSADE OF THE HEART; 
BLACK CHURCHES QUIETLY WAGE WINNING WAR AGAINST A SILENT KILLER: HIGH BLOOD 
PRESSURE 
On the first Sunday of every month, Mary Glover-Horton brings to church a 
stethoscope and an aneroid manometer, a Velcro-banded instrument for measuring 
arterial blood pressure. After worship, she sets up shop in the fellowship 
hall. 
One by one, the dozen or so members of the Durant Missionary Baptist church who 
have been identified as hypertensive -- including her mother, father and 
grandmother -- sit down, stretch out their arms and have their blood pressure 
checked. 
Those whose readings are within acceptable limits are praised for sticking to 
their regimens. Those in the danger zone are questioned: "Have you been staying 
off the salt? Have you been taking your medication regularly? Have you been 
under any unusual stress lately?" 
Glover-Horton and her church were pioneers eight years ago when they set up the 
volunteer testing. Now they are part of one of the quiet success stories of 
American public health. 
Spurred by growing alarm over high rates of hypertension among blacks, blood 
pressure control workers are joining deacons, pastors and church secretaries as 
regular fixtures among black congregations nationwide. 
In the program involving Durant Missionary and 16 other churches in central 
Mississippi -- a region with the highest documented rates of hypertension in 
the world -- participants have achieved an overall 80% success rate in keeping 
their blood pressure under control. That compares with an average of less than 
35% among all hypertension sufferers, according to the latest national figures. 
"This is an idea that is exploding nationally," said Dennis A. Frate, program 
director of the University of Mississippi's Rural Health Research Program, 
which instituted the church project in central Mississippi and has published a 
free guide for churches interested in setting up similar programs. 
In Washington, two dozen churches and more than 250 volunteers in the 
predominantly black southeast quadrant are involved in a project that has 
screened more than 2,300 residents since it was initiated five years ago. 
In the San Francisco Bay Area, which has one of the oldest and largest high 
blood pressure control programs in the nation, the work among the churches in a 
six-county district has been so successful that the program has been expanded 
to include post offices, barber shops and public housing projects. 
In Los Angeles, the movement appears not to have gained much ground yet. The 
Watts Health Foundation operates one of the few programs: weekly screening 
sessions by a mobile unit that goes to about half a dozen churches in the 
South-Central section and screens about 75 to 100 people weekly. 
The local chapter of the American Heart Assn. notes, however, that most senior 
citizen centers in Los Angeles County screen elderly residents once a month. 
More than 60 million Americans of all races are estimated to suffer from high 
blood pressure, a major contributor to strokes, kidney failures and heart 
attacks. 
But for reasons that still perplex health researchers, blacks are twice as 
likely as whites to have the disease -- which is sometimes called the "silent 
killer" because its symptoms usually go undetected unless medically diagnosed. 
Moreover, blacks are dying at a rate three times greater than that of whites as 
a result of untreated high blood pressure. 
There is no known cure, but effective treatments usually involve some 
combination of low-salt and low-fat diets, anti-hypertensive medication and 
changes in health habits, such as rest and recreation. 
The problem is to keep people on their treatment regime. It is especially 
pronounced among blacks on the lower economic rungs, who are among the most 
likely candidates to have hypertension and the least likely to seek medical 
attention. 
"This problem of non-compliance in hypertension therapy is a major contributing 
factor to the reason cardiovascular disease is the No. 1 cause of death in this 
country," Frate said. 
Peer Pressure Helps 
This is where the church steps in. Next to the family, it is usually the major 
social institution in black neighborhoods and communities. As such, it is a 
place where people congregate regularly and where peer pressure easily can be 
brought to bear to ensure the diagnosed hypertensives stay on their treatments. 
The programs require little more than the $50 cost of a stethoscope and a 
manometer and the half-day or so that it takes to train a volunteer. And the 
payoffs can be dramatic. 
In central Mississippi, volunteers were chosen from each of the churches to 
serve as hypertension control counselors. Each was trained in measuring blood 
pressure and was given a basic education on therapies. 
Under guidance of staff from the Rural Health Research Program, based in 
Goodman, volunteers screened their congregations to identify members with 
hypertension. From then on, periodic monitoring sessions -- usually scheduled 
once a month after religious services in most churches -- were all that 
basically was required to keep the programs going. 
"I've gotten to the point where I can tell when a person's pressure is up 
sometimes just by looking at them," Glover-Horton said. "Their ankles may be 
swollen or their eyes may be puffy." 
If any of her charges misses a session, she checks up on them during the week. 
Frate said that the unusual effectiveness of church-based hypertension control 
programs stems from just such close, personal interaction between volunteers 
and church members. 
"People need support to get through their therapy," he said. "That's what the 
church provides. It's really a simple form of what I call sophisticated 
nagging. . . . 
"In many churches, there also is a sense of competition among members who are 
hypertensive, and they get on each other about staying on their medication and 
getting their blood pressure checked regularly." 
Almost All Cases 
Frate said that, if it has not advanced to a critical stage, hypertension 
ordinarily can be brought under control in almost all cases. 
When it was pointed out to one hypertension victim in the central Mississippi 
project that she was compounding the danger of her condition by cooking with 
bacon drippings, then adding salt to season the food, she put the bacon 
drippings in a container and shipped it off to her son in Chicago. 
