CRITIC AT LARGE: HESTON REVISITS 'TEN COMMANDMENTS' 
Once, after being introduced at a large dinner party in San Diego, Charlton 
Heston announced that later on he would part the waters of the swimming pool. 
It was a bittersweet acknowledgement that of all the historic figures he has 
played -- among them Andrew Jackson, Buffalo Bill, William Clark of Lewis &amp; 
Clark, John the Baptist, Cardinal Richelieu, General Chinese Gordon and 
Michelangelo -- Heston is most indissolubly associated with his portrayal of 
Moses parting the Red Sea in Cecil B. DeMille's 1956 epic, "The Ten 
Commandments." 
The landmark film with its cast of thousands opens a short run today, in a 
restored cut that will be shown in 70mm format at the Cinerama Dome through 
Monday and in 35mm at the Crest (where it is scheduled to run through May 24). 
Everyone, says Heston, has always reminded him that they've seen "The Ten 
Commandments" on television and often they add that they've taped it. "But I 
stop and think that by now there are two generations who haven't seen the 
picture on the screen it was made to be seen on. And the picture they've seen 
has also had the edges cut off to fit on the small screen." 
Heston himself will see "The Ten Commandments" for the first time in years at 
the Cinerama Dome. He can't wait, even if it entails two more generations of 
jokes about his parting of the Red Sea. 
The actor recalled the making of the film in an interview Tuesday at his 
hilltop house in the Santa Monica Mountains. Just 30 when shooting began, he 
had come West from Broadway and live television with a five-picture commitment 
from producer Hal Wallis. Wallis dealt one of the commitments to Paramount for 
"The Greatest Show on Earth," Heston's first association with DeMille and, 
because of the long shooting schedule, another two commitments to DeMille for 
"Ten Commandments." 
"With the exception of two months on location in Egypt we shot the film on the 
Paramount lot, on what is now a parking lot." There was a vast sky cyclorama, 
used in many a Western, and a rugged environment that had been used in an 
earlier Heston film, "The Naked Jungle." 
"There were 14 film elements in the parting of the Red Sea sequence," Heston 
says. Some of them, including the chariots and the throngs rushing through the 
gap in the waters, shot in Egypt, the rest on the lot. 
The location work was done first. DeMille's people had built an enormous set in 
Europe. As Heston recalls, "The only one that might have been comparable was 
the one Sam Bronston had built for '55 Days at Peking.' He built most of Peking 
and didn't use all of it, at that. But DeMille had that double row of Sphinxes, 
some of them 120 feet high and the row must have been a quarter of a mile 
long." 
The Egyptian government urged DeMille to leave the set standing and promised to 
make a museum of it. "But DeMille took it down. He knew that there would be 17 
Italian film companies using the location the week after we left, and who 
knows, he may have been right." 
Yul Brynner flew in for one day's shooting, interrupting his run in "The King 
and I." Doubles were used for other principals, who did not appear in close-ups 
until shooting resumed at the studio. 
"Egypt was essentially a second-unit shoot, which is usually done concurrently 
with the main shoot, or later. But this was DeMille's own second unit." When it 
was finished, DeMille shut down the production for several weeks while he 
edited the footage together and blocked out specifically what he needed to do 
at the studio." 
"In the meantime," says Heston, "I went off to Universal and did another 
picture, 'The Private War of Major Benson,' on a fairly brisk schedule." 
DeMille, says Heston, "was courteously formal, very pleasant, although he could 
be a holy terror with AD's (assistant directors) and prop men. He arrived each 
morning at the set in suit and tie, although jacket and tie would be gone and 
the sleeves rolled up by midmorning. He was famous for his jodhpurs and puttees 
out on location, but," Heston says, "he explained to me that he just wasn't as 
young as he had been, and wanted the support for his legs." 
It drove DeMille crazy when performers were late to a shot. "But he couldn't 
rebuke them. It wasn't done; there was a scene to be photographed. Instead he 
would rebuke -- not scream, it was icily done -- wardrobe or makeup. If Anne 
Baxter was late, he would say to the makeup people, 'Do you realize that you've 
delayed Miss Baxter for 20 minutes. Don't you realize how important this scene 
is to her, and to the picture?' But Anne, of course, knew who was really being 
rebuked." 
On the other hand, DeMille was remarkably kind and courteous to his extras, 
explaining scenes to them in great detail. "And if he had some big production 
scenes, he would try to schedule them between Thanksgiving and Christmas, so 
there would be a kind of Christmas bonus for the extras." 
Adds Heston, "He used to say he'd made 73 films and one flop. That was a film 
called 'Four Frightened People' (1934) with Herbert Marshall and Claudette 
Colbert. He said that when it was released, there were five frightened people." 
Heston occasionally saw DeMille socially. "But I always called him Mr. DeMille. 
Yul rather daringly called him C.B., and he didn't seem to object. But for the 
most part the only people who called him C.B. were people like his cutter and 
his cameraman, who'd been with him forever." 
Three of the great directors he worked with had remarkably different 
approaches, Heston says. 
DeMille, who had come out of the silent era, was especially obsessed with the 
images. "He knew exactly how he wanted you to say the lines, and he told you," 
says Heston. "But he worked endlessly over the composition." William Wyler, for 
whom Heston was to do "Ben Hur" three years later, was legendary for the many 
takes he demanded. "It was not usually quite as many as legend says. But there 
would be seven or eight. DeMille would sometimes go with one take, but that was 
after he had rehearsed meticulously. George Stevens might only do three or four 
takes, but he did an usual number of set-ups, enormous coverage. 
"DeMille was a highly efficient director." 
REVISITING AN EPIC 
Kevin Thomas reviews "The Ten Commandments," re-released in 70-millimeter, in 
Special Screenings. F5 
