TEXAS ALLY SAYS WRIGHT PLANS TO QUIT THIS WEEK; 
SPEAKER GIVES NO HINT OF NEXT MOVE BUT FELLOW DEMOCRATS SAY OPENLY HE MUST 
LEAVE POST SOON 
One of House Speaker Jim Wright's most stalwart Texas allies said Tuesday that 
he expects the Speaker to resign from Congress this week because of "blowtorch" 
political pressure from his Democratic Party colleagues. 
Rep. Charles Wilson (D-Tex.) said that Friday's unexpected decision by Rep. 
Tony Coelho (D-Merced), the majority whip, to quit the House rather than face 
an ethical ordeal has put additional pressure on Wright to leave instead of 
fighting ethics charges himself. 
The Texas Democrat, however, returned from a weekend in seclusion without 
announcing any decision on his plans. Another close home-state supporter, Rep. 
Martin Frost (D-Tex.), said that Wright told him he is still considering "a 
range of options" that presumably include choices other than resigning. 
Some Losing Patience 
Even so, fellow Democrats are losing patience with the Speaker and began to say 
more openly that he must go soon to spare the House and the Democratic Party 
from any more damage. 
"I would hope the Speaker would take a good, hard look at what Coelho did," 
said Rep. Jim Slattery (D-Kan.). "I think it's in the best interests of this 
institution and the best interests of the Democratic Party to get this mess 
behind us. Regrettably, that involves the resignation of the Speaker." 
Another prominent House Democrat, who asked not to be identified, added: 
"Wright's going to have to go. If he doesn't, then we'll get a delegation 
together to go visit him and tell him he has to go." 
Awaits Panel Ruling 
The Speaker, talking briefly to reporters, said that he is awaiting a ruling by 
the House Ethics Committee on motions to dismiss major charges against him. 
While he indicated that he has largely made up his mind on his next move, 
Wright gave no hint about what it is. 
The panel, which is scheduled to meet Thursday, is regarded as likely to reject 
Wright's legal challenge to the case against him. 
In addition, Rep. John T. Myers (R-Ind.), the ranking GOP member of the panel, 
said that there is a possibility the committee might vote to conduct a 
preliminary inquiry into two additional areas at its session this week, thus 
expanding the year-old investigation of Wright's financial affairs. 
In his remarks, Wright said that he would have a statement on his plans later 
this week. 
'Want to Be Fair' 
"I think I know what I should do," he said. "I think I know what I believe to 
be in my best interests and the interests of the institution. I want to be fair 
to myself, my family, my reputation, and I want to be fair to this institution 
that I've served for 34 years." 
Wilson asserted that Wright is getting a "bum deal" because the charges 
alleging 69 violations of House rules were brought and would be judged by the 
same 12 members of the Ethics Committee. 
In addition, Wilson added, the fellow Democrats urging the Speaker to resign 
are motivated by the adverse political fallout generated by the case. 
"He's being judged by a jury that's under enormous political pressure," Wilson 
concluded. 
Meantime, the jockeying for leadership posts grew more frenetic Tuesday with 
most House members assuming that Wright will leave soon and be replaced by 
Majority Leader Thomas S. Foley of Washington. 
Gephardt Seen Leading 
Rep. Richard A. Gephardt (D-Mo.), a former presidential candidate, appeared to 
have a lock on Foley's job, according to many Democratic insiders. 
In a hot contest for Coelho's No. 3 job as party whip, Rep. William H. Gray III 
(D-Pa.) and Rep. David E. Bonior (D-Mich.) are off to a fast start, along with 
Rep. Beryl Anthony Jr. (D-Ark.). 
Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles) jumped into the scramble Monday -- a day 
after his probable opponents -- but his supporters said that he has a good 
chance of victory. 
The 26-member California Democratic delegation backs Waxman, as do some others 
who got campaign help from him, his supporters argued. 
In a related development, Rep. Barbara B. Kennelly (D-Conn.) announced that she 
will run for chairman of the Democratic Caucus if Gray, the incumbent, wins the 
whip race and vacates that post. 
Kennelly would face Rep. Steny H. Hoyer (D-Md.) and, if she won, would become 
the highest-ranking woman in the House. 
Coelho, who startled his colleagues by announcing Friday that he would resign 
June 15 to prevent a prolonged investigation of his $100,000 investment in a 
junk bond with the aid of a savings and loan official, said in a Fresno 
television interview that he had planned to leave Congress at the end of the 
second session in 1990 even before the controversy over the purchase. 
He said that he and his wife, Phyllis, decided last winter that it was time for 
him to leave public service and seek a higher-paying career in private life at 
a time when his two teen-aged daughters are finishing high school and preparing 
to enter college. 
