NEWSMAKERS 
Re-Face The Future: Designer Mr. Blackwell, best known for his annual 
worst-dressed celebrity lists, had his face redesigned Friday during a $20,000 
"complete sculpturing" which included cheekbone augmentation, eye restoration, 
removal of silicone from previous cosmetic surgery and regluing of his nose, 
said Blackwell's spokesman Michael Sands. Regluing of his nose? Blackwell, 
whose real name is Richard Sylvan Seltzer, had a nose job previously and it got 
out of line recently when he bumped it, Sands said. 
Big Apple Bash: A party in New York Tuesday marks the 80th birthday of former 
mayor Robert Wagner. Among those slated to attend are Ronald and Nancy Reagan, 
Happy Rockefeller, N.Y. Mayor David Dinkins, former mayor Ed Koch and former 
New York governor Hugh Carey. 
Drat Cat: Tony La Russa, manager of the Oakland Athletics, has gone to bat for 
a cat that disrupted a baseball game last week by running across the field. La 
Russa took the cat to a clinic to have her spayed and arranged to find her a 
home. Several feral cats live at the Oakland Coliseum, but they usually stay 
out of the way during ballgames. But when the A's played the New York Yankees 
last week, the cat darted out. Players stood by and some 30,000 fans roared as 
the cat tried unsuccessfully to hop the backstop behind home plate, then dashed 
into the A's dugout. 
King Flap: Martin Luther King III, a county commissioner in Fulton, Ga., is 
under scrutiny for giving his cousin a county job. Isaac N. Farris Jr., 28, 
makes only a $1 a year, but he has access to a county car, office, travel 
budget and other perks under a contract that says he is to perform 
administrative services at King's discretion. "Such a contract inevitably will 
appear to be a sweetheart deal to the public," said another commissioner, 
Gordon Joyner. King defended his cousin by saying, "What the county is getting 
is a man who is worth $40,000 or $50,000 a year for only a dollar. I don't 
believe that I've done anything wrong." 
