SAN DIEGO COUNTY SPOTLIGHT: POP MUSIC / THOMAS K. ARNOLD; 
PROMOTER FINDS PROMISING ROCK ACTS ON SOVIET SOJOURN 
Back in March, Soviet pop singer Laima Vaikule arrived in San Diego for a month 
of rehearsals in an oceanfront mansion in Leucadia. A few weeks ago, San Diego 
concert promoter Scott Pedersen arrived in the Soviet Union for a 12-day talent 
hunt in Moscow and Leningrad. 
Pedersen returned to town May 5 with a suitcase full of demonstration tapes and 
videos of Soviet rock acts he's thinking about booking here, perhaps during 
this fall's San Diego Soviet Arts Festival. 
Of the more than 40 bands and performers who showcased for Pedersen, courtesy 
of the government-run Gosk concert bureau, the one who impressed him the most 
was Vladimir Kuzman, a popular Soviet singer, songwriter and bandleader. 
"He was absolutely fantastic," Pedersen recalled. "His music is sort of a cross 
between Sting, Kenny G and progressive Journey, with a lot of good hard-rock 
guitar." 
Pedersen caught Kuzman and his six-piece band at the Youth Palace in Moscow. 
"It's about the size of our Civic Theatre," he said, "and the place was packed. 
The whole thing was like a normal rock show at the Civic. There were a couple 
of black backup singers, the horn and saxophone players were hoisted up in the 
air, they had smoke, they had explosions, they had lasers. 
"There were even a bunch of groupies hanging around outside the back door, 
waiting for him after the show. They were all dressed up as much as fashion 
would allow -- no Spandex, no miniskirts, nothing risque, but they definitely 
stood out from the other people at the show." 
Among the other acts Pedersen enjoyed were Mister Twister, a rockabilly group 
from Moscow, and Avtograf, a Soviet heavy-metal band that toured the United 
States last year. 
"The overall level of talent is unbelievable," Pedersen said. "And with 
American interest in the Soviet Union and in Soviet culture at an all-time high 
thanks to glasnost, I think the appeal many of these bands have to Soviet 
audiences would transfer over to American audiences." 
He said the low point of his tour was attending a rock festival in a 
14,000-seat arena in which all eight bands were lip-syncing to their records. 
"But the crowd either didn't notice or didn't care. It was rock 'n' roll and 
they loved it." 
Pedersen's Soviet sojourn was arranged by Don Hughes of La Jolla, whose 
International Attractions regularly imports Soviet dance troupes, choirs and 
puppet theaters to the United States for national tours. 
"Don is highly respected in the Soviet Union, and we were taken care of like I 
couldn't believe. Everywhere we went there were interpreters, buses and 
front-row seats," Pedersen said. 
"Still, the Soviet Union is not a place to go on a vacation. The bare 
necessities are just not there. Getting a drink of water, a cup of tea, takes 
hours, and the whole time I was there I only had three Pepsis because they're 
practically impossible to find." 
The biggest local rock event of the year promises to be the Aug. 22 performance 
by legendary British super group The Who at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium. 
Tickets for the show, the first concert at the stadium since 1983 at which 
people will be allowed on the field, went on sale last Saturday at 8 a.m. More 
than 1,500 eager fans were already waiting behind a chain-link fence in the 
stadium parking lot, wearing numbered wristbands they had picked up the day 
before. Box office workers called out numbers in groups of 100 to limit the 
length of the ticket line. 
Meanwhile, thousands of other Who fans were snapping up tickets -- priced at 
$22.50 apiece -- at 11 Ticketmaster outlets throughout San Diego County. 
By the end of the day, the total ticket sale tally stood at 30,000. And Kevin 
Stapleford, creative services director with progressive-rock radio station 
XTRA-FM (91X), which is co- producing the concert with Colorado promoter Barry 
Fey, is confident the remaining 24,000 seats will soon be sold as well. 
"We're sure it's going to sell out," Stapleford said of The Who's first San 
Diego appearance in six years. "It's a real special concert. They're on their 
25th anniversary reunion tour, and, since there's no opening act, it will be a 
three-hour concert celebrating a quarter-century of what they've done." 
LINER NOTES: An ad in last Thursday's Reader for a concert the next night at 
Club Mirage in Mission Valley really built up the star of the show. Quotes from 
six national music magazines tell us he's "a phenomenal guitarist who can do 
things most only dream of," "the greatest thing on guitar since frets," "the 
next big thing in the gallery of guitar gods," and so on. Conspicuous by its 
absence: the star's name. . . . 
Country legend Buck Owens' June 17 concert at the Bacchanal in Kearny Mesa 
appears headed for a sellout. Tickets are now on sale for a newly added second 
show, June 18. . . . 
Rod Stewart has just been booked for a July 28 appearance at the San Diego 
Sports Arena. Tickets go on sale June 17. 
