DANCE REVIEW; 
'SEA SHADOW,' 'REFLECTIONS' BY JOFFREY 
Connoisseurs of cloying lyricism ought to adore the new Joffrey Ballet program 
of revived home-grown divertissements. 
Introduced Tuesday in the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, the bill provides a 
gallery of Terpsichorean goo, from the subaqueous kitsch of Gerald Arpino's 
"Sea Shadow" (1962) through the neoclassic platitudes of Arpino's "Reflections" 
(1971) to the leaden nostalgia of Robert Joffrey's "Remembrances" pas de deux 
(1973) -- plus the familiar overkill of Arpino's inescapable "Suite 
Saint-Saens" (1978). 
In each ballet, there's a fatal disassociation between sight and sound -- 
between hectic, flashy and arbitrary dance patterns and music that is much 
slower and which builds more steadily, seamlessly, organically to its crest. 
"Sea Shadow" was originally set to the second movement of Ravel's Piano 
Concerto in G, but when the Ravel estate refused to permit choreographers to 
use works not composed for dancing, Arpino substituted a commissioned score by 
Michael Colgrass. This season, the Ravel accompaniment has been restored, but 
the piece looks as unmusical as ever -- with the barechested Tom Mossbrucker 
uncurling under a pier to discover Valerie Madonia in a unitard, her hair down, 
desperate to be lifted. 
Their exploratory relationship and the liquidity of the movement style suggest 
Robbins' "Afternoon of a Faun" with an undertow of Ashton's "Ondine." But the 
restless, generalized swoopings and surgings are hallmarks of nobody else but 
the terminally glib Gerald A. 
Mossbrucker and Madonia can't be faulted; they expertly deliver every gymnastic 
feat in this swoony charade, just as the three couples and four subsidiary 
women in "Reflections" endow the vacant bravura choreography with a sense of 
high occasion. But in this formal showpiece to Tchaikovsky's "Rococo" 
Variations, the emotionalism of the duets looks forced, superimposed in the 
same way that the virtuoso step combinations appear reflexive or off-the-rack. 
New to the previously reviewed "Remembrances" excerpt, Jodie Gates and Ashley 
Wheater danced with great freshness and fluidity. John Miner conducted 
authoritative performances of the Ravel and Tchaikovsky scores, with Stanley 
Babin the capable pianist in the former and cellist Nils Oliver superbly 
accomplished in the latter, except for the rough finale. LEWIS SEGAL 
