FISHING NOTES; 
WHITE SEA BASS ANGLERS FIND LUNKERS LURKING AND BITING OFF CATALINA 
It's a wide-open scramble for white sea bass off Catalina Island as anglers 
continue to catch 30- to 50-pound lunkers. 
Frank Hall at 22nd Street Sportfishing in San Pedro recalls the early 1950s and 
'60s when the bass caught off of Catalina's west end weighed upwards of 70 
pounds. 
Hall said some big fish were also caught during the years of the El Nino, but 
not the quality his boats have been returning with the past two weeks. 
Anglers are using squid for bait and 30-pound-test line. The limit on bass 
remains one per angler until June 15. 
After anglers catch their limit, the boats have been moving up the island and 
locating good action on barracuda and calico bass. 
The biggest sea bass caught the past week was by Stan Pleasonto of Culver City, 
who landed a 59-pound fish aboard the Shogun of L.A. Harbor Sportfishing. 
Catalina Island Isthmus sheriff's Deputy Joe Stoveres was diving at the back 
side of the island and speared a 34 1/2-pound fish. His partner, Paul Eire, 
brought up a 33-pound fish. 
Dave Luchau of Avalon speared a 39 1/2-pound halibut near shore. 
Marty Simon of Hermosa Beach was fishing off the King Harbor rocks for halibut 
when a bonito struck his anchovy. 
Simon battled the fish for several minutes. While he was reeling in the fish, 
estimated to weigh about five pounds, his line snapped, breaking the tip of his 
fishing rod. A seal had gobbled up his catch. 
The winners for returned tags during the recent halibut derbies has been 
announced. Bob Burnham of Hawthorne won $500 and Bill Northington of Redondo 
Beach won $200. 
South Bay Catches: Harry Hill of West Los Angeles, fishing off Catalina aboard 
the First String, caught a 42-pound white sea bass. 
Al Matsumoto of Harbor City, fishing off Catalina aboard the Aztec, caught a 
41-pound white sea bass. 
Victor Ayala of Lomita, fishing aboard the Southern Cal, caught a 39 1/2-pound 
halibut. 
John Dodge of Long Beach, fishing off Catalina aboard the Indian, caught a 
35-pound halibut. 
Jeff Medove of Carson, fishing off Catalina aboard the Aztec, caught a 30-pound 
white sea bass. 
Verda Simpson of Harbor City, fishing at Catalina aboard the First String, 
caught a 22 1/2-pound white sea bass. 
