THE PAPER TRAIL TO A PAST; 
SUPPORT GROUPS LESSEN THE ODDS FOR SEARCHERS OF KIN 
Searches by adoptees and birth parents for blood relatives vary widely, 
depending on the ages of those sought, the state in which they reside, what 
records are available -- and just plain luck. 
Some searches take decades, others a few weeks. The most common, say Orange 
County specialists, take six months to two years. 
The ages of searchers range from 18 to 70. But the range centers between 25 and 
35 and includes mostly women. But now there are younger searchers -- and also 
more men. 
And some searches are unusually urgent, such as one case in which the birth 
parents were sought for a bone-marrow transplant for their leukemia-stricken 
child. Some adoptees need to obtain vital genetic or medical background, 
including effects of drug abuse, for themselves and their children. 
For adoption-rights advocates, the public-records situation remains bleak. Only 
three states have open access to original birth certificates and other key 
adoption case documents. 
In all other states, including California, such records are sealed unless 
opened by court order. However, access to these records -- and therefore to 
crucial identifications, particularly the birth parents -- are routinely denied 
by judges. 
And what information is made available is often useless, they said. In these 
instances, the names and whereabouts of birth or adoptive parents and the 
children's adopted names are usually deleted. 
"It's absolutely a blank wall. It's ignoring the fact that adoption is a 
lifelong process and that adoptees as adults have a right to know," said 
consultant Patricia Treadway of the Fullerton-based Severed Strings. 
Others in the adoption field, however, are appalled by the prospect of any 
"unlimited openness" for records. The most outspoken foe is William Pierce, 
president of the Washington-based National Committee for Adoption, whose 
members include traditional adoption agencies. 
"If it's strictly voluntary, if all parties in the triad -- adopted adults, 
adoptive parents, birth parents -- consent to it, there's no problem, 
obviously," said Pierce. 
"But there are many who are frightened by the thought of (open records), who 
feel they are being betrayed if their privacy is invaded," added Pierce. "They 
had entered into (the adoption) agreement because it was confidential and the 
court promised that. We should continue to respect -- and protect -- their 
rights." 
Generally, searchers said, they are still left with piecing together fragments 
of information from available basic records, with details also culled from 
hospital, marriage, divorce, property and other such records. If lucky, some 
searchers do so armed with at least a last name and specific city. 
Mostly, they pray for a little extra help. 
"Sometimes you get a sympathetic attorney or doctor who has greater access to 
records, or a sympathetic or unknowing (records) clerk," said one searcher. 
"Sometimes, someone even forgets to black out the names -- and you're home 
free!" 
Others gain vital information about the person being sought -- a special 
occupation, a high school, a close relative, sometimes the person's full name 
itself -- from their adoptive parents, who somehow heard about it or found it 
in old documents. 
While many do searches on their own, some join the two major support 
organizations for next-of-kin searches -- Adoptees' Liberty Movement Assn. 
(ALMA) and Concerned United Birthparents (CUB). Some searchers also hire 
American Adoption Congress-backed consultants -- there are five in Orange 
County -- while others employ regular private investigators. 
Overall estimates of actual reunions, said search specialists, are hard to come 
by. However, the Nevada-based International Soundex Reunion Registry, which has 
listed more than 66,000 people since 1975, has reported 2,400 reunions from its 
computer-matching service. 
And Tustin-based search consultant Patricia Sanders said studies have indicated 
that "unfavorable" reunions -- those involving total rejection -- may be no 
more than 5% to 10%. 
But in many ways, search-movement leaders said, the "closed adoption" syndrome 
remains all-powerful in American society. 
Also, they said, while the concept of "open adoptions" -- where the birth 
parents maintain ongoing open contact with the child and the adoptive parents 
-- is now widely praised, the number of "fully open adoptions" remains 
relatively few. 
Sharon Kaplan, executive director of Parenting Resources, estimated that the 
number of "fully open" cases in California -- where 5,918 adoptions took place 
last year -- amounted to no more than 10% to 15%. 
Overall, though, search-movement advocates like to say that other trends point 
to a "new candor" in American society. They cite the impacts from such other 
issues as abortion rights and the lessening stigma attached to teen-age 
pregnancies and unwed mothers. 
Support Organizations: 
Adoptives' Liberty Movement Assn. National office: (212) 581-1568. Maintains 
registry. Southern California: (818) 882-6969. 
American Adoption Congress. Search hot line: (505) 296-2198. National office: 
(800) 274-OPEN. 
Concerned United Birthparents. National office: (800) 822-2777, (515) 263-9558. 
Maintains registry. Orange County branch: (714) 859-1952. 
International Soundex Reunion Registry. P.O. Box 2312, Carson City, Nev. 
Triadoption Publications. (714) 892-4098. Offers search-help books, referrals. 
LOCAL CONSULTANTS: 
Delayn Curtis, (714) 962-8866. 
Patricia Sanders, (714) 669-8100. 
Cindy Shacklett, P.O. Box 816, El Toro, 92630. 
Trish McAleer, (714) 498-9119. 
Patricia Treadway, (714) 525-9472. HERMAN WONG 
