DESERT LEOPARD COLONY 
Unlike many other Russian immigrants to Southern California, the one who 
arrived in the Antelope Valley this week had to be hauled to America, growling 
and spitting in anger. 
The new resident is a rare Russian Amur leopard, a 14-month-old male who 
traveled from the Helsinki Zoo, where he was born, to the Exotic Feline 
Breeding Compound near Rosamond, a Kern County town west of Edwards Air Force 
Base. 
Since his arrival Thursday, the leopard, named Gigant, has been sulking in his 
quarters, trying to remain out of sight inside a small shelter. 
"Right now he's pretty spooked," said Joseph Maynard, owner of the nonprofit, 
private zoo that has specialized in breeding big cats from zoos around the 
country for the past 13 years. 
The rare leopard's handlers predicted Friday that the trauma of the move will 
wear off. In about a year, a female leopard from the Rotterdam Zoo will join 
Gigant for breeding, part of a concerted effort to increase the population of 
Amur leopards worldwide. 
Scientists class the Amur leopard as a threatened subspecies, with only about 
80 of the animals in captivity and fewer than 100 in the wild, Maynard said. 
"It has been established that the subspecies is in serious danger," he said. 
"We'd like to get a total of 250 reproductively viable animals in captivity 
worldwide by swapping them back and forth." 
Most wild Amur leopards live in a game reserve in the mountainous Amur River 
region near the Soviet-Manchurian border, Maynard said. Their numbers have been 
reduced by poaching and deforestation, he said. 
Gigant now weighs about 80 pounds. He will grow to about 160 pounds and seven 
feet in length. Three feet of that span consist of a long tail that aids the 
Amur leopard's balance in tree-top forays after prey. The subspecies is also 
known for its light yellow, very furry coat with black spots, Maynard said. The 
Amur leopard has a life span of 16 to 20 years. 
The Antelope Valley's desert climate and summer and winter temperature swings 
should not be a problem for the leopard because it is adaptable, experiencing 
both heat and cold in its native habitat, Maynard said. 
"We're the high desert," he said. "If it were the southern deserts, now, the 
temperature would be a little extreme for them. . . . We don't foresee any 
problem, based on our experience with similar animals." 
The compound, which has been praised for its work by zoo officials around the 
country, is in the process of expanding the size of its animal habitats, 
Maynard said. 
It has experienced occasional run-ins with state regulators over permit 
disputes and some cages that were deemed too small. 
The current population of about 40 animals encompasses 11 species, including 
tigers, bobcats, golden cats and leopards, Maynard said. 
