LONDON EXPELS 3 S. AFRICANS OVER WEAPONS DEAL 
Britain ordered the expulsion of three South African diplomats Friday over 
their country's alleged role in a deal with Northern Ireland extremists to swap 
guns for British missile technology. 
Although the South African government denied involvement, the Foreign Office 
appeared to implicate Pretoria when it spoke of "the grave concern with which 
Her Majesty's government viewed the involvement by South African officials in 
this affair." 
It gave the South Africans one week to withdraw First Secretary for Information 
Jan H.P. Castelyn, Counselor Jonathan Fourie and Staff Sgt. Mark Brunner, who 
works in the defense attache's office. 
While there was no suggestion they were implicated in the affair, their 
expulsion is a rebuff at a time when Pretoria's relations with Britain seemed 
to be improving. 
It came two weeks after French police raided a Paris address and arrested a 
South African diplomat, an American arms dealer and three militant Protestants 
from Northern Ireland. 
Missile Parts 
The Northern Irelanders, one a warrant officer in the province's Territorial 
Army, allegedly were handing over parts of a Blowpipe, a shoulder-fired 
anti-aircraft missile manufactured in Belfast. 
British officials say they are gravely concerned by charges the South Africans 
were supplying weapons to the Protestants in exchange for the missile parts. 
The arrested South African, identified by French sources as Daniel Storm, was 
released after claiming diplomatic immunity. A week later, the French 
government expelled three South African officials implicated in the affair. 
The three Irishmen and American Douglas Bernhart are being held in France on 
gun-running and conspiracy charges. 
The Foreign Office said Permanent Undersecretary Patrick Wright summoned South 
African Ambassador Rae Killen and informed him of the expulsions. 
Wright warned that South Africans should be "under no illusions" about how 
gravely London views the affair. 
South African President Pieter W. Botha called the Blowpipe affair a 
"transgression" he regretted. 
