PERSONAL FINANCE / BILL SING: MUTUAL FUNDS CAN MINIMIZE RISKS 
The stock market's surprisingly strong rally to post-crash highs makes a jump 
back into the market look tempting. 
But common sense suggests that -- as during the summer rally preceding the 1987 
crash -- much of the easy money has already been made. The best advice for 
small investors is to avoid getting overly caught up in the euphoria. Invest, 
but with caution. 
Fortunately, there are ways through mutual funds that you can still cash in on 
any further rally while minimizing risks should it fizzle out. Some funds have 
done better than the market in good times and not as poorly in bad times. 
A look at bullish and bearish arguments from analysts shows why a stock 
investment now should be approached with caution. 
On the bullish side, the rally has triggered a positive shift in psychology as 
more and more institutional investors want to get a piece of the action. Many 
market watchers are dropping caution and proclaiming an eventual move past the 
Dow's record high of 2,722.42 set in August, 1987. 
Much of the rally's strength has hinged on a belief that the economy is due for 
a "soft landing." Under that scenario, slower economic growth will push 
interest rates lower as the Federal Reserve eases monetary policy. But instead 
of skidding into recession, the economy will ease into a period of slow but 
sustainable growth without high inflation. 
Even if recession comes, it may be limited to certain industries and geographic 
regions. "We may be in a new era where the economy is so enormous and so strong 
that a problem in one area won't necessarily push the whole country into the 
tank," suggests Burton Berry, editor of NoLoad Fund X, a San Francisco mutual 
fund newsletter. 
Other factors are also fueling the rally. They include an influx of foreign 
money, large amounts of cash still held by pension funds and other 
institutions, and continued merger and leveraged buyout activity that has 
reduced the supply of stocks. 
Also bullish: The price-earnings ratio -- the multiple of stock price over 
earnings per share -- is about 13 for issues in the Standard &amp; Poor's 
500-stock index. That is far from the 20 multiple that has marked past market 
tops. 
Also, individual investors are still largely on the sidelines. Market rallies 
rarely peak when the small guys are playing it safe. Recent declines in 
interest rates, if sustained, will entice small investors to shift some money 
from certificates of deposit and money market mutual funds into equities, 
bullish forecasters say. 
"This market could really surprise people on the upside," suggests Kurt Brouwer 
of Brouwer &amp; Janachowski, a San Francisco investment firm that manages 
mutual fund portfolios. A 3,000 Dow is quite possible, he suggests. 
But bearish observers say danger signs abound, prompting them to characterize 
recent gains as merely a rally in a bear market. 
The "soft landing" scenario could really turn into a full-blown recession, 
these bears say. Interest rates are still high and inflation is still a threat, 
as shown by this week's latest government report showing sharp rises in energy 
prices. 
So-called technical market indicators are not convincingly positive, bears add. 
Daily trading volume, while improved, has not consistently shown the massive 
strength characteristic of bull market rallies. The number of stocks hitting 
new highs is not as extensive as should be expected in a full-blown bull 
market, indicating that only some stocks are enjoying the full force of the 
rally. 
The dividend yield -- payouts as a percent of share price -- is about 3.5% for 
stocks in the Dow industrials. That's close to the 3% level that typically 
signals that a market peak is near. 
Bearish prognosticators conclude that investors should view the current market 
similar to the spring and summer before the 1987 crash. While this market can 
keep going higher, there is considerable downside risk once the party is over, 
they say. 
Indeed, two of the nation's most successful and well-respected managers of 
stock mutual funds, Michael Price of Mutual Shares and John Neff of Windsor 
Fund, have recently announced plans to close their funds to new investors 
because they can't find good values in the market. 
"When a guy like Price says he has a hard time finding values, it doesn't say 
the party's over, but it does mean there is significant risk in this market," 
investment adviser Brouwer says. "But there is always risk in the market. That 
doesn't mean stay away, you just need a prudent way of approaching it." 
One way to prudently invest is to pick lower-risk, no-load mutual funds that 
have outperformed the market during recent good times but held up well in the 
crash. Here are some: 
* Lindner Dividend (314-727-5305). This 15-year-old fund invests in 
unrecognized companies, uses preferred stocks and is "quick to pounce" on 
opportunities, says Donald J. Phillips, editor of Mutual Fund Values, a 
Chicago-based investment advisory service. It lost only 7% during the fourth 
quarter of 1987 -- the quarter of the crash -- compared to a 22.5% decline in 
the S&amp;P 500 with dividends reinvested. For the past 10 years, it has 
boasted an average annual return of 20.6% against 16.7% for the S&amp;P 500 
with dividends reinvested. 
* Gabelli Asset Fund (800-422-3554). Its manager, Mario Gabelli, has an 
excellent track record for finding hidden values. In the crash quarter, it fell 
only 14%. Its three-year average annual return totals 23.2%, compared to 13.2% 
for the S&amp;P 500. 
* Clipper Fund (213-278-5033). This Los Angeles-based fund is "the best general 
equity fund on the market," Phillips contends. It looks for underpriced stocks 
in out-of-favor industries. In the crash quarter, it fell only 7.6%. Its 
five-year average annual return totals 20.1%, compared to 18.3% for the S&amp;P 
500. One drawback: You need a minimum $25,000 to invest initially (only $1,000 
if it's for an individual retirement account.) 
* T. Rowe Price Equity Income (800-638-5660). This fund invests in companies 
with good dividend yields, which will serve as a cushion against falling 
prices. It lost 13.9% during the crash quarter. For the past three years, it 
has posted an average annual return of 16.8%, compared to 13.2% for the S&amp;P 
500. 
* Gradison Established Growth (800-543-1818). Its portfolio is picked by 
computer using strict criteria that emphasizes undervalued stocks. It lost 
13.6% during the crash quarter but has gained an average of 19.6% in the past 
five years, compared to 18.3% for the S&amp;P 500. 
Other lower-risk funds garnering frequent recommendations include Evergreen 
Total Return (800-235-0064), Nicholas (414-272-6133), Janus Fund 
(800-525-3713), Windsor II (800-662-7447) and Vanguard Equity Income 
(800-662-7447). 
