U.S. BORDER PATROL SUSPENDS AGENTS FOR RACIAL TAUNTS 
Three U. S. Border Patrol agents, including a supervisor, were suspended 
without pay for their roles in an incident last summer when an officer taunted 
hundreds of Mexican migrants with racial and sexual slurs amplified over his 
vehicle's public address system, an official confirmed Wednesday. 
The statement Wednesday by Ted A. Swofford, spokesman for the U.S. Border 
Patrol in San Diego, was the first official acknowledgement that the incident 
had occurred, although it was witnessed by three U. S. journalists, including a 
Times reporter, and was widely reported in the press. 
The three agents, who were not identified, all served their suspensions within 
the past two months and are back on the force, said Swofford. He described the 
disciplinary action as severe. 
Citing privacy concerns, Swofford did not identify the offending agents. He 
also would not elaborate on the terms of the suspensions, other than to 
characterize them as "substantial." One knowledgeable official said two weeks 
was a likely term for the suspension of the supervisor, although that could not 
be confirmed. 
Agents charged with administrative violations can face a range of penalties, 
from verbal reprimands to firings, Swofford said. 
"The patrol's feeling is that we are a professional organization and we pride 
ourselves on that," Swofford said. "Any activity that is not professional will 
not be tolerated." 
Last summer, news of the broadcast slurs drew angry responses from Latino 
groups, who cited the actions as evidence that U.S. agents were provoking 
violence along the border. Less than two hours after the taunts were broadcast, 
a Border Patrol agent posted near the same area shot and wounded a 15-year-old 
Mexican boy, who agents said was about to hurl a rock at another agent. 
The taunts occurred on the evening of Aug. 27 along the banks of the Tijuana 
River, a principal crossing point for undocumented immigrants. That evening, 
hundreds of border-crossers had gathered along the border fence and atop the 
river's southern levee, waiting for an opportunity to slip farther into U. S. 
territory. 
The agent spoke from a Border Patrol vehicle parked at the bottom of the mostly 
dry Tijuana River channel, about 250 yards north of the waiting migrants. 
"Your mothers are all whores!" the agent said over the loudspeaker, speaking 
crude border Spanish and occasionally punctuating his comments with a cackling 
laugh and tapes of Mexican music. "All Mexicans are whores!" 
The agent continued with a series of crude and sexually explicit comments. 
The broadcasts provoked incensed responses from the massed migrants, who hurled 
insults back. 
It was unclear if more than one agent had been involved in the actual taunts, 
or if the others had only abetted the effort. 
The taunting continued for at least an hour. Migrants interviewed at the time 
said such broadcasts are not uncommon. 
Swofford, the Border Patrol spokesman, said he had never heard of a similar 
incident. 
