RULE CHANGE ON RESETTLEMENT SPURS EXODUS; 
NEW TIDE OF 'BOAT PEOPLE' FLOODING ASIA 
A new tide of Vietnamese "boat people" has swamped Asian countries in recent 
weeks, overwhelming refugee facilities and threatening to undermine an 
international agreement aimed at solving the problem. 
Refugees in the region's camps have increased to more than 71,000, the highest 
level since 1979, when an international conference set standards by which 
Vietnamese could be resettled in the United States and other Western nations. 
Hardest hit are Malaysia, which recorded 3,400 arrivals in April, and Hong 
Kong, where arrivals reached 2,918 the same month and where refugees continue 
to pour in at the rate of 270 a day. Even the Philippines, which has received 
few "boat people" over the past decade, had 1,286 refugees in April -- six 
times the number for the same period last year. 
The surge occurred after members of the Assn. of Southeast Asian Nations 
announced March 14 that they no longer would automatically accept refugees for 
resettlement -- a well-publicized move that observers believe is triggering the 
latest exodus from economically stagnant Vietnam. 
These countries -- Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Brunei, Singapore and the 
Philippines -- agreed to follow the example of Hong Kong, which last June began 
screening arriving refugees and rejecting those considered to be fleeing 
economic hardship rather than political persecution. 
"It's the 'last train from the station' mentality that has taken hold," one 
Western relief official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity. "The 
announcement of the March 14 deadline without putting any other measures in 
place to deal with the question was an unmitigated disaster." 
Entire Families Are Leaving 
One significant change, according to refugee officials, underscores the widely 
held belief by the "boat people" that this may be their last chance. In the 
past, most used to flee without relatives in the hope that others would follow; 
now, entire families are leaving Vietnam. 
In Hong Kong, so many refugees have arrived in the past month that the 
government has been forced to put 1,600 "boat people" on four rented ferries 
moored in the harbor -- a temporary measure because of the incipient danger of 
typhoons in the summer months. An uproar was created earlier this month when 
the government decided to ship 2,000 new arrivals to already crowded camps. 
"The problem is accommodation," said Michael Hanson, the British colony's 
refugee coordinator. "Conditions are going to deteriorate. There's no way to 
avoid it." 
And Ruby Lee, the head of the Malaysian Red Crescent Society, which cares for 
refugees in that country, declared: "It has to come to the breaking point. 
Maybe it will create an awareness so that other governments will take a 
decision. It's preferable to have a crisis situation now than four weeks from 
now." 
Next month, a new international conference is scheduled in Geneva to decide on 
a refugee policy to replace the one adopted in 1979. 
Draft Agreement 
Under a draft agreement adopted after a preparatory meeting in Kuala Lumpur, at 
which the March 14 cutoff was announced, Vietnam said it would discourage 
illegal departures and take back "boat people" who volunteer to return home. 
The so-called "first asylum" countries of Asia, meanwhile, said they would 
receive the "boat people" and screen them for political refugees, while 
resettlement countries of the West, led by the United States, Canada, Australia 
and Britain, agreed to continue accepting political refugees. 
Under the 1979 agreement, virtually all "boat people" were considered refugees 
and eligible for resettlement. But the mood has changed dramatically with the 
passage of time after the Vietnam War, and many governments now feel that the 
grounds for offering refugee status to Vietnamese have largely disappeared. 
Even if a new final agreement is achieved in Geneva, it will take several 
months, or even years, to begin to implement it. Meanwhile, the refugees are 
expected to keep arriving in large numbers. 
Pulau Bidong, a typical refugee camp on a tiny island 20 miles from the 
northeastern Malaysian town of Kuala Terengganu, already is extremely 
overcrowded and rat-infested. In the last year, the camp's population has risen 
from about 5,000 to 14,359, although there are accommodations for only 6,000 
people. 
Congestion Growing Worse 
The congestion has become so serious that authorities recently had to raise the 
floorboards in the refugees' houses and move in families under the floors. 
"They're packed in so tightly, I don't see how they're going to get any more 
people in," said Nancy Charlesworth, a nun from Buffalo, N.Y., who works with 
unaccompanied children who are refugees. "They'll have to hang hammocks from 
the trees." 
Already, camp officials have taken over six school classrooms to use for 
housing, and more are threatened. 
"If we have to close the schools, the young people will have nothing to do," 
said Pierre Francesco, program director on the island for the Office of the 
U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. 
As it has become clear that Malaysia cannot proceed with its original plan to 
accept upward of 20,000 refugees, officials said it also is evident that the 
overcrowding in Pulau Bidong and other camps also could prove a significant 
factor in the Geneva deliberations. 
Malaysia Seeks to Get Word Out 
One Malaysian official conceded privately that his government would like the 
word to get back to Vietnam about how bad conditions are. Authorities only 
recently opened the camp to journalists. 
In a series of interviews here, many refugees who fled Vietnam acknowledged 
that they were aware of the cutoff but were undeterred by it. 
One was Vu Thi Kim Van, a 39-year-old mother of two with relatives in San 
Antonio, Tex., who arrived March 31. "I'd rather die in the sea than go back to 
Vietnam," she declared, echoing the sentiments of many other refugees. 
Another refugee, Nguyen Kim Lang, said she had tried several times to escape 
her country, only to be turned back. "I hope the Malaysian government and the 
U.N. will take pity on us and accept us for resettlement," she said. 
The determination of the refugees is evident from the fact that many have come 
across despite a series of pirate attacks that have left hundreds dead. Doan 
Van Ly, a former South Vietnamese army major who was released recently after 13 
years in a re-education camp, has been told that three of his nephews were 
murdered by pirates. 
'We Won't Stop Coming' 
"I cry for my nephews, but we won't stop coming," Ly said. "We cannot live with 
the Communists." 
Virtually all the men interviewed said they had served in the army before the 
collapse of South Vietnam in 1975. Army service is expected to be a major 
criterion when the screening of refugees is started after the Geneva 
conference. 
Public officials in Malaysia and Hong Kong are talking about a need for Vietnam 
to accept the notion of forced repatriation -- in other words, to take back 
those who are not considered refugees, whether they want to go back or not. 
Vietnam has previously opposed forced repatriation on "humanitarian grounds" -- 
a stand in which it finds itself in rare accord with the United States. 
The issue is particularly sensitive in Hong Kong, where the British 
administration accepts Vietnamese "boat people" but immediately sends back 
refugees from China, where many Hong Kong Chinese have relatives. 
Hanson, the colony's refugee coordinator, said he feels that a refugee policy 
will not work without "involuntary repatriation" for "boat people" who are not 
admitted as political refugees. 
Since June 14, Hong Kong has screened 1,463 "boat people" out of 17,000 
arrivals. Of this number, only 145 have been accepted as refugees. Those not 
accepted are sent to closed camps, surrounded by barbed wire and operated by 
the prison department. Those who are accepted are sent to refugee camps that 
are open and where the residents may have jobs and attend schools outside. 
The government caused a furor in early May by bowing to public pressure and 
dropping its plans to settle 2,000 refugees in a vacant public housing project 
called the Four Seasons. Instead, they were sent to an already overcrowded camp 
where authorities were forced to convert workrooms into housing space. 
"Many thousands of those Vietnamese are children," Phillip Barker, director of 
the Save the Children Fund in Hong Kong, said in a letter to the South China 
Morning Post. "Some have been pushed around like parcels five or six times in 
the last 18 months in the wake of so-called government policy. The use of 
children as pawns in an abusive 'game' cannot be condoned." 
In an interview, Barker said his group was considering withdrawing from the 
refugee program in Hong Kong because of the resources that have been wasted. 
Meanwhile, some refugee experts believe that the problem of the Vietnamese 
"boat people" will not be solved unless all arrivals are returned to Vietnam 
and told to apply for resettlement under the Orderly Departure Program. 
The program was created as an alternative for Vietnamese wishing to leave, and 
it relocated 22,000 people directly from Vietnam last year. But the waiting 
list is very long -- people who applied in June, 1982, are only now being 
processed -- and escaping by boat is seen as a way of jumping to the head of 
the line. 
"It's like buying a lottery ticket," Barker said. 
