POLICE SEIZE 150 POUNDS OF COCAINE, ARREST 4 IN RAIDS 
Fullerton and Anaheim police confiscated 150 pounds of cocaine and arrested 
four people suspected of trying to sell it in raids ending Wednesday at three 
Los Angeles County residences. 
Police also seized assault-style weapons and $250,000 in cash suspected of 
being linked to drugs at homes in Artesia, Bell and Paramount. 
The police agencies were led to the contraband by people suspected of being 
drug dealers whom the officers first observed in the Fullerton area early 
Tuesday during a separate drug investigation, Fullerton Police Capt. Lee DeVore 
said. 
"Through the day we saw enough activity in transferring of drugs into cars and 
switching cars that we were able to get search warrants for three residences," 
said DeVore, whose department headed the investigation. 
After obtaining search warrants from a Downey Municipal Court judge on Tuesday 
night, DeVore said 23 police officers conducted the raids in teams without 
incident. 
Most of the cocaine was discovered in the Artesia residence, as were the money 
and weapons, DeVore said. Police seized two AK-47 assault rifles and several 
semiautomatic handguns. Three of the four suspects were also arrested at the 
Artesia residence. A fourth was detained at the Bell residence. 
Booked into the Fullerton City Jail on suspicion of sale of cocaine were: Jorge 
Cano, 27, of Artesia; his wife, Maria, 21; Jose Lopez, 21, of Los Angeles, and 
Jose Heras, 28, of Bell. All four were being held under $1-million bonds for 
each. 
Fullerton police estimated the street value of the cocaine at $22 million. They 
said the seizure ranked as their second largest, behind the March, 1988, 
confiscation of 330 pounds of cocaine. The drugs will be held as evidence and 
then destroyed, DeVore said. The $250,000 suspected of being drug money may be 
returned to local police for their use in future drug investigations, he added. 
DeVore said the cocaine seized this week apparently originated in Colombia, as 
"Republic of Colombia" was stamped on sacks containing the powdery white drug. 
Two of the suspects, Cano and his wife, are of Colombian descent, DeVore said. 
