COURT OVERTURNS INSIDER TRADING CONVICTION; 
WALL STREET: THE COURT OF APPEALS RULING INVOLVING A STOCKBROKER NARROWS THE 
DEFINITION OF INSIDER TRADING TO EXCLUDE A LONG CHAIN OF TIPSTERS. 
In a key ruling on insider trading, an appeals court Wednesday overturned the 
conviction of a stockbroker who bought Waldbaum supermarket stock after 
learning about the company's imminent sale from a Waldbaum family member. 
The U.S. 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals said it could find no evidence that 
former Gruntal &amp; Co. broker Robert Chestman knew the information about the 
1986 sale of the supermarket chain was confidential. 
The ruling narrows the definition of insider trading to exclude a lengthy chain 
of tipsters, which defense lawyers in the case had labeled "family gossip." 
Insider trading lacks a statutory definition but generally refers to buying or 
selling securities on the basis of confidential, nonpublic information. 
The case had expanded securities law interpretation to encompass disclosure of 
secrets down a chain and hinged on whether Chestman had a fiduciary duty to 
Waldbaum Inc. No prior criminal case had involved confidential information 
passed among family members. 
Chestman, who began serving his two-year prison sentence last June, was 
expected to be released from a minimum-security prison in Allenwood, Pa., 
almost immediately, Chestman attorney Alan J. Brudner said. 
The U.S. Attorney's Office was reviewing the ruling and had not decided on 
whether to appeal to the Supreme Court or for an appellate court rehearing, 
spokeswoman Deborah Corley said. 
"It seems to confirm everything we've been saying about this case from the 
start," attorney Brudner said. "A chain of family gossip is not what the 
securities laws were intended to address, at least not in this case." 
According to testimony at Chestman's trial, Ira Waldbaum agreed in 1986 to sell 
the grocery business founded by his grandfather in 1921 to the Great Atlantic 
&amp; Pacific Tea Co. -- better known as A&amp;P -- for $50 a share, or $28.7 
million. 
He told his sister, Shirley Witkin, about the deal, stressing that the 
information had to remain confidential until it was announced publicly. Witkin 
informed her daughter, Susan Loeb, who in turn told her husband, Keith. 
Keith Loeb then told Chestman, who bought 11,000 shares of Waldbaum Inc. for 
about $25 each, making overnight profits of $250,000 for himself and several 
clients, including Loeb. 
The Securities and Exchange Commission, alerted to the trading by routine 
post-merger stock market surveillance, filed civil charges. Loeb cooperated 
with investigators. 
Chestman was charged criminally and convicted by a jury in May, 1989, on 31 
counts. The civil charges are pending. 
But the appeals court said in reversing the conviction: "It cannot be inferred 
that Chestman had constructive knowledge of the confidentiality of this 
information simply because he knew Loeb's wife to be a member of the Waldbaum 
family." 
The judges also said they could find no evidence that members of the Waldbaum 
family had a history of trusting each other with business confidences. 
Chestman's conviction had hinged on whether Loeb had a duty to the Waldbaum 
company via the family and whether Chestman knew he was breaching it. 
Loeb testified at the trial that he called Chestman, a senior vice president at 
Gruntal and his broker since 1982, on the morning of Wednesday, Nov. 26. "I 
told him that Waldbaum's is about to be sold and it would be substantially 
higher than it was currently trading at," he said. 
Loeb did not cite his source or say the information was confidential. 
Chestman's attorneys said he had decided to serve the prison term before his 
appeal was decided because he felt he couldn't get a job until the case was 
behind him. 
Chestman, who was to be released to a halfway house in August and paroled in 
November, had not immediately been told of the decision, Brudner said. 
