ELECTIONS: ASSEMBLY; 
ELDER POISED TO CASH IN ON POLITICAL ADVANTAGES 
He is the only South Bay state legislator with a primary opponent, but 
Assemblyman Dave Elder (D-San Pedro) appears poised to win a seventh two-year 
term, political organizers say. 
Elder's name surfaced in recent news reports about alleged political 
improprieties involving one of his aides. But party organizers say Elder's 
years of attention to his district, and the weakness of his opposition, will 
shield him from political fallout. 
"Dave Elder has been working hard for his district," said Carmen O. Perez of 
Long Beach, chief deputy to Los Angeles County Supervisor Kenneth Hahn and one 
of five vice chairs of the Democratic National Committee. "People tend to 
remember that more than a negative news article." 
News reports published last week said state prosecutors in 1988 questioned 
whether Elder aide Susan Grivas raised campaign money for Controller Gray Davis 
during working hours. The queries were part of an investigation into 
allegations that Davis illegally used public resources in his 1986 election 
campaign. 
Elder and Grivas, who no longer works for the assemblyman, have denied 
wrongdoing. State officials say they decided not to conduct a separate inquiry 
into Elder's actions because the assertions of a key informant could not be 
confirmed. 
Democratic organizers say news that the Davis probe touched Elder's office will 
have little effect on voters in the 57th District, which spans San Pedro, 
Wilmington, Harbor City and much of Long Beach. 
"I think people in the 57th are happy with the things Dave has done," said 
Betty Karnette, a member of the Democratic Party's 57th District executive 
board. "People think a lot of things in (the reports on Elder) were just a lot 
of hearsay." 
Elder said he doesn't expect news of the Davis inquiry to affect his reelection 
prospects because, in his view, "there is no issue." 
Elder has drawn two challengers this year: a Democrat and a Republican. 
Neither, however, seems likely to amass the resources needed for an effective 
districtwide campaign against the six-term incumbent. 
Ed Musgrave, Elder's opponent in the June 5 primary, is a political newcomer 
who is living on welfare. In an interview, Musgrave said he should be elected 
so the district can benefit from his educational background -- a master's 
degree in business administration and a bachelor's degree in physics. 
He said he has no quarrel with Elder's performance in office: "As far as I 
know, he's doing a good job." 
To push his own candidacy, Musgrave has campaigned door-to-door in four of the 
district's 204 precincts and is also planning a campaign mailer. Because he is 
short of money, the mailing will be limited in scope, he said. 
"It'll be just for my precinct," said Musgrave, formerly a part-time physics 
teacher at Long Beach College and Los Angeles City College. "That's all I can 
afford." 
Musgrave reports raising only $15 for his campaign so far. As of March, by 
contrast, Elder had more than $30,000 on hand, according to his most recent 
campaign finance statement. 
Should Elder win the primary as expected, his Republican opponent in the Nov. 6 
general election will be caseworker Rodney D. Guarneri of Long Beach. 
Political organizers agree that Guarneri, who has no primary opposition, faces 
an uphill battle in the general election -- if only because of the political 
makeup of the district, where Democrats hold a 61% to 29% advantage in 
registration. 
Said Steve Johnson, Republican Party director for Los Angeles County: "The 
registration figures are pretty lopsided." 
Elder said that he has nevertheless committed himself to a heavy speaking 
schedule in the 57th District and plans to do intensive campaign mailing: "We 
never take anything for granted." 
