PASADENA POLICE TO HONOR 17; 
AWARDS: SIX OFFICERS AND 11 CIVILIANS WILL BE CITED FOR HEROISM AND COMMUNITY 
SERVICE AT ANNUAL LUNCHEON. 
Eleven citizens and six police officers will receive awards for heroism and 
community service at the Police Department's 19th annual Police/Citizens Awards 
Luncheon. 
The recipients include five men who subdued a bottle-wielding church robber, a 
man who saved a woman from drowning in a Hastings Ranch swimming pool, three 
cellular-phone tipsters who foiled robberies and two officers and a passer-by 
who helped rescue a would-be suicide on the Colorado Boulevard Bridge. 
Lt. Chris Hagerty and Robert Edgerly, the city's director of adminstrative 
services, will share the Police Chief's Special Award for "spearheading the 
design and construction of a new state-of-the-art police facility and jail." 
The $17-million Pasadena police headquarters, on which construction workers are 
putting the finishing touches, is scheduled to be dedicated next month. 
The other recipients to be honored at the luncheon today are: 
* Morris Goodson, Leon Robertson, Leon Hudspeth, Thomas Dean and Thermon 
Holliday, who were participating in a Bible study group last October when an 
intruder put a broken bottle to a woman's neck and demanded that church members 
hand over their money. When the assailant tried to get away, the five men 
subdued him. 
"One hit him with a chair, another tackled him, the rest held him down," said 
Community Relations Officer Tom Delgado. 
* Robert Jones Jr., who pulled an unconscious woman from the bottom of a 
swimming pool in June and administered artificial respiration until paramedics 
arrived. His action saved the woman's life. 
* Nazo Manoukian and Traci Auzenne, who spotted a man stealing a car, followed 
him and notified police of the crime via a cellular telephone. During the 
chase, the robber pulled out a handgun and fired twice at Manoukian and 
Auzenne. 
* Another cellular-phone tipster, Paul Jacobs, who called police and then 
followed a pair of robbers who had just stolen $112,000 from a bank in 
February. The robbers, seeing Jacobs following them, tried to ram his car. 
* John Northcott, a San Marino police officer, who pulled a victim from a 
burning car after a collision at California and San Gabriel boulevards last 
May. 
Receiving the Gold Award of Merit will be John Meyer and Officers Mike Bugh and 
Diego Torres, who worked together to save a woman seeking to jump from the 
Colorado Boulevard Bridge, risking injury in the process. 
Receiving the Silver Award of Merit will be Investigator Mary Goldie, who 
helped identify and catch a serial rapist, and Officer James Deal, who 
"demonstrated skill, dedication and courage in making over 450 undercover drug 
buys," Delgado said. 
The award presenters will be jockey Bill Shoemaker and Acting Police Chief 
Bruce Philpott. The luncheon will be at the Pasadena Hilton Hotel. 
