BOMBS RIP COLOMBIA, KILLING 25, INJURING 168; 
VIOLENCE: BLASTS OCCUR AMID CROWDS IN BOGOTA AND CALI. 'THERE'S NO DOUBT IT WAS 
THE DRUG MAFIA,' POLICE SAY. 
Two car bombs exploded Saturday in the Colombian capital, killing at least 19 
people and injuring 143, while six people were killed and 25 hurt when another 
bomb exploded in the southern city of Cali. 
No one immediately claimed responsibility for the blasts, but the nation's 
powerful drug barons are suspected. 
It was the most deadly day of bombing in Bogota since a huge blast demolished 
security police headquarters last December, killing 67 people and injuring 
hundreds. It came on a day when the city was crowded with shoppers. 
The bomb in Cali, 190 miles southwest of Bogota, exploded in a nightclub area 
of the city, headquarters of one of Colombia's most powerful cocaine cartels. 
It was the third car bomb to explode in Cali in the past two weeks in what 
authorities believe is a resurgence of a war between Colombia's two main 
cocaine cartels based in Medellin and Cali. 
Of the 143 injured in the Bogota blasts, 19 were in critical condition in local 
hospitals, a Health Ministry statement said. 
One of the Bogota car bombs exploded in the main shopping street of Quirigua, a 
heavily populated working-class suburb in the northwest of Bogota. Many of the 
casualties appeared to be aboard a crowded bus that was passing by, local radio 
station RCN reported. 
The other bomb exploded almost simultaneously a few miles away at the Niza 
shopping center in a wealthy northern suburb. Besides inflicting casualties, it 
wrecked 32 cars, Bogota Mayor Andres Pastrana said. 
The Niza bomb exploded in a parking lot across from the new, three-level mall. 
Glass from 20-foot-high plate-glass windows turned to shrapnel, according to 
RCN. It said about 200 houses and apartments and 16 stores were damaged by the 
bomb, which left a 3-foot-deep crater. 
Asked who was to blame, police Col. Jose Camero told RCN: "There's no doubt it 
was the drug mafia." 
"The Extraditables," top Colombian drug barons wanted for trial in the United 
States, pledged last month to explode huge bombs in Bogota as part of their war 
on the state. 
The authorities blame drug traffickers for scores of bombings and 
assassinations that have killed more than 200 people since the government 
cracked down on the illegal drug trade last August. 
President Virgilio Barco Vargas had launched the crackdown hours after the 
killing of presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galan, which was blamed on drug 
traffickers. 
Since then, his administration has extradited 14 drug suspects. 
