AIR CONTROLLERS STILL OVERWORKED, GAO SAYS; ORANGE COUNTY, LONG BEACH CITED 
Three years after it first described serious flaws in the nation's air traffic 
control system, a congressional watchdog agency said Thursday that the 
country's 14,400 air controllers are still seriously overworked, undertrained 
and demoralized. 
And there apparently are particular problems among the controllers who manage 
air traffic in and out of airports in Orange County and Long Beach in 
California, according to testimony at a congressional hearing on the study. 
El Toro Criticized 
Conditions at the air traffic control facility at the El Toro Marine Corps Air 
Station, which handles flights in Orange County, Long Beach and much of the 
rest of the busy air corridor between Los Angeles and San Diego, "are poor, and 
I would go so far as to say very poor," said Randy Moore, who heads the local 
branch of the controllers' union. Moore was among three air traffic controllers 
who testified at Thursday's hearing. 
The margin of safety in the nation's skies remains "less than desirable," 
although flying on commercial airliners is not unsafe, a consulting firm hired 
by the General Accounting Office concluded. The GAO is the congressional 
investigative agency that conducted the study at the request of the 
investigations and oversight subcommittee of the Public Works and 
Transportation Committee. 
The GAO report "says, in effect, nothing has changed" since the agency released 
its last study in 1986, said Rep. Guy V. Molinari (R-N. Y.), the ranking 
minority member of the subcommittee, which conducted the hearing on the safety 
of the nation's air control system. 
Earlier this week, government safety officials blamed a near collision last 
February between two airliners over Orange County on the failure of the Federal 
Aviation Administration, which employs the controllers, to correct problems at 
the Coast Terminal Radar Approach Control facility, the formal name of the El 
Toro tracking station. 
"I think they know the problem exists, but I think it might take some public 
pushing like this hearing to actually get them in gear," Moore, in an 
interview, said of the FAA. "I hope they do something about it." 
However, Robert E. Whittington, the FAA's acting administrator, told the 
subcommittee that his agency is already taking significant steps to increase 
the number of controllers, reduce their workload, curtail overtime, update 
equipment and improve training. Whittington said he believes that controllers' 
morale is good. 
"The safety afforded by our air traffic control system remains high," 
Whittington said, citing statistics showing that near collisions dropped from 
840 in 1986 to 712 in 1988 and that traffic controller errors fell from 1,202 
in 1986 to 1,042 last year. 
The GAO's finding that serious problems remain was based on a survey of 5,098 
controllers and air traffic supervisors. Responses were obtained from 80% of 
those to whom questionnaires were sent, a return rate that GAO officials 
described as remarkably high. 
Handle Too Many Planes 
The study found that: 
 -- Sixty-five percent of the controllers said that they routinely handle too 
many airplanes during peak traffic periods. Supervisors reported that 38% of 
their radar controllers handle too much traffic. 
 -- Nearly 60% of the controllers said that they typically work too long 
without a break. Although the FAA guidelines call for a break after every two 
hours in front of the radar screen, 87% of the controllers said they had 
exceeded that limit at least once in the last month. 
 -- Although 43% of the controllers said they suffer from low morale, 
supervisors perceived controller morale as high. 
 -- A majority of the most senior and experienced controllers, who are formally 
designated as full performance level controllers, rated as inadequate nearly 
half of the procedures used to train new controllers. 
The figures are virtually unchanged from those presented in a 1986 report on a 
similar survey of controllers that was taken in 1985, the study said. 
"We find that the report bears out many of our worst suspicions and fears," R. 
Steve Bell, president of the National Air Traffic Controllers Assn., the 
controllers' union, testified. "I can say that the FAA has a tired and 
demoralized work force that is fed up with the empty promises that have been 
served up in the last eight years . . . . 
"It all boils down to business as usual. And it is a very poor way of doing 
business." 
In reply to a question from Rep. Glenn M. Anderson (D-San Pedro), chairman of 
the full committee, the official who directed the research for the GAO said 
that the survey results gave him pause. 
"It does give me some concern, not that the system is unsafe, but (about) what 
the FAA is willing to settle for as an acceptable level of safety." 
Since 1981, when President Ronald Reagan fired 11,400 striking members of the 
Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization, the number of air traffic 
controllers has increased to only 14,437. That is about 1,800 fewer than the 
pre- strike total. In addition, there are now about 3,300 fewer senior 
controllers than before the strike, the study said. 
But the figures may understate the problem because the volume of the nation's 
air traffic has increased each year, the study noted. 
