ZAN THOMPSON: TINY PAWS THAT WILL LEAD AND PROTECT 
The first class of puppies to fall around the obstacle course was the babies, 
puppies 4 to 7 months old. They had the invincible innocence of all young 
things, and they lumbered around the course on their big, round feet, soft as 
muffins. 
This was last Sunday at the open house of International Guiding Eyes in Sylmar 
in the San Fernando Valley. My friend Mary Ann Thomas is president of the 
California State Board of Guide Dogs for the Blind. Mary Ann knows I will go 
anywhere I can meet a lot of dogs, and there were a lot there, all enchanting. 
The obstacle course was laid out on a lawn between a couple of International 
Guiding Eyes' buildings. The first thing the pups had to do was sit; all of 
them managed that. Several gave the tester-trainer warm kisses on his hand. 
The first problem the dogs encountered was food, two large, unopened sacks of 
dried food, and balanced on top a plate holding two hamburger patties and two 
grilled frankfurters. The purpose was to test the dogs' distractibility. A dog 
guiding a blind person must ignore temptations, even hamburgers. 
Another trial was a set of steps built like a stile, three steps up, a small 
platform, then three steps down. There was a handrail on each side for the 
handlers, the people who have taken the pups into their homes to raise until 
they are 1 year old. The steps sound easy -- but almost all of the puppies 
spread their hind legs and braced themselves as if for a tug of war. The dogs 
between 7 and 11 months old did much better, although several of those had to 
be hauled up the stairs by their handlers with the help of the tester-trainer. 
The older dogs walked up the steps, posed and gazed grandly at the crowd from 
the top, and walked with a casual Chesterfieldian air down the other side. 
A few feet away was a wire pen holding two Rhode Island red chickens borrowed 
from Knott's Berry Farm for the day, another test of the dogs' ability to keep 
their minds on their work. A few of the dogs walked right by. The tester made 
sure they went back and looked at the chickens. Some of the dogs, very few, 
shrugged. "Big deal. A couple of chickens." 
A lot of them jumped back in surprise and then approached the pen and sniffed 
at the chickens. A couple were obviously uneasy about the chickens, even 
afraid, and got away as soon as possible. 
The next test was a grill placed flat on the grass, like a grid or a manhole 
cover such as dogs might encounter when they graduated and had their own people 
to guide. Some of the dogs trotted casually across it, some sniffed it and then 
went over it, but several tried to walk on their tiptoes in the front while 
kicking their hind feet up as fast as they could. 
The last obstacle was a large floor fan, turned on, with crepe paper streamers 
blowing out from it. Again, some dogs merely looked and walked ahead, some were 
hesitant and one large German shepherd was not going to go by it at all. At 
first he tried to walk on the side away from the infernal thing, but the 
trainer made him come back and walk between his friend and the fan. 
Only one dog broke the pattern at the plate of grilled meats. He grabbed a 
frankfurter and happily chomped it. He was so quick, his handler didn't have 
time to pull him back. One snap and he had it. Everyone laughed and I clapped. 
Oh, just a little bit. But I am on the side of the fellow who says, "Oh, come 
on, let's give it a go." 
International Guiding Eyes was founded in 1948 through donations of the 
International Assn. of Machinists Union and has been supported by donations 
ever since from the Machinists Union, which is the mainstay, and from 
corporations, clubs, unions and individuals. Last Sunday, the Telephone Company 
Pioneers contributed $1,000. 
No money is received at any guide dog center from city, county or state. It is 
just from people who realize what they can do for a blind person -- give him 
independence, self-respect and the outpouring of love from a dog. 
The pups are trained first by families who give them house manners and simple 
obedience. Then, at the end of a year, the dogs go back to the Guiding Eye in 
Sylmar. Many people immediately apply for another pup. 
The dogs chosen to train are Labrador and golden retrievers, German shepherds, 
boxers, collies and some crossbreeds. Right now, they are trying border 
collies, smaller dogs with minds that could get them into Caltech and the 
hearts of lions. A woman who was taking a border collie home as her fourth 
puppy to train said that the dogs are so intelligent that it will compensate 
for their lack of heft. 
The trainers who had brought their dogs to be shown were all ages and both 
sexes. When the dogs come back to Guiding Eye, they are given rigorous teaching 
for four months with a licensed instructor. Then a dog and an applicant for a 
guide dog are carefully matched for disposition and living conditions. Last, 
the dog and the applicant live together in a room at the Guiding Eye and work 
together every day, in traffic, on buses, on airplanes, on trains. 
The dogs are so beautiful and the trainers so proud; being with them for an 
afternoon is a high privilege. 
