TURKISH-ARMENIAN CONTROVERSY 
Levon Marashlian's column "Face Turkey's Crime, Then Go Beyond It" (Commentary, 
April 23) is full of misrepresentations, half-truths and outright 
falsifications. This commentary is an insult to the silent memory of millions 
of Turkish people who died during World War I and to the intelligence of any 
unsuspecting reader. Where shall I begin? 
First, the misrepresentations: Armenians would like to draw analogies between 
their civil war experiences in eastern Anatolia during World War I and the 
Jewish Holocaust during World War II. What they conveniently ignore are the 
facts that Jews never established Jewish armies behind German lines in order to 
back stab Germany and establish a Jewish state on German soil. Armenians did 
all that and more in eastern Anatolia! How can the two be the same? 
Second, the half-truths: The Armenian writer quotes Adm. Mark Bristol, the 
American envoy to Ankara right after World War I, supposedly acknowledging "the 
cruelties practiced upon the Armenians by Turks acting under official orders. . 
. ." The writer, again conveniently, ignores what Bristol said in his letter 
dated March 28, 1921, addressed to Dr. James L. Barton: 
" . . . I see that reports are being freely circulated in the United States 
that the Turks massacred thousands of Armenians in the Caucasus. Such reports 
are repeated so many times that it makes my blood boil. The Near East Relief 
have the reports from Yarrow and our own American people which show absolutely 
that such Armenian reports are absolutely false. The circulation of such false 
reports in the United States, without refutation, is an outrage and is 
certainly doing the Armenians more harm than good. I feel that we should 
discourage the Armenians in this kind of work, not only because it is wrong, 
but because they are injuring themselves. . . ." 
Third, falsifications: Marashlian says: "Under the guise of national security, 
in essence, the White House elevated the interests of corporations . . . above 
moral principles that define America." Whereas the reality is that the Armenian 
agenda and the American agenda don't overlap. Let me be more precise: The 
Armenian agenda and the American agenda clash and contradict with each other. 
American interests are simply better served by letting the scholars and 
historians settle this controversial issue, rather than blindly subscribing to 
Armenian allegations. 
Now that the world is taking a closer look at the Armenian allegations and 
studying sources other than those dictated by the Armenian fanatics, we are 
seeing a different picture. That picture is behind the Armenian defeats in the 
U.S. Congress in 1985, 1987, and then twice in 1990. 
This time, truth will bulldoze the Armenian exaggerations. Truth has a way of 
doing that, you know! 
ERGUN KIRLIKOVALI 
President 
Turkish-American Historical Society 
Santa Ana 
