CROW TO HANG IN THERE AS LONG AS SOCKERS DO 
If they are to be bounced out of the playoffs before the championship series 
for only the second time in nine years, Kevin Crow won't be sitting around 
watching it happen. 
Crow remains an inspiration for a Socker team that is up to its ears in trouble 
and beginning to show signs of wear and tear with bickering and 
finger-pointing. The Sockers trail the Dallas Sidekicks, 2-1, in the 
best-of-seven MISL Western Division finals, with Game 4 at 6:05 tonight in the 
San Diego Sports Arena. 
Crow, who suffered an abdominal strain in Game 2, was unable to practice last 
week, but when Game 3 started Friday night, he was on the field for his 81st 
consecutive playoff game. The Sockers have played exactly 81 playoff games 
since Crow joined the team in 1983. 
"It's incredible," midfielder Brian Quinn said. "Since Kevin and I started here 
together, I think he's played, like, 70 more games than me." 
Quinn has missed his share with injuries. Crow keeps playing and doesn't think 
much about it. Picking up a regular paycheck is reason enough for him to be out 
there, unless he is hurt so badly that he feels he is a detriment to the team. 
"I just have the simple philosophy that you're paid to play," Crow said. "If 
you can go out and help the team without hurting it, then I think you're 
obligated to do it. 
"I believe in that blue-collar work ethic. If you do work hard, the rewards are 
there." 
Maybe that's as good a summation as any as to why the Sockers have tripped in 
this series. There hasn't been enough blue-collar hard work. 
Socker Coach Ron Newman and other members of the team are becoming increasingly 
concerned and impatient with the punchless play of midfielder Branko Segota, 
who has only five points in seven playoff games. 
After Friday's loss, Newman indicated he might consider replacing Segota with 
someone who would play more aggressively. That isn't likely, but whatever 
happens, the Sockers need to find their offense. Soon. They have scored just 
two goals in the past two games. 
Segota's latest analysis of his problem is that his teammates aren't creating 
chances for him. Last week, he said he didn't want to play more physically for 
fear he would wind up in the penalty box. It could be that he has no real idea 
why he isn't up to par and that thinking about it is bogging down his game. 
Whatever, the Sockers don't have any consistent scorers. It appeared forward 
Damir Haramina might help fill that role after he had a strong finish in the 
regular season, but he has played sparingly in this series and made no 
significant contributions. Forward Paul Wright had two goals in Game 1 but 
missed on several opportunities Friday in Game 3. 
To top it all off, midfielder Waad Hirmez is now questionable for the rest of 
the series with a right hamstring strain. Hirmez led the team in goals during 
the regular season with 29 and helped them eliminate St. Louis with a hat trick 
in Game 4 of the semifinals. 
The sum of the problems is that the Sockers aren't as dangerous offensively as 
they were last season, when Segota was more in command of his game, veteran 
forward Steve Zungul was healthy and contributing and since-traded Zoran Karic 
was providing a threat from the top of the penalty box. 
Tonight's game will likely set the tone for the rest of the series. Losing 
another in San Diego would mean they would have to win both in Dallas, which is 
highly unlikely considering their history of inconsistent road play. 
And as the series draws closer to an end, each game gets a little bit more 
tense, particularly for the team that is behind. 
"I think when it gets from four on," Quinn said, "it's time to stop drinking 
coffee." 
