SAN DIEGO SPOTLIGHT : CLASSICAL MUSIC; 
THE PICTURE-PERFECT PLACE TO STAGE CHAMBER CONCERTS 
In an effort to make the San Diego Museum of Art a more enticing destination, 
curator of education Barney Malesky has launched an ambitious program of 
monthly chamber concerts. Supported by a grant from the Masserini Charitable 
Trust, Malesky's programming over the next year will include traditional 
chamber ensembles, jazz groups, and silent films accompanied by the San Diego 
Cine-Phonic Orchestra. 
Malesky has booked the Arioso Wind Quintet for three concerts on the museum's 
series, which to date is nameless. In their opening program April 29 in the 
museum's second-floor Baroque Gallery, Arioso offered a selection of Baroque 
music and 20th-Century compositions inspired by Baroque models. Performing Jan 
Sweelinck's Theme and Variations with Massimo Stanzioni's 
"David With Sword" hanging behind the oboist's shoulder allowed listeners to 
contemplate the aesthetic connections between Sweelinck and Stanzioni, who were 
contemporaries. During Arioso's spirited quintet version of Mozart's Overture 
to "The Magic Flute," it was possible to compare Mozart's style with the 
Classicism of Simon Vouet's "Aeneus and his Father Fleeing Troy," another of 
the gallery's paintings that framed the musicians. 
Arioso's next museum concert will be an all-American program at 7 p.m. May 17 
in the Copley Auditorium. The ensemble will return to the Baroque Gallery on 
June 10 at 1 p.m. with a contemporary potpourri, including a composition by 
Arioso's horn virtuoso John Lorge. 
Other May musical offerings include a screening this Saturday at 7 p.m. of the 
1926 silent film classic "The Phantom of the Opera" with the Cine-Phonic 
Orchestra; the Westwind Brass will play on May 20 at 1 p.m. 
For the summer months, Malesky is planning a jazz series, including free early 
evening concerts in front of the museum's main entrance. 
More Previn promises. For the La Jolla Chamber Music Society's SummerFest '89, 
Andre Previn was the popular annual festival's conspicuous no-show. Apparently 
completely recovered from his tendinitis, the former music director of the Los 
Angeles Philharmonic intents to do penance for slighting the La Jollans last 
year. He will grace three SummerFest '90 (Aug. 17-28) concerts and will appear 
in several musical guises. 
Conductor Previn will mount the podium Aug. 26 in UC San Diego's Mandeville 
Auditorium to lead members of the San Diego Symphony in Mozart's Sinfonia 
Concertante, K. 364. On the Aug. 25 program in Sherwood Auditorium, Previn will 
star as SummerFest's composer-in-residence, accompanying flutist Carol Wincenc 
in his "Peaches for Flute" and mezzo-soprano Christine Cairns in his "Six Songs 
on Poems by Philip Larkin." On Aug. 27 in Sherwood Auditorium pianist Previn 
will provide the keyboard parts to Mozart's Piano Quartets in G minor and 
E-flat Major. 
SummerFest is not, however, just a PrevinFest. Pianist Emanuel Ax will make his 
festival debut in a pair of programs, the Aug. 17 opening concert and again 
Aug. 19. Other musicians making their first SummerFest appearance include 
cellist Carter Brey, pianist Andre Michel Schub, violinist Young Uck Kim, 
flutist Anne Diener Giles and newly appointed San Diego Symphony principal horn 
John Lorge. Returning artists include pianist David Golub, cellist Gary 
Hoffman, violist Cynthia Phelps, violinist Cho-Liang Lin, bassoonist Dennis 
Michel, and the Colorado String Quartet. 
Six concerts will be given in Sherwood Auditorium, and both Sunday programs 
(Aug. 26) will occur in UCSD's Mandeville Auditorium. Other traditional 
SummerFest features include the young people's afternoon concert and ice cream 
social at Sherwood Auditorium (Aug. 19), open rehearsals, master classes, and a 
private concert in Rancho Santa Fe for festival supporters. 
Relaxing under pressure. Four public seminars on the Alexander Technique will 
be offered by the music and drama departments of San Diego State University on 
Wednesday and Thursday. Marjorie Barstow, a student of F. Matthias Alexander, 
the founder of a method to eliminate habits that cause excess strain, tension 
and effort in performance, will teach the courses. The music department offers 
regular classes in the Alexander Technique, taught by Eileen Troberman, who 
apprenticed with Barstow. For information about Barstow's offerings at SDSU, 
phone the music office (594-6031). 
More winners. Mezzo-soprano Lisa Friedrichs won first prize ($3,000) in the 
vocal division in the annual Virginia Hawk Competition for aspiring young 
musicians in El Cajon on April 21. Soprano Diane Winterton placed second 
($1,000). In the instrumental division, first-place winners ($1,000 each) were 
violinist Pengfei Xhou, pianist George Estrada and oboist Vicki Strong. 
Instrumentalists taking second prizes ($500 each) were violinist David Chan, 
pianist Arlene Hipolito, and bassoonist Michael Curtis. These winners were 
presented in concert May 6 at El Cajon's Neighborhood Center. 
That's all, folks! Los Angeles theater organist Gaylord Carter will make his 
farewell appearance on the California Theatre's mighty Wurlitzer on Sunday at 2 
p.m. With the imminent demolition of the historic building, the local Theatre 
Organ Society has slated only three more programs, including the grand finale 
on June 24. Carter, who is remembered by old-timers for providing the opening 
and closing theme music to the 1930's "Amos 'n' Andy" radio programs, will 
accompany two Harold Lloyd films, "Hot Water" (1924) and "For Heaven's Sake" 
(1926). 
