ORANGE COUNTY SUMMER; 
PEDAL-PUSHING PASSION; 
BIKING HAS CAUGHT ON FAST IN ORANGE COUNTY, AND THE BOOM IS TURNING INTO AN 
EXPLOSION 
It all seemed so innocent at first. Dan Gladney was just looking for a way to 
stay in shape. 
"I thought, 'Gee, this looks like a lot of fun,' " he recalled. "Buy a bike, a 
helmet, and you're set." 
If only things were so easy. 
Just a year after he went out and spent $350 on a new bicycle ("I thought that 
was a lot of money at the time") Gladney recently "upgraded" to an aluminum 
bicycle in the $2,000 range. 
The weekly rides of the past have given way to daily outings at 5 a.m., and the 
20-mile excursions that once seemed so challenging are now hardly enough to 
work up a sweat. And the helmet? Gladney now has two of them, plus multiple 
pairs of Lycra bike shorts, jerseys, riding gloves, two pairs of specially 
fitted shoes, gloves and sunglasses. 
"Well yes, I guess I'm a little obsessed," said Gladney, 36, a zone director of 
sales for the Kendall Health Care Products Co. and a resident of Mission Viejo. 
"But it's just so . . . fun." 
Gladney is not alone, and in fact is part of a bicycling boom that has swept 
across Southern California and turned the sport into a passion for tens of 
thousands of riders. 
There are few places where biking has caught on as fast as in Orange County, 
where cycling has become a million-dollar industry and bike stores have become 
as prominent as yogurt shops. And with summer, the boom has turned into an 
explosion. 
Drive down any Orange County road this summer and you're likely to see them -- 
some alone, others riding in packs -- their bodies bent over the frames, heads 
low in the wind, legs spinning, their bright yellow, blue and red jerseys and 
helmets announcing the presence of the serious bicyclist. 
With miles of bike trails leading to both the beaches and the hills, local 
enthusiasts see Orange County as one of the finest places in the country to 
practice their sport year-round. 
"I don't know if there is a bad time to ride around here," said KarroLynn 
Wells, membership director for the Orange County Wheelmen, a cycling club 
boasting more than 900 members. "Sometimes it gets hot, and if it rains it can 
get really cold. But that's not often." 
Biking, however, just isn't what it used to be. Blame it on the 1984 Olympics, 
when the cycling competition was held in Mission Viejo, but the entire industry 
has gone big-time and high-tech. 
No longer content with a leisurely ride down the street, the packs of bikers 
you see on the streets take their sport seriously. Every little detail of the 
bike, from the frame to the spokes to the seat post, gets close attention. 
Gone are the days when a handful of U.S. bike manufacturers dominated the 
market, and a top-quality bike went for several hundred dollars. 
Entry-level sport, touring and racing bikes now start around $250 and go into 
the thousands. There are dozens of brands, a bewildering selection of gear and 
brake systems, wheels and tires. Even the frame has to be carefully selected: 
traditional steel, light-weight aluminum or perhaps the new-age composite or 
carbon fiber. 
"For the person who doesn't know much about bikes it can be a little 
confusing," said Jessie Gascon, co-owner of Bicycle Man of Mission Viejo, who 
logs between 150 and 200 miles a week himself. 
"We just have to bring them up to date because the technology has changed so 
much in the last 5 years. It's like comparing a Ford Pinto with a Thunderbird 
now; things have changed so much. It's a whole new world out there." 
Dave Jones, general manager of Two Wheel Transit Authority in Fountain Valley, 
agreed that the dizzying array of choices on new bikes leaves many people lost. 
But when they get into it, they do so in a big way. 
"Some people don't need a $1,000 bicycle when a $300 one will do fine," he 
said. "And then there are people who want a pro bike because it's the 'in' 
thing to do. They just want to have one. It can get addictive." 
Small bike-shop owners like Gascon, as well as the larger dealers like Two 
Wheel, report the biggest growth in the bike industry has been in off-road 
mountain bikes with raised handlebars and larger, knobby tires. 
"Fat tire" enthusiasts now account for an estimated 60% to 70% of all bike 
sales in Southern California. 
"Some people enjoy getting out of the traffic and back in the hills with 
nature," said Two Wheel's Jones. "And mountain bikes are great on the road too. 
A lot of people who buy the mountain bikes don't even take them off the road." 
Outside of the gadgetry and the lure of owning a hand-made Italian racing bike, 
what attracts people to the sport and keeps them in it is the simple fact that 
it is a relatively easy way to stay in shape. 
"People who live around here and don't bicycle, are really missing it," said 
Dan Gilchrist, events coordinator at Two Wheel Transit Authority. "It really is 
wonderful. You can commute on this, you can get fit, you can travel, you can go 
to the market, you can take a vacation and you can always find good camaraderie 
out there on the road. If you don't bike in Orange County, you're missing out." 
