HELP FOR VENTURA RESCUE WORKERS URGED; 
PROPOSAL: PROGRAM WOULD AID EMERGENCY SERVICES PERSONNEL WHO HAVE SUFFERED 
PSYCHOLOGICAL TRAUMA IN THEIR WORK. 
No matter how hard she tries, Julie Bridges cannot forget the train accident 
that dismembered a Simi Valley man three years ago. 
Bridges, a Ventura County paramedic in 1987, combed the railroad tracks 
searching for the bloodied parts of his torn body -- first one leg, then the 
other, next the torso and finally the man's head. 
"I couldn't close my eyes that night because I kept seeing body parts," said 
Bridges, who is now the assistant administrator for the Ventura County 
Emergency Medical Services Division. "I keep remembering it, and I suppose I'll 
have a long-term problem with it." 
Bridges is one of many emergency services workers -- such as paramedics, 
firefighters and police officers -- who have suffered psychological trauma that 
lingers long after witnessing particularly gruesome accidents or troubling 
death scenes. 
Now, as part of her duties, Bridges is coordinating with agencies throughout 
Ventura County to set up a program that would be open to more than 1,700 rescue 
workers. The teams would be on hand to counsel workers immediately after 
disturbing events so they are not debilitated by them. 
The proposal for a Critical Incident Stress Debriefing Program, which would 
make teams of psychologists and peer-counselors available to treat emergency 
workers 24 hours a day, is scheduled to come before the county Board of 
Supervisors in the next two months, Bridges said. 
Some counseling is available to various agencies in the county, but Bridges and 
others believe that a critical trauma debriefing team could make help more 
widely available. 
Such teams are commonplace in the wake of nearly every major disaster, arriving 
on the scenes of earthquakes and hurricanes to counsel emergency services 
workers. And they are becoming increasingly prevalent in local fire and police 
departments, with more than 125 communities in the United States running their 
own teams, according to the Critical Incident Stress Debriefing Foundation in 
Ellicot City, Md. 
Critical Incident Stress Debriefing is a relatively new psychological specialty 
designed to treat workers who have been exposed to incidents deemed unusually 
traumatic -- such as deaths of children, major disasters such as air crashes, 
accidents in which more than three people are killed, prolonged rescue 
situations and deaths or suicides of co-workers. 
"I think that the majority of emergency services workers need some kind of help 
like this," said Jeffrey Mitchell, co-founder of the Critical Incident 
Debriefing Foundation and associate professor of emergency health services at 
the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. "Most have experienced at least 
some of the stress symptoms at some point in their careers." 
If not treated immediately, the short-term problems could fester and develop 
into long-term behavior disorders, Mitchell said. 
The police officers, firefighters and paramedics who witness such events might 
seek solace in alcohol or drugs. Some will avoid their friends and families. 
Their health might suffer as they develop problems sleeping, eating and 
relaxing, Mitchell said. 
Mitchell coaches psychologists across the country on how to counsel the workers 
who often are mired in the belief that they do not need help because they are 
the helpers. 
Also, Mitchell said, the machismo associated with law enforcement and rescue 
professions frequently precludes admitting emotional problems. 
But the problems -- and need for help -- are definitely present, according to 
county emergency service workers. 
Firefighters say they are haunted by the taste and smell of some accident 
scenes three weeks later. Police officers remember how their guts wrenched the 
first time they saw a dead body. And paramedics recount stories of 
conversations with people who keeled over dead in mid-sentence. 
"Sometimes I start recounting all the fatalities I've been on," said one county 
firefighter, who asked not to be identified. 
The man said he is still disturbed by a Casitas Springs fire that killed an 
elderly woman in a mobile home in April, charring her body beyond recognition. 
"It's depressing to see human life destroyed like that," he said. 
The Ventura County Fire Department has two chaplains on call who respond to 
fires and provide some counseling for firefighters and witnesses. But some 
firefighters believe that the chaplains do not have the expertise to deal with 
their psychological needs. 
Keith Kraetsch, president of the Ventura County Professional Firefighters, a 
labor organization that represents the county's 375 firefighters, said that 
additional psychological services are imperative. 
"I think the county has a moral obligation to provide them to us," Kraetsch 
said. 
Lt. Arvid Wells of the Ventura County Sheriff's Department said the program 
would be well received by the 143 volunteers he commands on the sheriff's 
search-and-rescue team. 
The volunteers are shocked when they first retrieve a decaying body. They must 
be made to realize, he said, that it is normal to feel upset -- and even 
physically ill -- when first seeing a dead body. 
"Finally people are realizing the fact that rescue workers see more death and 
destruction than other people," Wells said. "The days of the macho, 'I can view 
anything and do any job,' are over." 
The idea for the Ventura program was sparked when 17 Ventura County 
firefighters became distressed after they were overcome by fumes during a fire 
at a chemical manufacturing plant in Saticoy on April 10, 1989. 
The men were taken to local hospitals for treatment after being exposed to the 
poisonous gases at Pacific Intermediates. 
But no psychological counseling was provided for the men, who were worried 
about what future effects the exposure would have on them, Bridges said. 
"There was a feeling of general panic that they didn't feel they were getting 
the support that they needed," Bridges said. 
The proposed Ventura program would provide support for county emergency 
services workers facing such incidents. The county also may try to contract 
with private ambulance and police departments countywide, Bridges said. 
The Ventura program would be made up of three- or four-member teams of mental 
health professionals and peer counselors. Depending on the circumstances of a 
case, the team would head out to talk to the workers at scenes of incidents or 
arrange for a more formal therapy session up to a week later, Bridges said. 
Start-up costs for the program, which Bridges hopes to see in effect by 
November, would be about $15,000. That money would pay for the training and 
salary of a part-time program coordinator, computer and telephone costs and 
materials for team uniforms or identification, she said. 
Bridges said she hopes to negotiate with private hospitals to put up another 
$5,000 to train the psychologists and peer counselors. 
Already, 20 psychologists have applied to volunteer their time to the program. 
Also, Bridges said, she hopes clergy will go through the training and help in 
the program. 
Other agencies involved in developing the program include the county Sheriff's 
Department, Fire Department, Emergency Services department, coroner's office, 
Mental Health Services department and St. John's Regional Medical Center in 
Oxnard. 
The Ventura County Fire Department now relies on two chaplains to provide 
counseling at fire scenes. The Ventura County Sheriff's Department has its own 
psychologist with an office at department headquarters in Ventura. The 
psychologist is on call 24 hours a day. And county employees can see 
psychologists through the county's Employee Assistance Program. 
The five police departments in the county each contract with psychologists for 
emergency services as well. 
Bridges, however, said the Critical Incident Debriefing team would give workers 
an option about whom to see. 
Three of the five county supervisors contacted said they support the idea, but 
Supervisor Madge Schaefer said she believes that such a program was needed only 
for the county Fire Department. She said other county agencies already are 
adequately served. 
Similar programs in Los Angeles and Orange counties have helped workers through 
trying times. 
The Los Angeles County Fire Department, with 2,300 firefighters, was the first 
California agency to implement its own Crisis Incident Stress Debriefing 
Program, program coordinator Marguarite Jordan said. 
The team was started in an effort to cut down on people retiring because of 
stress-related ailments, Jordan said. It is now mandatory for firefighters 
exposed to any incident deemed traumatic to undergo counseling with team 
psychologists, Jordan said. 
The team first swung into action during the 1986 Cerritos air disaster, when 
firefighters and emergency workers went to rescue victims and found only 
mangled bodies. 
The team provided on-site counseling. As a result, Jordan said, no one in the 
Fire Department took early retirements or filed stress claims citing the 
disaster, Jordan said. 
In Orange County, the program was kicked off in 1985 and is run by the Red 
Cross. Workers there term it "emotional first aid," Donna Gamble of the Red 
Cross said. 
"It eases us back into normal life," she said. "It gets us over our period of 
adjustment much quicker." 
