FUSION GENIE'S STILL IN BOTTLE, SCIENTISTS' CRITICS SAY; 
WHAT STARTED AS A TRIUMPHANT SAGA FIZZLES INTO CONFUSION AND CARPING 
On March 23, two elated chemists -- B. Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann -- 
stood before reporters at a University of Utah news conference, proudly 
explaining how their discovery of nuclear fusion in a flask would lead to a 
worldwide abundance of cheap, clean energy. Afterward, they autographed press 
releases for colleagues and showed off their suddenly famous laboratory to 
visiting members of the news media. 
That was less than seven weeks ago. On Monday night in Los Angeles, a starkly 
contrasting scene unfolded as the two mumbled through presentations before a 
throng of fellow chemists at the Bonaventure Hotel, ducked sharp questions and 
then slipped quickly away after failing to defend their supposed breakthrough. 
The Pons-Fleischmann saga is beginning to raise troubling questions about the 
lure of patents and prizes in scientific discovery, about institutional and 
governmental pressures to attract recognition and money, and about the adverse 
effects of competition on scientific credibility. 
Suddenly, there is no more talk of a Nobel Prize. The two chemists are besieged 
by critics -- castigated for their inability to explain their experiment, their 
failure to reveal full details of the research and their decision to circumvent 
the normal rules of science by announcing their results at a press conference 
before reporting them at a meeting or publishing them in a scientific journal. 
"I guess we've all been guilty of eagerness," James J. Brophy, the University 
of Utah's vice president for research and development, conceded Tuesday. 
Meanwhile, people around the world -- tantalized by the idea of an energy 
miracle -- are now left wondering: Is fusion in a flask real or simply the 
delusion of two scientists carried away by their own misguided enthusiasm? 
If the Utah researchers have not found cold fusion, what have they found? One 
possibility is a previously undiscerned chemical reaction. If that is the case, 
they may have found a new way to make batteries, but no solution to energy 
problems. 
The other most likely possibility is that they simply made a mistake. 
The final answer may not come for weeks or months, until Pons and Fleischmann 
have had more time to refine their experiments and to share their data with 
other researchers. 
One hope for resolving the quandary is a joint project with the Los Alamos 
National Laboratory. Two weeks ago, Pons said that a fusion flask would be set 
up in Salt Lake City in cooperation with Los Alamos researchers, then moved to 
Los Alamos where researchers can use sophisticated equipment to look for signs 
of a nuclear reaction. 
Pons said Monday, however, that the project could not be started until 
necessary paper work has been completed. 
Meanwhile, the governor of Utah has created a nine-member panel that will 
oversee a $5-million fund for fusion research created by the state Legislature. 
Those funds cannot be disbursed until Pons' and Fleischmann's claims have been 
corroborated. The University of Utah's Brophy said Tuesday that the panel will 
be given access to all of the researchers' data -- the first time that anyone 
outside the university will have seen it. 
It is hoped that the panel will complete its evaluation before within two 
weeks. 
Pons and Fleischmann were an unlikely pair from the beginning. The rumpled 
Fleischmann, 62, has a long and distinguished history that brought him the 
chairmanship of the chemistry department of the University of Southampton in 
England and numerous awards before he retired from teaching in 1983. 
Pons Rose Quickly 
In contrast, the peripatetic Pons, 45, had dropped out of graduate school at 
the University of Michigan in 1967, first to join his family's textile 
business, then to operate a restaurant in Florida. He met Fleischmann in 1975 
when he returned to graduate school, choosing the University of Southampton 
because it would allow him to transfer most of the credits he had already 
earned. Pons rose quickly, becoming chairman of the University of Utah's highly 
respected chemistry department. 
Spurred by shared interests in skiing and cooking, Pons and Fleischmann became 
close friends, spending long periods in each other's homes and collaborating on 
a variety of projects. Their continued scientific conversations ultimately led 
to their new approach to fusion, which Fleischmann has always said was a 
"one-in-a-billion shot." 
Their apparatus is simple, small palladium and platinum electrodes immersed in 
heavy water -- water in which each of the hydrogen atoms has an extra neutron. 
Applying a small voltage to the electrodes, they said, creates an electrical 
field that forces high concentrations of deuterium ions into the palladium 
electrode. At those high concentrations, the deuterium ions fuse to form 
helium, releasing large quantities of energy. 
They convinced themselves that their apparatus was producing more energy than 
they were putting into it and that they were observing radioactive debris in 
the reaction vessel that could only have arisen from a nuclear fusion reaction. 
The pair spent 5 1/2 years and $100,000 of their own money researching the 
phenomenon. Earlier this year, they discovered that physicist Steven Jones of 
Brigham Young University in Provo and his colleagues were working on the same 
technique. Jones was also seeing radioactive debris, but he did not observe 
significant heat production and did not believe that the process could be used 
for large-scale energy production. 
The two groups met early in March and ultimately agreed to publish their 
findings simultaneously. Pons and Fleischmann said it would take them another 
18 months before they were ready to publish, but Jones objected that an 
abstract of his work was already being circulated among scientists and that he 
planned to present the results soon. 
It was agreed that the two groups would each submit a paper to the British 
journal Nature on March 24. But without warning, Jones, Pons and Fleischmann 
announced their findings on March 23, simultaneously filing patent 
applications. Jones' paper was published two weeks ago; Pons and Fleischmann 
withdrew theirs when the journal asked for more experimental details. 
They did write a brief explanation of their results, which appeared in a Dutch 
journal, and they gave cursory descriptions at a meeting of the American 
Chemical Society and other meetings. But most of their experimental details 
remained obscure. 
Many researchers, already angered by the lack of detail, were further incensed 
two weeks ago when the pair, accompanied by university officials, went before a 
U.S. Senate committee to ask for $25 million for a fusion research center in 
Salt Lake City. That money would join the $5 million already appropriated by 
the Utah Legislature and an additional $70 million the University of Utah hopes 
to raise from industry. 
Because of the potential application of the Utah results to energy production, 
thousands of scientists around the world put aside research projects and began 
trying to replicate the fusion results -- usually basing their experiments on 
newspaper descriptions of the fusion cell. 
Within three weeks, reports of partial confirmation began to appear in the 
United States and around the world, usually from small research groups lacking 
access to sophisticated analytical tools. Several of the groups withdrew their 
claims, citing experimental errors. 
Such initial confirmation is common, said physicist Douglas Morrison of the 
European Center for Nuclear Research. Many researchers want to "get on the 
bandwagon," he said, and thus make premature claims of success. 
Find No Evidence 
Last week, at a meeting of physicists in Baltimore, spokesmen for the 11 U.S. 
Department of Energy research laboratories, as well as comparable facilities in 
Canada and England, reported that they could find no evidence for fusion or for 
excess heat production. 
Many others found experimental errors in Pons' and Fleischmann's data, 
concluding that the Utah researchers' calculations of the energy produced in 
the cell were probably based on faulty assumptions. In short, said Caltech 
chemist Nathan Lewis, "We find no evidence for anything other than conventional 
chemistry." 
Monday night, for the first time, the Utah researchers conceded that they too 
had been troubled by some of the measurements. But, even then, they continued 
to stick by their claim to have produced excess heat. 
