THE BUTCHER: NO NEED TO WASH MEATS FRESH FROM THE LOCAL STORE 
Among the many letters we've received from readers is one that reads: "I wash 
everything my family and I eat, including meat, and I have been chided on this 
by friends and family as being finicky. 
"I do not like the bone chips that come from the sawing of meat and that is 
just one of the reasons I wash it. I am also concerned about additives used to 
retain color and retard spoilage. Am I being too finicky? Am I losing some 
valuable nutrition? Does this harm the meat in any other way?" 
With the exception of poultry, there is no need to wash fresh meat. Doing so 
does indeed cause the loss of water-soluble nutrients. To remove bone dust -- 
which should have been removed by the butcher -- it is better to scrape the 
meat with the back of a knife. 
Substance Abuse 
With regard to the use of "additives to retain color and retard spoilage," I 
seriously doubt that any butcher uses any such substances. We have very good 
labeling laws in this country, and I feel quite safe in saying that no butcher 
in his right mind would risk the results of being caught. 
A reader from Virginia writes: "When we were in Texas recently, we bought some 
arm steaks. We have never heard of that cut before. It was good, all of those 
who tasted it agreed, and we wondered why we had never heard of arm steaks 
before." 
Butchers in various parts of the country cut meat differently. Traditionally, 
in the eastern part of America, beef was cut with the bone left in. One of the 
cuts that resulted from cutting the shoulder or chuck section of the beef 
carcass with the bone in was the arm chuck pot roast -- a large cross-section 
of the shoulder where the front leg was attached. Because it contained several 
different muscles, some quite tough, the recommended cooking method was moist 
heat, i.e., pot roasting. 
In the western part of the United States, beef has almost always been 
muscle-boned; that is, each individual muscle removed from the carcass is sold 
separately as a roast, steak, stew, etc., depending on its degree of 
tenderness. The arm steak that you had in Texas was very likely cut from what 
is called the shoulder clod, which is the most tender muscle from the arm 
chuck. 
A Nomenclature Chart 
Yet another reader offers a suggestion that may help. "Of particular interest 
would be the descriptive nomenclature of various cuts of beef, veal, pork and 
lamb. Recipes are boundless, but most cookbooks don't do a very good job in 
this area, especially with all the various regional names. A composite chart 
identifying the animal, describing the cut and location, listing regional or 
other names and common methods of preparation (broil, grill, etc.) would be 
ideal. Does such a thing exist and if so, how can I get one?" 
The National Livestock and Meat Board used to have charts available for beef, 
lamb, pork and veal that were very helpful in showing where the various cuts 
came from on the carcass, which were tough, which were tender and so on. 
A reader in San Gabriel writes: "OK, you've answered the question of how fresh 
is fresh chicken. Now, please answer this, why do I see so many packages of 
fish and 'fresh' pork cuts labeled 'thawed; previously frozen'? Why in heaven's 
name don't they leave them frozen? When these packages are thawed, they get 
messy looking, all watery and leave me wondering if it is OK to freeze that 
item until I'm ready to use it." 
There are several reasons why markets thaw meat and fish that has been frozen. 
In my opinion there are no good reasons for doing so; no reasons that make any 
sense, but there are reasons. 
A Popular Perception 
Most people perceive frozen as not fresh and will pass up fish in the frozen 
food case in favor of thawed, previously frozen fish in the fresh fish counter. 
It doesn't make any sense to me, but that's the way it is. People tend not to 
buy frozen fish and meat when the unfrozen counterpart is available. 
Another reason, I think, is that people don't realize that you can start the 
cooking process from the frozen state. Most people shop one meal at a time and 
they think if they buy something frozen, it's going to need thawing before they 
can cook it. Few realize that meat and fish can go directly from the freezer to 
the skillet or oven without being thawed. 
When the word gets out, you'll likely see much more meat and fish sold frozen 
solid. It's often fresher that way. 
