LOCAL ELECTION; 
LONG BEACH COUNCIL; 
NOW, DRUMMOND IS ACCUSED OF CONFLICTS 
City Council candidate James Serles tried last week to turn the tables on his 
3rd District opponent, Doug Drummond, accusing Drummond of aligning himself 
with wealthy development interests. 
Drummond, a dark-horse candidate greatly outspent by Serles in the primary, 
forced Serles into the June 5 runoff largely on the strength of 
conflict-of-interest allegations linking Serles' votes as a planning 
commissioner with developer contributions. 
Now Serles, a dentist who has twice before sought the 3rd District seat, is 
complaining that Drummond's political consultant, Tim Carey, heads a 
pro-development political action committee funded by wealthy business and 
development interests. 
Serles also said the developers' committee, the Southern California Caucus, has 
targeted him for defeat because he supports developer fees and has voted to 
lower the density of the city's residential areas. 
"Drummond should be asked to explain why he has decided to seek an alliance 
with the executive director of the largest pro-development PAC in Southern 
California," Serles said in a prepared statement, later adding: "It just 
doesn't make sense that Mr. Carey is handling Mr. Drummond's campaign and is 
the key player in the Southern California Caucus." 
Both Drummond and Carey denied that the caucus was in any way involved in the 
race for the 3rd District seat, left open by Jan Hall's decision not to run for 
reelection. 
"I don't know anything about it. What is the Southern California Caucus?" asked 
Drummond, a retired police commander. "I have never received any outside 
support in the form of mailers, supplies, materials, money or anything that is 
not in my campaign statement." 
Drummond said he hired Carey to design his campaign mailers after deciding that 
he could use professional help with that task. "I'm upset that I have a guy who 
raised $175,000, and he's pointing to me and saying I'm running some kind of 
wham-bam Madison Avenue campaign," Drummond continued. "I wish someone would 
come in and point out where these Madison Avenue folks are.' 
Carey said it is absurd to conclude that just because he was executive director 
of the caucus, the caucus was working to elect Drummond. "The caucus is not 
involved in that election," Carey said. "We were not involved in the primary, 
and we have not made any effort to be involved in the general. Nor are our 
members." 
Carey described his mailer work for Drummond as a free-lance job he is doing 
through his small political consulting firm, Carey &amp; Associates of Los 
Angeles. 
Founded three years ago with the support of Los Angeles County Supervisor Pete 
Schabarum, the caucus has poured money into the campaigns of pro-development 
candidates throughout Southern California. Rather than contributing directly to 
the candidates or working with them, the caucus mounts independent campaigns on 
their behalf and in that way escapes spending limits. 
Serles, asserting that Drummond's mailers fit the pattern of hit pieces written 
by the caucus in other local races, also pointed out that Drummond's campaign 
has accepted a $1,000 donation from Mola Development Co. of Orange County, 
which has also contributed to the caucus. 
Drummond said Mola gave money to his campaign because he is a friend of one of 
the company's executives, Peter von Elten, who is running for the Assembly. 
Drummond added that he is not supporting Von Elten or any other candidate in 
that race. 
During the primary, Drummond accused Serles of violating the state Political 
Reform Act by accepting hundreds of dollars in campaign contributions from four 
developers and businessmen, then voting for projects they brought before the 
Planning Commission. 
The Long Beach city prosecutor later cleared Serles of wrongdoing, saying that 
although two of those votes were improper, they were not made with criminal 
intent. 
Serles has said the votes, which remain under investigation by the state Fair 
Political Practices Commission, were oversights. He has since sued Drummond, 
asserting that Drummond's mailers about the votes were libelous. 
