BUSH HAS CAUGHT UP TO THE MOUNTEBANK 
George Bush has blown the whistle on the country's long-building fiscal crisis, 
agreeing to Capitol Hill budget talks "with no preconditions." After 10 years 
of credit-card Pentagon spending, Barnum &amp; Bailey tax breaks and 
trillion-dollar check-kiting, America is faced with fiscal reality. Ronald 
Reagan was lucky; George Bush is getting to pay the piper. 
Why, after riding piggyback on the bucking Reagan mustang the last decade, is 
George Bush finally jumping off? 
The best answer might be that he isn't Ronald Reagan. Beneath the occasional 
giddiness, beneath the heel-clicking loyalty to "supply-side" economics, 
beneath the "read my lips" pretension, is a man of gut-level sanity. Bush likes 
being President. He's not about to have his Administration destroyed by a 
fiscal policy that he was the first to nail as "voodoo economics." 
In asking Democratic leaders to negotiate a budget deal, President Bush is back 
to his political starting point. Ten years ago, he said the country couldn't 
afford to tax like Coolidge and spend like Rockefeller. It was Reagan who said 
that those big tax cuts would bring in more money than the government would 
know what to do with, that those hefty federal deficits would ultimately take 
care of themselves. 
A decade later, Reagan is back in California and Bush is back to his more 
accustomed role as a no-frills fiscal conservative. When you think about it, 
Bush has spent the last 10 years of his life walking in the trail of that 
charming old mountebank Ronald Reagan. Each had his own, differing plans for 
the presidency back then. Bush offered the conventional treatments -- less 
government spending, better management, fiscal prudence. 
The other fellow had a zippier economic medicine to sell. Buy a bottle of his 
medicine, fellow, and you get a 30%, wallet-stuffing tax cut. Your country got 
enough missiles and manpower to scare the ayatollah all the way back to Paris. 
And none of it would cost you a plugged nickel. 
America loved the mountebank. His stories were as good as Lincoln's. His jokes 
were the best since Jack Kennedy's. His tricks seemed downright Houdinilike . . 
. for a while. 
This week, George Bush finally caught up to the mountebank, and his message to 
the country could not have been clearer. Ronald Reagan may have enjoyed playing 
Coolidge, but this President has no intention of playing Hoover. 
