FUEL LEAK PROMPTS NASA TO SCRUB LAUNCH OF SHUTTLE; 
SPACE: ENGINEERS NOTICE THE PROBLEM WHEN THEY BEGIN PUMPING LIQUID HYDROGEN 
INTO COLUMBIA. A NEW LIFTOFF TIME COULD BE ANNOUNCED TODAY. 
The launch of the space shuttle Columbia was scrubbed Tuesday when liquid 
hydrogen began leaking into the craft's engine compartment shortly after 
engineers started pumping the highly explosive fuel into the shuttle's main 
tank in preparation for a night launch. 
The launch, already two weeks behind schedule, was postponed for at least 24 
hours, but it probably will be delayed longer than that because it could take 
some time for engineers to determine the cause of the leakage, officials said. 
Although liquid hydrogen is explosive when it comes into contact with liquid 
oxygen -- the other component in the shuttle's main fuel system -- engineers 
insisted Tuesday that the vehicle was not in danger of exploding because the 
problem was detected when only a trace amount of vapor was found in the engine 
compartment. 
"They shut it down to be safe," said Patricia Phillips, a spokeswoman for the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. "You simply cannot have excess 
hydrogen in what amounts to a controlled explosion at liftoff." 
Engineers were to work through the night to try to determine the nature of the 
problem, and a new launch date was expected to be announced sometime today. 
The launch had been set for 9:38 p.m. PDT. The 10-day mission is the first to 
be devoted to a single scientific discipline. The crew had not boarded Columbia 
when the launch was scrubbed at 3:25 p.m. 
Manned by seven astronauts, the largest crew since the January, 1986, 
Challenger explosion, Columbia will be carrying the Astro observatory: three 
ultraviolet telescopes and one X-ray telescope that will photograph the 
universe at wavelengths normally obscured by the Earth's atmosphere. 
The astronauts will operate the four telescopes around the clock for nine days, 
and perhaps 10 if their maneuvering fuel holds out, before packing them up and 
bringing them home for reuse on a later shuttle mission. 
Over the course of their mission, the astronauts are scheduled to make as many 
as 300 separate observations of objects ranging from Comet Austin, which last 
week made its closest approach to Earth, to quasars at the edge of the universe 
-- and all at wavelengths that, because they are absorbed by the atmosphere, 
have rarely been studied by astronomers in the past. 
On this fourth shuttle mission of 1990 and the 36th overall, the astronauts 
also will conduct an astronomy lesson from space for high school students, and 
payload specialist Ronald A. Parise will use a ham radio to attempt to make 
contact with cosmonauts aboard the Soviet space station Mir. 
The two spacecraft will have to be within 2,400 miles of each other for Parise 
to make contact. If the attempt is successful, it will mark the first time that 
astronauts and cosmonauts have had a direct radio link. In the historic 1975 
Apollo-Soyuz linkup, all communications between the two craft were handled 
through ground communications centers. 
Columbia commander Vance D. Brand, who was a crew member on that linkup, has 
been brushing up on his Russian for the occasion. 
Brand, 58, a former aviator in the Marine Corps, will be making his fourth 
space flight. In addition to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, he was commander of the 
fifth shuttle mission in 1982, which was the first to launch a commercial 
satellite, and commander of a 1984 mission. 
Pilot Guy S. Gardner, 42, is an Air Force officer who flew 177 combat missions 
in Southeast Asia in 1972 before becoming a test pilot instructor. This will be 
his second shuttle flight; he was pilot of a Defense Department mission in 
December, 1988. 
Mission specialist John M. (Mike) Lounge, 43, is chief of the Space Station 
Support Office, which is designing the Freedom space station. He will be making 
his third shuttle flight. He was a mission specialist on an August, 1985, 
flight in which an Australian communications satellite was launched and an 
American satellite repaired. 
The remaining four crew members all have doctorates in astronomy or 
astrophysics. 
Mission specialist Jeffrey Hoffman, 45, will be making his second flight. In 
April, 1985, he made the first unscheduled spacewalk in an unsuccessful attempt 
to rescue the malfunctioning Syncom IV-3 communications satellite. 
Parker, 53, also will be making his second flight. A Caltech graduate, he 
worked on the first Spacelab mission in November, 1983. 
Parise, 38, and Samuel T. Durrance, 46, will be the first non-astronauts to fly 
on the shuttle since the Challenger accident. Parise is an employee of Computer 
Sciences Corp. of Silver Spring, Md. Durrance is a faculty member at Johns 
Hopkins University in Baltimore. 
Maugh reported from Kennedy Space Center and Dye from Los Angeles. 
