WARSAW PACT CALLED A THREAT NO LONGER; 
MILITARY: NATO'S SENIOR GENERAL COMMENTS AS DEFENSE MINISTERS CALL FOR A REVIEW 
OF ALLIANCE STRATEGIES. 
The senior general in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization officially 
declared here Tuesday that a military threat from the Warsaw Pact nations "no 
longer exists." 
The statement by Norwegian four-star Gen. Vigleik Eide, chairman of NATO's 
military committee, marked the first time a high-ranking general has formally 
repudiated the threat from the seven-nation former Communist alliance. 
Eide's declaration came during a two-day meeting of NATO's defense ministers at 
which they followed President Bush's lead in calling for a full-scale review of 
the military and political strategies of the Western alliance. 
One major proposal in any new strategy, strongly endorsed by U.S. Defense 
Secretary Dick Cheney, is creation of a multinational force, particularly among 
the troops based in West Germany. In a communique to be issued at the end of 
the meeting today, the defense ministers will recommend a detailed study on how 
such forces could take over missions now assigned to single-nation units. 
Cheney said that, if arms control talks lead to lower levels of troops in 
Europe and reduced East-West tensions, "we can contemplate new ways of doing 
business." 
However, British Defense Secretary Tom King warned that Soviet "foot-dragging" 
could preclude agreement this year on a treaty limiting conventional forces in 
Europe. NATO members had high hopes for such a treaty, and the United States 
and Britain have indicated that without it, there would be no point in holding 
a summit meeting of the 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in 
Europe, planned for this fall. 
"We're not happy about it; we want to get on with it," King said, referring to 
the talks. 
Cheney said that the delay on cuts in conventional forces is merely a 
"temporary pause," while the Soviet Union works out the pace of troop 
withdrawals from the territories of its former allies in Hungary, 
Czechoslovakia and East Germany. 
He and NATO leaders see the proposed multinational units as a device to 
interweave the troops of a newly united Germany with other NATO units, as well 
as a way of easing German resentment over the stationing of large numbers of 
foreign troops in the reunited country. 
"NATO has to do something or risk being seen as hopelessly anachronistic," 
explained a senior official. "It's an effort to maintain the political 
relevance of our integrated defense." 
Under the plan, a multinational force could also operate outside NATO territory 
in case of emergencies, with German troops as full partners. 
NATO officials described the multinational force as one in which an army corps, 
now consisting of three or four divisions from one nation, could be composed of 
one division each from the United States, Germany and Britain. 
A German might command one corps with an American deputy, while a British 
general could be in charge of another with a German second in command. 
Ideally, the principle would be extended downward to smaller units, according 
to officials here. 
A German Defense Ministry spokesman said that creation of the multinational 
units could "provide a new form of NATO solidarity" while increasing the 
flexibility and mobility of the smaller forces stationed along the NATO 
borders. 
While the plan has its supporters, other officials pointed out that in 40 years 
of existence, NATO has not been able to fully integrate the communications, 
logistics and weapons systems of its 16 members. 
One senior U.S. military officer observed that such units would be less 
effective militarily than the single-nation units in the field today and that 
they potentially would face a highly standardized and centrally directed Soviet 
army. 
The strategy review that is expected to be approved today will examine such 
issues. 
At one level, the review will be designed to provide a role for NATO in the 
post-Warsaw Pact era that Gen. Eide was talking about, in a Europe where broad 
reductions in conventional arms have already been implemented and Soviet troops 
have moved out of territories of its former satellites. It would involve 
reduced force structures in Europe, of which the multinational force could be 
an integral part. 
These concepts mean re-examining basic NATO defense doctrines, such as 
"flexible response" -- the mix of conventional and nuclear deterrents -- and 
forward defense, the basing of allied troops in West Germany. 
In his presentation to the defense ministers, Eide warned that the Soviet 
military is "continuously modernizing and updating" a wide range of forces, 
including the navy. But his dismissal of the threat from the combined Warsaw 
Pact countries reflected the informed view that the former Communist alliance 
is in a state of collapse, even if not yet defunct. 
The NATO foreign ministers did not discuss in any detail Tuesday what could 
well be the next controversial weapon in Europe: the air-to-surface nuclear 
missile, which could be launched from aircraft based in Britain, the Low 
Countries and West Germany. 
This weapon is expected to be promoted by the United States as it withdraws its 
nuclear artillery and bombs from West Germany, but officials say it will also 
generate controversy in West Germany, where opinion polls show an increasing 
resistance to atomic weapons. 
In another key decision reflecting the declining threat from the Warsaw Pact, 
NATO sources indicated that the ministers have effectively dropped the 
alliance's policy of an annual 3% growth in defense budgets after inflation. 
The goal was not achieved by all NATO members anyway. 
"The 3% formula will be quietly buried," one defense official commented. 
