CHENEY URGES FLEXIBILITY IN CONFRONTING SOVIET MOVES 
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, softening his views on Soviet policy, Monday 
hailed several "encouraging" moves by the Soviets and declared that the United 
States should take advantage of any new opportunities they offer to lessen the 
threat of war. 
In a cautiously optimistic view of Soviet policy, Cheney, the Bush 
Administration's foremost hard-liner, suggested there may be emerging "a new 
era of international relations" and said the United States must be flexible 
enough to deal with the changing circumstances. 
He also said he is encouraged by what has developed in the U.S.-Soviet talks on 
reducing conventional forces in Europe, "and we may reach an agreement" on 
significant reductions. 
Although tempered with caution, the overall view of U.S.-Soviet policy, voiced 
during a luncheon interview with reporters, was unusually optimistic for 
Cheney. He recently upset White House and State Department officials by 
straying from Administration policy and predicting that Soviet leader Mikhail 
S. Gorbachev would fail in his reform efforts and be replaced by a leader more 
hostile to the West. The view subsequently was repudiated by both President 
Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III. 
Trying to be Careful 
Declaring he was "trying to be very careful" in answering reporters' questions, 
Cheney said: 
"Gorbachev's stated intentions of reducing the defense budget and pulling 
troops out of Eastern Europe and the fact that they've taken the troops out of 
Afghanistan -- all of these obviously are encouraging, and I think in the West 
we obviously need to do everything we can to take advantage of the current 
circumstances to reduce the overall threat of war and to enhance international 
stability and enter into arms control agreements if they make sense. . . . " 
However, Cheney said there is "enough uncertainty" about what will happen in 
the Soviet Union that U.S. decisions now should not be based "upon the hope 
that these changes will be fundamental and irreversible, that we can afford to 
significantly reduce our own military commitments." 
He said "the jury is still out" on whether the Soviets will live up to 
Gorbachev's promises of unilateral reduction of Soviet military forces in 
Eastern Europe. The first reductions -- withdrawals of 10,000 men and 1,000 
tanks from East Germany -- were scheduled to begin last Thursday. 
In terms of strategic systems or long-range missiles, Cheney said there has 
been no letup in the modernization or deployment of Soviet SS-24 and SS-25 
missiles. 
"I could not at this point," said Cheney, "sit down and say to the President, 
'Mr. President, here's all the evidence that shows that, in fact, the Soviets 
are going to implement all the good things that Gorbachev has said he wants to 
do.' But, on the other hand, it's a big cumbersome system and you would expect 
that it will take time before some of that stuff can be accomplished." 
Both Cheney and a State Department official also rebuked Soviet Foreign 
Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze on Monday for threatening to break terms of the 
Intermediate Nuclear Forces Treaty or take a rearmament step if the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization goes through with its plan to modernize its 
short-range nuclear missiles based in Europe. 
Cheney denounced the threat as an attempt to "create turmoil" within NATO only 
two weeks before its summit meeting in Brussels from May 29-30. 
Shevardnadze's comments followed a pledge by Gorbachev, during talks in Moscow 
with Baker last week, to reduce the number of its short-range missiles in 
Europe by removing 500 warheads. Both Soviet moves were designed to increase 
the pressure on Western Europe to repudiate a call by the United States and 
Britain to modernize nuclear missiles instead of beginning new negotiations 
with Moscow to reduce short-range nuclear missiles. 
State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said at a news briefing: "We think 
Shevardnadze's remarks are an outlandish statement. One day the Soviets 
announce small unilateral reductions, the next day they're talking about 
breaking recently concluded treaties." 
Baker had called Gorbachev's pledge to remove the warheads "a small step, a 
good step." But Cheney, referring to the pledge as "Gorbachev's latest ploy," 
said the Soviet leader has "got so many rat holes over there in Eastern Europe 
that 500 is a pittance. He's still got an overwhelming preponderance in sheer 
numbers with respect to short-range nuclear forces." 
