THE NEW YORK COMMODITIES PROBE; 
SILVER FUTURES SCANDAL WAS CFTC'S BIGGEST CASE 
The commodities trading raid Thursday was the most excitement to hit the New 
York Commodities Exchange since the Hunt brothers of Dallas allegedly schemed 
to corner the silver market in 1979-80 in a wild episode that led to the crash 
of silver prices. 
It was the biggest market-manipulation case ever filed by the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission, the federal body behind Thursday's raids. The CFTC is still 
pressing a complaint against Nelson Bunker Hunt and W. Herbert Hunt nine years 
later. 
The agency alleged that the two flamboyant scions of Texas oil wildcatter H. L. 
Hunt maintained bullion and futures positions that played a significant role in 
driving up the price of silver before the collapse. 
While amassing 63 million ounces of silver bullion, it said, they established 
huge long positions in silver futures contracts. Such contracts are agreements 
to buy the metal at a later date. 
The Hunts denied any illegality. Shortly after the crash, testifying before 
Senate and House committees, they accused the commodity exchanges of causing 
the plunge in silver prices to less than $11 an ounce from more than $50. 
However, in a major verdict last summer, a jury found that the two, and their 
brother Lamar, had illegally tried to corner the silver market. 
Several Legal Delays 
If the CFTC prevails in its own administrative complaint, filed Feb. 28, 1985, 
the two Hunts and several co-defendants could be barred from commodities 
trading and fined $100,000 for each trading violation. 
However, the CFTC case has been stalled by legal delays. The most recent was a 
stay issued last December by the federal bankruptcy judge in Dallas who 
presides over the Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings filed by the two brothers. 
The Hunts, who lost an estimated $1 billion of their fortune in the 1980 silver 
market crash, sought protection of the bankruptcy court last September to avoid 
having to post a $225-million bond required for appealing a federal damage 
award against them a month earlier. 
The commission is appealing the judge's ruling, contending it exceeded the 
court's authority. 
Meanwhile, the tangle of damage suits stemming from investor losses in the 
silver market collapse have yielded some major results. 
The biggest development was the verdict last August by a New York jury, which 
found that the Hunts violated civil fraud, commodities and antitrust laws. They 
also found that Nelson, 62, and W. Herbert, 59, violated civil racketeering 
laws. Only Lamar, 56, who owns the Kansas City Chiefs football team, was 
cleared of racketeering allegations. 
That jury ordered the three brothers to pay more than $130 million in damages 
to Minpeco SA, a commodities company owned by the government of Peru. 
IRS Files Claims 
Lamar Hunt later agreed to pay $17 million to Minpeco, and on April 14 Minpeco 
and two other leading creditors of Nelson and W. Herbert Hunt filed a 
reorganization plan in which the personal assets of the two would be liquidated 
to repay more than $2 billion in debts. 
Joining Minpeco in presenting the plan to bankruptcy court were the Internal 
Revenue Service, which claims $1 billion in back taxes from the two Hunts, and 
Hanover Trust Co. The Hunts filed their own reorganization plan a week earlier. 
Separately, in a settlement reached just a month ago, several brokerage houses 
agreed to pay about $45 million to settle two class-action suits filed in 1981 
and 1982 in behalf of individuals who invested during the silver speculation 
that preceded the 1980 crash. 
At the same time, defendant Lamar Hunt agreed to pay another $2.75 million to 
the settlement fund. Earlier, another defendant, Banque Populaire Suisse, 
agreed to pay $9.5 million in the case. 
