TRANSIENT ARRESTED IN FIRE AT PAN PACIFIC 
A 42-year-old transient has been arrested as a suspect in connection with an 
arson fire that destroyed Los Angeles' historic Pan Pacific Auditorium a week 
ago, investigators announced Tuesday. 
At a news conference, Fire Chief Donald Manning said the suspect, identified as 
Mark Kamansky, was arrested Sunday afternoon in a park next to the charred 
ruins of the auditorium after he told investigators that he had entered the 
shuttered building on several occasions and had set "more than one fire" 
inside. 
Although authorities did not say that they were actively seeking further 
suspects, Battalion Chief Henry Ed Allen acknowledged that "we're looking for 
acquaintances." 
Motive Is Unclear 
"He did confess that he'd set more than one fire in the structure," Manning 
said. "He did not give us a motive and we have not developed one for him yet." 
Manning, who said that the suspect "lived in an automobile," emphasized that 
"we have quite a bit of work ahead of us before we can actually file on this 
case." 
Los Angeles County Parks Police Capt. Manuel Cisneros said Kamansky -- who told 
officers that he was living in Pan Pacific Park -- was detained Sunday by a 
parks officer until arson investigators arrived. 
Under law, investigators have 48 hours to file charges against Kamansky, who is 
being held in lieu of $10,000 bail. If charges are not filed within that 
period, he would have to be released, Manning said. 
"The suspect is due out at 4 p.m. (today)," said Los Angeles County Deputy 
Dist. Atty. Robert Savitt. "That means they have until then to put together all 
their information, present it to me, and I will make a decision one way or the 
other." 
But in a brief statement at the news conference, an optimistic Mayor Tom 
Bradley said that authorities had made "a good arrest and we're looking forward 
to completion of the investigation." 
Fire investigators said they are not concerned that the circumstances of the 
arrest are similar to an embarrassing arrest made in the wake of the 1986 fire 
that destroyed the Los Angeles Central Library. 
Exaggerated Confession 
In that case, a 28-year-old Hollywood man was arrested after making statements 
to acquaintances and investigators that amounted to a confession. After his 
arrest, the suspect insisted his remarks had been exaggerations, and his 
attorney insisted that the man was the type of person who liked to "color 
events." After several days, the district attorney's office decided not to file 
charges. 
In the days after the Pan Pacific fire, arson investigators had alerted county 
parks officers to be on the lookout for transients matching descriptions 
provided by witnesses at the fire scene. Cisneros said that Parks Officer Keith 
Slack was patrolling the north end of the park at 3:30 p.m. Sunday when a 
"patron told Slack that a male transient was in the playground area exposing 
himself." 
In a field interview with Slack, Kamansky -- who fit the description provided 
by witnesses -- said that he "lived in the park" and that "he was in the 
building when the fire started," Cisneros said. Slack called arson 
investigators, Cisneros added, "who told him to detain the suspect at the 
scene." 
When an arson team arrived a few minutes later, Kamansky told them that "a 
white male and female were inside the building with him and that the three of 
them started the fires," Cisneros said. Kamansky then was booked, Manning said. 
Spectacular Blaze 
The fire broke out in the southwest corner of the vacant entertainment center 
shortly after 7 p.m. last Wednesday. Flames from the building at 7600 Beverly 
Blvd. shot 200 feet into air, creating a tremendous traffic jam. 
Investigators earlier ruled out as a suspect a man who appeared to have 
suffered slight burns and smoke inhalation from the fire and then disappeared 
into the crowd before he could receive treatment. 
Three days after the fire, Mattie, a specially trained Labrador retriever, 
sniffed out the presence of a flammable liquid on the floor of the building. 
Mattie's handler, a Connecticut State Police trooper, said she is one of five 
such dogs working with fire departments in the United States. 
Times staff writer Bob Baker contributed to this story. 
