IMPROVING SKILLS WITH REAL BOOKS; 
THE WORDS ON THE PAGE, THE WORLD IN YOUR HANDS BOOKS ONE, TWO, THREE EDITED BY 
CATHERINE LIPKIN AND VIRGINIA SOLOTAROFF (HARPER &amp; ROW: $14.95, CLOTH; 
$6.95, PAPER; BOOK ONE: 114 PP.; BOOK TWO: 161 PP.; BOOK THREE: 184 PP.) 
Steve was in his early 50s. He had come to the library seeking help with 
reading. His 4-year-old son asked him to read stories and he couldn't. Steve 
said he had "screwed up" with his children from his first marriage -- children 
all grown now -- and he couldn't bluff his way along with this little boy. 
After a few years with a tutor, a variety of "fill-in-the-blank" workbooks, 
phonics drills and a string of "high-low" books with juvenile covers, Steve 
grew frustrated. One evening in the library, he said in disgust, "I want to 
read a real book!" Steve's strong determination to improve his skills was 
hampered by a scarcity of appropriate literature. 
To help fill this void for the thousands of new adult readers like Steve, 
editors Catherine Lipkin and Virginia Solotaroff have developed a new literary 
series, "The Words on the Page, the World in Your Hands." The series is three 
volumes of fiction, poetry and memoirs by an impressive list of 76 contemporary 
writers, including Shirley Kaufman, Alice Walker, A. R. Ammons, Peter Meinke, 
Karl Shapiro, Thomas Disch and Joyce Carol Oates. 
Lipkin and Solotaroff, both actively involved in adult literacy programs in New 
York, solicited and received overwhelming support of hundreds of published 
writers. The contributions are not "written down" to readers, but rather 
"written to them." Some are selected excerpts from published works, others are 
original, and some are carefully adapted by their authors, "without sacrificing 
flavor, point or power." 
The series, however, isn't exclusively for adults learning to read. It also is 
an invitation to another segment of the population whose numbers are countless 
-- the aliterates: those who know how to read, are well-educated, and whose 
priorities have become other than reading for pleasure. This anthology awakens, 
challenges and enlightens imagination. I read through each volume with a 
swelling sense of addiction. I had an uncontrollable urge to browse in the book 
store and at the library, to dust off my own neglected collection at home, and 
to share rhyme and prose with anyone who willingly listened. 
The editors describe available adult-literacy materials as having been written 
originally for children or developed by educators "assuming adults learn much 
as children do, emphasize phonics and word recognition, often at the expense of 
meaningful content." 
Lipkin and Solotaroff believe literacy students should have texts that "engage 
their adult imaginations and offer them opportunities to experience their 
surroundings in new ways. 
While savoring each selection in each volume of "Words on the Page," I was 
reminded that my love of reading isn't for consonants and vowels or proper 
spelling. It is a love for the words and the images and feelings they evoke 
inside of me. Perhaps this is what being literate means. 
It is the anxiety shared with Dick Gregory in "Freedom March," adapted from his 
book, "Nigger," and included in Book One, as he is confronted by police in 
Greenwood, Miss., during a civil-rights march in 1962. 
It is the heart swelling with emotion in Tess Gallagher's recollections of her 
longshoreman father, "My Father's Love Letters," adapted from her article, "In 
Praise of What Persists": "My father's love letters were to be the only record 
that my parents had ever loved each other, for they never showed affection for 
one another in front of us." 
In Alfred Corn's "Learning the Words," the reader lives the words he has 
learned. Literacy can provide a new reality: 
 "I spelled the word for dove: 
 One landed on the ground 
 I asked the spelling of love, 
 And love is what I found." 
While discussing the magic and mystery of reading an essay sharing the 
anthology's title, "The Words on the Page, the Worlds in Your Hands," novelist 
Thomas M. Disch confides that he doesn't have a "clear idea what's going on in 
my head" when reading a novel. Disch doesn't explain how writing works to turn 
the words on the page into a dream "as real as your own life." He only 
reassures the reader "that it happens all the time." 
Disch encourages new readers and reminds rusty ones to "just look around" -- 
and to read. 
