THE MAN WHO SENT SIGNALS TO SATAN; 
THE RUSHDIE AFFAIR THE NOVEL, THE AYATOLLAH AND THE WEST BY DANIEL PIPES (BIRCH 
LANE PRESS: $18.95; 224 PP.) 
For more than a year now a tragedy has been writing itself with the whole world 
as its stage. At the center of the plot is a man whose death has been ordered 
by a religious patriarch. Scores of people have taken a ritual oath to kill the 
man, when and if he emerges from hiding. The man's sin: writing a novel that 
challenges the basic tenets of one of the world's major religions. 
The hunted man is, of course, Salman Rushdie, the British author of 
Indian-Muslim origin, whose novel, "The Satanic Verses," is, arguably, the most 
controversial book since the appearance of the Holy Koran 14 centuries ago. 
Accused of insulting the Prophet Muhammad and doubting the divine origin of the 
Koran, Rushdie was formally sentenced to death on Feb. 14, 1989, in a fatwa 
(edict) issued by Iran's "Supreme Guide," Ayatollah Khomeini. 
"The Satanic Verses" has been banned and burned in nearly 100 nations while it 
has topped the best-seller lists in a handful of Western countries. 
The cataclysmic events set in motion by the publication of Rushdie's rather 
complex novel provide the theme of Daniel Pipes' fascinating new essay, "The 
Rushdie Affair: The Novel, the Ayatollah and the West." 
Pipes, author of five books on the Middle East, begins his study by drawing the 
outer contours of the drama: So far more than 20 people have been killed in 
anti-Rushdie riots. Hundreds more have been injured. Relations between several 
states have been affected, and billions of dollars worth of trade has been 
lost. The process of freeing hostages and prisons in the Middle East has been 
delayed. The threat of censorship and self-censorship has hit at the heart of 
Western belief in freedom of expression. Finally, a clash of civilizations, 
East versus West and Muslim versus Judeo-Christian, has assumed an intensity 
virtually unknown since medieval times. 
Pipes might have added to his inventory another important consequence of the 
controversy: the civil war of ideas that has been unleashed within Islam 
itself. 
Pipes' book is one of nearly a dozen published by Western and Muslim scholars 
on the subject in recent months. It merits special attention for at least two 
reasons. First, this is a highly enjoyable book to read, a work of impeccable 
scholarship that can be read like a thriller. Second, Pipes does not seek 
refuge in spineless excuses of scholarly objectivity in order to hide his own 
views. We know right from the start that he is an opponent of Islamic 
fundamentalism and a supporter of Western-style human rights. He also makes it 
clear that he does not like Rushdie's politics or, rather, what might have been 
Rushdie's politics when he wrote "The Satanic Verses." 
No serious study of civilization's confrontations over basic values can be 
written from a totally neutral point of view. Even choosing a camera angle 
becomes a statement of principle. 
Pipes does not try to understand "the other side" in a condescending way with 
the aim of justifying every excess, every enormity, in the name of real or 
imagined grievances of Islam against Western colonialism and imperialism. That 
Britain once interfered in Persian politics, for example, is no justification 
for exporting terrorism to Britain today. 
Having made his own position clear, Pipes uses every ounce of information 
available on the subject to offer a complete picture of a complex and 
passionate debate about the basic values of existence. So careful is he to give 
everyone, especially his designated betes noires, a fair hearing that he offers 
the most painstakingly detailed account of Khomeini's stance that this reviewer 
has seen even in the official literature from Tehran. 
Pipes' essay is divided into two parts. The first part studies two texts: the 
Rushdie novel and the Khomeini fatwa. In the section on "The Satanic Verses," 
Pipes dispels many of the misconceptions that had crept into the media's 
account of the novel. He also draws attention to the little-known fact that 
Rushdie's novel includes a savage satire on Khomeini himself. 
Part II is devoted to the responses provoked by the clash of the two texts. It 
is here that the international aspects of the "affair" and the crucial issue of 
freedom of expression as a global right are analyzed against a background of 
dramatic events. 
Khomeini and Rushdie, as Pipes shows, began as potential political allies, 
united by their intense hatred of the West and, most specifically, the United 
States. Khomeini has described the West as "hell on earth" and given the United 
States the sobriquet of "The Great Satan." Rushdie, an early supporter of 
Khomeini's revolution, was something of a hero in the ayatollah's republic 
until "The Satanic Verses" came out. 
Rushdie's first three novels were translated into Persian and published by the 
Ministry of Islamic Guidance in Tehran. His novel, "Shame," even won the 
Ayatollah Beheshti Literary Prize in 1986. 
Rushdie, however, proved to be too much of a free thinker for the ayatollah's 
taste. The ideal vision of fundamentalist Islam is a world in which zikr, the 
mere repetition of traditional incantations, has totally replaced fikr, 
critical thinking. "A man who thinks sends signals to Satan," says one 
much-quoted fundamentalist dictum. Virtually all writers and poets, Muslims 
included, have at one time or another been accused of "sending signals to 
Satan" by trying to see a different image of things from the one reflected by 
Islamic fundamentalism, the Islam of fear. 
Even Ayatollah Khomeini himself was for a time, in the 1940s, suspected of 
apostasy by those more zealous than himself simply because he had introduced a 
philosophy course in the holy city of Qom. 
The tragic irony of Rushdie's situation is that he knows that only the West can 
offer him a measure of safety and security against scores of zealots who dream 
of murdering him. Pipes has a bit of fun on this score -- the only time his 
excellent book falls to the level of a polemical pamphlet. 
Pipes describes Rushdie as an "immature and spoiled intellectual" who 
"criticizes and makes fun of nearly everything. One book attacks the Gandhis 
and modern India, another reviles the leadership in Pakistan, a third takes on 
American foreign policy, the fourth one blasts fundamentalist Islam and 
Britain." 
Pipes then goes on to offer an exhaustive list of Rushdie's sorties of hate 
against the West. But those who read "The Satanic Verses" as a work of 
literature know that Rushdie's politics amount to no more than irritating 
chaff. 
In any case, a year of living with the danger of death has modified Rushdie's 
excessive political views. But his latest pronouncements simply came too late 
to be included in Pipes' book. Rushdie has expressed gratitude to the 
government of "Maggie-the-Bitch" Thatcher for having saved his life. The recent 
collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the defeat of the Sandinistas in 
Nicaragua also have tempered his naive, leftist illusions. 
Was Khomeini's decision to issue the fatwa based on political calculation or 
the result of purely religious reflection? Pipes raises the subject and studies 
the many different views expressed on the subject. 
The fact is that for Khomeini there was no distinction between the sacred and 
the profane. He used religion in the service of political aims and, as Pipes 
brilliantly shows, set the interests of his own government above the basic 
principles of Islam itself. 
Pipes offers a number of important conclusions that merit attention at all 
levels. He writes: "The 'Satanic Verses' controversy confirmed once again that 
appeasement does not pay, especially when dealing with a militant, dogmatic 
state such as Iran." 
More important, Pipes shows that Khomeini was, in the end, isolated even within 
Islam, although the vast majority of Muslims found "The Satanic Verses" 
offensive. Khomeini was part of Islam but was not all of Islam. 
Pipes ends on a note of hope: "For all the battering they have taken, liberal 
ideas remain alive in the Muslim world; not all is submerged under the darkness 
of fundamentalism." 
