DISSENTER ON 'STAR WARS' LEAVES LIVERMORE LAB 
A nuclear weapons scientist who publicly questioned the feasibility of a key 
part of the Star Wars program is leaving Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, where he once did battle with one of the legendary names in nuclear 
physics, Edward Teller. 
Roy Woodruff, 49, former director of Livermore's nuclear weapons program, 
announced Wednesday that he is moving to the Los Alamos National Laboratory in 
New Mexico, where he will become a senior adviser in the arms control and 
verification program. 
Woodruff stepped down as leader of Livermore's weapons program in 1985 after a 
bitter dispute with Teller -- "father of the H-bomb" -- and Teller's protege, 
Lowell Wood. He accused the two scientists of being "overly optimistic" and 
misleading then-President Reagan about the feasibility of using space-borne 
lasers to zap enemy missiles. 
After the dispute became public, Woodruff, a highly respected researcher who 
has spent 21 years at the laboratory, found himself left with little to do. 
On Wednesday, Woodruff acknowledged in a telephone interview that "of course 
(the dispute) had something to do" with his decision to switch to Livermore's 
rival institution at Los Alamos. Both laboratories are are managed by the 
University of California for the U.S. Department of Energy . 
"But I'm very happy with the decision," he said. "I respect the people at this 
lab but I think it's time to move on. I'm delighted with this opportunity. 
We're putting the controversy behind us." 
The move came as no surprise. Woodruff put his home up for sale in the San 
Francisco Bay Area community of Livermore a couple of years ago, explaining 
that he feared his position there might become "untenable." 
His fight with Teller, who now is an associate director emeritus at Livermore, 
grew out of a disagreement over the "Super Excalibur" project, an orbiting 
X-ray laser that -- theoretically -- would concentrate beams of light from a 
nuclear explosion so intensely that they would destroy missiles. 
Teller, a Reagan confidant, pushed the program in Washington, arguing that 
Excalibur could be a crucial part of a nuclear shield that would protect this 
nation from an intercontinental attack by the Soviet Union. Reagan bought the 
concept and the Strategic Defense Initiative, popularly known as "Star Wars," 
was born. 
But Woodruff thought Teller and others at Livermore had vastly oversold the 
program, and he said later he was denied the opportunity to make his views 
known to the President. The debate finally reached the public arena and 
Woodruff found himself criticized by everyone from the secretary of energy on 
down. 
He said he was given a routine job with little to do, and finally he filed a 
complaint with the University of California, charging that he was being 
punished for criticizing the laser program and Teller. The university upheld 
the complaint and ordered to lab to give him a better job. 
He became head of the lab's effort to develop techniques for verifying 
compliance with nuclear arms treaties. He said Wednesday he will continue that 
work in his new home in New Mexico. 
