CALIFORNIA ELECTIONS: THE DEBATES 
During Sunday's debate, Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp and former San Francisco 
Mayor Dianne Feinstein made points that were not fully explained and raised 
questions that went unanswered. The following is a discussion of those issues 
and an analysis of each by Times staff writer Daniel M. Weintraub: 
Issue: Feinstein criticized Van de Kamp for failing to prosecute leaders of the 
anti-abortion group Operation Rescue for violation of a court order. 
Analysis: The U.S. District Court in March, 1989, ordered members of Operation 
Rescue not to interfere with women seeking abortions. But 10 days later, the 
group's members barricaded a Los Angeles abortion clinic, and Police Chief 
Daryl F. Gates recommended that four Operation Rescue leaders be charged with 
felonies. Dist. Atty. Ira Reiner declined to prosecute and referred the matter 
to the city attorney for investigation of misdemeanor charges. Abortion rights 
groups asked Van de Kamp to take over the case but he declined and stood by 
Reiner's decision. 
Issue: Van de Kamp questioned Feinstein's feminist credentials, saying that 
while she was mayor of San Francisco, the deputy mayor and the directors of 
eight "major" departments were all men. 
Analysis: Van de Kamp's campaign said Monday that he was referring to the 
Police and Fire departments, the Airport Department, public health, public 
works, social services, the general hospital and the municipal bus service. 
Feinstein's campaign did not dispute his contention, but said she appointed the 
city's first female city attorney and first female treasurer. As for Van de 
Kamp's record as attorney general, his 19-member executive staff includes seven 
women. 
Issue: Feinstein charged that Van de Kamp, because he opposes capital 
punishment, would "commute every single case" of those sentenced to death. 
Analysis: Even if Van de Kamp wanted to commute every sentence, he almost 
certainly could not do so. The state Constitution prohibits the governor from 
commuting the sentences of twice-convicted felons except on the recommendation 
of a majority of the state Supreme Court. Most of the more than 275 inmates on 
California's Death Row have been convicted of more than one felony. The Supreme 
Court, dominated by appointments of conservative Gov. George Deukmejian, would 
not be expected to go along with such a strategy. 
Issue: Feinstein said crime went down 20% in San Francisco while she was mayor, 
and she charged that "violent crime" increased 20% statewide since Van de Kamp 
became attorney general. 
Analysis: Feinstein's reference to her own record on crime includes only the 
most serious offenses. According to the San Francisco Police Department, all 
crime increased 0.1% during her tenure, and arrests for so-called "Part II" 
offenses -- including arson, narcotics, carrying weapons, embezzlement, 
prostitution and drunk driving -- increased 30.9%. 
Statewide, the number of arrests for violent crimes has increased 19.8% since 
1983, according to "Crime and Delinquency in California," a 1988 report 
published by Van de Kamp's Justice Department. The definition of violent crime 
included murder, rape, robbery, assault and kidnaping. Those figures include a 
dramatic increase in assaults reported in 1986 after the definition of that 
crime was expanded to include domestic violence. 
Issue: Van de Kamp charged that Feinstein would put cost-of-living increases 
for education programs "on the table" in her search for ways to close the 
state's current $3.6-billion budget gap. 
Analysis: Feinstein has said that she would consider any proposal to increase 
revenues or cut the budget. The kindergarten-through-community college portion 
of the education budget is protected by voter-approved Proposition 98, but the 
provisions of that measure could be suspended for one year by a two-thirds vote 
of each house of the Legislature. 
