RESTAURANT REVIEW; 
STITCHES DISHES UP THE RIGHT PRESCRIPTION FOR THE PALATE 
Wee-oo, wee-oo, wee-oo, here comes another ambulance. We're across the street 
from the emergency entrance of County-USC Medical Center, having dinner. 
The place is named Stitches, and yes, the waiters do wear green 
operating-theater tunics. Yes, there's a tangle of scarcely unpacked plastic 
tubes behind the counter, so when somebody draws a Coke you see syrup moving 
around like blood in an I.V. unit. A bottle of liquefied CO2 lies next to it, 
as if left there by an absent-minded anesthetist. 
Some of this might be accident, but Stitches does seem to have a little fun 
with its situation. We certainly can't blame it. Not every restaurant has to 
endure the apocalyptic wail of a siren every few minutes. 
But the place is not just a gag. Stitches is a real resource for this 
restaurant-poor neighborhood, where the hamburger otherwise rules. You see 
doctors and nurses wander across the street at all hours, obviously pleased to 
vary their cafeteria diet. 
And for visitors to the hospital, it must be a real comfort. A plate of 
linguine can get you through a lot of anxiety. 
Technically it's just a lunch counter with a beer and wine license, but 
Stitches has a more sophisticated style than you'd expect. On the wall you find 
a Miro print and a Patrick Nagel poster. Hot rolls the size of walnuts, 
dripping with garlic and olive oil, come with many entrees. 
There are evident signs of health-consciousness. Garlic abounds, and chicken is 
definitely the specialty. Probably the best entree is grilled chicken breast 
with "garlic slivers," which are thin slices of garlic cooked quite brown, 
perfumey and sweet. The best of the pastas is chicken Alfredo, made with rather 
wide noodles (like egg noodles, rather than fettuccine) and broccoli and the 
occasional bit of dried tomato. 
The chicken sandwich is a grilled breast in thick, sweet teriyaki sauce (and 
some Thousand Island-type secret sauce) on a whole wheat bun sprinkled with 
bran. It comes with some home fries that define, or even redefine, the genre: 
slices of potato fried very, very casually (and often quite brown) with the 
occasional bit of onion or bell pepper. You might think it Army chow, until you 
notice that it's made with delicate new potatoes. 
The pizzas follow the thin-crust school, easy to handle and of a fresh cracker 
flavor. The fairly short list includes a barbecued chicken pizza (there's also 
a chicken sausage pizza for hard-core chicken fans), which was what I actually 
got when I asked for the Roma tomato, garlic and basil pizza. It wasn't bad as 
barbecued chicken pizza goes, with a sauce that was at least not stupefyingly 
sweet. 
Sometimes Stitches tries its hand at Cajun food. The only attempt I'm familiar 
with is an odd "seafood gumbo" that was really a good pepper-hot tomato broth 
with celery and an odd papery substance with bits of red coloring -- probably 
surirmi, or imitation crab. Not what I'd call gumbo, but not bad on a cold day. 
One thing I know that Stitches has a monopoly on in its immediate neighborhood 
is calamari pasta. The linguine is colored black with squid ink and served in a 
light white wine (and garlic) sauce with bits of squid. Unfortunately, the 
squid itself is a little mushy and overdone. 
The heavy focus on chicken cannot be accidental, because Stitches doesn't 
specialize in meat. The most expensive thing on the menu is the flank steak, 
but though it's pretty tender (apart from a tiny rind of gristle), it's not 
very flavorful. Nor is it a very big portion, but maybe the doctors prefer it 
that way. In any case, it's vastly overpowered by the vegetables (boiled rather 
than steamed, but usually not badly overcooked) and salad (with garlicky 
vinaigrette, natch). 
The least successful thing I've had here was a pork-chop special. The grilled, 
not barbecued, chops were served with a candy-sweet, palate-numbing sauce that 
could kill the flavor of anything. But then these cotton-dry chops didn't 
deserve a lot of mercy to begin with. 
And you really wouldn't come here for the desserts. Apparently, none of them 
are made on the premises. They're merely honest commercial pastries from the 
cheesecake/apple pie/chocolate chocolate list. 
Stitches has a monstrous parking problem. You have your choice of all-day lots 
that charge a flat $5 rate and tend to fill up anyway, or potluck parking on 
the street. Things seem a little slow in the late afternoon and evening, and 
there's a happy hour from 3 to 7 p.m. with a pitcher of beer and a pizza (one 
topping) for $8.99. 
So it's not Spago. Stitches is still worth knowing about in this part of town. 
What do you want across the street from Emergency Admitting? 
Stitches, 1927 1/2 Zonal Ave., Lincoln Heights; (213) 222-0221. Breakfast, 
lunch and dinner 9 a.m.-9 p.m. daily. Beer and wine. Street parking; parking 
lots in neighborhood. No credit cards. Dinner for two, food only, $15-$30. 
