GOVERNMENT RAIDS SYLMAR JET ENGINE PARTS FIRM 
A jet engine parts company in Sylmar was raided late last month by units of the 
Defense Department and the FBI as part of a federal investigation into 
allegedly substandard parts the company sold that may have ended up in both 
military and commercial aircraft. 
The investigation into McHaffie, Inc. was confirmed by Rodney Hansen, special 
agent in charge of the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, or DCIS, in Los 
Angeles, which is operated by the Department of Defense's inspector general. 
Hansen declined to comment further on the investigation. 
No charges have been filed against McHaffie, Inc. 
Norman McHaffie, president of the parts company, denied that his company was 
under investigation. 
But General Electric Aircraft Engines in Evendale, Ohio, confirmed that several 
weeks ago the DCIS told G.E. that it was investigating McHaffie, which supplies 
G.E. with fasteners for jet engines, said G.E. spokesman Dave Lane. 
"Upon learning of alleged irregularities regarding testing of fasteners by 
McHaffie," Lane said in a prepared statement, G.E. set up its own quality task 
force to review "the McHaffie fasteners in engines produced and under 
production" at two G.E. aircraft engine plants. 
Lane said that G.E. "thus far has not identified any engine safety concerns 
with McHaffie-supplied fasteners in field or test engines produced at G.E." 
Technical Presentations 
Besides testing its equipment, Lane said, G.E. made "technical presentations to 
our customers, including the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy and the FAA." 
Fasteners are bolts that help hold the various parts of an engine together. 
One customer G.E. alerted was Boeing Co., which looked through its G.E. engines 
with McHaffie fasteners. "We have found no anomalies," said Jack Gamble, 
spokesman for Boeing Commercial Airplanes. 
Among the engines G.E. produces at its Evendale plant are two models that are 
used in several Boeing aircraft. One engine model is used in some Boeing 767 
and 747 planes, while another engine, which G.E. jointly produces with a French 
company, is used exclusively in the Boeing 737 series. 
Various federal agencies, including the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration, the Defense Department and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 
have been conducting a nationwide probe into companies suspected of selling 
faulty or counterfeit parts. 
At least a half dozen local parts companies have been investigated by the 
federal government, including Lee Aerospace Products, a Simi Valley firm. Last 
week a federal grand jury indicted the company and its two top executives and 
charged them with selling defective and substandard bolts that were ultimately 
installed in the space shuttle Discovery. 
