DANCE REVIEW; 
JOFFREY MOUNTS AN ALL-ARPINO PROGRAM AT CHANDLER PAVILION 
All-Arpino programs by the Joffrey Ballet are scarcely news -- but the 
three-part bill at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion on Thursday seemed in danger 
of proving historic. For all anyone knew at the time, this might have been the 
final performance of any Gerald Arpino ballet by the company he co-founded. 
After resigning as artistic director on Tuesday, Arpino had issued a statement 
through his lawyer prohibiting the performance of any of his works as of 
Friday. Two Arpino works are scheduled for Saturday's performance. Attorneys 
for both sides were conferring Friday afternoon in an attempt to reach a 
settlement. 
In any case, a company in crisis is something to see. This was a night of 
virtually faultless dancing, an assertion of spirit and prowess despite the 
circumstances -- and, inevitably, despite the choreography. 
Normally a blur of dancers running and jumping through dappled light, "Suite 
Saint-Saens" (1978) suddenly acquired some potent afterimages: the noble calm 
of Douglas Martin in the opening section, for example, or the playful 
flamboyance of Carole Valleskey in the finale. Edward Stierle, of course, 
jumping madly -- but also moments when Peter Narbutas, Deborah Dawn, Tyler 
Walters and others filled Arpino's emptiest adagios with deep feeling. 
If Jerome Robbins' faun met Frederick Ashton's Ondine under a pier some night, 
you'd have "Sea Shadow" (1962), an adagio to Ravel with lots of rippling limbs 
and stylized gymnastics. Valerie Madonia and Tom Mossbrucker couldn't exactly 
make the liquid posturings look profound, but they danced with great surety, 
and pianist Stanley Babin accompanied them sensitively. 
The new "TWO-A-DAY" extravaganza featured several major cast changes from the 
previous evening. A listless Jill Davidson led the boys through the top-hat 
ensemble, Deborah Dawn slinked expertly through the Spanish sequence and, best 
of all, Jodie Gates gave the Marilyn Miller impersonation a childlike sense of 
wonder. 
John Miner and Allan Lewis shared the program's conducting duties, with the 
orchestra sounding especially fine in "Suite Saint-Saens." LEWIS SEGAL 
