WITNESS CONTRADICTS SELF IN CAMARENA MURDER TRIAL 
A key prosecution witness in the trial of four men accused of involvement in 
the murder of U.S. drug agent Enrique Camarena was caught in several 
significant contradictions Tuesday while under cross-examination by defense 
attorneys. 
Hector Cervantes Santos, a former Mexican police officer who said he once 
served as the security chief at a drug baron's "safe house" in Guadalajara, 
testified that he saw defendant Juan Ramon Matta Ballesteros at one meeting in 
1984 where Camarena's abduction was planned. 
However, defense attorney Martin R. Stolar pointed out during cross-examination 
that Cervantes had at various times told Drug Enforcement Administration agents 
that Matta was present at three meetings where drug traffickers and Mexican law 
enforcement officials planned Camarena's 1985 kidnaping. 
On the witness stand Tuesday in federal court here, Cervantes said that Matta, 
a convicted Honduran drug kingpin, attended a meeting in October, 1984, to 
discuss the Camarena kidnaping but the witness contradicted his earlier 
statements to DEA agents by saying Matta was not at two other meetings. 
In another apparent contradiction, Cervantes, while on the witness stand, said 
there were four meetings where the kidnaping was planned. However, in 
interviews with DEA agents and in grand jury testimony, he referred to a total 
of six planning meetings. 
Camarena was abducted off a Guadalajara street in February, 1985, and then 
tortured and murdered. His mutilated body was found at a ranch 65 miles from 
Guadalajara a month later. 
This is the third week of what is expected to be a two-month trial before U.S. 
District Judge Edward Rafeedie. The DEA has conducted an unprecedented 
five-year investigation in an attempt to get to the bottom of Camarena's 
murder. Their aggressive tactics have come under fire from the Mexican 
government. 
The DEA has made payments to 17 individuals in return for their testimony at 
the trial, according to U.S. government documents. 
Among them is Cervantes, 30, who has been paid more than $36,000 since he 
decided to become a government informant last November. Cervantes and his 
family have been relocated to the United States for their safety, he testified. 
Defense lawyers have tried to discredit Cervantes by repeatedly pressing him 
about his contradictory accounts of the meetings. 
A jury of six men and six women have had to keep track of a lengthy list of 
Spanish-surnamed individuals who Cervantes said attended the various meetings. 
His testimony, through an interpreter, has been complicated and frequently 
confusing. 
Cervantes said he worked for Javier Barba Hernandez, a Guadalajara lawyer 
turned drug trafficker, from 1982 to 1985. Barba was killed in a shoot-out with 
Mexican police in 1986. 
Cervantes said that he had been present at all the meetings where Camarena's 
kidnaping was planned and that he never left Barba's side during the meetings. 
However, Cervantes had earlier told a federal grand jury in Los Angeles that 
there were times that he had to leave the meetings to get refreshments for 
people at the gatherings, which were held in the living room of Barba's house. 
Cervantes also acknowledged on cross-examination that Camarena's name was never 
mentioned during any of the meetings. What was stated, he said, was that there 
was a troublesome DEA agent, who participants in the meetings wanted to "pick 
up" and question. 
Questions were also raised by defense lawyers about the manner in which 
Cervantes identified the defendants in court. They asserted Tuesday that he 
only had been able to identify the defendants because he had been shown photos 
of them shortly before the trial by prosecutors and DEA agents. 
Cervantes, however, said that he had been able to identify the defendants 
through his own recollection, but he acknowledged Tuesday that he had been 
shown photographs on numerous occasions over the last six months. However, last 
Friday, he denied that he ever had been shown any photographs. 
Defense lawyers expressed dismay that they had not been given information 
earlier about what photos Cervantes had been shown and when. 
Rafeedie criticized the government for not disclosing such information earlier. 
"This caginess that has occurred is what is causing all these problems," 
Rafeedie said. "The defendants should know what photos this witness has seen 
and when." 
The witness's testimony has ranged from complicated to, at times, bizarre. He 
said that his boss, Barba, walked around his mansion carrying a hand grenade on 
his belt and also kept a lion in his house. 
Cervantes also described parties where a Mexican police commander, Federico 
Castel del Oro, "got loaded" on cocaine. Castel del Oro is now serving as a 
government informant in the case, according to court documents, but he is not 
expected to testify. 
Cervantes is scheduled to return to the witness stand today. 
