YOUR BODY: EYEING NEW SUNGLASSES? CONSIDER THREE TYPES 
Sunglass shoppers, take note: Labels on non-prescription sunglasses are getting 
more specific. 
Under a new voluntary labeling program developed by the Sunglass Assn. of 
America, in cooperation with the Food and Drug Administration, non-prescription 
sunglasses will be classified in three categories: cosmetic, meant for wearing 
during shopping and other activities in non-harsh sunlight; general purpose, 
recommended for outdoor activities such as driving or hiking; and special 
purpose, meant for wearing during skiing and other bright light activities. 
The categories will indicate that the glasses in each block differing amounts 
of visible light and ultraviolet A and B light. Excess exposure to ultraviolet 
B light has been linked with cataract formation, and, some believe, retinal 
degeneration. 
Does this mean outdoor-loving shopaholics who drive and ski need three 
different pairs of sunglasses? 
Not at all, say some eye care specialists, who suspect the labeling change may 
be motivated as much by marketing reasons as medical concerns. 
When sunglass shopping, it is most important to pick a pair blocking as close 
to 100% of UVB light as possible, says Jay Schlanger, a Los Angeles 
optometrist. Under the new guidelines, sunglasses labeled cosmetic block 70% or 
more of UVB, while general purpose glasses block 95% or more and special 
purpose models block 99% or more. 
When it comes to tint, grays and greens result in less color distortion, 
Schlanger added. 
The new labels reflect a consensus of standards, not a change in manufacturing, 
said Tom Loomis, technical director of the Sunglass Assn. of America. He said 
sunglass prices might increase slightly, but only temporarily, as a result of 
the new labeling. 
A 'Mini-Epidemic' 
An upper respiratory infection has been hitting Los Angeles area youngsters 
especially hard in recent weeks, according to several local pediatricians and 
the county health department. 
Caused by a Coxsackie virus, the disease is marked by blisters in the mouth and 
small red bumps on the soles and palms, said Dr. Loreta Matheo, a Santa Monica 
pediatrician. She's seen a recent "mini-epidemic" of the contagious but not 
serious disease, fielding at least a call a day from concerned parents. 
The disease most often strikes toddlers, is usually not seen in children older 
than 9, and is often accompanied by runny nose and diarrhea, Matheo said. There 
can be fever, ranging from low-grade to 103 degrees. Often spread by sneezing 
or sharing cups and bottles, the disease usually disappears by itself in three 
to five days, Matheo said. 
What to do? "Keep kids out of school until the blisters are gone," advised Dr. 
Laurene Mascola, acting chief of the acute communicable disease control unit of 
the Los Angeles Department of Health Services, who said she has gotten several 
calls about the disease. 
"Give children acetaminophen if they're uncomfortable and whatever liquids they 
want to drink," added Matheo. "Be scrupulous about hand washing and have family 
members use separate towels. If there's a marked decline in fluid intake or the 
fever seems out of control, call the doctor." 
Type A vs. Type B 
Women with hard-driving, competitive Type A personalities may climb the career 
ladder faster than their more laid-back Type B colleagues. But their marriages 
are not as happy. 
That's the conclusion of Marie Morell, a UCLA assistant professor of psychology 
who interviewed 42 married couples with her colleague, psychologist Megan 
Sullaway, to determine the consequences of behavior types on marriage 
satisfaction. "When the wife was Type A, both partners reported more marital 
problems, particularly with communication," said Morell, whose study was funded 
by the National Institutes of Health. These couples also complained that they 
spent too little time together, lacked problem-solving skills and were 
sometimes dissatisfied sexually. 
Reporting the most marital satisfaction in her study were Type B women married 
to Type A men and Type B women married to Type B men. 
Based on the study, Morell isn't suggesting that only certain personality types 
mate. Her advice: "Recognize the needs of the individual." She speculates that 
men married to Type A women were dissatisfied partly because their wives did 
not always have enough time to provide emotional support. 
Men should develop broader social support networks in addition to relying on 
their wives for emotional support, Morell suggested. A lot of the 
dissatisfaction arose from husbands who relied primarily on their wives for 
emotional support, she added. 
Expansion of a social support network might be a good idea for men, agreed 
Marcia Lasswell, USC clinical professor of marriage and family therapy and 
professor of psychology at Cal Poly Pomona. "But a quicker route to marital 
satisfaction might be for busy Type A's to schedule in some time, regularly, 
for nurturing the relationship." 
Morell acknowledges her study may have built-in bias because it included many 
more Type A's -- both men and women -- than Type B's. Once they signed up for 
her study, Type A's -- sometimes called compulsive -- were very likely to 
follow through. Not so the Type B's. "We tried to get a sample more equally 
divided," she said. But many Type B's who signed up were no-shows. 
