DEAF JURORS WIN 8-YEAR BATTLE FOR INTERPRETERS 
Los Angeles County broke a sound barrier Monday that will enable deaf and 
hearing-impaired citizens to serve on juries in municipal and superior courts. 
"At least deaf people now have the option of serving on a jury just like 
everybody else," said Nathan Shapiro, 57, a prospective Van Nuys Superior Court 
juror who on Monday became the first person with hearing problems to be 
assigned a sign-language interpreter at county expense. 
Shapiro and the Greater Los Angeles Council for the Deaf began fighting for 
interpreters for jurors nearly a decade ago. 
Previously, people with hearing problems were excused from jury duty. With the 
addition of the new interpreter program, hearing problems will no longer be 
reason enough not to serve, said Ed Johnson, director of interpreter services 
for the county's courts. 
"We hope this will encourage other deaf and hearing-impaired people to become 
jurors," Johnson said. "We now have seven others in our jury pool waiting to be 
assigned to a court." 
The new service will cost the county $30,000 for a full-time coordinator plus 
$171 a day for each interpreter. 
Interpreters will be available in municipal and superior courts in Van Nuys, 
Torrance, downtown Los Angeles, Santa Monica and Pasadena, Johnson said. 
The service is the result of a settlement reached last October in a federal 
class action lawsuit filed in 1981. 
The Council for the Deaf filed the suit after Shapiro, a Northridge engineer 
who has had hearing difficulties since birth, hired an interpreter in 1980 to 
help him serve as a juror in San Fernando Superior Court. 
Shapiro billed the county about $4,000 for the interpreter's fee. But the 
county refused to pay. 
Refused to Pay 
When Shapiro was summoned for jury duty in 1987, county officials again refused 
to pay for an interpreter, which led the Council for the Deaf to press even 
harder for settlement of the lawsuit, said Marcella Meyer, council executive 
director. 
"It's about time that deaf people had the right to serve as jurors if they want 
to," Meyer said. "This is one step forward." 
"It's been long overdue," said Karen Bowman, 29, of Northridge, who was hired 
earlier this year to coordinate the sign language service. "There are many, 
many people who could serve as well as hearing people." 
Bowman, who has been deaf since birth, read the standard jury orientation for 
Shapiro in sign language Monday. 
Benita Maupin, an interpreter with the county courts, will provide 
sign-language interpretation if Shapiro is selected as a juror. 
Maupin, who can hear, said she learned sign language before she learned to 
speak. 
"Both my parents were deaf," Maupin said. "So you could say English is my 
second language. Sign language is my first." 
Maupin said the courts traditionally have provided interpreters for deaf or 
hearing-impaired witnesses and defendants, but not for jurors. 
When other deaf or hearing- impaired people learn of the new service, Maupin 
said, she believes many will want to serve on a jury. 
He Isn't Called 
As for Shapiro, he failed to be called for a jury panel on his first day of 
duty but said he hopes to serve on a case. He said it doesn't matter whether 
the trial is civil or criminal. 
"It's a very important process," Shapiro said of the American jury system. 
"That's why I've put so much into it." 
He said he hopes many other hearing-impaired jurors will follow him. 
"I hope I'm not the last one called," he said. 
