GORBACHEV IN CHINA; 
WEST WAS SLOW TO SEE DEPTH OF COMMUNIST SPLIT; 
KHRUSHCHEV FELT CHILL IN BEIJING 
When Soviet leader Nikita S. Khrushchev's propjet airliner touched down in 
Beijing on Sept. 30, 1959, the burly Russian was ready for a bitter 
confrontation with a man he had come to detest, Chinese Communist Party 
Chairman Mao Tse-tung. 
"The warmth had gone out of our relations with China, and it had been replaced 
by a chill that I could sense as soon as I arrived," the Soviet chief said in 
"Khrushchev Remembers," the unofficial autobiography published in the West in 
1974. 
Sino-Soviet friction had been building for several years before the 1959 
Khrushchev-Mao summit, and the icy estrangement between Communist giants would 
not reach its full bitterness for several more years. 
Start of the Rift 
But Khrushchev's 1959 visit to China -- together with an only slightly less 
tense trip in 1958 -- can be said to mark the start of the Moscow-Beijing split 
that Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping 
hope to heal this week in the first Sino-Soviet summit since 1959. 
The bitterness of the Mao-Khrushchev meeting seems clear with the benefit of 
almost 30 years of hindsight. But the depth of the Soviet-Chinese friction was 
not understood at the time in the West, which continued to view Moscow and 
Beijing as two pillars of a Communist monolith. 
"The relationship had begun to come apart when Khrushchev became an outspoken 
critic of the Great Leap Forward," Mao's often brutal campaign for Chinese 
self-reliance in the mid-1950s, John King Fairbank wrote in "The Great Chinese 
Revolution," published in 1986. "On his two visits to Peking, in 1958 and 1959, 
he and Mao did not get along. The Russian leader thought the Chinese leader was 
a romantic deviationist whose judgment could not be trusted." 
On the Chinese side, there is now substantial evidence that Mao berated 
Khrushchev for what the Chinese leader considered a timid policy toward the 
Third World. Mao also complained that the Soviet Union gave only tepid support 
to China's bombardment of an offshore island garrisoned by Nationalist Chinese 
troops from Taiwan. 
But this evidence was largely overlooked in the West. 
Herter's Position 
A few days after the 1959 Khrushchev-Mao summit, American Secretary of State 
Christian A. Herter told a Washington press conference that Moscow, because of 
its presumed place as the leader of the Communist world, bore "a degree of 
responsibility for the actions of other members of the bloc," including China. 
Herter noted, with apparent surprise, that the public statements of the Chinese 
and Soviet leaders during their summit exhibited disagreement over the basic 
approach to international disputes, with Khrushchev urging the peaceful 
settlement of conflicts and Mao advocating revolutionary force. 
Khrushchev flew to China 31 hours after he returned to Moscow from a 10-day, 
coast-to-coast tour of the United States, which included talks at Camp David 
with President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Although Khrushchev's U.S. trip was 
frequently marked by Cold War rhetoric on both sides, its overall impact was an 
easing of East-West tensions that came to be known as "the spirit of Camp 
David." The detente proved to be short-lived. 
In "Khrushchev Remembers," the Soviet leader related that he was reluctant to 
go to China so soon after returning from the United States. The ostensible 
purpose of the China trip was to allow him to attend ceremonies marking the 
10th anniversary of the Communist victory in the Chinese civil war. 
But a major reason, at least from the Soviet standpoint, was dictated by rising 
border tensions between China and India. Khrushchev apparently hoped to serve 
as peacemaker between China and India, whose prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, 
the Soviet Union was assiduously courting. 
"We were eager to give Nehru a chance," Khrushchev wrote. 
But from Mao's standpoint, the Soviet neutrality in the border dispute between 
China and India was a betrayal of Communist solidarity. The Chinese said it was 
of little use to have the Soviet Union for an ally if it would not take their 
side in a disagreement with a non-Communist neighbor. 
'An Envoy of Peace' 
In his public statements in Beijing, Khrushchev called on all Communist nations 
to "do everything possible to preclude war as a means for settling outstanding 
questions." Premier Chou En-lai publicly referred to Khrushchev as "an envoy of 
peace." But the Chinese leaders showed their displeasure with the summit by 
refusing to issue a joint communique at the end of the visit. 
Khrushchev's book, recalling the 1959 incidents and the later heavy border 
fighting between India and China in 1962, said: 
"I believe it was Mao himself who stirred up the trouble with India. I think he 
did so because of some sick fantasy. He had started the war with India, and now 
he wanted to drag the Soviet Union into the conflict. Here was Mao trying to 
dictate policy to other socialist countries -- just as Stalin had done before 
him. Here, once again, was the dictatorship of one individual masquerading as 
the dictatorship of the proletariat." 
Fairbank, the dean of U.S. China scholars, wrote that the Mao-Khrushchev 
animosity "reached the point in mid-1960 where Khrushchev suddenly withdrew all 
the Soviet technicians from China together with their blueprints." 
"The CCP (Chinese Communist Party) was soon sending ideological blasts against 
Soviet revisionism to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and being paid 
back in kind." 
In the three decades since the last summit meeting between the Communist 
powers, the leaders of both China and the Soviet Union have met regularly with 
U.S. presidents. 
Starting with President Richard M. Nixon's visit to China in February, 1972, 
there have been seven Sino-American summits. And, counting Khrushchev's 1959 
trip to the United States, there have been 14 meetings between the top leaders 
of the United States and the Soviet Union. 
