SCIENCE / MEDICINE; 
AN AVIAN ENIGMA; 
NEW ZEALAND'S KIWI PROVES ASTONISHING, BUT ITS FUTURE IS GRIM 
Obscured by a hide that he had constructed from the fronds of giant tree ferns, 
John McLennan had squatted for five hours under the stars of the Southern 
Cross, watching a 3-foot-deep hole. 
With light-gathering, infrared binoculars raised, the New Zealand scientist 
waited for the emergence of a bird so strange that when it was first described 
in 1813, English naturalists dismissed the report as a hoax: With barely 
visible stumps for wings, no external tail and a bill bordered with bristles at 
the face and nostrils at the tip, the burrowing, cone-shaped kiwi is an avian 
enigma wrapped in shaggy, hair-like feathers. 
Because it is stealthy and active only at night, the habits of New Zealand's 
national bird have remained largely unknown since the time of its discovery. 
Today, however, McLennan's studies of this 2-foot-long, flightless bird reveal 
that the kiwi's behavior is even more astonishing than its appearance. The 
silly-looking kiwi of shoe polish fame is actually a sort of super-bird whose 
behaviors may harken back to a lofty ancestry: its closest relative is now 
thought to be an extinct monster that stood 11 feet tall. 
Death of a Symbol 
But the most alarming finding of his six-year study is that New Zealand is fast 
eradicating its national emblem. The New Zealand press has taken to calling it 
"kiwicide." 
Kiwis were once so numerous that Maoris, Polynesians who invaded the island 
1,000 years ago, made full-length cloaks from their feathers. Early European 
explorers feasted on their gamy flesh. But today, the smallest of the three 
kiwi species, the little spotted kiwi, now survives only on a single island 
sanctuary, Kapiti Island off the mainland. Populations of brown kiwi, the 
national bird, may have declined by 90% this century. The greater spotted kiwi, 
the largest species, are few but the exact numbers are unknown. 
McLennan waited at the hole for a male kiwi to leave its burrow for its nightly 
hunt. With its long, nostril-tipped bill, the kiwi finds its prey by smell, 
stabbing the earth to seize invertebrates such as the 9-inch New Zealand 
bushworm. McLennan wanted to examine the burrow: He wondered if the 5-inch egg 
the male was incubating had hatched. 
Then, shortly after 1 a.m., the red-bearded ecologist heard the crashing of an 
approaching animal. The female kiwi was coming. 
McLennan waited in silence for many minutes, wondering what the female would do 
next. And then, he recalled, "I felt this little tap on my foot. Her nose was 
right on my boot." 
Fearless Males 
McLennan was lucky it was a female. He has found that males, during the 
breeding season, will fearlessly attack intruders, including humans, slicing at 
invaders with razor-sharp, toxin-tipped toenails. "I've been walking alone, and 
they dash out like a hit-and-run driver -- they'll hit you hard on the leg, 
striking out with the feet, and dash away," McLennan said. 
Although kiwis seem dull-witted, nearly blind and defenseless in captivity, the 
wild kiwi is nothing of the sort. McLennan has discovered that the kiwi's 
eyesight is excellent; although flightless, the kiwi can cross rushing streams 
and scale huge boulders. Further, McLennan found that female brown kiwis are 
capable of staggering feats of reproduction. Laying the largest egg for its 
body weight of any bird that ever lived, a 4-pound brown kiwi can, if its nest 
fails or is destroyed, produce as many as five, 1-pound eggs in a single 
breeding season -- the equivalent of an average-sized woman bearing five, 
30-pound babies. 
The giant eggs reveal the kiwi's likely lineage. The kiwi's closest relative is 
probably the moa, some species of which stood 11 feet tall. Its egg could make 
an omelet for 12. DNA studies also suggest the link. Today's studies of kiwis 
may yield the best guesses yet advanced about how this enormous bird, 
extinguished after Polynesian man arrived on the New Zealand islands 1,000 
years ago, may have lived, McLennan said. 
New Zealand is the only place in the world where the kiwi is found. And it 
would seem a safe haven: The usual culprits in recent extinctions -- pollution, 
poaching and illegal trade in endangered species -- aren't big problems in this 
pristine and peaceful nation, where sheep farming is the primary industry. Yet 
according to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural 
Resources, New Zealand faces one of the most rapid rates of extinction in the 
world. 
Part of the problem is development, as forests are cleared for farms and homes. 
Another part are the pets and pests Europeans brought here 300 years ago: 
stoats, dogs, cats, ferrets, pigs, rats, Australian possums, Japanese deer, a 
United Nations of species. Many of them have overrun the country. And even 
though New Zealanders are now trying to get rid of some of the invaders, kiwis, 
as well as other species, are caught in the cross-fire. 
"I could lead you to the deathbeds of thousands of kiwis," said Mike Rudge, who 
like McLennan works for the New Zealand Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research. 
"It is absolutely amazing," he said, "that this is our national bird, and kiwis 
are under literally under siege." 
One of those deathbeds would be Waitangi forest, formerly one of the brown 
kiwi's major strongholds. More than a thousand kiwis lived there in August, 
1987. By the end of that September, the population had been halved. 
The culprit was found on the last day of that month: it was a single German 
shepherd bitch that had run wild. 
Kiwis evolved in the absence of mammalian predators, which is why there was 
never any reason to fly. Though they will fearlessly defend breeding territory, 
adults will leave their young (usually under the daytime care of the male) for 
long hours while they go on their nighttime hunts. By its fifth or sixth night 
of life, the chick emerges from the burrow and tries to feed itself. "They're 
really nice to watch then, shuffling around the burrows," McLennan said. 
When it first emerges, the chick "is a perfect adult kiwi in miniature, a 
little powder puff of feathers on the forest floor," McLennan said. "They're 
really terribly vulnerable to stoats, cats and ferrets then." 
Kiwi Census 
McLennan counted only three pairs of brown kiwi, and two unmated adults, in his 
700-hectare study area. They laid 21 eggs in two years. Fifteen eggs failed or 
were destroyed by predators. Six hatched. Three chicks were killed before 
fledging. 
Only three chicks fledged in two years -- a per-year gain of half a chick per 
pair. And what happens once the chick leaves the nest a month later? "We don't 
know," answered McLennan. 
The picture looks so bad for kiwis that some hopeful organizations have 
launched kiwi rescue schemes. The idea is to find and capture kiwis in areas 
slated for development and move them to new areas. But the kiwi's nocturnal 
stealth usually thwarts such efforts. 
In August, 1981, Royal Forest and Bird Society branch Chairman Peter Winter was 
invited to participate in one such rescue attempt five days before 50 acres of 
North Island forest -- prime kiwi habitat -- were to be burned and crushed to 
make way for a new farm block in North Taranaki. 
Winter related: "We made five visits in all. The number of kiwi-catchers (all 
volunteers) ranged from 10 on one night to four. We mimicked kiwi calls and 
learned to distinguish the real from the false, but we did not catch kiwi. In 
fact, nobody even saw one." Although the volunteers estimated that about 12 
kiwi pairs lived in the area, none could be rescued before the burn-off. 
The North Taranaki was a relatively small tract. Last year, New Zealand's Lands 
and Survey Department cleared 3,200 hectares of North Island scrubland to 
create 12 farms under a land settlement scheme. "When that development went 
in," ecologist Rudge said, "you probably annihilated the last large bastion of 
kiwi in Northland." 
Endangered by Trappers 
In captivity, kiwis are known to live for more than 20 years. But among the 
threats they face in the wild is one that left a lasting mark on three of the 
eight birds McLennan studied in Northland: Missing toes indicated that these 
adults were caught in leg-hold traps, set by fur-trappers to catch introduced 
Australian possums. From reports he had heard from area residents, a dozen 
kiwis in the study area were killed in these traps in the previous 12 years. 
The New Zealand government encourages possum trappers. After all, the 
Australian possums destroy acres of trees, pilfer from farmers, and usurp 
habitat and food from native animals. The foreign animals, brought here to 
start a fur trade, now so overrun some forested areas that entire hillsides are 
collapsing from erosion. But in the effort to preserve New Zealand's forests 
and scrub, trappers may be unwittingly eradicating the bird that symbolizes the 
country's uniqueness. 
The irony does not escape McLennan. "In this country, people can take over 
prime forest, knowing they are going to wreck kiwi habitat, destroy kiwi nests, 
and place traps that may well disable kiwis. But if they shot a kiwi and were 
caught, they'd be fined. It just doesn't make sense." 
