MARSHALL ISLANDS HOPE TO PROFIT ON IMPORTED GARBAGE; 
U.S. TRASH MAY BE THEIR TREASURE 
Bucking the global trend, a chain of Pacific islands is eyeing a 
multimillion-dollar plan to import American garbage. 
While countries around the world are giving a thumbs down to the international 
trade in waste, the Marshall Islands sees profit and possible salvation from a 
plan to import up to one-tenth of the nontoxic waste produced on the West 
Coast. 
The waste would be used as landfill to enlarge the chain of remote, low-lying 
atolls. In return, the Marshall Islands would also get millions of dollars in 
fees for the trash. 
The nation's parliament passed a resolution in March authorizing President 
Amata Kabua to negotiate a deal with a California-based company to ship 
millions of tons of rubbish. 
Several other Pacific islands have recently turned down similar deals offered 
by U.S. firms to dispose of trash. 
Admiralty Pacific Inc., a waste disposal company, hopes to begin transporting 
garbage to the Marshalls, 4,200 miles southwest of the United States, by June, 
1990, and eventually ship tens of millions of tons a year. 
Kabua, who first endorsed the scheme last October after meeting with Admiralty 
officials, says he wants the garbage for the money and for badly needed 
landfill in the archipelago. 
The atolls cover a 70-square-mile area and few of its islands rise more than 5 
feet above the sea. 
But the environmentalist group Greenpeace is accusing the company, which says 
it wants to ship 10% of household waste produced on the U.S. West Coast, of 
trying to evade American regulations on waste disposal. 
International Treaty 
Most of the world's nations reached agreement on March 22 in Basel, 
Switzerland, on an international treaty to control the export of hazardous 
waste. 
The convention aimed to curb what African countries called "garbage 
imperialism," dumping of waste by the West in the Third World. 
Admiralty's owner, Dan Fleming, says the company will respect Majuro and 
Washington safety laws in shipping the waste to the Pacific nation, an 
operation he says will be cheaper than transporting it by land to other parts 
of the United States. 
Imported waste is not a new concept to the 43,000 inhabitants of the Marshall 
Islands, a double chain of low-lying coral atolls that Washington used as a 
nuclear testing site in the 1950s. 
Some 66 nuclear weapons were exploded on Bikini and Enewetak atolls at that 
time, and some areas are still uninhabitable due to radiation contamination. 
The islands were a former United Nations Trust Territory administered by 
Washington until gaining semi-independence in 1986. They depend on U.S. aid for 
90% of their government budget. 
Members of Majuro's Parliament hotly debated the resolution on the garbage plan 
before passing it on March 10 by a 20-3 majority. Critics raised fears that the 
Marshalls might unknowingly end up importing toxic waste. 
Sen. Hiroshi Yamamura, who represents an island contaminated by radioactive 
fallout from the 1950s testing, said Majuro had no way to be sure that the 
waste was safe. 
"Do we really trust the Americans?" he asked in Parliament. "How can we know 
that the so-called household garbage is nontoxic waste?" 
"Admiralty Pacific may hide the toxic waste in order to get the money," said 
Senator Tony de Brum. "More than 40 nations have turned down the U.S. offer 
regarding the dumping proposal. Why should the Marshall Islands accept it?" 
In the last year, Papua New Guinea, Western Samoa, the Solomon Islands and 
Tonga have turned down a variety of waste disposal and incineration schemes 
proposed by American firms. 
Greenpeace estimates that a ton of American household garbage contains 20 
pounds of toxic material, such as cleaning fluids, lead-based paints and 
pesticides, and that their removal would make a deal like the one proposed by 
Admiralty unprofitable. 
President Kabua, who hopes to bring in as much as $56 million a year importing 
the trash, and his cousin and sponsor of the resolution, Sen. Imata Kabua, said 
Majuro could hire scientists to evaluate the safety of the plan. 
The Majuro government says the plan still depends on the completion of 
environmental, landfill and other studies to see if it will benefit the 
Marshall Islands. 
Admiralty is expected to complete an engineering feasibility study, which it 
began in January, this month. 
The British pressure group Ark said last month that global warming because of 
the pollution-induced "greenhouse effect" could raise the world's sea levels by 
more than 15 feet over the next 60 years. 
If such studies prove true, the Marshalls could be totally submerged. 
