HOME IMPROVEMENT; 
ORDINARY-LOOKING SANDER BOASTS MANY USES; 
WOODWORKING: RANDOM ORBIT SANDERS HAVE BEEN USED BY AUTO BODY SHOPS, OPERATED 
ON AIR PRESSURE. NOW A MODEL IS AVAILABLE THAT RUNS ON ELECTRICITY. 
Over the years, a lot of friends have asked me what's the most useful type of 
sander for do-it-yourself woodworking. And my answer has always been something 
of a hedge. 
"Nothing can match the speed and power of a good belt sander," I usually say. 
But then I'd turn around and warn that a belt sander can also work too fast, 
and in the hands of a rookie, it can create some pretty deep gouges and 
depressions in a matter of seconds. 
So for all-around versatility and user-friendliness, I'd recommend a good 
orbital sander . . . specifically one of the smaller types called "palm 
sanders" made by Makita, Ryobi, Porter-Cable, Black &amp; Decker and others. 
But then I'd have to point out that orbitals are painfully slow if you have a 
lot of heavy sanding to do. 
And finally -- because they are too difficult to control and because they 
create horrendous swirl marks -- I would dismiss disk sanders as totally out of 
the question. 
Just recently however, a new sander made by Porter-Cable has appeared on the 
market, and it may be the most useful type available (shown in the sketch). 
"But that looks like an ordinary disk sander!" you say. Well it may look like 
one, but it isn't. It's a new type called a random orbit sander. Actually, 
random orbit sanders aren't new. 
They've long been used in auto body shops and in factories. But they've always 
been pneumatically powered by air pressure, and that has kept them out of the 
home market. 
That changed when Porter-Cable introduced an electric version a few months 
back. If my guess is right, other makers will probably follow suit. The random 
orbit design is just too good to ignore. 
How It Works. Conventional orbital sanders all work on the same principle. An 
eccentric drives the sanding pad in a circular orbit, much the same path your 
hand would take when wiping a window with a circular scrubbing motion. To 
reduce the likelihood that the sander will create visible circular scratch 
marks, these sanders keep the diameter of the orbit small, about 
one-thirty-second inch or so. Trouble is, the smaller the orbit, the slower the 
sanding. 
The random orbit sander takes a different approach. Its eccentric drives the 
circular pad in a large orbit with a diameter of about half an inch. This 
increases sanding speed greatly. 
Normally, an orbit this large would create visible swirl marks, but the sanding 
pad doesn't just orbit. It's mounted in a ball bearing so it's free to spin on 
its axis, totally at random, which is exactly what it does once you press it to 
your work and the friction of sanding comes to bear. The combination of orbital 
and spinning action breaks up any swirl marks before they can form. 
What does all this mean in practice? You can sand at close to belt sander 
speeds with coarse 8O-grit paper, then switch to 100 and then 150 grit paper to 
get a super-fine finish. And the sander doesn't really care about grain 
direction. 
This makes it perfect for those tricky situations when you are sanding two 
pieces of wood joined at right angles as shown in the sketch. If you attacked 
this joint with a belt sander, you'd always be sanding one piece across the 
grain, creating unsightly cross-grain scratches in the process. With an 
orbital, grain direction is immaterial. 
Porter-Cable's random orbit sander takes self-adhesive 5-inch disks, a system I 
have grown to like. Disks press on and peel off in a second, and if you keep 
the sticky side free of dust, you can remount it several times. Swapping disks 
is so easy you don't give it a second thought. 
There are a few tricks to using this sander. First, you press its pad flat on 
your work, you don't tip it slightly on edge as you would a disk sander. 
Second, be sure the pad is down flat on your work surface before you turn on 
the sander. If you start it in the air and then lower it to your work, it will 
behave something like a disk sander until sanding friction sets the pad into 
random motion. 
Third (related to the second), don't expect to feather your work by using the 
sander with a light touch. If you fail to keep downward pressure on the pad, it 
will break out of its random orbits and start acting like a disk sander. 
Fourth, you'll probably have to use both hands to keep this tool under control. 
And fifth, be careful if you try to use the random orbit sander on moldings, 
sharp corners, edges and the like. It may sand faster than you expect. 
This new sander lists for around $205, but I 've seen it in catalogues for well 
under that. Trend-lines, (800) 343-3248, sells it for $140. 
