2 FULLERTON SLAYINGS PROMPT NATIONWIDE ALERT OVER SUSPECT 
Fullerton police issued a nationwide alert Tuesday for a suspect they believe 
killed his former girlfriend and a man in her apartment. 
At first police feared that the suspect had kidnaped the woman's 4-year-old 
son. But the boy was found about 16 hours later in the care of his uncle, who 
had been baby-sitting the child since Sunday afternoon, said Sgt. Tony 
Hernandez of the Fullerton Police Department. 
Police identified the suspect as Dan Van Nguyen, 35, who once lived with the 
dead woman and had been her business partner in an Orange County beauty parlor 
before he moved to San Antonio, Tex., last September. 
In San Antonio, a reporter said he had received telephone calls from a woman 
apparently related to Nguyen, who said that the suspect had telephoned her 
several times since the killing. In at least one subsequent call, Nguyen 
threatened to kill himself, said the reporter, Jerome Kurry of the San Antonio 
Express-News. 
Police identified the victims as Trinh Tuyet Duong, 28, who lived in Apartment 
5 at 3946 W. Franklin Ave., Fullerton, where the slayings occurred, and Lewis 
Long Vu, 34, of Bellflower, who neighbors said had moved into Duong's apartment 
about 2 weeks ago. The dead woman's son was identified as Nam Phuong Nguyen. 
Police said the child is not related to the suspect. 
Police were called to the small apartment complex shortly after midnight by 
apartment manager Antoinette Aguilar, who reported hearing a shot and a woman's 
screams from Duong's apartment. When Aguilar telephoned at 12:19 a.m., more 
shots were being fired, police said. 
Another resident, Diane Gayton, 32, said the shots began about 40 minutes after 
Duong and a man returned to the apartment. Gayton said that after the first 
shots, she heard a woman scream "Oh, my God!" and then "Help!" 
Alexander Morales, 30, of La Mirada, who was visiting a tenant downstairs from 
Duong's apartment, said that before the shots he heard loud falling noises and 
a woman screaming, as if being beaten. 
Police said Aguilar saw a man flee the apartment and recognized him as the 
suspect, who had lived there with Duong previously. 
The fleeing man got into the car that Duong usually drove and sped off, police 
said. The car -- a gray, 4-door, 1984 Toyota Cressida with California license 
plate number 2 EQC 571 -- is registered to the suspect, police said. 
In an interview, Kurry said he received a telephone call Tuesday morning at the 
Express-News from a woman with a Vietnamese accent who "asked me if I knew 
anything about a killing in Fullerton." 
He said that during the call and subsequent telephone conversations with the 
woman, who identified herself only as "Pearl," it became clear that she is a 
relative of the suspect and had received calls from him. 
Kurry said that according to Pearl, Nguyen had been upset about his breakup 
with Duong and about the failure of his business in San Antonio, a restaurant 
called King Wah. Pearl said the restaurant had closed its doors for good on 
Sunday. 
Monday afternoon, Pearl drove Nguyen to an airport for a flight to San 
Francisco, according to Kurry. She described Nguyen as "emotional" and said she 
transported him at his request, Kurry said. 
Early Tuesday morning, Nguyen called Pearl and said "I'm going to kill them," 
according to Kurry. The call came shortly after 2 a.m. San Antonio time, Kurry 
said, about the same time that shots were heard at Duong's Fullerton apartment. 
In subsequent calls to the Express-News, Pearl said Nguyen had called and 
talked to her husband, saying he was going to kill himself. Later Nguyen asked 
Pearl's husband whether he should return to San Antonio, Kurry said. 
Police said Nguyen, a former Vietnamese air force pilot, immigrated to the 
United States in 1985. At that time he was married and had two children. His 
fluency in English landed him a job teaching the language to other immigrants. 
Late Tuesday, Hernandez said police were checking airports in case Nguyen had 
booked a flight back to San Antonio. Police also broadcast descriptions of 
Nguyen and his car to law enforcement agencies and released Nguyen's photograph 
to news media. 
Police asked anyone who encounters Nguyen or his car to immediately telephone 
Fullerton police at (714) 738-6800. 
