COMMON DRUGS MAY INHIBIT SEXUAL ACTIVITY; 
MEDICINE: AT LEAST 200 MEDICATIONS -- BOTH OVER-THE-COUNTER AND PRESCRIPTION -- 
CAN AFFECT PERFORMANCE OR ENJOYMENT. 
Is your sex life in shambles? Check to see what's in the medicine cabinet 
before heading to the doctor or sex therapist. 
Some widely used drugs can cause side effects that upset the delicate balance 
of the human libido or trigger physical problems that interfere with sexual 
fulfillment. 
Topping the list of culprits are blood-pressure pills and psychiatric drugs. 
But at least 200 medications -- both prescription and over-the-counter -- are 
known to influence sexual performance or enjoyment, says pharmacist M. Laurence 
Lieberman, author of "The Sexual Pharmacy" (New American Library, $18.95). 
Dr. Taylor Segraves, a psychiatry professor at Case Western Reserve medical 
school in Cleveland, said studies indicate about half of all sexual problems 
stem from physical causes and perhaps 10% of those cases are linked to drug 
side effects. 
"It's not a huge number, but if you happen to be one of those patients, it is 
quite significant," Segraves said. 
For people experiencing sexual difficulties, Segraves recommends that they make 
a list of what medications they have been taking -- and when they started using 
them -- and bring it along when they visit a doctor or sex therapist. 
"Most of the anti-hypertensive drugs may cause problems with male ejaculation 
or getting an erection," Segraves said, noting that studies have generally 
looked at the impact of the high-blood pressure drugs on male, not female, 
sexual activity. 
One type of anti-hypertensive that appears relatively free of sexual side 
effects are angiotensin-converting enzyme or ACE inhibitors, he said. 
Another class of drugs notorious for causing sexual problems are medications to 
alleviate mental disorders. 
Anti-psychotics like chlorprothixene and haloperidol have been reported to 
inhibit both ejaculation and orgasm, Segraves said. Lieberman also noted that 
some males taking haloperidol for Tourette's syndrome have experienced a 
decreased sex drive. 
In addition to creating difficulties similar to those caused by 
anti-psychotics, some tricyclic anti-depressants may interfere with the ability 
to get an erection, while monoamine oxidase-blocking anti-depressants can delay 
the ability to reach orgasm or ejaculation. 
Another bothersome drug from a sexual standpoint may be the acne-fighting drug 
isotretinoin or Accutane. A large-scale study found that 13% of females and 7% 
of males had a lowered sex drive after about one month of Accutane therapy, 
Lieberman said. 
There have also been reports of the tranquilizer Valium and other members of 
the benzodiazepine drug family inhibiting ejaculation. In fact, Segraves said, 
some of those medications, which depress the central nervous system, have been 
used in small doses to help men plagued by premature ejaculation. 
In the past, doctors had generally thought diuretics -- often prescribed for 
people with high blood pressure -- had no harmful effect on sex. But recently, 
some older men using the drugs have reported problems, Segraves said. 
In addition to sexual shortfalls, some medications also may lead to troublesome 
excesses. 
The benzodiazepines may lower people's normal social anxieties, prompting them 
to engage in sexual behavior they would normally shun. 
Drugs that increase levels of the brain chemical dopamine, such as levadopa for 
Parkinson's disease, have been reported to cause spontaneous -- and sometimes 
inappropriate -- erections in some patients. In one study, 10 of 41 patients 
treated with levadopa showed an increase in sexual activity. 
In a bizarre association, a couple of patients taking clomipramine, a drug 
recently approved for treating obsessive-compulsive disorder, have reported 
spontaneous orgasms when they yawned. 
What should someone do who suspects a medication may be playing havoc with his 
or her sexual enjoyment? 
Segraves said the first step should be to find a doctor or other medical 
professional who takes the complaint seriously. In the past, many doctors have 
steered clear of discussions about patients' sexual problems or dismissed such 
difficulties as medically unimportant. 
Younger physicians should have received better training about the sexual side 
effects of drugs and may also be more open to discussing sexual matters, 
although some may overlook the role of sex in an older person's life, Segraves 
said. 
If the problem does appear to be linked to drugs, a doctor may be able to lower 
a patient's dosage or switch them to a different class of drugs. "The patient 
and doctor have to have a good relationship. It may take a couple months of 
experimenting to find a drug that works," Segraves said. 
If changing drugs or lowering the dose would endanger health, Segraves said, a 
patient, after checking with a physician, may want to postpone taking an 
evening or morning dose of the drug until after he or she has intercourse. 
If delaying medication is also out of the question, a patient should not 
despair, he said. 
Patients can learn to enjoy other forms of sexual intimacy. Some men, said 
Segraves, may be able to artificially induce erection through drug injections, 
and in rare cases, a man may decide to have a penile prosthesis surgically 
implanted. 
SIDE EFFECTS FROM SOME DRUGS 
While their impact on sexuality may not be as dramatic as prescription drugs, 
some common over-the-counter medications can produce side effects that can 
disrupt -- or enhance -- sex and fertility. Here is a short list of examples 
compiled from "The Sexual Pharmacy" (New American Library, $18.95) by 
pharmacist M. Laurence Lieberman: 
Aspirin: May help improve male infertility by reducing inflammation of the 
genital tract. 
Brompheniramine: As little as 16 milligrams daily of this antihistamine has 
been reported to reverse the occasional problem of backward ejaculation in 
diabetics. 
Diphenhydramine: This antihistamine and several related drugs have been found 
to inhibit the movement of sperm, which could result in decreased fertility. 
Ibuprofen: At a maximum daily dose of 1,200 milligrams, it may delay the start 
of menstruation up to 14 days. It may also reduce fertility-impairing 
inflammation in men. 
L-tryptophan: Sexual disinhibition, such as lewd comments and inappropriate 
touching, have been reported among people given large doses on an empty 
stomach. This dietary supplement was recently recalled by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration after it was linked to a serious blood disorder. 
Vitamin D: May lower the sex drive if supplement is given at doses above 12,000 
units per day. 
