DESPERATE FLIGHT FAILS, 2 CAUGHT IN UTAH; 
SUSPECTS BELIEVED TO HAVE STOLEN TRUCK, 2 CYCLES IN ORANGE COUNTY 
Two teen-agers suspected of stealing a pickup truck and a couple of motorcycles 
in Orange County led police on a wild chase in Utah early Tuesday, repeatedly 
driving the wrong way on an interstate highway, hurtling medians and crashing 
through fences before they were captured. 
Along the way, the two motorcycles bounced out of the rear of the truck. The 
truck was abandoned as police closed in, but the two suspects were discovered, 
with the help of a police dog, hiding among houses in a tiny subdivision south 
of Cedar City. 
The chase began about 3:35 a.m. when Sgt. Kurt Wright saw the pickup truck 
speeding on State Street in the middle of Hurricane, a small southwestern Utah 
city near Zion National Park. 
Wright gave this rendition of the chase and capture: 
Wright attempted to stop the 1986 Nissan 4x4 pickup, unaware that it was 
stolen, but the vehicle speeded up and headed north out of town, onto 
Interstate 15, about 10 miles away. 
As he chased the truck, northbound on the freeway, Wright notified the Utah 
highway patrol in Cedar City, about 40 miles north, and authorities there began 
setting up roadblocks including spikes. He also learned, as he entered the 
interstate, that the truck was stolen. 
Wright, one of Hurricane's four-man Police Department and the only officer on 
duty at the time, was the sole lawman in pursuit until the suspects reached the 
exit for Hamilton Fort, a tiny town about 5 miles south of Cedar City. There, 
the suspects saw another officer waiting to join the pursuit, but in an effort 
to dodge the officer, they crossed over the highway median and continued 
speeding north in the freeway's southbound lanes. 
Through Another Fence 
They soon left the highway, crashing through a fence parallel to the 
interstate, and doubled back, speeding south on a frontage road in an attempt 
to elude authorities. The truck again burst through the fence, sped across the 
southbound lanes, over the median and into the northbound lanes, still 
proceeding south. 
The driver tried to exit at Hamilton Fort, but when the truck "hit a bump or 
something," the two motorcycles flew out and onto the highway. The truck then 
turned around and headed north once again on the highway. Again it went over 
the median, veered across the southbound lanes and crashed through the fence, 
into the Hamilton Fort subdivision. 
At that point, the two suspects abandoned the truck and fled into the 
subdivision, made up of about 20 houses, Wright said. Cedar City police were 
called in with their canine unit and spotlights, and they surrounded the 
subdivision. The police dog sniffed out the first suspect, a 17-year-old 
juvenile from Los Angeles, about 2 hours after the chase began, Wright said. 
The second suspect, 18-year-old George William Carter II of Laguna Hills, 
surrendered immediately afterward, he said. 
Carter was arraigned Tuesday in 5th Circuit Court in St. George on three counts 
each of of second-degree vehicle theft and possession of stolen property, and 
one count each of felony failure to stop at the command of a police officer, 
reckless driving and destruction of public property, valued at $1,200. Carter 
was held in lieu of $20,000 bail and his preliminary hearing was set for May 
24. 
The juvenile, who was not identified, was arraigned on three counts each of 
vehicle theft and possession of stolen property. He was transported to the 
Cedar City detention center when authorities were unable to find relatives. 
Wright said the pickup was reported stolen from El Toro on Sunday. The 
motorcycles were a 1987 Yamaha reported stolen Monday in Laguna Hills and a 
1989 Kawasaki, taken Saturday from the same area, he said. 
