CONTROLLERS' SITUATION STILL STIRS CONCERN; 
WORK CONDITIONS AT EL TORO FACILITY CALLED 'VERY POOR' 
Three years after it first described serious flaws in the nation's air traffic 
control system, a congressional watchdog agency said Thursday that the 
country's 14,400 air controllers are still seriously overworked, undertrained 
and demoralized. 
And there apparently are particular problems among the controllers who manage 
air traffic in and out of airports in Orange County and Long Beach, according 
to testimony at a congressional hearing on the study. 
Conditions at the air traffic control facility at the El Toro Marine Corps Air 
Station, which handles flights in Orange County and much of the busy air 
corridor between Los Angeles and San Diego, "are poor, and I would go so far as 
to say very poor," said Randy Moore, who heads the local branch of the 
controllers union. Moore was among three air traffic controllers who testified 
at Thursday's hearing. 
The margin of safety in the nation's skies remains "less than desirable," 
although flying on commercial airliners is not unsafe, a consulting firm hired 
by the General Accounting Office concluded. The GAO is the congressional 
investigative agency that conducted the study at the request of the 
investigations and oversight subcommittee of the Public Works and 
Transportation Committee. 
The GAO report "says, in effect, nothing has changed" since the agency released 
its last study in 1986, said Rep. Guy V. Molinari (R-N.Y.), the ranking 
minority member of the subcommittee, which conducted the hearing on the safety 
of the nation's air control system. 
Earlier this week, government safety officials blamed a near-collision between 
two airliners over Orange County last February on the failure of the Federal 
Aviation Administration, which employs the controllers, to correct problems at 
the Coast Terminal Radar Approach Control facility, the formal name of the El 
Toro tracking station. 
"I think they know the problem exists but I think it might take some public 
pushing like this hearing to actually get them in gear," Moore, in an 
interview, said of the FAA. "I hope they do something about it." 
The El Toro tracking facility "has been understaffed for some time," said 
Moore, the union local president. "In 1985 we had 22 (senior controllers). At 
the current date we have 23." 
Although the FAA has authorized a total of 65 controller positions at the 
station, only 45 are filled. 
The FAA has serious problems attracting controllers to Orange County because of 
the high cost of living, William Pollard, the FAA's associate administrator for 
air traffic, told the subcommittee. 
"Our system is such that controllers would make the same amount of money in a 
lesser cost-of-living area," Pollard said. 
The FAA tried to solve the problem last year by asking Congress to authorize 
higher salaries for controllers working in New York, Chicago and Southern 
California. However, legislators granted the pay differential only to 
controllers working at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport. 
Not the Only Problem 
Orange County's high cost of living is not the only problem facing the El Toro 
tracking station, Moore said. 
"It's a prewar building we're in. We have 342 square feet with 16 positions, 
eight radar screens and eight handoff positions," he said. The air-conditioning 
system keeps half the room cold and the other half warm, and on occasion fumes 
from the jet engines of fighter planes landing at the El Toro air station have 
nauseated controllers at their screens, Moore said. 
FAA acting administrator Robert E. Whittington told the subcommittee that his 
agency is already taking significant steps to increase the number of 
controllers, reduce their workload, curtail required overtime, update equipment 
and improve training. Whittington said he believes that controllers' morale is 
good. 
"The safety afforded by our air traffic control system remains high," 
Whittington said, citing statistics showing that near-collisions dropped from 
840 in 1986 to 712 in 1988, and that traffic controller errors fell from 1,202 
in 1986 to 1,042 last year. 
The GAO's finding that serious problems remain was based on a survey of 5,098 
controllers and air traffic supervisors. Responses were obtained from 80% of 
those to whom questionnaires were sent, a return rate that GAO officials 
described as remarkably high. 
Other Findings 
The study found that: 
 -- Sixty-five percent of the controllers said they routinely handle too many 
airplanes during peak traffic periods. Supervisors reported that 38% of their 
radar controllers handle too much traffic. 
 -- Nearly 60% of the controllers said that they typically work too long 
without a break. Although the FAA guidelines call for a break after every 2 
hours in front of the radar screen, 87% of the controllers said they had 
exceeded that limit at least once in the last month. 
 -- Although 43% of the controllers said they suffer from low morale, 
supervisors perceived controller morale as high. 
 -- A majority of the most senior and experienced controllers, who are formally 
designated as full performance level controllers, or FPLs, rated as inadequate 
nearly half of the procedures used to train new controllers. 
The figures are virtually unchanged from those presented in a 1986 report on a 
similar survey of controllers that was done in 1985, the study says. 
'Worst Suspicions and Fears' 
"We find that the report bears out many of our worst suspicions and fears," 
testified R. Steve Bell, president of the National Air Traffic Controllers 
Assn., the controllers union. "I can say that the FAA has a tired and 
demoralized work force that is fed up with the empty promises that have been 
served up in the last 8 years. . . . 
"It all boils down to business as usual. And it is a very poor way of doing 
business." 
In reply to a question from Rep. Glenn M. Anderson (D-Harbor City), chairman of 
the full committee, the official who headed the research effort for the GAO 
said that the survey results gave him pause. 
"It does give me some concern, not that the system is unsafe, but (about) what 
the FAA is willing to settle for as an acceptable level of safety." 
Since 1981, when President Reagan fired 11,400 striking members of the 
Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization, the number of air traffic 
controllers has increased to only 14,437. That is about 1,800 fewer than the 
pre-strike total. In addition, there are about 3,300 fewer senior controllers 
than before the strike, the study says. 
But the figures may understate the problem because the volume of the nation's 
air traffic has increased each year, the study notes. 
The FAA in the next 4 years plans to close the El Toro tracking facility and 
relocate it, along with three other stations in Southern California, in a new, 
consolidated station at a site yet to be determined, Pollard said. 
In the meantime, the agency will spend about $250,000 to improve the facility, 
the FAA official added. 
