LABOR: LAWS MUST CATCH UP WITH FAMILY LIFE 
Congress and corporations are finally showing signs that they are aware of the 
impact on family life of the dramatically changing role of women in the 
workplace. 
After years of inaction, Congress is on the verge of adopting a compromise bill 
to set up a multibillion-dollar child-care program. Much more is needed, but it 
will be a good beginning. 
Soon after that legislation passes and is signed by President Bush, who 
supports it, Congress is expected to adopt a bill to make sure workers have the 
right to get maternity and paternity leave from their jobs. 
The proposal requires employers to provide only unpaid leave when a child is 
born, which is unfortunate because that's when a couple needs not only the time 
off but a larger income. Again, though, it's a start. 
Also, there is clear evidence that employers are focusing more than ever on 
providing fringe benefits to help the growing number of "non-traditional" 
families. 
The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that its new survey of 100,000 companies 
indicates a trend toward an increase in family benefits, ranging from flexible 
work schedules to help for workers paying dependent-care costs. 
As more and more women have entered the work force, there has been a dramatic 
decline in traditional families, those in which the father has an outside job 
and the mother takes care of the kids and house. 
In just 15 years, the percentage of such families has been cut in half, to 23% 
of all households. 
Also, as recently as 20 years ago, about a third of all women had jobs outside 
of their homes. Today, 46% of them do, and that trend, too, is continuing. 
Nevertheless, while Congress and employers talked a lot, little was done by 
either of them to deal with the impact of the nation's new demography. 
That continuing demographic change was part of the much-needed women's 
liberation movement. It was also spurred by the decline in real wages of men, 
which has forced many women to find paying jobs just to maintain the family's 
standard of living. 
The change created problems for many families who never faced them before: Who 
takes care of the kids when mother and father are both away at work? What to do 
about duplicative health insurance when both husband and wife have insurance 
that can help protect the other? And so on. 
Flexible work schedules can help. For the first time, the BLS survey included a 
question on flexible schedules and found that 11% of employers now offer 
workers the right to begin and end work within a range of hours to help them 
meet family commitments. 
A BLS spokesman said past spot checks show that the number of those on flexible 
schedules has gone up significantly in the past few years, and the trend is 
continuing. 
Also useful to the modern family are flexible benefits, and they, too, are 
rising rapidly. The survey showed 9% of workers are now given a choice, for 
example, of whether to take longer vacations or increase some other benefit 
instead of taking health insurance that is already provided by a spouse. 
While that percentage is low, it's still far higher than the 2% who had 
flexible benefits just two years ago, and a Wyatt Co. survey found that half of 
the companies it checked plan to offer a choice of benefits within the next 
five years. 
Another assist: "reimbursement accounts" from which employees can draw money, 
tax-free, to pay for such things as care for children and for elderly family 
members. 
Four years ago, only 5% of workers surveyed by BLS were offered reimbursement 
accounts. Now 23% can use them, and their ranks are swelling rapidly. 
While workers have to finance the accounts, the significant tax advantages make 
them worthwhile. Obviously, the plan would be much better if employers kicked 
in some contribution, too. 
The urgent need for government action to assure workers of maternity and 
paternity leave was made obvious by the latest government figures: Only 37% of 
women workers are given even unpaid maternity leave by their employers, and 
only 18% of male workers can get paternity leave. 
Don't give credit where it isn't due. Altruism wasn't a big motivating factor 
in spurring Congress or employers to action. 
Congress is finally acting because such benefits are increasingly popular 
politically, a point being hammered home in intensive lobbying by unions, 
women's groups and others. 
And companies, too, are usually acting out of self-interest. Many do it under 
union pressure, and many more know they have to offer such benefits to attract 
and hold workers, especially women, who already make up nearly half of the work 
force. 
As observed by Dallas Salisbury, of the Employment Benefit Research Institute, 
it costs big money for companies to train newly hired young women, only to lose 
them when the women find later that they cannot balance the requirements of 
their jobs with family needs. 
Karen Ignagni, head of the AFL-CIO employee benefits department, says such 
benefits also increase productivity of workers, since they can do their jobs 
better if they aren't worrying about neglecting their families at home. 
Studies show that increased productivity more than offsets the added costs of 
the benefits, she said. 
It is good to see that at last Congress and increasing numbers of employers are 
at least taking some steps to deal with problems stemming from the increasing 
number of women who work outside their homes. 
