OPPONENT ATTACKS KORENSTEIN'S SALVO AT PORTER RANCH 
A Los Angeles school board candidate said Saturday that incumbent Julie 
Korenstein's attack on the proposed $2-billion Porter Ranch development is "a 
campaign publicity ploy" designed to mask "an overenrollment crisis" that 
Korenstein has failed to solve. 
Gerald E. Horowitz did not endorse the Porter Ranch plan, which calls for 3,000 
residences and 7.5 million square feet of commercial development in the hills 
above Chatsworth. But he called Korenstein's attack "curious" since the 
developer has set aside five acres for construction of a school and will pay 
the Los Angeles Unified School District millions of dollars in state-mandated 
fees. 
At a news conference at Castlebay Lane School in Northridge, Horowitz accused 
Korenstein and fellow Board of Education members of allowing busing of pupils 
under the Capacity Adjustment Program to create "educational havoc" in west San 
Fernando Valley schools. 
Horowitz, principal of Byrd Junior High School in Sun Valley and Korenstein's 
opponent in the June 6 runoff election, said students from overcrowded schools 
are being bused under the program to 61 West Valley schools, where frequent new 
arrivals disrupt classes. 
Yet four other West Valley schools have been "capped" by crowding, forcing new 
enrollees in those neighborhoods to attend more distant schools, he said. "I 
don't want to see all the West Valley schools being 'capped out' to other 
schools," he said. 
"Any time you bus a youngster, you're disrupting the educational process and 
family life," Horowitz said. 
Horowitz noted that 16 Valley schools remain closed despite the overcrowding. 
"What we don't have is a board member who has the sense and the ability to get 
those schools open, cut the CAP program and put temporary classrooms on the 
campuses where they are most needed," Horowitz said. 
But Korenstein accused Horowitz of getting "his facts wrong, per usual." She 
said overcrowded schools already have temporary classrooms and bus pupils to 
less crowded schools when space for more temporary classrooms is exhausted. 
School to Reopen 
Korenstein said Parthenia School is to be reopened next fall through her 
efforts. "Yes, we have overcrowding and, yes, we must reopen closed schools, 
and my being on the Board of Education has made it possible for the very first 
San Fernando Valley school that's been closed to be reopened," she said. 
Korenstein said she opposes the Porter Ranch project not only because of the 
impact it would have on schools but because of the effect it would have on air 
quality and traffic. "It's going to be a small Century City," she said. 
Accusing Korenstein of failing to back district administrators in Monday's 
scheduled teachers' strike, Horowitz said she is "bought and paid for" by the 
teachers union. She "represents the union and not the kids of our community," 
and has "no conscience about damaging their future," he said. 
Korenstein maintained that she has put students first. "I am encouraging a 
solid, competitive salary for teachers" to provide "the best teachers for our 
children," she said. 
Korenstein led five challengers in the April 11 election for the West Valley 
seat on the board but fell 57 votes short of the 50% plus one vote needed to 
avoid a runoff. Horowitz qualified for the runoff by finishing second with 22% 
of the vote. 
