HOOVER DEFENSE SEEKS MISTRIAL OVER DOCUMENTS 
Arguing that prosecutors deliberately withheld "critical" statements by J. 
David (Jerry) Dominelli that could clear their client, lawyers for Nancy Hoover 
Hunter on Wednesday asked a federal judge to dismiss the 234-count indictment 
against her. 
In a written motion filed with the court, Hoover's attorneys cited transcripts 
of grand jury testimony and other documents in which Dominelli claimed that 
Hunter, his former live-in companion, was unaware of the illegal activity that 
led to the collapse of J. David &amp; Co., the La Jolla investment they 
operated. 
Lawyer Wants Dismissal 
"The prosecutor's suppression of Dominelli's statements exonerating Hunter from 
involvement in major aspects of his fraud mandates the dismissal of the 
indictment," the lawyers said in the motion filed with U. S. District Judge 
Earl B. Gilliam. 
The lawyers, Richard Marmaro and Robert S. Brewer, based their motion on a 
federal court rule known as the Brady Doctrine, which requires prosecutors to 
turn over to defense attorneys all information favorable to the defendant, 
generally as soon as the material is discovered. 
Marmaro and Brewer have been engaged in an unusually bitter dispute with 
Assistant U. S. Atty. S. Gay Hugo over the production of documents since before 
the trial began nearly two months ago. The defense has made repeated motions 
for a mistrial, all of which have been turned down by Gilliam. 
"On May 18, 1989, the prosecutor, in one fell swoop, topped all of her previous 
misconduct by disclosing heretofore suppressed Brady material which had been in 
her possession for years," the lawyers said in their motion Wednesday. 
"This is critical exculpatory material as well as evidence which could have 
been used by the defense to effectively cross-examine several of the 
government's witnesses who have already testified," the motion says. 
Accused of Suppression 
The lawyers said there is "no plausible explanation or justification" for the 
prosecution's withholding of Dominelli's statements, and accused Hugo of 
deliberately suppressing the information. 
"She has stopped playing by the rules, and she has adopted a 'win at all costs' 
strategy, trampling along the way on court orders, due process rights and 
fundamental fairness," the motion says. 
Gilliam is expected to hold a hearing on the motion today or Friday. 
Because of a gag order imposed by Gilliam last week, Hugo was not permitted to 
respond to reporters' questions about the new defense allegations. 
Hunter is charged with 234 counts of fraud, conspiracy, income-tax evasion and 
making false statements to a federal agent. The charges stem from her 
involvement as a top executive in J. David &amp; Co., which collapsed in 1984 
when nervous investors forced it into bankruptcy court. The ensuing 
investigations revealed a huge Ponzi scheme, in which money from new clients 
was used to pay off old investors and little or no trading was done. 
Dominelli pleaded guilty to federal charges and is serving a 20-year prison 
sentence. 
Hunter's lawyers are attempting to convince the jury that Dominelli alone was 
responsible for the $180-million fraud, and that Hunter was blinded by her love 
for him. 
At issue in the mistrial motion are six documents dated from Feb. 15, 1984, to 
Jan. 28, 1988. The defense obtained the documents last week from the 
prosecutors. 
Dominelli Interview 
In one of the documents, an FBI memorandum prepared April 16, 1985, an unnamed 
agent summarized an interview he had with Dominelli. 
"Dominelli advised that no one else involved in J. David &amp; Co. or J. David 
Banking Co. Ltd. knew of the fact that the business was a sham, including . . . 
Nancy Hoover or any of the salesmen. . . . He said no one ever knew of the 
financial trouble the company was in until the end because he discussed it with 
no one, including (Mark) Yarry, Hoover or anyone else," the memorandum says. 
Yarry was another top J. David executive. 
Another of the documents is a note written by Dominelli on Feb. 15, 1984, about 
the time the firm was collapsing. Referring to Yarry and Hunter, Dominelli 
said: "At no time were they aware of any actions I may have taken with regard 
to client funds entrusted to me or any of my companies. . . . I assume full 
responsibility for any and all discrepancies that may arise . . . ." 
Also at issue is a transcript of Dominelli's testimony before a grand jury on 
May 20, 1986. During that session, under questioning by Hugo, Dominelli said 
that he, not Hunter, opened all the mail containing confirmation information 
about trades he made through brokerage houses. Hunter, he said, opened all 
other mail. 
Hugo had claimed in her opening statement to the jury that Hunter opened all 
the firm's mail. 
"This testimony is a direct rebuttal of the government's theory," Hunter's 
lawyers said in their motion. 
They also alleged that Hugo was guilty of "blatant lies" when she said in court 
more than a month ago that all so-called "Brady material" had been turned over 
to the defense. 
The trial continues today. 
