LEGISLATURE OKS EXTRA $50 MILLION TO KEEP IMMIGRANT EDUCATION ALIVE 
The Legislature on Friday passed and sent to Gov. George Deukmejian compromise 
legislation providing an extra $50 million to keep immigrant education programs 
operating for the rest of the fiscal year. 
The Assembly, after a compromise was worked out between Deukmejian and 
Democratic supporters of the bill, passed the legislation on a 61-0 vote. 
Minutes later, the Senate gave final legislative approval, 36 to 0. Deukmejian 
is expected to sign the bill, carried by Sen. Art Torres (D-Los Angeles). 
Funding for the special classes, offering English and civics instruction to 
immigrants under the 1986 federal amnesty program, had run dry because of the 
unexpectedly large number of aliens applying for the instruction. 
The program is financed by the federal government, but administered by the 
state. Deukmejian originally had budgeted $100 million for the program during 
the current fiscal year, which ends June 30, but those funds already have been 
largely exhausted. The bill calls for the extra $50 million to come from next 
year's proposed allocation of $180 million. Torres said he also will seek more 
money next year. 
Supporters of the legislation said the special schools are crucial because 
immigrants are required to pass a test that demonstrates basic English and 
civics skills or face deportation. Unless the extra money was made available, 
backers of the bill said, many of the aliens granted temporary residence status 
under the amnesty program would have been threatened with deportation. 
Some classes around the state have already closed because of the budget 
shortfall. The instruction is offered by a variety of school districts and 
nonprofit agencies. Many offer midnight and early morning classes to those who 
work during the day or into the night. Some schools offer classes in off-beat 
locations, like coin laundries, because demand is so high that there are not 
enough regular classrooms to go around. 
Not all of the 1.5 million people in California who applied for legalization 
benefits under the amnesty program are required to take the special classes. 
Some can do well enough on their own to pass the tests. But state officials 
said many of those applying for the schooling have such a poor grasp of English 
that they need more hours of instruction than officials had anticipated when 
setting up the program. 
Administration officials had wanted to put a limit of 100 hours on the amount 
of instruction each person would be allowed, but Torres and other supporters of 
the bill refused to go along with the cap. 
