ABANDONING THE BOX; 
TODAY'S EXECUTIVES ARE LIGHTENING THEIR LOADS WITH SOFTER, FLEXIBLE PORTFOLIOS 
Robert Wolf, vice chairman of the Los Angeles advertising agency Chiat/Day, 
used to go to business meetings toting a conventional hard-sided briefcase. But 
today he uses a lightweight $300 canvas and leather case to carry his papers. 
"It's more flexible," Wolf explained. "You can get more stuff into it. I carry 
mostly papers from work, but I also carry a dictating machine and a 
calculator." The case is "light and it has a shoulder strap, which is a real 
advantage over a leather briefcase when you are running through airports trying 
to catch a plane." 
One of the country's most celebrated deal makers, real estate magnate Donald J. 
Trump of New York, summed up the current attitude toward briefcases in his 
autobiography: "I play it very loose. I don't carry a briefcase." 
Across the country these are tough times for traditional "business cases," a 
category that includes the soft accordion-like rectangular leather briefcases 
used by many lawyers, extremely wide "catalogue cases" used by salesmen as well 
as the slender, strongbox-like attache case favored by many tradition-minded 
business executives. 
A cooling off of the nation's seven-year-long economic expansion, an explosion 
of new business technology such as portable computers and cellular telephones, 
as well as the rising number of women executives who prefer lighter-weight 
portfolios, have combined to erode the status and utility of familiar 
leather-bound business cases, once used chiefly to shuttle papers and lunch 
from home to office. 
"In the business world, the attache case is not the status symbol it once was," 
said John T. Molloy, a management consultant and author of the book "Dress for 
Success." 
"Many top executives don't even carry briefcases any more," Molloy continued. 
"If they carry anything, they carry a small leather (portfolio)." 
It's not just top executives that are forgoing briefcases, however. Many 
younger middle mangers -- unconstrained by tradition -- are opting for 
alternatives. 
Revenue Up Slightly 
During the past three years, when unit sales of other hand luggage rose 9% to 
86.7 million, unit sales of business cases -- which includes the soft-sided 
canvas-type carried by Wolf -- have remained at about 11.4 million, said Robert 
K. Ermatinger, executive vice president of Luggage &amp; Leather Goods 
Manufacturers of America Inc., a private industry trade group in New York. 
Wholesale revenue from business cases climbed only slightly last year to $646 
million from $615 million in 1987, according to the trade group. And with 
businesses paring their work forces of executives these days in an attempt to 
run leaner and more competitive, sales might grow even more sluggish. 
"As the economy goes, so goes the sale of business cases," said Herbert 
Schlesinger, vice president of Berlin, N.J.-based Schlesinger Co., a leading 
American manufacturer of leather briefcases. 
From the late 1970s to 1988 the industry was blessed with a combination "of 
status-conscious yuppies . . . and a booming business expansion," Schlesinger 
explained. But today, he said, "the market is saturated" with business cases. 
The industry has not stood still in the face of these challenges. 
Although the traditional briefcase market still accounts for the bulk of sales, 
manufacturers are scrambling to offer variations on the theme. Consumers can 
buy everything from a $10,000 James Bond-like briefcase with eavesdropping 
devices offered by CCS Communication Control Corp. of New York, to canvas 
carrying cases and oversized portfolios with shoulder straps. 
Yet even in the traditional market of standard 18-by-12-by-4-inch briefcases, 
there has been a proliferation of new materials and designs. 
At the exotic end of the scale are elephant and alligator cases that cost 
upward of $1,500. More typical are $80 to $400 black, brown or burgundy leather 
and vinyl cases, said Lewis Savinar of H. Savinar Luggage Co., a family-run 
discount retailer in Los Angeles. But there are also canvas, wooden and even 
gold, silver or black aluminum cases. 
Manufacturers are not only tinkering with the outward appearance of business 
cases. Inside, they have been adding more compartments, flaps and pockets to 
hold things such as pens, calculators, business cards and appointment books. 
"From a merchant's standpoint, the sheer variety of selection has become tough 
to manage," Savinar said. 
Influence of Women 
"A super-conservative buyer like a lawyer or an accountant would buy the brief 
bag; a lot of judges, for instance, buy these," Savinar said, pointing to the 
accordion-like bags that close at the top with a small flap. 
Those a little less conservative, he said, often stick with a basic leather 
attache case. And trendy yuppies and "your entertainment industry types" are 
partial to the $340 to $560 silver and black aluminum briefcases marketed by 
Zero Halliburton, a division of Zero Corp. of Los Angeles. 
But it is the rise of women executives that has caused perhaps the biggest 
rethinking in business case design and marketing. 
Sarah Stack, first vice president at the Los Angeles investment house of 
Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards, is typical of those women executives who have 
chosen a soft-sided case over a hard-sided briefcase. 
"Style was a minimal consideration" when she decided to forgo a traditional 
briefcase and buy a soft-sided, expandable portfolio case, Stack said. 
"Basically, I brought it because it was cheap and functional," Stack said. "I 
can carry my lunch in it, my calculator and my appointment book. I don't think 
people's egos are as tied up in what they carry," she said, adding that she's 
seen a lot of men carry portfolios. 
In the past few years, manufacturers have alternately toyed with bright colors, 
slimmer designs and softer materials in an effort to appeal to women 
executives. Yet, except for preferring lighter-weight products with shoulder 
straps, most women generally stick with the same conservative colors and styles 
that men purchase, retailers say. 
"They buy the same thing men buy," Savinar said. "The only difference is that 
they don't like anything heavy. Savinar said many women customers at his store 
buy small three-inch-wide briefcases or portfolios -- a flat portable leather 
case that usually closes at the top with a zipper or a leather flap. 
Indeed, although attache cases still outsell all other business cases, unit 
sales of portfolios increased 115,000 to 5.17 million from 1987 to 1988, nearly 
twice the unit increase of attache cases, according to the Luggage &amp; 
Leather Goods Manufacturers of America. 
Dorothy Penix, executive vice president of Hartmann Luggage Co., a division of 
Brown-Forman Corp. of Louisville, Ky., concedes that "women have had a big 
impact on us. We now offer a little softer design and the addition of shoulder 
straps on some portfolios," Penix said. 
Attached to Old Cases 
Technology is also having a big impact on the design of briefcases. 
At least one company, Rona of Little Ferry, N.J., now offers a briefcase with a 
compartment for a mobile cellular telephone. The company already produces other 
models designed to hold tape recorders and typewriters. 
Yet, while many manufacturers are experimenting with unusual designs and 
materials, some experts complain that it's difficult to get consumers to try 
some of the newer variations because people become so attached to their old 
briefcase. What's more, prices for new leather cases have escalated sharply in 
recent years. 
"Briefcases are like a desk away from the office," observed Penix, of Hartmann 
Luggage Co. "A good briefcase helps you organize your life. People get very 
emotionally attached to their briefcases. We've done a lot of repairs for 
people who've had their briefcases for 20 years or more and don't want to give 
them up for a new one." 
