BACK IN HIGH GEAR; 
MICHIGAN'S ECONOMY STAGES BROAD RECOVERY AFTER ITS NEAR COLLAPSE 
The state of Michigan is undergoing a striking economic recovery these days, 
with jobs going begging in some areas. In fact, on Friday the state announced 
that its unemployment rate continued to fall, even as the nation's jobless rate 
inched upward. 
For Michigan, it's been a long road back. Seven years ago, in fact, this state 
almost went out of business. The recession that gave America an economic cold 
in the early 1980s left the state with pneumonia. 
Overwhelmingly dependent on the auto industry, which found itself in the midst 
of its most traumatic crisis since the 1930s, Michigan suffered nearly a total 
economic collapse. 
By 1982 -- when the state's jobless rate peaked at a stunning 17.3% -- an 
eerie, desperate silence had descended on Michigan's industrial heartland. 
With tens of thousands of auto workers receiving layoff notices each month, 
plant closings became so numerous that each new idling hardly rated a mention 
in Detroit's newspapers. 
Jobless Emigrating to Sun Belt 
Detroit's soup kitchens were bulging, and the lines at the state's unemployment 
offices frequently snaked around the block. By December, 1982, a staggering 
750,000 people were out of work in a state with a total population of just 9 
million. 
"Michigan had more unemployed people than lots of states had people," recalls 
Doug Ross, Michigan's commerce secretary. With tax revenue plunging, the 
state's government was so broke that it had to turn to a consortium of Japanese 
banks to pay its bills. 
Soon, the highways south to Texas were filling up with what Texans, then still 
riding their oil high, derisively called the "black taggers." They were the new 
Okies, jobless auto workers emigrating to the Sun Belt in search of work, and 
easily identifiable by the black Michigan license plates on their domestic vans 
and cars. 
As a result, Michigan, once known as the pre-eminent manufacturing center of 
the nation, quickly gained a new reputation: It was dubbed the buckle of the 
Rust Belt, the most depressed state in the most depressed region in the 
country. 
"The Rust Belt reputation had a lot of truth to it at the beginning of the 
decade," concedes Ross. 
But today, much of that rust has been scraped away, and Michigan is now in the 
midst of a dramatic economic turnaround. 
No longer a basket case, Michigan now has a balanced budget and has become a 
prime example of how a state can survive and flourish in the wake of a 
devastating blow to its main industry. 
Indeed, the economic changes that are helping the entire Rust Belt to recover 
can be seen most dramatically here in Michigan. The rate of job growth since 
1982 has not only outpaced its neighboring states, but the national average as 
well. Thanks to the creation of 616,000 new jobs, Michigan's jobless rate has 
fallen by more than 10 percentage points since 1982 to just 6.1% today, and 
employment is now at an all time high. While the state's unemployment rate 
remains higher than the national average, its dramatic tumble has drawn 
national attention to the turnaround here. In fact, Michigan officials bragged 
Friday, the gap between the state and national unemployment rates in April was 
at its narrowest in a decade. 
"The changes seem sharper here because we went through a more traumatic 
period," Ross says. "We saw the beast. But you are seeing some aspects of it 
happening in Illinois, Ohio and Indiana." 
Market Driven Rebound 
Yet Michigan's growth has not come as a result of any grand state policies, or 
from any governmental efforts to target industrial winners and losers, state 
officials and economists agree. "This is a free market phenomenon, this is 
clearly the result of people reacting to market forces," acknowledges Mark 
Murray, a research economist with the state commerce department. 
Although Democratic Gov. James J. Blanchard has been credited with reducing 
tensions between state government and the business community, "It is still 
extremely hard to tell the role that government policy has played," says 
University of Michigan economist Paul Courant. "This recovery has primarily 
been market driven." 
And, perhaps more surprisingly, Michigan's recovery has also not come by 
diversifying away from the auto industry, which has dominated the state's 
economy since the turn of the century. 
Rather, growth has come, Ross and others like to say, by diversifying "through 
the auto industry," into new automation-related fields spawned by heavy 
manufacturing's new need to compete with the Japanese. 
The auto industry's demand for robots and other automation equipment has led to 
the creation of dozens of new companies in the Detroit area that are supplying 
advanced manufacturing technology to the Big Three auto makers. 
So many of them have located in the area, in order to be near the auto 
companies' headquarters, that a stretch of suburban Detroit from Ann Arbor to 
Troy, Mich., has been dubbed "Automation Alley." 
The Alley is now home to some 400 manufacturing technology firms, with $5 
billion in total sales and employing 35,000 workers. Many are actually owned by 
the Big Three -- Electronic Data Systems, General Motors' computer services 
subsidiary, has transferred thousands of workers from its Dallas headquarters 
to the Detroit area to service GM. 
Won Foreign Customers 
Another GM affiliate, GMFanuc, a joint venture between General Motors and Fanuc 
of Japan, is now the largest robot company in America, and is based in Auburn 
Hills, a Detroit suburb on the northeastern end of the alley. 
Many of these companies -- involved in such arcane fields as robotics, machine 
vision, and manufacturing applications of artificial intelligence, have now won 
over new customers among the Japanese and European auto makers. Nissan for 
instance, has just opened a big research and development center in Ann Arbor. 
Some firms are branching out into other industries as well, looking for sales 
in the aerospace and appliance industries. 
As a result, Detroit is fast becoming the new national center for manufacturing 
technology. 
"What we've got here is a critical mass of firms that makes us the intellectual 
center of the action for those trying to find out how you apply new information 
technology to manufacturing," Ross says. 
This new technology-based sector has led to rapid growth in service sector 
employment, mostly in the Detroit area, which has more than offset the decline 
in manufacturing jobs. 
Between 1979 and 1982, Michigan lost 431,000 jobs, including 292,000 in 
manufacturing, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Although just 
94,000 manufacturing jobs were regained by 1987, 557,000 non-manufacturing jobs 
had also been newly created in the state, according to a University of Michigan 
study released at a recent seminar on the state's economy. 
"This is the first economic cycle in Michigan in which manufacturing employment 
has declined at the same time that we have had a decline in the unemployment 
rate," observes George Fulton, a University of Michigan economist. 
Fear Fed Policies 
Other sectors of the state's economy are blossoming as well. The Grand Rapids 
area in western Michigan has regained its status as one of the nation's leading 
centers of furniture manufacturing with a new emphasis on modern office 
furnishings. Meanwhile, plastics manufacturers, established here to serve the 
auto and furniture industries, are now winning over other new customers. State 
officials say 25% of the nation's growth in the plastics industry in 1987 
occurred in Michigan. 
But despite the recovery, the state's economy remains vulnerable. Blanchard 
warned this month that the Federal Reserve Board's recent tight-money, high 
interest rate policies threaten the auto industry as well as Michigan's 
turnaround, and called on other Midwest governors to join him in a protest 
against the Fed. 
Meanwhile, many center-cities in Michigan, like others around the nation, have 
never made it back from the recession of the early '80s. Auto factory towns 
such as Flint and Pontiac and the central city of Detroit, lost plants but have 
not benefitted from the growth in high-technology jobs, which have generally 
gone to affluent suburban areas. 
"To the extent that you're a GM factory town, you ended up in trouble," Ross 
says. "What has hurt the Flints and the Pontiacs and the Detroits is that they 
had people who couldn't switch over to the new information-based technology. 
"Our problem right now is that we have a mismatch of people and jobs." 
