BIRTH MOTHER BECOMES PART OF EXTENDED FAMILY 
Amanda Bialack, a precocious and outgoing 4-year-old, opened the front door of 
her family's Encino home, the smile on her face hinting at her excitement. 
"Hi!" she said, stretching up to exchange quick kisses with Jeanne Furie. 
"Hi, bunky," Furie said. 
Hugs and kisses with Amanda's parents, Maggie and Ed, followed before Furie, 
24, joined them on the living room couch and began chatting. Amanda 
participated by joyfully climbing between them and, just as often, on them. 
Later that evening, as she jumped up and down on her bed, Amanda was asked 
about Furie. 
"She grew me," Amanda explained. 
Is she your mother? a visitor inquired. 
"No. Maggie's my mom," Amanda replied, as if the answer were ridiculously 
obvious. "Jeanne's my aunt." 
In truth, however, both Maggie and Jeanne are, in different ways, mother to 
Amanda. Maggie is her adoptive mother. Jeanne is her birth mother. Together, 
they represent a small but growing number of people involved over the last 
decade in the process known as cooperative adoption. 
Cooperative adoption means that ongoing contact is maintained between the 
adoptive family and the biological mother (it is extremely rare for birth 
fathers to maintain contact). 
The degree of contact varies and is controlled by the adoptive parents, who 
have legal say over the situation. 
Contact may be restricted to a yearly exchange of letters and photos, or, as in 
Amanda's case, may involve frequent face-to-face meetings with the birth mother 
and other blood relatives -- Furie's mother also sees Amanda regularly. 
At age 2, when Amanda first began asking about the birth process, she was told 
that Maggie's "stomach was broken" and that Furie helped out by "growing" 
Amanda for her parents, Ed and Maggie, who then adopted her. Just how much 
Amanda truly comprehends is unknown, given the mysteries of the 4-year-old 
mind. 
Yet, at some level, Amanda understands and is comfortable with the situation, 
the Bialacks say. "I really think kids have a tremendous ability to put things 
in their place without complicating it with the psychobabble that adults add," 
Maggie said. 
Supporters hail cooperative adoption as a healthy alternative to traditional 
adoption, a process seen as cruelly secretive and detrimental to everyone, 
particularly the child. Maintaining contact, they say, helps adopted children 
deal with the deep psychological scars that can arise from feeling they were 
abandoned at birth and answers their questions about their identity. 
"Children suffer great loss in adoption. The more we can cut that loss, the 
less they suffer," said Sharon Kaplan, executive director of Parenting 
Resources in Tustin and a leading advocate of cooperative adoption. 
However, its critics condemn cooperative adoption as a dangerous experiment 
that only complicates an already complex web of parent-child relationships. 
"Adoption should be a total transfer of family membership, legally and 
socially," said William Pierce, spokesman for the National Committee for 
Adoption, an independent agency in Washington advocating traditional adoption 
practices. 
"Cooperative adoption strikes me as a kind of psychological joint custody or 
prolonged foster care," he said. "Children need one set of parents they can 
rely on in an unambiguous way. Cooperative adoption is just a dangerous fad." 
The Bialacks and Furie acknowledge that their arrangement is a journey through 
uncharted waters that most people find troublesome. But they also feel strongly 
that their course of action is preferable to traditional adoption and has 
served them well. Amanda is thriving, they agree, and the openness of the 
arrangement has enriched all their lives. 
"The only problem we've had so far is the response of other people who think we 
don't know what we're doing," said Maggie, a 42-year-old bookkeeper. "But we 
do. We're taking it step by step." 
If, in the future, cooperative adoption no longer appears to be in Amanda's 
best interest, she said, the arrangement, which is entirely voluntary, will be 
reconsidered. 
"She's only 4. We have a long way to go with this," Ed said. "We don't have all 
the answers. We just know what our love and instincts tell us." 
The Bialacks were introduced to cooperative adoption by their social worker at 
Vista del Mar Child and Family Services, the Cheviot Hills agency that arranged 
Amanda's adoption. Only about 2% of the 150 adoptions annually arranged at 
Vista del Mar involve cooperative adoption, according to officials there. 
The Bialacks met Furie during the adoption and liked her (she was an unwed 
teen-ager; the birth father was already out of the picture). Still, they had 
their doubts. 
"I was very threatened at first," Maggie said. "My feeling was, just because I 
can't bear children doesn't mean I want to share parenting. The fear was that 
Amanda would automatically love her birth mother more and run off with her 
someday." 
Ed, an attorney who practices business law, said he also felt "very insecure, 
very threatened." 
Despite those feelings, the social worker, Selma Hersh, now retired and living 
in Carlsbad, recalled that the Bialacks "immediately sought to go beyond their 
fears. They responded positively to the idea because they felt it was best for 
Amanda." 
The first step, taken soon after Amanda's adoption became final, was to contact 
Furie through the adoption service. A letter was sent suggesting further 
contact through the mail. But Furie, still agonizing over the loss of her 
child, rejected the idea. 
The breakthrough came when Amanda was about 5 months old. A local television 
news program researching a story on cooperative adoption approached the 
Bialacks for an interview. They agreed and again contacted Furie to ask if she 
wanted to be included. 
This time, Furie responded positively. "My situation had changed," she said. "I 
had grieved enough. We hadn't even talked yet about me seeing Amanda, but I 
decided that's what I wanted to do. I wanted to know how she was doing. 
"I didn't realize at the time that it would lead to such a major change in my 
life." 
