A EUROPEAN VIEW: SECURITY NOT DEPENDENT ON TANKS; 
NATO: AMERICA AND EUROPE APPEAR TO BE AT ODDS OVER CONTINENTAL SECURITY. EUROPE 
SEEKS A CONSENSUS THAT USE OF MILITARY FORCE IS INCONCEIVABLE. 
Apotentially calamitous rift between American and European thinking on the 
future of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is developing. Several 
visiting U.S. officials have said, in effect: "We must get a unified Germany 
into NATO -- and be done with it." 
What they mean is that the Kremlin's escalating difficulties should be 
exploited and the alliance's military component strengthened. The worry here is 
that these assertions reflect State Department policy. 
The preferred policy in Europe is exactly the opposite. Europeans have 
witnessed the crisis of communism in the East. They have followed the agony of 
the Communist parties in Western Europe. The sense of relief they now feel as a 
result of the changes coming out of 1989 is well justified: Europeans have 
lived with the Iron Curtain for decades. 
In all the media analysis of the emerging situation, however, there is a 
fundamental omission. NATO's conventional forces in Central Europe are now 
superior to the Warsaw Pact's. This advantage is so recent and surprising that 
it seems incredible. 
Assuming that the Bush-Gorbachev agreement to limit the number of American and 
Soviet soldiers, respectively, in Central Europe to 195,000 is enshrined in a 
treaty, NATO troop strength will be: 195,000 Americans, 400,000 West Germans, 
70,000 British, 50,000 French and roughly 12,000 Belgians, Dutch and Canadians. 
Facing them will be the 195,000 Soviets troops. The armies of Poland, 
Czechoslovakia and Hungary follow the orders of center-right or Christian 
Democratic governments, hardly knee-jerk communist allies. 
The Vienna negotiations to reduce conventional forces, moreover, aim to 
severely deprive those and other Soviet soldiers up to the Urals of military 
hardware. Under such restraints, who could honestly expect a sudden Soviet 
conventional attack? How could NATO forces be surprised when the nearly 
signature-ready Vienna Protocols identify more than 140,000 pieces of offensive 
military equipment, from the Atlantic to the Urals, subject to international 
verification and inspection? 
The Soviets, to be sure, will have their huge arsenal of more than 25,000 
nuclear warheads. But nobody can foresee the circumstances in which such an 
arsenal would be used, even if unrest spreads throughout the Soviet Union and 
Mikhail S. Gorbachev is overthrown. This is precisely the reason why the Soviet 
leader should not be faced with such challenges as a militarily stronger NATO. 
On this side of the Atlantic, more and more people think that "security" should 
be divorced from a balance of military power. Rather, it should be hinged to a 
consensus that military power is irrelevant. This belief is reflected in the 
views of several West European leaders who have stressed -- most recently 
during the NATO meeting in Brussels on May 3 -- that the Conference on Security 
and Cooperation in Europe, not NATO, is the best vehicle for maintaining 
security on the Continent. 
At the heart of European thinking is the idea of "security areas," a 
geographical zone in which people share loyalty to the principles of democracy, 
the renunciation of the military force, peaceful settlement of disputes and 
cooperation. Most of the 35 member states of the conference might eventually 
form a "security area." 
Is this utopia? 
Not at all. Such a "security area" already exists in Western Europe -- the 
European Community. That one of its 12 members would use military force against 
another is inconceivable. Thus, military force is irrelevant. The Scandinavian 
states certainly are another example of the triumph of this concept of 
security. The East European nations, now liberated from communism and adopting 
the principles and practices of democratic countries, may be the next converts. 
Although the Soviet military threat to Western Europe has, for all practical 
purposes, disappeared, it certainly would require a large dose of optimism to 
conceive of the "security area" including the Soviet Union, at least in the 
near future. In calling for a NATO summit meeting in June "to consider the 
future political mission of the alliance," President Bush rightly warned that 
"our enemy today is uncertainty and instability." 
Since both enemies are likely to come from the East, the alliance, with a 
unified Germany as a member, should be kept alive. Yet the Soviets should 
receive assurances that the ultimate goal is not a militarily stronger NATO but 
a more "secure" Continent. 
