HAWTHORNE RUNNERS GEAR UP FOR IMPORTANT MASTERS CONTEST 
The Hawthorne High boys track team, fresh from winning their seventh divisional 
title in eight years a week ago at the CIF-Southern Section 4-A finals, still 
have unfinished business. 
The Cougars, who set a state record in the 400-meter relay in 40.36 at Cerritos 
College last Saturday, will attempt to qualify for the state championships 
tonight at 6:30 in the Masters meet at Cerritos College. 
The Cougars may have another record on their minds when they take the track. 
They are attempting to become the first high school 400 relay team to break the 
40-second barrier. The top five finishers in each event will qualify for the 
state championships. 
The Masters is an important tuneup for the state meet, according to Hawthorne 
Coach Kye Courtney, whose club compiled 80 points -- 40 more than its closest 
competitor, Long Beach Wilson -- in the 4-A finals. 
"This week we're working a little harder," said Courtney, whose team performed 
well in the 4-A finals despite having practiced only two days because of minor 
injuries. 
"I can't run them hard before the state meet, so we're working for that this 
week," he said. 
But he insists he's not taking tonight's field lightly. 
"We can't look ahead," he said. "We're concerned about the meet because they 
squeeze a 6 1/3-hour meet into two hours, so kids like (sprinter Curtis) 
Conway, who runs in a lot of events, will have their hands full. 
"But Curtis has done it every year he's been here, so I don't think he'll have 
any trouble." 
Conway will compete in the 100, 200 and the 400 and 1,600 relays. He won both 
sprints and was a member of the winning relay teams in the 4-A finals despite a 
sore hamstring. 
Hawthorne sophomore Anthony Smith, a 400 relay team member and 4-A champion in 
the long jump with a mark of 24-2 3/4, was also hampered by a sore hamstring 
but should be ready. 
"We're not taking a chance on him pulling it again by putting him in the pit 
during practice," said Courtney, "but he will be jumping." 
Keith Pouncey and Dean Dunbar, who finished first and third in the 110-meter 
high hurdles, will also attempt to qualify, as will Cougars Erik Allen (100) 
and Chris Alexander (100). 
The Hawthorne girls team will try to qualify in the 400 relay after an upset 
win over Muir of Pasadena on Saturday. Kesha Marvin, the 4-A champion in 400 
meters, and sprinter Danika Conwright (100 and 200) are two of Hawthorne's 
standouts. 
Other South Bay schools represented tonight include St. Bernard, whose girls 
relay teams won the 400 and 1,600 relay championships. St. Bernard is led by 
Kerri Pegues, who won the 200 and 400 sprints last week. 
Greg Wiler of Rolling Hills, the 4-A pole vault champion at 15-0, will try to 
advance, along with Tim Camillo of Leuzinger, who finished second to Wiler at 
14-6. 
Bishop Montgomery's Pete Hargraves, who finished second in the 2-A 100 and took 
third in the 200, will attempt to advance in both sprints. 
Lisa Leslie of Morningside, Jenifer Tully of Torrance and Bonnie Jones of St. 
Bernard will compete in the girls long jump. 
Laurie Lucas of Palos Verdes will be in the 3,200 and Marilyn Cragin of 
Miraleste will compete in the high jump. 
