SENATE VOTES 52-48 TO BAN 9 ASSAULT WEAPONS IN SETBACK FOR BUSH, NRA 
The Senate voted today to prohibit the importation and manufacture of nine 
military-style assault weapons in a surprise defeat for the Administration, 
Senate Republicans and the National Rifle Assn. 
The Senate voted 52 to 48 to retain in its anti-crime package a provision that 
would ban for three years five foreign- and four U.S.-made semiautomatic 
weapons -- called the "weapons of choice" for criminals and drug traffickers. 
Opponents of the restrictions immediately called for reconsideration of the 
decision. But the Senate voted 50-49 not to reconsider. 
The Administration and Senate Republicans active on the bill opposed the ban 
and the National Rifle Assn. campaigned for its defeat. 
Supporters of the assault weapon ban had said over the weekend they held little 
hope of winning. They said they expected to face opposition on the campaign 
trail this fall because of the legislation. 
California's senators, Democrat Alan Cranston and Republican Pete Wilson, voted 
in favor of the firearms restrictions. 
Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah), leading the fight against the ban, said that it 
would hurt only the "decent, honest people" who collect these weapons or use 
them for target practice, or sometimes for hunting. 
Hatch said "deranged psychopaths" and the "crooks and violent people will be 
able to get them." 
But Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said "assault weapons put awesome killing 
in the hands of drug runners, hate groups and other criminals." 
"The ease with which these weapons can be obtained is fueling the arms race on 
the streets of every community in America," Kennedy added. "This is literally a 
matter of life and death for law enforcement." 
Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.), the chief sponsor of the restrictions, said, 
"Assault weapons are rapidly becoming the weapon of choice for drug dealers. 
Our law enforcement officials are literally fed up." 
Five of the weapons included in the Metzenbaum and DeConcini proposals have 
already been banned from coming into the United States under an executive order 
signed by President Bush. 
The Senate bill under consideration today initially was part of the Bush 
Administration's anti-crime package, but has long since been reshaped by 
majority Democrats led by Senate Judiciary Chairman Joseph R. Biden Jr. 
(D-Del.). The Administration now opposes the measure. 
In addition to the question of cracking down on firearms, the key provisions of 
the anti-crime package are an expansion of the death penalty, a curb on 
petitions for court review of sentences and relaxed standards for search and 
seizure by police. 
The two parties differed sharply on details of those issues, as shown by the 
controversy over the assault weapons. 
The Democrats proposed bans on assault weapons, but Republicans proposed only 
increased penalties to 10 years in prison for criminals who use them in the 
commission of violent or drug-related crimes. 
Tuesday, the Senate voted 82 to 17 to kill a ban on 21 types of semiautomatic 
assault weapons proposed by Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum (D-Ohio). The amendment 
would have also banned bullet magazines with more than 15 rounds. 
