FUGITIVE HELD IN TIJUANA WRITER'S DEATH; 
CRIME: THE EX-SECURITY CHIEF AT CALIENTE RACETRACK, CAPTURED IN L.A., IS BACK 
IN MEXICO TO FACE CHARGES IN THE SLAYING OF THE COLUMNIST KNOWN AS EL GATO. 
A central suspect in the sensational slaying two years ago of Hector Felix 
Miranda, a prominent Tijuana journalist widely known as El Gato, or the Cat, 
was in the custody of Mexican authorities Wednesday after his arrest by Los 
Angeles authorities this week, officials said. 
Antonio Vera Palestina, former chief of security at Tijuana's Caliente 
Racetrack, was taken into custody Tuesday afternoon as he arrived near the 
Greyhound bus terminal in downtown Los Angeles, authorities said. 
Los Angeles police and U.S. immigration officers arrested the longtime fugitive 
after receiving a tip from Baja California authorities, who have been 
investigating the journalist's April, 1988, slaying. Vera went to the station 
to meet a friend, according to a statement by the Los Angeles Police 
Department, which set up surveillance at the site. 
The 38-year-old Vera, a former police officer in Mexico City, was in the United 
States illegally and was consequently turned over to U.S. immigration 
authorities. On Tuesday evening, he was returned to the U.S.-Mexico border, 
where he was turned over to state police agents and jailed in Tijuana. 
The arrest culminates two years of doubt and intrigue surrounding the slaying, 
which became a heated political issue in Baja California, testing the Mexican 
government's stated commitment to a free press. 
Felix was one of two dozen journalists killed in the six-year term of former 
Mexican President Miguel de la Madrid. Most of the slayings remain unsolved, 
according to Mexican journalism groups. 
Felix, 47, was killed on April 20, 1988, as he drove to work down a 
rain-slicked street in Tijuana. A vehicle blocked his path, and an assassin 
pumped two rounds from a 12-gauge shotgun through the driver's window of his 
car. 
The assailants had observed his path to and from work and waited for him at the 
assassination spot, investigators said. 
Felix's killing sparked anti-government protests and large-scale mourning in 
Tijuana, his adopted city. 
The perception that authorities were covering up Felix's slaying was widely 
credited with contributing to the decisive electoral victory last year of 
opposition Gov. Ernesto Ruffo Appel, the first-ever opposition governor in 
modern Mexico. 
"This is only a first step, but it is a very important one," said J. Jesus 
Blancornelas, Felix's longtime colleague and co-worker, after news of Vera's 
arrest. "From here comes the most difficult part," he added, referring to the 
upcoming court proceedings against Vera. 
Although grateful for Vera's arrest, Blancornelas said during a Wednesday night 
press conference that he believes the masterminds of the killing are still at 
large. He voiced the hope that Vera's arrest will finally resolve the mystery 
surrounding his colleague's death. 
Blancornelas and Felix founded the muckraking weekly Zeta, in which Felix's 
pointed barbs appeared in a must-read column called Un Poco de Algo (A Little 
of Something). Felix, using a telltale combination of puns, double meanings, 
crude words and other verbal stunts, regularly took shots at a wide range of 
public officials in Baja. His titillating, gossipy missives were savored by the 
powerful and powerless alike. 
For the past two years, Blancornelas, probably the most prominent journalist in 
Tijuana, has repeatedly used his publication to demand a thorough investigation 
into his colleague's killing. He has reprinted old columns by Felix and 
featured full-page, black-bordered advertisements asking three successive Baja 
California governors what they planned to do with the case. 
The weekly Zeta, under Blancornelas' direction, has pointed its finger directly 
at Jorge Hank Rhon, the president of the Caliente Racetrack, who employed Vera. 
Vera was also the longtime personal bodyguard for Hank, who is the scion of a 
wealthy and influential Mexico City family. Hank, the race track owner, was an 
acquaintance of the slain journalist but toward the end of the journalist's 
life, Hank emerged as a frequent target in Felix's column. 
Hank has repeatedly denied any involvement in the case. His father, Jorge Hank 
Gonzalez, former mayor of Mexico City and now Mexico's minister of agriculture 
and water resources, a cabinet-level post, has also publicly denied that his 
son played any role in the slaying, or that any cover-up was perpetuated to 
protect his son. 
On Wednesday, Baja California Gov. Ruffo held a press conference in the state 
capital of Mexicali to announce the arrest. During the campaign, Ruffo, 
standard-bearer of Mexico's opposition National Action Party, had vowed to 
pursue the case and clear up the unsolved slaying, a promise that he repeated 
Wednesday. 
"The investigation will be pursued to its ultimate consequences, no matter who 
is involved," a statement from the governor's office said Wednesday. 
Vera, who authorities said was living in El Monte, east of Los Angeles, was 
arrested without incident. He had been sought since the killing, and sightings 
of Vera had been reported everywhere from San Diego to Mexico City. 
Vera appeared before Baja California State Judge Miguel Angel Barud on 
Wednesday and, at a preliminary hearing, denied the charges against him. The 
judge has 72 hours to determine whether there is sufficient proof to retain 
Vera in custody, something that is considered a virtual certainty considering 
the wealth of evidence garnered during the two years since an arrest order was 
issued for Vera. 
Vera could face up to 30 years in jail on the murder charge. The suspect, 
sporting a beard, was led into the courtroom in handcuffs, under tight 
security. 
Victoriano Medina Moreno, a former security guard at the race track, was 
convicted last August of being the triggerman in the slaying. He is serving a 
27-year prison sentence. 
However, Blancornelas, the slain columnist's longtime colleague, has argued in 
print that Vera was the actual triggerman and that Medina only drove the 
getaway vehicle. Blancornelas and other journalists have said that Medina, 
although sharing responsibility, was being offered up as a scapegoat for the 
entire murder scheme -- an allegation denied by Baja authorities. Medina 
himself contended that he was tortured into making a confession. 
Mexican authorities never presented an adequate explanation as to why they 
believe Vera and Medina killed Felix. Officials said one of his columns cost 
Medina his former job, but Felix's former colleagues said neither Medina's or 
Vera's names ever appeared in any of Felix's columns. 
