APOLOGY IN ATTEMPTED RAPE CASE INCLUDES GRISLY SOUVENIR 
The janitor and the young woman met in an evening English class at a local high 
school. 
Both were Korean, and they soon became friends, studying their English lessons 
together. On April 19, Yoon No Yoon asked her for a ride to work, telling her 
his car was broken, sheriff's deputies said. Yoon had to drive, he said, 
because the directions were so difficult. He drove instead to a spot near Zuma 
Beach, deputies say, where he began "making advances" at knifepoint, ripping 
her clothes. 
She fought him off, police said, and when he took her home, she called the 
Rampart Division police station. 
The attempted rape report was duly passed along to Malibu sheriff's deputies, 
and there matters lay until Monday, police said, when the 31-year-old janitor 
telephoned the young woman's home and said he wanted to apologize. According to 
police, Yoon asked the woman to meet him at McDonald's in Koreatown. 
Once again, the young woman called the Rampart station. On Monday night, she 
and her father went to the restaurant. So did police. The janitor from Seoul 
was already there, waiting to talk. 
He never got the chance. 
When police arrested Yoon, they found he had brought with him a manila 
envelope. Inside were two contrite letters written in Korean to the woman and 
-- encased in an opaque crystal box -- a more substantial token of his remorse. 
"The officers opened (the box) up," said Sgt. Alex Salazar, and inside, in a 
glass vial surrounded by a ring of small black glass beads, "there was a little 
pinky finger floating in some liquid." 
Yoon, whose left hand was bandaged from the amputation between the joints of 
the finger, was arrested and booked on suspicion of attempted rape, police 
said. His bail was set at $100,000. The fingertip is being kept as evidence by 
the Los Angeles County coroner's office. 
When Yoon was arrested, "he was confused that after he did what he did, cutting 
his finger and giving her this remorseful token, that she would get the police 
involved," Salazar said. Yoon reportedly indicated as much to a Korean-speaking 
officer. 
"This was a way for him to express his remorse," Salazar said. 
Not a Tradition 
Although one police officer surmised that the act was a cultural ritual, 
experts say such a mutilation is no more a Korean cultural tradition than 
Vincent Van Gogh's act of cutting off his ear for a woman was a Dutch or French 
tradition. 
"Cutting off a finger, or self-mutilation in any form, is not a normal cultural 
act," said Susan Chung, a psychiatrist at Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in 
Panorama City. 
"In apologizing for some misbehavior, clearly, people don't go through this 
kind of serious action," said Chung, who counsels Korean patients, many of them 
recent immigrants. 
Along with the possibility of Yoon's agitated mental state, Chung said that 
such an extreme act might also stem from a cultural belief that someone who 
commits a shameful act should not require outside punishment in order to feel 
regret. 
"Overall, in Korean culture, a shameful act should be handled inside the family 
or inside a very small circle of people," Chung said, or "as in this case, 
apparently the individual was taking responsibility for criticizing and 
punishing himself." 
Modern Accounts 
Dr. Byung-yul Yoon (no relation), clinical psychologist at the Asian Pacific 
Counseling and Treatment Center in Hollywood, said such behavior -- cutting off 
half the small finger and offering it in apology -- has been romanticized in 
modern accounts of Japanese gangster or "yakuza" activities, the only occasion 
the practice has surfaced recently. 
Yoon No Yoon was being questioned by sheriff's and district attorney's 
investigators Tuesday evening. He was expected to be arraigned this morning. 
