JAMES FLANIGAN: THE POWER OF THE CHANGING WORK FORCE 
Just in time for Mother's Day the House of Representatives last week passed a 
Family and Medical Leave bill that would allow employees to take 12 weeks 
unpaid time off to care for a newborn or adopted child, or a parent or spouse, 
without endangering their jobs. 
But the White House said President Bush would veto the bill if it gets through 
the Senate and comes before him. 
What's going on? A big trend for the '90s -- the importance of work and family 
issues -- that is being obscured by politics. 
The House bill is opposed by small-business groups, which don't like Congress 
mandating benefits that big companies can afford more easily than small firms. 
But the bill is supported by big firms -- the so-called Fortune 1,000 -- 
because they would rather cope with a uniform federal law that would apply to 
all competitors equally in every state. 
So the House bill would exempt 95% of the nation's 8 million businesses, but 
still would apply to more than half the work force by covering companies with 
50 or more employees and all federal, state and local governments. 
But even if Bush vetoes the bill, companies large and small are going to have 
to offer family leave and other new and varied benefits if they want to keep 
employees in the '90s. Because the forces driving the legislation are those 
that will preoccupy business throughout the decade: change, diversity and 
looming labor shortages in the U.S. work force. 
Women will comprise 12 million of the 19 million new entrants to the U.S. labor 
force in this decade, rising from 45% of the total at present to 47%. 
And the proportion of black, Hispanic and Asian workers will rise to 26% of the 
work force, from 21%. 
But the most important change will be scarcity of new workers as the labor 
force grows much more slowly in the '90s than in the past two decades. 
Faced with change and shortages, many companies are already offering help with 
family issues. American Telephone &amp; Telegraph allows up to six months 
unpaid leave. IBM offers a personal leave of up to three years, during which 
health benefits remain in force, employees can work part time and are 
guaranteed a full-time job upon return. 
Marriott, the chain that employs 230,000 people in hotels and food service 
outlets, asked employees two years ago what they wanted. In response, it now 
offers a pretax savings plan to finance parental leave -- unpaid leave being no 
luxury to many people -- as well as discounts on child care and seminars on 
parenting. Like most large companies, Marriott offers extended unpaid time off 
-- with continued health benefits -- beyond the required maternity leave. 
US Sprint, the telephone network with 16,000 staffers, allows employees to 
share jobs -- splitting duties and days at work -- or to work flexible hours 
for many reasons, not necessarily child rearing. 
Such benefits are called women's issues, but "family" is a more accurate term 
because the common concern is modern family life -- two-earner couples or 
single parents raising children and caring for aging relatives. Recognition of 
such needs is new, even if the problems aren't. And work and family issues are 
often subject to rhetoric and misunderstanding. There's a fond belief, repeated 
even by experts, that in past centuries women stayed home and men worked. 
But that's not true. In past centuries, both men and women worked on farms -- 
and worked until they dropped. It is only for a historically brief period in 
this century that the idea of keeping women in the home took hold -- and it's 
doubtful that anybody asked the woman for her opinion. Women at the higher end 
of the social scale worked: Frances Perkins in 1933 was the first Secretary of 
Labor. And at the lower end, domestic servants were a constant 5% to 6% of the 
U.S. work force until World War II. (Domestics are 1% of today's work force.) 
In any event, that war brought women back into the general work force and they 
never really left, even though television in the 1950s portrayed the American 
woman as a homebound spouse -- June Cleaver of "Leave It to Beaver," Alice 
Kramden of "The Honeymooners" and Lucy Ricardo of "I Love Lucy." 
By contrast, today's TV mothers go out to work -- Claire Huxtable on "The Cosby 
Show" and Roseanne Conner on "Roseanne." 
Yet despite their years in the work force, women still get short pay. Median 
weekly earnings for retail sales workers, for example, are $304 for men, $208 
for women. Among editors and reporters, men make $589 a week and women $442. 
Women do better in light manufacturing -- earning $254 a week to $287 for men. 
And among lawyers and MBAs, women earn 82 cents for every $1 of male wages -- 
the differences in part reflecting seniority in the profession but also the big 
money that men haul down from top partnerships and executive positions. 
Trends for the '90s? A sure bet is that those wage gaps will close -- and those 
executive positions will open up. Or else talented employees will go elsewhere. 
Recent surveys by Opinion Research and Wick &amp; Co., a management 
consultancy, show women leaving corporations faster than men -- not for family 
reasons but to seek opportunity -- or out of frustration with the lack of it. 
In the new decade, companies that let talented people get away will decline, 
and those that motivate and keep employees will prosper. The equation is that 
simple, which is not to say that solving it will be easy. 
Catering to a diverse work force takes time and money -- there is no one 
program to suit all of today's workers. Hiring temporary replacements for 
workers on leave will be a boon to firms such as Manpower Inc., but an added 
cost for companies pressed to economize. And family issues promise new demands 
for medical benefits, just when all of business is determined to cut medical 
costs. 
So there will be tension -- which is not to say it might not be creative. 
Thanks to labor shortages, employees may finally be judged on competence and 
not gender or race. It can happen. 
Recall that when the Hubble Telescope was in trouble, two skilled mission 
specialists were alerted to go out in a spacewalk and fix it: Kathryn D. 
Sullivan and Bruce McCandless. 
No big deal: When jobs need doing, you get people who can do them. 
