MAKING A CASE FOR CAR-POOL LANES; 
PROP. 111 WOULD AID RIVERSIDE AND ORANGE COUNTIES 
Picture families living at opposite ends of a gravel road. One owns a 
prosperous farm. The grown sons from the other family earn income by planting 
and harvesting the farm's crops. 
Keeping the road open is important to both, but it is hard work and the farmer 
never seems to be able to lay hands on money to pay for it. So the sons keep 
the road open. But they also keep a meticulous ledger because they hope that 
the farmer will get his financial act together some day and pay them for it. 
This is not a fable but the true story of Riverside and Orange counties and 
about a road, state Highway 91, that carries 200,000 cars between the counties 
every day. 
There are plans to increase the commuter capacity of the Riverside Freeway by 
creating two car-pool lanes in each direction along a 12-mile stretch where the 
county lines meet. The $90-million project would also provide single car-pool 
lanes on other sections of the freeway. In a well-ordered society, the costs of 
the car-pool lanes -- crucial to both counties -- would be shared and the 
project carefully coordinated. That has not happened. Thus, this is also a tale 
about one more example of the many possibilities for cutting rush-hour 
congestion that would result from voter approval of Proposition 111 on the June 
5 ballot. 
Orange County is the recalcitrant neighbor in the story, having twice turned 
down measures that would finance transportation improvements with a modest 
half-cent sales-tax increase. Riverside County voters looked farther up the 
road last year, so to speak, and passed just such a measured sales-tax 
increase, so their transportation commission is ready to begin work on the 
freeway. The problem is that without corresponding improvements in Orange 
County, traffic could simply pile up when the car-pool lanes disappeared at the 
Orange County boundary. 
Orange County officials are hoping Proposition 111 passes not because they 
would get funds for car-pool lanes on their side of the freeway but because it 
could make possible a bit of creative financing under which they could get 
their part of the freeway widened. 
Approval of Proposition 111 could provide a kind of loan guarantee that would 
make it more palatable for Riverside County to advance funds to Orange County 
for its car-pool lanes. Riverside has suggested it might be willing to do that 
if Proposition 111 passes, and if the voters who approved their sales-tax 
increase agreed it was all right. 
The state would have to be the financier in the end, because it would reimburse 
Riverside County after it had designated the project for funds. If that 
happened, it would take time for the project to move up on the priority list. 
But passage of Proposition 111 would give state officials some latitude to make 
a regional car-pool project work. 
There are lots of "if's" here. Projects from all over California would be 
competing for funds that would be available from its passage . Ideally, the 
installation of car-pool lanes along the Riverside Freeway should have been 
possible long before this. But versatile Proposition 111 has the potential to 
correct past oversights, and along the way make for good neighbors along a 
well-traveled commuter path. 
