ANGELS HAVE RUN OF LUCK IN 13TH, 5-4 
Devon White doubled with one out and scored on two sloppy fielding plays by the 
Brewers as the Angels outlasted Milwaukee, 5-4, in 13 innings Friday night at 
Anaheim Stadium. 
The victory against the American League's worst fielding team was the Angel's 
fifth in a row, a season-high streak, and seventh in their past eight games. 
White's sinking liner to left against Tony Fossas (1-3) almost hopped past left 
fielder Mike Felder and was ruled a double. 
Playing the percentages, the Brewers walked Dante Bichette, a right-handed 
hitter, to put left-handed hitter Wally Joyner against the left-hander Fossas. 
But Joyner never got to hit. Fossas' pickoff throw to second went into center 
field, allowing White to take third, and center fielder Robin Yount's throwing 
error on the play enabled White to come home with the Angels' second 
consecutive extra-inning victory. They defeated the Toronto Blue Jays, 4-3, in 
11 innings Thursday. 
"It hasn't particularly easy, but it is very gratifying nonetheless," Angel 
Manager Doug Rader said. "We've always refused to lose, except sometimes 
earlier in the season the other team wasn't listening." 
Willie Fraser (2-2), who pitched four shutout innings in relief, was credited 
with the victory. 
The Angels are 3-2 in extra-inning games and 5-6 in one-run games. They are 
within three games of .500 for the first time since May 4. 
Angel starter Mark Langston, who went 7 1/3 innings and had a season-high nine 
strikeouts, was elated with the team's winning streak. 
"We expected to be going like this all year," he said. "Now that we have our 
bats going, every night we are feeling pretty confident we can win the game." 
The Angel offense came to the aid of Langston, who was unable to hold the 4-1 
lead he took into the eighth inning. Milwaukee scored three in that inning. 
Home runs accounted for the Angels' first four runs. Chili Davis' two-run drive 
to right in the third and home runs by Dave Winfield and Lance Parrish in the 
fourth were the highlights. Other than that, only one other batter reached 
second against Milwaukee starter Chris Bosio. That was Johnny Ray, who singled 
in the second and moved into scoring position when Parris walked behind him. He 
was stranded when Rich Schu struck out. 
Winfield's home run was the 361st of his career, tying him with Atlanta's Dale 
Murphy and Joe DiMaggio, for 35th on the all-time home run list. 
Langston's lead was cut to 4-3 before he was taken out of the game. Felder, who 
entered the game as a pinch-hitter, led off with a walk and moved to third on 
Gary Sheffield's double down the left field line. Yount drove in both runners 
when he chopped a single into short left. 
Mark Eichhorn relieved Langston, but Milwaukee kept the inning alive when Dave 
Parker hit a grounder to first baseman Joyner, whose throw hit Young in the 
back of the head. The error put runners on first and second with one out. Rob 
Deer forced Parker at second, with Yount moving to third, and Yount scored the 
tying run on Glenn Braggs' single to right. 
Greg Vaughn walked, loading the bases, but Charlie O'Brien grounded into a 
force play that ended an agonizing inning for the Angeles. 
Milwaukee threatened in the top of the 10th against Fraser, the third Angel 
pitcher. Parker hit a one-out single to center and was removed in favor or 
pinch-runner Darryl Hamilton. Deer lined a double to left that sent Hamilton to 
third, and the Angeles walked Braggs intentionally. Bill Spiers struck out and 
shortstop Gary DiSarcina preserved the tie by running all-out and snaring 
O'Brien's liner before falling face-first onto the grass in shallow left. 
Langston was in fine form in the early going, matching his season high by 
recording his seventh strikeout before the game was four innings old. Although 
the suspense of a no-hitter was dispelled with one out in the fourth inning, 
well short of the 5 1/3 perfect innings he pitched in Toronto last Sunday, his 
strikeout pace created a different element of suspense for the fans at Anaheim 
Stadium. 
The Angeles gave Langston two runs to work with in the third. White singled for 
the second consecutive at-bat and Davis followed with a home run into the 
terrace seats in right field, his fourth home run of the season and first since 
May 8. It was measured at 378 feet. 
Deer jarred Langston out of the groove in the seventh with a looping single to 
right. It became dangerous only when left fielder Davis tried to backhand the 
ball on one hop and instead allowed it to roll to the fence. Deer advanced to 
third, and scored from there on Braggs' grounder to first to cut the Angel's 
lead to 4-1. 
Angel Notes 
The Brewers' two errors in the 13th gave them 47 for the season, highest in the 
American League . . . Dave Winfield, who established a charitable foundation in 
his name while he played for the New York Yankees, said he's interested in 
becoming involved in similar activities here. One program he's considering is a 
substance abuse prevention campaign for elementary-school age children. "It 
augments what they teach in school," Winfield said. "It's 'Don't just say no.' 
It gives positive alternatives and trains adolescents to feel positive about 
themselves." 
Bill Schroeder caught five innings at Class-A Palm Springs and reported no 
problem with his surgically repaired right elbow. Schroeder, who was 0 for 1 
with a walk, is scheduled to catch there again today. 
Donnie HIll (bruised left knee) didn't start Friday but was available. Hill 
injured the knee last Saturday in Toronto and reinjured it Wednesday. A 
magnetic resonance imaging test was normal . . . Greg Minton (right elbow 
surgery) threw off the mound for the first time Friday for three to five 
minutes and had no pain . . . Jack Howell (sprained left knee) has shown some 
improvement, but Bob McClure (left elbow soreness) has not, according to 
trainer Ned ? Kent Anderson (sprained right shoulder) is about the same. 
Dick Schofield (strained hamstring) took ground balls and moved laterally 
without mishap . . . Second baseman Johnny Ray extended his hitting streak to 
10 consecutive games with a second-inning single. 
